Let us consider the Collect.  How it redeems our Liturgy from its leaven
of Augustinianism! How it silences the obscurantists who accuse
believers in universal restitution of going beyond the Church's
teaching!  Is this collect an authoritative formula of the Church, or is
it not?  "O God, whose never-failing Providence ordereth all things both
in Heaven and on earth."  In other words, a man's conscious mind may
wrongly "devise his way," but "the Lord will direct his steps."
Saturate your mind with that thought.  Speak to the universal Spirit
outside you and individualize Him.  Say, "Abba, Father, whose
never-failing providence ordereth all things both in Heaven and on
earth, though my heart may be 'devising my way' wrongly and tortuously,
I know Thou wilt 'direct my steps' into Thy purpose."  In that attitude
of mind you know that God will be in whatever happens to you. This gives
you a great freedom in worshipping Infinite Spirit.  You feel yourself
emancipated from all traditional conceptions, and you feel in yourself
the aspiration of Faber when he wrote:

    "Oh, for freedom, for freedom in worshipping God,
    For the mountain-top feeling of generous souls,
    For the health, for the air, of the hearts deep and broad,
    Where grace, not in rills, but in cataracts rolls!"


It is well to face the principle underlying these words of the collect:
Abba, Father, "ordereth all things both in Heaven and on earth."  Then,
as His will is man's sanctification, the logical conclusion is an
absolute ultimate universalism.

The absurdity of the paradox that man by wrongly "devising his way" can
ultimately defeat the predestined purpose of Infinite Originating Mind
is self-evident.  Sophocles and Plato taught that omnipotent purpose
governed the apparently accidental phenomena of life, and the writer of
the book of Proverbs says plainly: "A man's heart may devise his way,"
but "the Lord will direct his steps."  That is the inspired statement of
the problem. Milton thought the problem insoluble, and describes the
fallen angels exercising their minds on "fixed fate, free will,
fore-knowledge absolute," and being "in wandering mazes lost," I really
think it only needs common sense.  Infinite Mind expresses Himself in
individual human life-centres that He may realize His own qualities and
have millions of separate entities to love and, after education, to love
Him.  Is it conceivable that He would so overdo His creative work as to
produce beings with a superior will to Himself capable of resisting Him
through the endless ages, and putting His purpose to complete confusion?
Is it not obvious that He would only give them enough will to train
them? The will of man, such as it is, has its clearly-defined sphere.
It is with his will he "deviseth his way," and that "devising his way"
is the test of his life; but he can no more escape the ultimate purpose
of Abba, Father, than a material substance on this planet can escape the
law of gravitation.  Obviously we have volition, we have the power to
"devise our way."  This must be so for two reasons. First, Originating
Spirit desires to realize His highest qualities in man.  Therefore, man
must have liberty to withhold his co-operation or he would be only an
automaton.  Mechanical moral qualities would not be moral any more than
your watch is moral.  To receive and to distribute the nature of the
Divine mind, not mechanism, but mental acquiescence is necessary.  "The
heavens declare the glory of God," but they do it mechanically, not
morally.  The solar system is a perfect work of mechanical creation, but
the planet cannot leave its appointed orbit.  Man can.  If man obeyed
God, only as a planet revolves in its orbit, he would "declare the glory
of God," but he would not be a man; that is, he would not be a mental
centre in which the Originating Mind could realize Itself.  Then, again,
without being free to disobey, we could never become moral beings.  The
antagonistic pressure of non-moral inclinations challenges our highest
self, and as we make, within our limited sphere, correct choice between
alternatives presented, we are built up Godward or the reverse.  But
inasmuch as Infinite Spirit and His vehicles are elementally
inseverable, and "Abba, Father, ordereth all things," though wrong
choice, and the selection of lower standards, will occasion pain and
unrest, and delay the evolution of the Eternal purpose, and grieve the
Spirit within us.  Creative Spirit is Omnipotent, to defeat Him is
impossible.  He will ultimately, in ways of His own, "direct man's
steps" without turning him into an automaton.  When once you perceive
that man in his inmost nature is the product of the Divine Mind, imaging
forth an image of Itself, you are certain that no negation can finally
frustrate the evolution of the Divine principle which is the inmost
centre in us all. It must ultimately blend with the ocean of uncreated
life whence it came, and whither from all Eternity it is predestined to
return, for Infinite Mind has declared of His human children, "Ye shall
be perfect."  Of course, we must ourselves "open out the way."  In that
obligation lies the function of our Will and our responsibility for
using the Keys of our own Kingdom of Heaven within.

As Browning expresses it so grandly in "Paracelsus":

    "There is an inmost centre in us all,
    Where truth abides in fulness; and around,
    Wall upon wall, the gross flesh hems it in.
      ... TO KNOW
    Rather consists in opening out a way
    Whence the imprisoned splendour may escape,
    Than in effecting entry for a light
    Supposed to be without."


Those who use the Keys of their Kingdom of Heaven know, and "open out
the way."  And for those who don't know, though they blunder terribly
and suffer in the blundering, the Immanent Spirit "directs their steps."
Do you say this implies fatalism, submission to impersonal destiny
destructive of independence and self-reliance?  The Gospel negatives the
suggestion, and demonstrates that this "ordering all things" is not the
despotic overrule of an irresistible law, but the immanent influence of
an omnipotent Providence ceaselessly suggesting to the Soul of man.  The
Lord Jesus said: "I can do nothing of Myself, the Father in Me doeth the
works."  Was that fatalism?  No, the Lord Jesus was consciously working
out the thoughts, the ideas of the Immanent Spirit, and the Epistle
says; "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit that we are the
children of God; and if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and
joint-heirs with Christ."  "Joint-heirs with Christ," that is, that the
same spirit that was in perfection in the Christ is germinally in us,
and though we may not yet be conscious of it, we are co-partners in the
same splendid inheritance. Again, the prevalence of evil is to some a
stumbling-block.  They say God is all, and all is God, and God is Love,
resistless, resourceful, perfect.  He "ordereth all things both in
Heaven and on earth," why, then, this discord between the heart that
"deviseth the way" and the Lord who "directeth the steps"? why all this
misunderstanding?  Have we not learnt the answer?  It is an interesting
study in human psychology to note how thoughtful men will stumble over
the answer.  I am always repeating the axiom: Even God cannot make
anything except by means of the process through which it becomes what it
is.  He is making moral beings.  He can only make moral beings by means
of the process through which a moral being becomes what he is, and that
is, by having the opportunity of being non-moral.  Therefore Infinite
Spirit, who can never make a mistake, is responsible for the conditions
under which what we call evil becomes possible, because by those
conditions alone can men become moral beings, and these conditions
underlie the three functioning centres in the complex mechanism of human
beings.

That is the inner meaning of that metaphor about gathering grapes from
thorns and figs from thistles in the Gospel.  The thorn and the thistle,
the grape and the fig, do not signify separate types of men.  If so, the
force of the metaphor would fail, and Necessitarian Calvinism would be
established.

The thorn and the thistle are obeying God's own law of heredity and
affinity by producing only thorns and thistles; they would violate the
law of their being if they produced grapes and figs.  It is an allegory
of our separate selves, of that complex nature which differentiates us
from the immanence of God as subconscious mind in the vegetable and the
animal. Each man is the soil in which the "soul-man" and the "body-man"
produce thorn and thistle, and the "spirit-man" produces grape and fig.
The opposing functioning centres in the same individual strive for the
mastery, and from this very striving emerges the perfected life of the
Child of God, and that is where the possibility of what we call evil
comes in.  Our own limited minds teach us that God's thought-forms,
imaged forth from the womb of Infinite Mind, could never attain
Self-consciousness unless associated with matter in some definite form.
That association with matter involved body with its "thorn and thistle"
tendencies, which tendencies are the training-ground of the individual,
and this training will be complete when the "spirit-man," through the
"soul-man," controls the "body-man," and he can say with Paul: "I keep
under my body and bring it into subjection."

As vehicles of spirit we have the capacity of living by a definite
effort and purpose the higher life, the fruit-bearing life, and, as we
live it, we weaken and starve the thorn-bearing life.  "We are debtors,"
says the Apostle, we, who have received the Keys of our own Kingdom of
Heaven within--"we are debtors not to live after the flesh."

No one needs the pulpit to tell them what is the life "not after the
flesh."  Every purposeful encouragement of the Divine nature within,
every clinging to principle in time of temptation, every masterful
conquest over bodily desires by forcing the mind away from sense
impressions into recollection of the Divinity within, every quenching of
anger by a kind and gentle word, ministers to the fruit-bearing life and
withers the thorn.

In one word, the higher life is the continuous conscious blending of the
human mind with the Infinite Mind.  Remember conscious mind is part of
the "soul-man," and our ability to gain dominion over the physical body
develops as we use our will to blend our thought-power with the Infinite
Mind, for the "spirit-man" influences the "body-man," through the
channel of the "soul-man," which is the seat of mind.

Begin it by suffering the indwelling Spirit to realize itself as love.

The Master taught us that to manifest love is to live not as an isolated
unit but in terms of the larger life of humanity.  When He was asked,
"What shall I do to inherit eternal life?" He replied with the parable
of the Good Samaritan.  Manifest love to theological and political
opponents, and unlovable people generally, and the thorn and thistle
within you will have a poor chance of life.

When you express love you are functioning from Spirit.  Then "soul-man"
and "body-man" must obey.  "Soul-man" must help for will is part of
"soul-man."  Watch yourself.  Keep the tongue from evil and the lips
that they speak no guile.  Never allow yourself to repeat that which
will prejudice your hearer against another.  Don't repeat a scandal. It
causes an evil thought-atmosphere to prevail; it thwarts the God within;
it grieves the Spirit more fatally than breaches of the moral law.

This, then, is the message of to-day.  Use your will to keep your mental
faculties in conscious realization of your true relation to Infinite
Mind, as one of His vehicles, and you will not grieve the Spirit.  Know
that God is the Spirit within you, and never forget that He is also
Abba, Father, outside you.  Abba, Father, longs for us far more than we
long for Him.  Around us always are the everlasting arms.  He knows our
imperfections and weaknesses of character far better than we know those
of our own children, and our Lord said: "If ye then, being evil, know
how to give good gifts to your children, how much more shall your
Heavenly Father give good gifts to them that ask Him?"




                  *"Out of the Everywhere into Here."*


"Of His own will He brought us forth by the Word, wherefore receive with
meekness the inborn Word."--ST. JAMES i. 18, 21 (R.V.).


Though I have repeatedly spoken on the words of the Epistle for the
fourth Sunday after Easter, I simply cannot pass them by now.  They
illuminate conspicuously the thesis that we were "thought-forms" in the
womb of Infinite Mind before we were "body-forms" in this terrestrial
school, and they affirm the closeness of our intimacy with Infinite Mind
and the obviousness of our life's duty.  Grant the axiom that the power
of Infinite Mind to realize in us, and express through us, and
externalize love in the circumstances of our life, is strictly
conditioned by our appreciation of what Infinite Mind is in Itself, then
the more familiar, the more reverently tender, our estimate of
Originating Spirit, the more will It be able to manifest in our lives.

St. James in the words I have quoted has suggested to us a conception of
Infinite Creative Mind so exalted, so metaphysical, and yet so personal,
that, if by spiritual consciousness we can grasp it, we possess the
highest possible estimate of the All-Conscious Life-Principle whence we
came.  St. James says: "He brought us forth with the Word," "He willed
us forth from Himself by the Logos."  In the Greek there is, of course,
no personal pronoun, and, indeed, it is a paradox to put the masculine
personal pronoun before this Greek word, _apekuesen_, a word used, and
only used, for the birth of a child from its mother; it has no other
meaning.  Imagine the motherly tenderness of this metaphor. Can it be
used by accident?  Does it not suggest the words: "Can a woman forget
her sucking child that she should not have compassion upon the son of
her womb?"  Can Infinite Mind forget the individual life-centre which
has come forth from its creative thought-womb?  You say this is emotion,
this is sentiment.  Quite so; that is exactly what is needed; our
relations to Originating Mind are too formal, too cold, too perfunctory,
too theological.

The Mother-Soul, _apekuesen_, "brought us forth," "bore us," body-formed
us, that by separation we might come to know our Parentage as we could
never have known it if we had remained in the womb of Creative Mind,
just as between human child and mother there can be no conscious
cognizing intercourse till they are separated.

I pray that I may realize how profoundly this inspired metaphor of St.
James reaches into the deep things of God.  It proves that the
irrevocability of Divine Immanence in man is not the product of human
speculation, but an authoritative revelation.  As the child in the womb
receives the nature of the mother, and is born into the world bearing
that nature, part of the mother, a repetition of the mother, so have we
come into this world with a Divine nature within us, which is our real
self, our eternal humanity.  It is true for us, when it is not yet true
to us, that we are the offspring of the Infinite Parent-Spirit by a
process more intimate than anything implied by the word "creation."

What a glorious confidence ought to be inspired by this assurance!  How
it ought to alter our outlook upon life!  The nature and perfections of
God, as Omnipotent Love and Wisdom, are germinally within us, and are
gradually advancing mankind, by an agency ultimately irresistible, to a
more and ever more perfect condition.  Based on this proposition of St.
James, final restitution stands upon an impregnable foundation; the
terrifying problem of evil, while it remains as an urgent motive for
action, loses its power to perplex.  As an Infinite Motherliness is the
sole producing agent of all that is, and as all that is must have been
in the thought-womb of Infinite Motherliness before coming into
existence, the whole mystery of the dark side of life must be within the
purpose of the eternal order, and there can be no independent rival to
the Author of the Universe.  Again, this amazing revelation of the
Creative Motherliness should help us in realizing the oneness of
humanity.  It should stimulate us to generous strivings for better
social conditions and more brotherly relations between man and man.  It
ought to make impossible the international jealousies which provoke
taunts and defiances between European nations which ultimately issue in
the misery and wickedness of war.  Above all, it should impress upon us
the dignity, the priceless dignity, of every individual human life, as
drawn directly from the Originating Spirit.

I desire to apply this thought.  I will take myself.  I ask, "What am
I?"  Now, don't imagine that you honour God by calling yourself a poor
worm and a miserable sinner, whatever you may justly feel; it is gravely
discourteous to the Supreme Source of your being.  Say: "I am a human
life, a personal spirit, body-formed into terrestrial birth.  I
recognize that I have a double consciousness, that two distinct planes
of thought and initiative compose my life: the one is the natural or the
animal man, the product of evolution through the operation of the Cosmic
Mind; the other is the spiritual man, the essential inner nature,
equipped with all the potentialities and the qualities of the Infinite
Creative Mother-Soul.  In the recognition of this duality lies the
wisdom of life; in the reconciliation of these two planes of
consciousness lies the battle of life; and in the supremacy of the
higher plane of consciousness lies the victory of life.  I recognize my
limitations, and I regretfully acknowledge my many defeats."

Upon what does victory depend?  It depends upon our use of our
will-power in constraining our mental faculty to rise above the mere
sense-impressions of our lower consciousness, and intensify upon the
eternal fact of our oneness with the Infinite Life from which we have
come forth as a child comes from its mother's womb.  St. James puts it
perfectly clearly.  He does not perplex us with theological casuistry or
schemes of salvation; he just bids us use our Divine heredity. He says
Infinite Mind has given birth to you by the Logos, the Word.  Creative
Motherliness has "brought you forth (_apekuesen_) by the Logos,"
wherefore "receive with meekness the 'Logos Emphutos,' the 'inborn
Word,' 'the hereditary Divine nature,' which is able to save your
souls."  "With meekness"--that is, with receptivity.  Mentally practise
Divine self-realization, become conscious that the Logos, which is the
mystic Christ, the image and nature of the Mother-God, is within you,
"inborn."  Be receptive to its promptings, acknowledge it, recognize it,
realize it, appeal to it; put away purposely what St. James calls "all
superfluity of naughtiness"--an expression which each must interpret for
himself. Strengthen it by inhibiting wrong thoughts, by secret communion
with it, and it will rapidly evolve, and as it grows it will externalize
in the conditions of your life, it will become more and more a power in
the affairs of your daily duty, it will build up your character, it will
bring you into right relations with your fellow-men, and make you kind
to others.  As it awakens the nature of the Infinite Mother-Soul within
you it will teach you what is God's ideal of humanity--namely, that
God's true son is not one perfect man, though one perfect Man alone
realized the ideal, but the whole multitudinous race of men, of which
race God is the Father, the Mother, the Soul, the Glory, and the
Eternity.

Now, how do I know this?  How can I be certain of this?  How do I know
that the "Logos Emphutos," the inherited nature from the prolific
Mother-Spirit, is within me and "able to save my soul"?  I might have
arrived at the knowledge by induction, as did Charles Kingsley when he
said that logic required him to believe that there must have been, or
will be, an Incarnation.  I arrive at it by Revelation; the central
figure of the Christian Revelation proves to me incontestably the fact.

This "Logos Emphutos," this inborn Word, this hereditary witness of the
close and tender relationship between ourselves and Creative
Motherliness, this "urge" of the Creative Mother-Soul, is a universal
principle.  It is not easy to define it; but what existence is to being,
what the spoken word is to thought, what the lightning-flash is to
electricity, that the Logos is to the Creative Mother-Soul--its
expression, its activity, its self-utterance.  The Logos is the quality
of Originating Mind that forms, upholds, sustains all that is.  "Without
the Logos was not anything made that was made"; "in the Logos all things
consist."  "By the Logos," says St. Paul, "the heavens were made."  The
Logos is the one life in all, the cosmic mind in all--in the mineral,
the crystal, the lower order of animal life, and above all, in its
highest function, it is the dominating power in the soul of man, and in
the angels and archangels of the higher spheres of light and life.

It has always been so.  The early Aryans, 1700 B.C., knew it; but
generations of wrong thinking have darkened human minds to their Divine
origin as possessors of the "Logos Emphutos."  Infinite Mind, therefore,
"in the fulness of time," specialized the "Logos Emphutos," for purposes
of recognition and observation, in one perfect life-centre.  We call
this "The" Incarnation, as if the Lord Jesus alone were the Incarnate
Son.  If so, He would profit us little.  He could in no sense be our
model and our brother. Incarnation is a universal Principle, of which
universal Principle the Lord Jesus is the specialization in absolute
perfection.  "The Logos," says St. John, "was made flesh and dwelt among
us, and we beheld His glory full of grace and truth."  That is, the
universal principle of the Divinity of humanity, as the outbirth of the
Mother God, was manifested in Jesus of Nazareth in such full-orbed
completeness that the qualities and perfections of the Parent God were
displayed in Him, and the full result upon human character of this
Divine Immanence, the realization of which had before been vague and
without outline, was shown forth in Him, that men might know what power
was in them, and what the indwelling Spirit of God was making of them.
This embodiment of the Logos, called Jesus, did not stay long in the
limitations of the flesh, but long enough to manifest the splendid
Divine potentiality of a man in whom the Logos rules.  The human beings
that He came to illuminate killed His body.  Plato long ago prophesied
that if a perfect man appeared the world would crucify Him, and Plato
was right.  And the Gospel records His farewell.  He says: "It is
expedient for you that I go away."

Now, before we consider what He meant by that saying, just brush the
dust off this foundation-stone--the dust of accumulated dogmatic
limitations, and theological "schemes of salvation," and all the rest.
The Christian revelation is a complete and intelligible philosophy, and
it secures your position.  Infinite Mind, brooding Creative
Motherliness, has expressed itself by materializing its thoughts in the
phenomena of the universe, and body-forming its highest thought in human
beings. That man is the highest expression and self-realization of the
Creative Mother-mind, is the guarantee that man's consciousness mirrors
the infinite Mother-mind as the dewdrops mirror the sun.  It follows
that if there were an absolutely perfect human being, that human being
would be so God-inhabited that he would be able to say, "I and Infinite
Mind are one; he that hath seen Me hath seen Infinite Mind."  Now Jesus
is this perfect human being.  The Divine ideal was specialized,
completely expressed, in His individual personality.  The Divinity of
Jesus means that He was the full embodiment of the qualities and
principles of the Creative Motherliness, the Infinite Spirit. So in
Jesus, God is no longer a vague abstraction, because I can interpret the
Universal Mind through the specialization in Jesus:

      "Space and time, O Lord, that show Thee
        Oft in power, veiling good,
      Are too vast for us to know Thee
      As our trembling spirits would;
    But in Jesus, yes, in Jesus, Father, Thou art understood."

But more; in Jesus I can also understand myself.  Infinite Mind sent
Jesus to be a complete full-orbed specimen of what I am potentially
myself.  The principles that He embodied, the "Logos Emphutos" that
became flesh in Him, are not peculiar to Him, but universal, so that we
can claim identity with Him.  St. John says: "As He is, so are we in
this world"; St. Paul says: "The Christ"--that is, the "Logos
Emphutos"--"is in you the hope of glory"; and He Himself said: "I am in
the Father, and ye in Me, and I in you."

That is why He said: "It is expedient for you that I go away."  He came
to teach that the "inborn Word" is universal; it is the Mother-God
repeating Itself in all Souls; and if this truth were to be realized and
appreciated, it was expedient that the visible Personality in which it
was specialized should be removed, in order that men might mentally
universalize the manifestation, and learn that this spirit of Sonship,
this Divine nature, this distribution of the Creative Being, belongs to
all men, as the hope of their existence, the ideal of their life, the
leaven of their humanity, the assurance of their perfection.

He did not really leave us.  He said that if He did not go the Comforter
could not come. He is the Comforter.  He identified Himself completely
with the coming of the Holy Ghost; He speaks of Pentecost as His second
coming; He says, "I will not leave you comfortless," "I will come unto
you"; and St. Paul, in 2 Cor. iii. 17, in emphatic terms, declares, "Now
the Lord"--meaning the Lord Jesus Christ--"is that Spirit."

Our Lord also said, "When He is come He will convict the world of sin."
Do you know something of this?  He meant that when Divine Sonship, the
inborn Word that was specialized in Him, begins to stir in a man, to
make itself felt, there is a new principle in him which cannot tolerate
the lower nature, but torments it.  Until the "Logos Emphutos" is
awakened there is no real consciousness of sin.  Philo taught that where
the Logos had not stirred in a man there was no moral responsibility;
but "when He has come," when something has taught you that you came out
from the Mother-Soul, that you are an expression of God, how you hate
yourself for past sin; and if from deeply ingrained habit you are
sometimes now selfish, irritable, unkind, impure, the punishment comes
quickly in the painful sense of disturbed harmony, and you are miserable
till restored.  This is "the Spirit of Jesus," "the Christ in you," the
"Logos Emphutos," call it the Holy Ghost if you like, convicting you of
sin.

One final thought.  This very intimate relationship to the Mother-Soul
unfolds the limitless capacities of our being.  All the power of the
Kingdom of Heaven is at our disposal if we will mentally claim it.
Remember, the moral issues of life are mental.  It is a fundamental law
of conscious life that by metaphysical telepathy we can have immediate
communion with Infinite Life.  Our minds can focus the Divine Presence,
and we may speak to the world's Creator as intimately as a child would
prattle to its mother.  Then consider what ought our moral life to be?
Not obedience to a conventional category of social maxims, but an
expression of the Infinite Mind, and our daily prayer should be, "May my
conscious mind perceive that Thy life, Thy thoughts, Thy spirit are
within me, and that Thou art seeking to realize Thyself and manifest Thy
love through me."

Again, inasmuch as the whole must include its parts, and as we can
mentally attract the attention of the whole, we can most assuredly
attract the attention of any beloved individual personality in the
spirit world by wireless thoughtography; not drawing them down into
these denser elements that they have left, but lifting our spirit-self
into the ethereal element where they abide, for when we are realizing
God we are summoning them.  That is a communion that breaks down the
barrier between two worlds, and enables us to say, "With angels and
archangels, and with all the company of Heaven, we laud and magnify Thy
glorious name; evermore praising Thee, and saying, Holy, holy, holy,
Lord God Almighty, Heaven and earth are full of Thy glory; glory be to
Thee, O Lord most High."




                             *Last Words.*


"We live, if ye stand fast in the Lord."--1 THESS. iii. 8.


The last Sunday of a year suggests a moral balancing of accounts.  I
will not burden you with retrospect; what is the good? Nor will I waste
your time with anticipations--always a futile speculation.  The only
thing that matters is the present.  How do we stand--now, to-day?  That
is important both to pupil and to pupil-teacher.  There is something
intensely pathetic, something that arouses an echo in my own heart, in
the way Paul interweaves the "we" and the "ye" in that sentence.  This
great prototype, "We live if ye stand fast," of all subsequent
ministrants to souls recognizes the close interdependence of spiritual
welfare between himself and those he had been commissioned to teach. The
truth of human solidarity, and the responsibility of each soul to
minister to its neighbour, reaches its climax in such a relationship as
that existing between Paul and the Church in Thessalonica.  He had
laboured to kindle the dormant capacities of their souls, while training
his own.  His life had not been easy.  Festus said he was mad.  The
magistrates at Philippi scourged and imprisoned him.  Demas forsook him,
and his colleague Peter withstood him. Moreover, he had constant
weakness of health, his thorn in the flesh tormented him, but the one
only thing he cared for was that souls awakened under his ministry
should not fall back.  He speaks as if his very life hung upon their
continued perseverance in the truth he had taught.  "We live," he
says--"we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord."  It is as if he had said,
"Ye are the very travail of my soul; life will not be worth living to
me; it will be darkened by shadow, if ye, the souls whom I have
influenced, fall away when I am no longer with you."  More than that he
felt that he would be measured by the result of his work.  I imagine
that all ministers must feel the same, and, without presumption, may in
the same way suggest to their people, as one additional motive for
striving for the grace of perseverance, the motive of contributing to
the life-joy of the human instrument through whom they have gained some
light.  The thought obtrudes itself aggressively at one of these
way-marks, these sign-posts in the passage of time, which remind one of
the uncertainty as to the continuance of existing conditions. Not that
"uncertainty" matters in the least. I dislike the word "uncertainty";
the one certainty is that all is well, as God is All and God is Love;
when you know that, you don't talk about "uncertainty":

    "All unknown the future lies--Let it rest.
    God who veils it from our eyes--Knows best.
    Ask not what shall be to-morrow--Be content,
    Take the cup of joy or sorrow--God has sent."


Of course, every pupil-teacher in God's school knows that he,
personally, is nothing--nothing but a voice crying in the Wilderness.
Nevertheless, he has one desire in the fulfilment of which his happiness
here, and perhaps in the other dimension, is closely concerned; it is
that his fellow-pupils should "stand fast in the Lord."  "In the Lord,"
mark you--"in the Lord."  Not in fidelity to some ethical standard--not
in the shibboleths of some acceptable so-called school of thought, not
in the excluding externalisms of some particular denomination--those are
all incidents which have their place--but "in the Lord."  To define
exhaustively the meaning of "in the Lord" would be to recapitulate the
whole curriculum; but to be "in the Lord" is a spiritual acquisition
attained by systematic thinking into God, and "standing fast in the
Lord" is using the will to compel the conscious mind to hold the thought
till it becomes a normal attitude.  To be "in the Lord" is to have
discovered your true relation as an individual to the Infinite
Originating Spirit.  It is to have recognized that God is known only by
the mind, and that mental force is "that you have the likest God within
your soul"; and with the aid of that mental force to have thought
yourself out of objective Deism into the truth of the universally
diffused Creative Mind, Immanent, Transcendent, and Paternal.  It is to
have realized what Wordsworth calls the Sense Sublime of--

    "Something far more deeply interfused,
    A Motion and a Spirit that impels
    All thinking things, all objects of all thought,
    And rolls through all things."

This "sense sublime," which is spiritual consciousness, is a sense
which, once awakened, Materialism can never stamp out, though it is very
possible to be unfaithful to it.  It is a thrilling consciousness of
penetrating Divine Mind everywhere.  This "sense sublime" is an
hereditary instinct in our nature which makes "feeling after God"
automatic.  This "sense sublime," added to the natural demand for a
conception of God under some conditions of personality, has been the
foundation of all religions.  It was the foundation of the higher Deism
of the Jewish theology, which possessed beautiful characteristics in
spite of its anthropomorphism.  Isaiah was full of the "sense sublime,"
and he bids us create "thought-forms" and think of Infinite Spirit as
men would think of their mothers--"As one whom his mother comforteth, so
will I comfort you."  "Use your imagination," he would say, "to conceive
that the tenderness of a mother feebly represents the watchful love, the
protecting care, of Jehovah towards the human race; for a human mother
may forget her child, 'Yet will I not forget thee,' saith the Lord."

Beautiful and consoling as is Isaiah's conception of God as Universal
Mother, it is still Deistic, it still leaves the Infinite Intelligence
as a Person, which He is not.  It does not answer the philosophic
problem of how mentally to specialize the Infinite Mind while at the
same time preserving mentally the conception of its universality.  The
Gospel of the "Word made Flesh," the revelation of the Incarnation,
solves that problem.

In the Christian revelation the words "Absolute," "Infinite Mind," and
the rest, are relieved of impersonality and vagueness.  We see that
earth's teeming millions are not created, designed, or fashioned, or
even generated in the physical sense.  They are to God what words are to
thoughts--expressions, utterances of the Infinite Mind of God.  Each
human being is an individual vehicle or life-centre in which the
Infinite Mind expresses, manifests itself.  Each human life is the
reproduction in an individuality of qualities which the Infinite
Creative Mind perceives within itself and desires to realize.  Now, if
the sum-total of these universally diffused qualities of the Infinite
Mind could be specialized in one absolutely perfect individual
life-centre, we should be able to recognize the personalness of the
Infinite Mind and estimate the qualities and principles of the
Originating Spirit.  And in Jesus we have this unique specimen, this
concentration in one individual life-centre, and we know what God is
because in Jesus dwelt "all the fulness of the God-head bodily."  More
than this.  The Universal, specialized in Jesus, enables us to
understand how God is immanent in us; for the Lord Jesus declared that
our relationship to the Infinite Mind was essentially and potentially of
the same nature as His, that we too have "the Father in us."  He
emphatically declares: "I go to My Father and to your Father."  Thus is
Jesus the Mediator, or Uniting Medium, between God and man.  Thus does
"God in Christ reconcile the world to Himself," for in the perfectly
God-inhabited man is revealed the transcendent truth that God and man,
in inherent eternal unity, are one. When we think into this
self-revelation of God in Jesus Christ, when we recognize what it
implies--namely, that the personality of Infinite Spirit is manifested
in the objective Christ, and that the mystic Christ is in all, and that
every human being is a potential Jesus--we have realized what it is to
be "in the Lord."  If only we could stand fast in this truth!  If we
restless, capricious human beings could but exercise our wills, our
power of self-compulsion, in holding our conscious minds fast to this
thought, it would reconstitute the whole of our character and being,
because it would readjust our mental relations with the material
environment and sense-impressions in which we live.

It alters the whole outlook on life to know you personally are an idea
in the mind of God, and that you have the power within you to identify
yourself with God's purpose.  Your entire theology is expanded; for to
begin to know God as He is in Himself is to become a convinced
Universalist and a denier of the essentiality of evil, though you hate
evil as you never hated it before.  So to be "in the Lord" is not to be
staggered by the existence of evil.  The imperfection that seems to mar
the perfection of the economy of the world is recognized as a necessary
condition for the production of the highest good, one of its objects
being to make you hate it.  The proposition which I constantly reiterate
is clear, logical, conclusive.  God is All, All is God; God is the only
_ousia_ (substance) in the universe.  This negation of good which we
hate, this contrast, either is or is not part of universal order.  If it
is part of universal order, then, in spite of all seeming paradox, it is
of the "all things that work together for good."  If it is not part of
His universal order, then the philosophy of Infinity is shattered, and
we are confronted with another creative originator in the universe, in
everlasting antagonism to the good God--a paralyzing Dualism, which is
only another name for Atheism.  God is All, God is Love, God is
Omnipotent, and God is Immanent. Therefore it is certain that a hidden
purpose of benevolence and love, incomparably higher than would be
accomplished by the abolition of what we call evil, must have actuated
the Infinite Mind when He "thought-created" phenomena.  Clearly it is an
impossibility, even to Omnipotence, to make moral beings, in whom He
could realize His highest quality of love, without giving them a measure
of volition, which volition had to pass the test of the complex
education and temptations of earth-life, with all that it entails; and
His purpose is so high and glorious that its ultimate consummation will
justify and vindicate all the apparently inexplicable means He adopts in
bringing it about.

Once more--though I fear I cause that string to vibrate too often, but
out of the heart the mouth speaketh--to "stand fast in the Lord" is to
be unspeakably uplifted and supported when crushed under the sorrow of
bereavement.  "Standing fast in the Lord"--you know that every separate
individual human being is a product of the Divine Mind, imaging forth an
image of Itself on the plane of the material.  Consequently, each
Individual and the Originating Spirit are essentially inseverable.
Therefore human souls strongly linked by love are inseverable, and,
though visibly separated, are merged in one another, and spirit with
spirit does meet.  "The Communion of Saints" is to you who are "standing
in the Lord" not a theological dogma, but a fact of being.  You do not
believe, you know, that the casting off of the body, the passing out of
sight of the temporary corporeal enslavement, causes no separation
between you and those who are living now in a world of duller life,
where the limitations of the physical do not exist.  We may be
unconscious of the intensity and reality of this communion, because our
spiritual self, our real man, is still in the educative isolation of the
flesh; but the beloved departed know that the only real home of the
spirit is the Universal, and that there is no limitation of time or
space where they are, and that as thought-transference on the physical
plane is acknowledged as a scientific fact, nothing can hinder the
transmission of mind-impulse on the spiritual plane, especially when we
remember that there is a force greater, according to St. Paul, than
Faith, and greater than Hope, and that is Love.  If Faith can penetrate
into the spirit-world, cannot Love?  God is Love, and "Love never
faileth."

If you are "standing fast in the Lord" the vibration of your love
penetrates into God's hidden world.  The method is the mental process of
thinking yourself into conscious realization of the Presence of
Universal Spirit, and then, with that thought sustained, thinking
strongly of the loved one you want in the spirit world.  They catch the
impulse of your telepathic, God-inspired, love-thought, and respond to
your spirit, and sometimes you will be definitely conscious of the
response through the percipient mind.  Another test of standing fast in
the Lord is the increase of your usefulness in the world.  The service
for others, of one who is standing fast in the Lord, will manifest
itself mainly in three spheres: the sphere of action, of example, of
intercession.  First you will have a new enthusiasm and desire to work
in the sphere of definite remedial activity on this temporal, this
material plane.  You know that there is nothing but God, therefore you
recognize that the material plane is one of God's spheres of love and
sacrifice.  Being "in the Lord" does not imply a life of indolent
contemplation.  It implies "coming to the help of the Lord against the
mighty," like that consecrated sister of humanity, Sister Dora.  You
remember, I have often repeated it, how, after a laborious day in her
hospital, her rest was constantly broken by the sound of the bell placed
at the head of her bed to be rung whenever any sufferer wanted her, and
on that bell was engraved the motto, "The Master is come and calleth for
thee."  I often try to remind myself of that.  As every member of the
race is God-inhabited, every claim made upon us--though of course we
must consider each claim with due discretion--is the Master's voice
saying, "Remember, I in them, and thou in Me, that they may be perfect
in us."

Then, again, standing fast in the Lord gives you a new power of
expressing, manifesting, the Immanent God by your life, your example.
The highest duty in life is manifesting God. You will find that the
words in my prayer, "May my highest aim this day be to manifest God and
to make others happy," become your normal attitude.  It will be as
natural to you now to give a gentle answer to a deliberate provocation
as formerly it was natural to give an irritable reply.  You will take
your own line on principles of moral rectitude, heedless of the strife
of tongues, but with perfect respect for the expressed opinions of
others who wholly differ from you.  Then it is hardly necessary to point
out that "Standing fast in the Lord" is to be a power in intercession.
God has taught us that there is no sphere in which the soul, that really
recognizes its relation to Infinite Spirit, can more effectually help
and bless others.  I cannot define these "thoughtographs" of mental
causation on the spiritual plane, but it is impossible to measure the
cumulative force of united intercession.

Intercession does not mean that you have importuned an objective
Omnipotent Being to do a kindness to one of His subjects, though in
human language we seem thus to express it.  It is, that having found
your true relation as an individual to the Universal Originating Spirit,
and your sympathy and pity being drawn to some case of need, you
specialize, by the power of your thought, the All-surrounding Infinite
Love, and focus it, direct it, to the particular case of need, and
Infinite Love thinks, wills, and expresses Himself through you.  When
Paul said, "Brethren, pray for us," he knew that loving, sympathizing,
healing thoughts, projected like wireless-telegraphy vibrations from
united God-inhabited hearts, were the life of God in man reaching forth
to quicken, stimulate, and support a brother man. I have been upheld in
physical and mental weakness by a stream of kindly sympathy, radiating
Divine creative energy.  I once before expressed my gratitude in the
words of an American divine:

    "Beneath the shelter which your prayers have reared,
      Quiet and blest,
    The storm which struck me down no longer feared,
      Secure I rest."


That is what this wireless spiritual telegraphy does--it frees the mind
from fear.  To free the mind from fear is to strike at the root of many
a physical and mental trouble.

I have been withheld recently from taking an active part in this Divine
work, but I have a sheaf of letters of thanksgiving.  I give extracts
from two:

You prayed for a young girl who was about to face an examination for a
post and who was tormented with nervous headache. The letter says: "It
was a positive miracle; there was not a headache after that night, and
the examination was passed most successfully."

Again, you prayed two Sundays in succession for a youth in the North of
England. The letter says: "He was dying; the doctors had given him up,
and he himself had no thought of recovery.  He is well and a new man;
people are expressing the greatest astonishment, declaring that no one
understands it.  They do not know the explanation."  These cases are not
that an Objective external God did something kind because we asked Him,
but that the Immanent Universal Mind used our sympathy, and our yearning
to help, in bringing about that which He also desired, but for the
fulfilment of which He needed the focussed love and desire of the
individual life-centres in which He is Immanent.  That is one way of
"coming to the help of the Lord against the Mighty."

Now these recapitulations imperfectly express my meaning when I ask you
to "Stand fast in the Lord."  The end of a year is a time when a
register of results is justifiable, and an occasion for a fresh start is
recognized. I ask you to make a resolution that you will be spiritually
self-supporting, and independent of external aid, and that, whether the
pupil-teacher to whom you have become accustomed is in the flesh or out
of it, you will "Stand fast in the Lord," for his sake as well as your
own.  "We live, if ye stand fast."  It is so, it must be so, for the
test of a teacher is the perseverance of the taught.  To fall away from
a great principle because the temporary enunciator of that principle is
removed, is to condemn that enunciator as a failure, and perhaps to send
him to his account without his golden sheaves.

    "Ah, who shall then the Master meet
    And bring but withered leaves?
    Ah, who shall at the Saviour's feet,
    Before the awful judgment seat,
    Lay down for golden sheaves
    Nothing but leaves, nothing but leaves?"


In the words of Shakespeare I say, "Hereafter in a better world than
this I shall desire more love and knowledge of you"; meanwhile remember,
"The Kingdom of Heaven is within you," all the power you can possibly
need is at your disposal, you need no helper to give it you, it is yours
now.

    "O be strong, then, and brave, pure, patient, and true;
    The work that is yours let no other hand do.
    For the strength for all need is faithfully given
    From the fountain within you--the Kingdom of Heaven."



                  Printed for Elliot Stock, Publisher,
                   7, Paternoster Row, London, E.C.,
                  by Billing and Sons, Ltd., Guildford









                  *By THE VEN. ARCHDEACON WILBERFORCE*


*STEPS IN SPIRITUAL GROWTH*

Steps in Spiritual Growth--The Apple of God's Eye--The Seed is the
Logos--God Sleeps in the Stone--The Armour of God--Christ in you, the
Hope of Glory--The Water and the Blood--Praise--Noli me Tangere--Things
of Good Report--The Master-Truth of Christianity--The Wedding
Garment--The Moral Sense, and the Religious Instinct.


*POWER WITH GOD*

A Suggested Morning Prayer--Power with God--The Father's
Demand--Judgment by the Christ Within--The Word made Flesh--The Armour
of Light in the Strife of Tongues--The Meaning of a
Coronation--Manifesting God--The Holy Spirit--The Holy Trinity--Cosmic
Consciousness--Festival of St. Luke: The Layman's Saints' Day--Abba
Father--Affirmations.


*SERMONS PREACHED IN WESTMINSTER ABBEY.  First Series.*

Three Inspired Propositions--God's Riddle--Does God Suffer?--The Father
is greater than All--The Holy Trinity--The Holy Spirit--The Unpardonable
Sin--Septuagesima--Back to Origins--Quinquagesima--The Impulse Behind
Origins--Resurrection--Ascension--Paradise--Hades--The Communion of
Saints--Propitiation--Diversity and Toleration--Unbinding the Word--No
Wastefulness with God.


*THE HOPE THAT IS IN ME.*

God the Healer--For Ever with the Lord--Reincarnation--A New Year's
Motto--Epiphany--Social Evolution--Heavenly Citizenship--Mental
Limitation of God--Cure for Mental Limitation--The Open Cancer of
England's Life--The Amethyst--Mental Concentration--Thinking into
God--Welcome to the German Pastors in Westminster Abbey at
Ascensiontide--Creation, and the Book of Genesis--Life in Him--Glorify
God in your Body--Theosophy--Counsels to Cadets--God's Bairns.


*THE SECRET OF THE QUIET MIND*

Advent--"Mysteries": A Christmas Thought--Church Parade--Dives or
Lazarus, Which?--Individual Responsibility for Corporate Wrong
Doing--"If Thou Hadst Known"--Animal Sunday--The Secret of the Quiet
Mind--The Power of a Symbol--Mercy--What is Christianity?


*THE POWER THAT WORKETH IN US*

First Principles--Repentance--Repentance from Dead Works--Faith Towards
God--The Laying-on of Hands--From what Centre do we Think?--The Blessed
Sacrament--The Unjust Steward--The Earthquake in Sicily--A Suggestion
for Lent--The Leverage Power in Man--The Departure of Loved Ones.


*SANCTIFICATION BY THE TRUTH*

God's Truth--Limiting the Holy One-The Awakening--Motherhood in God--The
Origin of Man--Wheat and Tares--Ought the Clergy to Criticise the
Bible?--The Obligation of the Sabbath--Nelson and Trafalgar--The Bishop
of London's Fund--Joint Heirs with
Christ--Virtue--Knowledge--Self-Control--Patience--Godliness--Brotherly
Kindness--Our Father, which art in Heaven--Hallowed be Thy Name--Thy
Kingdom Come--Thy Will be Done--Give us this Day our Daily
Bread--Forgive us our Trespasses--Lead us not into Temptation--Thine is
the Kingdom.


*NEW (?) THEOLOGY*

New (?) Theology--Soul-Hunger--The Pre-Natal Promise--Where to Find the
Lord--The Storm--Praying for the Departed--The Doctrine of the Holy
Unity--Hades--Truth--Shallowness--Assurance--Demonology--Our Mother in
Heaven--The Visible Church--The Limits of Forgiveness--St. Simon and St.
Jude--The Atonement--Auto-Suggestion--O.H.M.S.--Phariseeism--Advent:
S.P.G.--Advent: Incarnation--Advent: The Bible--Advent: The Woman
Clothed with the Sun.



                              COMMENDED BY
                   DR. WALPOLE, BISHOP OF EDINBURGH.

"All who have at any time been laid aside by sickness will have felt the
need of just such a book as this which Mr. Trevelyan has compiled.
Trouble brings us face to face with realities, and it is then that we
need strong, hopeful words that will shew us how we ought to meet it.
These will be found in the admirable selections that are bound up under
the attractive title Apples of Gold."--GEORGE BISHOP OF EDINBURGH

A book of the greatest possible help--and will give more strengthening
thought than many such manuals are apt to give

                            *Apples of Gold*

A COMMONPLACE BOOK of selected Readings, intended to suggest thoughts,
lay foundations, and build up character.

                   COMPILED AND ARRANGED BY THE REV.
                         W. B. TREVELYAN, M.A.
                         WARDEN OF LIDDON HOUSE

216 pages.  Handsome Cloth Binding.  2s. 6d. net.

Presentation Editions, printed on thin paper.  Limp Leather, full gilt
back, gilt top, silk register.  4s. 6d. net.  Calf or Turkey Morocco,
red under gilt edges, gilt roll, silk register, boxed. 7s. 6d. net.



                    *Library of Historic Theology.*

                 EDITED BY THE REV. WM. C. PIERCY, M.A.

      _Each Volume, Demy 8vo., Cloth, Red Burnished Top, 5s. net._


                 _The following Volumes are now ready:_

THE PRESENT RELATIONS OF SCIENCE AND RELIGION.
       By the REV. PROFESSOR T. G. BONNEY, D.Sc.

ARCHEOLOGY OF THE OLD TESTAMENT.
       By PROFESSOR EDOUARD NAVILLE, D.C.L., LL.D.

MYSTICISM IN CHRISTIANITY.
       By the REV. W. K. FLEMING, M.A., B.D.

THE RULE OF LIFE AND LOVE.
       By the REV. R. L. OTTLEY, D.D.

THE RULE OF FAITH AND HOPE.
       By the REV. R. L. OTTLEY, D.D.

MARRIAGE IN CHURCH AND STATE.
       By the REV. T. A. LACEY, M.A.

CHRISTIANITY AND OTHER FAITHS.
       By the REV. W. ST. CLAIR TISDALL, D.D.

THE BUILDING UP OF THE OLD TESTAMENT.
       By the REV. CANON R. B. GIRDLESTONE, M.A.

THE CHURCHES IN BRITAIN.  Vol. I. and II.
       By the REV. ALFRED PLUMMER, D.D.

CHARACTER AND RELIGION.
       By the REV. THE HON. EDWARD LYTTELTON, M.A.

THE CREEDS: Their History, Nature and Use.
       By the REV. HAROLD SMITH, M.A.

MISSIONARY METHODS, ST. PAUL'S OR OURS?
       By the REV. ROLAND ALLEN, M.A.

THE CHRISTOLOGY OF ST. PAUL (Hulsean Prize Essay).
       By the REV. S. NOWELL ROSTRON, M.A.

RELIGION IN AN AGE OF DOUBT.
       By the REV. CHARLES J. SHEBBEARE, M.A.


      Further important announcements wilt be made in due course;
         full particulars may from obtained from the Publisher.







                          *THE PURPLE SERIES*

                   Books of Devotion and Meditation.

                        Cloth, 1s. 6d. net each.


PRAYER AND COMMUNION. By the Right Rev. the BISHOP OF EDINBURGH. Also
bound in White Parchment, 2s. 6d. net.

THERE IS NO DEATH.  By the Ven. BASIL WILBERFORCE, D.D. Also bound in
White Parchment, 2s. 6d. net.

MYSTIC IMMANENCE. By the Ven. BASIL WILBERFORCE, D.D. Also bound in
White Parchment, 2s. 6d. net.

THEM WHICH SLEEP IN JESUS. By the Rev. G. T. SHETTLE, L.A.

CEDAR AND PALM. By the Rev. W. EWING, M.A.

THE PROBLEMS AND PRACTICE OF PRAYER. By the Rev. S. C. LOWRY, M.A.

THE WAITING-PLACE OF SOULS. By the Rev. C. E. WESTON, M.A.