#

And just like that she was off to Russia. Lester insisted that she buy
a business-class ticket, and she discovered to her bemusement that
British Airways had about three classes above business, presumably
with even more exclusive classes reserved to royalty and peers of the
realm. She luxuriated in fourteen hours of reclining seats and warm
peanuts and in-flight connectivity, running a brief videoconference
with Lester just because she could. Tjan had sent her a guide to the
hotels and she'd opted for the Pribaltiyskaya, a crumbling Stalin-era
four-star of spectacular, Vegasesque dimensions. The facade revealed
the tragedy of the USSR's unrequited love-affair with concrete, as did
the cracks running up the walls of the lobby.

They checked her into the hotel with the nosiest questionnaire ever, a
two-pager on government stationary that demanded to know her
profession, employer, city of birth, details of family, and so
forth. An American businessman next to her at the check-in counter saw
her puzzling over it. "Just make stuff up," he said. "I always write
that I come from 123 Fake Street, Anytown, California, and that I work
as a professional paper-hanger. They don't check on it, except maybe
the mob when they're figuring out who to mug. First time in Russia?"

"It shows, huh?"

"You get used to it," he said. "I come here every month on
business. You just need to understand that if it seems ridiculous and
too bad to be true, it is. They have lots of rules here, but no one
follows 'em. Just ignore any unreasonable request and you'll fit right
in."

"That's good advice," she said. He was middle-aged, but so was she,
and he had nice eyes and no wedding ring.

"Get a whole night's sleep, don't drink the so-called 'champagne' and
don't change money on the streets. Did you bring melatonin and
modafinil?"

She stared blankly at him. "Drugs?"

"Sure. One tonight to sleep, one in the morning to wake up, and do it
again tomorrow and you'll be un-lagged. No booze or caffeine, either,
not for the first couple days. Melatonin's over the counter, even in
the States, and modafinil's practically legal. I have extra, here." He
dug in his travel bag and came up with some generic Walgreens bottles.

"That's OK," she said, handing her credit card to a pretty young
clerk. "Thanks, though."

He shook his head. "It's your funeral," he said. "Jet-lag is way worse
for you than this stuff. It's over the counter stateside. I don't
leave home without it. Anyway, I'm in room 1422. If it's two in the
morning and you're staring at the ceiling and regretting it, call me
and I'll send some down."

Was he hitting on her? Christ, she was so tired, she could barely see
straight. There was no way she was going to need any help getting to
sleep. She thanked him again and rolled her suitcase across the
cavernous lobby with its gigantic chandeliers and to the elevators.

But sleep didn't come. The network connection cost a fortune --
something she hadn't seen in years -- and the number of worms and
probes bouncing off her firewall was astronomical. The connection was
slow and frustrating. Come 2AM, she was, indeed, staring at the
ceiling.

Would you take drugs offered by a stranger in a hotel lobby? They were
in a *Walgreens bottle* for chrissakes. How bad could they be? She
picked up the house-phone on the chipped bedstand and punched his
hotel room.

"Lo?"

"Oh Christ, I woke you up," she said. "I'm sorry."

"'Sok. Lady from check-in, right? Gimme your room number, I'll send up
a melatonin now and a modafinil for the morning. No sweatski."

"Uh," she hadn't thought about giving a strange man her room
number. In for a penny, in for a pound. "2813," she said. "Thanks."

"Geoff," he said. "It's Geoff. New York -- upper West Side. Work in
health products."

"Suzanne," she said. "Florida, lately. I'm a writer."

"Good night, Suzanne. Pills are en route."

"Good night, Geoff. Thanks."

"Tip the porter a euro, or a couple bucks. Don't bother with rubles."

"Oh," she said. It had been a long time since her last visit
overseas. She'd forgotten how much minutiae was involved.

He hung up. She put on a robe and waited. The porter took about
fifteen minutes, and handed her a little envelope with two pills in
it. He was about fifteen, with a bad mustache and bad skin, and bad
teeth that he displayed when she handed him a couple of dollar bills.

A minute later, she was back on the phone.

"Which one is which?"

"Little white one is melatonin. That's for now. My bad."

She saw him again in the breakfast room, loading a plate with
hard-boiled eggs, potato pancakes, the ubiquitous caviar, salami, and
cheeses. In his other hand he balanced a vat of porridge with
strawberry jam and enough dried fruit to keep a parrot zoo happy for a
month.

"How do you keep your girlish figure if you eat like that?" she said,
settling down at his table.

"Ah, that's a professional matter," he said. "And I make it a point
never to discuss bizniz before I've had two cups of coffee." He poured
himself a cup of decaf. "This is number two."

She picked her way through her cornflakes and fruit salad. "I always
feel like I don't get my money's worth out of buffet breakfasts," she
said.

"Don't worry," he said. "I'll make up for you." He pounded his coffee
and poured another cup. "Humanity returns," he said, rubbing his
thighs. "Marthter, the creature waketh!" he said in high Igor.

She laughed.

"You are really into, uh, *substances*, aren't you?" she said.

"I am a firm believer in better living through chemistry," he said. He
pounded another coffee. "Ahhh. Coffee and modafinil are an amazing
combo."

She'd taken hers that morning when the alarm got her up. She'd been so
tired that it actually made her feel nauseated to climb out of bed,
but the modafinil was getting her going. She knew a little about the
drug, and figured that if the TSA approved it for use by commercial
pilots, it couldn't be that bad for you.

"So, my girlish figure. I work for a firm that has partners here in
Petersburg who work on cutting-edge pharma products, including some
stuff the FDA is dragging its heels on, despite widespread acceptance
in many nations, this one included. One of these is a pill that
overclocks your metabolism. I've been on it for a year now, and even
though I am a stone calorie freak and pack away five or six thousand
calories a day, I don't gain an ounce. I actually have to remember to
eat enough so that my ribs don't start showing."

Suzanne watched him gobble another thousand calories. "Is it healthy?"

"Compared to what? Being fat? Yes. Running ten miles a day and eating
a balanced diet of organic fruit and nuts? No. But when the average
American gets the majority of her calories from soda-pop, 'healthy' is
a pretty loaded term."

It reminded her of that talk with Lester, a lifetime ago in the
IHOP. Slowly, she found herself telling him about Lester's story.

"Wait a second, you're Suzanne *Church*? New Work Church? San Jose
Mercury News Church?"

She blushed. "You can't *possibly* have heard of me," she said.

He rolled his eyes. "Sure. I shoulder-surfed your name off the
check-in form and did a background check on you last night just so I
could chat you up over breakfast."

It was a joke, but it gave her a funny, creeped-out feeling. "You're
kidding?"

"I'm kidding.  I've been reading you for freaking *years*. I followed
Lester's story in detail. Professional interest. You're the voice of
our generation, woman. I'd be a philistine if I didn't read your
column."

"You're not making me any less embarrassed, you know." It took an
effort of will to keep from squirming.

He laughed hard enough to attract stares. "All right, I *did* spend
the night googling you. Better?"

"If that's the alternative, I'll take famous, I suppose," she said.

"You're here writing about the weight loss clinics, then?"

"Yes," she said. It wasn't a secret, but she hadn't actually gone out
of her way to mention it. After all, there might not be any kind of
story after all. And somewhere in the back of her mind was the idea
that she didn't want to tip off some well-funded newsroom to send out
its own investigative team and get her scoop.

"That is fantastic," he said. "That's just, wow, that's the best news
I've had all year. You taking an interest in our stuff, it's going to
really push it over the edge. You'd think that selling weight-loss to
Americans would be easy, but not if it involves any kind of travel: 80
percent of those lazy insular fucks don't even have
passports. Ha. Don't quote that. Ha."

"Ha," she said. "Don't worry, I won't. Look, how about this, we'll
meet in the lobby around nine, after dinner, for a cup of coffee and
an interview?" She had gone from intrigued to flattered to creeped-out
with this guy, and besides, she had her first clinic visit scheduled
for ten and it was coming up on nine and who knew what a Russian
rush-hour looked like?

"Oh. OK. But you've got to let me schedule you for a visit to some of
our clinics and plants -- just to see what a professional shop we run
here. No gold-teeth-shiny-suit places like you'd get if you just
picked the top Google AdWord. Really American-standard places, better
even, Scandinavian-standard, a lot of our doctors come over from
Sweden and Denmark to get out from under the socialist medicine
systems there. They run a tight ship, ya shore, you betcha," he
delivered this last in a broad Swedish bork-bork-bork.

"Um," she said. "It all depends on scheduling. Let's sort it out
tonight, OK?"

"OK," he said. "Can't *wait*." He stood up with her and gave her a
long, two-handed handshake. "It's a real honor to meet you,
Suzanne. You're one of my real heros, you know that?"

"Um," she said again. "Thanks, Geoff."

He seemed to sense that he'd come on too strong. He looked like he was
about to apologize.

"That's really kind of you to say," she said. "It'll be good to catch
up tonight."

He brightened. It was easy enough to be kind, after all.

She had the front desk call her a taxi -- she'd been repeatedly warned
off of gypsy cabs and any vehicle that one procured by means of a
wandering tout. She got into the back, had the doorman repeat the
directions to Lester's clinic twice to the cabbie, watched him switch
on the meter and checked the tariff, then settled in to watch St
Petersburg go flying by.

She switched on her phone and watched it struggle to associate with a
Russian network. They were on the road for all of five minutes -- long
enough to note the looming bulk of the Hermitage and the ripples left
by official cars slicing through the traffic with their blue blinking
lights -- when her phone went nutso. She looked at it -- she had ten
texts, half a dozen voicemails, a dozen new clipped articles, and it
was ringing with a number in New York.

She bumped the New York call to voicemail. She didn't recognize the
number. Besides, if the world had come to an end while she was asleep,
she wanted to know some details before she talked to anyone about
it. She paged back through the texts in reverse chronological -- the
last five were increasingly panicked messages from Lester and
Perry. Then one from Tjan. Then one from Kettlebelly. They all wanted
to discuss "the news" whatever that was. One from her old editor at
the Merc asking if she was available for comment about "the news."
Tjan, too. The first one was from Rat-Toothed Freddy, that snake.

"Kodacell's creditors calling in debts. Share price below one
cent. Imminent NASDAQ de-listing. Comments?"

Her stomach went cold, her breakfast congealed into a hard lump. The
clipped articles had quotes from Kettlewell ("We will see to it that
all our employees are paid, our creditors are reimbursed, and our
shareholders are well-done-by through an orderly wind-down"), Perry
("Fuck it -- I was doing this shit before Kodacell, don't expect to
stop now") and Lester ("It was too beautiful and cool to be real, I
guess.") Where she was mentioned, it was usually in a snide context
that made her out to be a disgraced pitchwoman for a failed movement.

Which she was. Basically.

Her phone rang. Kettlewell.

"Hi, Kettlewell," she said.

"Where have you been?" he said. He sounded really edgy. It was the
middle of the night in California.

"I'm in St Petersburg," she said. "In Russia. I only found out about
ten seconds ago. What happened?"

"Oh Christ. Who knows? Cascading failure. Fell short of last quarter's
estimates, which started a slide. Then a couple lawsuits filed. Then
some unfavorable press. The share price kept falling, and things got
worse. Your basic clusterfuck."

"But you guys had great numbers overall --"

"Sure, if you looked at them our way, they were great. If you looked
at them the way the Street looks at them, we were in deep
shit. Analysts couldn't figure out how to value us. Add a little
market chaos and some old score-settling assholes, like that fucker
Freddy, and it's a wonder we lasted as long as we did. They're already
calling us the twenty first century Enron."

"Kettlewell," she said, "I lived through a couple of these, and
something's not right. When the dotcoms were going under, their CEOs
kept telling everyone everything was all right, right up to the last
minute. They didn't throw in the towel. They stood like captains on
the bridge of sinking ships."

"So?"

"So what's going on here. It sounds like you're whipped. Why aren't
you fighting? There were lots of dotcoms that tanked, but a few of
those deep-in-denial CEOs pulled it off, restructured and came out of
it alive. Why are you giving up?"

"Suzanne, oh, Suzanne." He laughed, but it wasn't a happy laugh. "You
think that this happened overnight? You think that this problem just
cropped up yesterday and I tossed in the towel?"

Oh. "Oh."

"Yeah. We've been tanking for months. I've been standing on the bridge
of this sinking ship with my biggest smile pasted on for two
consecutive quarters now. I've thrown out the most impressive reality
distortion field the business world has ever seen. Just because I'm
giving up doesn't mean I gave up without a fight."

Suzanne had never been good at condolences. She hated
funerals. "Landon, I'm sorry. It must have been very hard --"

"Yeah," he said. "Well, sure. I wanted you to have the scoop on this,
but I had to talk to the press once the story broke, you understand."

"I understand," she said. "Scoops aren't that important anyway. I'll
tell you what. I'll post a short piece on this right away, just
saying, 'Yes, it's true, and I'm getting details.' Then I'll do
interviews with you and Lester and Perry and put up something longer
in a couple of hours. Does that work?"

He laughed again, no humor in it. "Yeah, that'll be *fine*."

"Sorry, Kettlewell."

"No, no," he said. "No, it's OK."

"Look, I just want to write about this in a way that honors what
you've done over the past two years. I've never been present at the
birth of anything remotely this important. It deserves to be described
well."

It sounded like he might be crying. There was a snuffling
sound. "You've been amazing, Suzanne. We couldn't have done it without
you. No one could have described it better. Great deeds are irrelevant
if no one knows about them or remembers them."

Her phone was beeping. She snuck a peek. It was her old
editor. "Listen," she said. "I have to go. There's a call coming in I
*have* to take. I can call you right back."

"Don't," he said. "It's OK. I'm busy here anyway. This is a big day."
His laugh was like a dog's bark.

"Take care of yourself, Kettlewell," she said. "Don't let the bastards
grind you down."

"Nil carborundum illegitimis to you, too."

She clicked over to her editor. "Jimmy," she said. "Long time no
speak. Sorry I missed your calls before -- I'm in Russia on a story."

"Hello, Suzanne," he said. His voice had an odd, strained quality, or
maybe that was just her mood, projecting. "I'm sorry, Suzanne. You've
been doing good work. The best work of your career, if you ask me. I
follow it closely."

It made her feel a little better. She'd been uncomfortable about the
way she and Jimmy had parted ways, but this was vindicating. It
emboldened her. "Jimmy, what the hell do I do now?"

"Christ, Suzanne, I don't know. I'll tell you what not to do,
though. Off the record."

"Off the record."

"Don't do what I've done. Don't hang grimly onto the last planks from
the sinking ship, chronicling the last few struggling, sinking
schmucks' demise. It's no fun being the stenographer for the fall of a
great empire. Find something else to cover."

The words made her heart sink. Poor Jimmy, stuck there in the Merc's
once-great newsroom, while the world crumbled around him. It must have
been heartbreaking.

"Thanks," she said. "You want an interview?"

"What? No, woman. I'm not a ghoul. I wanted to call and make sure you
were all right."

"Jimmy, you're a prince. But I'll be OK. I land on my feet. You've got
someone covering this story, so give her my number and have her call
me and I'll give her a quote."

"Really, Suzanne --"

"It's *fine*, Jimmy."

"Suzanne," he said. "We don't cover that kind of thing from our
newsroom anymore. Just local stuff. National coverage comes from the
wires or from the McClatchy national newsroom."

She sucked in air. Could it be possible? Her first thought when Jimmy
called was that she'd made a terrible mistake by leaving the Merc, but
if this was what the paper had come to, she had left just in time,
even if her own life-raft was sinking, it had kept her afloat for a
while.

"The offer still stands, Jimmy. I'll talk to anyone you want to
assign."

"You're a sweetheart, Suzanne. What are you in Russia for?"

She told him. Screw scoops, anyway. Not like Jimmy was going to send
anyone to *Russia*, he couldn't even afford to dispatch a reporter to
Marin County by the sounds of things.

"What a story!" he said. "Man!"

"Yeah," she said. "Yeah I guess it is."

"You *guess*? Suzanne, this is the single most important issue in
practically every American's life -- there isn't one in a thousand who
doesn't worry endlessly about his weight."

"Well, I have been getting really good numbers on this." She named the
figure. He sucked air between his teeth. "That's what the whole
freaking *chain* does on a top story, Suzanne. You're outperforming
fifty local papers *combined.*"

"Yeah?"

"Hell yeah," he said. "Maybe I should ask you for a job."

When he got off the phone, she spoke to Perry, and then to
Lester. Lester said that he wanted to go traveling and see his old
friends in Russia and that if she was still around in a couple weeks,
maybe he'd see her there. Perry was morose and grimly determined. He
was on the verge of shipping his three-d printers and he was sure he
could do it, even if he didn't have the Kodacell network for marketing
and logistics. He didn't even seem to register it when she told him
that she was going to be spending some time in Russia.

Then she had to go into the clinic and ask intelligent questions and
take pictures and record audio and jot notes and pay attention to the
small details so that she would be able to write the best account
possible.

They dressed well in Russia, in the clinics. Business casual, but well
tailored and made from good material. The Europeans knew from
textiles, and expert tailoring seemed to be in cheap supply here.

She'd have to get someone to run her up a blue blazer and a white
shirt and a decent skirt. It would be nice to get back into grown-up
clothes after a couple years' worth of Florida casual.

She'd see Geoff after dinner that night, get more detail for the
story. There was something big here in the medical tourism angle --
not just weight loss but gene therapy, too, and voodoo stem-cell stuff
and advanced prostheses and even some crazy performance enhancement
stuff that had kept Russia out of the past Olympics.

She typed her story notes and answered the phone calls. One special
call she returned once she was sitting in her room, relaxed, with a
cup of coffee from the in-room coffee-maker.

"Hello, Freddy," she said.

"Suzanne, darling!" He sounded like he was breathing hard.

"What can I do for you?"

"Just wanted a quote, love, something for color."

"Oh, I've got a quote for you." She'd given the quote a lot of
thought. Living with the squatters had broadened her vocabulary
magnificently.

"And those are your good points," she said, taking a sip of
coffee. "Goodbye, Freddy."

$$$$

PART II

The drive from Orlando down to Hollywood got worse every time Sammy
took it. The turnpike tolls went up every year and the road surface
quality declined, and the gas prices at the clip-joints were
heart-attack-inducing. When Sammy started at Disney Imagineering a
decade before, the company had covered your actual expenses -- just
collect the receipts and turn them in for cash back. But since Parks
had been spun off into a separate company with its own shareholders,
the new austerity measures meant that the bean-counters in Burbank set
a maximum per-mile reimbursement and never mind the actual expense.

Enough of this competitive intelligence work and Sammy would go broke.

Off the turnpike, it was even worse. The shantytowns multiplied and
multiplied. Laundry lines stretched out in the parking-lots of former
strip-malls. Every traffic-light clogged with aggressive
techno-tchotchke vendors, the squeegee bums of the twenty-first
century, with their pornographic animatronic dollies and infinitely
varied robot dogs. Disney World still sucked in a fair number of
tourists (though not nearly so many as in its golden day), but they
were staying away from Miami in droves. The snowbirds had died off in
a great demographic spasm over the past decade, and their children
lacked the financial wherewithal to even think of over-wintering in
their parents' now-derelict condos.

The area around the dead Wal-Mart was particularly awful. The shanties
here rose three, even four stories into the air, clustered together to
make medieval street-mazes. Broward County had long since stopped
enforcing the property claims of the bankruptcy courts that managed
the real-estate interests of the former owners of the fields and malls
that had been turned into the new towns.

By the time he pulled into the Wal-Mart's enormous parking lot, the
day had heated up, his air-con had conked, and he'd accumulated a
comet-tail of urchins who wanted to sell him a computer-generated bust
of himself in the style of a Roman emperor -- they worked on affiliate
commission for some three-d printer jerk in the shanties, and they had
a real aggressive pitch, practically flinging their samples at him.

He pushed past them and wandered through the open-air market stalls, a
kind of cruel parody of the long-gone Florida flea-markets. These
gypsies sold fabricated parts that could be modded to make single-shot
zip guns and/or bongs and/or illegal-gain wireless antennae. They sold
fruit smoothies and suspicious "beef" jerky. They sold bootleg
hardcopies of Mexican fotonovelas and bound printouts of Japanese
fan-produced tentacle-porn comics. It was all damnably eye-catching
and intriguing, even though Sammy knew that it was all junk.

Finally, he reached the ticket-window in front of the Wal-Mart and
slapped down five bucks on the counter. The guy behind the counter was
the kind of character that kept the tourists away from Florida:
shaven-headed, with one cockeyed eyebrow that looked like a set of
hills, a three-day beard and skin tanned like wrinkled leather.

"Hi again!" Sammy said, brightly. Working at Disney taught you to talk
happy even when your stomach was crawling -- the castmember's grin.

"Back again?" the guy behind the counter laughed. He was missing a
canine tooth and it made him look even more sketchy. "Christ, dude,
we'll have to invent a season's pass for you."

"Just can't stay away," Sammy said.

"You're not the only one. You're a hell of a customer for the ride,
but you haven't got anything on some of the people I get here --
people who come practically every day. It's flattering, I tell you."

"You made this, then?"

"Yeah," he said, swelling up with a little pigeon-chested puff of
pride. "Me and Lester, over there." He gestured at a fit, greying man
sitting on a stool before a small cocktail bar built into a scavenged
Orange Julius stand -- God knew where these people got all their crap
from. He had the look of one of the fatkins, unnaturally thin and
muscled and yet somehow lazy, the combination of a ten kilocalorie
diet, zero body-fat and non-steroidal muscle enhancers. Ten years ago,
he would have been a model, but today he was just another ex-tubbalard
with a serious food habit. Time was that Disney World was
nigh-unnavigable from all the powered wheelchairs carting around
morbidly obese Americans who couldn't walk from ride to ride, but
these days it looked more like an ad for a gymnasium, full of
generically buff fatkins in tight-fitting clothes.

"Good work!" he said again in castmemberese. "You should be very
proud!"

The proprietor smiled and took a long pull off a straw hooked into the
distiller beside him. "Go on, get in there -- flatterer!"

Sammy stepped through the glass doors and found himself in an
air-conditioned cave of seemingly infinite dimension. The old Wal-Mart
had been the size of five football fields, and a cunning arrangement
of curtains and baffles managed to convey all that space without
revealing its contents. Before him was the ride vehicle, in a single
shaft of spotlight.

Gingerly, he stepped into it. The design was familiar -- there had
been a glut of these things before the fatkins movement took hold,
stair-climbing wheelchairs that used gyro-stabilizers to pitch, yaw,
stand and sit in a perpetual controlled fall. The Disney World
veterans of their heyday remembered them as failure-prone behemoths
that you needed a forklift to budge when they died, but the ride
people had done something to improve on the design. These things
performed as well as the originals, though they were certainly
knock-offs -- no*how* were these cats shelling out fifty grand a pop
for the real deal.

The upholstered seat puffed clouds of dust into the spotlight's shaft
as he settled into the chair and did up his lap-belt. The little LCD
set into the control panel lit up and started to play the standard
video spiel, narrated in grizzled voice-over.

WELCOME TO THE CABINET OF WONDERS

THERE WAS A TIME WHEN AMERICA HELD OUT THE PROMISE OF A NEW WAY OF
LIVING AND WORKING. THE NEW WORK BOOM OF THE TEENS WAS A PERIOD OF
UNPARALLELED INVENTION, A CAMBRIAN EXPLOSION OF CREATIVITY NOT SEEN
SINCE THE TIME OF EDISON -- AND UNLIKE EDISON, THE PEOPLE WHO INVENTED
THE NEW WORK REVOLUTION WEREN'T RIP-OFF ARTISTS AND FRAUDS.

THEIR MARVELOUS INVENTIONS EMERGED AT THE RATE OF FIVE OR SIX PER
WEEK. SOME DANCED, SOME SANG, SOME WERE HELPMEETS AND SOME WERE MERE
JESTERS.

TODAY, NEARLY ALL OF THESE WONDERFUL THINGS HAVE VANISHED WITH THE
COLLAPSE OF NEW WORK. THEY'VE ENDED UP BACK IN THE TRASH HEAPS THAT
INSPIRED THEM.

HERE IN THE CABINET OF WONDERS, WE ARE PRESERVING THESE LAST REMNANTS
OF THE GOLDEN AGE, A SINGLE BEACON OF LIGHT IN A TIME OF DARKNESS.

AS YOU MOVE THROUGH THE RIDESPACE, PLEASE REMAIN SEATED. HOWEVER, YOU
MAY PAUSE YOUR VEHICLE TO GET A CLOSER LOOK BY MOVING THE JOYSTICK
TOWARD YOURSELF. PULL THE JOYSTICK UP TO CUE NARRATION ABOUT ANY
OBJECT.

MOVE THE JOYSTICK TO THE LEFT, TOWARDS THE MINUS-ONE, IF YOU THINK AN
ITEM IS UGLY, UNWORTHY OR MISPLACED. MOVE THE JOYSTICK TO THE RIGHT,
TOWARD THE PLUS-ONE, IF YOU THINK AN ITEM IS PARTICULARLY
PLEASING. YOUR FEEDBACK WILL BE FACTORED INTO THE CONTINUOUS
REARRANGEMENT OF THE CABINET, WHICH TAKES PLACE ON A MINUTE-BY-MINUTE
BASIS, DRIVEN BY THE ROBOTS YOU MAY SEE CRAWLING AROUND THE FLOOR OF
THE CABINET.

THE RIDE LASTS BETWEEN TEN MINUTES AND AN HOUR, DEPENDING ON HOW OFTEN
YOU PAUSE.

PLEASE ENJOY YOURSELF, AND REMEMBER WHEN WE WERE GOLDEN.

This plus-one/minus-one business was new to him. It had been a mere
four days since he'd been up here, but like so many other of his
visits, they'd made major rehabs to their ride in the amount of time
it would have taken Imagineering to write a memo about the possibility
of holding a design-review meeting.

He velcroed his camera's wireless eye to his lapel, tapped the preset
to correct for low light and motion, and hit the joystick. The
wheelchair stood up with wobbly grace, and began to roll forward on
two wheels, heeling over precipitously as it cornered into the main
space of the ride. The gyros could take it, he knew, but it still
thrilled him the way that a fast, out-of-control go-kart did, miles
away from the safe rides back in Disney.

The chair screeched around a corner and pulled into the first scene, a
diorama littered with cross-sectioned cars. Each one was kitted out
with different crazy technologies -- dashboard gods that monitored and
transmitted traffic heuristics, parallel-parking autopilots,
peer-to-peer music-sharing boxes, even an amphibious retrofit on a
little hybrid that apparently worked, converting the little Bug into a
water-Bug.

The chair swooped around each one, pausing while the narration played
back reminisces by the inventors, or sometimes by the owners of the
old gizmos. The stories were pithy and sweet and always funny. These
were artifacts scavenged from the first days of a better nation that
had died a-borning.

Then on to the kitchen, and the bathrooms -- bathroom after bathroom,
with better toilets, better showers, better tubs, better floors and
better lights -- bedrooms, kids' rooms. One after another, a hyper
museum.

The decor was miles ahead of where it had been the last time he'd been
through. There were lots of weird grace-notes, like taxidermied
alligators, vintage tourist pennants, chintz lamps, and tiny dioramae
of action figures.

He paused in front of a fabric printer surrounded by custom tees and
knit caps and three-d video-game figurines machine-crocheted from
bright yarns, and was passed by another chair. In it was a cute woman
in her thirties, white-blond shaggy hair luminous in the spotlight
over the soft-goods. She paused her chair and lovingly reached out to
set down a pair of appliqued shorts with organic LEDs pulsing and
swirling around the waistband. "Give it a plus-one, OK? These were my
best sellers," she said, smiling a dazzling beach-bunny smile at
him. She wheeled away and paused at the next diorama to set down a
doll-house in a child's room diorama.

Wow -- they were getting user-generated content in the *ride*. Holy
crap.

He finished out the ride with a keen hand on the plus-one/minus-one
lever, carefully voting for the best stuff and against the stuff that
looked out of place -- like a pornographic ceramic bong that someone
had left in the midst of a clockwork animatronic jug-band made from
stitched-together stuffed animals.

Then it was over, and he was debarking in what had been the Wal-Mart's
garden center. The new bright sun made him tear up, and he fished out
his shades.

"Hey, mister, c'mere, I've got something better than sunglasses for
you!" The guy who beckoned him over to a market-stall had the look of
an aging bangbanger: shaved head, tattoos, ridiculous cycling shorts
with some gut hanging over them.

"See these? Polarizing contact-lenses -- prescription or optically
neutral. Everyone in India is into these things, but we make 'em right
here in Florida." He lifted a half-sphere of filmy plastic from his
case and peeled back his eyelid and popped it in. His whole iris was
tinted black, along with most of the whites of his eyes. Geometric
shapes like Maori tattoos were rendered in charcoal grey across the
lenses. "I can print you up a set in five minutes, ten bucks for
plain, twenty if you want them bit-mapped."

"I think I'll stick with my shades, thanks," Sammy said.

"C'mon, the ladies love these things. Real conversation starter. Make
you look all anime and shit, guy like you can try this kind of thing
out for twenty bucks, you know, won't hurt."

"That's all right," Sammy said.

"Just try a pair on, then, how about that. I printed an extra set last
Wednesday and they've only got a shelf-life of a week, so these'll
only be good for another day. Fresh in a sealed package. You like
'em. you buy a pair at full price, c'mon that's as good as you're
going to get."

Before Sammy knew it, he was taking receipt of a sealed plastic packet
in hot pink with a perforated strip down one side. "Uh, thanks..." he
said, as he began to tuck it into a pocket. He hated hard-sells, he
was no good at them. It was why he bought all his cars online now.

"Naw, that's not the deal, you got to try them on, otherwise how can
you buy them once you fall in love with 'em? They're safe man, go on,
it's easy, just like putting in a big contact lens."

Sammy thought about just walking away, but the other vendors were
watching him now, and the scrutiny sapped his will. "My hands are too
dirty for this," he said. The vendor silently passed him a sealed
sterile wipe, grinning.

Knowing he was had, he wiped his hands, tore open the package, took
out the lenses and popped them one at a time into his eyes. He blinked
a couple times. The world was solarized and grey, like he was seeing
it through a tinted windscreen.

"Oh man, you look bad-*ass*," the vendor said. He held up a hand
mirror.

Sammy looked. His eyes were shiny black beads, like a mouse's eyes,
solid save for a subtle tracery of Mickey Mouse heads at the
corners. The trademark infringement made him grin, hard and
spitless. He looked ten years younger, like those late-teen hipsters
whose parents dragged them to Walt Disney World, who showed up in
bangbanger threads and sneered and scratched their groins and made
loud remarks about how suckballs it all was. His conservative buzz-cut
looked more like a retro-skinhead thing, and his smooth-shaved, round
cheeks made him boyish.

"Those are good for two days tops -- your eyes start getting itchy,
you just toss 'em. You want a pair that's good for a week, twenty
dollah with the Mickeys. I got Donalds and Astro Boys and all kinds of
shit, just have a look through my flash book. Some stuff I drew
myself, even."

Playing along now, Sammy let himself be led on a tour of the
flash-book, which featured the kind of art he was accustomed to seeing
in tattoo parlor windows: skulls and snakes and scorpions and naked
ladies. Mickey Mouse giving the finger, Daisy Duck with a strap-on,
Minnie Mouse as a dominatrix. The company offered a bounty for turning
in trademark infringers, but somehow he doubted that the company
lawyers would be able to send this squatter a cease-and-desist letter.

In the end, he bought one of each of the Disney sets.

"You like the mouse, huh?"

"Sure," he said.

"I never been. Too expensive. This is all the ride I want, right
here." He gestured at the dead Wal-Mart.

"You like that huh?"

"Man, it's cool! I go on that sometimes, just to see what it's turned
into. I like that it's always different. And I like that people add
their own stuff. It makes me feel, you know..."

"What?"

Suddenly, the vendor dropped his hard-case bangbanger facade. "Those
were the best days of my life. I was building three-d printers, making
them run. My older brother liked to fix cars, and so did my old man,
but who needs a car, where you going to go? The stuff I built, man, it
could make *anything*. I don't know why or how it ended, but while it
was going, I felt like the king of the goddamned world."

It felt less fun and ironic now. There were tears bright on the
vendor's black-bead eyes. He was in his mid-twenties, younger than
he'd seemed at first. If he'd been dressed like a suburban home-owner,
he would have looked like someone smart and accomplished, with lively
features and clever hands. Sammy felt obscurely ashamed.

"Oh," he said. "Well, I spent those years working a straight job, so
it didn't really touch me."

"That's your loss, man," the vendor said. The printer behind him was
spitting out the last of Sammy's contact-lenses, in sealed plastic
wrap. The vendor wrapped them up and put them in a brown liquor-store
bag.

Sammy plodded through the rest of the market with his paper bag. It
was all so depressing. The numbers at Disney World were down, way
down, and it was his job to figure out how to bring them up again,
without spending too much money. He'd done it before a couple of
times, with the live-action role-playing stuff, and with the rebuild
of Fantasyland as an ironic goth hangout (being a wholly separate
entity from the old Walt Disney Company had its advantages). But to do
it a third time -- Christ, he had no idea how he'd get there. These
weird-ass Wal-Mart squatters had seemed promising, but could you
possibly transplant something like this to a high-throughput,
professional location-based entertainment product?

The urchins were still in the parking lot with their Roman emperor
busts. He held his hands out to ward them off and found himself
holding onto a bust of his own head. One of the little rats had gotten
a three-d scan of his head while he was walking by and had made the
bust on spec. He looked older in Roman emperor guise than he did in
his mind's eye, old and tired, like an emperor in decline.

"Twenty dollah man, twenty, twenty," the kid said. He was about 12,
and still chubby, with long hair that frizzed away from his head in a
dandelion halo.

"Ten," Sammy said, clutching his tired head. It was smooth as epoxy
resin, and surprisingly light. There was a lot of different goop you
could run through those three-d printers, but whatever they'd used for
this, it was featherweight.

The kid looked shrewd. "Twenty dollah and I get rid of these other
kids, OK?"

Sammy laughed. He passed the kid a twenty, taking care to tuck his
wallet deep into the inside pocket of his jacket. The kid whistled
shrilly and the rest of the kids melted away. The entrepreneur made
the twenty disappear, tapped the side of his nose, and took off
running back into the market stalls.

It was hot and muggy and Sammy was tired, and the drive back to
Orlando was another five hours if the traffic was against him -- and
these days, everything was against him.

#

Perry's funny eyebrow twitched as he counted out the day's take. This
gig was all cream, all profit. His overheads amounted to a couple
hundred a month to Jason and his crew to help with the robot and
machinery maintenance in the Wal-Mart, half that to some of the
shantytown girls to dust and sweep after closing, and a retainer to a
bangbanger pack that ran security at the ride and in the market. Plus
he got the market-stall rents, and so when the day was over, only the
first hundred bucks out of the till went into overheads and the rest
split even-steven with Lester.

Lester waited impatiently, watching him count twice before splitting
the stack. Perry rolled up his take and dropped it into a hidden
pocket sewn into his cargo shorts.

"Someday you're going to get lucky and some chick is going to reach
down and freak out, buddy," Lester said.

"Better she finds my bank-roll than my prostate," Perry said. Lester
spent a lot of time thinking about getting lucky, making up for a
lifetime of bad luck with girls.

"OK, let's get changed," Lester said. As usual, he was wearing
tight-fitting jeans that owed a little debt to the bangbanger cycling
shorts, something you would have had to go to a gay bar to see when
Perry was in college. His shirt clung to his pecs and was tailored
down to his narrow waist. It was a fatkins style, the kind of thing
you couldn't wear unless you had a uniquely adversarial relationship
with your body and metabolism.

"No, Lester, no." Perry said. "I said I'd go on this double date with
you, but I didn't say anything about letting you dress me up for it."
The two girls were a pair that Lester had met at a fatkins club in
South Beach the week before, and he'd camera-phoned their pic to Perry
with a scrawled drunken note about which one was his. They were
attractive enough, but the monotonic fatkins devotion to sybartism was
so tiresome. Perry didn't see much point in hooking up with a girl he
couldn't have a good technical discussion with.

"Come *on*, it's good stuff, you'll love it."

"If I have to change clothes, I'm not interested." Perry folded his
arms. In truth, he wasn't interested, period. He liked his little
kingdom there, and he could get everything he needed from burritos to
RAM at the market. He had a chest freezer full of bankruptcy sale
organic MREs, for variety.

"Just the shirt then -- I had it printed just for you."

Perry raised his funny eyebrow. "Let's see it."

Lester turned to his latest car, a trike with huge, electric blue back
tires, and popped the trunk, rummaged, and proudly emerged holding a
bright blue Hawai'ian print shirt.

"Lester, are those . . . turds?"

"It's transgressivist moderne," Lester said, hopping from foot to
foot. "Saw it in the New York Times, brought the pic to Gabriela in
the market, she cloned it, printed it, and sent it out for stitching
-- an extra ten buck for same-day service."

"I am *not* wearing a shirt covered in steaming piles of shit,
Lester. No, no, no. A googol times no."

Lester laughed. "Christ, I had you going, didn't I? Don't worry, I
wouldn't actually have let you go out in public wearing this. But how
about *this*?" he said with a flourish, and brought out another
shirt. Something stretchy and iridescent, like an oil-slick. It was
sleeveless. "It'll really work with your biceps and pecs. Also: looks
pretty good compared to the turd shirt, doesn't it? Go on, try it on."

"Lester Banks, you are the gayest straight man I know," Perry said. He
shucked his sweaty tee and slipped into the shirt. Lester gave him a
big thumbs-up. He examined his reflection in the blacked-out glass
doors of the Wal-Mart.

"Yeah, OK," he said. "Let's get this over with."

"Your enthusiasm, your best feature," Lester said.

Their dates were two brunettes with deep tans and whole-eye cosmetic
contacts that hid their pupils in favor of featureless expanses of
white, so they looked like their eyes had rolled back into their
heads, or maybe like they were wearing cue-balls for glass eyes. Like
most of the fatkins girls Perry had met, they dressed to the nines,
ate like pigs, drank like fishes, and talked about nothing but
biotech.

"So I'm thinking, sure, mitochrondrial lengthening *sounds* like it
should work, but if that's so, why have we been screwing around with
it for thirty years without accomplishing anything?" His date, Moira,
worked at a law office, and she came up to his chest, and it was hard
to tell with those eyes, but it seemed like she was totally oblivious
to his complete indifference to mitochondria.

He nodded and tried not to look bored. South Beach wasn't what it had
once been, or maybe Perry had changed. He used to love to come here to
people-watch, but the weirdos of South Beach seemed too precious when
compared with the denizens of his own little settlement out on the
Hollywood freeway.

"Let's go for a walk on the beach," Lester said, digging out his
wallet and rubbing his card over the pay-patch on the table.

"Good idea," Perry said. Anything to get off this patio and away from
the insufferable club music thundering out of the speakers
pole-mounted directly over their table.

The beach was gorgeous, so there was that. The sunset behind them
stained the ocean bloody and the sand was fine and clean. Around their
feet, Dade County beachcombers wormed endlessly through the sand,
filtering out all the gunk, cig butts, condoms, needles, wrappers,
loose change, wedding rings, and forgotten sunglasses. Perry nudged
one with his toe and it roombaed away, following its instinct to avoid
human contact.

"How do you figure they keep the vags from busting those open for
whatever they've got in their bellies?" Perry said, looking over his
date's head at Lester, who was holding hands with his girl, carrying
her shoes in his free hand.

"Huh? Oh, those things are built like tanks. Have to be to keep the
sand out. You need about four hours with an air-hammer to bust one
open."

"You tried it?"

Lester laughed. "Who, me?"

Now it was Perry's date's turn to be bored. She wandered away toward
the boardwalk, with its strip of novelty sellers. Perry followed,
because he had a professional interest in the kind of wares they
carried. Most of them originated on one of his printers, after
all. Plus, it was the gentlemanly thing to do.

"What have we here?" he said as he pulled up alongside her. She was
trying on a bracelet of odd, bony beads.

"Ectopic fetuses," she said. "You know, like the Christian fundies use
for stem-cell research? You quicken an unfertilized egg in vitro and
you get a little ball of fur and bone and skin and stem-cells. It can
never be a human, so it has no soul, so it's not murder to harvest
them."

The vendor, a Turkish teenager with a luxurious mustache,
nodded. "Every bead made from naturally occurring foetus-bones." He
handed one to Perry.

It was dry and fragile in his hand. The bones were warm and porous,
and in tortured Elephant Man shapes that he recoiled from
atavistically.

"Good price," the Turkish kid said. He had practically no accent at
all, and was wearing a Japanese baseball-team uniform and spray-on
foot-coverings. Thoroughly Americanized. "Look here," he said, and
gestured at a little corner of his table.

It was covered in roses made from fabric -- small and crude, with
pin-backs. Perry picked one up. It had a certain naive charm. The
fabric was some kind of very delicate leather --

"It's skin," his date said. "Foetal skin."

He dropped it. His fingers tingled with the echo of the feeling of the
leather. *Jesus I hate biotech*. The rose fluttered past the table to
the sandy boardwalk, and the Turkish kid picked it up and blew it
clean.

"Sorry," Perry said, sticking his hands in his pockets. His date
bought a bracelet and a matching choker made of tiny bones and teeth,
and the Turkish kid, leering, helped her fasten the necklace. When
they returned to Lester and his date, Perry knew the evening was at a
close. The girls played a couple rounds of eye-hockey, unreadable
behind their lenses, and Perry shrugged apologetically at Lester.

"Well then," Lester said, "it sure has been a nice night." Lester got
smooched when they saw the girls off in a pedicab. In the buzz and hum
of its flywheel, Perry got a damp and unenthusiastic handshake.

"Win some, lose some," Lester said as the girls rolled away in a flash
of muscular calves from the pair of beach-perfect cabbies pedaling the
thing.

"You're not angry?" Perry said.

"Nah," Lester said. "I get laid too much as it is. Saps me of my
precious bodily fluids. Gotta keep some chi inside, you know?"

Perry raised up his funny eyebrow and made it dance.

"Oh, OK," Lester said. "You got me. I'm meeting mine later, after she
drops her friend off."

"I'll get a cab home then, shall I?"

"Take my car," Lester said. "I'll get a ride back in the morning. No
way you'll get a taxi to take you to our neighborhood at this hour."

Perry's car had been up on blocks for a month, awaiting his attention
to its failing brakes and mushy steering. So it was nice to get behind
the wheel of Lester's Big Daddy Roth trike and give it a little gas
out on the interstate, the smell of the swamp and biodiesel from the
big rigs streaming past the windscreen. The road was dark and
treacherous with potholes, but Perry got into the rhythm of it and
found he didn't want to go home, quite, so he kept driving, into the
night. He told himself that he was scouting dead malls for future
expansion, but he had kids who'd video-documented the status of all
the likely candidates in the hood, and he kept tabs on his choicest
morsels via daily sat photos that he subscribed to in his morning
feed.

What the hell was he doing with his life? The Wal-Mart ride was a lark
-- it had been Lester's idea, but Lester had lost interest and Perry
had done most of the work. They weren't quite squatting the Wal-Mart:
Perry paid rent to a state commission that collected in escrow for the
absentee landlord. It was a fine life, but the days blurred one into
the next, directionless. Building the ride had been fun, setting up
the market had been fun, but running them -- well, he might as well be
running a laundromat for all the mental acuity his current job
required.

"You miss it," he said to himself over the whistle of the wind and the
hiss of the fat contact-patches on the rear tires. "You want to be
back in the shit, inventing stuff, making it all happen."

For the hundredth time, he thought about calling Suzanne Church. He
missed her, too, and not just because she made him famous (and now he
was no longer famous). She put it all in perspective for him, and
egged him on to greater things. She'd been their audience, and they'd
all performed for her, back in the golden days.

It was, what, 5AM in Russia? Or was it two in the afternoon? He had
her number on his speed-dial, but he never rang it. He didn't know
what he'd tell her.

He could call Tjan, or even Kettlebelly, just ring them out of the
blue, veterans together shooting the shit. Maybe they could have a
Kodacell reunion, and get together to sing the company song, wearing
the company t-shirt.

He pulled the car off at a truck stop and bought an ice-cream novelty
from a vending machine with a robotic claw that scooped the ice-cream,
mushed it into the cone, then gave it a haircut so that it looked like
Astro Boy's head, then extended the cone on a robotic claw. It made
him smile. Someone had invented this thing. It could have been him. He
knew where you could download vision-system libraries, and
force-feedback libraries. He knew where you could get plans for the
robotics, and off-the-shelf motors and sensors. Christ, these days he
had a good idea where you could get the ice-cream wholesale, and which
crooked vending-machine interests he'd have to grease to get his stuff
into truck-stops.

He was thirty four years old, he was single and childless, and he was
eating an ice-cream in a deserted truck-stop at two in the morning by
the side of a freeway in south Florida. He bossed a low-budget tourist
attraction and he ran a pirate flea-market.

What the hell was he doing with his life?

Getting mugged, that's what.

They came out of the woods near the picnic tables, four bangbangers,
but young ones, in their early teens. Two had guns -- nothing fancy,
just AK-47s run off a computer-controlled mill somewhere in an
industrial park. You saw them all over the place, easy as pie to make,
but the ammo was a lot harder to come by. So maybe they were unloaded.

Speaking of unloaded. He was about to piss his pants.

"Wallet," one of them said. He had a bad mustache that reminded him of
the Turkish kid on the beach. Probably the same hormones that gave
kids mustaches gave them bad ideas like selling fetus jewelry or
sticking up people by the ice-cream machines at late night
truck-stops. "Keys," he said. "Phone," he added.

Perry slowly set down the ice-cream cone on the lid of the trash-can
beside him. He'd only eaten one spike off Astro-Boy's head.

His vision telescoped down so that he was looking at that kid, at his
mustache, at the gun in his hands. He was reaching for his wallet,
slowly. He'd need to hitch a ride back to town. Canceling the
credit-cards would be tough, since he'd stored all the identity-theft
passwords and numbers in his phone, which they were about to take off
him. And he'd have to cancel the phone, for that matter.

"Do you have an older brother named Jason?" his mouth said, while his
hands were still being mugged.

"What?"

"Works a stall by the Wal-Mart ride, selling contact lenses?"

The kid's eyes narrowed. "You don't know me, man. You don't want to
know me. Better for your health if you don't know me."

His hands were passing over his phone, his wallet, his keys --
Lester's keys. Lester would be glad to have an excuse to build a new
car.

"Only I own the Wal-Mart ride, and I've known Jason a long time. I
gave him his first job, fixing the printers. You look like him."

The kid's three buddies were beginning their slow fade into the
background. The kid was visibly on the horns of a dilemma. The gun
wavered. Perry's knees turned to water.

"You're that guy?" the kid said. He peered closer. "Shit, you are."

"Keep it all," Perry said. His mouth wasn't so smart. Knowing who
mugged you wasn't good for your health.

"Shit," the kid said. The gun wavered. Wavered.

"Come *on*," one of his buddies said. "Come on, man!"

"I'll be there in a minute," the kid said, his voice flat.

Perry knew he was a dead man.

"I'm really sorry," the kid said, once his friends were out of range.

"Me too," said Perry.

"You won't tell my brother?"

Perry froze. Time dilated. He realized that his fists were clenched so
tight that his knuckles hurt. He realized that he had a zit on the
back of his neck that was rubbing against his collar. He realized that
the kid had a paperback book stuck in the waistband of his bangbanger
shorts, which was unusual. It was a fantasy novel. A Conan novel. Wow.

Time snapped back.

"I won't tell your brother," he said. Then he surprised himself, "But
you've got to give me back the credit-cards and leave the car at the
market in the morning."

The kid nodded. Then he seemed to realize he was holding a gun on
Perry. He lowered it. "Yeah, that's fair," he said. "Can't use the
fucking cards these days anyway."

"Yeah," Perry said. "Well, there's some cash there anyway." He
realized he had five hundred bucks in a roll in a hidden pocket in his
shorts.

"You get home OK?"

"I'll thumb a ride," Perry said.

"I can call you a taxi," the kid said. "It's not safe to hang around
here."

"That's really nice of you," Perry said. "Thanks."

The kid took out a little phone and prodded it for a minute. "On the
way," he said. "The guns aren't loaded."

"Oh, well," Perry said. "Good to know."

An awkward silence spread between them. "Look, I'm really sorry," the
kid said. "We don't really do this. It's our first night. My brother
would really kill me."

"I won't tell him," Perry said. His heart was beating again, not
thundering or keeping ominously still. "But you know, this isn't
smart. You're going to stick someone up who has bullets and he's gonna
shoot you."

"We'll get ammo," the kid said.

"And shoot him? That's only a little better, you know."

"What do you want me to say?" the kid said, looking young and
petulant. "I apologized."

"Come by tomorrow with the car and let's talk, all right?"

Lester didn't even notice that his car was missing until the kid drove
up with it, and when he asked about it, Perry just raised his funny
eyebrow at him. That funny eyebrow, it had the power to cloud men's
minds.

"What's your name?" Perry asked the kid, giving him the spare stool by
the ticket-window. It was after lunch time, when the punishing heat
slowed everyone to a sticky crawl, and the crowd was thin -- one or
two customers every half hour.

"Glenn," the kid said. In full daylight, he looked older. Perry had
noticed that the shantytowners never stopped dressing like teenagers,
wearing the fashions of their youths forever, so that a walk through
the market was like a tour through the teen fashions of the last
thirty years.

"Glenn, you did me a real solid last night."

Glenn squirmed on his stool. "I'm sorry about that --"

"Me too," Perry said. "But not as sorry as I might have been. You said
it was your first night. Is that true?"

"Car-jacking, sure," the kid said.

"But you get into other shit, don't you? Mugging? Selling a little
dope? Something like that?"

"Everyone does that," Glenn said. He looked sullen.

"Maybe," Perry said. "And then a lot of them end up doing a stretch in
a work-camp. Sometimes they get bit by water-moccasins and don't come
out. Sometimes, one of the other prisoners hits them over the head
with a shovel. Sometimes you just lose three to five years of your
life to digging ditches."

Glenn said nothing.

"I'm not trying to tell you how to run your life," Perry said. "But
you seem like a decent kid, so I figure there's more in store for you
than getting killed or locked up. I know that's pretty normal around
here, but you don't have to go that way. Your brother didn't."

"What the fuck do you know about it, anyway?" The kid was up now, body
language saying he wanted to get far away, fast.

"I could ask around the market," Perry said, as though the kid hadn't
spoken. "Someone here has got to be looking for someone to help
out. You could open your own stall."

The kid said, "It's all just selling junk to idiots. What kind of job
is that for a man?"

"Selling people stuff they can't be bothered to make for themselves is
a time-honored way of making a living. There used to be professional
portrait photographers who'd take a pic of your family for money. They
were even considered artists. Besides, you don't have to sell stuff
you download. You can invent stuff and print that."

"Get over it. Those days are over. No one cares about inventions
anymore."

It nailed Perry between the eyes, like a slaughterhouse bolt. "Yeah,
yeah," he said. He didn't want to talk to this kid any more than this
kid wanted to talk to him. "Well, if I can't talk you out of it, it's
your own business. . ." He started to rearrange his ticket-desk.

The kid saw his opportunity for freedom and bolted. He was probably
headed for his brother's stall and then the long walk to wherever he
planned on spending his day. Everything was a long walk from here, or
you could wait for the busses that ran on the hour during
business-hours.

Perry checked out the car, cleaned out the empties and the roaches and
twists from the back seat, then parked it. A couple more people came
by to ride his ride, and he took their money.

Lester had just finished his largest-ever flattened-soda-can
mechanical computer, it snaked back and forth across the whole of the
old Wal-Mart solarium, sheets of pressboard with precision-cut gears
mounted on aviation bearings -- Francis had helped him with those. All
day, he'd been listening to the racket of it grinding through its
mighty 0.001KHz calculations, dumping carloads of M&Ms into its output
hopper. You programmed it with regulation baseballs, footballs,
soccer-balls, and wiffleballs: dump them in the input hopper and they
would be sorted into the correct chutes to trigger the
operations. With a whopping one kilobit of memory, the thing could
best any of the early vacuum tube computers without a single
electrical component, and Lester was ready to finally declare victory
over the cursed Univac.

Perry let himself be coaxed into the work-room, deputizing Francis to
man the ticket-desk, and watched admiringly as Lester put the machine
through its paces.

"You've done it," Perry said.

"Well, I gotta blog it," Lester said. "Run some benchmarks, really
test it out against the old monsters. I'm thinking of using it to
brute-force the old Nazi Enigma code. That'll show those dirty Nazi
bastards! We'll win the war yet!"

Perry found himself giggling. "You're the best, man," he said to
Lester. "It's good that there's at least one sane person around here."

"Don't flatter yourself, Perry."

"I was talking about *you*, Lester."

"Uh-oh," Lester said. He scooped a double handful of brown M&Ms up
from the output hopper and munched them. "It's not a good sign when
you start accusing me of being the grownup in our partnership. Have
some M&Ms and tell me about it."

Perry did, unburdening himself to his old pal, his roommate of ten
years, the guy he'd gone to war with and started businesses with and
collaborated with.

"You're restless, Perry," Lester said. He put nine golf-balls, a
ping-pong ball, and another nine golf balls in the machine's input
hopper. Two and a third seconds later, eighty one M&Ms dropped into
the output hopper. "You're just *bored*. You're a maker, and you're
running things instead of making things."

"No one cares about made things anymore, Les."

"That's sort of true," Lester said. "I'll allow you that. But it's
only sort of true. What you're missing is how much people care about
organizations still. That was the really important thing about the New
Work: the way we could all come together to execute, without a lot of
top-down management. The bangbanger arms dealers, the bio-terrorists
and fatkins suppliers -- they all run on social institutions that we
perfected back then. You've got something like that here with your
market, a fluid social institution that you couldn't have had ten or
fifteen years ago."

"If you say so," Perry said. The M&Ms were giving him heartburn. Cheap
chocolate didn't really agree with his stomach.

"I do. And so the answer is staring you right in the face: go invent
some social institutions. You've got one creeping up here in the
ride. There are little blogospheres of fans who coordinate what
they're going to bring down and where they're going to put it. Build
on that."

"No one's going to haul ass across the country to ride this ride,
Les. Get real."

"Course not." Lester beamed at him. "I've got one word for you, man:
franchise!"

"Franchise?"

"Build dupes of this thing. Print out anything that's a one of a kind,
run them as franchises."

"Won't work," Perry said. "Like you said, this thing works because of
the hardcore of volunteer curators who add their own stuff to it --
it's always different. Those franchises would all be static, or would
diverge... It'd just be boring compared to this."

"Why should they diverge? Why should they be static? You could network
them, dude! What happens in one, happens in all. The curators wouldn't
just be updating one exhibit, but all of them. Thousands of
them. Millions of them. A gigantic physical wiki. Oh, it'd be so very
very very cool, Perry. A cool *social institution.*"

"Why don't you do it?"

"I'm gonna. But I need someone to run the project. Someone who's good
at getting people all pointed in the same direction. You, pal. You're
my hero on this stuff."

"You're such a flatterer."

"You love it, baby," Lester said, and fluttered his long
eyelashes. "Like the lady said to the stamp collector, philately will
get you everywhere."

"Oy," Perry said. "You're fired."

"You can't fire me, I'm a volunteer!"

Lester dropped six golf-balls and a heavy medicine ball down the
hopper. The machine ground and chattered, then started dropping
hundred-loads of M&Ms -- 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, 600, 700 -- then
some change.

"What operation was that?" Perry said. He'd never seen Lester pull out
the medicine ball.

"Figure it out," Lester said.

Perry thought for a moment. Six squared? Six cubed? Log six? "Six
*factorial*? My God you're weird, Les."

"Genius is never appreciated." He scooped up a double-handful of brown
M&Ms. "In your face, Von Neumann! Let's see your precious ENIAC top
*this*!"

#

A month later, Perry was clearing security at Miami International,
looking awkward in long trousers, closed-sole shoes, and a denim
jacket. It was autumn in Boston, and he couldn't show up in flip-flops
and a pair of cutoffs. The security guards gave his leathery, lopsided
face a hard look. He grinned like a pirate and made his funny eyebrow
twitch, a stunt that earned him half an hour behind the screen and a
date with Doctor Jellyfinger.

"What, exactly, do you think I've got hidden up there?" he asked as he
gripped the railing and tried not to let the illegitimati carborundum.

"It's procedure, sir."

"Well, the doc said my prostate was the size of a guava about a month
ago -- in your professional opinion, has it shrunk or grown? I mean,
while you're up there."

The TSA man didn't like that at all. A minute later, Perry was
buckling up and leaving the little room with an exaggerated bowlegged
gait. He tipped an imaginary hat at the guard's retreating back and
said, "Call me!" in a stagey voice.

It was the last bit of fun he had for the next four hours, crammed in
the tin can full of recycled discount air-traveller flatulence and the
clatter of fingers on keyboards and the gabble of a hundred phone
conversations as the salarymen on the flight stole a few minutes of
cramped productivity from the dead travel time.

Touching down in Boston and getting his luggage, he felt like he'd
landed on an alien planet. The feeling of disorientation and
foreignness was new to Perry. He was used to being supremely
comfortable, in control -- confident. But he was nervous now, maybe
even scared, a little.

He dialed Tjan. "I've got my bags," he said.

"I'll be right around," Tjan said. "Really looking forward to seeing
you."

There were more cops than passengers in the arrivals area at Logan,
and they watched Tjan warily as he pulled up and swung open a door of
his little sports-car.

"What the fuck is this, a Porsche?" Perry said as he folded himself
awkwardly into the front seat, stepping in through the sun-roof,
pulling his bag down into his lap after him.

"It's a Lada. I had it imported -- they're all over
Russia. Evolutionary algorithm used to produce a
minimum-materials/maximum-strength chassis. It's nice to see you,
Perry."

"It's nice to see you, Tjan," he said. The car was so low to the
ground that it felt like he was riding luge. Tjan hammered mercilessly
on the gearbox, rocketing them to Cambridge at such speed that Perry
barely had time to admire the foliage, except at stop-lights.

They were around the campus now, taking a screeching right off Mass
Ave onto a tree-lined street of homely two-storey brick houses. Tjan
pulled up in front of one and popped the sun-roof. The cold air that
rushed in was as crisp as an apple, unlike any breath of air to be had
in Florida, where there was always a mushiness, a feeling of air that
had been filtered through the moist lungs of Florida's teeming fauna.

Perry climbed out of the little Russian sports-car and twisted his
back and raised his arms over his head until his spine gave and popped
and crackled.

Tjan followed, and then he shut down the car with a remote that made
it go through an impressive and stylish series of clicks, clunks and
chirps before settling down over its wheels, dropping the chassis to a
muffler-scraping centimeter off the ground.

"Come on," he said. "I'll show you your room."

Tjan's porch sagged, with a couple kids' bikes triple-locked to it and
an all-covering chalk mosaic over every inch of it. The wood creaked
and gave beneath their feet.

The door sprang open and revealed a pretty little girl, nine or ten
years old, in blue-jeans and a hoodie sweater that went nearly to her
ankles, the long sleeves bunched up like beach-balls on her
forearms. The hood hung down to her butt -- it was East Coast
bangbanger, as reinterpreted through the malls.

"Daddy!" she said, and put her arms around Tjan's waist, squeezing
hard.

He pried her loose and then hoisted her by the armpits up to
eye-height. "What have you done to your brother?"

"Nothing he didn't deserve," she said, with a smile that showed
dimples and made her little nose wrinkle.

Tjan looked over at Perry. "This is my daughter, Lyenitchka, who is
about to be locked in the coal cellar until she learns to stop
torturing her younger brother. Lyenitchka, this is Perry Gibbons, upon
whom you have already made an irreparably bad first impression." He
shook her gently Perrywards.

"Hello, Perry," she said, giggling, holding out one hand. She had a
faint accent, which made her sound like a tiny, skinny Bond
villainess.

He shook gravely. "Nice to meet you," he said.

"You got your kids," Perry said, once she was gone.

"For the school year. Me and the ex, we had a heart-to-heart about the
Russian education system and ended up here: I get the kids from
September to June, but not Christmases or Easter holidays. She gets
them the rest of the time, and takes them to a family dacha in
Ukraine, where she assures me there are hardly any mafiyeh kids to
influence my darling daughter."

"You must be loving this," Perry said.

Tjan's face went serious. "This is the best thing that's ever happened
to me."

"I'm really happy for you, buddy."

They had burgers in the back-yard, cooking on an electric grill that
was caked with the smoking grease of a summer's worth of outdoor
meals. The plastic table-cloth was weighed down with painted rocks and
the corners blew up in the freshening autumn winds. Lyenitchka's
little brother appeared when the burgers began to spit and smoke on
the grill, a seven-year-old in metallic mesh trousers and shirt
wrought with the logo of a cartoon Cossack holding a laser-sword
aloft.

"Sasha, meet Perry." Sasha looked away, then went off to swing on a
tire-swing hanging from the big tree.

"You've got good kids," Perry said, handing Tjan a beer from the
cooler under the picnic table.

"Yup," Tjan said. He flipped the burgers and then looked at both of
them. Lyenitchka was pushing her brother on the swing, a little too
hard. Tjan smiled and looked back down at his burgers.

Tjan cut the burgers in half and dressed them to his kids' exacting
standards. They picked at them, pushed them onto each other's plates
and got some into their mouths.

"I've read your briefing on the ride," Tjan said, once his kids had
finished and eaten half a package of Chutney Oreos for dessert. "It's
pretty weird stuff."

Perry nodded and cracked another beer. The cool air was weirding him
out, awakening some atavistic instinct to seek a cave. "Yup, weird as
hell. But they love it. Not just the geeks, either, though they eat it
up, you should see it. Obsessive doesn't begin to cover it. But the
civilians come by the hundreds, too. You should hear them when they
come out: 'Jee-zus, I'd forgotten about those dishwasher-stackers,
they were wicked! Where can I get one of those these days you figger?'
The nostalgia's thick enough to cut with a knife."

Tjan nodded. "I've been going over your books, but I can't figure out
if you're profitable."

"Sorry, that's me. I'm pretty good at keeping track of numbers, but
getting them massaged into a coherent picture --"

"Yeah, I know." Tjan got a far-away look. "How'd you make out on
Kodacell, Perry? Finance-wise?"

"Enough to open the ride, buy a car. Didn't lose anything."

"Ah." Tjan fiddled with his beer. "Listen, I got rich off of
Westinghouse. Not fuck-the-service-here-I'm-buying-this-restaurant
rich, but rich enough that I never have to work again. I can spend the
rest of my life in this yard, flipping burgers, taking care of my
kids, and looking at porn."

"Well, you were the suit. Getting rich is what suits do. I'm just a
grunt.""

Tjan had the good grace to look slightly embarrassed. "Now here's the
thing. I don't *have* to work, but, Perry, I have *no idea* what I'm
going to do if I don't work. The kids are at school all day. Do you
have any idea how much daytime TV sucks? Playing the stock market is
completely nuts, it's all gone sideways and upside down. I got an
education so I wouldn't *have* to flip burgers for the rest of my
life."

"What are you saying, Tjan?"

"I'm saying yes," Tjan said, grinning piratically. "I'm saying that
I'll join your little weird-ass hobby business and I'll open another
ride here for the Massholes. I'll help you run the franchising op,
collect fees, make it profitable."

Perry felt his face tighten.

"What? I thought you'd be happy about this."

"I am," Perry said. "But you're misunderstanding something. These
aren't meant to be profitable businesses. I'm done with that. These
are art, or community, or something. They're museums. Lester calls
them *wunderkammers* -- cabinets of wonders. There's no franchising op
the way you're talking about it. It's ad hoc. It's a protocol we all
agree on, not a business arrangement."

Tjan grunted. "I don't think I understand the difference between a
agreed-upon protocol and a business arrangement." He held up his hand
to fend off Perry's next remark. "But it doesn't matter. You can let
people have the franchise for free. You can claim that you're not
letting anyone have anything, that they're letting themselves in for
their franchise. It doesn't matter to me.

"But Perry, here's something you're going to have to understand: it's
going to be nearly impossible *not to* make a business out of
this. Businesses are great structures for managing big projects. It's
like trying to develop the ability to walk without developing a
skeleton. Once in a blue moon, you get an octopus, but for the most
part, you get skeletons. Skeletons are good shit."

"Tjan, I want you to come on board to help me create an octopus,"
Perry said.

"I can try," Tjan said, "but it won't be easy. When you do cool stuff,
you end up making money."

"Fine," Perry said. "Make money. But keep it to a minimum, OK?"

#

The next time Perry turned up at Logan, it was colder than the inside
of an icebox and shitting down grey snow with the consistency of
frozen custard.

"Great weather for an opening," he said, once he'd climbed through the
roof of Tjan's car and gotten snow all over the leather
upholstery. "Sorry about the car."

"Don't sweat it, the kids are murder on leather. I should trade this
thing in on something that's less of a deathtrap anyway."

Tjan was balder than he'd been in September, and skinnier. He had a
three-day beard that further hollowed out his normally round
cheeks. The Lada sports-car fishtailed a little as they navigated the
tunnels back toward Cambridge, the roads slick and icy.

"We scored an excellent location," Tjan said. "I told you that, but
check this out." They were right in the middle of a built-up area of
Boston, something that felt like a banking district, with impressive
towers. It took Perry a minute to figure out what Tjan was pointing
at.

"That's the site?" There was a mall on the corner, with a boarded up
derelict Hyatt overtopping it, rising high into the sky. "But it's
right in the middle of town!"

"Boston's not Florida," Tjan said. "Lots of people here don't have
cars. There were some dead malls out in Worcester and the like, but I
got this place for nothing. The owners haven't paid taxes in the ten
years since the hotel folded, and the only shops that were left open
were a couple of Azerbaijani import-export guys, selling junky stuff
from India.

"We gutted the whole second floor and turned the ground-floor
food-court into a flea-market. There's an old tunnel connecting this
to the T and I managed to get it re-opened, so I expect we'll get some
walk-in."

Perry marveled. Tjan had a suit's knack for pulling off the
ambitious. Perry had never tried to even rent an apartment in a big
city, figuring that any place where land was at a premium was a place
where people willing to spend more than him could be found. Give him a
ghost-mall that was off the GPS grid anytime.

"Have you managed to fill the flea market?" It had taken Perry a long
time to fill his, and still he had a couple of dogs -- a tarot reader
and a bong stall, a guy selling high-pressure spray-paint cans and a
discount porn stall that sold naked shovelware by the petabyte.

"Yeah, I got proteges up and down New England. A lot of them settled
here after the crash. One place is as good as another, and the housing
was wicked-cheap once the economy disappeared. They upped stakes and
came to Boston as soon as I put the word out. I think everyone's
waiting for the next big thing."

"You think?"

"Perry, New Work is the most important thing that ever happened to
some of those people. It was the high-point of their lives. It was the
only time they ever felt useful."

Perry shook his head. "Don't you think that's sad?"

Tjan negotiated a tricky tunnel interchange and got the car pointed to
Cambridge. "No, Perry, I don't think it's sad. Jesus Christ, you can't
believe that. Why do you think I'm helping you? You and me and all the
rest of them, we did something *important*. The world changed. It's
continuing to change. Have you stopped to think that one in five
American workers picked up and moved somewhere else to do New Work
projects? That's one of the largest American resettlements since the
dustbowl. The average New Work collective shipped more inventions per
year than Edison Labs at its peak. In a hundred years, when they
remember the centuries that were America's, they'll count this one
among them, because of what we made.

"So no, Perry, I don't think it's sad."

"I'm sorry. Sorry, OK? I didn't mean it that way. But it's tragic,
isn't it, that the dream ended? That they're all living out there in
the boonies, thinking of their glory days?"

"Yes, that *is* sad. But that's why I agreed to do the ride -- not to
freeze the old projects in amber, but to create a new project that we
can all participate in again. These people uprooted their lives to
follow us, it's the least we can do to give them something back for
that."

Perry stewed on that the rest of the way to Tjan's, staring at the
sleet, hand resting against the icy window-glass.

#

Sammy checked in to a Comfort Inn tucked into the thirty-seventh
storey of the Bank of America building in downtown Boston. The lobby
was empty, the security-guard's desk unmanned. B of A was in
receivership, and not doing so hot at that, as the fact that they had
let out their executive floors to a discount business-hotel testified.

The room was fine, though -- small and windowless, but fine: power,
shower, toilet and bed, all he demanded in a hotel room. He ate the
packet of nuts he'd bought at the airport before jumping on the T and