THOMAS THE RHYMER.

TRADITIONAL VERSION.


_Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border_, (iv. 117.) "Given from a copy
obtained from a lady residing not far from Ercildoune, corrected and
enlarged by one in Mrs. Brown's MSS."

  True Thomas lay on Huntlie bank;
    A ferlie he spied wi' his ee;
  And there he saw a ladye bright,
    Come riding down by the Eildon Tree.

  Her shirt was o' the grass-green silk,                  5
    Her mantle o' the velvet fyne;
  At ilka tett of her horse's mane,
    Hung fifty siller bells and nine.

  True Thomas, he pull'd aff his cap,
    And louted low down to his knee:                     10
  "All hail, thou mighty Queen of Heaven!
    For thy peer on earth I never did see."--

  "O no, O no, Thomas," she said,
    "That name does not belang to me;
  I am but the Queen of fair Elfland,                    15
    That am hither come to visit thee.

  "Harp and carp, Thomas," she said;
    "Harp and carp along wi' me;
  And if ye dare to kiss my lips,
    Sure of your bodie I will be."--                     20

  "Betide me weal, betide me woe,
    That weird shall never daunton me."--
  Syne he has kissed her rosy lips,
    All underneath the Eildon Tree.

  "Now, ye maun go wi' me," she said;                    25
    "True Thomas, ye maun go wi' me;
  And ye maun serve me seven years,
    Thro' weal or woe as may chance to be."

  She mounted on her milk-white steed;
    She's ta'en true Thomas up behind:                   30
  And aye, whene'er her bridle rung,
    The steed flew swifter than the wind.

  O they rade on, and farther on;
    The steed gaed swifter than the wind;
  Until they reach'd a desert wide,                      35
    And living land was left behind.

  "Light down, light down, now, true Thomas,
    And lean your head upon my knee;
  Abide and rest a little space,
    And I will shew you ferlies three.                   40

  "O see ye not yon narrow road,
    So thick beset with thorns and briers?
  That is the path of righteousness,
    Though after it but few enquires.

  "And see ye not that braid braid road,                 45
    That lies across that lily leven?
  That is the path of wickedness,
    Though some call it the road to heaven.

  "And see not ye that bonny road,
    That winds about the fernie brae?                    50
  That is the road to fair Elfland,
    Where thou and I this night maun gae.

  "But, Thomas, ye maun hold your tongue,
    Whatever ye may hear or see;
  For, if you speak word in Elfyn land,                  55
    Ye'll ne'er get back to your ain countrie."

  O they rade on, and farther on,
    And they waded through rivers aboon the knee,
  And they saw neither sun nor moon,
    But they heard the roaring of the sea.               60

  It was mirk mirk night, and there was nae stern light,
    And they waded through red blude to the knee;
  For a' the blude that's shed on earth
    Rins through the springs o' that countrie.

  Syne they came on to a garden green,                   65
    And she pu'd an apple frae a tree--
  "Take this for thy wages, true Thomas;
    It will give thee the tongue that can never lie."--

  "My tongue is mine ain," true Thomas said;
    "A gudely gift ye wad gie to me![L70]                70
  I neither dought to buy nor sell,
    At fair or tryst where I may be.

  "I dought neither speak to prince or peer,
    Nor ask of grace from fair ladye."--
  "Now hold thy peace!" the lady said,                   75
    "For as I say, so must it be."--

  He has gotten a coat of the even cloth,
    And a pair of shoes of velvet green;
  And till seven years were gane and past,
    True Thomas on earth was never seen.                 80


70. The traditional commentary upon this ballad informs us, that the
apple was the produce of the fatal Tree of Knowledge, and that the
garden was the terrestrial paradise. The repugnance of Thomas to be
debarred the use of falsehood, when he might find it convenient, has a
comic effect. SCOTT.




THE YOUNG TAMLANE.


The _Tayl of the Yong Tamlene_ is mentioned in the _Complaynt of
Scotland_, (1548,) and the dance of _Thom of Lyn_ is noticed in
the same work. A considerable fragment of this ballad was printed by
Herd, (vol. i. 215,) under the title of _Kertonha'_, a corruption of
Carterhaugh; another is furnished in Maidment's _New Book of Old
Ballads_, (p. 54,) and a nearly complete version in Johnson's
_Museum_, (p. 423,) which, with some alterations, was inserted in the
_Tales of Wonder_, (No. 58.) The present edition, prepared by Sir
Walter Scott from a collation of various copies, is longer than any
other, but was originally disfigured by several supposititious stanzas
here omitted. Another version, with Maidment's fragment, will be found
in the Appendix to this volume.

"Carterhaugh is a plain, at the conflux of the Ettrick and Yarrow in
Selkirkshire, about a mile above Selkirk, and two miles below Newark
Castle; a romantic ruin which overhangs the Yarrow, and which is said
to have been the habitation of our heroine's father, though others
place his residence in the tower of Oakwood. The peasants point out,
upon the plain, those electrical rings, which vulgar credulity
supposes to be traces of the Fairy revels. Here, they say, were
placed the stands of milk, and of water, in which _Tamlane_ was
dipped, in order to effect the disenchantment; and upon these spots,
according to their mode of expressing themselves, the grass will never
grow. Miles Cross, (perhaps a corruption of Mary's Cross,) where fair
Janet awaited the arrival of the Fairy train, is said to have stood
near the Duke of Buccleuch's seat of Bow-hill, about half a mile from
Carterhaugh."--(SCOTT'S _Minstrelsy_, ii. 334, at the end of a
most interesting essay, introductory to this tale, on the Fairies of
Popular Superstition.)


  "O I forbid ye, maidens a',
    That wear gowd on your hair,
  To come or gae by Carterhaugh,
    For young Tamlane is there.

  "There's nane that gaes by Carterhaugh,             5
    But maun leave him a wad,
  Either gowd rings, or green mantles,
    Or else their maidenheid.

  "Now gowd rings ye may buy, maidens,
    Green mantles ye may spin;                       10
  But, gin ye lose your maidenheid,
    Ye'll ne'er get that agen."--

  But up then spak her, fair Janet,
    The fairest o' a' her kin;
  "I'll cum and gang to Carterhaugh;                 15
    And ask nae leave o' him."--

  Janet has kilted her green kirtle,
    A little abune her knee;
  And she has braided her yellow hair,
    A little abune her bree.                         20

  And when she came to Carterhaugh,
    She gaed beside the well;
  And there she fand his steed standing,
    But away was himsell.

  She hadna pu'd a red red rose,                     25
    A rose but barely three;
  Till up and starts a wee wee man,
    At lady Janet's knee.

  Says--"Why pu' ye the rose, Janet?
    What gars ye break the tree?                     30
  Or why come ye to Carterhaugh,
    Withouten leave o' me?"--

  Says--"Carterhaugh it is mine ain;
    My daddie gave it me;
  I'll come and gang to Carterhaugh,                 35
    And ask nae leave o' thee."

  He's ta'en her by the milk-white hand,
    Among the leaves sae green;
  And what they did, I cannot tell--
  The green leaves were between.                     40

  He's ta'en her by the milk-white hand,
    Among the roses red;
  And what they did, I cannot say--
    She ne'er return'd a maid.

  When she cam to her father's ha',                  45
    She looked pale and wan;
  They thought she'd dreed some sair sickness,
    Or been with some leman.

  She didna comb her yellow hair,
    Nor make meikle o'er her head;                   50
  And ilka thing that lady took,
    Was like to be her deid.

  It's four and twenty ladies fair
    Were playing at the ba';
  Janet, the wightest of them anes,                  55
    Was faintest o' them a'.

  Four and twenty ladies fair
    Were playing at the chess;
  And out there came the fair Janet,
    As green as any grass.                           60

  Out and spak an auld grey-headed knight,
    Lay o'er the castle wa',--
  "And ever, alas! for thee, Janet,
    But we'll be blamed a'!"--

  "Now haud your tongue, ye auld grey knight!        65
    And an ill deid may ye die;
  Father my bairn on whom I will,
    I'll father nane on thee."--

  Out then spak her father dear,
    And he spak meik and mild--                      70
  "And ever, alas! my sweet Janet,
    I fear ye gae with child."--

  "And if I be with child, father,
    Mysell maun bear the blame;
  There's ne'er a knight about your ha'              75
    Shall hae the bairnie's name.

  "And if I be with child, father,
    'Twill prove a wondrous birth;
  For weel I swear I'm not wi' bairn
    To any man on earth.                             80

  "If my love were an earthly knight,
    As he's an elfin grey,
  I wadna gie my ain true love
    For nae lord that ye hae."--

  She prink'd hersell and prinn'd hersell,           85
    By the ae light of the moon,
  And she's away to Carterhaugh,
    To speak wi' young Tamlane.

  And when she came to Carterhaugh,
    She gaed beside the well;                        90
  And there she saw the steed standing,
    But away was himsell.

  She hadna pu'd a double rose,
    A rose but only twae,
  When up and started young Tamlane,                 95
    Says--"Lady, thou pu's nae mae!

  "Why pu' ye the rose, Janet,
    Within this garden grene,
  And a' to kill the bonny babe,
    That we got us between?"                        100

  "The truth ye'll tell to me, Tamlane;
    A word ye mauna lie;
  Gin e'er ye was in haly chapel,
    Or sained in Christentie?"--

  "The truth I'll tell to thee, Janet,              105
    A word I winna lie;
  A knight me got, and a lady me bore,
    As well as they did thee.

  "Randolph, Earl Murray, was my sire,
    Dunbar, Earl March, is thine;                   110
  We loved when we were children small,
    Which yet you well may mind.

  "When I was a boy just turn'd of nine,
    My uncle sent for me,
  To hunt, and hawk, and ride with him,             115
    And keep him companie.

  "There came a wind out of the north,
    A sharp wind and a snell;
  And a deep sleep came over me,
    And frae my horse I fell.                       120

  "The Queen of Fairies keppit me,
    In yon green hill to dwell;
  And I'm a fairy, lyth and limb;
    Fair ladye, view me well.

  "Then would I never tire, Janet,                  125
    In Elfish land to dwell;
  But aye, at every seven years,
    They pay the teind to hell;
  And I am sae fat and fair of flesh,
    I fear 'twill be mysell[L130].                  130

  "This night is Hallowe'en, Janet,
    The morn is Hollowday;
  And, gin ye dare your true love win,
    Ye hae nae time to stay.

  "The night it is good Hallowe'en,                 135
    When fairy folk will ride;
  And they that wad their true-love win,
    At Miles Cross they maun bide."

  "But how shall I thee ken, Tamlane?
    Or how shall I thee knaw,                       140
  Amang so many unearthly knights,
    The like I never saw?"

  "The first company that passes by,
    Say na, and let them gae;
  The next company that passes by,                  145
    Sae na, and do right sae;
  The third company that passes by,
    Then I'll be ane o' thae.

  "First let pass the black, Janet,
    And syne let pass the brown;                    150
  But grip ye to the milk-white steed,
    And pu' the rider down.

  "For I ride on the milk-white steed,
    And aye nearest the town;
  Because I was a christen'd knight,                155
    They gave me that renown.

  "My right hand will be gloved, Janet,
    My left hand will be bare;
  And these the tokens I gie thee,
    Nae doubt I will be there.                      160

  "They'll turn me in your arms, Janet,[L161]
    An adder and a snake;
  But had me fast, let me not pass,
    Gin ye wad buy me maik.

  "They'll turn me in your arms, Janet,             165
    An adder and an ask;
  They'll turn me in your arms, Janet,
    A bale that burns fast.

  "They'll turn me in your arms, Janet,
    A red-hot gad o' airn;                          170
  But haud me fast, let me not pass,
    For I'll do you no harm.

  "First dip me in a stand o' milk,
    And then in a stand o' water;
  But had me fast, let me not pass--                175
    I'll be your bairn's father.

  "And, next, they'll shape me in your arms,
    A tod, but and an eel;
  But had me fast, nor let me gang,
    As you do love me weel.                         180

  "They'll shape me in your arms, Janet,
    A dove, but and a swan;
  And, last, they'll shape me in your arms
    A mother-naked man:
  Cast your green mantle over me--                  185
    I'll be myself again."--

  Gloomy, gloomy, was the night,
    And eiry was the way,
  As fair Janet, in her green mantle,
    To Miles Cross she did gae.                     190

  Betwixt the hours of twelve and one,
    A north wind tore the bent;
  And straight she heard strange elritch sounds
    Upon that wind which went.

  About the dead hour o' the night,                 195
    She heard the bridles ring;
  And Janet was as glad o' that
    As any earthly thing.

  Will o' Wisp before them went,
    Sent forth a twinkling light;                   200
  And soon she saw the Fairy bands
    All riding in her sight.

  And first gaed by the black black steed,
    And then gaed by the brown;
  But fast she gript the milk-white steed,          205
    And pu'd the rider down.

  She pu'd him frae the milk-white steed,
    And loot the bridle fa';
  And up there raise an erlish cry--
    "He's won amang us a'!"--                       210

  They shaped him in fair Janet's arms,[L208]
    An esk, but and an adder;
  She held him fast in every shape--
    To be her bairn's father.

  They shaped him in her arms at last,              215
    A mother-naked man:
  She wrapt him in her green mantle,
    And sae her true love wan!

  Up then spake the Queen o' Fairies,
    Out o' a bush o' broom--                        220
  "She that has borrow'd young Tamlane,
    Has gotten a stately groom."--

  Up then spake the Queen o' Fairies,
    Out o' a bush o' rye--
  "She's ta'en awa the bonniest knight              225
    In a' my cumpanie.

  "But had I kenn'd, Tamlane," she says,
    "A lady wad borrow'd thee--
  I wad ta'en out thy twa grey een,
    Put in twa een o' tree.                         230

  "Had I but kenn'd, Tamlane," she says,
    "Before ye came frae hame--
  I wad ta'en out your heart o' flesh,
    Put in a heart o' stane.

  "Had I but had the wit yestreen                   235
    That I hae coft the day--
  I'd paid my kane seven times to hell
    Ere you'd been won away!"


130, See _Thomas of Ersseldoune_, (p. 107,) v. 225, 226.

V. 161-172, v. 208-214. The same process of disenchantment is found in
the Danish ballad _Nattergalen_, st. 20-22, Grundtvig, No. 57 (also
_Svenska Folk-visor_, No. 41). The comparison with the transformations
of Proteus is curious.


                               [Grk: amphi de cheiras
    ballomen; oud' ho geron dolies epeletheto technes;
    all' etoi protista leon genet' eugeneios,
    autar epeita drakon kai pordalis ede megas sus;
    gigneto d' hygron hydor kai dendreon hypsipetelon.
    hemeis d' astempheos echomen tetleoti thymo.]
                                   _Odyssey_, iv. 454-59.

    Verum ubi correptum manibus vinclisque tenebis,
    Tum variae eludent species atque ora ferarum:
    Fiet enim subito sus horridus atraque tigris,
    Squamosusque draco, et fulva cervice leaena,
    Aut acrem flammae sonitum dabit, atque ita vinclis
    Excidet, aut in aquas tenues dilapsus abibit.
    Sed quanto ille magis formas se vertet in omnes,
    Tanto, nate, magis contende tenacia vincla.
                                   _Georgics_, iv. 405-12.




THE WEE WEE MAN.


This ballad will be found, in forms slightly varying, in Herd, (i.
156;) Caw's _Poetical Museum_, (p. 348;) Motherwell's _Minstrelsy_,
(p. 343;) and Buchan's _Ancient Ballads_, (i. 263.) It bears some
resemblance to the beginning of the remarkable poem, _Als Y Yod on ay
Mounday_, (see Appendix). The present version is from the _Poetical
Museum_.


  As I was walking by my lane,
    Atween a water and a wa,
  There sune I spied a wee wee man,
    He was the least that eir I saw.

  His legs were scant a shathmont's length,           5
    And sma and limber was his thie;
  Atween his shoulders was ae span,[L7]
    About his middle war but three.

  He has tane up a meikle stane,
    And flang't as far as I cold see;                10
  Ein thouch I had been Wallace wicht,
    I dought na lift it to my knie.

  "O wee wee man, but ye be strang!
    Tell me whar may thy dwelling be?"
  "I dwell beneth that bonnie bouir,                 15
    O will ye gae wi me and see?"

  On we lap, and awa we rade,
    Till we cam to a bonny green;
  We lichted syne to bait our steid,
    And out there cam a lady sheen;                  20

  Wi four and twentie at her back,
    A' comely cled in glistering green;
  Thouch there the King of Scots had stude,
    The warst micht weil hae been his queen.

  On syne we past wi wondering cheir,                25
    Till we cam to a bonny ha;
  The roof was o the beaten gowd,
    The flure was o the crystal a.

  When we cam there, wi wee wee knichts[L29]
    War ladies dancing, jimp and sma;                30
  But in the twinkling of an eie,
    Baith green and ha war clein awa.


7. Much better in Motherwell.

      Between his een there was a span,
        Betwixt his shoulders there were ells three.

29-32.

      There were pipers playing in every neuk,
        And ladies dancing, jimp and sma';
      And aye the owreturn o' their tune
        Was, "Our wee wee man has been lang awa!"--
                                   MOTHERWELL.




THE ELFIN KNIGHT.


Reprinted from _A Collection of Curious Old Ballads and Miscellaneous
Poetry_, Edinburgh. David Webster, 1824.

Other versions are given in Motherwell's _Minstrelsy_, (see the
Appendix to this volume;) Kinloch's _Ancient Scottish Ballads_, (p.
145;) Buchan's _Ancient Ballads_, (ii. 296.)

Similar collections of impossibilities in _The Trooper and Fair Maid_,
Buchan, i. 230; _Robin's Tesment_, _id._, i. 273, or Aytoun, 2d ed. ii.
197; _As I was walking under a grove_, _Pills to purge Melancholy_, v.
370. See also _post_, vol. ii. 224, 352, vol. iv. 132, 287; and in
German, _Von eitel unmoeglichen Dingen_, Erk's _Liederhort_, p. 334-37;
Uhland, _Eitle Dinge_, No. 4, A, B; _Wunderhorn_, ii. 410.


  The Elfin knight sits on yon hill,
      _Ba, ba, ba, lillie ba._
  He blaws his horn baith loud and shrill.
    _The wind hath blawn my plaid awa._

  He blaws it east, he blaws it west,
  He blaws it where he liketh best.

  "I wish that horn were in my kist,                  5
  Yea, and the knight in my arms niest."

  She had no sooner these words said,
  Than the knight came to her bed.

  "Thou art o'er young a maid," quoth he,
  "Married with me, that thou would'st be."          10

  "I have a sister, younger than I,
  And she was married yesterday."

  "Married with me if thou would'st be,
  A curtisie thou must do to me.

  "It's ye maun mak a sark to me,                    15
  Without any cut or seam," quoth he;

  "And ye maun shape it, knife-, sheerless,
  And also sew it needle-, threedless."

  "If that piece of courtisie I do to thee,
  Another thou must do to me.                        20

  "I have an aiker of good ley land,
  Which lyeth low by yon sea strand;

  "It's ye maun till't wi' your touting horn,
  And ye maun saw't wi' the pepper corn;

  "And ye maun harrow't wi' a thorn,                 25
  And hae your wark done ere the morn;

  "And ye maun shear it wi' your knife,
  And no lose a stack o't for your life;

  "And ye maun stack it in a mouse hole,
  And ye maun thrash it in your shoe sole;           30

  "And ye maun dight it in your loof,
  And also sack it in your glove;

  "And ye maun bring it over the sea,[L33]
  Fair, and clean, and dry to me;

  "And when that ye have done your wark,             35
  Come back to me, and ye'll get your sark."

  "I'll not quite my plaid for my life;
  It haps my seven bairnes and my wife."

  "My maidenhead I'll then keep still,
  Let the Elfin knight do what he will.              40

  "My plaid awa, my plaid away,
  And owre the hills and far awa,
  And far awa to Norowa',
  My plaid shall not be blawn awa."


33, thou must.




THE BROOMFIELD HILL.


A fragment of this ballad was printed in Herd's Collection, ("_I'll
wager, I'll wager_," i. 226.) The present version is from the _Border
Minstrelsy_, (iii. 28,) and we have added another from Kinloch's
_Ancient Scottish Ballads_. A somewhat longer copy is given in
Buchan's _Ballads_, (ii. 291,) and a modernized English one, of no
value, (_The West Country Wager_,) in _Ancient Poems_, &c.,
Percy Society, vol. xvii. p. 116.

_Brume, brume on hil_, is mentioned in the _Complaynt of
Scotland_, and formed part of Captain Cox's well-known collection.

A Danish ballad exhibits the same theme, though differently treated:
_Soevnerunerne_, Grundtvig, No. 81.


  There was a knight and a lady bright,
    Had a true tryst at the broom;
  The ane ga'ed early in the morning,
    The other in the afternoon.

  And aye she sat in her mother's bower door,         5
    And aye she made her mane,
  "O whether should I gang to the Broomfield hill,
    Or should I stay at hame?

  "For if I gang to the Broomfield hill,
    My maidenhead is gone;                           10
  And if I chance to stay at hame,
    My love will ca' me mansworn."--

  Up then spake a witch woman,
    Aye from the room aboon;
  "O, ye may gang to Broomfield hill,                15
    And yet come maiden hame.

  "For when ye come to the Broomfield hill,
    Ye'll find your love asleep,
  With a silver belt about his head,
    And a broom-cow at his feet.                     20

  "Take ye the blossom of the broom,
    The blossom it smells sweet,
  And strew it at your true love's head,
    And likewise at his feet.

  "Take ye the rings off your fingers,               25
    Put them on his right hand,
  To let him know, when he doth awake,
    His love was at his command."--

  She pu'd the broom flower on Hive-hill,
    And strew'd on's white hals bane,                30
  And that was to be wittering true,
    That maiden she had gane.

  "O where were ye, my milk-white steed,
    That I hae coft sae dear,
  That wadna watch and waken me,                     35
    When there was maiden here?"--

  "I stamped wi' my foot, master,
    And gar'd my bridle ring;
  But nae kin' thing wald waken ye,
    Till she was past and gane."--                   40

  "And wae betide ye, my gay goss hawk,
    That I did love sae dear,
  That wadna watch and waken me,
    When there was maiden here."--

  "I clapped wi' my wings, master,                   45
    And aye my bells I rang,
  And aye cry'd, Waken, waken, master,
    Before the ladye gang."--

  "But haste and haste, my gude white steed,
    To come the maiden till,                         50
  Or a' the birds of gude green wood
    Of your flesh shall have their fill."--

  "Ye needna burst your gude white steed,
    Wi' racing o'er the howm;
  Nae bird flies faster through the wood,            55
    Than she fled through the broom."




LORD JOHN.

From Kinloch's _Ancient Scottish Ballads_, (p. 195.)


  "I'll wager, I'll wager," says Lord John,
    "A hundred merks and ten,
  That ye winna gae to the bonnie broom-fields,
    And a maid return again."--

  "But I'll lay a wager wi' you, Lord John,           5
    A' your merks oure again,
  That I'll gae alane to the bonnie broom-fields,
    And a maid return again."

  Then Lord John mounted his grey steed,
    And his hound wi' his bells sae bricht,          10
  And swiftly he rade to the bonny broom-fields,
    Wi' his hawks, like a lord or knicht.

  "Now rest, now rest, my bonnie grey steed,
    My lady will soon be here;
  And I'll lay my head aneath this rose sae red,     15
    And the bonnie burn sae near."

  But sound, sound, was the sleep he took,
    For he slept till it was noon;
  And his lady cam at day, left a taiken and away,
    Gaed as licht as a glint o' the moon.            20

  She strawed the roses on the ground,
    Threw her mantle on the brier,
  And the belt around her middle sae jimp,
    As a taiken that she'd been there.

  The rustling leaves flew round his head,           25
    And rous'd him frae his dream;
  He saw by the roses, and mantle sae green,
    That his love had been there and was gane.

  "O whare was ye, my gude grey steed,
    That I coft ye sae dear;                         30
  That ye didna waken your master,
    Whan ye ken'd that his love was here."--

  "I pautit wi' my foot, master,
    Garr'd a' my bridles ring;
  And still I cried, Waken, gude master,             35
    For now is the hour and time."--

  "Then whare was ye, my bonnie grey hound,
    That I coft ye sae dear,
  That ye didna waken your master,
    Whan ye kend that his love was here."--          40

  "I pautit wi' my foot, master,
    Garr'd a' my bells to ring;
  And still I cried, Waken, gude master,
    For now is the hour and time."--

  "But whare was ye, my hawks, my hawks,             45
    That I coft ye sae dear,
  That ye didna waken your master,
    Whan ye ken'd that his love was here."--

  "O wyte na me, now, my master dear,
    I garr'd a' my young hawks sing,                 50
  And still I cried, Waken, gude master,
    For now is the hour and time."--

  "Then be it sae, my wager gane!
    'T will skaith frae meikle ill;
  For gif I had found her in bonnie broom-fields,    55
    O' her heart's blude ye'd drunken your fill."



The stanzas below are from an American version of this ballad called
_The Green Broomfield_, printed in a cheap song-book. (Graham's
_Illustrated Magazine_, Sept. 1858.)


  "Then when she went to the green broom field,
    Where her love was fast asleep,
  With a gray _goose_-hawk and a green laurel bough,
    And a green broom under his feet.

  "And when he awoke from out his sleep,
    An angry man was he;
  He looked to the East, and he looked to the West,
    And he wept for his sweetheart to see.

  "Oh! where was you, my gray _goose_-hawk,
    The hawk that I loved so dear,
  That you did not awake me from out my sleep,
    When my sweetheart was so near!"




KEMPION.


This ballad was first printed in the _Border Minstrelsy_, (vol. iii.
p. 230,) "chiefly from Mrs. Brown's MS. with corrections from a
recited fragment." Motherwell furnishes a different version, from
recitation, (_Minstrelsy_, p. 374,) which is subjoined to the
present, and the well-known ditty of the _Laidley Worm of
Spindleston-Heugh_, upon the same theme, will be found in the Appendix
to this volume.

"Such transformations as the song narrates," remarks Sir Walter Scott,
"are common in the annals of chivalry. In the 25th and 26th cantos of
the second book of the _Orlando Inamorato_, the Paladin, Brandimarte,
after surmounting many obstacles, penetrates into the recesses of an
enchanted palace. Here he finds a fair damsel, seated upon a tomb, who
announces to him, that, in order to achieve her deliverance, he must
raise the lid of the sepulchre, and kiss whatever being should issue
forth. The knight, having pledged his faith, proceeds to open the
tomb, out of which a monstrous snake issues forth, with a tremendous
hiss. Brandimarte, with much reluctance, fulfils the _bizarre_
conditions of the adventure; and the monster is instantly changed into
a beautiful Fairy, who loads her deliverer with benefits."

_Jomfruen i Ormeham_, in Grundtvig's _Danmarks Gamle Folkeviser_, ii.
177, is essentially the same ballad as _Kempion_. The characteristic
incident of the story (a maiden who has been transformed by her
step-mother into a snake or other monster, being restored to her
proper shape by the kiss of a knight) is as common in the popular
fiction of the North as Scott asserts it to be in chivalrous romance.
For instances, see Grundtvig, l. l., and under the closely related
_Lindormen_, ii. 211.

The name _Kempion_ is itself a monument of the relation of our ballads
to the _Kaempeviser_. Pollard of Pollard Hall, who slew "a venomous
serpent which did much harm to man and beast," is called in the modern
legend a _Champion_ Knight.


  "Cum heir, cum heir, ye freely feed,
    And lay your head low on my knee;
  The heaviest weird I will you read,
    That ever was read to gay ladye.

  "O meikle dolour sall ye dree,                        5
    And aye the salt seas o'er ye'se swim;
  And far mair dolour sall ye dree
    On Estmere crags[L8], when ye them climb.

  "I weird ye to a fiery beast,
    And relieved sall ye never be,                     10
  Till Kempion, the kingis son,
    Cum to the crag, and thrice kiss thee."--

  O meikle dolour did she dree,
    And aye the salt seas o'er she swam;
  And far mair dolour did she dree                     15
    On Estmere crag, when she them clamb.

  And aye she cried for Kempion,
    Gin he would but come to her hand:
  Now word has gane to Kempion,
    That sicken a beast was in his land.               20

  "Now, by my sooth," said Kempion,
    "This fiery beast I'll gang and see."--
  "And by my sooth," said Segramour,
    "My ae brother, I'll gang wi' thee."

  Then bigged hae they a bonny boat,                   25
    And they hae set her to the sea;
  But a mile before they reach'd the shore,
    Around them she gar'd the red fire flee.

  "O Segramour, keep the boat afloat,
    And let her na the land o'er near;                 30
  For this wicked beast will sure gae mad,
    And set fire to a' the land and mair."--

  Syne has he bent an arblast bow,
    And aim'd an arrow at her head;
  And swore if she didna quit the land,                35
    Wi' that same shaft to shoot her dead.

  "O out of my stythe I winna rise,
    (And it is not for the awe o' thee,)
  Till Kempion, the kingis son,
    Cum to the crag, and thrice kiss me."--            40

  He has louted him o'er the dizzy crag,
    And gien the monster kisses ane;
  Awa she gaed, and again she cam.
    The fieryest beast that ever was seen.

  "O out o' my stythe I winna rise,                    45
    (And not for a' thy bow nor thee,)
  Till Kempion, the kingis son,
    Cum to the crag, and thrice kiss me."--

  He's louted him o'er the Estmere crags,
    And he has gi'en her kisses twa:                   50
  Awa she gaed, and again she cam,
    The fieryest beast that ever you saw.

  "O out of my den I winna rise,
    Nor flee it for the fear o' thee,
  Till Kempion, that courteous knight,                 55
    Cum to the crag, and thrice kiss me."--

  He's louted him o'er the lofty crag,
    And he has gi'en her kisses three:
  Awa she gaed, and again she cam,
    The loveliest ladye e'er could be!                 60

  "And by my sooth," says Kempion,
    "My ain true love, (for this is she,)
  They surely had a heart o' stane,
    Could put thee to such misery.

  "O was it warwolf in the wood?                       65
    Or was it mermaid in the sea?
  Or was it man or vile woman,
    My ain true love, that mis-shaped thee?"--

  "It wasna warwolf in the wood,
    Nor was it mermaid in the sea:                     70
  But it was my wicked step-mother,
    And wae and weary may she be!"--

  "O, a heavier weird shall light her on,
  Than ever fell on vile woman;
  Her hair shall grow rough, and her teeth grow lang,  75
  And on her four feet shall she gang.
  "None shall take pity her upon;
  In Wormeswood she aye shall won;
  And relieved shall she never be,
  Till St. Mungo come over the sea."--                 80
  And sighing said that weary wight,
    "I doubt that day I'll never see!"


8.  If by Estmere Crags we are to understand the rocky cliffs of
    Northumberland, in opposition to Westmoreland, we may bring our
    scene of action near Bamborough, and thereby almost identify the
    tale of _Kempion_ with that of the _Laidley Worm of Spindleston_, to
    which it bears so strong a resemblance.--SCOTT.

But why should we seek to do this?




KEMP OWYNE.


Kemp Owyne, says Motherwell, "was, no doubt, the same Ewein or Owain,
ap Urien the king of Reged, who is celebrated by the bards, Taliessin
and Llywarch-Hen, as well as in the Welsh historical Triads. In a poem
of Gruffyd Llwyd, A.D. 1400, addressed to Owain Glyndwr, is the
following allusion to this warrior. 'Thou hast travelled by land and
by sea in the conduct of thine affairs, like Owain ap Urien in days of
yore, when with activity he encountered the black knight of the
water.'[C] His mistress had a ring esteemed one of the thirteen
rarities of Britain, which, (like the wondrous ring of Gyges) would
render the wearer invisible." _Minstrelsy_, p. lxxxiii.

    [C]   "On sea, on land, thou still didst brave
          The dangerous cliff and rapid wave;
          Like _Urien_, who subdued the knight,
          And the fell dragon put to flight,
          Yon moss-grown fount beside;
          The grim, black warrior of the flood,
          The dragon, gorged with human blood,
          The waters' scaly pride."
                             Jones's _Welsh Bards_, i. 41.

The copy of Kemp Owyne printed in Buchan's _Ancient Ballads_, (ii.
78,) is the same as the following.


  Her mother died when she was young,
    Which gave her cause to make great moan;
  Her father married the warst woman
    That ever lived in Christendom.

  She served her with foot and hand,                  5
    In every thing that she could dee;
  Till once, in an unlucky time,
    She threw her in ower Craigy's sea.

  Says, "Lie you there, dove Isabel,
    And all my sorrows lie with thee;                10
  Till Kemp Owyne come ower the sea,
    And borrow you with kisses three,
  Let all the warld do what they will,
    Oh borrowed shall you never be."

  Her breath grew strang, her hair grew lang,        15
    And twisted thrice about the tree,
  And all the people, far and near,
    Thought that a savage beast was she;
  This news did come to Kemp Owyne,
    Where he lived far beyond the sea.               20

  He hasted him to Craigy's sea,
    And on the savage beast look'd he;
  Her breath was strang, her hair was lang,
    And twisted was about the tree,
  And with a swing she came about:                   25
    "Come to Craigy's sea, and kiss with me.

  "Here is a royal belt," she cried,
    "That I have found in the green sea;
  And while your body it is on,
    Drawn shall your blood never be;                 30
  But if you touch me, tail or fin,
    I vow my belt your death shall be."

  He stepped in, gave her a kiss,
    The royal belt he brought him wi';
  Her breath was strang, her hair was lang,          35
    And twisted twice about the tree,
  And with a swing she came about:
    "Come to Craigy's sea, and kiss with me.

  "Here is a royal ring," she said,
    "That I have found in the green sea;             40
  And while your finger it is on,
    Drawn shall your blood never be;
  But if you touch me, tail or fin,
    I swear my ring your death shall be."

  He stepped in, gave her a kiss,                    45
    The royal ring he brought him wi';
  Her breath was strang, her hair was lang,
    And twisted ance around the tree,
  And with a swing she came about:
    "Come to Craigy's sea, and kiss with me.         50

  "Here is a royal brand," she said,
    "That I have found in the green sea;
  And while your body it is on,
    Drawn shall your blood never be;
  But if you touch me, tail or fin,                  55
    I swear my brand your death shall be."

  He stepped in, gave her a kiss,
    The royal brand he brought him wi';
  Her breath was sweet, her hair grew short,
    And twisted nane about the tree;                 60
  And smilingly she came about,
    As fair a woman as fair could be.




KING HENRY.


A modernized copy of King Henry was published in the _Tales of
Wonder_, (No 57,) under the title of _Courteous King Jamie_. It first
appeared in an ancient dress in the _Border Minstrelsy_, (iii. 274,)
but a version preferable in some respects was given by Jamieson in his
_Popular Ballads_, (ii. 194,) which is here printed, without the
editor's interpolations. For a notice of similar legends, see the
_Marriage of Sir Gawaine_, at page 28 of this volume.


  Lat never a man a wooing wend,
    That lacketh thingis three;
  A routh o' gould, an open heart,
    Ay fu' o' charity.

  As this I speak of King Henry,                      5
    For he lay burd-alane;
  And he's doen him to a jelly hunt's ha',
    Was far frae ony town.

  He chas'd the deer now him before,
    And the roe down by the den,                     10
  Till the fattest buck in a' the flock
    King Henry he has slain.

  O he has doen him to his ha',
    To mak him bierly cheer;
  And in it cam a grisly ghost,                      15
    Staed stappin' i' the fleer.

  Her head hat the roof-tree o' the house,
    Her middle ye mat weel span;--
  He's thrown to her his gay mantle;
    Says,--"Ladie, hap your lingcan."                20

  Her teeth was a' like leather stakes,
    Her nose like club or mell;
  And I ken nae thing she 'pear'd to be,
    But the fiend that wons in hell.

  "Some meat, some meat, ye King Henry;              25
    Some meat ye gie to me."
  "And what meat's in this house, Ladie?
    And what ha'e I to gi'e?"
  "Its ye do kill your berry-brown steed,
    And ye bring him here to me."                    30

  O whan he slew his berry-brown steed,
    Wow but his heart was sair!
  She ate him a' up, flesh and bane,
    Left naething but hide and hair.

  "Mair meat, mair meat, ye King Henry,              35
    Mair meat ye bring to me."
  "And what meat's in this house, Ladie?
    And what hae I to gi'e?"
  "O ye do kill your good grey hounds,
    And ye bring them in to me."                     40

  O whan he killed his good grey hounds,
    Wow but his heart was sair!
  She ate them a' up, flesh and bane,
    Left naething but hide and hair.

  "Mair meat, mair meat, ye King Henry,              45
    Mair meat ye bring to me."
  "And what meat's in this house, Ladie?
    And what hae I to gi'e?"
  "O ye do kill your gay goss hawks,
    And ye bring them here to me."                   50

  O whan he kill'd his gay goss hawks,
    Wow but his heart was sair!
  She ate them a' up, skin and bane,
    Left naething but feathers bare.

  "Some drink, some drink, now, King Henry;          55
    Some drink ye bring to me."
  "O what drink's in this house, Ladie,
    That ye're nae welcome tee?"
  "O ye sew up your horse's hide,
    And bring in a drink to me."                     60

  And he's sew'd up the bloody hide,
    A puncheon o' wine put in;
  She drank it a' up at a waught,
    Left na ae drap ahin'.

  "A bed, a bed, now, King Henry,                    65
    A bed ye mak to me;
  For ye maun pu' the heather green,
    And mak a bed to me."

  And pu'd has he the heather green,
    And made to her a bed;                           70
  And up he's ta'en his gay mantle,
    And o'er it has he spread.

  "Tak aff your claiths, now, King Henry,
    And lye down by my side;"
  "O God forbid," says King Henry,                   75
    "That ever the like betide;
  That ever the fiend that wons in hell,
    Should streek down by my side."



  Whan nicht was gane, and day was come,
    And the sun shone thro' the ha',                 80
  The fairest lady that ever was seen
    Lay atween him and the wa'.

  "O weel is me!" says King Henry;
    "How lang'll this last wi' me?"
  Then out it spake that fair lady,--                85
    "E'en till the day you die.

  "For I've met wi' mony a gentle knicht,
    That gae me sic a fill;
  But never before wi' a curteis knicht,
    That gae me a' my will."                         90




COSPATRICK.

(_Border Minstrelsy_, iii. 263.)


This ballad, which is still very popular, is known under various other
names, as _Bothwell_, _Child Brenton_, _Lord Dingwall_, _We were
Sisters_, _We were Seven_, &c. Scott's version was derived principally
from recitation, but some of the concluding stanzas were taken from
Herd's. Herd's copy, which must be regarded as a fragment, is given in
connection with the present, and Buchan's in the Appendix to this
volume. Another edition, of a suspicious character, may be seen in
Cromek's _Remains of Nithsdale and Galloway Song_, (p. 205.) All the
principal incidents of the story are found in _Ingefred og Gudrune,
Danske Viser_, No. 194, translated by Jamieson, _Illustrations_ p. 340.
More or less imperfect versions of the same are _Riddar Olle, Svenska
Folk-Visor_, ii. p. 217, 59, 56, 215, and _Herr Aester och Froeken Sissa_,
p. 50. The substitution of the maid-servant for the bride, occurs also
in _Torkild Trundesoen, Danske V._, No. 200, or _Thorkil Troneson_,
Arwidsson, No. 36. This idea was perhaps derived from _Tristan and
Isold_: see Scott's _Sir Tristrem_, II. 54, 55.


  Cospatrick has sent o'er the faem;
  Cospatrick brought his ladye hame;
  And fourscore ships have come her wi',
  The ladye by the grene-wood tree.

  There were twal' and twal' wi' baken bread,         5
  And twal' and twal' wi' gowd sae reid,
  And twal' and twal' wi' bouted flour,
  And twal' and twal' wi' the paramour.

  Sweet Willy was a widow's son,
  And at her stirrup he did run;                     10
  And she was clad in the finest pall,
  But aye she let the tears down fall.

  "O is your saddle set awrye?
  Or rides your steed for you ower high?
  Or are you mourning, in your tide,                 15
  That you suld be Cospatrick's bride?"

  "I am not mourning, at this tide,
  That I suld be Cospatrick's bride;
  But I am sorrowing in my mood,
  That I suld leave my mother good.                  20

  "But, gentle boy, come tell to me,
  What is the custom of thy countrie?"--
  "The custom thereof, my dame," he says,
  "Will ill a gentle laydye please.

  "Seven king's daughters has our lord wedded,       25
  And seven king's daughters has our lord bedded;
  But he's cutted their breasts frae their breast-bane,
  And sent them mourning hame again.

  "Yet, gin you're sure that you're a maid,
  Ye may gae safely to his bed;                      30
  But gif o' that ye be na sure,
  Then hire some damsell o' your bour."--

  The ladye's call'd her bour maiden,
  That waiting was into her train;
  "Five thousand merks I'll gie to thee,             35
  To sleep this night with my lord for me."--

  When bells were rang, and mass was sayne,
  And a' men unto bed were gane,
  Cospatrick and the bonny maid,
  Into a chamber they were laid.                     40

  "Now, speak to me, blankets, and speak to me, bed,
  And speak, thou sheet, enchanted web;
  And speak up, my bonny brown sword, that winna lie,
  Is this a true maiden that lies by me?"--

  "It is not a maid that you hae wedded,             45
  But it is a maid that you hae bedded;
  It is a leal maiden that lies by thee,
  But not the maiden that it should be."--

  O wrathfully he left the bed,
  And wrathfully his claes on did;                   50
  And he has ta'en him through the ha',
  And on his mother he did ca'.

  "I am the most unhappy man,
  That ever was in Christen land!
  I courted a maiden, meik and mild,                 55
  And I hae gotten naething but a woman wi' child."--

  "O stay, my son, into this ha',
  And sport ye wi' your merry men a';
  And I will to the secret bour,
  To see how it fares wi' your paramour."--          60

  The carline she was stark and sture,
  She aff the hinges dang the dure;
  "O is your bairn to laird or loun,
  Or is it to your father's groom?"--

  "O hear me, mother, on my knee,                    65
  Till my sad story I tell to thee:
  O we were sisters, sisters seven,
  We were the fairest under heaven.

  "It fell on a summer's afternoon,
  When a' our toilsome task was done,                70
  We cast the kevils us amang,
  To see which suld to the grene-wood gang.

  "Ohon! alas, for I was youngest,
  And aye my wierd it was the hardest!
  The kevil it on me did fa',                        75
  Whilk was the cause of a' my woe.

  "For to the grene-wood I maun gae,
  To pu' the red rose and the slae;
  To pu' the red rose and the thyme,
  To deck my mother's bour and mine.                 80

  "I hadna pu'd a flower but ane,
  When by there came a gallant hende,
  Wi' high-coll'd hose and laigh-coll'd shoon,
  And he seem'd to be sum kingis son.

  "And be I a maid, or be I nae,                     85
  He kept me there till the close o' day;
  And be I a maid, or be I nane,
  He kept me there till the day was done.

  "He gae me a lock o' his yellow hair,
  And bade me keep it ever mair;                     90
  He gae me a carknet o' bonny beads,
  And bade me keep it against my needs.

  "He gae to me a gay gold ring,
  And bade me keep it abune a' thing."--
  "What did ye wi' the tokens rare,                  95
  That ye gat frae that gallant there?"--

  "O bring that coffer unto me,
  And a' the tokens ye sall see."--
  "Now stay, daughter, your bour within,
  While I gae parley wi' my son."--                 100

  O she has ta'en her thro' the ha',
  And on her son began to ca';
  "What did ye wi' the bonny beads
  I bade you keep against your needs?

  "What did you wi' the gay gold ring               105
  I bade you keep abune a' thing?"--
  "I gae them to a ladye gay,
  I met on grene-wood on a day.

  "But I wad gie a' my halls and tours,
  I had that ladye within my bours;                 110
  But I wad gie my very life,
  I had that ladye to my wife."--

  "Now keep, my son, your ha's and tours,
  Ye have the bright burd in your bours;
  And keep, my son, your very life,                 115
  Ye have that ladye to your wife."--

  Now, or a month was come and gane,
  The ladye bare a bonny son;
  And 'twas weel written on his breast-bane,
  "Cospatrick[L120] is my father's name."           120
  "O row my lady in satin and silk,
  And wash my son in the morning milk."


120, Cospatrick, _Comes Patricius_, was the designation of the Earl of
Dunbar, in the days of Wallace and Bruce.--SCOTT.




BOTHWELL.

From Herd's _Scottish Songs_, (i. 143.)


  As Bothwell was walking in the lowlands alane,
    _Hey down, and a down_,
  He met six ladies sae gallant and fine,
    _Hey down, and a down._

  He cast his lot amang them a',                      5
  And on the youngest his lot did fa'.

  He's brought her frae her mother's bower,
  Unto his strongest castle and tower.

  But ay she cry'd and made great moan,
  And ay the tear came trickling down.               10

  "Come up, come up," said the foremost man,
  "I think our bride comes slowly on."

  "O lady, sits your saddle awry,
  Or is your steed for you owre high?"

  "My saddle is not set awry,                        15
  Nor carries me my steed owre high;

  "But I am weary of my life,
  Since I maun be Lord Bothwell's wife."

  He's blawn his horn sae sharp and shrill,
  Up start the deer on every hill;                   20

  He's blawn his horn sae lang and loud,
  Up start the deer in gude green wood.

  His lady mother lookit owre the castle wa',
  And she saw them riding ane and a'.

  She's called upon her maids by seven,              25
  To mak his bed baith saft and even:

  She's called upon her cooks by nine,
  To make their dinner fair and fine.

  When day was gane and night was come,
  "What ails my love on me to frown?                 30

  "Or does the wind blow in your glove,
  Or runs your mind on another love?"

  "Nor blows the wind within my glove,
  Nor runs my mind on another love;"

  "But I not maid nor maiden am,                     35
  For I'm wi' bairn to another man."

  "I thought I'd a maiden sae meek and sae mild,
  But I've nought but a woman wi' child."

  His mother's taen her up to a tower,
  And lockit her in her secret bower:                40

  "Now doughter mine, come tell to me,
  Wha's bairn this is that you are wi'."

  "O mother dear, I canna learn
  Wha is the father of my bairn.

  "But as I walk'd in the lowlands my lane,          45
  I met a gentleman gallant and fine;

  "He keepit me there sae late and sae lang,
  Frae the ev'ning late till the morning dawn;

  "And a' that he gied me to my propine,
  Was a pair of green gloves, and a gay gold ring,   50

  "Three lauchters of his yellow hair,
  In case that we shou'd meet nae mair."

  His lady mother went down the stair:
  "Now son, now son, come tell to me,
  Where's the green gloves I gave to thee?"          55

  "I gied to a lady sae fair and so fine,
  The green gloves and a gay gold ring:

  "But I wad gie my castles and towers,
  I had that lady within my bowers:

  "But I wad gie my very life,                       60
  I had that lady to be my wife."

  "Now keep, now keep your castles and towers,
  You have that lady within your bowers:

  "Now keep, now keep your very life,
  You have that lady to be your wife."               65

  "O row my lady in sattin and silk,
  And wash my son in the morning milk."




WILLIE'S LADYE.


Printed from Mrs. Brown's MS., in the _Border Minstrelsy_, vol. iii.
p. 170. Another copy is given in Jamieson's _Popular Ballads_, (ii.
367,) and versions, enlarged and altered from the ancient, in the same
work, (ii. 179,) and in _Tales of Wonder_, No. 56. This ballad bears
a striking resemblance to _Sir Stig and Lady Torelild_, translated
from the Danish by Jamieson, _Illustrations of Northern Antiquities_,
p. 344. This is the eighth (marked H) of nine Danish ballads given by
Grundtvig, under the title _Hustru og Mands Moder_, vol. ii. 404.
Three Swedish versions have been printed: two in Arwidsson's
_Fornsanger, Liten Kerstins Foertrollning_, ii. 252, and another
(Grundtvig) in Cavallius and Stephens's _Svenska Folksagor_.

"Those who wish to know how an incantation, or charm, of the
distressing nature here described, was performed in classic days, may
consult the story of Galanthis's Metamorphosis, in Ovid, or the
following passage in Apuleius: 'Eadem (saga, scilicet, quaedam)
amatoris uxorem, quod in eam dicacule probrum dixerat, jam in sarcinam
praegnationis, obsepto utero, et repigrato f[oe]tu, perpetua praegnatione
damnavit. Et ut cuncti numerant, octo annorum onere, misella illa,
velut elephantum paritura, distenditur.' APUL. _Metam._ lib. i.

"There is a curious tale about a Count of Westeravia, whom a deserted
concubine bewitched upon his marriage, so as to preclude all hopes of
his becoming a father. The spell continued to operate for three years,
till one day, the Count happening to meet with his former mistress,
she maliciously asked him about the increase of his family. The Count,
conceiving some suspicion from her manner, craftily answered, that God
had blessed him with three fine children; on which she exclaimed, like
Willie's mother in the ballad, "May heaven confound the old hag, by
whose counsel I threw an enchanted pitcher into the draw-well of your
palace!" The spell being found, and destroyed, the Count became the
father of a numerous family. _Hierarchie of the Blessed Angels_, p.
474." SCOTT.


  Willie's ta'en him o'er the faem,
  He's wooed a wife, and brought her hame;
  He's wooed her for her yellow hair,
  But his mother wrought her meikle care;

  And meikle dolour gar'd her dree,                   5
  For lighter she can never be;
  But in her bower she sits wi' pain,
  And Willie mourns o'er her in vain.

  And to his mother he has gane,
  That vile rank witch, o' vilest kind!              10
  He says--"My ladie has a cup,
  Wi' gowd and silver set about;
  This gudely gift sall be your ain,
  And let her be lighter o' her young bairn."--

  "Of her young bairn she's never be lighter,        15
  Nor in her bour to shine the brighter:
  But she sall die, and turn to clay,
  And you sall wed another may."--

  "Another may I'll never wed,
  Another may I'll never bring hame:"--              20
  But, sighing, said that weary wight--
  "I wish my life were at an end!

  "Yet gae ye to your mother again,
  That vile rank witch, o' vilest kind!
  And say, your ladye has a steed,                   25
  The like o' him's no in the land o' Leed.

  "For he is silver shod before,
  And he is gowden shod behind;
  At every tuft of that horse mane,
  There's a golden chess, and a bell to ring.        30
  This gudely gift sall be her ain,
  And let me be lighter o' my young bairn."--

  "Of her young bairn she's ne'er be lighter,
  Nor in her bour to shine the brighter;
  But she sall die, and turn to clay,                35
  And ye sall wed another may."--

  "Another may I'll never wed,
  Another may I'll never bring hame:"--
  But, sighing, said that weary wight--
  "I wish my life were at an end!--                  40

  "Yet gae ye to your mother again,
  That vile rank witch, o' rankest kind!
  And say your ladye has a girdle,
  It's a' red gowd to the middle;

  "And aye, at ilka siller hem                       45
  Hang fifty siller bells and ten;
  This gudely gift sall be her ain,
  And let me be lighter o' my young bairn."--

  "Of her young bairn she's ne'er be lighter,
  Nor in your bour to shine the brighter;            50
  For she sall die, and turn to clay,
  And thou sall wed another may."--

  "Another may I'll never wed,
  Another may I'll never bring hame;"--
  But, sighing, said that weary wight--              55
  "I wish my days were at an end!"--

  Then out and spak the Billy Blind,[L57]
  (He spak aye in good time:)
  "Yet gae ye to the market-place,
  And there do buy a loaf of wace;                   60
  Do shape it bairn and bairnly like,
  And in it twa glassen een you'll put;

  "And bid her your boy's christening to,
  Then notice weel what she shall do;
  And do you stand a little away,                    65
  To notice weel what she may say."

  [L67]He did him to the market-place,
  And there he bought a loaf[L68] o' wax;
  He shaped it bairn and bairnly like,
  And in twa glazen een he pat;                      70

  He did him till his mither then,
  And bade her to his boy's christnin;
  And he did stand a little forbye,
  And noticed well what she did say.

  "O wha has loosed the nine witch knots,            75
  That were amang that ladye's locks?
  And wha's ta'en out the kaims o' care,
  That were amang that ladye's hair?

  "And wha has ta'en down that bush o' woodbine,
  That hung between her bour and mine?               80
  And wha has kill'd the master kid,[L81]
  That ran beneath that ladye's bed?
  And wha has loosed her left foot shee,
  And let that ladye lighter be?"

  Syne, Willy's loosed the nine witch knots,         85
  That were amang that ladye's locks;
  And Willie's ta'en out the kaims o' care,
  That were into that ladye's hair;

  And he's ta'en down the bush o' woodbine,
  Hung atween her bour and the witch carline;        90
  And he has kill'd the master kid,
  That ran beneath that ladye's bed;

  And he has loosed her left foot shee,
  And latten that ladye lighter be;
  And now he has gotten a bonny son,                 95
  And meikle grace be him upon.


57. _Billy Blind_--A familiar genius, or propitious spirit, somewhat
similar to the _Brownie_.

67-74. Inserted from Jamieson's copy.

68. _leaf_, Jamieson.

81. The witch's chief familiar, placed in the chamber of the sick woman
in the form of a kid.




ALISON GROSS.

Jamieson's _Popular Ballads_, ii. 187.

FROM THE RECITATION OF MRS. BROWN.


The beginning is to be compared with _Lindormen_, the whole ballad
with _Jomfruen i Ormeham_, Grundtvig's _Folkeviser_, ii. 213, 177.


  O Alison Gross, that lives in yon tower,
    The ugliest witch in the north countrie,
  Has trysted me ae day up till her bower,
    And mony fair speech she made to me.

  She straiked my head, and she kembed my hair,            5
    And she set me down saftly on her knee,
  Says,--"Gin ye will be my lemman sae true,
    Sae mony braw things as I would you gi'e."

  She shaw'd me a mantle o' red scarlet,
    Wi' gouden flowers and fringes fine,                  10
  Says "Gin ye will be my lemman sae true,
    This goodly gift it sall be thine."

  "Awa, awa, ye ugly witch,
    Haud far awa, and lat me be;
  I never will be your lemman sae true,                   15
    And I wish I were out of your company."

  She neist brocht a sark o' the saftest silk,
    Weel wrought wi' pearls about the band;
  Says,--"Gin ye will be my ain true love,
    This goodly gift ye sall command."                    20

  She shaw'd me a cup o' the good red goud,
    Weel set wi' jewels sae fair to see;
  Says,--"Gin ye will be my lemman sae true,
    This goodly gift I will you gie."

  "Awa, awa, ye ugly witch!                               25
    Haud far awa, and lat me be;
  For I wadna ance kiss your ugly mouth
    For a' the gifts that ye cou'd gie."

  She's turned her richt and round about,
    And thrice she blew on a grass-green horn;            30
  And she sware by the moon and the stars aboon,
    That she'd gar me rue the day I was born.

  Then out has she ta'en a silver wand,
    And she's turned her three times round and round;
  She's mutter'd sic words, that my strength it fail'd,   35
    And I fell down senseless on the ground.

  She's turn'd me into an ugly worm,
    And gar'd me toddle about the tree;
  And ay, on ilka Saturday's night,
    My sister Maisry came to me,                          40

  Wi' silver bason, and silver kemb,
    To kemb my headie upon her knee;
  But or I had kiss'd her ugly mouth,
    I'd rather hae toddled about the tree.

  But as it fell out on last Hallowe'en,                  45
    When the Seely Court[L46] was ridin' by,
  The queen lighted down on a gowan bank,
    Nae far frae the tree whare I wont to lye.

  She took me up in her milk-white hand,
    And she straiked me three times o'er her knee;        50
  She changed me again to my ain proper shape,
    And I nae mair maun toddle about the tree.


46. _Seely Court_, i.e. "pleasant or happy court," or "court of the
pleasant and happy people." This agrees with the ancient and more
legitimate idea of Fairies. JAMIESON. See p. 120, v. 131, _et seq._




THE EARL OF MAR'S DAUGHTER.

From Buchan's _Ancient Ballads and Songs of the North of Scotland_,
(i. 49.)


It is much to be regretted that this piece has not come down to us in
a purer and more ancient form. Similar ballads are found in Danish,
Swedish, and Faroish. Several forms of the Danish are given by
Grundtvig (_Ridderen i Fugleham_, No. 68), who also cites many
popular tales which have the same basis, e.g. the Countess d'Aulnoy's
fairy story of _The Blue Bird_.


  It was intill a pleasant time,
    Upon a simmer's day;
  The noble Earl of Mar's daughter
    Went forth to sport and play.

  As thus she did amuse hersell,                      5
    Below a green aik tree,
  There she saw a sprightly doo
    Set on a tower sae hie.

  "O Cow-me-doo, my love sae true,
    If ye'll come down to me,                        10
  Ye'se hae a cage o' guid red gowd
    Instead o' simple tree:

  "I'll put gowd hingers roun' your cage,
    And siller roun' your wa';
  I'll gar ye shine as fair a bird                   15
    As ony o' them a'."

  But she had nae these words well spoke,
    Nor yet these words well said,
  Till Cow-me-doo flew frae the tower,
    And lighted on her head.                         20

  Then she has brought this pretty bird
    Hame to her bowers and ha';
  And made him shine as fair a bird
    As ony o' them a'.

  When day was gane, and night was come,             25
    About the evening tide,
  This lady spied a sprightly youth
    Stand straight up by her side.

  "From whence came ye, young man?" she said,
    "That does surprise me sair;                     30
  My door was bolted right secure;
    What way ha'e ye come here?"

  "O had your tongue, ye lady fair,
    Lat a' your folly be;
  Mind ye not on your turtle doo                     35
    Last day ye brought wi' thee?"

  "O tell me mair, young man," she said,
    "This does surprise me now;
  What country ha'e ye come frae?
    What pedigree are you?"                          40

  "My mither lives on foreign isles,
    She has nae mair but me;
  She is a queen o' wealth and state,
    And birth and high degree;

  "Likewise well skill'd in magic spells,            45
    As ye may plainly see;
  And she transform'd me to yon shape,
    To charm such maids as thee.

  "I am a doo the live lang day,
    A sprightly youth at night;                      50
  This aye gars me appear mair fair
    In a fair maiden's sight.

  "And it was but this verra day
    That I came ower the sea;
  Your lovely face did me enchant,--                 55
    I'll live and dee wi' thee."

  "O Cow-me-doo, my luve sae true,
    Nae mair frae me ye'se gae."
  "That's never my intent, my luve,
    As ye said, it shall be sae."                    60

  "O Cow-me-doo, my luve sae true,
    It's time to gae to bed."
  "Wi' a' my heart, my dear marrow,
    It's be as ye ha'e said."

  Then he has staid in bower wi' her                 65
    For sax lang years and ane,
  Till sax young sons to him she bare,
    And the seventh she's brought hame.

  But aye as ever a child was born,
    He carried them away,                            70
  And brought them to his mither's care,
    As fast as he cou'd fly.

  Thus he has staid in bower wi' her
    For twenty years and three;
  There came a lord o' high renown                   75
    To court this fair ladie.

  But still his proffer she refused,
    And a' his presents too;
  Says, "I'm content to live alane
    Wi' my bird, Cow-me-doo."                        80

  Her father sware a solemn oath
    Amang the nobles all,
  "The morn, or ere I eat or drink,
    This bird I will gar kill."

  The bird was sitting in his cage,                  85
    And heard what they did say;
  And when he found they were dismist,
    Says, "Waes me for this day!

  "Before that I do langer stay,
    And thus to be forlorn,                          90
  I'll gang unto my mither's bower,
    Where I was bred and born."

  Then Cow-me-doo took flight and flew
    Beyond the raging sea;
  And lighted near his mither's castle               95
    On a tower o' gowd sae hie.

  As his mither was wauking out,
    To see what she coud see,
  And there she saw her little son
    Set on the tower sae hie.                       100

  "Get dancer here to dance," she said,
    "And minstrells for to play;
  For here's my young son, Florentine,
    Come here wi' me to stay."

  "Get nae dancers to dance, mither,                105
    Nor minstrells for to play;
  For the mither o' my seven sons,
    The morn's her wedding-day."

  "O tell me, tell me, Florentine,
    Tell me, and tell me true,                      110
  Tell me this day without a flaw,
    What I will do for you."

  "Instead of dancers to dance, mither,
    Or minstrells for to play,
  Turn four-and-twenty wall-wight men,              115
    Like storks, in feathers gray;

  "My seven sons in seven swans,
    Aboon their heads to flee;
  And I, mysell, a gay gos-hawk,
    A bird o' high degree."                         120

  Then sichin' said the queen hersell,
    "That thing's too high for me;"
  But she applied to an auld woman,
    Who had mair skill than she.

  Instead o' dancers to dance a dance,              125
    Or minstrells for to play,
  Four-and-twenty wall-wight men
    Turn'd birds o' feathers gray;

  Her seven sons in seven swans,
    Aboon their heads to flee;                      130
  And he, himsell, a gay gos-hawk,
    A bird o' high degree.

  This flock o' birds took flight and flew
    Beyond the raging sea;
  And landed near the Earl Mar's castle,            135
    Took shelter in every tree.

  They were a flock o' pretty birds,
    Right comely to be seen;
  The people view'd them wi' surprise,
    As they danc'd on the green.                    140

  These birds ascended frae the tree,
    And lighted on the ha';
  And at the last wi' force did flee
    Among the nobles a'.

  The storks there seized some o' the men,          145
    They cou'd neither fight nor flee;
  The swans they bound the bride's best man,
    Below a green aik tree.

  They lighted next on maidens fair,
    Then on the bride's own head;                   150
  And wi' the twinkling o' an e'e,
    The bride and them were fled.

  There's ancient men at weddings been,
    For sixty years or more;
  But sic a curious wedding-day                     155
    They never saw before.

  For naething cou'd the companie do,
    Nor naething cou'd they say;
  But they saw a flock o' pretty birds
    That took their bride away.                     160

  When that Earl Mar he came to know
    Where his dochter did stay,
  He sign'd a bond o' unity,
    And visits now they pay.




YOUNG AKIN.


Mr. Kinloch printed a fragment of this ballad under the title of
_Hynde Etin_. (See Appendix.) The story was afterwards given
complete by Buchan, (_Ballads of the North of Scotland_, i. 6,)
as here follows. Buchan had previously communicated to Motherwell a
modernized version of the same tale, in which the Etin is changed to
a Groom. (See _post_.)

This ancient ballad has suffered severely in the course of its
transmission to our times. Still there can be no doubt that it was
originally the same as _The Maid and the Dwarf King_, which is
still sung in Denmark, Norway, Sweden, and the Faroe Islands. Numerous
copies of the Scandinavian ballad have been given to the world: seven
Danish versions, more or less complete, four Norse, nine Swedish, one
Faroish, and some other fragments (Grundtvig, ii. 37, and note, p.
655). One of the Swedish ballads (_Bergkonungen_, Afzelius, No.
35) is translated in Keightley's _Fairy Mythology_, 103, under the
title of _Proud Margaret_. Closely related is _Agnete og Havmanden_,
Grundtvig, ii. 48, 656, which is found in several forms in German (e.g.
_Die schoene Hannele_ in Hoffmann von Fallersleben's _Schlesische
Volkslieder_, No. 1), and two in Slavic.


  Lady Margaret sits in her bower door,
    Sewing at her silken seam;
  She heard a note in Elmond's-wood,
    And wish'd she there had been.

  She loot the seam fa' frae her side,                5
    And the needle to her tae;
  And she is on to Elmond-wood
    As fast as she coud gae.

  She hadna pu'd a nut, a nut,
    Nor broken a branch but ane,                     10
  Till by it came a young hind chiel,
    Says, "Lady, lat alane.

  "O why pu' ye the nut, the nut,
    Or why brake ye the tree?
  For I am forester o' this wood:                    15
    Ye shou'd spier leave at me."

  "I'll ask leave at no living man,
    Nor yet will I at thee;
  My father is king o'er a' this realm,
    This wood belongs to me."                        20

  She hadna pu'd a nut, a nut,
    Nor broken a branch but three,
  Till by it came him Young Akin,
    And gar'd her lat them be.

  The highest tree in Elmond's-wood,                 25
    He's pu'd it by the reet;
  And he has built for her a bower
    Near by a hallow seat.

  He's built a bower, made it secure
    Wi' carbuncle and stane;                         30
  Tho' travellers were never sae nigh,
    Appearance it had nane.

  He's kept her there in Elmond's-wood,
    For six lang years and one;
  Till six pretty sons to him she bear,              35
    And the seventh she's brought home.

  It fell ance upon a day,
    This guid lord went from home;
  And he is to the hunting gane,
    Took wi' him his eldest son.                     40

  And when they were on a guid way,
    Wi' slowly pace did walk,
  The boy's heart being something wae,
    He thus began to talk:--

  "A question I wou'd ask, father,                   45
    Gin ye wou'dna angry be?"
  "Say on, say on, my bonny boy,
    Ye'se nae be quarrell'd by me."

  "I see my mither's cheeks aye weet,
    I never can see them dry;                        50
  And I wonder what aileth my mither,
    To mourn continually."

  "Your mither was a king's daughter,
    Sprung frae a high degree;
  And she might hae wed some worthy prince,          55
    Had she nae been stown by me.

  "I was her father's cup-bearer,
    Just at that fatal time;
  I catch'd her on a misty night,
    Whan summer was in prime.                        60

  "My luve to her was most sincere,
    Her luve was great for me;
  But when she hardships doth endure,
    Her folly she does see."

  "I'll shoot the buntin' o' the bush,               65
    The linnet o' the tree,
  And bring them to my dear mither,
    See if she'll merrier be."

  It fell upo' another day,
    This guid lord he thought lang,                  70
  And he is to the hunting gane,
    Took wi' him his dog and gun.

  Wi' bow and arrow by his side,
    He's aff, single, alane;
  And left his seven children to stay                75
    Wi' their mither at hame.

  "O, I will tell to you, mither,
    Gin ye wadna angry be:"
  "Speak on, speak on, my little wee boy,
    Ye'se nae be quarrell'd by me."                  80

  "As we came frae the hynd hunting,
    We heard fine music ring:"
  "My blessings on you, my bonny boy,
    I wish I'd been there my lane."

  He's ta'en his mither by the hand,                 85
    His six brithers also,
  And they are on thro' Elmond's-wood,
    As fast as they coud go.

  They wistna weel where they were gaen,
    Wi' the stratlins o' their feet;                 90
  They wistna weel where they were gaen,
    Till at her father's yate.

  "I hae nae money in my pocket,
    But royal rings hae three;
  I'll gie them you, my little young son,            95
    And ye'll walk there for me.

  "Ye'll gi'e the first to the proud porter,[L97]
    And he will lat you in;
  Ye'll gi'e the next to the butler boy,
    And he will show you ben;                       100

  "Ye'll gi'e the third to the minstrel
    That plays before the king;
  He'll play success to the bonny boy
    Came thro' the wood him lane."

  He ga'e the first to the proud porter,            105
    And he open'd an' let him in;
  He ga'e the next to the butler boy,
    And he has shown him ben;

  He ga'e the third to the minstrel
    That play'd before the king;                    110
  And he play'd success to the bonny boy
    Came thro' the wood him lane.

  Now when he came before the king,
    Fell low down on his knee:
  The king he turned round about,                   115
    And the saut tear blinded his ee.

  "Win up, win up, my bonny boy,
    Gang frae my companie;
  Ye look sae like my dear daughter,
    My heart will birst in three."                  120

  "If I look like your dear daughter,
    A wonder it is none;
  If I look like your dear daughter,
    I am her eldest son."

  "Will ye tell me, ye little wee boy,              125
    Where may my Margaret be?"
  "She's just now standing at your yates,
    And my six brithers her wi'."

  "O where are all my porter boys
    That I pay meat and fee,                        130
  To open my yates baith wide and braid?
    Let her come in to me."

  When she came in before the king,
    Fell low down on her knee:
  "Win up, win up, my daughter dear,                135
    This day ye'll dine wi me."

  "Ae bit I canno' eat, father,
    Nor ae drop can I drink,
  Till I see my mither and sister dear,
    For lang for them I think."                     140

  When she came before the queen,
    Fell low down on her knee:
  "Win up, win up, my daughter dear,
    This day ye'se dine wi' me."

  "Ae bit I canno' eat, mither,                     145
    Nor ae drop can I drink,
  Until I see my dear sister,
    For lang for her I think."

  When that these two sisters met,
    She hail'd her courteouslie:                    150
  "Come ben, come ben, my sister dear,
    This day ye'se dine wi' me."

  "Ae bit I canno' eat, sister,
    Nor ae drop can I drink,
  Until I see my dear husband,                      155
    For lang for him I think."

  "O where are all my rangers bold
    That I pay meat and fee,
  To search the forest far an' wide,
    And bring Akin to me?"                          160

  Out it speaks the wee little boy,--
    "Na, na, this maunna be;
  Without ye grant a free pardon,
    I hope ye'll nae him see."

  "O here I grant a free pardon,                    165
    Well seal'd by my own han';
  Ye may make search for young Akin,
    As soon as ever you can."

  They search'd the country wide and braid,
    The forests far and near,                       170
  And found him into Elmond's-wood,
    Tearing his yellow hair.

  "Win up, win up, now young Akin.
    Win up, and boun wi' me;
  We're messengers come from the court;             175
    The king wants you to see."

  "O lat him take frae me my head,
    Or hang me on a tree;
  For since I've lost my dear lady,
    Life's no pleasure to me."                      180

  "Your head will nae be touch'd, Akin,
    Nor hang'd upon a tree:
  Your lady's in her father's court,
    And all he wants is thee."

  When he came in before the king,                  185
    Fell low down on his knee:
  "Win up, win up now, young Akin,
    This day ye'se dine wi' me."

  But as they were at dinner set,
    The boy asked a boun;                           190
  "I wish we were in the good church,
     For to get christendoun.

  "We ha'e lived in guid green wood
    This seven years and ane;
  But a' this time since e'er I mind,               195
    Was never a church within."

  "Your asking 's nae sae great, my boy,
    But granted it shall be;
  This day to guid church ye shall gang,
    And your mither shall gang you wi'."            200

  When unto the guid church she came,
    She at the door did stan';
  She was sae sair sunk down wi' shame,
    She coudna come farer ben.

  Then out it speaks the parish priest,             205
    And a sweet smile gae he;---
  "Come ben, come ben, my lily flower,
    Present your babes to me."

  Charles, Vincent, Sam, and Dick,
    And likewise James and John;                    210
  They call'd the eldest Young Akin,
    Which was his father's name.

  Then they staid in the royal court,
    And liv'd wi' mirth and glee;
  And when her father was deceas'd,                 215
    Heir of the crown was she.


97. The regular propitiation for the "proud porter" of ballad poetry.
See, e.g. _King Arthur and the King of Cornwall_, in the Appendix, v.
49: also the note to _King Estmere_, vol. iii. p. 172.




YOUNG HASTINGS THE GROOM.

(Motherwell's _Minstrelsy_, p. 287.)


  "O well love I to ride in a mist,
    And shoot in a northern wind;
  And far better a lady to steal,
    That's come of a noble kind."

  Four-and-twenty fair ladies                         5
    Put on that lady's sheen;
  And as many young gentlemen
    Did lead her o'er the green.

  Yet she preferred before them all
    Him, young Hastings the Groom;                   10
  He's coosten a mist before them all,
    And away this lady has ta'en.

  He's taken the lady on him behind,
    Spared neither the grass nor corn,
  Till they came to the wood of Amonshaw,            15
    Where again their loves were sworn.

  And they have lived in that wood
    Full many a year and day,
  And were supported from time to time,
    By what he made of prey.                         20

  And seven bairns, fair and fine,
    There she has born to him,
  And never was in good church door,
    Nor never gat good kirking.

  Once she took harp into her hand,                  25
    And harped them asleep;
  Then she sat down at their couch side,
    And bitterly did weep.

  Said, "Seven bairns have I born now
    To my lord in the ha';                           30
  I wish they were seven greedy rats,
    To run upon the wa',
  And I mysel' a great grey cat,
    To eat them ane an' a'.

  "For ten long years now I have lived               35
    Within this cave of stane,
  And never was at good church door,
    Nor got no good churching."

  O then outspak her eldest child,
    And a fine boy was he,--                         40
  "O hold your tongue, my mother dear;
    I'll tell you what to dee.

  "Take you the youngest in your lap,
    The next youngest by the hand;
  Put all the rest of us you before,                 45
    As you learnt us to gang.

  "And go with us into some good kirk,--
    You say they are built of stane,--
  And let us all be christened,
    And you get good kirking."                       50

  She took the youngest in her lap,
    The next youngest by the hand;
  Set all the rest of them her before,
    As she learnt them to gang.

  And she has left the wood with them,               55
    And to a kirk has gane;
  Where the good priest them christened,
    And gave her good kirking.




CLERK COLVILL, OR THE MERMAID.


This ballad exemplifies a superstition deeply rooted in the belief of
all the northern nations,--the desire of the Elves and Water-spirits for
the love of Christians, and the danger of being exposed to their
fascination. The object of their fatal passion is generally a
bridegroom, or a bride, on the eve of marriage. See, in the Appendix,
_Sir Oluf and the Elf-King's Daughter_, for further illustrations; also
the two succeeding pieces.

_Clerk Colvill_ was first printed in Herd's _Scottish Songs_,
(i. 217,) and was inserted, in an altered shape, in Lewis's _Tales of
Wonder_, (No. 56.)


  Clerk Colvill and his lusty dame
    Were walking in the garden green;
  The belt around her stately waist
    Cost Clerk Colvill of pounds fifteen.

  "O promise me now, Clerk Colvill,                   5
    Or it will cost ye muckle strife,
  Ride never by the wells of Slane,
    If ye wad live and brook your life."

  "Now speak nae mair, my lusty dame,
    Now speak nae mair of that to me:                10
  Did I ne'er see a fair woman,
    But I wad sin with her fair body?"

  He's ta'en leave o' his gay lady,
    Nought minding what his lady said,
  And he's rode by the wells of Slane,               15
    Where washing was a bonny maid.

  "Wash on, wash on, my bonny maid,
    That wash sae clean your sark of silk;"
  "And weel fa' you, fair gentleman,
    Your body's whiter than the milk."               20



  Then loud, loud cry'd the Clerk Colvill,
    "O my head it pains me sair;"
  "Then take, then take," the maiden said,
    "And frae my sark you'll cut a gare."            25

  Then she's gi'ed him a little bane-knife,
    And frae her sark[L27] he cut a share;
  She's ty'd it round his whey-white face,
    But ay his head it aked mair.

  Then louder cry'd the Clerk Colvill,               30
    "O sairer, sairer akes my head;"
  "And sairer, sairer ever will,"
    The maiden crys, "till you be dead."

  Out then he drew his shining blade,
    Thinking to stick her where she stood;           35
  But she was vanish'd to a fish,
    And swam far off, a fair mermaid.

  "O mother, mother, braid my hair;
    My lusty lady, make my bed;
  O brother, take my sword and spear,                40
    For I have seen the false mermaid."


27, his sark.




LADY ISABEL AND THE ELF-KNIGHT.

From Buchan's _Ballads of the North of Scotland_, i. 22, where it
is entitled _The Gowans sae gay_, from the burden.


The hero of the first of the two following ballads would seem to be an
Elf, that of the second a Nix, or Merman, though the punishment
awarded to each of them in the catastrophe, as the ballads now exist,
is not consistent with their supernatural character. It is possible
that in both instances two independent stories have been blended: but
it is curious that the same intermixture should occur in Norse and
German also. See Grundtvig's preface to _Noekkens Svig_, ii. p. 57.
The conclusion in all these cases is derived from a ballad resembling
_May Colvin_, vol. ii. p. 272.

We have had the Elf-Knight introduced under the same circumstances at
page 128; indeed, the first three or four stanzas are common to both
pieces.


  Fair lady Isabel sits in her bower sewing,
    _Aye as the gowans grow gay_;
  There she heard an elf-knight blawing his horn,
    _The first morning in May_.

  "If I had yon horn that I hear blawing,"            5
    _Aye as the gowans grow gay_;
  "And yon elf-knight to sleep in my bosom,"
    _The first morning in May_.

  This maiden had scarcely these words spoken,
    _Aye as the gowans grow gay_;                    10
  Till in at her window the elf-knight has luppen,
    _The first morning in May_.

  "Its a very strange matter, fair maiden," said he,
    _Aye as the gowans grow gay_,
  "I canna' blaw my horn, but ye call on me,"        15
    _The first morning in May_.

  "But will ye go to yon greenwood side,"
    _Aye as the gowans grow gay_?
  "If ye canna' gang, I will cause you to ride,"
    _The first morning in May_.                      20

  He leapt on a horse, and she on another,
    _Aye as the gowans grow gay_;
  And they rode on to the greenwood together,
    _The first morning in May_.

  "Light down, light down, lady Isabel," said he,    25
    _Aye as the gowans grow gay_;
  "We are come to the place where ye are to die,"
    _The first morning in May_.

  "Ha'e mercy, ha'e mercy, kind sir, on me,"
    _Aye as the gowans grow gay_;                    30
  "Till ance my dear father and mother I see,"
    _The first morning in May_.

  "Seven king's-daughters here hae I slain,"
    _Aye as the gowans grow gay_;
  "And ye shall be the eight o' them,"               35
    _The first morning in May_.

  "O sit down a while, lay your head on my knee,"
    _Aye as the gowans grow gay_;
  "That we may hae some rest before that I die,"
    _The first morning in May_.                      40

  She stroak'd him sae fast, the nearer he did creep,
    _Aye as the gowans grow gay_;
  Wi' a sma' charm she lull'd him fast asleep,
    _The first morning in May_.

  "Wi' his ain sword belt sae fast as she ban' him,  45
    _Aye as the gowans grow gay_;
  With his ain dag-durk sae sair as she dang him,
    _The first morning in May_.

  "If seven kings' daughters here ye ha'e slain,"
    _Aye as the gowans grow gay_,                    50
  "Lye ye here, a husband to them a',"
    _The first morning in May_.




THE WATER O' WEARIE'S WELL.

From Buchan's _Ballads of the North of Scotland_, ii. 201. Repeated
in Scottish _Traditional Versions of Ancient Ballads_, Percy Society,
xvii. 63.


The three ballads which follow, diverse as they may now appear, after
undergoing successive corruptions, were primarily of the same type. In
the first (which may be a compound of two ballads, like the preceding,
the conclusion being taken from a story of the character of _May
Colvin_ in the next volume) the Merman or Nix may be easily
recognized: in the second he is metamorphosed into the Devil; and in
the third, into a ghost. Full details upon the corresponding
Scandinavian, German, and Slavic legends, are given by Grundtvig, in
the preface to _Noekkens Svig, Danmarks G. Folkeviser_, ii. 57:
translated by Jamieson, i. 210, and by Monk Lewis, _Tales of Wonder_,
No. 11.


  There came a bird out o' a bush,
    On water for to dine;
  And sighing sair, says the king's daughter,
    "O waes this heart o' mine!"

  He's taen a harp into his hand,                     5
    He's harped them all asleep;
  Except it was the king's daughter,
    Who ae wink cou'dna get.

  He's luppen on his berry-brown steed,
     Taen her on behind himsell;                     10
  Then baith rade down to that water,
     That they ca' Wearie's well.

  "Wide in, wide in, my lady fair,
     Nae harm shall thee befall;
  Aft times hae I water'd my steed,                  15
     Wi' the water o' Wearie's well."

  The first step that she stepped in,
     She stepped to the knee;
  And sighing sair, says this lady fair,
     "This water's nae for me."                      20

  "Wide in, wide in, my lady fair,
     Nae harm shall thee befall;
  Aft times hae I water'd my steed,
     Wi' the water o' Wearie's well."

  The next step that she stepped in,                 25
     She stepped to the middle;
  And sighing, says, this lady fair,
     "I've wat my gowden girdle."

  "Wide in, wide in, my lady fair,
     Nae harm shall thee befall;                     30
  Aft times hae I water'd my steed,
     Wi' the water o' Wearie's well."

  The niest step that she stepped in,
    She stepped to the chin;
  And sighing, says, this lady fair,                 35
    "They shou'd gar twa loves twine."

  "Seven king's-daughters I've drown'd there,
    In the water o' Wearie's well;
  And I'll make you the eight o' them,
    And ring the common bell."                       40

  "Sin' I am standing here," she says,
    "This dowie death to die;
  Ae kiss o' your comely mouth
    I'm sure wou'd comfort me."

  He louted him ower his saddle bow,                 45
    To kiss her cheek and chin;
  She's taen him in her arms twa,
    And thrown him headlang in.

  "Sin' seven king's daughters ye've drown'd there,
    In the water o' Wearie's well,                   50
  I'll make you bridegroom to them a',
    An' ring the bell mysell."

  And aye she warsled, and aye she swam,
    Till she swam to dry land;
  Then thanked God most cheerfully,                  55
    The dangers she'd ower came.




THE DAEMON LOVER.


This ballad was communicated to Sir Walter Scott, (_Minstrelsy_, iii.
195,) by Mr. William Laidlaw, who took it down from recitation. A
fragment of the same legend, recovered by Motherwell, is given in the
Appendix to this volume, and another version, in which the hero is not
a daemon, but the ghost of an injured lover, is placed directly after
the present.

The Devil (Auld _Nick_) here takes the place of the Merman (Nix) of
the ancient ballad. See p. 198, and the same natural substitution
noted in _K.u.H._--_Maerchen_, 3d ed. iii. 253.


  "O where have you been, my long, long love,
    This long seven years and more?"--
  "O I'm come to seek my former vows
    Ye granted me before."--

  "O hold your tongue of your former vows,            5
    For they will breed sad strife;
  O hold your tongue of your former vows,
    For I am become a wife."

  He turn'd him right and round about,
    And the tear blinded his ee;                     10
  "I wad never hae trodden on Irish ground,
    If it had not been for thee.

  "I might hae had a king's daughter,
    Far, far beyond the sea;
  I might have had a king's daughter,                15
    Had it not been for love o' thee."--

  "If ye might have had a king's daughter,
    Yer sell ye had to blame;
  Ye might have taken the king's daughter,
    For ye kend that I was nane."--                  20

  "O faulse are the vows of womankind,
    But fair is their faulse bodie;
  I never wad hae trodden on Irish ground,
    Had it not been for love o' thee."--

  "If I was to leave my husband dear,                25
    And my two babes also,
  O what have you to take me to,
    If with you I should go?"--

  "I hae seven ships upon the sea,
    The eighth brought me to land;                   30
  With four-and-twenty bold mariners,
    And music on every hand."

  She has taken up her two little babes,
    Kiss'd them baith cheek and chin;
  "O fair ye weel, my ain two babes,                 35
    For I'll never see you again."

  She set her foot upon the ship,
    No mariners could she behold;
  But the sails were o' the taffetie,
    And the masts o' the beaten gold.                40

  She had not sail'd a league, a league,
    A league but barely three,
  When dismal grew his countenance,
    And drumlie grew his ee.

  The masts that were like the beaten gold,          45
    Bent not on the heaving seas;
  But the sails, that were o' the taffetie,
    Fill'd not in the east land breeze.--

  They had not sailed a league, a league,
    A league but barely three,                       50
  Until she espied his cloven foot,
    And she wept right bitterlie.

  "O hold your tongue of your weeping," says he,
    "Of your weeping now let me be;
  I will show you how the lilies grow                55
    On the banks of Italy."--

  "O what hills are yon, yon pleasant hills,
    That the sun shines sweetly on?"--
  "O yon are the hills of heaven," he said,
    "Where you will never win."--                    60

  "O whaten a mountain is yon," she said,
    "All so dreary wi' frost and snow?"--
  "O yon is the mountain of hell," he cried,
    "Where you and I will go."

  And aye when she turn'd her round about,           65
    Aye taller he seem'd for to be;
  Until that the tops o' that gallant ship
    Nae taller were than he.

  The clouds grew dark, and the wind grew loud,
    And the levin fill'd her ee;                     70
  And waesome wail'd the snaw-white sprites
    Upon the gurlie sea.

  He strack the tap-mast wi' his hand,
    The fore-mast wi' his knee;
  And he brake that gallant ship in twain,           75
    And sank her in the sea.




JAMES HERRIES.

From Buchan's _Ballads of the North of Scotland_, (i. 214.)

(See the preface to the last ballad but one.)


  "O are ye my father, or are ye my mother?
     Or are ye my brother John?
   Or are ye James Herries, my first true love,
     Come back to Scotland again?"

  "I am not your father, I am not your mother,        5
     Nor am I your brother John;
   But I'm James Herries, your first true love,
     Come back to Scotland again."

  "Awa', awa', ye former lovers,
     Had far awa' frae me;                           10
   For now I am another man's wife,
     Ye'll ne'er see joy o' me."

  "Had I kent that ere I came here,
     I ne'er had come to thee;
   For I might hae married the king's daughter,      15
     Sae fain she wou'd had me.

  "I despised the crown o' gold,
     The yellow silk also;
   And I am come to my true love,
     But with me she'll not go."                     20

  "My husband he is a carpenter,
     Makes his bread on dry land,
   And I hae born him a young son,--
     Wi' you I will not gang."

  "You must forsake your dear husband,               25
     Your little young son also,
   Wi' me to sail the raging seas,
     Where the stormy winds do blow."

  "O what hae you to keep me wi',
     If I should with you go?                        30
   If I'd forsake my dear husband,
     My little young son also?"

  "See ye not yon seven pretty ships,
     The eighth brought me to land;
   With merchandize and mariners,                    35
     And wealth in every hand?"

   She turn'd her round upon the shore,
     Her love's ships to behold;
   Their topmasts and their mainyards
     Were cover'd o'er wi' gold.                     40

   Then she's gane to her little young son,
     And kiss'd him cheek and chin;
   Sae has she to her sleeping husband,
     And dune the same to him.

  "O sleep ye, wake ye, my husband,                  45
     I wish ye wake in time;
   I woudna for ten thousand pounds,
     This night ye knew my mind."

   She's drawn the slippers on her feet,
     Were cover'd o'er wi' gold;                     50
   Well lined within wi' velvet fine,
     To had her frae the cold.

   She hadna sailed upon the sea
     A league but barely three,
   Till she minded on her dear husband,              55
     Her little young son tee.

  "O gin I were at land again,
     At land where I wou'd be,
   The woman ne'er shou'd bear the son,
     Shou'd gar me sail the sea."                    60

  "O hold your tongue, my sprightly flower,
     Let a' your mourning be;
   I'll show you how the lilies grow
     On the banks o' Italy."

   She hadna sailed on the sea                       65
     A day but barely ane,
   Till the thoughts o' grief came in her mind,
     And she lang'd for to be hame.

  "O gentle death, come cut my breath,
     I may be dead ere morn;                         70
   I may be buried in Scottish ground,
     Where I was bred and born."

  "O hold your tongue, my lily leesome thing,
     Let a' your mourning be;
   But for a while we'll stay at Rose Isle,          75
     Then see a far countrie.

  "Ye'se ne'er be buried in Scottish ground,
     Nor land ye's nae mair see;
   I brought you away to punish you,
     For the breaking your vows to me.               80

  "I said ye shou'd see the lilies grow
     On the banks o' Italy;
   But I'll let you see the fishes swim,
     In the bottom o' the sea."

   He reached his band to the topmast,               85
     Made a' the sails gae down;
   And in the twinkling o' an e'e,
     Baith ship and crew did drown.

   The fatal flight o' this wretched maid
     Did reach her ain countrie;                     90
   Her husband then distracted ran,
     And this lament made he:--

  "O wae be to the ship, the ship,
     And wae be to the sea,
   And wae be to the mariners,                       95
     Took Jeanie Douglas frae me!

  "O bonny, bonny was my love,
     A pleasure to behold;
   The very hair o' my love's head
     Was like the threads o' gold.                  100

  "O bonny was her cheek, her cheek,
     And bonny was her chin;
   And bonny was the bride she was,
     The day she was made mine!"



*** The following stanzas from a version of this ballad printed at
Philadelphia (and called _The House Carpenter_) are given in Graham's
_Illustrated Magazine_, Sept. 1858.

  "I might have married the king's daughter dear;"
    "You might have married her," cried she,
  "For I am married to a House Carpenter,
     And a fine young man is he."

  "Oh dry up your tears, my own true love,
     And cease your weeping," cried he;
  "For soon you'll see your own happy home,
     On the banks of old Tennessee."




THE KNIGHT'S GHOST.

From _Buchan's ballads of the North of Scotland_, (i. 227.)


  "There is a fashion in this land,
    And even come to this country,
  That every lady should meet her lord,
    When he is newly come frae sea:

  "Some wi' hawks, and some wi' hounds,               5
    And other some wi' gay monie;
  But I will gae myself alone,
    And set his young son on his knee."

  She's ta'en her young son in her arms,
    And nimbly walk'd by yon sea strand;             10
  And there she spy'd her father's ship,
    As she was sailing to dry land.

  "Where hae ye put my ain gude lord,
    This day he stays sae far frae me?"
  "If ye be wanting your ain gude lord,              15
    A sight o' him ye'll never see."

  "Was he brunt, or was he shot?
    Or was he drowned in the sea?
  Or what's become o' my ain gude lord,
    That he will ne'er appear to me?"                20

  "He wasna brunt, nor was he shot,
    Nor was he drowned in the sea;
  He was slain in Dumfermling,
    A fatal day to you and me."

  "Come in, come in, my merry young men,             25
    Come in and drink the wine wi' me;
  And a' the better ye shall fare,
    For this gude news ye tell to me."

  She's brought them down to yon cellar,
    She brought them fifty steps and three;          30
  She birled wi' them the beer and wine,
    Till they were as drunk as drunk could be.

  Then she has lock'd her cellar door,
    For there were fifty steps and three;
  "Lie there wi' my sad malison,                     35
    For this bad news ye've tauld to me."

  She's ta'en the keys intill her hand,
    And threw them deep, deep in the sea;
  "Lie there wi' my sad malison,
    Till my gude lord return to me."                 40

  Then she sat down in her own room,
    And sorrow lull'd her fast asleep;
  And up it starts her own gude lord,
    And even at that lady's feet.

  "Take here the keys, Janet," he says,              45
    "That ye threw deep, deep in the sea;
  And ye'll relieve my merry young men,
    For they've nane o' the swick o' me.

  "They shot the shot, and drew the stroke,
    And wad in red bluid to the knee;                50
  Nae sailors mair for their lord coud do,
    Nor my young men they did for me."

  "I hae a question at you to ask,
    Before that ye depart frae me;
  You'll tell to me what day I'll die,               55
    And what day will my burial be?"

  "I hae nae mair o' God's power
    Than he has granted unto me;
  But come to heaven when ye will,
    There porter to you I will be.                   60

  "But ye'll be wed to a finer knight
    Than ever was in my degree;
  Unto him ye'll hae children nine,
    And six o' them will be ladies free.

  "The other three will be bold young men,           65
    To fight for king and countrie;
  The ane a duke, the second a knight,
    And third a laird o' lands sae free."




THE WIFE OF USHER'S WELL.

_Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border_, iii. 258.


That the repose of the dead is disturbed by the immoderate grief of
those they have left behind them, is a belief which finds frequent
expression in popular ballads. Obstinate sorrow rouses them from their
grateful slumber; every tear that is shed for them wets their shroud;
they can get no rest, and are compelled to revisit the world they
would fain forget, to rebuke and forbid the mourning that destroys
their peace.

      "Ice-cold and bloody, a lead-weight of sorrow, falls on my
            breast each tear that you shed,"

says the ghost of Helgi in the _Edda_ to his lamenting wife (_Helgak.
Hundingsb._ II.) The same idea is found in the German ballad, _Der
Vorwirth_, Erk's _Liederhort_, No. 46, 46 a, and in various tales, as
_Das Todtenhemdchen_, (_K.u.H. Maerchen_, No. 109, and note), etc. In
like manner Sir Aage, in a well-known Danish ballad (Grundtvig, No.
90), and the corresponding _Sorgens Magt, Svenska F.V._, No. 6.

      "Every time thou weepest for me,
        Thy heart makest sad,
      Then all within, my coffin stands full
        Of clotted blood."

Rarely is the silence of the grave broken for purposes of consolation.
Yet some cases there are, as in a Lithuanian ballad cited by
Wackernagel, _Altd. Blaetter_, i. 176, and a Spanish ballad noticed by
Talvj, _Versuch_, p. 141. The present ballad seems to belong to the
latter class rather than the former, but it is so imperfect that its
true character cannot be determined.

Chambers maintains, we think erroneously, that this ballad is a
fragment of _The Clerk's Twa Sons o' Owsenford_. See the second volume
of this collection, page 63.


  There lived a wife at Usher's Well,
    And a wealthy wife was she,
  She had three stout and stalwart sons,
    And sent them o'er the sea.

  They hadna been a week from her,                    5
    A week but barely ane,
  When word came to the carline wife,
    That her three sons were gane.

  They hadna been a week from her,
    A week but barely three,                         10
  When word came to the carline wife,
    That her sons she'd never see.

  "I wish the wind may never cease,
    Nor fishes[L14] in the flood,
  Till my three sons come hame to me,                15
    In earthly flesh and blood."--

  It fell about the Martinmas,
    When nights are lang and mirk,
  The carline wife's three sons came hame,
    And their hats were o' the birk.                 20

  It neither grew in syke nor ditch,
    Nor yet in ony sheugh;
  But at the gates o' Paradise,
    That birk grew fair eneugh.



  "Blow up the fire, my maidens!                     25
    Bring water from the well!
  For a' my house shall feast this night,
    Since my three sons are well."--

  And she has made to them a bed,
    She's made it large and wide;                    30
  And she's ta'en her mantle her about,
    Sat down at the bed-side.



  Up then crew the red red cock,                     35
    And up and crew the gray;
  The eldest to the youngest said,
    "'Tis time we were away."--

  The cock he hadna craw'd but once,
    And clapp'd his wings at a',                     40
  Whan the youngest to the eldest said,
    "Brother, we must awa.--

  "The cock doth craw, the day doth daw,
    The channerin' worm doth chide;
  Gin we be mist out o' our place,                   45
    A sair pain we maun bide.

  "Fare ye weel, my mother dear!
    Fareweel to barn and byre!
  And fare ye weel, the bonny lass,
    That kindles my mother's fire."                  50


14. Should we not read, for _fishes_ here, _fashes_-- i. e.
troubles?--LOCKHART.




THE SUFFOLK MIRACLE:

_Or, a relation of a young man, who, a month after his death, appeared
to his sweetheart, and carried her on horseback behind him for forty
miles in two hours, and was never seen after but in his grave._


From _A Collection of Old Ballads_, i. 266. In Moore's _Pictorial Book
of Ancient Ballad Poetry_ (p. 463) is a copy from a broadside in the
Roxburghe collection.

_The Suffolk Miracle_ has an external resemblance to several noble
ballads, but the likeness does not extend below the surface. It is
possible that we have here the residuum of an old poem, from which all
the beauty and spirit have been exhaled in the course of tradition;
but as the ballad now exists, it is a vulgar ghost-story, without any
motive. Regarding the external form alone, we may place by its side
the Breton ballad, _Le Frere de Lait_, in Villemarque's _Chants
Populaires de la Bretagne_, vol. i. No. 22 (translated by Miss
Costello, _Quart. Review_, vol. 68, p. 75), the Romaic ballad of
_Constantine and Arete_, in Fauriel's _Chants Populaires de la Grece
Moderne_, p. 406 (see Appendix), and the Servian ballad (related to
the Romaic, and perhaps derived from it), _Jelitza and her Brothers_,
Talvj, _Volkslieder der Serben_, i. 160, all of them among the most
beautiful specimens in this kind of literature; and also Buerger's
_Lenore_. It has been once or twice most absurdly suggested that
_Lenore_ owed its existence to this _Suffolk Miracle_. The difference,
indeed, is not greater than between a "Chronicle History" and
_Macbeth_; it is however certain that Buerger's ballad is all his own,
except the hint of the ghostly horseman and one or two phrases, which
he took from the description of a Low German ballad. The editors of
the _Wunderhorn_ claim to give this ballad, vol. ii. p. 19. An
equivalent prose tradition is well known in Germany. Most of the
ballads relating to the return of departed spirits are brought
together in an excellent article by Wackernagel in the _Altdeutsche
Blaetter_, i. 174.


  A wonder stranger ne'er was known
  Than what I now shall treat upon.
  In Suffolk there did lately dwell
  A farmer rich and known full well.

  He had a daughter fair and bright,                  5
  On whom he placed his chief delight;
  Her beauty was beyond compare,
  She was both virtuous and fair.

  There was a young man living by,
  Who was so charmed with her eye,                   10
  That he could never be at rest;
  He was by love so much possest.

  He made address to her, and she
  Did grant him love immediately;
  But when her father came to hear,                  15
  He parted her and her poor dear.

  Forty miles distant was she sent,
  Unto his brother's, with intent
  That she should there so long remain,
  Till she had changed her mind again.               20

  Hereat this young man sadly grieved,
  But knew not how to be relieved;
  He sighed and sobbed continually
  That his true love he could not see.

  She by no means could to him send,                 25
  Who was her heart's espoused friend;
  He sighed, he grieved, but all in vain,
  For she confined must still remain.

  He mourned so much, that doctor's art
  Could give no ease unto his heart,                 30
  Who was so strangely terrified,
  That in short time for love he died.

  She that from him was sent away
  Knew nothing of his dying day,
  But constant still she did remain,                 35
  And loved the dead, although in vain.

  After he had in grave been laid
  A month or more, unto this maid
  He came in middle of the night,
  Who joyed to see her heart's delight.              40

  Her father's horse, which well she knew,
  Her mother's hood and safe-guard too,
  He brought with him to testify
  Her parents order he came by.

  Which when her uncle understood,                   45
  He hoped it would be for her good,
  And gave consent to her straightway,
  That with him she should come away.

  When she was got her love behind,
  They passed as swift as any wind,                  50
  That in two hours, or little more,
  He brought her to her father's door.

  But as they did this great haste make,
  He did complain his head did ake;
  Her handkerchief she then took out,                55
  And tied the same his head about.

  And unto him she thus did say:
  "Thou art as cold as any clay;
  When we come home a fire we'll have;"
  But little dreamed he went to grave.               60

  Soon were they at her father's door,
  And after she ne'er saw him more;
  "I'll set the horse up," then he said,
  And there he left this harmless maid.

  She knocked, and straight a man he cried,          65
  "Who's there?" "'Tis I," she then replied;
  Who wondred much her voice to hear,
  And was possessed with dread and fear.

  Her father he did tell, and then
  He stared like an affrighted man:                  70
  Down stairs he ran, and when he see her,
  Cried out, "My child, how cam'st thou here?"

  "Pray, sir, did you not send for me,
  By such a messenger?" said she:
  Which made his hair stare on his head,             75
  As knowing well that he was dead.

  "Where is he?" then to her he said;
  "He's in the stable," quoth the maid.
  "Go in," said he, "and go to bed;
  I'll see the horse well littered."                 80

  He stared about, and there could he
  No shape of any mankind see,
  But found his horse all on a sweat;
  Which made him in a deadly fret.

  His daughter he said nothing to,                   85
  Nor none else, (though full well they knew
  That he was dead a month before,)
  For fear of grieving her full sore.

  Her father to the father went
  Of the deceased, with full intent                  90
  To tell him what his daughter said;
  So both came back unto this maid.

  They ask'd her, and she still did say
  'Twas he that then brought her away;
  Which when they heard they were amazed,            95
  And on each other strangely gazed.

  A handkerchief she said she tied
  About his head, and that they tried;
  The sexton they did speak unto,
  That he the grave would then undo.                100

  Affrighted then they did behold
  His body turning into mould,
  And though he had a month been dead,
  This handkerchief was about his head.

  This thing unto her then they told,               105
  And the whole truth they did unfold;
  She was thereat so terrified
  And grieved, that she quickly died.

  Part not true love, you rich men, then;
  But, if they be right honest men                  110
  Your daughters love, give them their way,
  For force oft breeds their lives decay.




SIR ROLAND.

From Motherwell's _Minstrelsy_, p. 124.


This fragment, Motherwell tells us, was communicated to him by an
ingenious friend, who remembered having heard it sung in his youth. He
does not vouch for its antiquity, and we have little or no hesitation
in pronouncing it a modern composition.


  Whan he cam to his ain luve's bouir,
    He tirled at the pin,
  And sae ready was his fair fause luve
    To rise and let him in.

  "O welcome, welcome, Sir Roland," she says,         5
    "Thrice welcome thou art to me;
  For this night thou wilt feast in my secret bouir,
    And to-morrow we'll wedded be."

  "This night is hallow-eve," he said,
    "And to-morrow is hallow-day;                    10
  And I dreamed a drearie dream yestreen,
    That has made my heart fu' wae.

  "I dreamed a drearie dream yestreen,
    And I wish it may cum to gude:
  I dreamed that ye slew my best grew hound,         15
    And gied me his lappered blude."



  "Unbuckle your belt, Sir Roland," she said,
    "And set you safely down."
  "O your chamber is very dark, fair maid,
    And the night is wondrous lown."                 20

  "Yes, dark, dark is my secret bowir,
    And lown the midnight may be;
  For there is none waking in a' this tower,
    But thou, my true love, and me."



  She has mounted on her true love's steed,          25
    By the ae light o' the moon;
  She has whipped him and spurred him,
    And roundly she rade frae the toun.

  She hadna ridden a mile o' gate,
    Never a mile but ane,                            30
  Whan she was aware of a tall young man,
    Slow riding o'er the plain.

  She turned her to the right about,
    Then to the left turn'd she;
  But aye, 'tween her and the wan moonlight,         35
    That tall knight did she see.

  And he was riding burd alane,
    On a horse as black as jet;
  But tho' she followed him fast and fell,
    No nearer could she get.                         40

  "O stop! O stop! young man," she said,
    "For I in dule am dight;
  O stop, and win a fair lady's luve,
    If you be a leal true knight."

  But nothing did the tall knight say,               45
    And nothing did he blin;
  Still slowly rode he on before,
    And fast she rade behind.

  She whipped her steed, she spurred her steed,
    Till his breast was all a foam;                  50
  But nearer unto that tall young knight,
    By Our Ladye, she could not come.

  "O if you be a gay young knight,
    As well I trow you be,
  Pull tight your bridle reins, and stay             55
    Till I come up to thee."

  But nothing did that tall knight say,
    And no whit did he blin,
  Until he reached a broad river's side,
    And there he drew his rein.                      60

  "O is this water deep," he said,
    "As it is wondrous dun?
  Or it is sic as a saikless maid
    And a leal true knight may swim?"

  "The water it is deep," she said,                  65
    "As it is wondrous dun;
  But it is sic as a saikless maid
    And a leal true knight may swim."

  The knight spurred on his tall black steed,
    The lady spurred on her brown;                   70
  And fast they rade unto the flood,
    And fast they baith swam down.

  "The water weets my tae," she said,
    "The water weets my knee;
  And hold up my bridle reins, sir knight,           75
    For the sake of Our Ladye."

  "If I would help thee now," he said,
    "It were a deadly sin;
  For I've sworn neir to trust a fair may's word,
    Till the water weets her chin."                  80

  "O the water weets my waist," she said,
    "Sae does it weet my skin;
  And my aching heart rins round about,
    The burn maks sic a din.

  "The water is waxing deeper still,                 85
    Sae does it wax mair wide;
  And aye the farther that we ride on,
    Farther off is the other side.

  "O help me now, thou false, false knight,
    Have pity on my youth;                           90
  For now the water jawes owre my head,
    And it gurgles in my mouth."

  The knight turned right and round about,
    All in the middle stream,
  And he stretched out his head to that lady,        95
    But loudly she did scream.

  "O this is hallow-morn," he said,
    "And it is your bridal day;
  But sad would be that gay wedding,
    If bridegroom and bride were away.              100

  "And ride on, ride on, proud Margaret!
    Till the water comes o'er your bree;
  For the bride maun ride deep, and deeper yet,
    Wha rides this ford wi' me.

  "Turn round, turn round, proud Margaret!          105
    Turn ye round, and look on me;
  Thou hast killed a true knight under trust,
    And his ghost now links on with thee."




APPENDIX.




FRAGMENT OF THE BALLAD OF KING ARTHUR AND THE KING OF CORNWALL.

Printed from the celebrated Percy MS. in Madden's _Syr Gawayne_, p. 275.
The editor has added the following note.


"It has no title, and the first line has been cut away by the ignorant
binder to whom the volume was intrusted, but both are supplied from
the notice given of the ballad in the Dissertation prefixed to vol.
iii. of the _Reliques_, p. xxxvii. Dr. Percy has added in the margin
of the MS. these words: "To the best of my remembrance, this was the
first line, before the binder cut it." The poem is very imperfect,
owing to the leaves having been half torn away to light fires (!) as
the Bishop tells us, but I am bound to add, previous to its coming
into his possession. The story is so singular, that it is to be hoped
an earlier and complete copy of it may yet be recovered. On no account
perhaps is it more remarkable, than the fact of its close imitation of
the famous _gabs_ made by Charlemagne and his companions at the court
of King Hugon, which are first met with in a romance of the twelfth
century, published by M. Michel from a MS. in the British Museum,
12mo., London, 1836, and transferred at a later period to the prose
romance of _Galien Rethore_, printed by Verard, fol., 1500, and often
afterwards. In the absence of other evidence, it is to be presumed
that the author of the ballad borrowed from the printed work,
substituting Arthur for Charlemagne, Gawayne for Oliver, Tristram for
Roland, etc., and embellishing his story by converting King Hugon's
spy into a "lodly feend," by whose agency the _gabs_ are accomplished.
It is further worthy of notice, that the writer seems to regard Arthur
as the sovereign of Little Britain, and alludes to an intrigue between
the King of Cornwall and Queen Guenever, which is nowhere, as far as I
recollect, hinted at in the romances of the Round Table."


  "Come here my cozen, Gawain, so gay;
  My sisters sonne be yee;
  For you shall see one of the fairest Round Tables,
  That ever you see with your eye."

  Then bespake [the] Lady Queen Guenever,                  5
  And these were the words said shee:
  "I know where a Round Table is, thou noble king,
  Is worth thy Round Table and other such three.

  "The trestle that stands under this Round Table," she said,
  "Lowe downe to the mould,                               10
  It is worth thy Round Table, thou worthy king,
  Thy halls, and all thy gold.

  "The place where this Round Table stands in,
  It is worth thy castle, thy gold, thy fee;
  And all good Litle Britaine,"--                         15
  "Where may that table be, lady?" quoth hee,

  "Or where may all that goodly building be?"
  "You shall it seeke," shee sayd, "till you it find,
  For you shall never gett more of me."

  Then bespake him noble King Arthur,                     20
  These were the words said hee;
  "Ile make mine avow to God,
  And alsoe to the Trinity,

  "Ile never sleepe one night, there as I doe another,
  Till that Round Table I see;                            25
  Sir Marramiles and Sir Tristeram,
  Fellowes that ye shall bee.

  "Weele be clad in palmers weede,
  Five palmers we will bee;
  There is noe outlandish man will us abide,              30
  Nor will us come nye."
  Then they rived east and they rived west,[L32]
  In many a strange country.

  Then they travelled[L34] a litle further,
  They saw a battle new sett;                             35
  "Now, by my faith," saies noble King Arthur,

  [_Half a page is here torn away._]

  But when he came that castle to,
  And to the palace gate,
  Soe ready was ther a proud porter,
  And met him soone therat.                               40

  Shooes of gold the porter had on,
  And all his other rayment was unto the same;
  "Now, by my faith," saies noble King Arthur,
  "Yonder is a minion swaine."

  Then bespake noble King Arthur,                         45
  These were the words says hee:
  "Come hither, thou proud porter,
  I pray thee come hither to me.

  "I have two poor rings of my finger,
  The better[L50] of them Ile give to thee;               50
  [To] tell who may be lord of this castle," he saies,
  "Or who is lord in this cuntry?"

  "Cornewall King," the porter sayes,
  "There is none soe rich as hee;
  Neither in Christendome, nor yet in heathennest,        55
  None hath soe much gold as he."

  And then bespake him noble King Arthur,
  These were the words sayes hee:
  "I have two poore rings of my finger,
  The better of them Ile give thee,                       60
  If thou wilt greete him well, Cornewall King,
  And greete him well from me.

  "Pray him for one nights lodging, and two meales meate,
  For his love that dyed uppon a tree;
  A bue[L65] ghesting, and two meales meate,              65
  For his love that dyed uppon a tree.

  "A bue[L67] ghesting, and two meales meate,
  For his love that was of virgin borne,
  And in the morning that we may scape away,
  Either without scath or scorne."                        70

  Then forth is gone[L71] this proud porter,
  As fast as he cold hye;
  And when he came befor Cornewall King,
  He kneeled downe on his knee.

  Sayes, "I have beene porter, man, at thy gate,          75

    [_Half a page is wanting._]

  ... our Lady was borne,
  Then thought Cornewall King these palmers had beene in Britt.

  Then bespake him Cornewall King,
  These were the words he said there:
  "Did you ever know a comely King,                       80
  His name was King Arthur?"

  And then bespake him noble King Arthur,
  These were the words said hee:
  "I doe not know that comly King,
  But once my selfe I did him see."                       85
  Then bespake Cornwall King againe,
  These were the words said he.

  Sayes, "Seven yeere I was clad and fed,
  In Litle Brittaine, in a bower;
  I had a daughter by King Arthurs wife,                  90
  It now is called my flower;
  For King Arthur, that kindly cockward,
  Hath none such in his bower.

  "For I durst sweare, and save my othe,
  That same lady soe bright,                              95
  That a man that were laid on his death-bed
  Wold open his eyes on her to have sight."
  "Now, by my faith," sayes noble King Arthur,
  "And thats a full faire wight!"

  And then bespoke Cornewall [King] againe,              100
  And these were the words he said:[L101]
  "Come hither, five or three of my knights,
  And feitch me downe my steed;
  King Arthur, that foule cockeward,
  Hath none such, if he had need.                        105

  "For I can ryde him as far on a day,
  As King Arthur can doe any of his on three.
  And is it not a pleasure for a King,
  When he shall ryde forth on his journey?

  "For the eyes that beene in his head,                  110
  They[L111] glister as doth the gleed;"--
  "Now, by my faith," says noble King Arthur,

    [_Half a page is wanting._]

  No body....
  But one thats learned to speake.

  Then King Arthur to his bed was brought,               115
  A greeived man was hee;
  And soe were all his fellowes with him,
  From him they[L118] thought never to flee.

  Then take they did that lodly boome,[L119]
  And under thrubchandler[L120] closed was hee;          120
  And he was set by King Arthurs bed-side,
  To heere theire talke, and theire com'nye;

  That he might come forth, and make proclamation,
  Long before it was day;
  It was more for King Cornwalls pleasure,               125
  Then it was for King Arthurs pay.

  And when King Arthur on his bed was laid,
  These were the words said hee:
  "Ile make mine avow to God,
  And alsoe to the Trinity,                              130
  That Ile be the bane of Cornwall Kinge
  Litle Brittaine or ever I see!"

  "It is an unadvised vow," saies Gawaine the gay,
  "As ever king hard make I;
  But wee that beene five christian men,                 135
  Of the christen faith are wee;
  And we shall fight against anoynted King,
  And all his armorie."

  And then he spake him noble Arthur,
  And these were the words said he:                      140
  "Why, if thou be afraid, Sir Gawaine the gay,
  Goe home, and drinke wine in thine owne country."


32, the rived west.

34, tranckled.

50, They better.

65, bue, _sic_.

67, bue, _sic_; of two.

71, his gone.

101, said he.

111, The.

118, the.

119, goome?

120, thrubchadler.


THE THIRD PARTE.

  And then bespake Sir Gawaine the gay,
  And these were the words said hee:
  "Nay, seeing you have made such a hearty vow,          145
  Here another vow make will I.

  "Ile make mine avow to God,
  And alsoe to the Trinity,
  That I will have yonder faire lady
  To Litle Brittaine with mee.                           150

  "Ile hose her hourly to my hart,[L151]
  And with her Ile worke my will;

    [_Half a page is wanting._]

  These were the words sayd hee:
  "Befor I wold wrestle with yonder feend,
  It is better be drowned in the sea."                   155

  And then bespake Sir Bredbeddle,
  And these were the words said he:
  "Why, I will wrestle with yon lodly feend,
  God! my governor thou shalt bee."

  Then bespake him noble Arthur,                         160
  And these were the[L161] words said he:
  "What weapons wilt thou have, thou gentle knight?
  I pray thee tell to me."

  He sayes, "Collen brand Ile have in my hand,
  And a Millaine knife fast be my knee;                  165
  And a Danish axe fast in my hands,
  That a sure weapon I thinke wilbe."

  Then with his Collen brand, that he had in his hand,
  The bunge of the trubchandler he burst in three.
  What that start out a lodly feend,                     170
  With seven heads, and one body.

  The fyer towards the element flew,
  Out of his mouth, where was great plentie;
  The knight stoode in the middle, and fought,
  That it was great joy to see.                          175

  Till his Collaine brand brake in his hand,
  And his Millaine knife burst on his knee;
  And then the Danish axe burst in his hand first,
  That a sur weapon he thought shold be.

  But now is the knight left without any weapone,        180
  And alacke! it was the more pitty;
  But a surer weapon then had he one,
  Had never Lord in Christentye:
  And all was but one litle booke,
  He found it by the side of the sea.                    185

  He found it at the sea-side,
  Wrucked upp in a floode;
  Our Lord had written it with his hands,
  And sealed it with his bloode.

    [_Half a page is wanting._]

  "That thou doe....                                     190
  But ly still in that wall of stone;
  Till I have beene with noble King Arthur,
  And told him what I have done."

  And when he came to the King's chamber,
  He cold of his curtesie                                195
  Saye, "Sleep you, wake you, noble King Arthur?
  And ever Jesus watch yee!"

  "Nay, I am not sleeping, I am waking,"
  These were the words said hee:
  "For thee I have car'd; how hast thou fared?           200
  O gentle knight, let me see."

  The knight wrought the King his booke,
  Bad him behold, reede, and see;
  And ever he found it on the backside of the leafe,
  As noble Arthur wold wish it to be.                    205

  And then bespake him King Arthur,
  "Alas! thou gentle knight, how may this be,
  That I might see him in the same licknesse,
  That he stood unto thee?"

  And then bespake him the Greene Knight,[L210]          210
  These were the words said hee:
  "If youle stand stifly in the battell stronge,
  For I have won all the victory."

  Then bespake him the King againe,
  And these were the words said hee:                     215
  "If we stand not stifly in this battell strong,
  Wee are worthy to be hanged all on a tree."

  Then bespake him the Greene Knight,
  These were the words said hee:
  Saies, "I doe coniure thee, thou fowle feend,          220
  In the same licknesse thou stood unto me."

  With that start out a lodly feend,
  With seven heads, and one body;
  The fier towarde the element flaugh,
  Out of his mouth, where was great plenty.              225

  The knight stood in the middle....

    [_Half a page is wanting._]

  ... the space of an houre,
  I know not what they did.

  And then bespake him the Greene Knight,
  And these were the words said he:                      230
  Saith, "I coniure thee, thou fowle feend,
  That thou feitch downe the steed that we see."

  And then forth is gone Burlow-beanie,
  As fast as he cold hie;
  And feitch he did that faire steed,                    235
  And came againe by and by.

  Then bespake him Sir Marramile,
  And these were the words said hee:
  "Riding of this steed, brother Bredbeddle,
  The mastery belongs to me."                            240

  Marramiles tooke the steed to his hand,
  To ryd him he was full bold;
  He cold noe more make him goe,
  Then a child of three yeere old.

  He laid[L245] uppon him with heele and hand,           245
  With yard that was soe fell;
  "Helpe! brother Bredbeddle," says Marramile,
  "For I thinke he be the devill of hell.

  "Helpe! brother Bredbeddle," says Marramile.
  "Helpe! for Christs pittye;                            250
  For without thy help, brother Bredbeddle,
  He will never be rydden for me."[L252]

  Then bespake him Sir Bredbeddle,
  These were the words said he:
  "I coniure thee, thou Burlow-beane,[L255]              255
  Thou tell me how this steed was riddin in his country."
  He saith, "There is a gold wand,
  Stands in King Cornwalls study windowe.

  "Let him take that wand in that window,
  And strike three strokes on that steed;                260
  And then he will spring forth of his hand,
  As sparke doth out of gleede."

  Then bespake him the Greene Knight,

    [_Half a page is wanting._]

  A lowd blast....

  And then bespake Sir Bredbeddle,                       265
  To the feend these words said hee:
  Says, "I coniure thee, thou Burlow-beanie,
  The powder-box thou feitch me."

  Then forth is gone Burlow-beanie,
  As fast as he cold hie;                                270
  And feich he did the powder-box,
  And came againe by and by.

  Then Sir Tristeram tooke powder forth of that box,
  And blent it with warme sweet milke;
  And there put it unto the horne,                       275
  And swilled it about in that ilke.

  Then he tooke the horne in his hand,
  And a lowd blast he blew;
  He rent the horne up to the midst,
  All his fellowes this they knew.[L280]                 280

  Then bespake him the Greene Knight,
  These were the words said he:
  Saies. "I coniure thee, thou Burlow-beanie,
  That thou feitch me the sword that I see."

  Then forth is gone Burlow-beanie,                      285
  As fast as he cold hie;
  And feitch he did that faire sword,
  And came againe by and by.

  Then bespake him Sir Bredbeddle,
  To the king these words said he:                       290
  "Take this sword in thy hand, thou noble King,
  For the vowes sake that thou made Ile give it thee;
  And goe strike off King Cornewalls head,
  In bed where he doth lye."[L294]

  Then forth is gone noble King Arthur,                  295
  As fast as he cold hye;
  And strucken he hath King Cornwalls head,
  And came againe by and by.

  He put the head upon a swords point,

    [_The poem terminates here abruptly._]


151, hurt.

161, they words.

210, The Greene Knight is Sir Bredbeddle.

245, sayed.

252, p' me, _i.e._ pro or per.

255, Burlow-leane.

280, the knew.

294, were.




FRAGMENT OF CHILD ROWLAND AND BURD ELLEN.


It is not impossible that this ballad should be the one quoted by
Edgar in _King Lear_, (Act iii. sc. 4:)

      "Child Rowland to the dark tower came."

We have extracted the fragment given by Jamieson, with the breaks in
the story filled out, from _Illustrations of Northern Antiquities_, p.
397; and we have added his translation of the Danish ballad of _Rosmer
Hafmand_, which exhibits a striking similarity to _Child Rowland_,
from _Popular Ballads and Songs_, ii. 202. The tale of the _Red Etin_,
as given in Chamber's _Pop. Rhymes of Scotland_, p. 56, has much
resemblance to Jamieson's story, and, like it, is interspersed with
verse.

The occurrence of the name Merlin is by no means a sufficient ground
for connecting this tale, as Jamieson would do, with the cycle of King
Arthur. For Merlin, as Grundtvig has remarked (_Folkeviser_, ii. 79),
did not originally belong to that cycle, and again, his name seems to
have been given in Scotland to any sort of wizard or prophet.




  ["King Arthur's sons o' merry Carlisle]
    Were playing at the ba';
  And there was their sister Burd Ellen,
    I' the mids amang them a'.

  "Child Rowland kick'd it wi' his foot,              5
    And keppit it wi' his knee;
  And ay, as he play'd out o'er them a',
    O'er the kirk he gar'd it flee.

  "Burd Ellen round about the isle
    To seek the ba' is gane;                         10
  But they bade lang and ay langer,
    And she camena back again.

  "They sought her east, they sought her west,
    They sought her up and down;
  And wae were the hearts [in merry Carlisle,]       15
    For she was nae gait found!"

At last her eldest brother went to the Warluck Merlin, (_Myrddin
Wyldt_,) and asked if he knew where his sister, the fair Burd Ellen,
was. "The fair Burd Ellen," said the Warluck Merlin, "is carried away
by the fairies, and is now in the castle of the king of Elfland; and
it were too bold an undertaking for the stoutest knight in Christendom
to bring her back." "Is it possible to bring her back?" said her
brother, "and I will do it, or perish in the attempt." "Possible
indeed it is," said the Warluck Merlin; "but woe to the man or
mother's son who attempts it, if he is not well instructed beforehand
of what he is to do."

Influenced no less by the glory of such an enterprise, than by the
desire of rescuing his sister, the brother of the fair Burd Ellen
resolved to undertake the adventure; and after proper instructions
from Merlin, (which he failed in observing,) he set out on his
perilous expedition.


  "But they bade lang and ay langer,
    Wi' dout and mickle maen;
  And wae were the hearts [in merry Carlisle,]
    For he camena back again."                       20


The second brother in like manner set out; but failed in observing the
instructions of the Warluck Merlin; and

  "They bade lang and ay langer,
    Wi' mickle dout and maen;
  And wae were the hearts [in merry Carlisle,]
    For he camena back again."

Child Rowland, the youngest brother of the fair Burd Ellen, then
resolved to go; but was strenuously opposed by the good queen,
[Gwenevra,] who was afraid of losing all her children.

At last the good queen [Gwenevra] gave him her consent and her
blessing; he girt on (in great form, and with all due solemnity of
sacerdotal consecration,) his father's good _claymore_, [Excalibar,]
that never struck in vain, and repaired to the cave of the Warluck
Merlin. The Warluck Merlin gave him all necessary instructions for his
journey and conduct, the most important of which were, that he should
kill every person he met with after entering the land of Fairy, and
should neither eat nor drink of what was offered him in that country,
whatever his hunger or thirst might be; for if he tasted or touched in
Elfland, he must remain in the power of the Elves, and never see
_middle eard_ again.

So Child Rowland set out on his journey, and travelled "on and ay
farther on," till he came to where (as he had been forewarned by the
Warluck Merlin,) he found the king of Elfland's horse-herd feeding his
horses.

"Canst thou tell me," said Child Rowland to the horse-herd, "where
the king of Elfland's castle is?"--"I cannot tell thee," said the
horse-herd; "but go on a little farther, and thou wilt come to the
cow-herd, and he, perhaps, may tell thee." So Child Rowland drew the
good claymore, [Excalibar,] that never struck in vain, and hewed off
the head of the horse-herd. Child Rowland then went on a little
farther, till he came to the king of Elfland's cow-herd, who was
feeding his cows. "Canst thou tell me," said Child Rowland to the
cow-herd, "where the king of Elfland's castle is?"--"I cannot tell
thee," said the cow-herd; "but go on a little farther, and thou wilt
come to the sheep-herd, and he perhaps may tell thee." So Child
Rowland drew the good claymore, [Excalibar,] that never struck in
vain, and hewed off the head of the cow-herd. He then went on a little
farther, till he came to the sheep-herd. * * * * [_The sheep-herd,
goat-herd, and swine-herd are all, each in his turn, served in the
same manner; and lastly he is referred to the hen-wife._]

"Go on yet a little farther," said the hen-wife, "till thou come to a
round green hill surrounded with rings (_terraces_) from the bottom to
the top; go round it three times _widershins_, and every time say,
"Open, door! open, door! and let me come in; and the third time the
door will open, and you may go in." So Child Rowland drew the good
claymore, [Excalibar,] that never struck in vain, and hewed off the
head of the hen-wife. Then went he three times _widershins_ round the
green hill, crying, "Open, door! open, door! and let me come in;" and
the third time the door opened, and he went in.

It immediately closed behind him; and he proceeded through a long
passage, where the air was soft and agreeably warm like a May
evening, as is all the air of Elfland. The light was a sort of
twilight or gloaming; but there were neither windows nor candles, and
he knew not whence it came, if it was not from the walls and roof,
which were rough, and arched like a grotto, and composed of a clear
transparent rock, incrusted with _sheeps-silver_ and spar, and various
bright stones. At last he came to two wide and lofty folding-doors,
which stood a-jar. He opened them, and entered a large and spacious
hall, whose richness and brilliance no tongue can tell. It seemed to
extend the whole length and height of the hill. The superb Gothic
pillars by which the roof was supported, were so large and so lofty,
(said my seannachy,) that the pillars of the Chanry Kirk,[D] or of
Pluscardin Abbey, are no more to be compared to them, than the Knock
of Alves is to be compared to Balrinnes or Ben-a-chi. They were of
gold and silver, and were fretted like the west window of the Chanry
Kirk, with wreaths of flowers composed of diamonds and precious stones
of all manner of beautiful colors. The key-stones of the arches above,
instead of coats of arms and other devices, were ornamented with
clusters of diamonds in the same manner. And from the middle of the
roof, where the principal arches met, was hung by a gold chain, an
immense lamp of one hollowed pearl, perfectly transparent, in the
midst of which was suspended a large carbuncle, that by the power of
magic continually turned round, and shed over all the hall a clear and
mild light like the setting sun; but the hall was so large, and these
dazzling objects so far removed, that their blended radiance cast no
more than a pleasing lustre, and excited no more than agreeable
sensations in the eyes of Child Rowland.

    [D] The cathedral of Elgin naturally enough furnished similes to a
    man who had never in his life been twenty miles distant from it.

The furniture of the hall was suitable to its architecture; and at the
farther end, under a splendid canopy, seated on a gorgeous sofa of
velvet, silk, and gold, and "kembing her yellow hair wi' a silver
kemb,"


  "There was his sister burd Ellen;                  25
    She stood up him before."

Says,

  "'God rue on thee, poor luckless fode!
    What has thou to do here?

  "'And hear ye this, my youngest brither,
    Why badena ye at hame?                           30
  Had ye a hundur and thousand lives,
    Ye canna brook ane o' them.

  "'And sit thou down; and wae, O wae
    That ever thou was born;
  For come the King o' Elfland in,                   35
    Thy leccam is forlorn!'"

A long conversation then takes place; Child Rowland tells her the news
[of merry Carlisle,] and of his own expedition; and concludes with the
observation, that, after this long and fatiguing journey to the castle
of the king of Elfland, he is _very hungry_.

Burd Ellen looked wistfully and mournfully at him, and shook her head,
but said nothing. Acting under the influence of a magic which she
could not resist, she arose, and brought him a golden bowl full of
bread and milk, which she presented to him with the same timid,
tender, and anxious expression of solicitude.

Remembering the instructions of the Warluck Merlin, "Burd Ellen," said
Child Rowland, "I will neither taste nor touch till I have set thee
free!" Immediately the folding-doors burst open with tremendous
violence, and in came the king of Elfland,


  "With '_fi_, _fi_, _fo_, and _fum_!
    I smell the blood of a Christian man!
  Be he dead, be he living, wi' my brand
    I'll clash his harns frae his harn-pan!'"        40

"Strike, then, Bogle of Hell, if thou darest!" exclaimed the undaunted
Child Rowland, starting up, and drawing the good claymore,
[Excalibar,] that never struck in vain.

A furious combat ensued, and the king of Elfland was felled to the
ground; but Child Rowland spared him on condition that he should
restore to him his two brothers, who lay in a trance in a corner of
the hall, and his sister, the fair burd Ellen. The king of Elfland
then produced a small crystal phial, containing a bright red liquor,
with which he anointed the lips, nostrils, eye-lids, ears, and
finger-ends of the two young men, who immediately awoke as from a
profound sleep, during which their souls had quitted their bodies, and
they had seen, &c., &c., &c. So they all four returned in triumph to
[merry Carlisle.]

Such was the rude outline of the romance of Child Rowland, as it was
told to me when I was about seven or eight years old, by a country
tailor then at work in my father's house. He was an ignorant and dull
good sort of honest man, who seemed never to have questioned the truth
of what he related. Where the _et caeteras_ are put down, many curious
particulars have been omitted, because I was afraid of being deceived
by my memory, and substituting one thing for another. It is right also
to admonish the reader, that the Warluck Merlin, Child Rowland, and
Burd Ellen, were the only _names_ introduced in _his_ recitation; and
that the others, inclosed within brackets, are assumed upon the
authority of the locality given to the story by the mention of
_Merlin_. In every other respect I have been as faithful as possible.




ROSMER HAFMAND,

OR,

THE MER-MAN ROSMER.


The ballad of _Rosmer_ is found in Danish, Swedish, Faroish, and
Norse. All the questions bearing upon its origin, and the relations of
the various _forms_ in which the story exists, are amply discussed by
Grundtvig, vol. ii. p. 72. Three versions of the Danish ballad are
given by Vedel, all of which Jamieson has translated. The following is
No. 31 in Abrahamson.


  There dwalls a lady in Danmarck,
    Lady Hillers lyle men her ca';
  And she's gar'd bigg a new castell,
    That shines o'er Danmarck a'.

  Her dochter was stown awa frae her;                 5
    She sought for her wide-whare;
  But the mair she sought, and the less she fand,--
    That wirks her sorrow and care.

  And she's gar'd bigg a new ship,
    Wi' vanes o' flaming goud,                       10
  Wi' mony a knight and mariner,
    Sae stark in need bestow'd.

  She's followed her sons down to the strand,
    That chaste and noble fre;
  And wull and waif for eight lang years             15
    They sail'd upon the sea.

  And eight years wull and waif they sail'd,
    O' months that seem'd sae lang;
  Syne they sail'd afore a high castell,
    And to the land can gang.                        20

  And the young lady Svane lyle,
    In the bower that was the best,
  Says, "Wharfrae cam thir frem swains,
    Wi' us this night to guest?"

  Then up and spak her youngest brither,             25
    Sae wisely ay spak he;
  "We are a widow's three poor sons,
    Lang wilder'd on the sea.

  "In Danmarck were we born and bred,
    Lady Hillers lyle was our mither;                30
  Our sister frae us was stown awa,
    We findna whare or whither."

  "In Danmarck were ye born and bred?
    Was Lady Hillers your mither?
  I can nae langer heal frae thee,                   35
    Thou art my youngest brither.

  "And hear ye this, my youngest brither:
    Why bade na ye at hame?
  Had ye a hunder and thousand lives,
    Ye canna brook ane o' them."                     40

  She's set him in the weiest nook
    She in the house can meet;
  She's bidden him for the high God's sake
    Nouther to laugh ne greet.

  Rosmer hame frae Zealand came,                     45
    And he took on to bann:
  "I smell fu' weel, by my right hand,
    That here is a Christian man."

  "There flew a bird out o'er the house,
    Wi' a man's bane in his mouth;                   50
  He coost it in, and I cast it out,
    As fast as e'er I couth."

  But wilyly she can Rosmer win;
    And clapping him tenderly,
  "It's here is come my sister-son;--                55
    Gin I lose him, I'll die.

  "It's here is come, my sister-son,
    Frae baith our fathers' land;
  And I ha'e pledged him faith and troth,
    That ye will not him bann."                      60

  "And is he come, thy sister-son,
    Frae thy father's land to thee?
  Then I will swear my highest aith,
    He's dree nae skaith frae me."

  'Twas then the high king Rosmer,                   65
    He ca'd on younkers twae:
  "Ye bid proud Svane lyle's sister-son
    To the chalmer afore me gae."

  It was Svane lyle's sister-son,
    Whan afore Rosmer he wan,                        70
  His heart it quook, and his body shook,
    Sae fley'd, he scarce dow stand.

  Sae Rosmer took her sister-son,
    Set him upon his knee;
  He clappit him sae luifsomely,                     75
    He turned baith blue and blae.

  And up and spak she, Svane lyle;
    "Sir Rosmer, ye're nae to learn
  That your ten fingers arena sma,
    To clap sae little a bairn."                     80

  There was he till, the fifthen year,
    He green'd for hame and land:
  "Help me now, sister Svane lyle,
    To be set on the white sand."

  It was proud Lady Svane lyle,                      85
    Afore Rosmer can stand:
  "This younker sae lang in the sea has been,
    He greens for hame and land."

  "Gin the younker sae lang in the sea has been,
    And greens for hame and land,                    90
  Then I'll gie him a kist wi' goud,
    Sae fitting till his hand."

  "And will ye gi'e him a kist wi' goud,
    Sae fitting till his hand?
  Then hear ye, my noble heartis dear,               95
    Ye bear them baith to land."

  Then wrought proud Lady Svane lyle
    What Rosmer little wist;
  For she's tane out the goud sae red,
    And laid hersel i' the kist.                    100

  He's ta'en the man upon his back;
    The kist in his mouth took he;
  And he has gane the lang way up
    Frae the bottom o' the sea.

  "Now I ha'e borne thee to the land;               105
    Thou seest baith sun and moon;
  Namena Lady Svane for thy highest God,
    I beg thee as a boon."

  Rosmer sprang i' the saut sea out,
    And jawp'd it up i' the sky;                    110
  But whan he cam till the castell in,
    Nae Svane lyle could he spy.

  Whan he came till the castell in,
    His dearest awa was gane;
  Like wood he sprang the castell about,            115
    On the rock o' the black flintstane.

  Glad they were in proud Hillers lyle's house,
    Wi' welcome joy and glee;
  Hame to their friends her bairns were come,
    That had lang been in the sea.                  120




TAM-A-LINE, THE ELFIN KNIGHT. (See page 114.)

From _Scottish Traditionary Versions of Ancient Ballads_, Percy
Society, xvii. p. 11.


  Take warnin', a' ye ladyes fair,
    That wear gowd on your hair;
  Come never unto Charter-woods,
    For Tam-a-line he's there.

  Even about that knicht's middle                     5
    O' siller bells are nine;
  Nae ane comes to Charter-woods,
    And a may returns agen.

  Ladye Margaret sits in her bouir door,
    Sewing at her silken seam;                       10
  And she lang'd to gang to Charter woods,
    To pou the roses green.

  She hadna pou'd a rose, a rose,
    Nor braken a branch but ane,
  Till by it came him true Tam-a-line,               15
    Says, "Layde, lat alane.

  "O why pou ye the rose, the rose?
    Or why brake ye the tree?
  Or why come ye to Charter-woods,
    Without leave ask'd of me?"                      20

  "I will pou the rose, the rose,
    And I will brake the tree;
  Charter-woods are a' my ain,
    I'll ask nae leave o' thee."

  He's taen her by the milk-white hand,              25
    And by the grass-green sleeve;
  And laid her low on gude green wood,
    At her he spier'd nae leave.

  When he had got his will o' her,
    His will as he had ta'en,                        30
  He's ta'en her by the middle sma',
    Set her to feet again.

  She turn'd her richt and round about,
    To spier her true love's name,
  But naething heard she, nor naething saw,          35
    As a' the woods grew dim.

  Seven days she tarried there,
    Saw neither sun nor muin;
  At length, by a sma' glimmerin' licht,
    Came thro' the wood her lane.                    40

  When she came to her father's court,
    Was fine as ony queen;
  But when eight months were past and gane,
    Got on the gown o' green.

  Then out it speaks an eldren knicht,               45
    As he stood at the yett;
  "Our king's dochter, she gaes wi' bairn,
    And we'll get a' the wyte."

  "O haud your tongue, ye eldren man,
    And bring me not to shame;                       50
  Although that I do gang wi' bairn,
    Yese naeways get the blame.

  "Were my love but an earthly man,
    As he's an elfin knicht,
  I wadna gie my ain true luve,                      55
    For a' that's in my sicht."

  Then out it speaks her brither dear,
    He meant to do her harm,
  "There is an herb in Charter-woods
    Will twine you an' the bairn."                   60

  She's taen her mantle her about,
    Her coiffer by the band;
  And she is on to Charter-woods,
    As fast as she coud gang.

  She hadna poud a rose, a rose,                     65
    Nor braken a branch but ane,
  Till by it came him, Tam-a-Line,
    Says, "Ladye, lat alane."

  "O! why pou ye the pile, Margaret,
    The pile o' the gravil green,                    70
  For to destroy the bonny bairn
    That we got us between?

  "O! why pou ye the pile, Margaret,
    The pile o' the gravil gray,
  For to destroy the bonny bairn                     75
    That we got in our play?

  "For if it be a knave bairn,
    He's heir o' a' my land;
  But if it be a lass bairn,
    In red gowd she shall gang."                     80

  "If my luve were an earthly man,
    As he's an elfin grey,
  I coud gang bound, luve, for your sake,
    A twalmonth and a day."

  "Indeed your luve's an earthly man,                85
    The same as well as thee;
  And lang I've haunted Charter-woods,
    A' for your fair bodie."

  "O! tell me, tell me, Tam-a-Line,
    O! tell, an' tell me true;                       90
  Tell me this nicht, an' mak' nae lee,
    What pedigree are you?"

  "O! I hae been at gude church-door,
    An' I've got christendom;
  I'm the Earl o' Forbes' eldest son,                95
    An' heir ower a' his land.

  "When I was young, o' three years old,
    Muckle was made o' me;
  My stepmither put on my claithes,
    An' ill, ill, sained she me.                    100

  "Ae fatal morning I gaed out,
    Dreading nae injurie;
  And thinking lang, fell soun asleep,
    Beneath an apple tree.

  "Then by it came the Elfin Queen,                 105
    And laid her hand on me;
  And from that time since e'er I mind,
    I've been in her companie.

  "O Elfin it's a bonny place,
    In it fain wad I dwell;                         110
  But aye at ilka seven years' end,
    They pay a tiend to hell,
  And I'm sae fou o' flesh an blude,
    I'm sair fear'd for mysell."

  "O tell me, tell me, Tam-a-Line,                  115
    O tell, an' tell me true;
  Tell me this nicht, an' mak' nae lee,
    What way I'll borrow you?"

  "The morn is Hallowe'en nicht,
    The Elfin court will ride,                      120
  Through England, and thro' a' Scotland,
    And through the warld wide.

  "O they begin at sky sett in,
    Ride a' the evenin' tide;
  And she that will her true love borrow,           125
    At Miles-cross will him bide.

  "Ye'll do ye down to Miles-cross,
    Between twall hours and ane;
  And full your hands o' holie water,
    And cast your compass roun'.                    130

  "Then the first ane court that comes you till,
    Is published king and queen;
  The neist ane court that comes you till,
    It is maidens mony ane.

  "The neist ane court that comes you till,         135
    Is footmen, grooms, and squires;
  The neist ane court that comes you till,
    Is knichts; and I'll be there.

  "I Tam-a-Line, on milk-white steed,
    A gowd star on my crown;                        140
  Because I was an earthly knicht,
    Got that for a renown.

  "And out at my steed's right nostril,
    He'll breathe a fiery flame;
  Ye'll loot you low, and sain yoursel,             145
    And ye'll be busy then.

  "Ye'll tak' my horse then by the head,
    And lat the bridal fa';
  The Queen o' Elfin she'll cry out,
    'True Tam-a-Line's awa'.'                       150

  "Then I'll appear into your arms
    Like the wolf that ne'er wad tame;
  Ye'll haud me fast, lat me not gae,
    Case we ne'er meet again.

  "Then I'll appear into your arms                  155
    Like fire that burns sae bauld;
  Ye'll haud me fast, lat me not gae,
    I'll be as iron cauld.

  "Then I'll appear into your arms
    Like the adder an' the snake;                   160
  Ye'll haud me fast, lat me not gae,
    I am your warld's maike.

  "Then I'll appear into your arms
    Like to the deer sae wild;
  Ye'll haud me fast, lat me not gae,               165
    And I'll father your child.

  "And I'll appear into your arms
    Like to a silken string;
  Ye'll haud me fast, lat me not gae,
    Till ye see the fair mornin'.                   170

  "And I'll appear into your arms
    Like to a naked man;
  Ye'll haud me fast, lat me not gae,
    And wi' you I'll gae hame."

  Then she has done her to Miles-cross,             175
    Between twal hours an' ane;
  And filled her hands o' holie water,
    And kiest her compass roun'.

  The first ane court that came her till,
    Was published king and queen;                   180
  The niest ane court that came her till,
    Was maidens mony ane.

  The niest ane court that came her till,
    Was footmen, grooms, and squires;
  The niest ane court that came her till,           185
    Was knichts; and he was there!

  True Tam-a-Line, on milk-white steed,
    A gowd star on his crown;
  Because he was an earthly man,
    Got that for a renown.                          190

  And out at the steed's right nostril,
    He breath'd a fiery flame;
  She loots her low, an' sains hersel,
    And she was busy then.

  She's taen the horse then by the head,            195
    And loot the bridle fa';
  The Queen o' Elfin she cried out,--
    "True Tam-a-Line's awa'."

  "Stay still, true Tam-a-Line," she says,
    "Till I pay you your fee;"                      200
  "His father wants not lands nor rents,
    He'll ask nae fee frae thee."

  "Gin I had kent yestreen, yestreen,
    What I ken weel the day,
  I shou'd hae taen your fu' fause heart,           205
    Gien you a heart o' clay."

  Then he appeared into her arms
    Like the wolf that ne'er wad tame;
  She held him fast, lat him not gae,
    Case they ne'er met again.                      210

  Then he appeared into her arms
    Like the fire burning bauld;
  She held him fast, lat him not gae,
    He was as iron cauld.

  And he appeared into her arms                     215
    Like the adder an' the snake;
  She held him fast, lat him not gae,
    He was her warld's maike.

  And he appeared into her arms
    Like to the deer sae wild;                      220
  She held him fast, lat him not gae,
    He's father o' her child.

  And he appeared into her arms
    Like to a silken string;
  She held him fast, lat him not gae,               225
    Till she saw fair mornin'.

  And he appeared into her arms
    Like to a naked man;
  She held him fast, lat him not gae,
    And wi' her he's gane hame.                     230

  These news hae reach'd thro' a' Scotland,
    And far ayont the Tay,
  That ladye Margaret, our king's dochter,
    That nicht had gain'd her prey.

  She borrowed her love at mirk midnicht,           235
    Bare her young son ere day;
  And though ye'd search the warld wide,
    Ye'll nae find sic a may.




TOM LINN. (See p. 114.)

This fragment was taken down from the recitation of an old woman.
Maidment's _New Book of Old Ballads_, p. 54.


  O all you ladies young and gay,
    Who are so sweet and fair,
  Do not go into Chaster's wood,
    For Tomlinn will be there.



  Fair Margaret sat in her bonny bower,               5
    Sewing her silken seam,
  And wished to be in Chaster's wood,
    Among the leaves so green.

  She let the seam fall to her foot,
    The needle to her toe,                           10
  And she has gone to Chaster's wood,
    As fast as she could go.

  When she began to pull the flowers;
    She pull'd both red and green;
  Then by did come, and by did go,                   15
    Said, "Fair maid, let abene!

  "O why pluck you the flowers, lady,
    Or why climb you the tree?
  Or why come ye to Chaster's wood,
    Without the leave of me?"                        20

  "O I will pull the flowers," she said,
    "Or I will break the tree;
  For Chaster's wood it is my own,
    I'll ask no leave at thee."

  He took her by the milk-white hand,                25
    And by the grass-green sleeve;
  And laid her down upon the flowers,
    At her he ask'd no leave.

  The lady blush'd and sourly frown'd,
    And she did think great shame;                   30
  Says, "If you are a gentleman,
    You will tell me your name."

  "First they call me Jack," he said,
    "And then they call'd me John;
  But since I liv'd in the Fairy court,              35
    Tomlinn has always been my name.

  "So do not pluck that flower, lady,
    That has these pimples gray;
  They would destroy the bonny babe
    That we've gotten in our play."                  40

  "O tell to me, Tomlinn," she said,
    "And tell it to me soon;
  Was you ever at a good church door,
    Or got you christendom?"

  "O I have been at good church door,                45
    And oft her yetts within;
  I was the Laird of Foulis's son,
    The heir of all his land.

  "But it fell once upon a day,
    As hunting I did ride,                           50
  As I rode east and west yon hill,
    Then woe did me betide.

  "O drowsy, drowsy as I was,
    Dead sleep upon me fell;
  The Queen of Fairies she was there,                55
    And took me to hersel.

  "The morn at even is Hallowe'en,
    Our Fairy court will ride,
  Through England and through Scotland both,
    Through all the world wide;                      60
  And if that ye would me borrow,
    At Rides Cross ye may bide.

  "You may go into the Miles Moss,
    Between twelve hours and one;
  Take holy water in your hand,                      65
    And cast a compass round.

  "The first court that comes along,
    You'll let them all pass by;
  The next court that comes along,
    Salute them reverently.                          70

  "The next court that comes along,
    Is clad in robes of green;
  And it's the head court of them all,
    For in it rides the Queen.

  "And I upon a milk-white steed,                    75
    With a gold star in my crown;
  Because I am an earthly man,
    I'm next the Queen in renown.

  "Then seize upon me with a spring,
    Then to the ground I'll fa';                     80
  And then you'll hear a rueful cry,
    That Tomlinn is awa'.

  "Then I'll grow in your arms two,
    Like to a savage wild;
  But hold me fast, let me not go,                   85
    I'm father of your child.

  "I'll grow into your arms two
    Like an adder, or a snake;
  But hold me fast, let me not go,
    I'll be your earthly maik.                       90

  "I'll grow into your arms two
    Like ice on frozen lake;
  But hold me fast, let me not go,
    Or from your goupen break.

  "I'll grow into your arms two,                     95
    Like iron in strong fire;
  But hold me fast, let me not go,
    Then you'll have your desire."

  And its next night into Miles Moss,
    Fair Margaret has gone;                         100
  When lo she stands beside Rides Cross,
    Between twelve hours and one.

  There's holy water in her hand,
    She casts a compass round;
  And presently a Fairy band                        105
    Comes riding o'er the mound.



This seems to be the most appropriate connection for a short fragment
from Maidment's _North Countrie Garland_, (p. 21.) It was taken down
from the recitation of a lady who had heard it sung in her childhood.




BURD ELLEN AND YOUNG TAMLANE.

  Burd Ellen sits in the bower windowe,
    _With a double laddy double, and for the double dow_,
  Twisting the red silk and the blue,
    _With the double rose and the May-hay_.

  And whiles she twisted, and whiles she twan,        5
    _With a double_, &c.
  And whiles the tears fell down amang,
    _With the double_, &c.

  Till once there by cam young Tamlane,
    _With a double_, &c.                             10
  "Come light, oh light, and rock your young son!"
    _With the double_, &c.

  "If you winna rock him, you may let him rair,
    _With a double_, &c.
  For I hae rockit my share and mair."               15
    _With the double_, &c.



  Young Tamlane to the seas he's gane,
    _With a double laddy double, and for the double dow,_
  And a' women's curse in his company's gane,
    _With the double rose and the May-hay_.          20




ALS Y YOD ON AY MOUNDAY. (See p. 126.)


In the manuscript from which these verses are taken, they form the
preface to a long strain of incomprehensible prophecies of the same
description as those which are appended to _Thomas of Ersyldoune_.
Whether the two portions belong together, or not, (and it will be seen
that they are ill enough joined,) the first alone requires to be cited
here for the purpose of comparison with the _Wee Wee Man_. The whole
piece has been twice printed, first by Finlay, in his _Scottish
Ballads_, (ii. 163,) and afterwards, by a person who was not aware
that he had been anticipated, in the _Retrospective Review_, Second
Series, vol. ii. p. 326. Both texts are in places nearly
unintelligible, and are evidently full of errors, part of which we
must ascribe to the incompetency of the editors. Finlay's is here
adopted as on the whole the best, but it has received a few
corrections from the other, and one or two conjectural emendations.


  Als y yod on ay Mounday
    Bytwene Wyltinden and Wall,
  The ane after brade way,
    Ay litel man y mette with alle,
  The leste yat ever y, sathe to say,                 5
    Oither in bowr, oither in halle;
  His robe was noither grene na gray,
    Bot alle yt was of riche palle.

  On me he cald, and bad me bide;
    Well stille y stode ay litel space;              10
  Fra Lanchestre the parke syde
    Yeen he come, wel fair his pase.
  He hailsed me with mikel pride;
    Ic haved wel mykel ferly wat he was;
  I saide,--"Wel mote the betyde,                    15
    That litel man with large face."

  I beheld that litel man
    Bi the strete als we gon gae;
  His berd was syde ay large span,
    And glided als the fether of pae;                20
  His heved was wyte als ony swan,
    His hegehen was gret and grai als so;
  Brues lange, wel I the can
    Merk it to fize inches and mae.

  Armes scort, for sothe I saye,                     25
    Ay span seemed thaem to bee:
  Handes brade vytouten nay,
    And fingeres lange, he scheued me.
  Ay stane he tok op thar it lay,
    And castit forth that I moth see;                30
  Ay merk-soot of large way
    Bifore me strides he castit three.

  Wel stille I stod als did the stane,
    To loke him on thouth me nouth lang;
  His robe was alle gold begane,                     35
    Wel craftelike[L36] maked, I understande;
  Botones asurd, everlk ane,
    Fra his elbouthe ontil his hande;
  Erdelik[L39] man was he nane;
    That in myn hert ich onderstande.                40

  Til him I sayde ful sone on ane,
    For forthirmar I wald him fraine,
  "Gladli wald[L43] I wit thi name,
    And I wist wat me mouthe gaine;
  Thou ert so litel of fleshe and bane,              45
    And so mikel of mith and mayne,
  War vones thou, litel man, at hame?
    Wit of thee I wald ful faine."

  "Thoth I be litel and lith,
    Am y noth wytouten wane;                         50
  Ferli frained thou wat hi hith,
    That[L52] thou salt noth wit my name;
  My wonige stede ful wel es dyght,[L53]
    Nou sone thou salt se at hame."
  Til him I sayde, "For Godes mith,                  55
    Let me forth myn erand gane."

  "The thar noth of thin erand lette,
    Thouth thou come ay stonde wit me,
  Forther salt thou noth bi sette,
    Bi miles twa noyther bi three."                  60
  Na linger durst I for him lette,
    But forth y funded wyt that free;
  Stintid vs brok no beck;
    Ferlich me thouth hu so mouth bee.

  He vent forth, als y you say,                      65
    In at ay yate, y vnderstande;
  In til ay yate wvndouten nay;
    It to se thouth me nouth[L68] lang.
  The bankers on the binkes lay,
    And fair lordes sett y fonde;                    70
  In ilka ay hirn y herd ay lay,
    And leuedys soth meloude sange.

[Here there seems to be a break, and a new start
made, with a tale told not on a _Monday_, but on a
_Wednesday_.]

  Lithe, bothe zonge and alde:
    Of ay worde y will you saye,
  Ay litel tale that me was tald
    Erli on ay Wedenesdaye.
  A mody barn, that was ful bald,
    My friend that y frained aye,
  Al my gesing he me tald,
    And galid me als we went bi waye.

  "Miri man, that es so wyth,
    Of ay thing gif me answere:
  For him that mensked man wyt mith,
    Wat sal worth of this were?" &c.


Finlay, 36, crustlike.

39, Clidelik.

43, Glalli wild.

52, That, qy. Yat?; with.

53, dygh.

68, south.




THE ELPHIN KNIGHT. (See p. 128.)


"The following transcript is a literal copy from the original in the
Pepysian library, Cambridge." Motherwell's _Minstrelsy_, Appendix, p.
i.

"A Proper New Ballad, entituled, _The Wind hath blown my Plaid away,
or, A Discourse betwixt a young Maid and the Elphin-Knight_; To be
sung with its own pleasant New Tune."


  The Elphin Knight site on yon hill,
    _Ba, ba, ba, lilli ba,_
  He blowes his horn both loud and shril,
    _The wind hath blown my plaid awa_.

  He blowes it East, he blowes it West,               5
    _Ba, ba_, &c.
  He blowes it where he lyketh best.
    _The wind_, &c.

  "I wish that horn were in my kist,
    _Ba, ba_, &c.                                    10
  Yea, and the knight in my armes two."
    _The wind_, &c.

  She had no sooner these words said,
    _Ba, ba_, &c.
  When that the knight came to her bed.              15
    _The wind_, &c.

  "Thou art over young a maid," quoth he,
    _Ba, ba_, &c.
  "Married with me thou il wouldst be."
    _The wind_, &c.                                  20

  "I have a sister younger than I,
    _Ba, ba_, &c.
  And she was married yesterday."
    _The wind_, &c.

  "Married with me if thou wouldst be,               25
    _Ba, ba_, &c.
  A courtesie thou must do to me.
    _The wind_, &c.

  "For thou must shape a sark to me,
    _Ba, ba_, &c.                                    30
  Without any cut or heme," quoth he.
    _The wind_, &c.

  "Thou must shape it needle- and sheerlesse,
    _Ba, ba_, &c.
  And also sue it needle-threedlesse."               35
    _The wind_, &c.

  "If that piece of courtesie I do to thee,
    _Ba, ba_, &c.
  Another thou must do to me.
    _The wind_, &c.                                  40

  "I have an aiker of good ley-land,
    _Ba, ba_, &c.
  Which lyeth low by yon sea-strand.
    _The wind_, &c.

  "For thou must cure it with thy horn,              45
    _Ba, ba_, &c.
  So thou must sow it with thy corn.
    _The wind_, &c.

  "And bigg a cart of stone and lyme,
    _Ba, ba_, &c.                                    50
  Robin Redbreast he must trail it hame.
    _The wind_, &c.

  "Thou must barn it in a mouse-holl,
    _Ba, ba_, &c.
  And thrash it into thy shoes' soll.                55
    _The wind_, &c.

  "And thou must winnow it in thy looff,
    _Ba, ba_, &c.
  And also seck it in thy glove.
    _The wind_, &c.                                  60

  "For thou must bring it over the sea,
    _Ba, ba_, &c.
  And thou must bring it dry home to me.
    _The wind_, &c.

  "When thou hast gotten thy turns well done,        65
    _Ba, ba_, &c.
  Then come to me and get thy sark then.
    _The wind_, &c."

  "I'l not quite my plaid for my life,
    _Ba, ba_, &c.                                    70
  It haps my seven bairns and my wife.
    _The wind shall not blow my plaid awa._"

  "My maidenhead I'l then keep still,
    _Ba, ba_, &c.
  Let the Elphin Knight do what he will.             75
    _The wind's not blown my plaid awa._"

  "_My plaid awa, my plaid awa,
    And o'er the hill and far awa,
  And far awa, to Norrowa,
    My plaid shall not be blown awa._"




THE LAIDLEY WORM OF SPINDLESTON-HEUGH. See p. 137.


"A song above 500 years old, made by the old mountain-bard, Duncan
Frasier, living on Cheviot, A.D. 1270."

This ballad, first published in Hutchinson's _History of
Northumberland_, was the composition of Mr. Robert Lambe, vicar of
Norham. Several stanzas are, however, adopted from some ancient tale.
It has been often printed, and is now taken from Ritson's
_Northumberland Garland_.

The similar story of _The Worme of Lambton_, versified by the Rev. J.
Watson (compare _Ormekampen_ and the cognate legends, Grundtvig, i.
343, also vol. viii. p. 128, of this collection), may be seen in
Richardson's _Borderer's Table-Book_, viii. 129, or in Moore's
_Pictorial Book of Ancient Ballad Poetry_, page 784. With the tale of
the _Lambton Worm of Durham_ agrees in many particulars that of the
_Worm of Linton_ in Roxburghshire. (See Scott's introduction to
_Kempion_, and Sir C. Sharpe's _Bishopric Garland_, p. 21.) It is
highly probable that the mere coincidence of sound with _Linden-Worm_
caused this last place to be selected as the scene of such a story.


  The king is gone from Bambrough Castle,
    Long may the princess mourn;
  Long may she stand on the castle wall,
    Looking for his return.

  She has knotted the keys upon a string,             5
    And with her she has them ta'en,
  She has cast them o'er her left shoulder,
    And to the gate she is gane.

  She tripped out, she tripped in,
    She tript into the yard;                         10
  But it was more for the king's sake,
    Than for the queen's regard.

  It fell out on a day, the king
    Brought the queen with him home;
  And all the lords in our country                   15
    To welcome them did come.

  "O welcome father!" the lady cries,
    "Unto your halls and bowers;
  And so are you, my step-mother,
    For all that's here is yours."                   20

  A lord said, wondering while she spake,[L21]
    "This princess of the North
  Surpasses all of female kind
    In beauty, and in worth."

  The envious queen replied, "At least,              25
    You might have excepted me;
  In a few hours, I will her bring
    Down to a low degree.

  "I will her liken to a laidley worm,
    That warps about the stone,                      30
  And not till Childy Wynd[L31] comes back,
    Shall she again be won."

  The princess stood at the bower door
    Laughing, who could her blame?
  But e'er the next day's sun went down,             35
    A long worm she became.

  For seven miles east, and seven miles west,
    And seven miles north, and south,
  No blade of grass or corn could grow,
    So venomous was her mouth.                       40

  The milk of seven stately cows
    (It was costly her to keep)
  Was brought her daily, which she drank
    Before she went to sleep.

  At this day may be seen the cave                   45
    Which held her folded up,
  And the stone trough, the very same
    Out of which she did sup.

  Word went east, and word went west,
    And word is gone over the sea,                   50
  That a laidley worm in Spindleston-Heughs
    Would ruin the North Country.

  Word went east, and word went west,
    And over the sea did go;
  The Child of Wynd got wit of it,                   55
    Which filled his heart with woe.

  He called straight his merry men all,
    They thirty were and three:
  "I wish I were at Spindleston,
    This desperate worm to see.                      60

  "We have no time now here to waste,
    Hence quickly let us sail:
  My only sister Margaret,
    Something, I fear, doth ail."

  They built a ship without delay,                   65
    With masts of the rown tree,
  With flutring sails of silk so fine,
    And set her on the sea.

  They went on board; the wind with speed,
    Blew them along the deep;                        70
  At length they spied an huge square tower
    On a rock high and steep.

  The sea was smooth, the weather clear;
    When they approached nigher,
  King Ida's castle they well knew,                  75
    And the banks of Bambroughshire.

  The queen look'd out at her bower window,
    To see what she could see;
  There she espied a gallant ship
    Sailing upon the sea.                            80

  When she beheld the silken sails,
    Full glancing in the sun,
  To sink the ship she sent[L83] away
    Her witch wives every one.

  The spells were vain; the hags returned            85
    To the queen in sorrowful mood,
  Crying that witches have no power
    Where there is rown-tree wood.

  Her last effort, she sent a boat,
    Which in the haven lay,                          90
  With armed men to board the ship,
    But they were driven away.

  The worm lept out, the worm lept down,
    She plaited round the stone;
  And ay as the ship came to the land                95
    She banged it off again.

  The Child then ran out of her reach
    The ship on Budley-sand,
  And jumping into the shallow sea,
    Securely got to land.                           100

  And now he drew his berry-brown[L101] sword,
    And laid it on her head;
  And swore, if she did harm to him,
    That he would strike her dead.

  "O quit thy sword, and bend thy bow,              105
    And give me kisses three;
  For though I am a poisonous worm,
    No hurt I'll do to thee.

  "O quit thy sword, and bend thy bow,
    And give me kisses three;                       110
  If I'm not won e'er the sun go down,
    Won I shall never be."

  He quitted his sword, and bent his bow,
    He gave her kisses three;
  She crept into a hole a worm,                     115
    But out stept a lady.

  No clothing had this lady fine,
    To keep her from the cold;
  He took his mantle from him about,
    And round her did it fold.                      120

  He has taken his mantle from him about,
    And in it he wrapt her in,
  And they are up to Bambrough castle,
    As fast as they can win.

  His absence, and her serpent shape,               125
    The king had long deplored;
  He now rejoyced to see them both
    Again to him restored.

  The queen they wanted, whom they found
    All pale, and sore afraid,                      130
  Because she knew her power must yield
    To Childy Wynd's, who said,

  "Woe be to thee, thou wicked witch;
    An ill death mayest thou dee;
  As thou my sister hast lik'ned,                   135
    So lik'ned shalt thou be.

  "I will turn you into a toad,
    That on the ground doth wend;
  And won, won shalt thou never be,
    Till this world hath an end."                   140

  Now on the sand near Ida's tower,
    She crawls a loathsome toad,
  And venom spits on every maid
    She meets upon her road.

  The virgins all of Bambrough town                 145
    Will swear that they have seen
  This spiteful toad, of monstrous size,
    Whilst walking they have been.

  All folks believe within the shire
    This story to be true,                          150
  And they all run to Spindleston,
    The cave and trough to view.

  This fact now Duncan Frasier,
    Of Cheviot, sings in rhime,
  Lest Bambroughshire men should forget             155
    Some part of it in time.


v. 21-28. Compare _Young Waters_, (iii. 90,) v. 21-28, and _Young
Beichan and Susie Pye_, (iv. 7,) v. 118-124.

v. 31. Childy Wynd is obviously a corruption of Child Owain.

83, went.

101, berry-broad.




LORD DINGWALL. (See p. 152.)

From Buchan's _Ancient Ballads and Songs of the North of Scotland_.
(i. 204.)


  We were sisters, sisters seven,
    _Bowing down, bowing down_;
  The fairest women under heaven.
    _And aye the birks a-bowing._

  They kiest kevels them amang,
  Wha wou'd to the grenewood gang.                    5

  The kevels they gied thro' the ha',
  And on the youngest it did fa'.

  Now she must to the grenewood gang,
  To pu' the nuts in grenewood hang.

  She hadna tarried an hour but ane,
  Till she met wi' a highlan' groom.                 10

  He keeped her sae late and lang,
  Till the evening set, and birds they sang.

  He ga'e to her at their parting,
  A chain o' gold, and gay gold ring:

  And three locks o' his yellow hair:                15
  Bade her keep them for evermair.

  When six lang months were come and gane,
  A courtier to this lady came.

  Lord Dingwall courted this lady gay,
  And so he set their wedding-day.                   20

  A little boy to the ha' was sent,
  To bring her horse was his intent.

  As she was riding the way along,
  She began to make a heavy moan.

  "What ails you, lady," the boy said,               25
  "That ye seem sae dissatisfied?

  "Are the bridle reins for you too strong?
  Or the stirrups for you too long?"

  "But, little boy, will ye tell me,
  The fashions that are in your countrie?"           30

  "The fashions in our ha' I'll tell,
  And o' them a' I'll warn you well.

  "When ye come in upon the floor,
  His mither will meet you wi' a golden chair.

  "But be ye maid, or be ye nane,                    35
  Unto the high seat make ye boun.

  "Lord Dingwall aft has been beguil'd,
  By girls whom young men hae defiled.

  "He's cutted the paps frae their breast bane,
  And sent them back to their ain hame."             40

  When she came in upon the floor,
  His mother met her wi' a golden chair.

  But to the high seat she made her boun':
  She knew that maiden she was nane.

  When night was come, they went to bed,             45
  And ower her breast his arm he laid.

  He quickly jumped upon the floor,
  And said, "I've got a vile rank whore."

  Unto his mother he made his moan,
  Says, "Mother dear, I am undone.                   50

  "Ye've aft tald, when I brought them hame,
  Whether they were maid or nane.

  "I thought I'd gotten a maiden bright,
  I've gotten but a waefu' wight.

  "I thought I'd gotten a maiden clear,              55
  But gotten but a vile rank whore."

  "When she came in upon the floor,
  I met her wi' a golden chair.

  "But to the high seat she made her boun',
  Because a maiden she was nane."                    60

  "I wonder wha's tauld that gay ladie,
  The fashion into our countrie."

  "It is your little boy I blame,
  Whom ye did send to bring her hame."

  Then to the lady she did go,                       65
  And said, "O Lady, let me know

  "Who has defiled your fair bodie?
  Ye're the first that has beguiled me."

  "O we were sisters, sisters seven,
  The fairest women under heaven;                    70

  "And we kiest kevels us amang,
  Wha wou'd to the grenewood gang;

  "For to pu' the finest flowers,
  To put around our summer bowers.

  "I was the youngest o' them a',                    75
  The hardest fortune did me befa'.

  "Unto the grenewood I did gang,
  And pu'd the nuts as they down hang.

  "I hadna stay'd an hour but ane,
  Till I met wi' a highlan' groom.                   80

  "He keeped me sae late and lang,
  Till the evening set, and birds they sang.

  "He gae to me at our parting,
  A chain of gold, and gay gold ring:

  "And three locks o' his yellow hair:               85
  Bade me keep them for evermair.

  "Then for to show I make nae lie,
  Look ye my trunk, and ye will see."

  Unto the trunk then she did go,
  To see if that were true or no.                    90

  And aye she sought, and aye she flang,
  Till these four things came to her hand.

  Then she did to her ain son go,
  And said, "My son, ye'll let me know.

  "Ye will tell to me this thing:--                  95
  What did yo wi' my wedding-ring?"

  "Mother dear, I'll tell nae lie:
  I gave it to a gay ladie.

  "I would gie a' my ha's and towers,
  I had this bird within my bowers."                100

  "Keep well, keep well, your lands and strands,
  Ye hae that bird within your hands.

  "Now, my son, to your bower ye'll go:
  Comfort your ladie, she's full o' woe."

  Now when nine months were come and gane,          105
  The lady she brought hame a son.

  It was written on his breast-bane,
  Lord Dingwall was his father's name.

  He's ta'en his young son in his arms,
  And aye he prais'd his lovely charms.             110

  And he has gi'em him kisses three,
  And doubled them ower to his ladie.




HYNDE ETIN. (See p. 179.)

From Kinloch's _Ancient Scottish Ballads_, p. 228.


  May Marg'ret stood in her bouer door,
    Kaiming doun her yellow hair;
  She spied some nuts growin in the wud,
    And wish'd that she was there.

  She has plaited her yellow locks                    5
    A little abune her bree;
  And she has kilted her petticoats
    A little below her knee;
  And she's aff to Mulberry wud,
    As fast as she could gae.                        10

  She had na pu'd a nut, a nut,
    A nut but barely ane,
  Till up started the Hynde Etin,
    Says, "Lady! let thae alane."

  "Mulberry wuds are a' my ain;                      15
    My father gied them me,
  To sport and play when I thought lang;
    And they sall na be tane by thee."

  And ae she pu'd the tither berrie,
    Na thinking o' the skaith;                       20
  And said, "To wrang ye, Hynde Etin,
    I wad be unco laith."

  But he has tane her by the yellow locks,
    And tied her till a tree,
  And said, "For slichting my commands,              25
    An ill death shall ye dree."

  He pu'd a tree out o' the wud,
    The biggest that was there;
  And he howkit a cave monie fathoms deep,
    And put May Marg'ret there.                      30

  "Now rest ye there, ye saucie may;
    My wuds are free for thee;
  And gif I tak ye to mysell,
    The better ye'll like me."

  Na rest, na rest May Marg'ret took,                35
    Sleep she got never nane;
  Her back lay on the cauld, cauld floor,
    Her head upon a stane.

  "O tak me out," May Marg'ret cried,
    "O tak me hame to thee;                          40
  And I sall be your bounden page
    Until the day I dee."

  He took her out o' the dungeon deep,
    And awa wi' him she's gane;
  But sad was the day an earl's dochter              45
    Gaed hame wi' Hynde Etin.



  It fell out ance upon a day,
    Hynde Etin's to the hunting gane;
  And he has tane wi' him his eldest son,
    For to carry his game.                           50

  "O I wad ask you something, father,
    An ye wadna angry be;"--
  "Ask on, ask on, my eldest son,
    Ask onie thing at me."

  "My mother's cheeks are aft times weet,            55
    Alas! they are seldom dry;"--
  "Na wonder, na wonder, my eldest son,
    Tho' she should brast and die.

  "For your mother was an earl's dochter,
    Of noble birth and fame;                         60
  And now she's wife o' Hynde Etin,
    Wha ne'er got christendame.

  "But we'll shoot the laverock in the lift,
    The buntlin on the tree;
  And ye'll tak them hame to your mother,            65
    And see if she'll comforted be."



  "I wad ask ye something, mother,
    An' ye wadna angry be;"--
  "Ask on, ask on, my eldest son,
    Ask onie thing at me."                           70

  "Your cheeks they are aft times weet,
    Alas! they're seldom dry;"--
  "Na wonder, na wonder, my eldest son,
    Tho' I should brast and die.

  "For I was ance an earl's dochter,                 75
    Of noble birth and fame;
  And now I am the wife of Hynde Etin,
    Wha ne'er got christendame."




SIR OLUF AND THE ELF-KING'S DAUGHTER. (See p. 192.)


This is a translation by Jamieson (_Popular Ballads and Songs_, i.
219), of the Danish _Elveskud_ (Abrahamson, i. 237). Lewis has given a
version of the same in the _Tales of Wonder_, (No. 10.) The
corresponding Swedish ballad, _The Elf-Woman and Sir Olof_ (Afzelius,
iii. 165) is translated by Keightley, _Fairy Mythology_, p. 84. This
ballad occurs also in Norse, Faroish, and Icelandic.

Of the same class are _Elfer Hill_, (from the Danish, Jamieson, i.
225; from the Swedish, Keightley, 86; through the German, _Tales of
Wonder_, No. 6:) _Sir Olof in the Elve-Dance_, (Keightley, 82;
_Literature and Romance of Northern Europe_, by William and Mary
Howitt, i. 269:) _The Merman and Marstig's Daughter_, (from the
Danish, Jamieson, i. 210; _Tales of Wonder_, No. 11:) the Breton tale
of _Lord Nann and the Korrigan_, (Keightley, 433:) three Slavic
ballads referred to by Grundtvig, (_Elveskud_, ii. 111:) _Sir Peter of
Stauffenbergh and the Mermaid_, (from the German, Jamieson,
_Illustrations of Northern Antiquities_, 257,) and the well-known
_Fischer_ of Goethe.


  Sir Oluf the hend has ridden sae wide,
  All unto his bridal feast to bid.

  And lightly the elves, sae feat and free,
  They dance all under the greenwood tree!

  And there danced four, and there danced five;       5
  The Elf-King's daughter she reekit bilive.

  Her hand to Sir Oluf sae fair and free:
  "O welcome, Sir Oluf, come dance wi' me!

  "O welcome, Sir Oluf! now lat thy love gae,
  And tread wi' me in the dance sae gay."            10

  "To dance wi' thee ne dare I, ne may;
  The morn it is my bridal day."

  "O come, Sir Oluf, and dance wi' me;
  Twa buckskin boots I'll give to thee;

  "Twa buckskin boots, that sit sae fair,            15
  Wi' gilded spurs sae rich and rare.

  "And hear ye, Sir Oluf! come dance wi' me;
  And a silken sark I'll give to thee;

  "A silken sark sae white and fine,
  That my mother bleached in the moonshine."         20

  "I darena, I maunna come dance wi' thee;
  For the morn my bridal day maun be."

  "O hear ye, Sir Oluf! come dance wi' me,
  And a helmet o' goud I'll give to thee."

  "A helmet o' goud I well may ha'e;                 25
  But dance wi' thee ne dare I, ne may."

  "And winna thou dance, Sir Oluf, wi' me?
  Then sickness and pain shall follow thee!"

  She's smitten Sir Oluf--it strak to his heart;
  He never before had kent sic a smart;              30

  Then lifted him up on his ambler red;
  "And now, Sir Oluf, ride hame to thy bride."

  And whan he came till the castell yett,
  His mither she stood and leant thereat.

  "O hear ye, Sir Oluf, my ain dear son,             35
  Whareto is your lire sae blae and wan?"

  "O well may my lire be wan and blae,
  For I ha'e been in the elf-womens' play."

  "O hear ye, Sir Oluf, my son, my pride,
  And what shall I say to thy young bride?"          40

  "Ye'll say, that I've ridden but into the wood,
  To prieve gin my horse and hounds are good."

  Ear on the morn, whan night was gane,
  The bride she cam wi' the bridal train.

  They skinked the mead, and they skinked the wine:  45
  "O whare is Sir Oluf, bridegroom mine?"

  "Sir Oluf has ridden but into the wood,
  To prieve gin his horse and hounds are good."

  And she took up the scarlet red,
  And there lay Sir Oluf, and he was dead!           50

  Ear on the morn, whan it was day,
  Three likes were ta'en frae the castle away;

  Sir Oluf the leal, and his bride sae fair,
  And his mither, that died wi' sorrow and care.

  And lightly the elves sae feat and free,           55
  They dance all under the greenwood tree!




FRAGMENT OF THE DAEMON LOVER. (See p. 201.)

(Motherwell's _Minstrelsy_, p. 92.)


  "I have seven ships upon the sea,
    Laden with the finest gold,
  And mariners to wait us upon;--
    All these you may behold.

  "And I have shoes for my love's feet,               5
    Beaten of the purest gold,
  And lined wi' the velvet soft,
    To keep my love's feet from the cold.

  "O how do you love the ship," he said,
    "Or how do you love the sea?                     10
  And how do you love the bold mariners
    That wait upon thee and me?"

  "O I do love the ship," she said,
    "And I do love the sea;
  But woe be to the dim mariners,                    15
    That nowhere I can see."

  They had not sailed a mile awa',
    Never a mile but one,
  When she began to weep and mourn,
    And to think on her little wee son.              20

  "O hold your tongue, my dear," he said,
    "And let all your weeping abee,
  For I'll soon show to you how the lilies grow
    On the banks of Italy."

  They had not sailed a mile awa',                   25
    Never a mile but two,
  Until she espied his cloven foot,
    From his gay robes sticking thro'.

  They had not sailed a mile awa',
    Never a mile but three,                          30
  When dark, dark, grew his eerie looks,
    And raging grew the sea.

  They had not sailed a mile awa',
    Never a mile but four,
  When the little wee ship ran round about,          35
    And never was seen more!




CONSTANTINE AND ARETE. See p. 217.


We are indebted for the following recension of _Constantine and Arete_
to Mr. Sophocles of Harvard College. It is constructed from Fauriel's
text, combined with a copy in Zambelios's [Grk: Aismata Demotika], and
with a version taken down from the recitation of a Cretan woman. The
translation is by the skilful hand of Professor Felton.

We may notice by the way that several versions of this piece are given
by Tommaseo, in his _Canti Popolari Toscani_, etc. iii. 341.


  [Grk:
    Manna me tous ennia sou huious kai me te mia sou kore,
  Ten kore te monakribe ten polyagapemene,
  Ten eiches dodeka chronon k' helios den sou ten eide,
  'S ta skoteina ten elouges, 's t' aphenga ten eplekes,
  'S t' astre kai 's ton augerino to' ephkeianes ta sgoura tes.       5
  He geitonia den exere pos eiches thygatera,
  Kai proxenia sou pherane apo te Babylone.
  Hoi okto aderphoi den theloune, kai ho Kostantinos thelei;
   "Dos tene, manna, dos tene ten 'Arete 's ta xena,
  Na 'cho k' ego paregoria 's te strata pou diabaino."               10
   "Phrenimos eisai, Kostante, m' aschem' apilogethes;
  An tyche pikra ge chara, poios tha mou tene phere?"
   To theo tes banei engyte kai tous hagious martyrous,
  An tyche pikra ge chara na pae na tes ten phere;
  Kai san ten epantrepsane ten Arete 's ta xena,                     15
  Erchetai chronos disephtos kai hoi ennia pethanan.
  Emeine he manna monache san kalamia 's ton kampo.
  'S ta ochto mnemata dernetai, 's ta ochto myrologaei,
  'S tou Kostantinou to thaphtio anespa ta mallia tes;
    "Sekou, Kostantinake mou, ten Arete mou thelo;                   20
  To theo mou 'bales engyte kai tous hagious martyrous,
  An tyche pikra ge chara na pas na mou ten pheres."
    Kai mesa 's ta mesanychta ap' to kibouri bgainei.
  Kanei to sygnepho alogo, kai t' astro salibari,
  Kai to phengari syntrophia kai paei na tene phere.                 25
  Briskei ten kai chtenizountai oxou 's to phengaraki.
  Apomakria ten chairetaei kai apomakria tes legei.
    "Gia ela, Aretoula mou, kyrana mas se thelei."
  "Alimono, aderphaki mou, kai ti 'ne tout' he hora!
  An en' chara 's to spiti mas, na balo ta chrysa mou,               30
  Kai an pikra, aderphaki mou, na 'rtho hos kathos eimai."
    "Mede pikra mede chara; ela hos kathos eisai."
  'S te strata pou diabainane, 's te strata pou pagainan,
  Akoun poulia kai kiladoun, akoun poulia kai lene;
    "Gia des kopela omorphe na serne apethamenos!"                   35
  "Akouses, Kostantake mou, ti lene ta poulakia?"
    "Poulakia 'ne kai as kiladoun, poulakia 'ne kai as lene."
  Kai parakei pou pagainan kai alla poulia tous legan;
    "Ti blepoume ta thlibera ta paraponemena?
  Na perpatoun hoi zontanoi me tous apethamenous?"                   40
    "Akouses, Kostantake mou, ti lene ta poulakia?"
  "Poulakia 'ne kai as kiladoun, poulakia 'ne kai as lene."
    "Phoboumai s' aderphaki mou, kai libanies myrizeis."
  "Echtes bradys epegame kato 's ton Haigianne,
  K' ethymiase mas ho papas me to poly libani."                      45
     Kai parempros pou pegane, kai alla poulia tous lene;
  "O the megalodyname, megalo thama kaneis!
  Tetoia panorea lygere na serne apethamenos!"
    T' akouse pale he Arete k' erragis' he kardia tes;
  "Akouses, Kostantake mou, ti lene ta poulakia?                     50
  Pes mou pou 'n' ta mallakia sou, to pegouro moustaki?"
     "Megale arrostia m' heureke, m' errexe tou thanatou."
  Briskoun to spiti kleidoto kleidomantalomeno,
  Kai ta spitoparathyra pou 'tan arachniasmena;
     "Anoixe, manna m', anoixe, kai na ten Arete sou."               55
  "An esai Charos, diabaine, kai alla paidia den echo;
  He dolea Aretoula mou leipei makria 's ta xena."
     "Anoixe, manna m', anoixe, k' ego' mai ho Kostantes sou.
  To thio sou 'bala engyte kai tous agious martyrous,
  An tyche pikra ge chara na pao na sou ten phero."                  60
     Kai hoste na 'bge 's ten porta tes, ebgeke he psyche tes.]


CONSTANTINE AND ARETE.

    O mother, thou with thy nine sons, and with one only daughter,
  Thine only daughter, well beloved, the dearest of thy children,
  For twelve years thou didst keep the maid, the sun did not behold her,
  Whom in the darkness thou didst bathe, in secret braid her tresses,
  And by the starlight and the dawn, didst wind her curling ringlets,
  Nor knew the neighborhood that thou didst have so fair a daughter,--
  When came to thee from Babylon a woer's soft entreaty:
  Eight of the brothers yielded not, but Constantine consented.
    "O mother give thine Arete, bestow her on the stranger,
  That I may have her solace dear when far away I wander."
    "Though thou art wise, my Constantine, thou hast unwisely spoken:
  Be woe my lot or be it joy, who will restore my daughter?"
    He calls to witness God above, he calls the holy martyrs,
  Be woe her lot, or be it joy, he would restore her daughter:
  And when they wedded Arete, in that far distant country,
  Then comes the year of sorrowing, and all the nine did perish.
  All lonely was the mother left, like a reed alone in the meadow;
  O'er the eight graves she beats her breast, o'er eight is heard her
                                                                wailing,
  And at the tomb of Constantine, she rends her hair in anguish.
    "Arise, my Constantine, arise, for Arete I languish:
  On God to witness thou didst call, didst call the holy martyrs,
  Be woe my lot or be it joy, thou wouldst restore my daughter."
    And forth at midnight hour he fares, the silent tomb deserting,
  He makes the cloud his flying steed, he makes the star his bridle,
  And by the silver moon convoyed, to bring her home he journeys:
  And finds her combing down her locks, abroad by silvery moonlight,
  And greets the maiden from afar, and from afar bespeaks her.
    "Arise, my Aretula dear, for thee our mother longeth."
  "Alas! my brother, what is this? what wouldst at such an hour?
  If joy betide our distant home, I wear my golden raiment,
  If woe betide, dear brother mine, I go as now I'm standing."
    "Think not of joy, think not of woe--return as here thou standest."
  And while they journey on the way, all on the way returning,
  They hear the Birds, and what they sing, and what the Birds are
                                                                 saying.
    "Ho! see the maiden all so fair, a Ghost it is that bears her."
  "Didst hear the Birds, my Constantine, didst list to what they're
                                                                saying?"
    "Yes: they are Birds, and let them sing, they're Birds, and let
                                                          them chatter:"
  And yonder, as they journey on, still other Birds salute them.
    "What do we see, unhappy ones, ah! woe is fallen on us;--
  Lo! there the living sweep along, and with the dead they travel."
    "Didst hear, my brother Constantine, what yonder Birds are saying?"
  "Yes! Birds are they, and let them sing, they're Birds, and let them
                                                               chatter."
    "I fear for thee, my Brother dear, for thou dost breathe of
                                                               incense."
  "Last evening late we visited the church of Saint Johannes,
  And there the priest perfumed me o'er with clouds of fragrant
                                                               incense."
    And onward as they hold their way, still other Birds bespeak them:

  "O God, how wondrous is thy power, what miracles thou workest!
  A maid so gracious and so fair, a Ghost it is that bears her:"
    'Twas heard again by Arete, and now her heart was breaking;
  "Didst hearken, brother Constantine, to what the Birds are saying?
  Say where are now thy waving locks, thy strong thick beard,
                                                           where is it?"
    "A sickness sore has me befallen, and brought me near to dying."
  They find the house all locked and barred, they find it barred and
                                                                 bolted,
  And all the windows of the house with cobwebs covered over.
  "Unlock, O mother mine, unlock, thine Arete thou seest."
  "If thou art Charon, get thee gone--I have no other children:
  My hapless Arete afar, in stranger lands is dwelling."
    "Unlock, O mother mine, unlock, thy Constantine entreats thee.
  I called to witness God above, I called the holy martyrs,
  Were woe thy lot, or were it joy, I would restore thy daughter."
    And when unto the door she came, her soul from her departed.




THE HAWTHORN TREE.

Ritson's _Ancient Songs_, ii. 44.


_A Mery Ballet of the Hathorne Tre_, from a MS. in the Cotton Library,
Vespasian, A. xxv. The MS. has "G. Peele" appended to it, but in a
hand more modern than the ballad. Mr. Dyce, with very good reason,
"doubts" whether Peele is the author of the ballad, but has printed
it, Peele's _Works_, ii. 256. It is given also by Evans, i. 342, and
partly in Chappell's _Popular Music_, i. 64.

The true character of this piece would never be suspected by one
reading it in English. The same is true of the German, where the
ballad is very common, and much prettier than in English, e.g. _Das
Maedchen und die Hasel_, _Das Maedchen und der Sagebaum_, Erk's
_Liederhort_, No. 33, five copies; Hoffmann, _Schlesische
Volkslieder_, No. 100, three copies, etc. In Danish and Swedish we
find a circumstantial story: _Jomfruen i Linden_, Grundtvig, No. 66;
_Linden, Svenska Folkvisor_, No. 87. The tree is an enchanted damsel,
one of eleven children transformed by a step-mother into various less
troublesome things, and the spell can be removed only by a kiss from
the king's son. By the intervention of the maiden, this rite is
performed, and the beautiful linden is changed to as beautiful a young
woman, who of course becomes the prince's bride. A Wendish ballad
resembling the German is given by Haupt and Schmaler, and ballads akin
to the Danish, are found in Slovensk and Lithuanian (see Grundtvig).


  It was a maide of my countre,
  As she came by a hathorne-tre,
  As full of flowers as might be seen,
  'She' merveld to se the tree so grene.

  At last she asked of this tre,                      5
  "Howe came this freshness unto the,
  And every branche so faire and cleane?
  I mervaile that you growe so grene."

  The tre 'made' answere by and by:
  "I have good causse to growe triumphantly;         10
  The swetest dewe that ever be sene
  Doth fall on me to kepe me grene."

  "Yea," quoth the maid, "but where you growe,
  You stande at hande for every blowe;
  Of every man for to be seen;                       15
  I mervaile that you growe so grene."

  "Though many one take flowers from me,
  And manye a branche out of my tre,
  I have suche store they wyll not be sene,
  For more and more my 'twegges'[L20] growe grene."  20

  "But howe and they chaunce to cut the downe,
  And carry thie braunches into the towne?
  Then will they never no more be sene
  To growe againe so freshe and grene."

  "Though that you do, yt ys no boote;               25
  Althoughe they cut me to the roote,
  Next yere againe I will be sene
  To bude my branches freshe and grene.

  "And you, faire maide, canne not do so;
  For yf you let youre maid-hode goe,                30
  Then will yt never no more be sene,
  As I with my braunches can growe grene."

  The maide wyth that beganne to blushe,
  And turned her from the hathorne-bushe;
  She though[t]e herselffe so faire and clene,       35
  Her bewtie styll would ever growe grene.

  Whan that she harde this marvelous dowbte,
  She wandered styll then all aboute,
  Suspecting still what she would wene,
  Her maid-heade lost would never be seen.           40

  Wyth many a sighe, she went her waye,
  To se howe she made herselff so gay,
  To walke, to se, and to be sene,
  And so out-faced the hathorne grene.

  Besides all that, yt put her in feare              45
  To talke with companye anye where,
  For feare to losse the thinge that shuld be sene
  To growe as were the hathorne grene.

  But after this never could I here
  Of this faire mayden any where,                    50
  That ever she was in forest sene
  To talke againe of the hathorne grene.


20. twedges.




ST. STEPHEN AND HEROD.

Ritson's _Ancient Songs_, i. 141, Sandys's _Christmas Carols_, p. 4:
from the Sloane MS., No. 2593 (temp. Hen. VI.)


This curious little ballad was sung as a carol for St. Stephen's Day.
Its counterpart is found in Danish (though not in an ancient form),
printed in Erik Pontoppidan's book on the relics of Heathenism and
Papistry in Denmark, 1736 (_Jesusbarnet, Stefan, og Herodes_
Grundtvig, No. 96). There is also a similar ballad in Faroish. Only a
slight trace of the story is now left in the Swedish _Staffans Visa_
(_Svenska F.V._, No. 99), which is sung as a carol on St. Stephen's
Day, as may very well have been the case with the Danish and Faroish
ballads too.

The miracle of the roasted cock occurs in many other legends. The
earliest mention of it is in Vincent of Beauvais's _Speculum
Historiale_, L. xxv. c. 64. It is commonly ascribed to St. James,
sometimes to the Virgin. (See the preface to the ballad in Grundtvig,
and to Southey's _Pilgrim to Compostella_.) We meet with it in another
English carol called _The Carnal[E] and the Crane_, printed in
Sandys's collection, p. 152, from a broadside copy, corrupt and almost
unintelligible in places. The stanzas which contain the miracle are
the following:


  There was a star in the West land,
    So bright it did appear
  Into King Herod's chamber,
    And where King Herod were.

  The Wise Men soon espied it,
    And told the king on high,
  A princely babe was born that night
    No king could e'er destroy.

  "If this be true," King Herod said,
    "As thou tellest unto me,
  This roasted cock that lies in the dish
    Shall crow full fences[F] three."

  The cock soon freshly feather'd was,
    By the work of God's own hand,
  And then three fences crowed he,
    In the dish where he did stand.

  "Rise up, rise up, you merry men all,
    See that you ready be;
  All children under two years old
    Now slain they all shall be."

    [E] crow?

    [F] rounds?



  Seynt Stevene was a clerk in kyng Herowdes halle,
  And servyd him of bred and cloth, as ever kyng befalle.[L2]

  Stevyn out of kechon cam, wyth boris hed on honde;
  He saw a sterr was fayr and bryght over Bedlem stonde.

  He kyst[L5] adoun the bores hed, and went into the halle:          5
  "I forsake the, kyng Herowdes, and thi werkes alle.

  "I forsak the, kyng Herowdes, and thi werkes alle:
  Ther is a chyld in Bedlem born is beter than we alle."

  "Quhat eylyt[L9] the, Stevene? quhat is the befalle?
  Lakkyt the eyther mete or drynk in kyng Herowdes halle?"          10

  "Lakit me neyther mete ne drynk in kyng Herowdes halle:
  Ther is a chyld in Bedlem born is beter than we alle."

  "Quhat eylyt the, Stevyn? art thu wod, or thu gynnyst to brede?[L13]
  Lakkyt the eythar gold or fe, or ony ryche wede?"[L14]

  "Lakyt 'me' neyther gold ne fe, ne non ryche wede;[L15]           15
  Ther is a chyld in Bedlem born xal[L16] helpen us at our nede."

  "That is al so soth, Stevyn, al so soth, i-wys,[L17]
  As this capon crowe xal that lyth her in myn dysh."

  That word was not so sone seyd, that word in that halle,
  The capon crew, CHRISTUS NATUS EST! among the lordes alle.        20

  "Rysyt up, myn turmentowres, be to[L21] and al be on,
  And ledyt Stevyn out of this town, and stonyt hym wyth ston."

  Tokyn he[L23] Stevene, and stonyd hym in the way;
  And therefor is his evyn on Crystes owyn day.


2. befalle, _befell_.

5. kyst, _cast_.

9. eylyt, _aileth_.

13. wod, _mad_: gynnyst to brede, _beginnest to entertain capricious
fancies_, like a woman, &c.

14. fe, _wages_: wede, _clothes_.

15. ne, _nor_.

16. xall, _shall_.

17. soth, _true_: i-wys, _for a certainty_.

21. be to, _by two_.

23. he, _they_.




GLOSSARY.


N.B. Figures placed after words denote the pages in which they occur.

  a, _one_.
  a', _all_.
  abee, abene, _be_.
  aboon, abune, _above_.
  aby, _pay for_.
  ae, _only, sole_.
  ae, _aye, still_,
  ahin, _behind_.
  airn, _iron_.
  ald, _old_.
  all and some, _each and all_.
  als, _as_.
  als, _also_.
  ance, anes, _once_.
  appone, _upon_.
  araye, _order_.
  arblast-bow, _cross-bow_.
  are, _before_.
  arena, _are not_.
  arighte, _laid hold of_.
  armorie, 237, _band of armed men_.
  asey, _assay_.
  ask, _newt, a kind of lizard_.
  askryede, _described_.
  asurd, _azured, blue_.
  at, 296, _of_.
  atteynt, _seize_.
  aught, _owed_.
  avanse, _gain, succeed_.
  avow, _vow_.
  awa, _away_.
  awenn, _own_.
  ay, _a_.
  ayont, _beyond_.

  ba', _ball_.
  backefysyke, 22.
  bade, _prayed for_.
  bade, _abode, staid_.
  bairnly, _childlike_.
  bald, _bold_.
  bale, _blaze, fire_.
  bale, _harme, ruin, sorrow_.
  ban', _bound_.
  bane, _bone_.
  bankers, 276, _coverings for benches_.
  bann, _curse_.
  barn, _child, wight_.
  beck, _stream_.
  bedone, 8, _bedecked_.
  begane, _bedecked_.
  begynne the bord, _sit at the head of the table_.
  ben, _in_.
  ben, _prompt, ready_.
  bent, _plain, field_, (from the coarse grass growing on open lands);
    bentis, bents, _coarse grass_.
  beryde, 98, _cried, made a noise_.
  bese, _will_ or _shall be_.
  best man, bride's, 85, _bridesman_, (corresponding to the best maid,
      or bridesmaid).
  bestedde, _circumstanced_.
  bi, _be_.
  bierly, 148, _proper, becoming, comfortable_.
  bigg, _build_.
  bilive, _quickly_.
  Billy Blind, or Billy Blin, _a Brownie, or domestic fairy_.
  binkes, _benches_.
  bird, _lady_.
  birk, _birch_.
  birled, 211, _poured out drink_, or _drunk_.
  blae, _livid_.
  blee, _color, complexion_.
  blewe, 99, _sounded a horn_.
  blin, blyn, _stop, cease_.
  bogle, _spectre, goblin_.
  bone, _boon_.
  boome, 287. Qy. goome, _man_?
  bord, _table_.
  borrow, _stand surety for, ransom, rescue_.
  bouir, _chamber, dwelling_.
  boun, _boon_.
  boun, _ready_;
    make ye boun, 289, boun, 187, _go straightway_.
  bourdes, _jests_.
  boure, bower, _chamber_.
  bouted, _bolted_.
  bown, _ready, ready to go_.
  bowrd, _jest_.
  brade, _broad_.
  brae, _hill-side_.
  brast, _burst_.
  brayd, _started, turned_.
  braw, _brave, fine_.
  bree, _brow_.
  brening, _burning_.
  brent, _burnt_.
  brether, 26, _brethren_.
  bricht, _bright_.
  brimes, _water_.
  britled, 15, brittened, 106, _cut up, carved_.
  brok, _brook_.
  broom-cow, _bush of broom_.
  brook, _enjoy, preserve_.
  brues, _brows_.
  brunt, _burnt_.
  bryste, _burst_.
  bue, 234, 235, _fair_?
  bugyle, _horn_.
  bunge, 239?
  buntin, buntlin, _blackbird_; al. _wood-lark_.
  burd, _maid, lady_.
  burd-alane, _alone_.
  Burlow-beanie, 241, _name of a fiend or spirit_.
  burn, _brook_.
  busk, _dress, make ready_.
  but, 208, _and_;
    but and, _and also_.
  by and by, _straightway_.
  bydeene, 13, _continuously, in numbers_.
  byggis, _builds_.
  bygone, _bedecked_.
  byhouys, _behoves_.
  byleve, 98, _remain_.
  byrde, _lady_.
  byre, _cow-house_.
  byrnande, _burning_.
  byteche, _commit_.

  ca', _call_.
  can, (sometimes gan,) _used as an auxiliary with an infinitive
      mood, to express the past tense of a verb_.
  carknet, _necklace_.
  carline, _female of churl_, _old woman_.
  carlist, 37, _churlish_.
  carp, _talk_, _tell stories_.
  cast, _planned_.
  chalmer, _chamber_.
  channerin', _fretting_.
  chere, _countenance_.
  chese, _choose_.
  chess, _jess_, _strap_.
  chewys, _choosest_.
  chiel, _child_, _young man_.
  christendame, christendoun, _christening_.
  christentye, _christendom_.
  claes, _clothes_.
  clapping, _fondling_.
  clear, clere, _fair_, _morally pure_.
  cockward, _cuckold_.
  coft, _bought_.
  coiffer, 260, _coif_, _head-dress_, _cap?_
  cold, _could, knew_; _used as an auxiliary with the infinitive
      to express a past tense_; e.g. he cold fling, _he flung_.
  coleyne, Collen, _Cologne steel_.
  com'nye, 237, _communing_, _discourse_.
  compass, _circle_,
  compenabull, 21, _sociable_, _admitting to participation_.
  coost, coosten, _cast_.
  couth, _could_, _knew_, _understood_.
  covent, _convent_.
  cow-me-doo, 171, like curdoo, _name for a dove_, from its cooing.
  craftelike, _craftily_.
  crapote, 99. Qy. cramasee, _crimson?_
  cropoure, _crupper_.
  crowt, 12, _curl up_.
  crystiante, _christendom_.
  cure, 279, _till_.

  dag-durk, _dagger_, _dirk_.
  damasee, _damson_.
  dang, _beat_, _struck_.
  dasse, _dais_, _raised platform_.
  daunton, _daunt_.
  decay, _destruction_.
  dee, _die_.
  dee, _do_.
  deid, _death_.
  dele, dell, _part_.
  delle, 101, _dally_.
  dere, _harm_.
  derne, _secret_.
  des, dese, _dais_, _elevated platform_.
  devyse, _direction_.
  deynteous, _dainty_.
  dight, 225, _placed_, _involved_.
  dight (corn), _winnow_.
  dinne, 12, _trouble_, _circumstance_.
  distans, 23, _dissension_, _strife_.
  done, _do_.
  doo, _dove_.
  doubt, dout, _fear_.
  dought, _could_, _might_; 112, _may_, _am able_.
  dow, _could_.
  dowie, _mournful_, _doleful_.
  dree, _suffer_.
  drest, _arranged_.
  drumlie, _troubled_, _gloomy_.
  dryssynge, _dressing_.
  dule, _sorrow_, _trouble_.
  dullfull, _doleful_.
  dyght, dygzht, _adorned_, _arrayed_, _dressed_.

  ear, _soon_, _early_.
  eerie, eiry, _fearful_, _producing superstitious dread_.
  eghne, _eyes_.
  eglis, _eagle's_.
  elde, eldren, _old_.
  Elfin, 262, _Elf-land_.
  elritch, _elvish_.
  endres-daye, 98, _past day_? _other day_? See Halliwell's _Dictionary_.

        "Of my fortune, how it ferde,
        This _endir_ day, as y forth ferde."

  erdelik, 275, _earthly_. (Finlay, "clidelik.")
  erlish, _elvish_.
  esk, _newt_.
  etin (Danish jette), _giant_.
  even cloth, 113, _fine cloth_?
  everlk, _every_.
  everychon, _every one_.

  faem, _foam_.
  faine, _desire_.
  faine, _glad_.
  fairest, _forest_.
  fand, _found_.
  fare, _go_.
  farer, _further_.
  fawte, _want_.
  fayrse, _fierce_.
  feat, _neat_, _dexterous_, _nimble_.
  fee, 100, _animals_, _deer_; 107, _rent_, _tribute_.
  feed, _same as_ food, fud, _creature_, _man_, _woman_, or _child_.
  feires, _companions_, _mates_.
  fele, _many_.
  fell, _hill_, _moor_.
  ferli, 275, _fairly?_
  ferlie, ferly, _wonder_.
  ferlich, _wondrous_.
  fernie, _covered with fern_.
  fet, fette, _fetched_.
  fethill, _fiddle_.
  fforthi, _therefore_.
  fifthen, _fifth_.
  fil, _fell_.
  first ane, _first_.
  firth, (frith,) _wood_.
  fize, 274, _five_.
  flang, _flung_.
  flaugh, _flew_.
  flaw, 175, _lie_.
  fleer, _floor_.
  fley'd, _frightened_.
  flone, _arrow_.
  fode, _creature_, _child_.
  fond, _try_, _make trial_.
  fonde, _found_.
  forbye, _aside_.
  fordoo, _destroy_.
  foremost man, 158, (like best man), _bridesman_.
  forowttyn, _without_.
  forteynd, _happened_.
  forther, _further_.
  forthi, _therefore_.
  fowles, _birds_.
  fraine, _question_.
  free, 275, _lord_, 253, _lady_.
  free, freely, _noble_, _lovely_.
  frem, _strange_.
  freyry, _fraternity_.
  frowte, _fruit_.
  fu', _full_.
  fundyd, 275, _went_.
  fytt, _canto_, _division of a song_.

  gad, _bar_.
  gae, _gave_.
  gae, _go_, _going_.
  gait, nae, _no way_, _no where_.
  galid, 276, _sang?_
  gangande, _going_.
  gar, _make_, _cause_.
  gare, 193, _strip_.
  garthes, _girths_.
  gate, 225, _way_.
  gesing, 276, _guessing_; or, _desire_, A. Sax. gitsung?
  getterne, _giitern_, _kind of harp_.
  ghesting, _lodging_, _hospitable reception_.
  gied, _went_.
  gien, _given_.
  gin, giue, _if_.
  gleed, _a burning coal_.
  glided, 274. Qy. _gilded?_
  glint, _gleam_.
  gon, _begun_, _performed_.
  gon, _went_.
  goud, _gold_.
  goupen, _the hollow of the hand contracted to receive anything_.
  gowan, _flower_.
  gowd, _gold_.
  gowden, _golden_.
  gown of green, got on the, 259, _was with child_.
  gravil, 260?
  gree, _favor_, _prize_.
  green'd, _longed_.
  greet, _weep_.
  grew, _gray_.
  groom, _man_, _young man_.
  gule, _red_.
  gurlie, _stormy_, _surly_.
  gyne, _device_.

  ha', _hall_.
  had, _hold_, _keep_.
  hailsed, _saluted_.
  halch, _salute_, _embrace_.
  hallow, _hollow_.
  Hallowe'en, 120, _the eve of All-Saints' day_, supposed to be
      peculiarly favorable for intercourse with the invisible world, all
      fairies, witches, and ghosts being then abroad.
  hals, halse, _neck_;
    halsed, _greeted_.
  haly, _holy_.
  hame, _home_.
  hap, _cover_.
  harde, _heard_.
  harns, _brains_;
    harn-pan, _skull_.
  hate, _hat_.
  hat, _hit_.
  hand, _hold_.
  haved, _had_.
  heal, _conceal_.
  heathennest, heathynesse, 234, _heathendom_.
  hegehen, _eyes_.
  hegh, _high_;
    heghere, _higher_.
  hem, _them_.
  hende, _handsome_, _gentle_.
  hent, _took_.
  herbere, _arbor_, _orchard_.
  herme, _harm_.
  hethyn, 107, _hence_.
  hett, _bid_.
  heved, _head_.
  hi, 275, _I_.
  high-coll'd, _high-cut_.
  hind, _gentle_.
  hind, 180, _stripling_.
  him lane, _alone_.
  hingers, _hangings_.
  hirn, _corner_.
  hith, _hight, is called_.
  hollen, _holly_.
  hore, _hoar_, _hoary_.
  hose, 238, _clasp_.
  howkit, _dug_.
  howm, _holm_; _level, low ground on the bank of a stream_.
  hunt's-ha', _hunting-lodge_.
  hye, in, _in haste_; 23, perhaps _aloud_.
  hyghte, _bid_; _was called_.
  hynde, _youth_, _stripling_, _swain_.
  hy[z]e, in, 20, _in haste_, _of a sudden_.

  ic, _I_.
  iknow, _known_.
  ilka, _each_.
  ilke, _same_.
  inow[z]e, _enough_.
  intill, _into_, _upon_.
  iralle, 99. Qu. rialle, _royal?_

  jawes, 227, _dashes_;
    jawp'd, 257, _dashed_, _spattered_.
  jelly, _jolly_, _pleasant_.
  jimp, _slender_, _neat_.
  jolly, _pretty_, _gay_.

  kaim, _comb_.
  kane, _rent_.
  karp, _talk_, _relate stories_.
  kemb, _comb_.
  ken, _know_.
  keppit, _caught_, _kept_.
  kevels, _lots_.
  kiest, _cast_.
  kilted, _tucked_.
  kin', _kind of_.
  kindly, 236, "_good old_"?
  kirk, _church_.
  kist, _chest_.
  knave-bairn, _male child_.
  knicht, _knight_.

  laidley, _loathly_, _loathsome_.
  laigh-coll'd, _low-cut_.
  laith, _loath_.
  lane, _alone_; joined with pronouns, as, my lane, his lane, her lane,
      their lane, _myself alone_, &c.
  lang, _to think_, originally, _to seem long_, then _to be weary_,
      _feel ennui_.
  lapande, _lapping_.
  lappered, _coagulated_, _clotted_.
  lat, latten, _let_.
  lauchters, _locks_.
  laverock, _lark_.
  leal, _loyal_, _chaste_.
  leccam, _body_.
  lede, _lead_.
  lee, _lie_.
  leesome, _pleasant_, _sweet_.
  lelfe, 22, _leave?_
  lere, _lore_, _doctrine_; _learn_.
  les, lesyng, _lying_, _lie_.
  lesse and more, _smaller and greater_.
  lett, lette, _hinder_, _hinderance_; _delay_;
    withouten lette, _for a certainty_.
  leuedys, _ladies_.
  leuer, _liefer_, _rather_.
  leu[z]e, _laughed_.
  leven, 111, _lawn_.
  levin, _lightning_.
  ley-land, _lea-land_, _not ploughed_.
  licht, _light_.
  lichted, _lighted_.
  lift, _air_.
  likes, _dead bodies_.
  lingcam, 148, _body_, =leccam?
  linger, _longer_.
  link, _walk briskly_; _arm in arm_.
  lire, _face_, _countenance_.
  lith, 275, _supple_, _limber_.
  lithe, _listen_.
  lodlye, _loathly_.
  loffe, _love_.
  loof, _hollow of the hand_.
  loot, _bow_.
  loot, _let_.
  loun, _loon_.
  louted, _bowed_.
  lown, _lone_.
  low[z]he, _laughed_, _smiled_.
  luifsomely, _lovingly_.
  luppen, _leapt_.
  lygge, _lay_
  lyggande, _lying_.
  lyle, _little_.
  lystnys, _listen_.
  lyth, _member_, _limb_.

  mae, _more_.
  maen, _moan_.
  maik, _mate_.
  makane, _making_.
  mane, _moan_.
  mansworn, _perjured_.
  marrow, _mate_.
  maste, _most_, _greatest_.
  maun, _must_.
  maunna, _may not_.
  mawys, mavis, _singing thrush_.
  may, _maid_.
  medill-erthe, _earth_, _the upper-world_.
  mekill, _great_, _large_.
  mell, _mallet_.
  meloude, _melody_.
  mensked, 276, _honored_.
  menyde, _moaned_.
  merks, _marks_.
  merk-soot, 274, _mark-shot_, _distance between bow-marks_.--Finlay.
  merrys, _marrest_.
  mese, _mess_, _meal_.
  micht, _might_.
  middle-eard, the _upper world_, placed between the nether regions and
      the sky.
  minded, _remembered_.
  minion, _fine_, _elegant_.
  mirk, _dark_.
  mith, _might_.
  mode, _passion_, _energy_.
  mody, _courageous_.
  mold, mould, _earth_, _ground_.
  montenans, _amount_.
  more, _greater_.
  most, _greatest_.
  moth, _might_.
  mother-naked, _naked as at one's birth_.
  mouthe, _might_.
  Mungo, St., _St. Kentigern_.
  my lane, _alone_.
  mykel, _much_.

  na, _not_;
    namena, _name not_, _&c._
  nay, _denial_.
  neist, _next_.
  newfangle, 9, (_trifling_, _inconstant_), _light_, _loose_.
  niest, _next_, _nearest_, _close_.
  noth, nouth, _not_.
  nouther, noyther, _neither_.

  on, _in_.
  on ane, _anon_.
  one, _on_, _in_.
  onie, _any_.
  or, _ere_, _before_.
  orfare, 99, _embroidery_.
  Oryence, _Orient_.
  oure, _over_.
  over one, 23, _in a company_, _together?_ See Jamieson's _Scottish
      Dictionary_, in v. ouer ane.
  owre, _over_, _too_.
  owreturn, _refrain_.

  pae, _peacock_.
  paines, _penance_.
  pall, _rich cloth_.
  palmer, _pilgrim_.
  papeioyes, _popinjays_.
  parde, _par dieu_.
  pautit, _paw_, _beat with the foot_.
  pay, 237, _pleasure_, _satisfaction_.
  paye, 104, _content_.
  payetrelle, 99, (otherwise, patrel, poitrail, pectorale, &c.)
      _a steel plate for the protection of a horse's chest_.
  payrelde, _apparelled_.
  perde, _par dieu_.
  perelle, _pearl_.
  pile, 260, _down_, sometimes _tender leaves_.
  plas, 19, _place_, _palace_.
  ply[z]t, _plight_, _promise_.
  poterner, 8, _pouch_, _purse_. _Rightly corrected by Percy from_
      poterver. _See_ pautonniere, pontonaria, _and_ pantonarius, _in
      Henschel's ed. of Ducange_.
  pou, _pull_.
  prest, _priest_.
  prieve, _prove_.
  prink'd, prinn'd, _adorned_, _drest up_, _made neat_.
  pristly, _earnestly_.
  propine, _gift_.

  raches, _scenting hounds_.
  radde, _quick_, _quickly_.
  rair, _roar_.
  rashing, _striking like a boar_.
  rathely, _quickly_.
  raught, _reached_.
  rauine, _beasts of chase_, _prey_.
  redd, 22, _explained_.
  rede, _counsel_.
  reekit, 299, _steamed_.
  reele bone, 99, _an unknown material, of which saddles, especially, are
      in the romances said to be made_; _called variously_, rewel-bone,
      (_Cant. Tales_, 13, 807,) rowel-bone, reuylle-bone, _and_
      (_Young Bekie_, vol. iv. 12) royal-bone.
  reet, _root_.
  reme, _kingdom_.
  renninge, _running_.
  repreve, _reprove_, _deride_.
  rewe, _take pity_.
  ridand, _riding_.
  rived, 233, (_arrived_,) _travelled_.
  rought, route, rowte, _rout_, _band_, _company_.
  routh, _plenty_.
  row, _roll_, _wrap_.
  rown-tree, _mountain-ash_.
  rudd, _complexion_.
  rybybe, _kind of fiddle_.
  ryn, _run_.
  rysse, _rise_.

  safe-guard, _a riding-skirt_.
  saghe, _saw_.
  saikless, _guiltless_.
  sained, _crossed_, _consecrated_.
  sall, _shall_.
  same, 25, _some_, _each_.
  sark, _shirt_.
  sathe, _sooth_, _truth_.
  saw, _saying_, _tale_.
  sawtrye, _psaltery_.
  scathe, _damage_.
  schane, _shone_.
  scho, _she_.
  schone, _shoes_.
  scort, _short_.
  sculd, _should_.
  seannachy, _genealogist, bard, or story-teller_.
  seck, _sack_.
  sekirlye, _truly_.
  selle, _saddle_.
  senne, _since_.
  sere, _sore_.
  seres, _sires_, _sirs_.
  sey, 18, v. 29, _saw_.
  share, 193, _slip_, _strip_.
  shathmont, 126, [A. Sax. scaeftmund,] _a measure from the top of the
      extended thumb to the utmost part of the palm, six inches_.
  shee, 166, _shoe_.
  sheede, _spill_.
  sheeld-bones, _blade-bones_, _shoulder-blades_.
  sheen, _bright_.
  sheen, _shoes_.
  sheep's-silver, _mica_.
  shent, _injured_, _abused_; 48, _shamed_.
  sheugh, _furrow_, _ditch_.
  sic, _such_.
  sichin', _sighing_.
  sicken, _such_.
  skaith, _harm_.
  skaith, [qy. skail?] 136, _save_, _keep innocent of_.
  skill, but a, 371, _only reasonable?_
  skinked, _poured out_.
  sky sett in, 262, for _sunset_ or _evening_.
  skyll, _reason_, _manner_, _matter_.
  slae, _sloe_.
  slawe, _slain_.
  slichting, _slighting_.
  smert, _quickly_.
  snell, _quick_, _keen_.
  solace, solas, _recreation_, _sport_.
  sooth, soth, _truth_;
    sothely, _truly_.
  soth, 276, _sweet_.
  soun, _sound_.
  speed, 11, _fare_.
  spier, _ask_.
  spylle, _destroy_.
  stappin', 148, _stopping_.
  stark, _strong_.
  start, _started_.
  stefly, _thickly_.
  stered, _guided_.
  stern light, 112, _light of stars_.
  stiffe, 29, _strong_, _stout_.
  stinted, _stopped_.
  store, _big_, _strong_.
  stown, _stolen_.
  stowre, _strong_, _brave_.
  straiked, _stroaked_.
  strak, _struck_.
  stratlins, 183, _straddlings?_
  streek, _stretch_.
  sture, 155, _big_, _strong_.
  stythe, _stead_, _place_.
  suire, _neck_.
  suld, _should_.
  swick, _blame_.
  swilled, 242, _shook, as in rinsing_.
  swoghyne, 103, _soughing_.
  swylke, _such_.
  syde, _long_.
  syen, _since_.
  syke, _rivulet_, _marshy bottom_.
  sykerly, sykerlyke, _certainly_, _truly_.
  syne, _then_.
  syth, _times_.
  sythen, _since_.

  tabull dormounte, 19, _standing table_, _the fixed table at the end
      of the hall_. (?)
  tae, _toe_.
  taiken, _token_.
  tee, _to_.
  teind, _tithe_.
  tene, _grief_, _sorrow_, _loss_, _harm_.
  tente, _attention_, _heed_;
    takis gude tente, _give good attention to_.
  tett, 109, _lock_ [_of hair._]
  thae, _those_.
  than, _then_
  thar, _where_.
  thar, 275, _it needs_.
  then, _than_.
  think lang, _to be weary_, _impatient_.
  thir, _these_, _those_.
  tho, _then_.
  thoghte, _seemed_.
  thoth, thouch, thouth, _though_.
  thought lang, _seemed long_; _grew weary_, _felt ennui_.
  thouth, 274, _seemed_.
  throw, _short time_, _while_.
  thrubchandler, 237?
  tide, _time_.
  till, _to_.
  tirled at the pin, _trilled, or rattled, at the door-pin, or latch,
      to obtain admission_.
  tither, _the other_.
  tod, _fox_.
  toute, 22. See Chaucer.
  touting, _tooting_.
  travayle, _labor_.
  traye, 104, _suffering_. [dree?]
  tree, _wood_, _staff_.
  trew, _trow_.
  tryst, _appointment_, _assignation_.
  twal, _twelve_.
  twan, _twined_.
  twine, _part_, _deprive of_.
  tyde, _time_.
  tyte, _promptly_, _quick_.

  unco, _strangely_, _very_.

  vanes, _flags_.
  venerye, _hunting_.
  vent, _went_.
  verament, _truly_.
  villanye, vilony, _disgrace_.
  vntill, _unto_.
  vones, (wones,) _dwellest_.
  vytouten, _without_.

  wa', _wall_.
  wace, _wax_.
  wad, _pledge_.
  wad, 212, _waded_.
  wadded, 9, _woad-colored_, _blue_.
  wadna, _would not_.
  wae, waefu', waesome, _sorrowful_, _sad_.
  waif, _straying_.
  wald, _would_.
  walker, 10, _fuller_.
  wall-wight men, 176, _picked_ (waled) _strong men_, _warriors_:
      see vol. vi., p. 220, v. 15.
  wan afore, 255, _came before_.
  wane, _dwelling_.
  war, _where_.
  ware of, to be, _to perceive_.
  warld's maike, 264, _companion for life_.
  warluck, _a wizard_, _a man in league with the devil_.
  warsled, _wrestled_, _struggled_.
  warwolf, _werwolf_, _manwolf_.
  wat, _wet_.
  waught, _draught_.
  wauking, _walking_.
  waylawaye, _alas_.
  wee, _little_.
  weiest, 254, [Jamieson,] _saddest_, _darkest_.
  weird, _fate_.
  weird, _destine_.
  wend, _weened_.
  wer, were, _war_.
  wern, _refuse_.
  werre, _worse_.
  werryed, _worried_.
  wesch, _wash_.
  wete, weten, _knowing_.
  whareto, _wherefore_.
  wharfrae, _whence_.
  whereas, _where_.
  wi, _with_.
  wicht, _strong_, _nimble_,
  wide, 199, _wade_.
  widershins, _the contrary way_, _the way contrary to the course
      of the sun_.
  wide-whare, _widely_, _far and near_.
  wierd, _fate_.
  wight, _strong_, _active_, _nimble_.
  wilder'd, _carried astray_.
  win, _go to_, _attain_;
    win up, _get up_.
  win, _rescue_.
  wind blows in your glove, 67?
  winna, _will not_.
  wistna, _knew not_.
  wit, _know_, _knowledge_.
  wittering, _information_.
  witti, _intelligible_.
  wodewale, _woodpecker_.
  woe, _sad_.
  won, _dwell_.
  wonige, 275, [adj. qy. woning?] _dwelling_.
  wood, _mad_.
  worth, 276, _become_, _be the result_.
  worthy, I were, 26, _it would become me_.
  wow, _exclamation of astonishment or grief_.
  wpe, _up_.
  wrebbe, 98; _wrebbe and wrye_, _turn and twist_?
  wrought, 240, for raught, _reached_.
  wrucked up, 240, _thrown up_.
  wrye, 98, _wrebbe and wrye_, _turn and twist_?
  wud, _wood_.
  wull, 253, _wandering in ignorance of one's course_, _lost in error_,
      _bewildered_.
  wylos, _willow_.
  wyndouten, _without_.
  wyne-berye, _grape_.
  wysse, _wise_.
  wyt, _with_.
  wyte, 136, _blame_.
  wyth, 276, _wight_, _agile_.
  wytouten, _without_.

  yard, _staff_.
  yat, _that_.
  yate, _gate_.
  y-born, _born_.
  y-doon, _done_.
  ychon, _each one_.
  yeen, 274, _against_, _towards_.
  ye'se, _ye shall_, _will_.
  yestreen, _yesterday_.
  yett, _gate_
  ylk, _each_.
  yod, _went_.
  yone, _yon_.
  yyng, _young_.

  zede, _went_.
  zonge, _young_. &c.

  [z]e, _ye_.
  [z]ede, _went_.
  [z]it, _yet_. &c.