CHAPTER IV

TORPIDS

  "Again we rush across the slush,
    A pack of breathless faces,
  And charge and fall, and see the ball
    Fly whizzing through the bases."


The remainder of the term slipped away without further accident or
incident.  Apart from the preparation of work, John saw little of
Scaife or Egerton.  The Fifth nodded to him in a friendly fashion when
he passed them in the street, and, greater kindness on their part, left
him alone.  Possibly, Lawrence had said a word to Lovell.  Such leisure
as John enjoyed (a new boy at Harrow has not much) he spent with the
devoted Fluff.  Desmond and Scaife walked together on Sunday
afternoons.  But the fact that Desmond seemed to be vanishing out of
his horizon made no difference to John's ever-increasing affection for
him.  Very humbly he worshipped at a distance.  On clear, dry days
Fluff and he would climb to the top of the wall of the squash
racquet-courts to see Scaife and Desmond play a single.  They were
extraordinarily well-matched in strength, activity, and skill.  John
noticed, however, that the Demon lost his temper when he lost a game,
whereas Caesar only laughed.  Somehow John divined that the Demon was
making the effort of his life to secure Desmond's friendship.  And
Caesar had ideals, standards to which the Demon pretended to attain.
Good simple John made sure that Caesar would elevate the Demon to his
plane, that evil would be exorcised by good.  Only in his dreams did
the Demon have the advantage.

Just before the end of the term, Caesar said to him--

"After all, I'm jolly glad I'm coming into your House, because the old
Demon is such a ripper; and he and I have been talking things over.
He's as mad keen as I am about games, and although the Manorites have
not played in a cock-house match at cricket or footer for years, still
there is a chance for us at Torpids next term.  You'll play, Verney.
You've improved a lot, so the Demon says, and he'll be captain.  Then
there are the sports.  If only Dirty Dick could be knocked on the head,
the Manor might jump to the front again."

"It will," said John.

When the School reassembled after Christmas, Desmond entered the Manor,
and found himself with Scaife in a two-room.  A civil note from the man
of millions had arranged this.  To John was given a two-room, also,
with the Duffer as stable companion.  Fluff remained in No. 15.  The
Duffer had got his remove from the Top Shell into John's form.  Scaife
and Desmond were elevated into the Upper Remove.  It followed,
therefore, that Scaife and Desmond prepared work in their own room, the
Caterpillar joining the Duffer and John.  Thus it will be seen that,
although Desmond had become a Manorite, he was, practically speaking,
out of John's orbit.

The Caterpillar had now been three years in the school, and he governed
himself accordingly.  He put on a "bar-maid" [1] collar and spent much
time on the top step of the boys' entrance to the Manor.  No mere
two-year-old presumed to occupy this sacred spot.  Had he dared to do
so, the Caterpillar would have made things very sultry for him.  Also,
he informed the Duffer and John that, by virtue of his position, he
proposed to prepare no work at all.  Each "con" was divided into two
equal parts: the Duffer "mugged" up one; John the other.  Then the
Caterpillar would be summoned, and glean the harvest.  The Duffer had a
crib or two, but the Caterpillar forbade their use.

"You kids," said he, "ought not to use 'Bohns.'  Besides, it's
dangerous."

The Caterpillar's deportment and coolness filled John and the Duffer
with respect and admiration.  The master in charge of the Lower Remove
happened to be short-sighted.  The Caterpillar took shameful advantage
of this.  At repetitions, for instance, he would read Horace's odes off
a torn-out page concealed in the palm of his hand, or--if
practicable--pin the page on to the master's desk.

He had genius for extricating himself (and others) out of what boys
call tight places.  One anecdote, well known to the Lower School and
repeated as proof of the Caterpillar's masterly methods, may serve to
illustrate the sort of influence Egerton wielded.  When he was in the
Fourth, his form met in the Old Schools in a room not far from that
august chamber used by the Head Master and Upper Sixth.  One day, the
master in charge of the form happened to be late.  The small boys in
the passage celebrated his absence with dance and song.  When the
belated man arrived, a monitor awaited him.  The Head Master presented
his compliments to Mr. A---- and wished to learn the names of the boys
who had created such a scandalous disturbance.  Mr. A---- invited the
roysterers to give up their names under penalties of extra school.
Hateful necessity!  Silence succeeded.  A---- grew irate.  The monitor
tried to conceal a smile.

"Any boy who was making any noise at all--stand up."

The Caterpillar rose slowly, long and thin, spick and span.

"If you please, sir," said he, "I was _whispering_!"

A----'s sense of humour was tickled.

"My compliments to the Head Master," said he, "and please tell him that
I find, on careful inquiry, that Egerton was--whispering."

A shout of laughter from Olympus proclaimed that the message had been
delivered.  The Caterpillar had saved the situation.

John became a disciple of this accomplished young gentleman and tried
to imitate him.  For Egerton represented, faithfully enough, traditions
to which John bowed the knee.  Upon any point of schoolboy honour his
authority ruled supreme.  He told the truth among his peers; he loathed
obscenity; he disliked and condemned bad language.

"The best men don't swear much," he would say.  "It's doosid bad form.
I allow myself a 'damn' or two, nothing more.  My great-grandfather,
who was one of the Regency lot, was known as Cursing Egerton, but
nowadays we leave that sort of thing to bargees."

Quite unconsciously, John assimilated the Caterpillar's axioms.

"We're not sent here at enormous expense to learn only Latin and Greek.
At Harrow and Eton one is licked into shape for the big things:
diplomacy, politics, the Services.  One is taught manners, what?  I'm
not a marrying sort of man, but if I do have sons I shall send 'em
here, even if I have to pinch a bit."

This was the side of Egerton which appealed so strongly to John.  The
Caterpillar was an Harrovian to the core, like the Duffer and Caesar
Desmond.  He deplored the increasing predominance of sons of very rich
men.  And he anathematized Harrovian fathers who were persuaded by
Etonian wives to send their sons to the Plain instead of to the Hill.
That some of the famous Harrow families, who owed so much to the
School, should forsake it, seemed to Egerton the unpardonable sin.

During this term, regretfully must it be recorded that John scamped his
"prep" and "ragged" in form whenever a suitable chance presented
itself.  The Duffer and he bribed a "Chaw" [2] to throw gravel against
the windows of the room where the boys were supposed to be mastering
the problems of Euclid and algebra.  The "tique" [3] master had been
Third Wrangler, but he couldn't tackle his Division properly.  Upon
this occasion the "chaw" created such a disturbance that (on audacious
demand) leave was granted to the Duffer and John to capture the
offender.  The young rascals pursued the "chaw" as far as the
Metropolitan Station, and presented that conscientious youth with
another sixpence.  Then it occurred to John that it might be expedient
to capture some bogus prisoner; so by means of talk, sugared with
chocolates, they persuaded a little girl to impersonate the thrower of
gravel.  The little girl, carefully coached in her part, was led to the
Wrangler, but stage-fright made her burst into tears at the critical
moment.  Somehow or other the truth leaked out; the Duffer and John
were sent up to the Head Master and "swished."  Each collected a few
twigs of the birch, carefully preserved to this day.

Meantime, the Torpid house-matches were coming on, and the School
agreed, wonderingly, that Dirty Dick's had a chance of being
cock-house.  The fact that the Manor had lost caste brought about this
possibility.  Boys just under fifteen found room at the Manor when
other houses were full.  All the Manorites in the Shell and Removes
were fellows who had come to Harrow rather over than under fourteen
years of age.

And when the list of the Torpid Eleven was posted, didn't John's heart
boil with pride when he read his own name at the bottom of it?

The Manor won the first and the second of the matches.  Then came the
semi-finals with Damer's.  When the teams met in the playing-fields the
difference in the size of the players was remarked.  Damer's Torpids
were small boys, not much bigger than John or the Duffer.  But they had
behind them that stupendous force which is fashioned out of pride,
_esprit de corps_, self-confidence begotten of long-continued success,
and, strongest of all, the conviction that every man-Jack would fight
till he dropped for the honour and glory of the crack house at Harrow.
Not a boy in Damer's team was Scaife's equal as a player, but in
Scaife's strength lay the weakness of the Manorites.  They relied upon
one player; Damer's pinned faith to eleven.

As it happened to be a fine day, the School turned out in force to
witness the match.  Most of the masters were present, and some ladies.
Rutford, however, had business elsewhere.  The School commented upon
his absence with sly smiles and shrugs of the shoulder.  Some of the
Manorites were indifferent; the better sort raged.  The Caterpillar
appeared upon the ground in a faultless overcoat, carrying a large bag
of lemons.  His straw hat was cocked at a slight angle.

"One is really uncommonly obliged to Dirty Dick for staying away," he
told everybody.  "Speaking personally, the mere sight of him is very
upsetting to me.  Keen as one feels about this match, one can't deny
that there is not room in a footer field for Dirty Dick and a
self-respecting person."

None the less, the absence of their house-master had a bad effect upon
the Torpids.  Damer, you may be sure, had come down, prepared to cheer
louder than any boy in his house; Damer, it was whispered, had been
known to shed tears when his house suffered defeat; Damer, in fine,
inspired ardours--a passion of endeavour.

Scaife won the toss and kicked off.

For the first five minutes nothing of interest happened.  Damer's
played collectively; the Manorites rather waited upon the individual.
When Scaife's chance came, so it was predicted, he would go through the
Damer's centre as irresistibly as a Russian battleship cuts through a
fleet of fishing-smacks.

Rutford being absent, Dumbleton, the butler, stood well to the fore.
He never missed a house-match, and no one could guess, looking at his
wooden countenance, how the game was going; for he accepted either
defeat or victory with dignified self-restraint.  A smart bit of work
provoked a bland, "Well played, sir, _very well_ played, sir!" uttered
in the same respectful tone in which he requested Lovell, let us say,
to go to Mr. Rutford's study after prayers.  The fags believed that
"Dumber," who had begun his career as boot-boy at the Manor in the
glorious days of old, had given notice to leave when he learned that
Dirty Dick was about to assume command; but had been prevailed upon to
stay by the promise of an enormous salary.  Nothing disturbed his
equanimity.  On the previous Saturday evening, John had heated the
wrong end of the poker in No. 15, knowing that Dumber's duty
constrained him to march round the House after "lights out," to rake
out any fires that might be still burning.  Snug under his counterpane,
the practical joker awaited, chuckling, a choleric word from the
impassive and impeccable butler.  How did Dumber divine that the poker
was unduly hot and black with soot underneath?  Who can answer that
question?  The fact remains that he seized John's best Sunday trousers
which were laid out on a chair, and holding the poker with these,
accomplished his task without remark or smile.  The trousers had to be
sent to the tailor's to be cleaned.

Not far from Dumber stood a group of small boys, including the unhappy
Fluff--unhappy because he was not playing, despite arduous training
(entirely to please John) and systematic coaching.  His failure meant
further separation from John, whom, it will be remembered, he would
have been allowed to call by his Christian name, had he been included
amongst the Torpids.  Of late, Fluff had not seen much of John, and in
his dark hours he allowed his thoughts to linger, not unpleasantly
sometimes, upon premature death and John's subsequent remorse.

Meantime, Scaife and Desmond were playing a furious game which must
have proved successful had it not been for the admirable steadiness of
the enemy.  Lawrence watched their efforts with compressed lips and
frowning brows.  He knew--who better?--that his cracks were tearing
themselves to tatters; but his protests were drowned by the shrill
cheers of the fags.

"Rutfords--Rutfor-r-r-r-r-ds!  Go it, old Demon!--Jolly well played,
Caesar!--Sky him![4]--Well skied, sir!--Ah-h-h-h!  Well given--well
taken!"

The last, long-drawn-out exclamation proclaimed that "Yards" [5] had
been given to Scaife right in front of Damer's base.  Damer's
retreated; Scaife, with heaving chest, balanced the big ball between
the tips of his fingers.

"Oh-h-h-h-h!"

Scaife had missed an easy shot.  Lawrence could see that the boy was
trembling with disappointment and mortification.  Barbed arrows from
Damer's small boys pierced Manorite hearts.

"Jolly well boshed, Scaife!--Good, kind, old Demon!--Thank you,
Scaife!--" and like derisive approbation rolled from lip to lip.  The
Caterpillar turned to Lovell.

"Showing temper, ain't he?"

"Yes," said Lovell.

"Clever chap," said the Caterpillar, reflectively; "but one is reminded
that a stream can't rise higher than its source.  Not mine that--the
governor's!  Caesar is facing the chaff with a grin."

The game began again.  But soon it became evident that Scaife had lost,
not only his temper, but his head.  He rushed here and there with so
little judgment that the odds amongst the sporting fellows went to six
to four against the Manor.  At the beginning of the game they were six
to four the other way.  And, inevitably, Scaife's wild and furious
efforts unbalanced Desmond's play.  Both boys were out of their proper
places to the confusion of the rest of the team.  Within half an hour
Damer's had scored two bases to nothing.

The Caterpillar distributed halves of lemons.  Lawrence went up to
Scaife.  The captain of the Torpids was standing apart, not far from
Desmond, who was sucking a lemon with a puzzled expression.  Gallant,
sweet-tempered, and always hopeful, Caesar could not understand his
friend's passion of rage and resentment.  With the tact of his race,
however, he held aloof, smiling feebly, because he had sworn to himself
not to frown.  Had he looked to his right, he would have seen John,
also sucking a lemon, but understudying his idol's nonchalant attitude
and smile.  John was sensible of an overpowering desire to fling
himself upon the ground and howl.  Instead he sucked his lemon, stared
at Desmond, and smiled--valiantly.

"Scaife," said Lawrence, gravely, "you're not playing the game."

Scaife scowled.  "I only know I've half killed myself," he muttered.

Lawrence continued in the same steady voice, "Yes; because you missed
an easy base which has happened to me and every other player scores of
times.  Come here, Desmond."

Desmond joined them.  Lawrence's face brightened when he saw hopeful
eyes and a gallant smile.

"You don't despair?"

"We'll knock 'em into smithereens yet."

"That's the Harrow spirit, but temper your determination to win with a
little common sense.  You've overdone it, both of you.  Take my tip:
they'll play up like blazes.  Defend your own base; and then when
they're spent, trample on 'em."

"Thank you," said Desmond.

Scaife nodded sulkily.

None the less he had too great respect for Lawrence's ability and
experience as a captain to disregard his advice.  After the kick-off,
Damer's _did_ play up, and the Manor had to defend its base against
sustained and fierce attack.  Again and again a third base was almost
kicked, again and again superior weight prevailed in the scrimmages.
Within ten minutes Damer's were gasping and weary.  And then, the ball
was forced out of the scrimmage and kicked to the top side, Desmond's
place in the field.  Comparatively fresh, seeing the glorious
opportunity, grasping it, hugging it, Caesar swooped on the ball.  He
had the heels of any boy on the opposite side.  Down the field he sped,
faster and faster, amid the roars of the School, roars which came to
his ears like the deep booming of breakers upon a lee shore.  To many
of those watching him, the sight of that graceful figure, that shining
ardent face, revealing the promise which youth and beauty always offer
to a delighted world, became an ineffaceable memory.  Damer turned to
the Head of his house.

"And Desmond ought to be one of _us_," he groaned.

And now Caesar had passed all forwards.  If he keep his wits a base is
certain.  The full back alone lies between him and triumph.  But this
is the moment, the psychological moment, when one tiny mistake will
prove irrevocable.  The Head of Damer's whispers as much to Damer, who
smiles sadly.

"His father's son will not blunder now," he replies.

Nor does he.  The mistake--for mistake there must be on one side or
t'other--is made by Damer's back.  As the ball rolls halfway between
them, the back hesitates and falters.

One base to two--and eighteen minutes to play!

The second base was kicked by Scaife five minutes later.

By this time the School knew that they were looking on at a cock-house
match, not a semi-final.  It was the wealth of Dives against the
widow's mite that the winner of this match would defeat easily either
of the two remaining houses.  And not a man or boy on the ground could
name with any conviction the better eleven.  The betting languished at
evens.

Moreover, both sides were playing "canny," risking nothing, nursing
their energies for the last furious five minutes.  Damer began to
fidget; then he dropped out of the front rank of spectators.  He
couldn't stand still to see his boys win--or lose.  He paced up and
down behind the fags, who winked at each other.

"Damer's got the needle," they whispered.

Dumbleton, however, stood still; a graven image of High Life below
Stairs.

"What do you think, Dumber?" asked Fluff.

"I think, my lord," replied Dumber, solemnly, "that every minute
improves our chance, but if it goes on much longer," he added
phlegmatically, "I shall fall down dead.  My 'eart's weak, my lord."

This was an ancient joke delivered by Dumber as if it were brand-new,
and received by the fags in a like spirit.

"Bless you, you've got no heart, Dumber.  It's turned into tummy long
ago," or, in scathing accents, "It's not your heart that's out of
whack, Dumber, but your blithering old headpiece.  What a pity you
can't buy a new one!" and so on and so forth.

Very soon, however, this chaff ceased.  Excitement began to shake the
spectators.  They felt it up and down their spinal columns; it formed
itself into lumps in their throats; it gave one or two cramp in the
calves of their legs; It reddened many cheeks and whitened as many
more.  The Caterpillar pulled out his watch.

"Three and a half minutes," he announced in a voice which fell like the
crack of doom upon the silent crowd.  If they could have cheered or
chaffed!  But the absolute equality of the last desperate struggle
prevented any demonstration.  The ball was worried through a scrimmage,
escaped to the right, slid out to the left, only to be returned whence
it came.  It seemed as if both sides were unable to kick it, and when
kicked it seemed to refuse to move as if weighted by the
ever-increasing burden of suspense. . . .

"Now--now's your chance!" yelled the Manorites.

To their flaming senses the ball appeared to be lying, a huge blurred
sphere, upon the muddy grass; and the Elevens were stupidly staring at
it.  The Saints be praised!  Some fellow can move.  Who is it?  The
players, big and little, are so daubed with mud from head to foot as to
be unrecognizable.  Ah-h-h!  It's young Verney.

"Good kid!  Well played--I say, well played, well pla-a-a-a-yed!"

Our John has, it seems, distinguished himself.  He has charged
valiantly into the captain of Damer's at the moment when that
illustrious chief is about to kick the ball to a trusted lieutenant on
the left.  He succeeds in kicking the ball into John's face.  John goes
over backwards; but the ball falls just in front of the Duffer.

"Kick it, Duffer--kick it, you old ass!"

The Duffer kicks it most accurately, kicks it well out to the top side.
Now, can Desmond repeat his amazing performance?  Yes--No--he can't.
The conditions are no longer the same.  Half a dozen fellows are
between him and the Damer base.

Alas!  The Manor is about to receive a second object-lesson upon the
fatuity of trusting to individuals.  Confident in Caesar's ability to
take the ball at least within kicking distance of the base, they have
rushed forward, leaving unguarded their own citadel.  Caesar, going too
fast, misjudges the distance between himself and the back.  A second
later the ball is well on its way to the Manor's base.  The back awaits
it, coolly enough; knowing that Damer's forwards are offside.  Then he
kicks the sodden, slippery ball--hard.  An exclamation of horror bursts
from the Manorites.  Their back has kicked the ball straight into the
hands of the Damerite captain, the steadiest player on the ground.

"_Yards_!"

The chief collects himself for a decisive effort, and then despatches
the ball straight and true for the target.


It passed between the posts within forty-five seconds of time.



[1] The "Barmaid" collar is the double collar, at that time just coming
into fashion.

[2] "Chaw," short for Chawbacon.

[3] "Tique," ab. for arithmetic.  "Tique-beaks" are mathematical
masters.

[4] To "sky," _i.e._ to charge and overthrow.

[5] In the Harrow game a boy may turn and kick the ball into the hands
of one of his own side.  The boy who catches it calls "Yards!" and, the
opposite side withdrawing three yards, the catcher is allowed a free
kick.




CHAPTER V

FELLOWSHIP

"Fellowship is Heaven, and the lack of it is Hell."


John was squelching through the mud, wondering whether his nose was
broken or not, when Lawrence touched his shoulder.

"Never mind, Verney," he said cheerily; "the Manor will be cock-house
at Torpids next year, and I venture to prophesy that you'll be Captain."

"Ob, thanks, Lawrence," said John.

But, much as he appreciated this tribute from the great man, and much
as it served to mitigate the pangs of defeat, a yet happier stroke of
fortune was about to befall him.  Desmond, who always walked up from
the football field with Scaife, conferred upon John the honour of his
company.

"Where's Scaife?" said John.

"The Demon is demoniac," said Desmond.  "He's lost his hair, and he
blames me.  Well, I did my best, and so did he, and there's no more to
be said.  It's a bore that we shall be too old to play next year.  I
told the Demon that if we had to be beaten, I would sooner take a
licking from Damer's than any other house; and he told me that he
believed I wanted 'em to win.  When a fellow's in that sort of blind
rage, I call him dotty, don't you?"

"Yes," said John.

"You played jolly well, Verney; I expect Lawrence told you so."

"He did say something decent," John replied.

The Caterpillar joined them as they were passing through the stile.
"We should have won," he said deliberately, "if the Demon hadn't
behaved like a rank out-rider."

"Scaife is my pal," said Desmond, hotly.

The Caterpillar shrugged his shoulders, and held high his well-cut
aquiline nose, as he murmured--

"One doesn't pretend to be a Christian, but as a gentleman one accepts
a bit of bad luck without gnashing one's teeth.  What?  That Spartan
boy with the fox was a well bred 'un, you take my word for it.  Scaife
isn't."

The Caterpillar joined another pair of boys before Desmond could reply.
John looked uncomfortable.  Then Desmond burst out with Irish
vehemence--

"Egerton is always jawing about breeding.  It's rather snobbish.  I
don't think the worse of Scaife because his grandfather carried a hod.
The Egertons have been living at Mount Egerton ever since they left
Mount Ararat, but what have they done?  And he ought to make allowances
for the old Demon.  He was simply mad keen to win this match, and he
has a temper.  You like him, Verney, don't you?"

John hesitated, realizing that to speak the truth would offend the one
fellow in the school whom he wished to please and conciliate.  Then he
blurted out--

"No--I don't."

"You don't?"  Desmond's frank blue eyes, Irish eyes, deeply blue, with
black lashes encircling them, betrayed amazement and curiosity--so John
thought--rather than anger.  "You don't?" he continued.  "Why not?  The
old Demon likes you; he says you got him out of a tight place.  Why
don't you like him, Verney?"

John's mind had to speculate vaguely whether or not Desmond knew the
nature of the tight place--_tight_ was such a very descriptive
adjective--out of which he had pulled Scaife.  Then he said nervously--

"I don't like him because--because he likes--you."

"Likes me?  What a rum 'un you are, Verney!  Why shouldn't he like me?"

"Because," said John, boldly meeting the emergency with the conviction
that he had burnt his ships, and must advance without fear, "because
he's not half good enough for you."

Desmond burst out laughing; the clear ringing laugh of his father,
which had often allayed an incipient mutiny below the gangway, and
charmed aside the impending disaster of a snatch-division.  And it is
on _one's own side_ in the House of Commons that good temper tells
preeminently.

"Not good enough for me!" he repeated.  "Thanks awfully.  Evidently you
have a high opinion of--_me_."

"Yes," said John.

The quiet monosyllable, so soberly, so seriously uttered, challenged
Desmond's attention.  He stared for a moment at John's face--not an
attractive object.  Blood and mud disfigured it.  But the grey eyes met
the blue unwaveringly.  Desmond flushed.

"You've stuck me on a sort of pedestal."  His tone was as serious as
John's.

"Yes," said John.

They were opposite the Music Schools.  The other Manorites had run on.
For the moment they stood alone, ten thousand leagues from Harrow,
alone in those sublimated spaces where soul meets soul unfettered by
flesh.  Afterwards, not then, John knew that this was so.  He met the
real Desmond for the first time, and Desmond met the real John in a
thoroughfare other than that which leads to the Manor, other than that
which leads to any house built by human hands, upon the shining highway
of Heaven.

Shall we try to set down Desmond's feelings at this crisis?  Till now,
his life had run gaily through fragrant gardens, so to speak:
pleasaunces full of flowers, of sweet-smelling herbs, of stately trees,
a paradise indeed from which the ugly, the crude, the harmful had been
rigorously excluded.  Happy the boy who has such a home as was allotted
to Harry Desmond!  And from it, ever since he could remember, he had
received tender love, absolute trust, the traditions of a great family
whose name was part of English history, an exquisite refinement, and,
with these, the gratification of all reasonable desires.  And this
magnificent upbringing shone out of his radiant face, the inexpressible
charm of youth unspotted--white.  Scaife's upbringing, of which you
shall know more presently, had been far different, and yet he, the
cynic and the unclean, recognized the God in Harry Desmond.  He had
not, for instance, told Desmond of the nature of that "tight" place; he
had kept a guard over his tongue; he had interposed his own strong will
between his friend and such attention as a boy of Desmond's
attractiveness might provoke from Lovell senior and the like.  It is
true that Scaife was well aware that without these precautions he would
have lost his friend; none the less, above and beyond this
consciousness hovered the higher, more subtle intuition that the good
in Desmond was something not lightly to be tampered with, something
awe-inspiring; the more so because, poor fellow! he had never
encountered it before.

Desmond stood still, with his eyes upon John's discoloured face.  Not
the least of Caesar's charms was his lack of self-consciousness.  Now,
for the first time, he tried to see himself as John saw him--on a
pedestal.  And so strong was John's ideal that in a sense Desmond did
catch a glimpse of himself as John saw him.  And then followed a rapid
comparison, first between the real and the ideal, and secondly between
himself and Scaife.  His face broke into a smile.

"Why, Verney," he exclaimed, "you mustn't turn me into a sort of Golden
Calf.  And as for Scaife not being good enough for me, why, he's miles
ahead of me in everything.  He's cleverer, better at games, ten
thousand times better looking, and one day he'll be a big power, and I
shall always be a poor man.  Why, I--I don't mind telling you that I
used to keep out of Scaife's way, although he was always awfully civil
to me, because he has so much and I so little."

"He's not half good enough for you," repeated John, with the Verney
obstinacy.  Unwittingly he slightly emphasized the "good."

"Good?  Do you mean 'pi'?  He's not _that_, thank the Lord!"

This made John laugh, and Desmond joined in.  Now they were Harrow boys
again, within measurable distance of the Yard, although still in the
shadow of the Spire.  The Demon described as "pi" tickled their ribs.

"You must learn to like the Demon," Desmond continued, as they moved
on.  Then, as John said nothing, he added quickly, "He and I have made
up our minds not to try for a remove this term.  You see, next term is
the jolliest term of the year--cricket and 'Ducker' [1] and Lord's.
And we shall know the form's swat thoroughly, and have time to enjoy
ourselves.  You'll be with us.  Your remove is a 'cert'--eh?"

John beamed.  He had made certain that Caesar would be in the Third
Fifth next term and hopelessly out of reach.

"Oh yes, I shall get my remove.  So will the Caterpillar."

"Hang the Caterpillar," said Desmond.

"He'd ask for a silken rope, as Lord Ferrers did," said John, with one
of his unexpected touches of humour.  Again Desmond bent his head in
the gesture John knew so well, and laughed.

"I say, Verney, you _are_ a joker.  Well, the old Caterpillar's a good
sort, but he's not fair to Scaife.  Here we are!"

They ran upstairs to "tosh" and change.  John found the Duffer just
slipping out of his ducks.  He looked at John with a rueful grin.

"Are you going to chuck me?" he asked.

"Chuck you?"

"Fluff says you've chucked him.  He was in here a moment ago to ask if
your nose was squashed.  I believe the silly little ass thinks you the
greatest thing on earth."

"I don't chuck anybody," said John, indignantly.  And he made a point
of asking Fluff to walk with him on Sunday.

After the Torpid matches the school settled down to train (more or
less) for the athletic sports.  John came to grief several times at
Kenton brook, essaying to jump it at places obviously--as the Duffer
pointed out--beyond his stride.  The Duffer and he put their names down
for the house-handicaps, and curtailed their visits to the Creameries.
After this self-denial it is humiliating to record that neither boy
succeeded in winning anything.  Caesar won the house mile handicap;
Scaife won the under sixteen high jump--a triumph for the Manor; and
Fluff, the despised Fluff, actually secured an immense tankard, which
one of the Sixth offered as a prize because he was quite convinced that
his own particular pal would win it.  The distance happened to be half
a mile.  Fluff was allowed an enormous start, and won in a canter.

The term came to an end soon after these achievements, and John spent a
week of the holidays at White Ladies, the Duke of Trent's Shropshire
place.  Here, for the first time, he saw that august and solemn
personage, a Groom of the Chambers, with carefully-trimmed whiskers, a
white tie, a silky voice, and the appearance of an arch-deacon.  This
visit is recorded because it made a profound impression upon a plastic
mind.  John had never sat in the seats of the mighty.  Verney Boscobel
was a delightful old house, but it might have been put, stables and
all, into White Ladies, and never found again.  Fluff showed John the
famous Reynolds and Gainsborough portraits, the Van Dycks and Lelys,
the Romneys and Richmonds.  Fair women and brave men smiled or frowned
at our hero wherever he turned his wondering eyes.  After the first
tour of the great galleries, he turned to his companion.

"I say," he whispered solemnly, "some of 'em look as if they didn't
like my calling you--Fluff."

"I wish you'd call me Esmé."

"All right," said John, "I will; and--er--although you didn't get into
the Torpids, you can call me--John."

"Oh, John, thanks awfully."

Ponies were provided for the boys to ride, and they shot rabbits in the
Chase.  Also, they appeared at dinner, a tremendous function, and were
encouraged by some of the younger guests to spar (verbally, of course)
with the duke's Etonian sons.  Fluff looked so much stronger and
happier that his parents, delighted with their experiment, were
inclined to cry up the Hill, much to the exasperation of the dwellers
in the Plain.

When he left White Ladies John had learned one valuable lesson.  His
sense of that hackneyed phrase, _noblesse oblige_, the sense which
remains nonsense with so many boys (old and young), had been quickened.
Little more than a child in many ways, he realized, as a man does, the
true significance of rank and wealth.  The Duke of Trent had married a
pleasure-loving dame; White Ladies was essentially a pleasure-house, to
which came gladly enough the wit and beauty of the kingdom.  And yet
the duke, not clever as compared to his guests, not even good-looking
as compared to the splendid gentlemen whom Van Dyck and Lely had
painted, _undistinguished_, in fine, in everything save rank and
wealth, worked, early and late, harder than any labourer upon his vast
domain.  And when John said to Fluff, "I say, Esmé, why does the duke
work so beastly hard?" Fluff replied with emphasis, "Why, because he
has to, you know.  It's no joke to be born a duke, and I'm jolly glad
that I'm a younger son.  Father says that he has no amusements, but
plenty of occupation.  Mother says he's the unpaid land-agent of the
Trent property."

John went back to Verney Boscobel, and repeated what Fluff had said, as
his own.

"It was simply splendid, mum, like a sort of castle in fairyland and
all that, but I _am_ glad I'm not a duke.  And I expect that even an
earl has a lot of beastly jobs to do which never bother _us_."

"Oh, you've found that out, have you, John?  Well, I hesitated when the
invitation came; but I'm glad now that you went."

"Yes; and it's ripping to be home again."


The summer term began in glorious sunshine; and John forgot that he
owned an umbrella.  The Caterpillar and he had achieved their remove,
but the unhappy Duffer was left behind alone with the hideous necessity
of doing his form's work by himself.  The boys occupied the same rooms,
but John prepared his Greek and Latin with Scaife, Caesar, and the
Caterpillar; whom he was now privileged to call by their nick-names.
They began to call him John, hearing young Kinloch do so; and then one
day, Scaife, looking up with his derisive smile, said--

"I'm going to call you Jonathan."

"Good," said Desmond.  "All the same, we can't call either the Duffer
or Fluff--David, can we?"

"I was not thinking of Kinloch or Duff," said Scaife, staring hard at
John.  And John alone knew that Scaife read him like a book, in which
he was contemptuously amused--nothing more.  After that, as if Scaife's
will were law, the others called John--Jonathan.

Very soon, the sun was obscured by ever-thickening clouds, John
happened to provoke the antipathy of a lout in his form known as Lubber
Sprott.  Sprott began to persecute him with a series of petty insults
and injuries.  He accused him of "sucking up" to a lord, of putting on
"lift" because he was the youngest boy in the Upper Remove, of
kow-towing to the masters--and so forth.  Then, finding these repeated
gibes growing stale, he resorted to meaner methods.  He upset ink on
John's books, or kicked them from under his arm as he was going up to
the New Schools.  He put a "dringer" [2] into the pocket of John's
"bluer." [3]  He pinched him unmercifully if he found himself next to
John in form, knowing that John would not betray him.  When occasion
offered he kicked John.  In short, he was successful in taking all the
fun and sparkle out of the merrie month of May.

Finally, Caesar got an inkling of what was going on.

"Is Sprott ragging you?" he asked point-blank.

"Ye-es," said John, blushing.  "It's n-nothing," he added nervously.
"He'll get tired of it, I expect."

"I saw him kick you," said Desmond, frowning.  "Now, look here,
Jonathan, you kick him; kick him as hard as ever you can where, where
he kicks you--eh?  And do it to-morrow in the Yard, at nine Bill, when
everybody is looking on.  You can dodge into the crowd; but if I were
you I'd kick him at the very moment he gets into line, and then he
can't pursue.  And if he does pursue--which I'll bet you a bob he
don't, he'll have to tackle you and me."

"I'll do it," said John.

Next day, a whole holiday, at nine Bill, both Caesar and John were
standing close to the window of Custos' den, waiting for Lubber Sprott
to appear.  While waiting, an incident occurred which must be duly
chronicled inasmuch as it has direct bearing upon this story.  Only the
week before Rutford had come up to the Yard late for Bill, he being the
master whose turn it was to call over.  Such tardiness, which happens
seldom, is reckoned as an unpardonable sin by Harrow boys.  Briefly it
means that six hundred suffer from the unpunctuality of one.
Therefore, when Rutford appeared, slightly flushed of countenance and
visibly annoyed, the School emphasized their displeasure by derisive
cheers.  Rutford, ever tactless where boys were concerned, was unwise
enough to make a speech from the steps condemning, in his usual
bombastic style, a demonstration which he ought to have known he was
quite powerless to punish or to prevent.  When he had finished, the
School cheered more derisively than before.  After Bill, he left the
Yard, purple with rage and humiliation.

Upon this particular morning, one of the younger masters, Basil Warde,
was calling Bill.  The School knew little of Warde, save that he was an
Old Harrovian in charge of a Small House, and that his form reported
him--queer.  He had instituted a queer system of punishments, he made
queer remarks, he looked queer: in fine, he was generally regarded as a
radical, and therefore a person to be watched with suspicion by boys
who, as a body, are intensely conservative.  He was of a clear red
complexion with lapis-lazuli blue eyes, that peculiar blue which is the
colour of the sea on a bright stormy day.  The Upper School knew that,
as a member of the Alpine Club, Warde had conquered half a dozen
hitherto unconquerable peaks.

Into the Yard and into this book Warde comes late.  As he hurried to
his place, the School greeted him as they had greeted Rutford only the
week before.  If anything, the demonstration was slightly more hostile.
That Bill should be delayed twice within ten days was unheard-of and
outrageous.  When the hoots and cheers subsided, Warde held up his
hand.  He smiled, and his chin stuck out, and his nose stuck up at an
angle familiar to those who had scaled peaks in his company.  In
silence, the School awaited what he had to say, hoping that he might
slate them, which would afford an excuse for more ragging.  Warde,
guessing, perhaps, the wish of the crowd, smiled more genially than
before.  Then, in a loud clear voice, he said--

"I beg pardon for being late.  And I thank you for cheering me.  I
haven't been cheered in the Yard since the afternoon when I got my
Flannels."

A deafening roar of applause broke from the boys.  Warde might be
queer, but he was a good sort, a gentleman, and, henceforward, popular
with Harrovians.

He began to call over as Lubber Sprott neared the place whose Desmond
and John awaited him.  The Lubber took up his position near the boys,
turning a broad back to them.  He stood with his hands in his pockets,
talking to another boy as big and as stupid as himself.  The Lubber, it
may be added, ought to have worn "Charity" tails, but he had not
applied for permission to do so.  He was fat and gross rather than
tall, and certainly too large for his clothes.

"Now," said Caesar.

John measured the distance with his eye, as Caesar thoughtfully nudged
other members of the Upper Remove.  John had room for a very short run.
The Lubber was swaying backwards and forwards.  John timed his kick,
which for a small boy he delivered with surprising force, so accurately
that the Lubber fell on his face.  The boys looking on screamed with
laughter.  The Lubber, picking himself up (John dodged into the crowd,
who received him joyfully) and glaring round, encountered the
contemptuous face of Desmond.

"Let me have a shot," said Caesar.

The Lubber advanced, spluttering with rage.

"Where is he--where is he, that infernal young Verney?"

By this time fifty boys at least were interested spectators of the
scene.  Desmond stood square in the Lubber's path.

"You like to kick small boys," said Caesar, in a very loud voice.  "I'm
small, half your size, why don't you kick me?"

The Lubber could have crushed the speaker by mere weight; but he
hesitated, and the harder he stared at Desmond the less he fancied the
job of kicking him.  Quality confronted quantity.

"Kick me," said Desmond, "if--if you dare, you big, hulking coward and
cad!"

"Come on, Lubber, get into line!" shouted some boy.

Sprott turned slowly, glancing over his vast, fat shoulder to guard
against further assault.  Then he took his place in the line, and
passed slowly out of the Yard and out of these pages.  He never
persecuted John again.[4]

Not yet, however, was the sun to shine in John's firmament.  As the
days lengthened, as June touched all hearts with her magic fingers,
insensibly relaxing the tissues and warming the senses, John became
more and more miserably aware that, in the fight between Scaife and
himself for the possession of Desmond, the odds were stupendously
against him.  Truly the Demon had the subtlety of the serpent, for he
used the failings which he was unable to hide as cords wherewith to
bind his friend more closely to him.  When the facts, for instance, of
what had taken place in Lovell's room came to Desmond's ears, he denied
fiercely the possibility of Scaife, his pal, making a "beast" of
himself.  The laughter which greeted his passionate protest sent him
hot-foot to Scaife himself.

"They say," panted Caesar, "that last winter you were dead drunk in
Lovell's room.  I told the beasts they lied."

Scaife's handsome face softened.  Was he touched by Caesar's loyalty?
Who can tell?  Always he subordinated emotion to intelligence: head
commanded heart.

"Perhaps they did," he answered steadily; "and perhaps they didn't.  I
deny nothing; I admit nothing.  But"--his fine eyes, so dark and
piercing, flamed--"Caesar, if I was dead drunk at your feet now, would
you turn away from me, would you chuck me?"

Desmond winced.  Scaife pursued his advantage.

"If you _are_ that sort of a fellow--the Pharisee"--Desmond winced
again--"the saint who is too pure, too holy, to associate with a
sinner, say so, and let us part here--and now.  For I _am_ a--sinner.
You are not a sinner.  Hold hard! let me have my say.  I've always
known that this moment was coming.  Yes, I am a sinner.  And my
governor is a sinner, a hardened sinner.  His father made our pile by
what you would call robbery.  The whole world knows it, and condones
it, because we are so rich.  Even my mother----"

He paused, trembling, white to the lips.

"Don't," said Desmond.  "Please don't."

"You're right.  I won't.  But I'm handicapped on both sides.  It's only
fair that you should know what sort of a fellow you've chosen for a
pal.  And it's not too late to chuck me.  Rutford will put Verney in
here, if I ask him.  And, by God!  I'm in the mood to ask him _now_.
Shall I go to him, Desmond, or shall I stay?"

He had never raised his voice, but it fell upon the sensitive soul of
the boy facing him as if it were a clarion-call to battle.

Desmond sprang forward, ardent, eager, afire with generous
self-surrender.

"Forgive me," he cried.  "Oh, forgive me, because I can't forgive
myself!"

After this breaking of barriers, Scaife took less pains to disguise a
nature which turned as instinctively to darkness as Desmond's to light.
A score of times protest died when Scaife murmured, "There I go again,
forgetting the gulf between us;" and always Desmond swore stoutly that
the gulf, if a gulf did yawn between them, should be bridged by
friendship and hope.  But, insensibly, Caesar's ideals became tainted
by Scaife's materialism.  Scaife, for instance, spent money lavishly
upon "food" and clothes.  So far as a Public Schoolboy is able, he
never denied his splendid young body anything it coveted.  Desmond, too
proud to receive favours without returning them, tried to vie with this
reckless spendthrift, and found himself in debt.  In other ways a keen
eye and ear would have marked deterioration.  John noticed that Caesar
laughed, although he never sneered, at things he used to hold sacred;
that he condemned, as Scaife did, whatever that clever young reprobate
was pleased to stigmatize as narrowminded or intolerant.

Cricket, however, kept them fairly straight.  Each was certain to get
his "cap," [5] if, as Lawrence told them, they stuck to the rigour of
the game.  This was Lawrence's last term.  He had stayed on to play at
Lord's, and when he left Trieve would become the Head of the House--a
prospect very pleasing to the turbulent Fifth.

About the middle of June John suffered a parlous blow.  He was never so
happy as when he was sitting in Scaife's room, cheek by jowl with
Desmond, sharing, perhaps, a "dringer," poring over the same
dictionary.  This delightful intimacy came to a sudden end in this
wise.  The form-master of the Upper Remove happened to be a precisian
in English.  A sure road to his favour was the right use of a word.
The Demon, appreciating this, bought a dictionary of synonyms, and made
a point of discarding the commonplace and obvious, substituting a
phrase likely to elicit praise and marks.  Desmond and John joined in
this hunt of the right word with enthusiasm.

One evening the four boys encountered the simple sentence--"_majoris
pretii quam quod aestimari possit_."

"'Priceless' 'll cover that," said Caesar.

"Or 'inest_ee_mable,'" said the Demon.

The three other boys stared at the Demon, and then at each other.  The
Caterpillar, something of a purist in his way, drawled out--

"One pronounces that 'inestimable.'"

"My father doesn't," said Scaife, hotly.  "I've heard him say
'inesteemable.'"

"No doubt," said Egerton, coldly.  "How does _your_ father pronounce
it, Caesar?"

Desmond said hurriedly, "Oh, 'inestimable;' but what does it matter?"

The Demon sprang up, furious.  "It matters this," he cried.  "I'm
d----d if I'll have Egerton sitting in my room sneering at my governor.
After this he'll do his work in his own room, or I'll do mine in the
passage."

Before Desmond could speak, Scaife had whirled out of the room,
slamming the door.  John looked stupefied with dismay.

The Caterpillar shrugged his shoulders.  Then he said slowly--

"Scaife's father pronounces 'connoisseur' 'connoysure,' and so does
Scaife."

Desmond stood up, flushed and distressed, but emphatic.

"Scaife is right about one thing," ha said.  "He won't sit here like a
cad and listen to Egerton sneering at his father.  I'm very sorry, but
after this we'd better split up.  Verney and you, Egerton; and Scaife
and I."

"Certainly," said the Caterpillar, rising in his turn.

Poor John cast a distracted and imploring glance at Desmond, which
flashed by unheeded.  Then he got up, and followed the Caterpillar out
of the room.  The passage was empty.

The Caterpillar sniffed as if the atmosphere in Scaife's room had been
polluted.

"One has nothing to regret," he remarked.  "Scaife has good points,
and--er--bad.  You've noticed his hands--eh?  _Very_ unfinished!  And
his foot--short, but broad."  The Caterpillar surveyed his long,
slender feet with infinite satisfaction; then he added, with an accent
of finality, "Scaife talks about going into the Grenadiers; but they'll
give him a hot time there, a very hot time.  One is really sorry for
the poor fellow, because, of course, he can't help being a bounder.
What does puzzle me is, why did Caesar want such a fellow for his pal?"

"But he didn't," said John.

"Eh?--what?"

"Scaife wanted Caesar," John explained.  "And I've noticed,
Caterpillar, that whatever Scaife wants he gets."

"He wants breeding, Jonathan, but he'll never get that--never."

After this, John saw but little of Desmond; and Scaife hardly spoke to
him.  Accordingly, much of our hero's time was spent in the company of
the Duffer and Fluff.  The three passed many delightful hours together
at "Ducker."  Armed with buns and chocolate, they would rush down the
hill, bathe, lie about on the grass, eat the buns, and chaff the kids
who were learning to swim.

  "Long, long, in the misty hereafter
    Shall echo, in ears far away,
  The lilt of that innocent laughter,
    The splash of the spray."


During the School matches they spent the afternoons on the Sixth Form
ground, carefully criticizing every stroke.  The theory of the game lay
pat to the tongue, but in practice John was a shocking bungler.  At his
small preparatory school in the New Forest, he had not been taught the
elementary principles of either racquets or cricket; but he had a good
eye, played a capital game of golf, rode and shot well for a small boy.
Fluff, although still delicate, gave promise of being a cricketer as
good, possibly, as his brothers, when he became stronger.

Upon Speech Day John's mother and uncle came down to Harrow, and you
may be sure that John escorted them in triumph to the Manor.  Mrs.
Verney has since confessed that John's expression as she greeted him
surprised and distressed her.  He looked quite unhappy.  And the dear
woman, thinking that he must be in debt, seriously considered the
propriety of tipping him handsomely _in advance_.  A moment later, as
she slipped out of an old and shabby dust-cloak, revealing the
splendours of a dress fresh from Paris, she divined from John's now
radiant face what had troubled him.

"John," she said, "you didn't really think that I was going to shame
you by wearing this dreadful cloak--did you?"

"I wasn't quite sure," John answered; then he burst out, "Mum, you look
simply lovely.  All the fellows will take you for my sister."

And after the great function in Speech-room came the cheering.  How
John's heart throbbed when the Head of the School, standing just
outside the door, proclaimed the illustrious name--

"Three cheers for Mr. John Verney."

And how the boys in the road below cheered, as the little man descended
the steps, hat in hand, bowing and blushing!  Everybody knew that he
was on the eve of departure for further explorations in Manchuria.  He
would be absent, so the papers said, three years at least.  The School
cheered the louder, because each boy knew that they might never see
that gallant face again.

Later in the afternoon a selection of Harrow songs was given in the
Speech-room.  "Five Hundred Faces," as usual, was sung by a new boy,
who is answered, in chorus, by the whole School.  How John recalled his
own feelings, less than a year ago, as he stood shivering upon the bank
of the river, funking the first plunge!  And his uncle, now sitting
beside him, had said that he would soon enjoy himself amazingly--and so
he had!  The new boy began the second verse.  His voice, not a strong
one, quavered shrilly--

  "A quarter to seven!  There goes the bell!
    The sleet is driving against the pane;
    But woe to the sluggard who turns again
  And sleeps, not wisely, but all too well!"


In reply to the weak, timid notes came the glad roar of the School--

  "Yet the time may come, as the years go by,
    When your heart will thrill
    At the thought of the Hill,
  And the pitiless bell, with its piercing cry!"


Ah, that pitiless bell!  And yet because of it one wallowed in Sunday
and whole-holiday "frowsts." [6]  John, you see, had the makings of a
philosopher.  And now the Eleven were grunting "Willow the King."  And
when the last echo of the chorus died away in the great room, Uncle
John whispered to his nephew that he had heard Harrow songs in every
corner of the earth, and that convincing proof of merit shone out of
the fact that their charm waxed rather than waned with the years; they
improved, like wine, with age.

Caesar's father came down with the Duke of Trent.  The duke tipped John
magnificently and asked him to spend his exeat at Trent House, and to
witness the Eton and Harrow match at Lord's from the Trent coach.  John
accepted gratefully enough; but his heart was sore because, just before
the row over that infernal word "inestimable," Caesar had asked John if
he would like to occupy an attic in Eaton Square.  After the row
nothing more was said about the attic; but John would have preferred
bare boards in Eaton Square to a tapestried chamber in Park Lane.

Now, during the whole of this summer term there was much animated
discussion in regard to the rival claims of lines or spots upon the
white waistcoat worn by all self-respecting Harrovians at Lord's.  Upon
this important subject John had betrayed scandalous indifference.
Accordingly, just before the match, the Caterpillar took him aside and
spoke a solemn word.

"Look here," he said; "one doesn't as a rule make personal remarks, but
it's rather too obvious that you buy your clothes in Lyndhurst.  I was
sorry to see that the Duke of Trent was the worst-dressed man at
Speecher; but a duke can look like a tinker, and nobody cares."

"I'd be awfully obliged if you'd tell me what's wrong," said John,
humbly.

"Everything's wrong," said the Caterpillar, decisively.  He looked
critically at John's boots.  "Your boots, for instance--most excellent
boots for wading through the swamps in the New Forest, but quite
impossible in town.  And the 'topper' you wear on Sunday!  Southampton,
you say?  Ah, I thought it was a Verney heirloom.  Now, it wouldn't
surprise me to hear that your mother, who dresses herself quite
charmingly, bought your kit."

"She did," John confessed.

"Just so.  One need say no more.  Now, you come along with me."

They marched down the High Street to the most fashionable of the School
tailors, where John was measured for an Eton jacket of the best, white
waistcoat with blue spots, light bags; while the Caterpillar selected a
new "topper," an umbrella, a pair of gloves, and a tie.

"Be very careful about the bags," said the Caterpillar.  "They are
cutting 'em in town a trifle tighter about the lower leg, but loose
above.  You understand?"

"Perfectly, Mr. Egerton," replied the obsequious snip.  "What we call
the 'tighto-looso' style, sir."

"I don't think they call it that in Savile Row," said the Caterpillar;
"but be careful."

The tailor was assured that he would receive an order properly signed
by Mr. Rutford.  And then John was led to the bootmaker's, and there
measured for his first pair of patent-leathers.  The Caterpillar was so
exhausted by these labours that a protracted visit to the Creameries
became imperative.

"You've always looked like a gentleman," said the Caterpillar, after
his "dringer," "and it's a comfort to me to think that now you'll be
dressed like one."

So John went up to town looking very smart indeed; and Fluff (who had
ordered a similar kit) whispered to John at luncheon that his brothers,
the Etonians, had expressed surprise at the change for the better in
their general appearance.

This luncheon was eaten on the top of the duke's coach, and it happened
that the next coach but one belonged to Scaife's father.  John could
just see Scaife's handsome head, and Caesar sitting beside him.  The
boys nodded to each other, and the Etonians asked questions.  At the
name of Scaife, however, the young Kinlochs curled contemptuous lips.

"Unspeakable bounder, old Scaife, isn't he?" they asked; and the
duchess replied--

"My dears, his cheques are honoured to any amount, even if he isn't."

Her laughter tinkled delightfully; but John reflected that Desmond was
eating the Scaife food and drinking the Scaife wine--all bought with
ill-gotten gold.

Later in the afternoon it became evident that the Scaife champagne was
flowing freely.  To John's dismay, the Harrovians (including Caesar) on
the top of the Scaife coach became noisy.  The Caterpillar and his
father, Colonel Egerton, sauntered up, and were invited by the duke to
rest and refresh themselves.  John was amused to note that the colonel
was even a greater buck than his son.  He quite cut out the poor old
Caterpillar, challenging and monopolizing the attention of all who
beheld him.

"Those boys are makin' the devil of a row," said the colonel, fixing
his eyeglass.  "Ah, the Scaifes!  A man I know dined with them last
week.  He reported everything overdone, except the food.  Their _chef_
is Marcobruno, you know."

Presently, to John's relief, Desmond left the Scaifes and joined the
Trent party, upon whom his gay, radiant face and charming manners made
a most favourable impression.  He laughed at the duchess's stories, and
made love to her quite unaffectedly.  The Etonians looked rather glum,
because their wickets were falling faster than had been expected.
Desmond told the duke, in answer to a question, that his father was in
his seat in the pavilion, with his eyes glued to the pitch.

"He's awfully keen," said Caesar.

"You boys are not so keen as we were," said the duke, nodding
reflectively.

"Oh, but we are, sir--indeed we are," said Caesar.  "Aren't we,
Caterpillar?"

The Caterpillar replied, thoughtfully.  "One bottles up that sort of
thing, I suppose."

"Ah," said the duke, kindly, "if it is the right sort of thing, it's
none the worse for being bottled up."

The boys went to the play that night and enjoyed themselves hugely.
Next day, however, the match ended in a draw.  John was standing on the
top of the coach, very disconsolate, when he saw Desmond beckoning to
him from below.  The expression on Caesar's face puzzled him.

"How can you pal up with those Etonians?" whispered Caesar, after John
had descended.  "Every Eton face I see now I want to hit."  Then he
added, with a smile and a chuckle, "I say, there's going to be a
ruction in front of the Pavvy.  Come on."

A minute later John was in the thick of a very pretty scrimmage between
the Hill and the Plain.  Hats were bashed in; cornflowers torn from
buttonholes; pale-blue tassels were captured; umbrellas broken.
Finally, the police interfered.

"Short, but very, very sweet," said Caesar, panting.

John and he were lamentable objects for fond parents to behold, but the
sense of depression had vanished.  And then Caesar said suddenly--

"By Jove!  I _have_ got a bit of news.  It quite takes the sting out of
this draw."

"What's happened?"

"My governor has been talking with Warde.  Rutford is leaving Harrow."

John gasped.  "That is ripping."

"Isn't it?  But who do you think is coming to us?  Why, Warde himself.
He was at the Manor when it was _the_ house, and the governor says that
Warde will make it _the_ house again.  He's got his work cut out for
him--eh?"

"You bet your life," said John.



[1] "Duck-Puddle," the school bathing-place.

[2] A "Dringer" is composed of the following ingredients: a layer of
strawberries is secreted in sugar and cream at the bottom of a clean
jam-pot; and this receives a decent covering of strawberry ice, which
brings the surface of the dringer and the top edge of the jam-pot into
the same plane.  The whole may be bought for sixpence.  (P. C. T.,
1905.)

[3] A "Bluer" is the blue-flannel jacket worn in the playing fields.
It must be worn buttoned by boys who have been less than three years in
the school.

[4] Small boys are not advised to copy John's tactics.  The victory is
not always to the weak.

[5] The house-cap, only worn by members of the House Cricket Eleven.

[6] Lying in bed in the morning when there is no First School is a
"frowst."  By a subtle law of association, an armchair is also a
"frowst."




CHAPTER VI

A REVELATION

  "Forty years on, when afar and asunder
    Parted are those who are singing to-day,
  When you look back, and forgetfully wonder
    What you were like in your work and your play;
  Then, it may be, there will often come o'er you
    Glimpses of notes like the catch of a song,--
  Visions of boyhood shall float them before you,
    Echoes of dreamland shall bear them along."


Before the end of the summer term, both Desmond and Scaife received
their "caps" and a word of advice from Lawrence.

"There are going to be changes here," said he; "and I wish I could see
'em, and help to bring 'em about.  Now, I'm not given to buttering
fellows up, but I see plainly that the rebuilding of this house depends
a lot upon you two.  It's not likely that you're able to measure your
influence; if you could, there wouldn't be much to measure.  But take
it from me, not a word, not an action of yours is without weight with
the lower boys.  Everything helps or hinders.  Next term there will be
war--to the knife--between Warde and some fellows I needn't name, and
Warde will win.  Remember I said so.  I hope you," he looked hard at
Desmond, "will fight on the right side."

The boys returned to their room, jubilant because the house-cap was
theirs, but uneasy because of the words given with it.  As soon as they
were alone, Scaife said sullenly--

"Does Lawrence expect us to stand in with Warde against Lovell and his
pals?  If he does, he's jolly well mistaken, as far as I'm concerned."

Desmond flushed.  He had spent nearly five terms at Harrow, but only
two at the Manor.  Of what had been done or left undone by certain
fellows in the Fifth he was still in twilight ignorance.  He discerned
shadows, nothing more, and, boylike, he ran from shadows into the
sunlight.  Desmond knew that there were beasts at the Manor.  Had you
forced from him an expression approaching, let us say, definiteness, he
would have admitted that beasts lurked in every house, in every school
in the kingdom.  You must keep out of their way (and ways)--that was
all.  And he knew also that too many beasts wreck a house, as they
wreck a regiment or a nation.

But once or twice within the past few months he had suspected that his
cut-and-dried views on good and evil were not shared by Scaife.  Scaife
confessed to Desmond that the Old Adam was strong in him.  He liked,
craved for, the excitement of breaking the law.  Hitherto, this
breaking of the law had been confined to such offences as smoking or
drinking a glass of beer at a "pub," [1] or using cribs, or, generally
speaking, setting at naught authority.  That Scaife had escaped severe
punishment was due to his keen wits.

Now, when Scaife gave Desmond the unexpurgated history of the row which
so nearly resulted in the expulsion of six boys, Desmond had asked a
question--

"Do you _like_ whisky?  I loathe it."

Scaife laughed before he answered.  Doubtless one reason why he exacted
interest and admiration from Desmond lay in a rare (rare at fifteen)
ability to analyse his own and others' actions.

"I loathe it too," he admitted.  "Really, you know, we drank precious
little, because it is such beastly stuff.  But I liked, we all liked,
to believe that we were doing the correct thing--eh?  And it warmed us
up.  Just a taste made the Caterpillar awfully funny."

"I see."

"Do you see?  I doubt it, Caesar.  Perhaps I shall horrify you when I
tell you that vice interests me.  I used to buy the _Police News_ when
I was a kid, and simply wallow in it.  I told a woman that last Easter,
and she laughed--she was as clever as they make 'em--and said that I
suffered from what the French call _la nostalgie de la boue_; that
means, you know, the homesickness for the gutter.  Rather personal, but
dev'lish sharp, wasn't it?"

"I think she was a beast."

"Not she, she's a sort of cousin; she came from the same old place
herself, that's why she understood.  You don't want to know what goes
on in the slums, but I do.  Why?  Because my grand-dad was born in 'em."

"He pulled himself out by brains and muscles."

"But he went back--sometimes.  Oh yes, he did.  And the governor--I'm
up to some of _his_ little games.  I could tell you----"

"Oh--shut up!" said Caesar, the colour flooding his cheeks.

Upon the last Saturday of the term the School Concert took place.  Few
of the boys in the Manor, and none out of it, knew that John Verney had
been chosen to sing the treble solo; always an attractive number of the
programme.  John, indeed, was painfully shy in regard to his singing,
so shy that he never told Desmond that he had a voice.  And the
music-master, enchanted by its quality, impressed upon his pupil the
expediency of silence.  He wished to surprise the School.

The concerts at Harrow take place in the great Speech-room.  Their
characteristic note is the singing of Harrow songs.  To any boy with an
ear for music and a heart susceptible of emotion these songs must
appeal profoundly, because both words and music seem to enshrine all
that is noble and uplifting in life.  And, sung by the whole School (as
are most of the choruses), their message becomes curiously emphatic.
The spirit of the Hill is acclaimed, gladly, triumphantly,
unmistakably, by Harrovians repeating the creed of their fathers,
knowing that creed will be so repeated by their sons and sons' sons.
Was it happy chance or a happier sagacity which decreed that certain
verses should be sung by the School "Twelve," who have struggled
through form after form and know (and have not yet had time to forget)
the difficulties and temptations which beset all boys?  They, to whom
their fellows unanimously accord respect at least, and often--as in the
case of a Captain of the Cricket Eleven--enthusiastic admiration and
fealty; these, the gods, in a word, deliver their injunction, transmit,
in turn, what has been transmitted to them, and invite their successors
to receive it.  To many how poignant must be the reflection that the
trust they are about to resign might have been better administered!
But to many there must come upon the wings of those mighty, rushing
choruses the assurance that the Power which has upheld them in the past
will continue to uphold them in the future.  In many--would one could
say in all--is quickened, for the first time, perhaps, a sense of what
they owe to the Hill, the overwhelming debt which never can be
discharged.

Desmond sat beside Scaife.  Scaife boasted that he could not tell "God
save the Queen" from "The Dead March in Saul."  He confessed that the
concert bored him.  Desmond, on the other hand, was always touched by
music, or, indeed, by anything appealing to an imagination which gilded
all things and persons.  He was Scaife's friend, not only (as John
discovered) because Scaife had a will strong enough to desire and
secure that friendship, but because--a subtler reason--he had never yet
seen Scaife as he was, but always as he might have been.

Desmond told Scaife that he could not understand why John had bottled
up the fact that he was chosen to sing upon such an occasion.  Scaife
smiled contemptuously.

"You never bottle up anything, Caesar," said he.

"Why should I?  And why should he?"

"I expect he'll make an awful ass of himself."

"Oh no, he won't," Desmond replied.  "He's a clever fellow is Jonathan."

As he gave John his nickname, Desmond's charming voice softened.  A boy
of less quick perceptions than Scaife would have divined that the
speaker liked John, liked him, perhaps, better than he knew.  Scaife
frowned.

"There are several Old Harrovians," he said, indicating the seats
reserved for them.  "It's queer to me that they come down for this
caterwauling."

Desmond glanced at him sharply, with a wrinkle between his eyebrows.
For the moment he looked as if he were short-sighted, as if he were
trying to define an image somewhat blurred, conscious that the image
itself was clear enough, that the fault lay in the obscurity of his own
vision.

"They come down because they're keen," he replied.  "My governor can't
leave his office, or he'd be here.  I like to see 'em, don't you,
Demon?"

"I could worry along without 'em," the Demon replied, half-smiling.
"You see," he added, with the blend of irony and pathos which always
captivated his friend, "you see, my dear old chap, I'm the first of my
family at Harrow, and the sight of all your brothers and uncles and
fathers makes me feel like Mark Twain's good man, rather lonesome."

At once Desmond responded, clutching Scaife's arm.

"You're going to be Captain of the cricket and footer Elevens, and
School racquet-player, and a monitor; and after you leave you'll come
down here, and you'll see that Harrow hasn't forgotten you, and then
you'll know why these fellows cut engagements.  My governor says that
an hour at a School Concert is the finest tonic in the world for an Old
Harrovian."

"Oh, shut up!" said Scaife; "you make me feel more of an outsider than
good old Snowball."  He glanced at a youth sitting close to them.
Snowball was as black as a coal: the son of the Sultan of the Sahara.
"Yes, Caesar, you can't get away from it, I _am_ an 'alien.'"

"You're a silly old ass!  I say, who's the guest of honour?"

Next to the Head Master was sitting a thin man upon whose face were
fixed hundreds of eyes.  The School had not been told that a famous
Field Marshal, the hero of a hundred fights, was coming to the concert.
And, indeed, he had accepted an invitation given at the last
moment--accepted it, moreover, on the understanding that his visit was
to be informal.  None the less, his face was familiar to all readers of
illustrated papers.  And, suddenly, conviction seized the boys that a
conqueror was among them, an Old Etonian, making, possibly, his first
visit to the Hill.  Scaife whispered his name to Desmond.

"Why, of course," Desmond replied eagerly.  "How splendid!"

He leaned forward, devouring the hero with his eyes, trying to pierce
the bronzed skin, to read the record.  From his seat upon the stage
John, also, stared at the illustrious guest.  John was frightfully
nervous, but looking at the veteran he forgot the fear of the recruit.
Both Desmond and he were wondering what "it felt like" to have done so
much.  And--they compared notes afterwards--each boy deplored the fact
that the great man was not an Old Harrovian.  There he sat, cool, calm,
slightly impassive.  John thought he must be rather tired, as a man
ought to be tired after a life of strenuous endeavour and achievement.
He had done--so John reflected--an awful lot.  Even now, he remained
the active, untiring servant of Queen and country.  And he had taken
time to come down to Harrow to hear the boys sing.  And, dash it all!
he, John, was going to sing to him.

At that moment Desmond was whispering to Scaife--

"I say, Demon; I'm jolly glad that I've not got to sing before _him_.
I bet Jonathan is in a funk."

"A big bit of luck," replied Scaife, reflectively.  Then, seeing the
surprise on Desmond's face, he added, "If Jonathan can sing--and I
suppose he can, or he wouldn't be chosen--this is a chance----"

"Of what?"

"Caesar, sometimes I think you've no brains.  Why, a chance of
attracting the notice of a tremendous swell--a man, they say, who never
forgets--never!  Jonathan may want a commission in the Guards, as I do;
and if he pleases the great man, he may get it."

"Jonathan's not thinking of that," said Desmond.  "Shush-h-h!"

The singers stood up.  They faced the Field Marshal, and he faced them.
He looked hardest at Lawrence, pointed out to him by the Head Master.
Perhaps he was thinking of India; and the name of Lawrence indelibly
cut upon the memories of all who fought in the Mutiny.  And Lawrence,
you may be sure, met his glance steadily, being fortified by it.  The
good fellow felt terribly distressed, because he was leaving the Hill;
and, being a humble gentleman, the old songs served to remind him, not
of what he had done, but of what he had left undone--the words
unspoken, the actions never now to be performed.  The chief caught his
eye, smiled, and nodded, as if to say, "I claim your father's son as a
friend."

When the song came to an end, John was seized, with an almost
irresistible impulse to bolt.  His turn had come.  He must stand up to
sing before nearly six hundred boys, who would stare down with gravely
critical and courteously amused eyes.  And already his legs trembled as
If he were seized of a palsy.  John knew that he could sing.  His
mother, who sang gloriously, had trained him.  From her he had
inherited his vocal chords, and from her he drew the knowledge how to
use them.

When he stood up, pale and trembling, the silence fell upon his
sensibilities as if it were a dense, yellow fog.  This silence, as John
knew, was an unwritten law.  The small boy selected to sing to the
School, as the representative of the School, must have every chance.
Let his voice be heard!  The master playing the accompaniment paused
and glanced at his pupil.  John, however, was not looking at him; he
was looking within at a John he despised--a poltroon, a deserter about
to run from his first engagement.  He knew that the introduction to the
song was being played a second time, and he saw the Head Master
whispering to his guest.  Paralysed with terror, John's intuition told
him that the Head Master was murmuring, "That's the nephew of John
Verney.  Of course you know him?"  And the Field Marshal nodded.  And
then he looked at John, as John had seen him look at Lawrence, with the
same flare of recognition in the steel-grey eyes.  Out of the confused
welter of faces shone that pair of eyes--twin beacons flashing their
message of encouragement and salvation to a fellow-creature in
peril--at least, so John interpreted that piercing glance.  It seemed
to say, far plainer than words, "I have stood alone as you stand; I
have felt my knees as wax; I have wished to run away.  But--_I didn't_.
Nor must you.  Open your mouth and sing!"

So John opened his mouth and sang.  The first verse of the lyric went
haltingly.

Scaife growled to Desmond, "He _is_ going to make an ass of himself."

And Desmond, meeting Scaife's eyes, half thought that the speaker
wished that John would fail--that he grudged him a triumph.  None the
less, the first verse, sung feebly, with wrong phrasing and imperfect
articulation, revealed the quality of the boy's voice; and this quality
Desmond recognized, as he would have recognized a fine painting or a
bit of perfect porcelain.  All his short life his father had trained
him to look for and acclaim quality, whether in things animate or
inanimate.  He caught hold of Scaife's arm.

"Make an ass of himself!" he whispered back.  "Not he.  But he may make
an ass of me."

Even as he spoke he was aware that tears were horribly near his eyes.
Some catch in John's voice, some subtle inflection, had smitten his
heart, even as the prophet smote the rock.

"Rot!" said Scaife, angrily.

He was angry, furiously angry, because he saw that Caesar was beyond
his reach, whirled innumerable leagues away by the sound of another's
voice.  John had begun the second verse.  He stared, as if hypnotized,
straight into the face of the great soldier, who in turn stared as
steadily at John; and John was singing like a lark, with a lark's
spontaneous delight in singing, with an ease and self-abandonment which
charmed eye almost as much as ear.  Higher and higher rose the clear,
sexless notes, till two of them met and mingled in a triumphant trill.
To Desmond, that trill was the answer to the quavering, troubled
cadences of the first verse; the vindication of the spirit soaring
upwards unfettered by the flesh--the pure spirit, not released from the
pitiful human clay without a fierce struggle.  At that moment Desmond
loved the singer--the singer who called to him out of heaven, who
summoned his friend to join him, to see what he saw--"the vision
splendid."

John began the third and last verse.  The famous soldier covered his
face with his hand, releasing John's eyes, which ascended, like his
voice, till they met joyfully the eyes of Desmond.  At last he was
singing to his friend--_and his friend knew it_.  John saw Desmond's
radiant smile, and across that ocean of faces he smiled back.  Then,
knowing that he was nearer to his friend than he had ever been before,
he gathered together his energies for the last line of the song--a line
to be repeated three times, loudly at first, then more softly,
diminishing to the merest whisper of sound, the voice celestial melting
away in the ear of earth-bound mortals.  The master knew well the
supreme difficulty of producing properly this last attenuated note, but
he knew also that John's lungs were strong, that the vocal chords had
never been strained.  Still, if the boy's breath failed; if anything--a
smile, a frown, a cough--distracted his attention, the end would
be--weakness, failure.  He wondered why John was staring so fixedly in
one direction.

Now--now!

The piano crashed out the last line; but far above it, dominating it,
floated John's flute-like notes.  The master played the same bars for
the second time.  He was still able to sustain, if it were necessary, a
quavering, imperfect phrase.  But John delivered the second repetition
without a mistake, singing easily from the chest.  The master put his
foot upon the soft pedal.  Nobody was watching him.  Had any one done
so, he would have seen the perspiration break upon the musician's
forehead.  The piano purred its accompaniment.  Then, in the middle of
the phrase, the master lifted his hands and held them poised above the
instrument.  John had to sing three notes unsupported.  He was smiling
and staring at Desmond.  The first note came like a question from the
heart of a child; the second, higher up, might have been interpreted as
an echo to the innocent interrogation of the first, the head no wiser
than the heart; but the third and last note had nothing in it of
interrogation: it was an answer, all-satisfying--sublime.  Nor did it
seem to come from John at all, but from above, falling like a snowflake
out of the sky.

And then, for one immeasurable moment--_silence_.

John slipped back to his seat, crimson with bashfulness, while the
School thundered applause.  The Field Marshal shouted "Encore," as
loudly as any fag; but the Head Master whispered--

"We don't encourage _encores_.  A small boy's head is easily turned."

"Not his," the hero replied.

Two numbers followed, and then the School stood up, and with them all
Old Harrovians, to sing the famous National Anthem of Harrow, "Forty
Years on."  Only the guests and the masters remained seated.

  "Forty years on, growing older and older,
    Shorter in wind, as in memory long,
  Feeble of foot and rheumatic of shoulder,
    What will it help you that once you were strong?
  God give us bases to guard or beleaguer,
    Games to play out, whether earnest or fun;
  Fights for the fearless, and goals for the eager,
    Twenty, and thirty, and forty years on!
  Follow up!  Follow up!  Follow up!  Follow up!
    Till the field ring again and again,
    With the tramp of the twenty-two men.
        Follow--up!"


As the hundreds of voices, past and present indissolubly linked
together, imposed the mandate, "_Follow up_!" the Head Master glanced
at his guest, but left unsaid the words about to be uttered.  Tears
were trickling down the cheeks of the man who, forty years before, had
won his Sovereign's Cross--For Valour.


After the concert, but before he left the Speech-room, the Field
Marshal asked the Head Master to introduce Lawrence and John, and, of
course, the Head of the School.  When John came up, there was a twinkle
in the veteran's eye.

"Ha--ha!" said he; "you were in a precious funk, John Verney."

"I was, sir," said John.

"Gad!  Don't I know the feeling?  Well, well," he chuckled, smiling at
John, "you climbed up higher than I've ever been in my life.  What was
it--hey?  'F' in 'alt'?"

"'G,' sir."

"You sang delightfully.  Tell your uncle to bring you to see me next
time you are in town.  You must consider me a friend," he chuckled
again--"an old friend.  And look ye here," his pleasant voice sank to a
whisper, "I daren't tip these tremendous swells, but I feel that I can
take such a liberty with you.  Shush-h-h!  Good-bye."

John scurried away, bursting with pride, feeling to the core the strong
grip of the strong man, hearing the thrill of his voice, the thrill
which had vibrated in thousands of soldier-hearts.  Outside, Fluff was
awaiting him.

"Oh, Jonathan, you can sing, and no mistake."

"Five--six--seven mistakes," John answered.

The boys laughed.

John told Fluff what the hero had said to him, and showed the piece of
gold.

"What ho!  The Creameries!  Come on, Esmé."

At the Creameries several boys congratulated John, and the Caterpillar
said--

"You astonished us, Jonathan; 'pon my soul you did.  Have a 'dringer'
with me?  And Fluff too?  By the way, be sure to keep your hair dipped
close.  These singing fellows with manes may be lions in their own
estimation, but the world looks upon 'em as asses."

"That's not bad for you, Caterpillar," said a boy in the Fifth.

"Not my own," said the Caterpillar, solemnly--"my father's.  I take
from him all the good things I can get hold of."

John polished off his "dringer," listening to the chaff, but his
thoughts were with Desmond.  He had an intuition that Desmond would
have something to say to him.  As soon as possible he returned to the
Manor.

There he found his room empty.  John shut the door and sat down,
looking about him half-absently.  The Duffer had not contributed much
to the mural decoration, saying, loftily, that he preferred bare walls
to rubbishy engravings and Japanese fans.  But, with curious
inconsistency (for he was the least vain of mortals), he had bought at
a "leaving auction" a three-sided mirror--once the property of a great
buck in the Sixth.  The Duffer had got it cheap, but he never used it.
The lower boys remarked to each other that Duff didn't dare to look in
it, because what he would see must not only break his heart but shatter
the glass.  Generally, it hung, folded up, close to the window, and the
Duffer said that it would come in handy when he took to shaving.

John's eye rested on this mirror, vacantly at first, then with
gathering intensity.  Presently he got up, crossed the room, opened the
two folding panels, and examined himself attentively, pursing up his
lips and frowning.  He could see John Verney full face, three-quarter
face, and half face.  And he could see the back of his head, where an
obstinate lock of hair stuck out like a drake's tail.  John was so
occupied in taking stock of his personal disadvantages that a ringing
laugh quite startled him.

"Why, Jonathan!  Giving yourself a treat--eh?"

John turned a solemn face to Desmond.  "I think my head is hideous," he
said ruefully.

"What do you mean?"

"It's too long," John explained.  "I like a nice round head like yours,
Caesar.  I wish I wasn't so ugly."

Desmond laughed.  John always amused him.  Caesar was easily amused,
saw the funny side of things, and contrasts tickled his fancy
agreeably.  But he stopped laughing when he realized that John was
hurt.  Then, quickly, impulsively, he said--

"Your head is all right, old Jonathan.  And your voice is simply
beautiful."  He spoke seriously, staring at John as he had stared in
the Speech-room when John began to sing.  "I came here to tell you
that.  I felt odd when you were singing--quite weepsy, you know.  You
like me, old Jonathan, don't you?"

"Awfully," said John.

"Why did you look at me when you sang that last verse?  Did you know
that you were looking at me?"

"Yes."

"You looked at me because--well, because--bar chaff--you--liked--me?"

"Yes."

"You--you like me better than any other fellow in the school?"

"Yes; better than any other fellow In the world."

"Is it possible?"

"I have always felt that way since--yes--since the very first minute I
saw you."

"How rum!  I've forgotten just where we did meet--for the first time."

"I shall never forget," said John, in the same slow, deliberate
fashion, never taking his eyes from Desmond's face.  Ever since he had
sung, he had known that this moment was coming.  "I shall never forget
it," he repeated--"never.  You were standing near the Chapel.  I was
poking about alone, trying to find the shop where we buy our straws.
And I was feeling as all new boys feel, only more so, because I didn't
know a soul."

"Yes," said Desmond, gravely; "you told me that.  I remember now; I
mistook you for young Hardacre."

"You smiled at me, Caesar.  It warmed me through and through.  I
suppose that when a fellow is starving he never forgets the first meal
after it."

"I say.  Go on; this is awfully interesting."

"I can remember what you wore.  One of your boot-laces had burst----"

"Well; I'm----"

"I had a wild sort of wish to run off, and buy you a new lace----"

"Of all the rum starts I----"

"Afterwards," John continued, "I tried to suck-up.  I asked you to come
and have some 'food.'  Do you remember?"

"I'll bet I came, Jonathan."

"No; you didn't.  You said 'No.'"

"Dash it all!  I certainly said, 'No, thanks.'"

"I dare say; but the 'No' hurt awfully because I did feel that it was
cheek asking you."

"Jonathan, you funny old buster, I'll never say 'No' again.  'Pon my
word, I won't.  So I said 'No.'  That's odd, because it's not easy for
me to say 'No.'  The governor pointed that out last hols.  Somehow, I
can't say 'No,' particularly if there's any excitement in saying 'Yes.'
And my beastly 'No' hurt, did it?  Well, I'm very, _very_ sorry."

He held out his hand, which John took.  Then, for a moment, there was a
pause before Desmond continued awkwardly--

"You know, Jonathan, that the Demon is my pal.  You like him better
than you did, don't you?"

John had the tact not to speak; but he shook his head dolefully.

"And I couldn't chuck him, even if I wanted to, which I don't--which I
don't," he repeated, with an air of satisfying himself rather than
John.  And John divined that Scaife's hold upon Desmond's affections
was not so strong as he had deemed it to be.  Desmond continued.  "But
I want you, too, old Jonathan, and if--if----"

"All right," said John, nobly.  He perceived that Desmond's loyalty to
Scaife made him hesitate and flush.  "I understand, Caesar, and if I
can't be first, let me be second; only, remember, with me you're first,
rain or shine."

Desmond looked uneasy.  "Isn't that a case of 'heads I win, tails you
lose'?"

John considered; then he smiled cheerfully, "You know you are a winner,
Caesar.  You're cut out for a winner; you can win whatever you want to
win."

"Oh, that's all rot," said Desmond.  He looked very grave, and in his
eyes lay shadows which John had never seen before.

And so ended John's first year at Harrow.



[1] All Public Houses are out of bounds.




CHAPTER VII

REFORM

  "'It must be a gran' thing to be a colledge profissor.'
  "'Not much to do,' said Mr. Hennessy.
  "'But a gr--reat deal to say,' said Mr. Dooley."


When John returned to the Hill at the beginning of the winter term the
great change had taken place.  Rutford had assumed the duties of
Professor of Greek at a Scotch University; Warde was in possession of
the Manor; Scaife and Desmond and John--but not the Caterpillar--had
got their remove.  They were Fifth Form boys--and in tails!  John, it
is true, although tougher and broader, was still short for his years
and juvenile of appearance, but Scaife and Desmond were quite big
fellows, and their new coats became them mightily.  Trieve was Head of
the House; Lovell, Captain of the House football Eleven and in the
Lower Sixth.

"Lovell will have to behave himself now," the Duffer remarked to
Scaife, who laughed derisively, as he answered--

"He couldn't, even if he tried."

Warde welcomed the House at lock-up, and introduced the boys to his
wife and daughter.  Mrs. Warde had a plain, pleasant face.  Miss Warde,
however, was a beauty, and she knew it, the coquette, and had known it
from the hour she could peep into a mirror.  The Caterpillar pronounced
her "fetching."  Being only fifteen, she wore her hair in a plait tied
by a huge bow, and the hem of her skirt barely touched the neatest
ankle on Harrow Hill.  Give her a saucy, pink-and-white face, pop a
pert tip-tilted nose into the middle of it just above a pouting red
mouth, and just below her father's lapis-lazuli eyes, and you will see
Iris Warde.  Her hair was reddish, not red--call it a warm chestnut;
and she had a dimple.

After the introductions, mother and daughter left the hall.  Warde
stood up, inviting the House to sit down.  Warde was about half the
width of the late Rutford, but somehow he seemed to take up more room.
He had spent the summer holidays in Switzerland, climbing terrific
peaks.  Snow and sun had coloured his clear complexion.  John, who saw
beneath tanned skins, reflected that Warde seemed to be saturated with
fresh air and all the sweet clean things which one associates with
mountains.  "He loves hills," thought John, "and he loves our Hill."
Warde began to speak in his jerky, confidential tones.  Dirty Dick had
always been insufferably dull, pompous, and didactic.

"I don't like speechmaking," said Warde, "but I want to put one thing
to you as strongly as a man may.  I have always wished to be master of
the Manor.  Some men may think mine a small ambition.  Master of a
house at Harrow?  Nothing big about that.  Perhaps not.  But I think it
big.  And it is big--for me.  Understand that I'm in love with my
job--head over heels.  I'd sooner be master of the Manor than Prime
Minister.  I couldn't tackle his work.  Enough of that.  Now, forget
for a moment that I'm a Master.  Let me talk as an Old Harrovian, an
old Manorite who remembers everything, ay--everything, good and bad.
Some lucky fellows remember the good only; we call them optimists.
Others remember the bad.  Pessimists those.  Put me between the two.
The other day I had an eye, _one_ eye, fixed on the top of a certain
peak--by Jove! how I longed to reach that peak!--but the other eye was
on a _crevasse_ at my feet.  Had I kept both eyes on the peak, I should
be lying now at the bottom of that _crevasse_.  You take me?  Well,
twenty years ago I sat here, in hall, my last night in the old house,
and I hoped that one day I might come back.  Why?  This is between
ourselves, a confidence.  I came to the Manor from a beastly school,
such schools are hardly to be found nowadays--a hardened young sinner
at thirteen.  The Manor licked me into shape.  Speaking generally, I
suppose the tone of the house insensibly communicated itself to me.
The Manor was cock-house at games and work.  I began by shirking both.
But the spirit of the Hill was too much for me.  I couldn't shirk that.
Some jolly old boys, we all know them and like them, are always saying
that their early school-days were the happiest of their life.  They're
fond of telling this big lie just as they're settling down to their
claret.  I really believe that they believe what they say, but it is a
lie.  The smallest boy here knows it's a lie.  Let's hark back a bit.
I said I was licked into shape--and I mean _licked_.  I had a lot of
really hard fagging--much harder than any of you boys know--I was sent
up and swished, I had whoppings innumerable, and it wasn't pleasant.
My mother had pinched herself to send me here, because my father had
been here before me; and I wondered why she did it.  At that time I
couldn't see why cheaper schools shouldn't be not only as good as
Harrow, but perhaps better.  Not till I was in the Fifth did I get a
glimmering of what my mother and the Manor were doing for me.  When I
got into the Sixth and into the Eleven, I knew.  And my last year here
made up, and more too, for the previous four.  I enjoyed that year
thoroughly.  I had ceased to be a slacker.  I tell you, all of you,
that happiness, like liberty, must be earned before we can enjoy it.
And you are sent here to earn it.  I'm not going to keep you much
longer.  I have come to the marrow of the matter.  I owe the Manor a
debt which I hope to pay to--you.  Just as you, in turn, will pay back
to boys not yet born the money your people have gladly spent on you,
and other greater things beside.  I want to see this house at the top
of the tree again: cock-house at cricket, cock-house at footer, with a
Balliol Scholar in it, and a school racquet-player.  And now Dumbleton
is going to bring in a little champagne.  We'll drink high health and
fellowship to the Manor and the Hill!"

His face broke into the smile his form knew so well; he sat down, as
the house roared its welcome to a friend.

As soon as the champagne was drunk ("Dumber" was careful to put more
froth than wine into the glasses of the kids), the boys filed out of
the Hall.  The Duffer, Desmond, John, and the Caterpillar assembled in
John's room.  Desmond, you may be sure, was afire with resolution.
Warde was the right sort, a clinker, a first flighter.  And he meant to
stick by him through thick and thin.  John said nothing.  The
Caterpillar drawled out--

"Warde didn't surprise me--much.  I've found out that he's one of the
Wardes of Warde-Pomeroy, the real old stuff.  Our families intermarried
in Elizabeth's reign."

"Chance to do it again, Caterpillar," said the Duffer.  "Warde's
daughter is an uncommonly pretty girl."

Then the Caterpillar used the epithet "fetching."

"She's fetching, very fetching," he said.  "It's a pleasure to remember
that we're of kin.  One must be civil to Warde.  He's a well bred 'un."

"You think too much of family," said Desmond.

"_One can't_," replied the Caterpillar, solemnly.  "One knows that
family is not everything, but, other things being equal, it means
refinement.  The first of the Howards was a swineherd, I dare say, but
generations of education, of association with the best, have turned
them from swineherds into gentlemen, and it takes generations to do it."

"Good old Caterpillar!" said the Duffer.

"Not my own," said the Caterpillar; adding, as usual, "My governor's,
you know."

"Warde hasn't a soft job ahead of him," said Desmond.  "Soft or hard,
he'll handle it his own way."

Desmond went out, wondering what had become of Scaife.  Scaife was in
his room, talking to Lovell senior, who had spent a fortnight with
Scaife's people In Scotland, fishing and grousing.  Desmond had been
asked also, but his father, rather to Caesar's disgust (for the Scaife
moor was famous), had refused to let him go.  Lovell and Scaife were
arguing about something which Desmond could not understand.

"I left it to my partner," said Scaife, "and the fool went no trumps
holding two missing suits.  The enemy doubled, my partner redoubled,
and the others redoubled again: that made it ninety-six a trick.  The
fellow on the left held my partner's missing suits; he made the Little
Slam, and scored nearly six hundred below the line.  It gave 'em the
rubber, too, and I had to fork out a couple of quid."

"What are you jawing about, Demon?" said Desmond.

"Bridge.  It's the new game.  It's going to be the rage.  Do you play
bridge, Caesar?"

"No.  I want to learn it."

"All right, I must teach you."

"We could get up a four in this house," said Lovell.  "We three and the
Caterpillar.  He plays, I know.  The Colonel is one of the cracks at
the Turf.  It would be an awful lark.  A mild gamble: small points--eh?
A bob a hundred.  What do you say, Caesar?"

Desmond hesitated.  Bridge had not yet reached its delirious stage.
But Desmond had seen it played, had heart his father praise it as the
most fascinating of card-games, and had determined to learn it at the
first convenient opportunity.  None the less Warde's words still echoed
in his ear.

"I think we ought to give Warde a chance," he said.

"You don't mean to say you were taken in by him?" said Lovell,
contemptuously.

Desmond burst into enthusiastic praise of Warde and his methods.
Lovell shrugged his shoulders and walked out of the room, nodding to
Scaife, but ignoring Desmond.

"You must go canny with Lovell," said Scaife.  "He's the fellow who
ought to give you your 'fez' after the first house-game."

"Never mind that.  You won't play bridge, Demon, will you?"

"Why not?" said Scaife.  "Where's the harm?  Your governor plays----"

"Yes; but----"

"You're afraid of getting sacked?"

"I'm not."

"All right; I'll take that back.  You're not a funk, Caesar, but you're
so easily humbugged.  Warde caught you with his 'pi jaw' and a glass of
gooseberry."

"The champagne was all right, wasn't it?"

"Oh, ho!  So you do mean to stand in with Warde against Lovell and me?
Thanks for being so candid.  Now I'll be candid with you.  I like
Lovell.  There's no nonsense about him.  He don't put on frills because
he's in the Sixth, and he don't mean to take to their sneaking, spying
ways.  He's just as anxious as Warde to see the Manor cock-house at
footer and cricket, and I'm as keen as he is; but we stop there.  The
Balliol Scholarship may go hang.  And as for sympathy and fellowship
and pulling together between masters and boys, I never did believe in
it, and never shall.  My hand is against the masters, so long as they
interfere with anything I want to do.  I like bridge, and I mean to
play it.  And I'll take jolly good care that I'm not nailed.  That's
part of the fun, as the drinking used to be.  I chucked that because it
wasn't good enough; but bridge is ripping, and, take my word for it,
you'll be keener than I when you begin."

"Perhaps.  But I'm not going to begin here."

"Right--oh!"

Scaife turned aside, whistling, but out of the corner of his shrewd eye
he marked the expression of Desmond's face, the colour ebbing and
flowing in the round boyish cheeks, the perplexity on the brow.  Then
he spoke in a different voice.

"Don't worry, old chap.  You've stuck to me through thick and thin, and
I'm grateful, really and truly.  You're right, and I'm wrong; I always
am wrong.  I was looking forward to larks.  If you count 'em purple
sins, I don't blame you for letting me go to the devil by myself."

"I never said bridge was a purple sin."

"Warde thinks it is.  If you're going to look at life here with his
eyes, you'll have to rename things.  Babies play Beggar my Neighbour
for chocolates; why shouldn't we play bridge for a bob a hundred?  The
game is splendid for the brain; ten thousand times better than
translating Greek choruses."

"But it is--gambling, Demon; you can't get away from that."

"Pooh!  It's gambling if I bet you a 'dringer' that you won't make ten
runs in a house-match; it's gambling if I raffle a picture and you take
a sixpenny ticket.  Are you going to give up that sort of gambling?"

"No; but----"

"What would Warde say to our co-operative system of work--eh?  You're
not prepared to go the whole hog?  You want to pick and choose.  Good!
But give me the same right, that's all.  Play bridge with your old
pals, or don't play, just as you please."

No more was said.  Scaife's manner rather than his matter confounded
the younger and less experienced boy.  Scaife, too, tackled problems
which many men prefer to leave alone.  Here heredity cropped up.
Scaife's sire and grandsire were earning their bread before they were
sixteen.  Of necessity they faced and overcame obstacles which the
ordinary Public School-boy never meets till he leaves the University.

For some time after this bridge was not mentioned.  Lovell, acting,
possibly, under advice from Scaife, treated Desmond courteously, and
gave him his "fez" after the first house-game.  Both boys now were
members of the Manor cricket and football Elevens, and, as such,
persons of distinction in their small world.  Scaife, moreover, began
to play football with such extraordinary dash and brilliancy, that it
seemed to be quite on the cards that he might get his School Flannels.
This possibility, and the Greek in the Fifth, absorbed his energies for
the first six weeks of the winter quarter.  John had come back to
Scaife's room to prepare work.  Desmond felt that Scaife had been
generous in proposing that John should join them, because in many small
ways it had become evident that the Demon disliked John, although he
still spoke of the tight place out of which John had hauled him.
Through Scaife John received his "fez"; and when John wore it for the
first time, Scaife came up and said, smiling--

"I'm nearly even with you, Verney."

"What do you mean?" said John.

"You know well enough what I mean," said Scaife, winking his eye
maliciously.

John flushed, because in his heart he did know.  But when he told
Egerton what Scaife had said, that experienced man of the world turned
up his nose.

"Just like him," he said.  "He wants you to feel that he has wiped out
his debt."

"Do you think my 'fez' ought to have been given to young Lovell?"

The Caterpillar, who played back for the Manor, considered the question.

"I don't know," he said.  "You are pretty nearly equal; but it's a fact
that the Demon turned the scale.  He pointed out to Lovell that if he
gave a 'fez' to his young brother, the house might accuse him of
favouritism.  That did the trick."

This made John uneasy and unhappy for a week or two; but the
consciousness that another might be better entitled to the coveted
"fez" made him play up with such energy that he succeeded in proving to
all critics that he had honestly earned what luck had bestowed on him.

During the last week of October, John began those long walks with
Desmond which, afterwards, he came to regard as perhaps the most
delightful hours spent at Harrow.  Scaife detested walking.  He had his
father's power of focusing attention and energy upon a single object.
For the moment he was mad about football.  Talk about books, scenery,
people, bored him, and he said so with his usual frankness and
impatience of restraint.  Desmond, on the other hand, was also like his
father, inasmuch as his tastes were catholic.  He was a bit of a
naturalist, learned in the lore of woods and fields, and he liked to
talk about books, and he liked to talk about his home.  Simple John
would sooner hear Caesar talk than listen to the heavenly choir.  So it
came to pass that once a week at least the boys would stroll down the
avenue at Orley Farm (where Anthony Trollope's sad boyhood was passed),
or take the Northwick Walk, which winds through meadows to the Bridge,
or visit John Lyon's farm at Preston, or, getting signed for Bill,
attempt a longer ramble to Ruislip Reservoir, or Oxhey Wood, or
Headstone with its moated grange, or Horsington Hill with its
long-stretching view across the Uxbridge plain.

Very soon it became the natural thing for Caesar to give John a
glimpse, at least, of whatever floated in and out of his mind.  John,
being himself a creature of reserves, could not quite understand
this unlocking of doors, but he appreciated his privileges.  Caesar's
ingenuousness, sympathy, and impulsiveness, seemed the more
enchanting because John himself was of the look-before-you-leap,
think-before-you-speak, sort.  One Sunday evening they were hurrying
back to Chapel, when they passed a woman carrying a heavy child.  The
poor creature appeared to be almost fainting with fatigue and possibly
hunger.  Her pinched face, her bent figure, her thin garments, bespoke
a passionate protest against conditions which obviously she was
powerless to avert or control.  The boys glanced at her with pitying
eyes as they passed.  Then Desmond said quickly--

"I say, Jonathan, she looks as if she was going to fall down."

John, seeing what was in his friend's mind, said--

"We must hurry up, or we shall miss Chapel."

They offered the woman sixpences, and blushes, because through the
tattered shawl might be seen a shrunken bosom.

The woman stared, stammered, and burst into tears.

"We shall miss Chapel," John repeated.

"Hang Chapel," said Desmond.

He was looking at the child.  When the woman took the silver, she let
the child slip to the ground, where it lay inert.

"What's the matter with it?" said Desmond.

Half sobbing, the woman explained that the child had sprained its ankle.

"I'm just about done," she gasped; "an' the sight o' you two young
gen'lemen runnin' up the 'ill finished me.  I ain't the leaky sort,"
she added fiercely, still gasping and trembling.

Then she bent down and tried to lift the heavy child, which moaned
feebly.

"You run on, Jonathan," said Desmond.

"Why?"

"I'm going to carry this kid up the hill."

"I'll help."

"No--hook it, you ass."

"I won't hook it."

Between them they carried the child as far as the Speech-room, where a
policeman accepted a shilling, and gave in return a positive assurance
that he would see woman and child to their destination.  When the boys
were alone, John said--

"Caesar----"

"Well?"

"What a fellow you are!  I wouldn't have thought of that.  It was
splendid."

"Ob, shut up."  There was a slight pause, then Caesar said defiantly,
"I thought of carrying that kid; but I wouldn't have done it, unless
I'd known that every boy was safe in Chapel.  I couldn't have faced the
chaff.  And--you could."

They were punished for cutting Chapel, because Caesar refused to give
the reason which would have saved them.

"I'd have told the truth," he admitted to John, "if I could have
shouldered that kid with the Manorites looking on."

John agreed that this was an excellent and a Caesarean (he coined the
adjective on this occasion) reason.


Among the Fifth Form boys of the Manor was a big coarse-looking youth
of the name of Beaumont-Greene.  Everybody called him Beaumont-Greene
in full, because upon his first appearance at Bill he had stopped the
line of boys by refusing to answer to the name of Greene.

"My name," said he, in a shrill pipe, "is Beaumont-Greene, and we spell
the Greene with a final 'e'."

Beaumont-Greene was a type of boy, unhappily, too common at all Public
Schools.  He had no feeling whatever for Harrow, save that it was a
place where it behoved a boy to escape punishment if he could, and to
run, hot foot, towards anything which would yield pleasure to his body.
He was known to the Manorites as a funk at footer, and a prodigious
consumer of "food" at the Creameries.  His father, having accumulated a
large fortune in manufacturing what was advertised in most of the
public prints as the "Imperishable, Seamless, Whale-skin Boot," gave
his son plenty of money.  As a Lower Boy, Beaumont-Greene had but a
sorry time of it.  Somebody discovered that he was what Gilbert once
described as an "imperfect ablutioner."  The Caterpillar made a point
of telling new boys the nature of the punishment meted out to the
unclean.  He had assisted at the "toshing" of Beaumont-Greene.

"A nasty job," the Caterpillar would remark, looking at his own
speckless finger-nails; "but it had to be done.  We took the Greene
person" (the Caterpillar alone refused to defame the fine name of
Beaumont by linking it to Greene) "and placed him naked in a large
tosh.  Into that tosh the house was invited to pour any fluid that
could be spared.  One forgets things; but, unless I'm mistaken, the
particular sheep-wash used was made up of lemonade, syrups, ink--plenty
of that--milk (I bought a quart myself), tooth-powder, paraffin, and a
cake of Sapolio--Monkey Brand!  We scrubbed the Yahoo thoroughly,
washed its teeth, ears, hair, and then we dried it.  I don't know who
smeared marmalade on to the towel, but the drying part was not very
successful.  Rather tough--eh?  Yes, very tough--on _us_, but
effective.  The Greene person has toshed regularly ever since.  At
least, so I'm told; I never go near him myself, and he's considerate
enough to keep out of my way."

Beaumont-Greene had not, it is true, the appetite for reckless breaking
of the law which distinguished Lovell and his particular pals; but
Lovell's good qualities cancelled to a certain extent what was vicious.
A fine cricketer, a plucky football-player, he might have proved a
credit to his house had a master other than Dirty Dick been originally
in command of it.  Before he was out of the Shell, he had declared war
against Authority.  Beaumont-Greene, on the other hand, detested games,
and sneered at those who played them.  Pulpy, pimply, gross in mind and
body, he stood for that heavy, amorphous resistance to good, which is
so difficult to overcome.

During the first half of the winter quarter, John saw but little of
Esmé Kinloch.  It is one of the characteristics of a Public School,
that the boys--as in the greater world for which it is a
preparation--are in layers.  Some layers overlap; others never touch.
Fluff was a fag; his friend John was in the Fifth Form, and a "fez."
In a word, an Atlantic rolled between them.  John, however, would often
give Fluff a "con," and occasionally they would walk together.  Fluff
was no longer the delicate, girlish child of a year ago.  He had
bloomed into a very handsome boy, attractive, like all the members of
his mother's family, with engaging manners, and he had also shown signs
of developing into a cricketer.  Fluff could paddle his own canoe,
provided, of course, that he kept out of the rapids.

But about the middle of the term John noticed that Fluff was losing
colour and spirits, the latter never very exuberant.  It was not in
John's nature to ask questions which he might answer for himself by
taking pains to do so.  He watched Fluff closely.  Then he demanded
bluntly--

"What's up?"

"Nothing."

"That's a cram," said John, severely.  "I didn't believe you'd tell me
a cram, Esmé."

"You don't care tuppence whether I tell crams or not--now."

John weighed the "now" deliberately.

"That's another cram," he said slowly.  "Has anybody been rotting you?"

Silence.  John repeated the question.  Still silence.  Then John added--

"You know, Esmé, that I shall stick to you till I find out what's up;
so you may as well save time by telling me at once."

"It's Beaumont-Greene," faltered Fluff.

"That fat beast!  What's he done?"

"He hasn't done much--yet."

"Tell everything!"

"He came into my room one night and turned me up in my bed.  I woke, on
my head, in the dark, half-smothered, and couldn't think what had
happened; it was simply awful.  Then I heard his beastly voice saying,
'If I let you down, will you do what I ask you?'  I'd have promised
anything to get out of that horrible choking prison, and now he
threatens to turn me up every night, and I dream of it----"

"Go on," said John, grimly.  "No, you needn't go on.  I can guess what
this low cad is up to."

"He said he'd be my friend; as if I'd have a beast like that for a
friend."

"Did you tell him that?"

"Yes, I did."

"You're a good-plucked 'un, Esmé.  And he's made it warm for you ever
since?"

"Yes."

"But he hasn't turned you up again?"

"N-no; but he will.  I'd almost sooner he'd do it, and have done with
it.  I can't sleep."

"Now, don't be a silly fool," John commanded.  "I'm going to think this
out, and I'll bet I make that fat, pimply beast sit up and howl."

"Thanks awfully, John."

But the more John thought of what he had undertaken to do, the less
clearly he saw his way to do it.  Evidently Beaumont-Greene was too
prudent to bully Fluff; he had resorted to the crueller alternative of
terrorizing him.  Lawrence would have settled this fellow's hash--so
John reflected--in a jiffy, but Trieve, "Miss Trieve," was hopelessly
incapable.  Presently inspiration came.  He seized an opportunity when
Beaumont-Greene happened to be by himself; then he marched boldly into
his room, leaving the door ajar.

"Hullo! what do you want?"

Beaumont-Greene was sitting opposite the fire, reading a novel and
leisurely consuming macaroons.

"I want you to leave young Kinloch alone--_please_."

Beaumont-Greene nearly choked; then he spluttered out--

"Say that again, will you?"

"I want you to leave young Kinloch alone."

"Really?  Anything else?"

"Nothing more, thank you."

Beaumont-Greene slowly raised himself out of his chair and glared at
John, whose head came to his chin.

"You've plenty of cheek."

"What I have isn't spotty, anyway."

John saw the veins begin to swell in Beaumont-Greene's throat.  He
thought with relief of the door ajar, but it was part of his policy--a
carefully devised policy--to provoke, if possible, a scene.  Then
others would interfere, explanations would be in order, and public
opinion would accomplish the rest.

"You infernal young jackanapes!"

"You pretty pet!"

"Get out of my room!  Hook it!"

"I want to," said John, coolly enough, although his heart was
throbbing.  "It's horribly fuggy in here, and I've Jambi[1] to do; but
I'm not going till you give me your word that you'll leave young
Kinloch alone."

"If you don't walk out I'll chuck you out."

"You must catch me first," said John.

And then a very pretty chase took place.  Beaumont-Greene, fat, scant
of breath, full of macaroons, began to pursue John round and round the
table.  John skilfully interposed chairs, sofa-cushions, anything he
could lay hands on.  Passing the washstand, he secured an enormous
sponge, which an instant later flew souse into the face of the grampus.
An abridged edition of Liddell and Scott's Greek Lexicon followed.
This nearly brought the big fellow to grass.  In his rage he, too,
began to hurl what objects happened to be within reach, but he was a
shocking bad shot; he missed, or John dodged every time.  John did not
miss.  Finally, as John had foreseen, a couple of Sixth Form fellows
rushed in.

"What's the meaning of this infernal row?" asked one.

"Ask him," said John.

Authority stared at Beaumont-Greene, and then at his wrecked room.

"I told him to hook it, and he wouldn't," spluttered the gasping Greene.

"Why?"

Half a dozen other fellows had come into the room.  Amongst them the
Duffer and the Caterpillar.

"I wanted to hook it," John explained, "because it's so beastly fuggy;
but Beaumont-Greene wouldn't promise me to do something he ought to do."

"This is mysterious."

"The swaggering young blackguard cheeked me," growled Greene.

"I was very polite--at first," pleaded John.

"Hook it now, anyway," said Authority.

"Not till he promises.  If you turn me out, I'll come back after you're
gone."

"What is it you want him to promise?"

John had achieved his object.

"I want him to leave young Kinloch _alone_."

The two Sixth Form boys glanced at each other; at John; at the gross,
spotted face of Beaumont-Greene.  Then the senior said coldly--

"I suppose you have no objection, Beaumont-Greene, to promise Verney or
any one else that you will leave young Kinloch alone?"

"I've never laid a finger on the kid," growled the big fellow; but he
looked pale and frightened.

"Then you promise--eh?"

"Yes."

"On your word of honour?"

"Yes."

That night John told Fluff with great glee how Beaumont-Greene had been
made to "sit up and howl."



[1] "Jambi"--Iambic verses.




CHAPTER VIII

VERNEY BOSCOBEL

"In honour of all who believe that life was made for friendship."


The immediate result of the incident described in the last chapter was
to strengthen the bond between John and Desmond.  Desmond had the epic
from Fluff, from the Caterpillar, and finally from John himself.

"You bearded that poisonous beast in his den," exclaimed he; "you
plotted and planned for the scrimmage; you foresaw what would happen.
Well, you are a corker, Jonathan."

"You'd have thought of something much better."

"Not I," Desmond replied.

Scaife, however, made no remarks.  Possibly, because Desmond made too
many, singing John's praises behind his back and to his face, in and
out of season.  This, of course, was indiscreet, and led to hard words
and harder feelings.  Beaumont-Greene realized that John had tarred and
feathered him.  The fags, you may be sure, rubbed the tar in.  If
Beaumont-Greene threatened to kick an impudent Fourth Form boy, that
youngster would bid him be careful.

"If you don't behave yourself," he would say, "I shall have to send
Verney to your room."

Lovell senior remarked that Beaumont-Greene was a "swine," but that
Verney had put on "lift" and must be snubbed.  What?  A boy who had not
been two years in the school _dared_ to take the law into his own
hands!  The matter ought to have been laid before the Head of the House.

Accordingly, John found himself, much to his dismay, unpopular with the
Olympians.  The last month of this term was, in some ways, the most
disagreeable he had yet spent at Harrow.

But the gain of Desmond's friendship far outweighed the loss of
popularity.  John tingled with pleasure when he reflected that he had
achieved his ambition to stand between Scaife and Desmond.  At the same
time, he was uncomfortably aware that Scaife seemed to have climbed
high above Desmond, who had stood still.  In moments of depression John
told himself that he was a makeshift, that Desmond would leave him and
join the Demon whenever that splendid young person chose to whistle him
up.  Scaife had failed to get his Football Flannels, but he came so
near to beating all previous records that the School began to regard
him as a "Blood."  He was seen arm-in-arm with Lovell, strolling up and
down the High Street, and the fags breathlessly repeated what Desmond
had predicted a year ago: the Demon was the coming man.  And always,
when John and Desmond passed him, John thought he could read a derisive
triumph upon the Demon's handsome face, an expression which said
plainly: "You young fool, don't you know that I'm playing cat and mouse
with you?"

The three still met twice daily to prepare work.  But the moment that
was done, Scaife disappeared, leaving John and Desmond together.

"He's playing bridge in Lovell's room," said Desmond.  More facts were
gleaned from the Caterpillar, who had joined the bridge-players, but
played seldom.

"One draws the line," said he, "at playing for stakes one can't afford
to lose.  Lovell and the Demon have made it too hot."

"And Warde will make it hotter," said John.

"Not he," replied the Caterpillar.  "The Demon is a wonder.  Thanks to
his brains, detection is impossible.  He suggested that Lovell's room
should be used.  Warde wouldn't dare to burst in upon one of the Sixth.
And you ought to see their dodgy arrangements.  Lovell has his young
brother on guard.  I'm hanged if the Demon didn't invent a sort of
drill, which they go through with a stopwatch.  It's a star
performance, I tell you.  Young Lovell bolts in.  In thirty-five
seconds--they have got it down to that--the cards and markers are
hidden; and the four of 'em are jawing away about footer."

"All the same," said John, obstinately, "Warde will be too much for
'em."

"Oh, rot!" said the Caterpillar.

The Manor got into the semi-finals of the football matches, and when
the School broke up for the Christmas holidays it was generally
conceded that the fortunes of the ancient house were mending.  In the
Manor itself Warde's influence was hardly yet perceptible: only a very
few knew that it was diffusing itself, percolating into nooks and
crevices, undreamed of: the hearts of the Fourth Form, for instance.
In Dirty Dick's time there had been almost universal slackness.  In
pupil-room, Rutford read a book; boys could work or not as they
pleased, provided their tutor was not disturbed.  Warde, on the other
hand, made it a point of honour to work with his pupils.  His
indefatigable energies, his good humour, his patience, were never so
conspicuous as when he was coaching duffers.  In other ways he made the
boys realize that he was at the Manor for their advantage, not his own.
The gardens and park were kept strictly private by Dirty Dick.  Warde
threw them open; a favour hardly appreciated in the winter quarter, but
the House admitted that it would be awfully jolly in the summer to lie
under the trees far from the "crowd."  In a word--a "privilege."

Upon the last Saturday, to John's delight, Desmond asked him to spend a
week in Eaton Square.  John had paid two visits to White Ladies; he was
now about to experience something entirely new.  White Ladies and
Verney Boscobel were typical of the past; they illustrated the history
of the families who had inhabited them.  The great world went to White
Ladies to see the pictures and the gardens, the Gobelin tapestries, the
Duchess and her guests; but the same world dined in Eaton Square to see
Charles Desmond.

During this visit, our John first learned what miracles one individual
may accomplish.  At White Ladies, he had dimly perceived, as has been
said, the duties and responsibilities imposed upon rank and wealth.  In
Eaton Square he saw more plainly the duties and responsibilities
imposed upon a man of great talents.  Both Charles Desmond and the Duke
of Trent were hard workers, but the labours of the duke seemed to John
(and to other wise persons) drab-coloured.  Charles Desmond's work, in
contrast, presented all the colours of the spectrum.  John left White
Ladies, thanking his stars that he was not a duke; he came away from
Eaton Square filled with the ambition to be Private Secretary to the
great Minister.  And when Mr. Desmond said to him with his genial
smile, "Well, young John, Harry, I hope, will be my secretary, and the
crutch of my declining years.  But what would you like to be?"  John
replied fervently, "Oh, sir, I should like to be Harry's understudy."

"Would you?"

And then John saw the face of his kind host change.  The smile faded.
Mr. Desmond had taken his answer as John meant it to be
taken--seriously.  He examined John as if he were already a candidate
for office.  The piercing eyes probed deep.  Then he said slowly, "I
should like to have you under me, John.  We shall talk of this again,
my boy.  My own sons----"  He paused, sighed, and then laughed, tapping
John's cheek with his slender, finely-formed fingers.  But he passed on
without finishing his sentence.  John knew that, of Caesar's brothers,
Hugo, the eldest, was Secretary of Legation at Teheran; Bill "devilled"
for a famous barrister; Lionel wore her Majesty's livery.  Strange that
none had elected to serve his own father!  Caesar explained later.

"You see," he said, "the dear old governor outshines everybody.  Hugo
and the others felt that under him they would be in eclipse, for ever
and ever--eh?"

"I see," said John, gravely.  "Yes, there's something in that.  He
wants you, Caesar."

"Dear old governor!" the other replied.  "Yes--he's keen on that.  But
I hope to make my own little mark.  I'd like to have my name on a brass
tablet in Harrow Chapel; that would be something."  His eyes began to
glow and sparkle.

Next day, at dinner, Rodney's name cropped up.

"Rodney paved the way for Nelson," Mr. Desmond observed.  "I look upon
him as one of our greatest Harrovians.  We ought to have a building to
Rodney's memory.  I put him before Peel or Byron."

"Oh, I say, father----"  Hot protest from Caesar.

"Act before word, Harry; practice before precept.  Rodney was a man of
action.  I should like to have been Rodney."

"I should like to have been Sheridan," said Caesar.  "I often look at
his name on the third panel of the Fourth Form Room."

He glanced at his father, who smiled, knowing that a delicate
compliment was intended, for enthusiastic admirers had spoken of
Charles Desmond as the Richard Brinsley Sheridan of the modern House of
Commons.  The father said curtly--

"A sky-rocket, my dear Harry."  Then he turned to John.  "And of all
our famous Harrovians whom would you like to take as a pattern, young
John?"

John hesitated.  Two or three of the guests present were celebrities.
Amongst them was England's greatest critic sitting beside an
ambassador.  There happened to be a lull in the talk.  All looked
curiously at John.

"I'd like to be another Lord Shaftesbury," he said slowly.

"Good!  Capital!"  Mr. Desmond nodded his head.  "I knew him well."  He
poured out anecdote after anecdote illustrating the character and
temperament of the statesman-philanthropist: his self-sacrifice, his
devotion to an ideal, his curious exclusiveness, his refinement, his
faith in an aristocracy never diminished by the indefatigable zeal
wherein he laboured to better the condition of the poor.  "If every
rich man were animated by Shaftesbury's spirit," said Mr. Desmond, in
conclusion, "extreme poverty would be wiped out of England, and yet we
should retain all that makes life charming and profitable.  He was no
leveller, save of foul rookeries.  First and last he believed in order,
particularly his own--a true nobleman.  And the inspiration of his
great career came to him on the Hill."

"Indeed?" said the Critic.

"John Verney will tell you all about it," said Mr. Desmond, glancing
cheerily at our hero.  His was ever the habit to draw out the humblest
of his guests.

So John recited how young Anthony Ashley, standing on the Hill, just
below the churchyard, chanced to see a pauper's coffin fall to the
ground and burst open, revealing the pitiful corpse within, and how he
had exclaimed in horror, "Good heavens!  Can this be permitted simply
because the man was poor and friendless?"  And how, then and there, the
boy had sworn to devote his powers to the amelioration of
poverty-stricken lives.

"Yes," said Mr. Desmond.  "He told me that the next fifteen minutes
decided his career.  Ah, he succeeded greatly.  Why, when I was at
Harrow we used to cross from Waterloo to Euston through some of the
worst slums in the world.  You boys can't realize what they looked
like.  And Shaftesbury's work and example wiped them out of our
civilization." [1]

When John returned to his uncle's house of Verney Boscobel (his home
since his father's death), Caesar Desmond accompanied him.  Then it
seemed to John that his cup brimmed, that everything he desired had
been granted unto him.  Verney Boscobel stood in the heart of the great
forest, one of the few large manors within that splendid demesne.  The
boys arrived at Lyndhurst Road Station late in the evening, long after
dusk, and were driven in darkness through Bartley and Minstead up to
the high-lying moors of Stoneycross.  Next morning, early, John woke
his friend, and opened the shutters.

"Jolly morning," he said.  "Have a look at the Forest, old chap."

Caesar jumped out of bed, and drew a long breath.

"Ah!" he exclaimed; "it's fairyland."

Frost had silvered all things below.  Above, motionless upon the blue
heavens, as if still frozen by the icy fingers of a December night,
were some aerial transparencies of aqueous vapour, amethystine in
colour, with edges of white foam.  In the east, obscured, but not
concealed, by grey mist, hung the crimson orb of the sun.  From it
faint rays shot forth, touching the clouds beneath, which, roused, so
to speak, out of sleep, drifted lethargically in a southerly direction.

      "Underneath the young grey dawn
  A multitude of dense, white, fleecy clouds
  Were wandering in thick flocks, . . .
  Shepherded by the slow, unwilling wind."


Desmond drew in his breath, sighing with purest delight.  From the
lawns encompassing the house his eyes strayed into a glade of bracken,
gold gleaming through silver--a glade shadowed by noble oaks and
beeches, with one birch tree in the middle of it surpassingly graceful.
Upon this each delicate bough and spray were outlined sharply against
the sky.  Beyond the glade stretched the moor, rugged, bleak, and
treeless, sloping sharply upward.  Beyond the moor lay the
Forest--belts of firs darkly purple; and flanking these the irregular
masses of oaks and beeches, varying in tint from palest lavender to
rose and brown, some still in shadow, some in ever-increasing glow of
sunlight; not one the same, and each in itself containing a thousand
differing forms, yet all harmonious parts of the resplendent whole.

"I'm so glad yon like my home," said John.  "Shall we have a gallop
before breakfast?  It's only a white frost."

So they galloped away into fairyland, returning with mortal appetites
to the oak-panelled dining-hall, whence a Verney had ridden forth to
join his kinsman, Sir Edmund, in arms for the King upon the distant
field of Edge Hill.  After breakfast the boys explored the quaint old
house; and John showed Caesar the twenty-bore gun, and promised his
guest much rabbit-shooting, and two days' hunting, at least, with the
New Forest Hounds, and some pike-fishing, and possibly an encounter
with a big grayling--which, later, the boys saw walloping about in the
Test above Broadlands--a splendid fish, once hooked by John, and
lost--a three-pounder, of course.

O golden age!  You will never forget that Christmas--will you, John?
If you live to be Prime Minister of England, the memory of those first
days alone with your friend will remain green when the colour has been
sucked by Time out of everything else.  Fifty years hence, maybe, you
will see Caesar's curly head and his blue eyes full of fun and life,
and you will hear his joyous laughter--peal upon peal--echoing through
the corridors of Verney Boscobel.  Your mother took him to her
heart--didn't she?  And all the servants, from butler to scullerymaid,
voted him the jolliest, cheeriest boy that ever came to Hampshire.
Why, Mrs. Osman, the cook, with a temper like tinder from too much
heat, refused flatly to let Caesar make toffee in her kitchen.  But
just then a barrel-organ turned up, and before she could open her
mouth, Caesar was dancing a polka with her; and after that he could
make toffee, or hay, or anything else, wherever and whenever he pleased.


When they returned to the Manor, John hoped and prayed that this
blessed intimacy would continue.  It did--for a time.  The three boys
got their remove, and found themselves in the Second Fifth, where they
proposed to linger till after the summer term.  Lovell and Scaife
seemed inseparable, and bridge began again, apparently an inexhaustible
source of amusement and excitement.  Then came the Torpid matches; and
John, as Lawrence predicted, was captain of the cock-house Eleven--the
first great victory of the Manorites.  During the term, Scaife and
Desmond won no races, being in age betwixt and between winners of Upper
and Lower School races.  Scaife refused to train.  Desmond took a few
runs, but abandoned them for racquets, the chief game in the Easter
term, but only played regularly by boys whose purses are well lined.
John confined his attention to "Squash."  Caesar played "Harder" with
the Demon.  The three worked together as of yore.  John now perceived
that Scaife had joined a clique pledged to fight Reform.  It was in the
air that something might happen.  Warde eyed the big fellows shrewdly,
as if measuring weapons.  He confounded some by asking them to dine
with him.  At dessert he would talk of sport, or games, or
politics--everything, in fine, except "shop."  The more worthy came
away from these pleasant evenings with rather a hangdog expression, as
if they had been receiving goods under false pretences.  John and
Desmond were made especially welcome.  And, after dinner, John, whose
voice had not yet cracked, would sing, to Mrs. Warde's accompaniment,
such songs as "O Bay of Dublin, my heart yu're throublin'," or "Think
of me sometimes," or Handel's "Where'er you walk."  The Caterpillar
made no secret of a passion for Iris Warde, and became a dangerous
rival of one of the younger masters.  He talked to Warde about
genealogies and hunting, topics of conversation in which they had a
common interest outside Harrow.  John guessed that Warde was making an
effort to secure Egerton, who, for his part, took the world as he found
it, consorting alike with John and his friends, and also with Lovell
and Co.  From the Caterpillar John learned that Beaumont-Greene had
begun to play bridge.

"Scaife and Lovell are skinning the beast," he added confidentially.
"Green he is, and no error."

"Ructions soon," said John.

"I don't believe it," replied the Caterpillar.  "Take my word, Warde
knows what he's about.  He's playing up to the younger members of the
house--you, Caesar, and you, Jonathan--and he's letting the others
slide."

"Giving 'em rope," said John, "to hang 'emselves."

"Well, now, there's something in that.  That hadn't occurred to me.
What?  You think that he's eggin' 'em on, eh?  Eggin' 'em on!"

"I think that, if I were you, Caterpillar, I'd cut loose from that
gang."

"They've made it rather warm for you."

"I don't care a hang about that."

As a matter of fact, John's life had been made very unpleasant by the
fast set.  Upon the other hand, the Duffer, Fluff, and many Lower
School boys reckoned him their leader and adviser.  And--such is the
irony of Fate--John's popularity with friends caused him more anxiety
than unpopularity with enemies.  Towards the end of the term, Desmond
spoke of applying to Warde for a certain room to be shared by himself
and John.  John had to decline an arrangement desired passionately,
because he had indiscreetly promised not to chuck the Duffer.  Caesar
dropped the subject.  After this, John noticed a slight coldness.  He
wondered whether Caesar were jealous, jealousy being John's own
besetting sin.  Finally, he came to the conclusion that his friend
might be not jealous but unreasonable.  In any case, during the last
three weeks of the term, John saw less of Caesar, and more--more,
indeed, than he wanted--of the Duffer and Fluff.

And then came the paralysing news that Desmond had promised to spend
ten days with Scaife's people, that a Professional had been hired, and
that both boys were going to give their undivided energies to cricket.

Afterwards, John often wondered whether Scaife, with truly demoniac
insight into Desmond's character, had let him go, so as to seize him
with more tenacious grasp when an opportunity presented itself.


As soon as John saw Caesar after the Easter holidays, he knew that,
temporarily, at any rate, he had lost his friend.  Caesar, indeed, was
demonstratively glad to see him, and dragged him off next day to walk
to a certain bridge where a few short weeks before the boys had carved
their names upon the wooden railing, surrounding them with a circle and
the Crossed Arrows.  But Caesar could talk of nothing else but Scaife
and cricket.  They had both "come on" tremendously.  Scaife's people
had a splendid cricket-ground.

Poor John!  If he could have submerged the Scaife cricket-ground and
the Scaife family by nodding his head, I fear that he would have nodded
it, although he told himself that he was an ungenerous beast and cad
not to sympathize with his pal.

And before the boys got back to the Manor, Caesar said, not without a
blush, that he had learned to play bridge.

"I shall teach you, Jonathan."

"No."

"I say--yes."

"You're not going to play with Lovell and that beast Beaumont-Greene?"

"The Demon says no cards this term, when lock-up's late.  And look
here, Jonathan, I've made the Demon promise to make the peace between
Lovell and you.  You'll play for the House, of course, and we must all
pull together, as Warde says."

John might have smiled at this opportune mention of Warde, but sense of
humour was swamped in apprehension.  Desmond went on to talk about
Scaife.

"He'll make 'em sit up, you see!  The 'pro.' we had is the finest
cover-point in England.  I never saw such a chap.  He dashes at the
ball.  Hit it as hard as you please, he runs in, picks it up, and snaps
it back to the wicket-keeper as easy as if he was playing pitch and
toss.  And, by Jove! the Demon can do it.  You wait.  I never saw any
fellow like him.  He's only just sixteen, and he'll get his Flannels.
You needn't shake your old head, I know he will.  And we must work like
blazes to get ours next summer."

John discounted much of this talk, but he soon found out that Caesar
had not overestimated the Demon's activity.  The draw at Lord's in the
previous summer had been attributed, by such experts as Webbe and
Hornby, to bad fielding.  The Demon told John, with his hateful,
derisive smile, that he had remembered this when he selected a "pro."
Not for the first time, John realized Scaife's over-powering ability to
achieve his own ends.  Who, but Scaife, would have made fielding the
principal object of his holiday practice?

Within a fortnight, Scaife was put into the Sixth Form game.  Desmond
found himself--thanks to Scaife--playing in the First Fifth game; but
John was placed in Second Fifth Beta.  Fortunately, he found an ally in
Warde, who had a private pitch in the small park surrounding the Manor,
where he coached the weaker players of his House.  John told himself
that he ought to get his "cap"; but, as the weeks slipped by, despite
several creditable performances, he became aware that the "cap" was
withheld, although it had been given to Fluff.  There were five
vacancies in the House Eleven, but, according to precedent, these need
not be filled up till after the last House-match, and possibly not even
then.  In a word, John might play for the House, and even distinguish
himself, without receiving the coveted distinction.  How sore John felt!

About the end of May he noticed that something was amiss with Caesar.
Generally they walked together on Sunday, but not always.  During these
walks, as has been said, Caesar did most of the talking.  Now, of a
sudden, he became a half-hearted listener, and to John's repeated
question, "What's up?" he would reply irritably, "Oh, don't
bother--nothing."

Finally, John heard from the Caterpillar that Caesar was playing
bridge, and losing.

"They don't play often," the Caterpillar added; "but on wet afternoons
they make up for lost time.  Caesar is outclassed.  I've told him, but
he's mad keen about the game."

Later, John learned from the same source that Sunday afternoon was a
bridge-fixture with Lovell and Co.  At any rate, Caesar did not play on
Sunday.  That was something.

Upon the following Saturday, after making an honest fifteen runs and
taking three wickets in a closely-contested game, John was running into
the Yard just before six Bill, when Lovell stopped him.

"You can get your 'cap,'" he said coldly.

"Oh, thanks; thanks awfully!"

Caesar received this agreeable news with indifference.

"You ought to have had it before Fluff," he growled.

"To-morrow, we'll walk to John Lyon's farm," said John, eagerly.

"Engaged," Caesar replied.

"Oh, Caesar, you're--you're----"

"Well?"

"You're going to play bridge?"

"Yes.  What of it?  It's only once in a way.  I _do_ bar cards on
Sunday; but there are reasons."

"What reasons?"

"Reasons which--er--I'll keep to myself."

"All right," said John, stiffly, but with a breaking heart.

Next day he asked Fluff to walk with him, but Fluff was walking with
some one else.  The Duffer had letters to write, and stigmatized
walking as a beastly grind.  John determined to walk by himself; but as
he was leaving the Manor he met the Caterpillar, a tremendous buck,
arrayed in his best--patent-leather boots, white waistcoat, a flower in
his buttonhole.

"Where are you off to, Jonathan?"

"To Preston.  You'd better come, Caterpillar."

"I never walk far in these boots.  Peal made 'em."

"Change 'em, can't you?"

"Right."

While he was absent, John seriously considered the propriety of taking
Egerton into his confidence.  Sincerely attached to Egerton, and
valuing his advice, he knew, none the less, that the Caterpillar looked
at everybody and everything with the eyes of a colonel in the Guards.
To tell Colonel Egerton's son that one's heart was lacerated because
Caesar Desmond was playing bridge on Sunday, seemed to invite jeers.
And, besides, that wasn't the real reason.  John felt wretched because
the Sunday walk had been sacrificed to Moloch.  Presently Egerton came
downstairs, spick and span, but not quite so smart.  The boys walked
quickly, talking of cricket.

"The Demon'll get his Flannels," said Egerton.  "I'm glad Lovell gave
you your cap, Jonathan; you deserved it a month ago.  It wasn't my
fault you didn't get it at the beginning of the term."

"I'm sure of that," said John, gratefully.

"You don't look particularly bucked-up.  A grin improves your face, my
dear fellow."

At this John burst into explosive speech.  Those beasts had got hold of
Caesar.  The Caterpillar stared; he had never heard John let himself
go.  John's vocabulary surprised him.

"Whew-w-w!" he whistled.  "Gad!  Jonathan, you do pile on the agony.
Caesar's all right.  Don't worry."

"He's not all right.  I thought Caesar had backbone, I----"

"Hold on," said the Caterpillar, gravely.

John thought he was about to be rebuked for disloyalty to a pal, an
abominable sin in the Caterpillar's eyes.

"Well?" said John.

"I'm going to tell you something," said Egerton.  "But you must swear
not to give me away."

"I'll swear."

"You're a good little cove, Jonathan, but sometimes you smell just a
little bit of--er--bread and butter.  Keep cool.  Personally, I would
sooner that you, at your age, did smell of bread and butter than
whisky.  Well, you think that Caesar is going straight to the bow-wows
because he plays bridge.  You accuse him in your own little mind of
feebleness, and so forth.  Yes, just so.  And it's doosid unfair to
Caesar, because he's given up his walk to-day entirely on your account.
Ah!  I thought that would make you sit up."

"My account?" John repeated blankly.

"Yes; Caesar would be furious if he knew that I was peaching, but he
won't know, and instead of this--er--trifling affair weakening your
good opinion of your pal, it will strengthen it."

"Oh, do go on, Caterpillar."

"Yesterday I was in Lovell's room.  We were talking of the first House
match.  Scaife and Caesar were there.  I took it upon myself to say you
ought to be given your 'cap'; and then Caesar burst out, 'Oh yes,
Lovell, do give him his "cap."  If you knew how he'd slaved to earn
it.'  But Lovell only laughed.  And then Scaife chipped in, 'Look here,
Caesar,' he said, 'do I understand that you put this thing, which after
all is none of your business or mine, as a favour which Lovell might do
_you_?'  And Caesar answered, 'You can put it that way, if you like,
Demon.'  And then Scaife laughed.  I don't like Scaife's laugh,
Jonathan."

"I loathe it," said John.

"Well, when Scaife laughed, Lovell looked first at him and then at
Caesar.  It came to me that Lovell was primed to say something.  At any
rate, he turned to Caesar, and said slowly, 'Tit for tat.  If I do this
for you, will you do something for me?'  And Caesar spoke up as usual,
without a second's hesitation, 'Of course, I will.'  And then Scaife
laughed again, just as Lovell said, 'All right, I'll give Verney his
"cap" before tea, and you will make a fourth at bridge with us
to-morrow afternoon.'"

"Oh, oh!" groaned John.

"Dash it all, don't look so wretched.  There's not much more.  Caesar
hesitated a moment.  Then he said quietly enough, 'Done!'  Personally,
I don't think Lovell was playing--well--cricket, but I do know that he
wanted a fourth at bridge, because I'd just refused to make that fourth
myself.  They play too high for me."

"It's awfully good of you to have told me this."

"Pray don't mention it!  Hullo!  What's up now?"

John's face was very red, and his fists were clenched.

"Nothing," he gasped.  "Only this--I'd like to kill Scaife.  I'd like
to cut off his infernal head."

The Caterpillar laughed indulgently.  "Jonathan, you're a rum 'un.  You
think it wicked to play cards on Sunday; but you would like"--he
imitated John's trembling, passionate voice--"you would like to cut off
Scaife's infernal head."

"Yes--I would," said John.

That same week he had a memorable talk with Warde; recorded because it
illustrates Warde's methods, and because, ultimately, it came to be
regarded by John as the turning-point of his intellectual life.  Since
he had taken the Lower Remove, John's energies of mind and body had
been concentrated upon improving himself at games.  Vaguely aware that
some of the School-prizes were within his grasp, he had not deemed them
worth the winning.  To him, therefore, Warde abruptly began--

"You pride yourself upon being straight--eh, Verney?"

"Why, yes," said John, meeting Warde's blue eyes not without misgiving.

"Well, to me, you're about as straight as a note of interrogation.  I
never see you without saying to myself, 'Is Verney going to bury his
talents in the cricket-ground?'"

"Oh!"

"Some parents, too many of them, send their boys here to make a few
nice friends, to play games, to scrape up the School with a remove once
a year.  That, I take it, is not what Mrs. Verney wants?"

"N--no, sir."

"You ought to be in the Sixth--and you know it.  Twice, or oftener, you
have deliberately taken things easy, because you wanted a soft time of
it during the summer term, and because you wished to remain in the same
form with Desmond, who, intellectually, is your--inferior.  Is that
square dealing with your people?"

John was silent, but red of countenance.  Warde went on, more
vehemently--

"I know all about your co-operative system of work.  I have a harder
name for it.  And I know just what you can do, and I want to see you do
it, for your own sake, for the sake of Mrs. Verney, and for the Hill's
sake.  I've pushed you on at cricket a bit, haven't I?  Yes.  You owe
me something.  Pay up by entering for a School-prize, and winning it!"

"A School-prize?"

"Yes; Lord Charles Russell's Shakespeare Medal.  The exam. is next
October.  I'll coach you.  Is it a bargain?"

He held out his hand, staring frankly, but piercingly, into John's eyes.

"All right, sir," said John, after a pause.  "I'll try."

"And buck up for your remove."

John smiled feebly, and sighed.



[1] There is a tablet on the wall of the Old Schools which bears the
following inscription:--Near this spot ANTHONY ASHLEY COOPER Afterwards
the 7th Earl of Shaftesbury, K.G.  While yet a boy in Harrow School Saw
with shame and indignation The pauper's funeral Which helped to awaken
his lifelong Devotion to the service of the poor And the oppressed.




CHAPTER IX

BLACK SPOTS

  "The Avon bears to endless years
    A magic voice along,
  Where Shakespeare strayed in Stratford's shade,
    And waked the world to song.
  We heard the music soft and wild,
    We thrilled to pulses new;
  The winds that reared the Avon's child
    Were Herga's[1] nurses too."


That evening John told Caesar what Warde had said to him, and then
added, "I mean to have a shot at 'the Swan of Avon.'"  Caesar looked
glum.

"But how about the remove?  We'd agreed to stay in the Second Fifth
till Christmas.  It's the jolliest form in the school."

"If we put our backs--and heads--into Trials,[2] we can easily get a
remove."

"Blow Trials."

John turned aside.

"Look here, Jonathan," said Caesar, eagerly.  "To please me, give up
your swatting scheme.  We can't spoil the end of this jolly term."

He caught hold of John's arm, squeezing it affectionately.  Never had
our hero been so sorely tempted.

"We must stick together, you and I," entreated Desmond.

"No," said John.

"As you please," Caesar replied coldly.

A detestable week followed.  John tackled his Shakespeare alone,
working doggedly.  Then, quite suddenly, the giant gripped him.  He had
always possessed a remarkable memory, and as a child he had learnt by
heart many passages out of the plays (a fact well known to the crafty
Warde); but these he had swallowed without digesting them.  Now he
became keen, the keener because he met with violent opposition from the
Caterpillar and the Duffer, who were of opinion that Shakespeare was a
"back number."

John won the prize, and on the following Speech Day saw his mother's
face radiant with pride and happiness, as he received the Medal from
the Head Master's hands.

"You look as pleased as if I'd got my Flannels," said John.

"Surely this Medal is a greater thing?"

"Oh, mum, you don't know much about boys."

"Perhaps not, but," her eyes twinkled, "I know something about
Shakespeare, and he's a friend that will stand by you when cricketing
days are over."

"If you're pleased, so am I," said John.


Scaife got his Flannels; and at Lord's his fielding was mentioned as
the finest ever seen in a Public School match.  John witnessed the game
from the top of the Trent coach, and he stopped at Trent House.  But he
didn't enjoy his exeat, because he knew that Caesar was in trouble.
Caesar owed Scaife thirteen pounds, and the fact that this debt could
not be paid without confession to his father was driving him
distracted.  Scaife, it is true, laughed genially at Caesar's distress.
"Settle when you please," he said; "but, for Heaven's sake, don't peach
to your governor!  Mine would laugh and pay up; yours will pay up and
make you swear not to touch another card while you're at Harrow."

"Just what he _will_ do," Caesar told John.

"And the best thing that could happen," John said bluntly.  "If you
don't cut loose now, it will be much worse next term."

"Rot," Desmond had replied.  "I'm paying the usual bill for learning a
difficult game.  That's how the Demon puts it.  But I've a turn for
bridge, and now I can hold my own.  I'm better than Beaumont-Greene,
and quite as good as Lovell.  The Demon, of course, is in another
class."

"And therefore he oughtn't to play with you.  It's robbery."

"Now you're talking bosh."

The Eton and Harrow match ended in another draw.  Time and Scaife's
fielding saved Harrow from defeat.  The fact of a draw had
significance.  A draw spelled compromise.  John had indulged in a
superstitious fancy common enough to persons older than he.  "If Harrow
wins," he put it to himself, "Caesar will triumph; if Eton wins, Caesar
will lose."  When the match proved a draw, John drew the conclusion
that his pal would "funk" telling the truth; an apprehension presently
confirmed.

"I didn't tell the governor," said Caesar, when John and he met.  "My
eldest brother, Hugo, is coming home, and I shall screw it out of him.
He's a good sort, and he's going to marry a girl who is simply rolling.
He'll fork out, I know he will.  I feel awfully cheery."

"I don't," said John.

He had good reason to fear that Caesar and he were drifting apart.  Now
he worked by himself.  And his voice had broken.  A small thing this,
but John was sensible that his singing voice touched corners in
Caesar's soul to which his speaking voice never penetrated.  More,
Caesar and he had agreed to differ upon points of conscience other than
card-playing.  And every point of conscientious difference increases
the distance between true friends in geometrical progression.  Poor
Jonathan!

But we have his grateful testimony that Warde stood by him.  And Warde
made him see life at Harrow (and beyond) in a new light.  Warde,
indeed, decomposed the light into primary colours, a sort of experiment
in moral chemistry, and not without fascination for an intelligent boy.
Sometimes, it became difficult to follow Warde--members of the Alpine
Club said that often it was impossible--because he jumped where others
crawled.  And he clipped words, phrases, thoughts so uncommonly short.

"You're beginning to see, Verney, eh?  Scales crumbling away, my boy.
And strong sunshine hurts the eyes--at first.  Black spots are dancing
before you.  I know the little devils."

Or again--

"This remove will wipe a bit more off the debt, won't it?  Ha, ha!
I've made you reckon up what you owe Mrs. Verney.  But there are
others----"

"I'm awfully grateful to you, sir."

"Never mind me."

"What do you mean, sir?"

"New Testament; Matthew; twenty-fifth chapter--I forget verse.[3]  Look
it up.  Christ answers your question.  Make life easier and happier for
some of the new boys.  Pass on gratitude.  Set it a-rolling.  See?"

John had appetite for such talk, but Warde never gave much of it--half
a dozen sentences, a smile, a nod of the head, a keen look, and a
striding off elsewhere.  But when John repeated what Warde had said to
Caesar, that young gentleman looked uneasy.

"Warde means well," he said; "and he's doing wonders with the Manor,
but I hope he's not going to make a sort of tin parson of you?"

"As if he could!" said John.

"You're miles ahead of me, Jonathan."

"No, no."

"I say--yes."

"Caesar," said John, in desperation, "perhaps we _are_ sliding apart,
but it isn't my fault, indeed it isn't.  And think what it means
to--me.  You've heaps of friends, and I never was first, I know that.
You can do without me, but I can't do without you."

"Dear old Jonathan."  Caesar held out his hand, smiling.

"I'm a jealous ass, Caesar.  And, as for calling me a parson," he
laughed scornfully, "why, I'd sooner walk with you, even if you were
the worst sinner in the world, than with any saint that ever lived."

The feeling in John's voice drove Caesar's gay smile from his face.
Did he realize, possibly, for the first time, that if John and he
remained friends, he might drag John down?  Suddenly his face
brightened.

"Jonathan," he said gravely, "to please you, I'll not touch a card
again this term, and we'll have such good times this last three weeks
that you'll forget the rest of it."

  'And what delights can equal those
    That stir the spirit's inner deeps,
    When one that loves but knows not reaps
  A truth from one that loves and knows?


The Manor played in the cock-house match at cricket, being but barely
defeated by Damer's.  Everybody admitted that this glorious state of
affairs was due to Warde's coaching of the weaker members of the
Eleven.  Scaife fielded brilliantly, and John, watching him, said to
himself that at such times the Demon was irresistible, Warde invited
the Eleven to dinner, and spoke of nothing but football, much to every
one's amusement.

"He's right," said the Caterpillar; "we're not cock-house at cricket
this year, but we may be at footer."

John spent his holidays abroad with his mother, and when the School
reassembled, he found himself in the First Fifth _alone_.  With
satisfaction he reflected that this was Lovell's last term, and
Beaumont-Greene's too.  Warde said a few words at first lock-up.

"We are going to be cock-house at footer, I hope," he began, "and next
term Scaife will show the School what he can do at racquets; but I want
more.  I'm a glutton.  How about work, eh?  Lot o' slacking last term.
Is it honest?  You fellows cost your people a deal of money.  And it's
well spent, if, _if_ you tackle everything in school life as you
tackled Mr. Damer's last July.  That's all."

"He's giving you what he gave me," said John.

"Good fellow, Warde," observed the Caterpillar; "in his room every
night after prayers to mug up his form work."

"What?"  Murmurs of incredulity.

"Fact, 'pon my word.  And he never refuses a 'con' to a fellow who
wants it."

"He's paid for it," sneered Scaife.

The other boys nodded; enthusiasm was chilled.  Yes, of course Warde
was paid for it.  John caught Scaife's eye.

"You don't believe that he's in love with his job, as he told us?"

"Skittles--that!"

John looked solemn.  He had a bomb to throw.

"Skittles, is it?" he echoed.  The other boys turned to listen.  "Do
you think he'd take a better-paid billet?"

Scaife laughed derisively.  "Of course he would, like a shot.  But he's
not likely to get the chance."

"He has just been offered the Head Mastership of Wellborough.  It's
worth about four thousand a year."

"Pooh! who told you that?"

"Caesar's father."

"It's true," said Caesar.

"And he refused it," said John, triumphantly.

"Then he's a fool," said Scaife, angrily.  He marched out of the room,
slamming the door.  But the Manor, as a corporate body, when it heard
of Warde's refusal to accept promotion, was profoundly impressed.  Thus
the term began with good resolutions upon the part of the better sort.

Very soon, however, with the shortening days, bridge began again.  John
made no protest, afraid of losing his pal.  He called himself coward,
and considered the expediency of learning bridge, so as to be in the
same boat with Caesar.  Caesar told him that he had not asked his
brother Hugo for the thirteen pounds.  Hugo, it seemed, had come back
from Teheran with a decoration and the air of an ambassador.  He spoke
of his "services."

"I knew that Hugo would make me swear not to play again," said Caesar
to John, "and, naturally, I want to get some of the plunder back.  I am
getting it back.  I raked thirty bob out of Beaumont-Greene last night."

John said nothing.

Presently it came to his ears that Caesar was getting more plunder
back.  The Caterpillar, an agreeable gossip, because he condemned
nothing except dirt and low-breeding, told John that Beaumont-Greene
was losing many shekels.  And about the middle of October Caesar said
to John--

"What do you think, old Jonathan?  I've jolly nearly paid on the Demon.
And you wanted me to chuck the thing.  Nice sort of counsellor."

"Beaumont-Greene must have lost a pot?"

"You bet," said Caesar; "but that doesn't keep me awake at night.  He
has got the _Imperishable Seamless Whaleskin Boot_ behind him."

Next time John met Beaumont-Greene he eyed him sharply.  The big fellow
was pulpier than ever; his complexion the colour of skilly.  Yes; he
looked much worried.  Perhaps the "Imperishable Boot" lasted too long.
And, nowadays, so many fellows wore shoes.  Thus John to himself.

Beaumont-Greene, indeed, not only looked worried, he was worried,
hideously worried, and with excellent reason.  He had an absurdly,
wickedly, large allowance, but not more than a sovereign of it was
left.  More, he owed Scaife twenty pounds, and Lovell another ten.
Both these young gentlemen had hinted plainly that they wanted to see
their money.

"I must have the stuff now," said Lovell, when Beaumont-Greene asked
for time.  "I'm going to shoot a lot this Christmas, and the governor
makes me pay for my cartridges."

"So does mine," said Scaife, grinning.  He was quite indifferent to the
money, but he liked to see Beaumont-Greene squirm.  He continued
suavely, "You ought to settle before you leave.  Ain't your people in
Rome?  Yes.  And you're going to join 'em.  Why, hang it, some Dago may
stick a knife into you, and where should we be then--hey?  Your
governor wouldn't settle a gambling debt, would he?"

This was too true.  Scaife grinned diabolically.  He knew that
Beaumont-Greene's father was endeavouring to establish a credit-account
with the Recording Angel.  Originally a Nonconformist, he had joined
the Church of England after he had made his fortune (cf. _Shavings from
the Workshops of our Merchant Princes_, which appeared in the pages of
"Prattle").  Then, the famous inventor of the Imperishable Boot had
taken to endowing churches; and he published pamphlets denouncing drink
and gambling, pamphlets sent to his son at Harrow, who (with an eye to
backsheesh) had praised his sire's prose somewhat indiscreetly.

"You shall have your confounded money," said Beaumont-Greene, violently.

"Thanks," said Scaife, sweetly.  "When we asked you to join us" (slight
emphasis on the "us"), "we knew that we could rely on you to settle
promptly."

The Demon grinned for the third time, knowing that he had touched a
weak spot; not a difficult thing to do, if you touched the big fellow
at all.  A young man of spirit would have told his creditors to go to
Jericho.  Beaumont-Greene might have said, "You have skinned me a bit.
I don't whine about that; I mean to pay up; but you'll have to wait
till I have the money.  I'm stoney now."  Scaife and Lovell must have
accepted this as an ultimatum.  But Beaumont-Greene's wretched pride
interfered.  He had posed as a sort of Golden Youth.  To confess
himself pinchbeck seemed an unspeakable humiliation.

Men have been known to take to drink under the impending sword of
dishonour.  Beaumont-Greene swallowed instead large quantities of food
at the Creameries; and then wrote to his father, saying that he would
like to have a cheque for thirty pounds by return of post.  He was
leaving Harrow, he pointed out, and he wished to give his friends some
handsome presents.  Young Desmond, for instance, the great minister's
son, had been kind to him (Beaumont-Greene prided himself upon this
touch), and Scaife, too, he was under obligations to Scaife, who would
be a power by-and-by, and so forth. . . .  To confess frankly that he
owed thirty pounds gambled away at cards required more cheek than our
stout youth possessed.  His father refused to play bridge on principle,
because he could never remember how many trumps were out.

The father answered by return of post, but enclosed no cheque.  He
pointed out to his dear Thomas that giving handsome presents with
another's money was an objectionable habit.  Thomas received a large,
possibly too large an allowance.  He must exercise self-denial, if he
wished to make presents.  His quarterly allowance would be paid as
usual next Christmas, and not a minute before.  There would be time
then to reconsider the propriety of giving young Desmond a suitable
gift. . . .

Common sense told Beaumont-Greene to show this letter to Scaife and
Lovell.  But he saw the Demon's derisive grin, and recoiled from it.

At this moment temptation seized him relentlessly.  Beaumont-Greene
never resisted temptation.  For fun, so he put it, he would write the
sort of letter which his father ought to have written, and which would
have put him at his ease.  It ran thus--

"MY DEAR THOMAS,

"No doubt you will want to give some leaving presents, and a spread or
two.  I should like my son to do the thing handsomely.  You know better
than I how much this will cost, but I am prepared to send you, say
twenty-five or thirty pounds for such a purpose.  Or, you can have the
bills sent to me.

"With love,

"Your affectionate father,

"GEORGE BEAUMONT-GREENE."


Beaumont-Greene, like the immortal Mr. Toots, rather fancied himself as
a letter-writer.  The longer he looked at his effusion, the more he
liked it.  His handwriting was not unlike his father's--modelled,
indeed, upon it.  With a little careful manipulation of a few
letters----!

The day was cold, but Beaumont-Greene suddenly found himself in a
perspiration.  None the less, it seemed easier to forge a letter than
to avow himself penniless.  Detection?  Impossible!  Two or three
tradesmen in Harrow would advance the money if he showed them this
letter.  Next Christmas they would be paid.  Within a quarter of an
hour he made up his mind to cross the Rubicon, and crossed it with
undue haste.  He forged the letter, placed it in an envelope which had
come from Rome, and went to his tailor's.

Under pretext of looking at patterns, he led the man aside.

"You can do me a favour," he began, in his usual heavy, hesitating
manner.

"With pleasure," said the tradesman, smiling.  Then, seeing an
opportunity, he added, "You are leaving Harrow, Mr. Beaumont-Greene,
but I trust, sir, you will not take your custom with you.  We have
always tried to please you."

Beaumont-Greene, in his turn, saw opportunity.

"Yes, yes," he answered.  Then he produced the letter, envelope and
all.  "I have here a letter from my father, who is in Rome.  I'll read
it to you.  No; you can read it yourself."

The tailor read the letter.

"Very handsome," he replied; "_very_ handsome indeed, sir.  Your father
is a true gentleman."

"It happens," said Beaumont-Greene, more easily, for the thing seemed
to be simpler than he had anticipated--"it happens that I _do_ want to
make some presents, but I'm not going to buy them here.  I shall send
to the Stores, you know.  I have their catalogue."

"Just so, sir.  Excellent place the Stores for nearly everything;
except, perhaps, my line."

"I should not think of buying clothes there.  But at the Stores one
must pay cash.  I've not got the cash, and my father is in Rome.  I
should like to have the money to-day, if possible.  Will you oblige me?"

The tradesman hesitated.  In the past there have been grave scandals
connected with lending money to boys.  And Harrow tradesmen are at the
mercy of the Head Master.  If a school-tailor be put out of bounds, he
can put up his shutters at once.  Still----

"I'll let you have the money," said the man, eying Beaumont-Greene
keenly.

"Thanks."

The tailor observed a slight flush and a sudden intake of breath--signs
which stirred suspicion.

"Will you take it in notes, sir?"

Here Beaumont-Greene made his first blunder.  He had an ill-defined
idea that paper was dangerous stuff.

"In gold, please."

He forgot that gold is not easily sent in a letter.  The tailor
hesitated, but he had gone too far to back out.

"Very well, sir.  I have not twenty-five pounds----"

"Thirty, if you please.  I shall want thirty."

"I have not quite that amount here, but I can get it."

When the man came back with a small canvas bag in his hand,
Beaumont-Greene had pocketed the letter.  He received the money,
counted it, thanked the tailor, and turned to go.

"If you please, sir----"

"Yes?"

"I should like to keep your father's letter, sir.  As a form of
receipt, sir.  When you settle I'll return it.  If--if anything should
happen to--to you, sir, where would I be?"

Beaumont-Greene's temper showed itself.

"You all talk as if I was on my death-bed," he said.

The tailor stared.  Others, then, had suggested to this large,
unwholesome youth the possibility of premature decease.

"Not at all, sir, but we do live in the valley of shadders.  My wife's
step-father, as fine and hearty a specimen as you'd wish to see, sir,
was taken only last month; at breakfast, too, as he was chipping his
third egg."

Beaumont-Greene said loftily, "Blow your wife's step-father and his
third egg.  Here's the letter."

He flung down the letter and marched out of the shop.  The tradesman
looked at him, shaking his head.  "He'll never come back," he muttered.
"I know his sort too well."  Then, business happening to be slack, he
re-read the letter before putting it away.  Then he whistled softly and
read it for the third time, frowning and biting his lips.  The
"Beaumont-Greene" in the signature and on the envelope did not look to
be written by the same hand.

"There's something fishy here," muttered the tradesman.  "I must show
this to Amelia."

It was his habit to consult his wife in emergencies.  The chief cutter
and two assistants said that Amelia was the power behind the throne.
Amelia read the letter, listened to what her husband had to say, stared
hard at the envelope, and delivered herself--

"The hand that wrote the envelope never wrote the letter, that's
plain--to me.  Now, William, you've got me and the children to think
of.  This may mean the loss of our business, and worse too.  You put on
your hat and go straight to the Manor.  Mr. Warde's a gentleman, and I
don't think he'll let me and the children suffer for your foolishness.
Don't you wait another minute."

Nor did he.


After prayers that night, Warde asked Beaumont-Greene to come to his
study.  Beaumont-Greene obeyed, smiling blandly.  Within three weeks he
was leaving; doubtless Warde wanted to say something civil.  The big
fellow was feeling quite himself.  He had paid Scaife and Lovell, not
without a little pardonable braggadocio.

"You fellows have put me to some inconvenience," he said.  "I make it a
rule not to run things fine, but after all thirty quid is no great sum.
Here you are."

"We don't want to drive you into the workhouse," said Scaife.  "Thanks.
Give you your revenge any time.  I dare say between now and the end of
the term you'll have most of it back."

Warde asked Beaumont-Greene to sit down in a particular chair, which
faced the light from a large lamp.  Then he took up an envelope.
Suddenly cold chills trickled down Beaumont-Greene's spine.  He
recognized the envelope.  That scoundrel had betrayed him.  Not for a
moment, however, did he suppose that the forgery had been detected.

"On the strength of this letter," said Warde, gravely, "you borrowed
thirty pounds from a tradesman?"

Denial being fatuous, Beaumont-Greene said--

"Yes, sir."

"You know, I suppose, that Harrow tradesmen are expressly forbidden to
lend boys money?"

"I am hardly a boy, sir.  And--er--under the circumstances----"

Warde smiled very grimly.

"Ah--under the circumstances.  Have you any objection to telling me the
exact circumstances?"

"Not at all, sir.  I wished to make some presents to my friends.  I am
going to give a large leaving-breakfast."

"Oh!  Still, thirty pounds is a large sum----"

"Not to my father, sir.  I--er--thought of coming to you, sir, with
that letter."

"Did you?"

Warde took the letter from the envelope, and glanced at it with faint
interest, so Beaumont-Greene thought.  Then he picked up a magnifying
glass and played with it.  It was a trick of his to pick up objects on
his desk, and turn them in his thin nervous fingers.  Beaumont-Greene
was not seriously alarmed.  He had great faith in a weapon which had
served him faithfully, his lying tongue.

"Yes, sir.  I thought you would be willing to advance the money for a
few days, and then----"

"And then?"

"And then I thought I wouldn't bother you.  It never occurred to me
that I was getting a tradesman into trouble.  I hope you won't be hard
on him, sir."

"I shall not be hard on him," said Warde, "because"--for a moment his
eyes flashed--"because he came to me and confessed his fault; but I
won't deny that I gave him a very uncomfortable quarter of an hour.  He
sat in your chair."

Beaumont-Greene shuffled uneasily.

"Have you this thirty pounds in your pocket?" asked Warde, casually.

Beaumont-Greene began to regret his haste in settling.

"No, sir."

"Some of it?"

"None of it."

"You sent it to London?  To buy these handsome presents?"

"Ye-es, sir."

"You hadn't much time.  Lock-up's early, and you received the money in
gold.  Did you buy Orders?"

Beaumont-Greene's head began to buzz.  He found himself wondering why
Warde was speaking in this smooth, quiet voice, so different from his
usual curt, incisive tones.

"Yes, sir."

"At the Harrow post-office?"

"Yes, sir."

"Ah."

Again the house-master picked up the letter, but this time he didn't
lay down the lens.  Instead he used it, very deliberately.
Beaumont-Greene shivered; with difficulty he clenched his teeth, so as
to prevent them clicking like castanets.  Then Warde held up the sheet
of paper to the light of the lamp.  Obviously he wished to examine the
watermark.  The paper was thin notepaper, the kind that is sold
everywhere for foreign correspondence.  Beaumont-Greene, economical in
such matters, had bought a couple of quires when his people went
abroad.  The paper he had bought did not quite match the Roman
envelope.  Warde opened a drawer, from which he took some thin paper.
This also he held up to the light.

"It's an odd coincidence," he said, tranquilly; "your father in Rome
uses the same notepaper that I buy here.  But the envelope is Italian?"

He spoke interrogatively, but the wretch opposite had lost the power of
speech.  He collapsed.  Warde rose, throwing aside his quiet manner as
if it were a drab-coloured cloak.  Now he was himself, alert, on edge,
sanguine.

"You fool!" he exclaimed; "you clumsy fool!  Why, a child could find
you out.  And you--you have dared to play with such an edged tool as
forgery.  Now, do the one thing which is left to you: make a clean
breast of it to me--at once."

In imposing this command, a command which he knew would be obeyed,
inasmuch as he perceived that he dominated the weak grovelling creature
in front of him, Warde overlooked the possibility that this boy's
confession might implicate other boys.  Already he had formed in his
mind a working hypothesis to account for this forged letter.  The
fellow, no doubt, was in debt to some Harrow townsman.

"For whom did you _steal_ this money?  To whom did you pay it to-day?
Answer!"

And he was answered.

"I owed the money to Scaife and Lovell."

Then he told the story of the card-playing.  At the last word he fell
on his knees, blubbering.

"Get up," said  Warde, sharply.  "Pull yourself together if you can."

The master began to walk up and down the room, frowning and biting his
lips.  From time to time he glanced at Beaumont-Greene.  Seeing his
utter collapse, he rang the bell, answered by the ever-discreet
Dumbleton.

"Dumbleton, take Mr. Beaumont-Greene to the sick-room.  There is no one
in it, I believe?"

"No, sir."

"You will fetch what he may require for the night; quietly, you
understand."

"Very good, sir."

"Follow Dumbleton," Warde addressed Beaumont-Greene.  "You will
consider yourself under arrest.  Your meals will be brought to you.
You will hold no communication with anybody except Dumbleton and me;
you will send no messages; you will write no notes.  Do you hear?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then go."

Dumbleton opened the door.  Young man and servant passed out and into
the passage beyond.  Warde waited one moment, then he followed them
into the passage; but instead of going upstairs, he paused for an
instant with his fingers upon the handle of the door which led from the
private side to the boys' quarters.  He sighed as he passed through.

At this moment Lovell was sitting in his room alone with Scaife.  They
had no suspicion of what had taken place in the study.  In the
afternoon there had been a match with an Old Harrovian team, and both
Scaife and Lovell had played for the School.  But as yet neither had
got his Flannels.  As Warde passed through the private side door,
Scaife was saying angrily--

"I believe Challoner" (Challoner was captain of the football Eleven and
a monitor) "has a grudge against us.  If we had a chance--and we
had--of getting our Flannels last year, why isn't it a cert. this, eh?"

Lovell shrugged his shoulders.

"It is a cert.," he answered; "and you're right.  Challoner doesn't
like us, and it amuses him to keep us out of our just rights.  The
monitors know I detest 'em, and they don't think you're called the
Demon for nothing.  Challoner is more of a monitor than a
footer-player.  How about a rubber?  There's just time."

"I don't mind."

Lovell went to the door and opened it.

"Bo-o-o-o-o-o-y!"

The familiar cry--that imperious call which makes an Harrovian feel
himself master of more or less willing slaves--echoed through the
house.  Immediately the night-fag came running; it was not considered
healthy to keep Lovell waiting.

"Ask Beaumont-Greene to come up here and----"

He paused.  Warde had just turned the corner, and was approaching.
Lovell hesitated.  Then he repeated what he had just said, with a
slight variation for Warde's benefit.  "Tell him I want to ask him a
question about the house-subscriptions."

"Right," said the fag, bustling off.

Lovell waited to receive his house-master.  He had very good manners.

"Can I do anything for you, sir?" he asked.

"Yes," said Warde, deliberately.  He entered Lovell's room and looked
at Scaife, who rose at once.

"I wish to speak with you alone, Lovell."

"Certainly, sir.  Won't you sit down?"

Warde waited till Scaife had closed the door, then he said quietly--

"Lovell, does Beaumont-Greene owe you money?"



[1] The Anglo-Saxon form of Harrow.

[2] The terminal examination.

[3] "Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these My
brethren, ye have done it unto Me."




CHAPTER X

DECAPITATION

"Ferdinand Mendez Pinto was but a type of thee, thou liar of the first
magnitude!"


Lovell betrayed his astonishment by a slight start; however, he faced
Warde with a smile.  Warde, clean-shaven, alert, with youthful figure,
looked but little older than his pupil.  For a moment the two stared
steadily at each other; then, very politely, Lovell said--

"No, sir, he does not."

Warde continued curtly, "Then he has paid you what he did owe you?"

Lovell nodded, shrugging his shoulders.  Plainly, Warde had discovered
the fact of the debt.  Probably that fool Beaumont-Greene had applied
to his father, and the father had written to Warde.  It was unthinkable
that Warde knew more than this.  Having reached this conclusion, Lovell
turned over in his mind two or three specious lies that might meet the
exigency.

"Yes," he replied, with apparent frankness, "Beaumont-Greene did owe me
money, and he has paid me."

After a slight pause, Warde said quietly, "It is my duty, as your
tutor, to ask you how Beaumont-Greene became indebted to you?"

"I lent him the money," said Lovell.

"Ah!  Please call 'Boy.'"

Lovell went into the passage.  Had he an intuition that he was about to
call "Boy" for the last time, or did the pent-up excitement find an
outlet in sound?  He had never called "Boy" so loudly or clearly.  The
night-fag scurried up again.

"Tell him to send Scaife here," said Warde.

Lovell's florid face paled.  Scaife would introduce complications.  And
yet, if it had come to Warde's ears that Beaumont-Greene was in debt to
two of his school-fellows, and if he had found out the name of one, it
was not surprising that he knew the name of the other also.  As he gave
the fag the message, he regretted that Scaife and he could not have a
minute's private conversation together.

"You lent Beaumont-Greene ten pounds, Lovell?"

"Yes, sir."

Scaife came in, cool, handsomer than usual because of the sparkle in
his eyes.

"Shut the door, Scaife.  Look at me, please.  Beaumont-Greene owed you
money?"

Scaife glanced at Lovell, whose left eyelid quivered.

"Kindly stand behind Scaife, Lovell.  Thank you.  Answer my question,
Scaife."

"Yes, sir; he owed me money."

"Have you lent him money too?" said Lovell.

It was admirably done--the hint cleverly conveyed, the mild amazement.
Warde smiled grimly.  Scaife understood, and took his cue.

"Yes; I have lent him money," said he, after a slight pause.

"Twenty pounds?"

"I believe, sir, that is the amount."

"And can you offer me any explanation why Beaumont-Greene, whose
father, to my knowledge, has always given him a very large allowance,
should borrow thirty pounds of you two?"

"I haven't the smallest idea, have you, Lovell?"

"No," said Lovell.  "Unless his younger brother, who is at Eton, has
got into trouble.  He's very fond of his brothers."

"Um!  You speak up for your--friend."

Lovell frowned.  "A friend, sir--no."

"Of course," said Warde, reflectively, "if it is true that
Beaumont-Greene borrowed this money to help a brother----"

He paused, staring at Lovell.  From the bottom of a big heart he was
praying that Lovell would not lie.

"Beaumont-Greene certainly gave me to understand that the affair was
pressing.  Having the money, I hadn't the heart to refuse."

"But you pressed for repayment?" said Warde, sharply.

"That is true, sir.  I'm on an allowance; and I shall have many
expenses this holidays."

"You, Scaife, asked for your money?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, between you, you have driven this unhappy wretch into crime."

"Crime, sir?"

At last their self-possession abandoned them.  Crime is a word which
looms large in the imaginations of youth.  What had Beaumont-Greene
done?

"What crime, sir?"

Scaife, the more self-possessed, although fully two years the younger,
asked the question.

"Forgery."

"Forgery?" Lovell repeated.  He was plainly shocked.

"The idiot!" exclaimed Scaife.

"Yes--forgery.  Have you anything to say?  It is a time when the truth,
all the truth, might be accepted as an extenuating circumstance.  I
speak to you first, Lovell.  You're a Sixth Form boy--remember, I have
been one myself--and it is your duty to help me."

"I beg pardon, sir," Lovell replied.  "I have never considered it my
duty as a Sixth Form boy to play the usher."

"Nor did I; but you ought to work on parallel lines with us.  You
accepted the privileges of the Sixth."

Lovell's flush deepened.

"More," continued Warde, "you know that we, the masters, have implicit
trust in the Sixth Form, a trust but seldom betrayed.  For instance, I
should not think of entering your room without tapping on the door;
under ordinary circumstances I should accept your bare word
unhesitatingly.  I say emphatically that if you, knowing these things,
have accepted the privileges of your order with the deliberate
intention of ignoring its duties, you have not acted like a man of
honour."

"Sir!"

"Don't bluff!  Now, for the last time, will you give me what I have
given you--trust?"

"I have nothing more to say," Lovell answered stiffly.

"And you, Scaife?"

"I am sorry, sir, that Beaumont-Greene has been such a fool.  We lent
him this money, because he wanted it badly; and he said he would pay us
back before the end of the term."

"You stick to that story?"

"Why, yes, sir.  Why should we tell you a lie?"

"Ah, why, indeed?" sighed Warde.  Then his voice grew hard and sharp.
The persuasiveness, the carefully-framed sentences, gave place to his
curtest manner.  "This matter," said he, "is out of my hands.  The Head
Master will deal with it.  I must ask you for your keys, Lovell."

"And if I refuse to give them up?"

"Then we must break into your boxes.  Thanks."  He took the keys.
"Follow me, please."

The pair followed him into the private side, upstairs, and into the
sick-room.  There were three beds in it; upon one sat Beaumont-Greene.
His complexion turned a sickly drab when he saw Lovell and Scaife.  He
even glanced at the window with a hunted expression.  The window was
three stories from the ground, and heavily barred ever since a boy in
delirium had tried to jump from it.

"Your night-things will be brought to you," said Warde.

He went out slowly.  The boys heard the key turn in the massive lock.
They were prisoners.  Scaife walked up to Beaumont-Greene.

"You told Warde about the bridge?"

"Ye-es; I had to.  Scaife, don't look at me like that.  Lovell"--his
voice broke into a terrified scream--"don't let him hit me.  I couldn't
help it--I swear I----"

"You cur!" said Scaife.  "I wouldn't touch you with a forty-foot pole."


Just what passed between Warde and the Head Master must be surmised.
Carefully hidden in Lovell's boxes were found cards and markers.  Upon
the latter remained the results of the last game played, and under the
winning column a rough calculation in pounds, shillings, and pence.
There were no names.

Next day, during first school, a notice came round to each Form to be
in the Speech-room at 8.30.  Not a boy knew or guessed the reason of
this summons.  The Manorites, aware that three of their House were in
the sickroom, believed that an infectious disease had broken out.  Only
Desmond, John, and the Caterpillar experienced heart-breaking fears
that a catastrophe had taken place.

When the School assembled at half-past eight, the monitors came in,
followed by the Head Master in cap and gown.  Then, a moment later, the
School Custos entered with Scaife.  They sat down upon a small bench
near the door.  Immediately the whispers, the shuffling of feet, the
occasional cough, died down into a thrilling silence.  The Head Master
stood up.

He was a man of singularly impressive face and figure.  And his voice
had what may be described as an edge to it--the cutting quality so
invaluable to any speaker who desires to make a deep impression upon
his audience.  He began his address in the clear, cold accents of one
who sets forth facts which can neither be controverted nor ignored.
Slowly, inexorably, without wasting a word or a second, he told the
School what had happened.  Then he paused.

As his voice melted away, the boys moved restlessly.  Upon their faces
shone a curious excitement and relief.  Gambling in its many-headed
forms is too deeply rooted in human hearts to awaken any great
antipathy.  So far, then, the sympathy of the audience lay with the
culprits; this the Head Master knew.

When he spoke again, his voice had changed, subtly, but unmistakably.

"You were afraid," he said, "that I had something worse--ah, yes,
unspeakably worse--to tell you.  Thank God, this is not one of those
cases from which every clean, manly boy must recoil in disgust.  But,
on that account, don't blind yourselves to the issues involved.  This
playing of bridge--a game you have seen your own people playing night
after night, perhaps--is harmless enough in itself.  I can say more--it
is a game, and hence its fascination, which calls into use some of the
finest qualities of the brain: judgment, memory, the faculty of making
correct deductions, foresight, and patience.  It teaches restraint; it
makes for pleasant fellowship.  It does all this and more, provided
that it never degenerates into gambling.  The very moment that the game
becomes a gamble, if any one of the players is likely to lose a sum
greater than he can reasonably afford to pay, greater than he would
cheerfully spend upon any other form of entertainment, then bridge
becomes cursed.  And because you boys have not the experience to
determine the difference between a mere game and a gamble, card-playing
is forbidden you, and rightly so.  Now, let us consider what has
happened.  A stupid foolish fellow, playing with boys infinitely
cleverer than himself, has lost a sum of money which he could not pay.
To obtain the means of paying it, he deliberately forged a letter and a
signature.  And then followed the inevitable lying--lie upon lie.  That
is always the price of lies--'to lie on still.'

"I would mitigate the punishment, if I could, but I must think of the
majority.  This sort of malignant disease must be cut out.  Two of the
three offenders are young men; they were leaving at the end of this
term.  They will leave, instead--to-day.  The third boy is much
younger.  Because of his youth, I have been persuaded by his
house-master to give him a further chance."

Again he paused.  Then he exclaimed loudly, "Scaife!"

Scaife stood up, very pale.  "Here, sir!"

"Scaife, you will go into the Fourth Form Room,[1] and prepare to
receive the punishment which no member of the Eleven should ever
deserve."

John sat with his Form while the Head Master was addressing the School.
Not far off was the Caterpillar, less cool than usual, so John
remarked.  His collar, for instance, seemed to be too tight; and he
moved restlessly upon his chair.  Many very brave men become nervous
when a great danger has passed them by.  Egerton said afterwards, "I
felt like getting down a hole, and pulling the hole after me.  Not my
own.  Some Yankee's, you know."  Still, he displayed remarkable
self-possession under trying circumstances.  Two of Lovell's particular
friends were seen to turn the colour of Cheddar cheese.  But Desmond,
so John noticed, grew red rather than yellow.  Nor did he tremble, but
his fists were clenched, and his eyes kindled.

As Scaife left the Speech-room, followed by Titchener (the provider of
birches, whose duty it is to see that boys about to be swished are
properly prepared to receive punishment), the boys began to shuffle in
their places.  But the Head Master held up his hand.  It was then that
Lovell's two particular friends, who had partially recovered, felt that
the earth was once more slipping from under them.

"It takes four to play bridge."  The Caterpillar's fingers went to his
collar again.  "In this case there must have been a fourth, possibly
a fifth and a sixth.  Not more, I think, because the secret was
too well kept.  We are confronted with the disagreeable fact that
three boys are going to receive the most severe punishments I can
inflict, and that another escapes scot-free.  _For I do not know
the--name--of--the--fourth_."

The Head Master waited to let each deliberate word soak in.  Perhaps he
had calculated the effect of his voice upon a boy of sensibility and
imagination.  That Scaife, his friend, should suffer the indignity of a
swishing, and that he should escape scot-free, seemed to Caesar Desmond
not a bit of rare good fortune--as it appeared to the others--but an
incredible miscarriage of justice.  To submit tamely to such a burden
was unthinkable.  He sprang to his feet, ardent, impetuous, afire with
the spirit which makes men accept death rather than dishonour; and
then, in a voice that rang through the room, thrilling the coldest and
most callous heart, he exclaimed--

"I was the fourth."

A curious sound escaped from the audience--a gasp of surprise, of
admiration, and of dismay, at least, so the Head Master interpreted it.
And looking at the faces about him, he read approval or disapproval,
according as each boy betrayed the feeling in his heart.

"You, Desmond?"

"Yes, sir."

The Caterpillar rose slowly.  He was cool enough now.

"I was the fifth."

But Lovell's two particular friends sat tight, as they put it.  Let us
not blame them.

"You, Egerton?"

"Yes, sir."

For a moment the Head Master hesitated.  Into his mind there flashed
the image of two notable figures--the fathers whom he had entreated to
send sons to the Manor.  If--if by so doing he had compassed the boys'
ruin, could he ever have forgiven himself?  But now, the boys
themselves had justified his action; they had proved worthy of their
breeding and the traditions of the Hill.

"Come here," he said.

When they stood opposite to him, he continued--

"You give yourselves up to receive the punishment I am about to inflict
upon Scaife?"

The boys did not answer, save with their eyes.  The silence in the
great room was so profound that John made sure that the beating of his
heart must be heard by everybody.

"I shall not punish you.  This voluntary confession has done much to
redeem your fault.  Meet me in my study at nine this evening, and I
will talk to you.  When I came here I hardly hoped to find saints, but
I did expect to find--gentlemen.  And I have not been disappointed."
He addressed the others.  "You will return to your boarding-houses, and
quietly, if you please."


The immediate and most noticeable effect of Lovell's expulsion was the
loss of the next House match.  Damer's defeated the Manor easily.  Some
of the fags whispered to each other that the injuries inflicted by the
Head Master on Scaife had been so severe as to incapacitate the
star-player of the House.  Two boys had concealed themselves in the
Armoury (which is just below the Fourth Form Room) upon the morning
when Scaife was flogged.  But they reported--nothing.  However severe
the punishment might have been, Scaife received it without a whimper.

In truth, Scaife received but one cut, and that a light one.  The Head
Master wished to lay stripes upon the boy's heart, not his body.  When
he saw him prepared to receive punishment, he said gravely--

"I have never flogged a member of the Eleven.  And now, at the last
moment, I offer you the choice between a flogging and expulsion."

"I prefer to be flogged."

_And then--one cut_.

But Scaife never forgot the walk from the Yard to the Manor, after
execution.  He was too proud to run, too proud not to face the boys he
happened to meet.  They turned aside their eyes from his furious glare.
But he met no members of his own House.  They had the delicacy to leave
the coast clear.  When he reached his room, he found Desmond alone.
Desmond said nervously--

"I asked Warde if we could have breakfast here this morning, instead of
going into Hall.  I've got some ripping salmon."

Scaife had faced everything with a brazen indifference, but the
sympathy in his friend's voice overpowered him.  He flung himself upon
the sofa by the window and wept, not as a boy weeps, but with the
cruel, grinding sobs of a man.  He wept for his stained pride, for his
vain-glory, not because he had sinned and caused others to sin.  The
boy watching him, seeing the hero self-abased, hearing his
heartbreaking sobs, interpreted very differently those sounds.
Infinitely distressed, turning over and over in his mind some soothing
phrases, some word of comfort and encouragement, Desmond waited till
the first paroxysm had passed.  What he said then shall not be set down
in cold print.  You may be sure he proved that friendship between two
strong vigorous boys is no frail thread, but a golden chain which
adversity strengthens and refines.  Scaife rose up with his heart
softened, not by his own tears, but by the tears he saw in Desmond's
eyes.

"I'm all right now," he said.  Then, with frowning brows, he added
thoughtfully, "I deserve what I got for being a fool.  I ought to have
foreseen that such a swine as Beaumont-Greene would be sure to betray
us sooner or later.  I shall be wiser next time."

"Next--time?"  The dismay in Desmond's voice made Scaife smile.

"Don't worry, Caesar.  No more bridge for me; but," he laughed harshly,
"the leopard can't change his spots, and he won't give up hunting
because he has fallen into a trap, and got out of it.  Come, let's
tackle the salmon."

The winter term came to an end, and the School broke up.  Upon the
evening of the last Sunday, Warde said a few words to John.

"I propose to make some changes in the house," he said abruptly.
"Would you like to share No. 7 with Desmond?"

No. 7 was the jolliest two-room at the Manor.  It overlooked the
gardens, and was larger than some three-rooms.  Then John remembered
Scaife and the Duffer.

"Desmond has been with Scaife ever since he came to the house, sir."

"True.  But I'm going to give Scaife a room to himself.  He's entitled
to it as the future Captain of the Eleven.  That is--settled.  You and
Duff must part.  He's two forms below you in the school, and never
likely to soar much higher than the Second Fifth.  Next term you will
be in the Sixth, and by the summer I hope Desmond will have joined you.
You will find[2] together.  Of course Scaife can find with you, if you
wish.  I've spoken to him and Desmond."

And so, John's fondest hope was realized.  When he came back to the
Manor, Desmond and he spent much time and rather more money than they
could afford in making No. 7 the cosiest room in the house.
Consciences were salved thus:--John bought for Desmond some picture or
other decorative object which cost more money than he felt justified in
spending on himself; then Desmond made John a similar present.  It was
whipping the devil round the stump, John said, but oh! the delight of
giving his friend something he coveted, and receiving presents from him
in return.

During this term, Scaife became one of the school racquet-players.  In
many ways he was admittedly the most remarkable boy at Harrow, the
Admirable Crichton who appears now and again in every decade.  He won
the high jump and the hurdle-race.  These triumphs kept him out of
mischief, and occupied every minute of his time.  He associated with
the "Bloods," and one day Desmond told John that he considered himself
to have been "dropped" by this tremendous swell.  John discreetly held
his tongue; but in his own mind, as before, he was convinced that
Scaife and Desmond would come together again.  The inexorable
circumstance of Scaife's superiority at games had separated the boys,
but only for a brief season.  Desmond would become a "Blood" soon, and
then it would be John's turn to be "dropped."  Being a philosopher, our
hero did not worry too much over the future, but made the most of the
present, with a grateful and joyous heart.  In his humility, he was
unable to measure his influence on Desmond.  In athletic pursuits an
inferior, in all intellectual attainments he was pulling far ahead of
his friend.  The artful Warde had a word to say, which gave John food
for thought.

"You can never equal your friend at cricket or footer, Verney.  If you
wish to score, it is time to play your own game."

Shortly after this, John realized that Warde had read Caesar aright.
Charles Desmond's son, as has been said, acclaimed quality wherever he
met it.  John's intellectual advance amazed and then fascinated him.
When John discovered this, he worked harder.  Warde smiled.  John ran
second for the Prize Poem.  He had genuine feeling for Nature, but he
lacked as yet the technical ability to display it.  A more practised
versifier won the prize; but John's taste for history and literature
secured him the Bourchier, not without a struggle which whetted to
keenness every faculty he possessed.  More, to his delight, he realized
that his enthusiasm was contagious.  Caesar entered eagerly into his
friend's competitions; struggle and strife appealed to the Irishman.
He talked over John's themes, read his verses, and predicted triumphs.
Warde told John that Caesar Desmond might have stuck in the First
Fifth, had it not been for this quickening of the clay.  The days
succeeded each other swiftly and smoothly.  Warde was seen to smile
more than ever during this term.  Certain big fellows who opposed him
were leaving or had already left.  Bohun, now Head of the House, was a
sturdy, straightforward monitor, not a famous athlete, but able to hold
his own in any field of endeavour.  Just before the Christmas holidays,
Warde discovered, to his horror, that the drainage at the Manor was out
of order.  At great expense a new and perfect system was laid down.  At
last Warde told himself his house might be pronounced sanitary within
and without.

When the summer term came, Desmond joined John in the Sixth Form.  They
were entitled to single rooms, but they asked and obtained permission
to remain in No. 7.  Desmond was invested with the right to fag, and
the right to "find."  How blessed a privilege the right to find is,
boys who have enjoyed it will attest.  The cosy meals in one's own
room, the pleasant talk, the sense of intimacy, the freedom from
restraint.  Custom stales all good things, but how delicious they taste
at first!

The privilege of fagging is not, however, unadulterated bliss.  When
Warde said to Caesar, "Well, Desmond, how do you like ordering about
your slave?" Desmond replied, ruefully, "Well, sir, little Duff has
broken my inkstand, spilt the ink on our new carpet, and let Verney's
bullfinch escape.  I think, on the whole, I'd as lief wait on myself."

Early in June it became plain that unless the unforeseen occurred,
Harrow would have a strong Eleven, and that Desmond would be a member
of it.  John and Fluff were playing in the Sixth Form game; but John
had no chance of his Flannels, although he had improved in batting and
bowling, thanks to Warde's indefatigable coaching.  Scaife hardly ever
spoke to John now, but occasionally he came into No. 7 to talk to
Desmond.  Upon these rare occasions John would generally find an excuse
for leaving the room.  Always, when he returned, Desmond seemed to be
restless and perplexed.  His admiration for Scaife had waxed rather
than waned.  Indeed, John himself, detesting Scaife--for it had come to
that--fearing him on Desmond's account, admired him notwithstanding:
captivated by his amazing grace, good looks, and audacity.  His
recklessness held even the "Bloods" spellbound.  A coach ran through
Harrow in the afternoons of that season.  Scaife made a bet that he
would drive this coach from one end of the High Street to the other,
under the very nose of Authority.  The rules of the school set forth
rigorously that no boy is to drive in or on any vehicle whatever.  Only
the Cycle Corps are allowed to use bicycles.  Scaife's bet, you may be
sure, excited extraordinary interest.  He won it easily, disguised as
the coachman--a make-up clever enough to deceive even those who were in
the secret.  His friends knew that he kept two polo-ponies at Wembley.
One afternoon he dared to play in a match against the Nondescripts.
Warde's daughter, just out of the schoolroom, happened to be present,
and she rubbed her lovely eyes when she saw Scaife careering over the
field.  Scaife laughed when he saw her; but before she left the ground
a note had reached her.


"DEAR MISS WARDE,

"I am sure that you have too much sporting blood in your veins to tell
your father that you have seen me playing polo.

"Yours very sincerely,

"REGINALD SCAIFE."


To run such risks seemed to John madness; to Desmond it indicated
genius.

"There never was such a fellow," said Caesar to John.

When Caesar spoke in that tone John knew that Scaife had but to hold up
a finger, and that Caesar would come to him even as a bird drops into
the jaws of a snake.  Caesar was strong, but the Demon was stronger.

After the Zingari Match, Desmond got his Flannels.  He was cheered at
six Bill.  Everybody liked him; everybody was proud of him, proud of
his father, proud of the long line of Desmonds, all distinguished,
good-looking, and with charming manners.  The School roared its
satisfaction.  John stood a little back, by the cloisters.  Caesar ran
past him, down the steps and into the street, hat in hand, blushing
like a girl.  John felt a lump in his throat.  He thrilled because
glory shone about his friend; but the poignant reflection came, that
Caesar was running swiftly, out of the Yard and out of his own life.
And before lock-up he saw, what he had seen in fancy a thousand times,
Caesar arm-in-arm with Scaife and the Captain of the Eleven, Caesar in
his new straw,[3] looking happier than John had ever seen him, Caesar,
the "Blood," rolling triumphantly down the High Street, the envied of
all beholders, the hero of the hour.

John called himself a selfish beast, because he had wished for one
terrible moment, wished with heart and soul, that Caesar was unpopular
and obscure.



[1] The place of execution.

[2] "Finding" is the privilege, accorded to the Sixth Form, of having
breakfast and tea served in their own rooms instead of in Hall.

[3] The black-and-white straw hat only worn by members of the School
Cricket Eleven.




CHAPTER XI

SELF-QUESTIONING

  "Friend, of my infinite dreams
    Little enough endures;
  Little howe'er it seems,
    It is yours, all yours.
  Fame hath a fleeting breath,
    Hope may be frail or fond;
  But Love shall be Love till death,
    And perhaps beyond."


Until the Metropolitan Railway joined Harrow to Baker Street, the Hill
stood in the midst of genuine and unspoilt country, separated by five
miles of grass from the nearest point of the metropolis, and
encompassed by isolated dwellings, ranging in rank and scale from
villas to country houses.[1]  Most of the latter have fallen victims to
the speculative builder, and have been cut up into alleys of brick and
stucco.  But one or two still remain among their hayfields and
rhododendrons.

John Verney had an eager curiosity, not common in schoolboys, to know
something about the countryside in which he dwelt.  As a Lower Boy,
whenever released from "Compulsory" and House-games, he used to wander
with alert eyes and ears up and down the green lanes of Roxeth and
Harrow Weald, enjoying fresh glimpses of the far-seen Spire, making
friends with cottagers, picking up traditions of an older and more
lawless[2] epoch, and, with these, an ever-increasing love and loyalty
to Harrow.  So Byron had wandered a hundred years before.

These solitary rambles, however, were regarded with disfavour by
schoolfellows who lacked John's imaginative temperament.  The
Caterpillar, for instance, protested, "Did I see you hobnobbing with a
chaw the other day?  I thought so; and you looked like a confounded
bughunter."  The Duffer's notions of topography were bounded by the
cricket-ground on the one side of the Hill, and the footer-fields on
the other; and his traditions held nothing much more romantic than A.
J. Webbe's scores at Lord's.  Fluff, as has been said, was too far
removed from John to make him more than an occasional companion.  And
so, for several terms, John, for the most part, walked alone.  By the
time Desmond joined him, he had gleaned a knowledge which fascinated a
friend of like sensibility and imagination.  Together they revisited
the old and explored the new.  One never-to-be-forgotten day the boys
discovered a deserted house of some pretensions about a mile from the
Hill.  Its grounds, covering several acres, were enclosed by a high oak
paling, within which stood a thick belt of trees, effectually
concealing what lay beyond.  Grim iron gates, always locked, frowned
upon the wayfarer; but John, flattening an inquisitive nose against the
ironwork, could discern a carriage-drive overgrown with grass and
weeds, and at the end of it a white stone portico.  After this the
place became to both boys a sort of Enchanted Castle.  A dozen times
they peered through the gates.  No one went in or out of the
grass-grown drive.  The gatekeeper's lodge was uninhabited; there were
no adjacent cottages where information might be sought.  The boys
called it "The Haunted House," and peopled it with ghosts; gorgeous
bucks of the Regency, languishing beauties such as Lawrence painted,
fiery politicians, duellists, mysterious black-a-vized foreigners.
John connected it in fancy with the days when the gorgeous Duke of
Chandos (who had Handel for his chapel-organist and was a Governor of
Harrow and guardian of Lord Rodney) kept court at Cannons.  He told
Caesar anecdotes of Dr. Parr, with his preposterous wig, his clouds of
tobacco, his sesquipedalian quotations, coming down from Stanmore; and
also of the great Lord Abercorn, another Governor of the school, who
used to go out shooting in the blue riband of the Garter, and who
entertained Pitt and Sir Walter Scott at Bentley Priory.

"What a lot you know!" said Caesar.  "And you have a memory like my
father's.  I'm beginning to think, Jonathan, that you'll be a swell
like him some day--in the Cabinet, perhaps."

"Ah," said John, with shining eyes.

"I hope I shall live to see it," Desmond added, with feeling.

"Thanks, old chap.  A crust or a triumph shared with a pal tastes twice
as good."

One soft afternoon in spring, after four Bill, Desmond and John were
approaching the iron gates of the Haunted House.  They had not taken
this particular walk since the day when Desmond got his Flannels.
During the winter term, Scaife and Desmond became members of the
Football Eleven.  During this term Scaife won the hundred yards and
quarter-mile; Desmond won the half-mile and mile.  In a word, they had
done, from the athletic point of view, nearly all that could be done.
A glorious victory at Lord's seemed assured.  Scaife, Captain and
epitome of the brains and muscles of the Eleven, had grown into a
powerful man, with the mind, the tastes, the passions of manhood.
Desmond, on the other hand, while nearly as tall (and much handsomer in
John's eyes), still retained the look of youth.  Indeed, he looked
younger than John, although a year his senior; and John knew himself to
be the elder and wiser, knew that Desmond leaned upon him whenever a
crutch was wanted.

The chief difficulty which besets a school friendship between two boys
is that of being alone together.  In Form, in the playing-fields, in
the boarding-house, life is public.  Even in the most secluded lane, a
Harrow boy is not secure against the unwelcome salutations of heated
athletes who have been taking a cross-country run, or leaping over, or
into, the Pinner brook.  To John the need of sanctuary had become
pressing.

Upon this blessed spring afternoon--ever afterwards recalled with
special affection--a retreat was suddenly provided.  As the boys jumped
over the last stile into the lane which led to the Haunted House,
Desmond exclaimed--

"By Jove, the gates are open!"

Then they saw that a man, a sort of caretaker, was in the act of
shutting them.

"May we go in?" John asked civilly.

The man hesitated, eying the boys.  Desmond's smile melted him, as it
would have melted a mummy.

"There's nothing to see," he said.

Then, in answer to a few eager questions, he told the story of the
Haunted House; haunted, indeed, by the ghosts of what might have been.
A city magnate owned the place.  He had bought it because he wished to
educate his only son at Harrow as a "Home-Boarder," or day-boy.  A few
weeks before the boy should have joined the school, he fell ill with
diphtheria, and died.  The mother, who nursed him, caught the disease
and died also.  The father, left alone, turned his back upon a place he
loathed, resolving to hold it till building-values increased, but never
to set eyes on it again.  The caretaker and his wife occupied a couple
of rooms in the house.

The boys glanced at the house, a common-place mansion, and began to
explore the gardens.  To their delight they found in the shrubberies,
now a wilderness of laurel and rhododendron, a tower--what our
forefathers called a "Gazebo," and their neighbours a "Folly."  The top
of it commanded a wide, unbroken view--

  "Of all the lowland western lea,
    The Uxbridge flats and meadows,
  To where the Ruislip waters see
    The Oxhey lights and shadows."


"There's the Spire," said John.

The man, who had joined them, nodded.  "Yes," said he, "and my mistress
and her boy are buried underneath it.  She wanted him to be there--at
the school, I mean--and there he is."

"We're very much obliged to you," said Desmond.  He slipped a shilling
into the man's hand, and added, "May we stay here for a bit? and
perhaps we might come again--eh?"

"Thank you, sir," the man replied, touching his hat.  "Come whenever
you like, sir.  The gates ain't really locked.  I'll show you the trick
of opening 'em when you come down."

He descended the steep flight of steps after the boys had thanked him.

"Sad story," said John, staring at the distant Spire.

Desmond hesitated.  At times he revealed (to John alone) a curious
melancholy.

"Sad," he repeated.  "I don't know about that.  Sad for the father, of
course, but perhaps the son is well out of it.  Don't look so amazed,
Jonathan.  Most fellows seem to make awful muddles of their lives.  You
won't, of course.  I see you on pinnacles, but I----"  He broke off
with a mirthless laugh.

John waited.  The air about them was soft and moist after a recent
shower.  The south-west wind stirred the pulses.  Earth was once more
tumid, about to bring forth.  Already the hedges were green under the
brown; bulbs were pushing delicate spears through the sweet-smelling
soil; the buds upon a clump of fine beeches had begun to open.  In this
solitude, alone with teeming nature, John tried to interpret his
friend's mood; but the spirit of melancholy eluded him, as if it were a
will-o'-the-wisp dancing over an impassable marsh.  Suddenly, there
came to him, as there had come to the quicker imagination of his
friend, the overpowering mystery of Spring, the sense of inevitable
change, the impossibility of arresting it.  At the moment all things
seemed unsubstantial.  Even the familiar Spire, powdered with gold by
the slanting rays of the sun, appeared thinly transparent against the
rosy mists behind it.  The Hill, the solid Hill, rose out of the
valley, a lavender-coloured shade upon the horizon.

"He came here," continued Desmond, dreamily--John guessed that he was
speaking of the father--"a rich, prosperous man.  I dare say he worked
like a slave in the city.  And he wanted peace and quiet after the
Stock Exchange.  Who wouldn't?  And he planted out these gardens,
thinking that every plant would grow up and thrive, and his son with
them.  And then the boy died; and the wife followed; and the enchanted
castle became a place of horror; and now it is a wilderness.  Haunted?
I should think it was--haunted!  I wish we'd never set foot in it.
There's a curse on it."

"Let's go," said John.

"Too late.  We'll stay now, and we'll come again, every Sunday.  Wild
and desolate as things look, they will be lovely when we get back in
summer.  Don't talk.  I'm going to light a pipe."

Through the circling cloud of tobacco-smoke John stared at the face
which had illumined nearly every hour of his school-life.  Its peculiar
vividness always amazed John, the vitality of It, and yet the perfect
delicacy.  Scaife's handsome features were full of vitality also, but
coarseness underlay their bold lines and peered out of the keen,
flashing eyes.  When the Caterpillar left Harrow he had said to John--

"Good-bye, Jonathan.  Awful rot your going to such a hole as Oxford!
One has had quite enough schooling after five years here.  It's settled
I'm going into the Guards.  My father tells me that old Scaife tried to
get the Demon down on the Duke's list.  But we don't fancy the Scaife
brand."

Often and often John wondered whether Desmond saw the brand as plainly
as the Caterpillar and he did.  Sometimes he felt almost sure that a
word, a look, a gesture betraying the bounder, had revolted Desmond;
but a few hours later the bounder bounded into favour again,
captivating eye and heart by some brilliant feat.  And then his brains!
He was so diabolically clever.  John could always recall his face as he
lay back in the chair in No. 15, sick, bruised, befuddled, and yet even
in that moment of extreme prostration able to "play the game," as he
put it, to defeat house-master and doctor by sheer strength of will and
intellect.  It was Scaife who had persuaded Desmond to smoke. . . .
Caesar's voice broke in upon these meditations.

"I say--what are you frowning about?"

John, very red, replied nervously, "Now that you're in the Sixth, you
ought to chuck smoking."

"What rot!" said Caesar.  "And here, in this tower, where one couldn't
possibly be nailed----"

"That's it," said John.  "It's just because you can't possibly be
nailed that it seems to me not quite square."

Caesar burst out laughing.  "Jonathan, you are a rum 'un.  Anyway--here
goes!"

As he spoke he flung the pipe into the bushes below.

"Thanks," said John, quietly.

"We'll come here again.  I like this old tower."

"You won't come here without me?"

"Oh, ho!  I'm not to let the Demon into our paradise--eh?  What a
jealous old bird you are!  Well, I like you to be jealous."  And he
laughed again.

"I am jealous," said John, slowly.


The School broke up on the following Tuesday, and Desmond went home
with John.

This happened to be the first time that the friends had spent Easter
together.  John wondered whether Caesar would take the Sacrament with
his mother and him.  He and Caesar had been confirmed side by side in
the Chapel at Harrow.  He felt sure that Desmond would not refuse if he
were asked.  On Easter Eve, Mrs. Verney said, in her quiet, persuasive
voice--

"You will join us to-morrow morning, Harry?"

Desmond flushed, and said, "Yes."

Not remembering his own mother, who had died when he was a child, he
often told John that he felt like a son to Mrs. Verney.  Upon Easter
morning, the three met in the hall, and Desmond asked for a Prayer-book.

"I've lost mine," he murmured.

That afternoon, when they were alone upon the splendid moor above
Stoneycross, Desmond said suddenly--

"Religion means a lot to you, Jonathan, doesn't it?"

"Yes."

"But you never talk about it."

"No."

"Why not?"

"I don't know how to begin."

"There's such sickening hypocrisy in this world."

John nodded.

"But your religion is a help to you, eh?  Keeps you straight?"

John nodded again.  Then Desmond said with an air of finality--

"I wish I'd some of your faith.  I want it badly."

"If you want it badly, you will get it."

A long silence succeeded.  Then Desmond exclaimed--

"Hullo!  By Jove, there's a fox, a splendid fellow!  He's come up here
amongst the rabbits for a Sunday dinner.  Gone awa-a-a-ay!"

He put his hand to his mouth and halloaed.  A minute later he was
talking of hunting.  Religion was not mentioned till they were
approaching the house for tea.  On the threshold, Desmond said with a
nervous laugh--

"I'd like your mother to give me a Prayer-book--a small one, nothing
expensive."

During the following week they hunted with fox hounds or stag-hounds
every day, except Wednesday.  In the New Forest the Easter hunting is
unique.  Tremendous fellows come down from the shires--masters of
famous packs, thrusters, keen to see May foxes killed.  And the Forest
entertains them handsomely, you may be sure.  Big hampers are unpacked
under the oaks which may have been saplings when William Rufus ruled in
England; there are dinners, and, of course, a hunt-ball in the ancient
village of Lyndhurst.  But as each pleasant day passed, John told
himself that the end was drawing near.  This was almost the last
holidays Caesar and he would spend together; and, afterwards, would
this friendship, so romantic a passion with one at least of them--would
it wither away, or would it endure to the end?

At the end of a fortnight, Desmond returned to Eaton Square.  Upon the
eve of departure, Mrs. Verney gave him a small Prayer-book.

"I have written something in it," she said; "but don't open it now."

He looked at the fly-leaf as the train rolled out of Lyndhurst Station.
Upon it, in Mrs. Verney's delicate handwriting, were a few lines.
First his name and the date.  Below, a text--"Unto whomsoever much is
given, of him shall be much required."  And, below that again, a verse--

  "Not thankful when it pleaseth me,
  As if Thy blessings had spare days:
  But such a heart whose pulse may be--
        Thy praise."


Desmond stared at the graceful writing long after the train had passed
Totton.  "Am I ungrateful?" he asked himself.  "Not to them," he
muttered; "surely not to them."  He recalled what Warde had said about
ingratitude being the unpardonable sin.  Ah! it was loathsome,
ingratitude!  And much had been given to him.  How much?  For the first
time he made, so to speak, an inventory of what he had received--his
innumerable blessings.  _What had he given in return_?  And now the
fine handwriting seemed blurred; he saw it through tears which he ought
to have shed.  "Oh, my God," he murmured, "am I ungrateful?"  The
question bit deeper into his mind, sinking from there into his soul.


When the School reassembled, a curious incident occurred.  John
happened to be going up the fine flight of steps that leads to the Old
Schools.  He was carrying some books and papers.  Scaife, running down
the steps, charged into him.  By great good fortune, no damage was done
except to a nicely-bound Sophocles.  John, however, felt assured that
Scaife had deliberately intended to knock him down, seized, possibly,
by an ecstasy of blind rage not uncommon with him.  Scaife smiled
derisively, and said--

"A thousand apologies, Verney."

"_One_ is enough," John replied, "if it is sincere."

They eyed each other steadily.  John read a furious challenge in
Scaife's bold eyes--more, a menace, the threatening frown of power
thwarted.  Scaife seemed to expand, to fill the horizon, to blot out
the glad sunshine.  Once again the curious certainty gripped the
younger that Scaife was indeed the personification of evil, the more
malefic because it stalked abroad masked.  For Scaife had outlived his
reputation as a breaker of the law.  Since that terrible experience in
the Fourth Form Room, he had paid tithe of mint and cummin.  As a Sixth
Form boy he upheld authority, laughing the while in his sleeve.  He
knew, of course, that one mistake, one slip, would be fatal.  And he
prided himself on not making mistakes.  He gambled, but not with boys;
he drank, not with boys; he denied his body nothing it craved; but he
never forgot that expulsion from Harrow meant the loss of a commission
in a smart cavalry regiment.  When it was intimated to him that the
Guards did not want his father's son, he laughed bitterly, and swore to
himself that he would show the stuck-up snobs what a soldier they had
turned away.  A soldier he fully intended to be--a dashing cavalry
leader, if the Fates were kind.  His luck would stand by him; if
not--why--what was life without luck?  He had never been a reader, but
he read now the lives of soldiers.  Murat, Uxbridge, Cardigan, Hodson,
were his heroes.  Talking of their achievements, he inflamed his own
mind and Desmond's.

The pleasant summer days passed.  May melted into June.  And each
Sunday John and Desmond walked to the Haunted House, ascended the
tower, and talked.  Scaife was leaving at the end of the summer.
Desmond was staying on for the winter term; then John would have him
entirely to himself.  This thought illumined dark hours, when he saw
his friend whirled away by Scaife, transported, as it were, by the
irresistible power of the man of action.  That nothing should be
wanting to that trebly-fortunate youth, he had helped to win the Public
Schools' Racquets Championship.  The Manor was now the crack
house--cock-house at racquets and football, certain to be cock-house at
cricket.  And Scaife got most of the credit, not Warde, who smiled more
than ever, and talked continually of Balliol Scholarships.  He never
bragged of victories past.

Meantime, John was devoting all energies to the competition for the
Prize Essay.  The Head Master had propounded as theme: "The History and
Influence of Parliamentary Oratory."  Bit by bit, John read or
declaimed it to Desmond.  Then, according to custom, Desmond copied it
out for his friend.  Signed "_Spero Infestis_," with a sealed envelope
containing John's name inside and the motto outside, the MS. was placed
in the Head Master's letter-box.  John, cooling rapidly after the fever
of composition, condemned his stuff as hopelessly bad; Caesar went
about telling everybody that Jonathan would win easily, "with a bit to
spare."  John did win, but that proved to be the least part of his
triumph.  The Essay had to be declaimed upon Speech Day.  Once more
John experienced the pangs that had twisted him at the concert, long
ago, when he had sung to the Nation's hero.  And as before, he began
weakly.  Then, the fire seizing him, self-consciousness was exorcised
by feeling, and forgetful of the hundreds of faces about him, he burst
into genuine oratory.  Thrilled himself, he thrilled others.  His voice
faltered again, but with an emotion that found an echo in the hearts of
his audience; his hand shook, feeling the pulse of old and young in
front of him.  Dominated, swept away by his theme, he dominated others.
When he finished, in the silence that preceded the roar of applause, he
knew that he had triumphed, for he saw Desmond's glowing countenance,
radiant with pleasure, transfigured by amazement and admiration.  Next
day a great newspaper hailed the Harrow boy as one destined to delight
and to lead, perhaps, an all-conquering party in the House of Commons.
And yet, warmed to the core by this praise, John counted it as nothing
compared with his mother's smile and Desmond's fervent grip.

Fortune, however, comes to no man--or boy--with both hands full.
Immediately after Speech Day, John's bubble of pride and happiness was
pricked by Scaife.  Midsummer madness seized the Demon.  One may
conceive that the innate recklessness of his nature, suppressed by an
iron will, and smouldering throughout many months, burst at last into
flame.  Desmond told John that the Demon had spent a riotous night in
town.  He had slipped out of the Manor after prayers, had driven up to
a certain club in Regent Street, returned in time for first school,
fresh as paint--so Desmond said--and then, not content with such an
achievement, must needs brag of it to Desmond.

"And if he's nailed, Eton wins," concluded Desmond.  "I've told you,
because together we must put a stop to such larks."

John slightly raised his thick eyebrows.  It was curious that Caesar
always chose to ignore the hatred which he must have known to exist
between his two friends.  Or did be fatuously believe that, because
John exercised an influence over himself, the same influence would or
could be exercised over Scaife?

"We?" said John.

"I've tried and failed.  But together, I say----"

"I shan't interfere, Caesar."

"Jonathan, you must."

"It would be a fool's errand."

"We three have gone up the School together.  You have never been fair
to Scaife.  I tell you he's sound at core.  Why, after he was
swished----"

Desmond told John what had passed; John shook his head.  He could
understand better than any one else why Scaife had broken down.

"He has splendid ambitions," pursued Desmond.  "He's going to be a
great soldier, you see.  He thinks of nothing else.  You never have
liked him, but because of that I thought you would do what you could."

The disappointment and chagrin in his voice shook John's resolution.

"To please you, I'll try."

And accordingly the absurd experiment was made.  Afterwards, John asked
himself a thousand times why he had not foreseen the inevitable result.
But the explanation is almost too simple to be recorded: he wished to
convince a friend that he would attempt anything to prove his
friendship.

That night they went together to Scaife's room.  The second-best room
in the Manor, situated upon the first floor, it overlooked the back of
the garden, where there was a tangled thicket of laurustinus and
rhododendron.  Scaife had spent much money in making this room as
comfortable as possible.  It had the appearance of a man's room, and
presented all the characteristics of the man who lived in it.
Everything connected with Scaife's triumphal march through the School
was preserved.  On the walls were his caps, fezes, and cups.  You could
hardly see the paper for the framed photographs of Scaife and his
fellow "bloods."  Scaife as cricketer, Scaife as football-player,
Scaife as racquet-player and athlete, stared boldly and triumphantly at
you.  He had a fine desk covered with massive silver ornaments.  Upon
this, as upon everything else in the room, was the hall-mark of the
successful man of business.  The papers, the pens and pencils, the
filed bills and letters, the books of reference, spoke eloquently of a
mind that used order as a means to a definite end.  All his books were
well bound.  His boots were on trees.  His racquets were in their
press.  Had you opened his chest of drawers, you would have found his
clothes in perfect condition.  Obviously, to an observant eye, the
owner of this room gave his mind to details, because he realized that
on details hang great and successful enterprises.

Scaife stared at John, but welcomed him civilly enough.  Cricket, of
course, explained this unexpected visit.  As Desmond blurted out what
was in his mind, Scaife frowned; then he laughed unpleasantly.

"And so I told Jonathan," concluded Desmond.

"So you told Jonathan," repeated Scaife.  "Are you in the habit of
telling Jonathan,"--the derisive inflection as he pronounced the name
warned John at least that he had much better have stayed away--"things
which concern others and which don't concern him?"

"If you're going to take it like that----"

"Keep cool, Caesar.  I'll admit that you mean well.  I should like to
hear what Verney has to say."

At that John spoke--haltingly.  Fluent speech upon any subject very
dear to him had always been difficult.  He could talk glibly enough
about ordinary topics; his sense of humour, his retentive memory, made
him welcome even in the critical society of Eaton Square, but you know
him as a creature of unplumbed reserves.  The matter in hand was so
vital that he could not touch it with firm hands or voice.  He spoke at
his worst, and he knew it; concluding an incoherent and slightly
inarticulate recital of the reasons which ought to keep Scaife in his
house at night with a lame "Two heads ought to prevail against one."

Scaife showed his fine teeth.  "You think that?  Your head and Caesar's
against mine?"

The challenge revealed itself in the derisive, sneering tone.

John shrugged his shoulders and rose.  "I have blundered; I am sorry."

"Hold hard," said Scaife.  He read censure upon Desmond's ingenuous
countenance.  Then his temper whipped him to a furious resentment
against John, as an enemy who had turned the tables with good breeding;
who had gained, indeed, a victory against odds.  Scaife drew in his
breath; his brows met in a frown.  "You have not blundered; and you are
not sorry," he said deliberately.  "I'm not a fool, Verney; but perhaps
I have underrated your ability.  You're as clever as they make 'em.
You knew well enough that you were the last person in the world to lead
me in a string; you knew that, I say, and yet you come here to pose as
the righteous youth, doing his duty--eh?--against odds, and accepting
credit for the same from Caesar.  Why, it's plain to me as the nose
upon your face that in your heart you would like me to be sacked."

Desmond interrupted.  "You are mad, Demon.  Take that back; take it
back!"

"Ask him," said Scaife.  "He hates me, and common decency ought to have
kept him out of this room.  But he's not a liar.  Ask him.  Put it your
own way.  Soften it, make pap of it, if you like, but get an answer."

"Jonathan, it is not true, is it?  You don't like Scaife; but you would
be sorry, very sorry, to see him--sacked."

"I'm glad you've not funked it," said Scaife.  "You've put it squarely.
Let him answer it as squarely."

John was white to the lips, white and trembling; despicable in his own
eyes, how much more despicable, therefore, in the eyes of his friend,
whose passionate faith in him was about to be scorched and shrivelled.

Scaife began to laugh.

"For God's sake, don't laugh!" said Desmond.  "Jonathan, I know you are
too proud to defend yourself against such an abominable charge."

"He's not a liar," said Scaife.

"It's true," said John, in a strangled voice.

"You have wished that he might be sacked?"

"Yes."

John met Desmond's indignant eyes with an expression which the other
was too impetuous, too inexperienced, to interpret.  Into that look of
passionate reproach he flung all that must be left unsaid, all that
Scaife could read as easily as if it were scored in letters of flame.
Because, in his modesty and humility, he had ever reckoned that Scaife
would prevail against himself--because, with unerring instinct, he had
apprehended, as few boys could apprehend, the issues involved, he had
desired, fervently desired, that Scaife should be swept from Caesar's
path.  But this he could not plead as an excuse to his friend; and
Scaife had known that, and had used his knowledge with fiendish
success.  John lowered his eyes and walked from the room.

When he met Desmond again, nothing was said on either side.  John told
himself that he would speak, if Desmond spoke first.  But evidently
Desmond had determined already the nature of their future relations.
They no longer shared No. 7, John being in the Upper Sixth with a room
to himself, but they still "found" together.  To separate would mean a
public scandal from which each shrank in horror.  No; let them meet at
meals as before till the end of the term.  Indeed, so little change was
made in their previous intercourse, that John began to hope that Caesar
would walk with him as usual upon the following Sunday.  And if he
did--if he did, John felt that he would speak.  On the top of the
tower, looking towards the Spire, alone with his friend, exalted above
the thorns and brambles or the wilderness, words would come to him.

But on the following Sunday Desmond walked with Scaife.



[1] Of these, the Park, now a boarding-house, was a characteristic
specimen.  It belonged to Lord Northwick, Lord of the Manor of Harrow.

[2] In the thirties Harrow boys played "Jack o' Lantern," or nocturnal
Hare and Hounds.  They used to attend Kingsbury Races and Pinner Fair.
Lord Alexander Russell, when he was a boy at the Grove, kept a pack of
beagles at the foot of the Hill.




CHAPTER XII

"LORD'S"

  "There we sat in the circle vast,
    Hard by the tents, from noon,
  And looked as the day went slowly past
    And the runs came all too soon;
  And never, I think, in the years gone by,
    Since cricketer first went in,
  Did the dying so refuse to die,
    Or the winning so hardly win."


"My dear Jonathan, I'm delighted to see you.  You know my father, I
think?"  It was the Caterpillar that spoke.

John shook hands with Colonel Egerton.

The three were standing in the Members' Enclosure at Lord's.  The
Caterpillar, gorgeous in frock-coat, with three corn-flowers[1] in the
lapel of it, was about as great a buck as his sire, quite as conspicuous,
and, seemingly, as cool.  It happened to be a blazing hot day, but heat
seldom affected Colonel Egerton.

"By Jove," he said to John, "I'm told it's a certainty this year, and
I've come early, too early for me, to see a glorious victory.  There's
civil war raging on the top of the Trent coach, I give you my word."

"We've won the toss," said John.

"Ah, there's Charles Desmond, an early bird too."

He bustled away, leaving John and the Caterpillar together.  The great
ground in front of them was being cleared.  One could see, through the
few people scattered here and there, the wickets pitched in the middle of
that vast expanse of lawn, and the umpires in their long white coats.
Upon the top of the steps, in the middle of the pavilion, the Eton
captain was collecting his Eleven.  The Duffer, who had got his Flannels
at the last moment, came up and joined John and the Caterpillar.

"The Manor's well to the front," said the Caterpillar.  "By Jove!  I
never thought to see Fluff in the Eleven."

"Fluff came on tremendously this term," the Duffer replied.

"Of course the Kinlochs are a cricketing family."

"Good joke the brothers playing against each other," said John.

"Warde," the Duffer nodded in the direction of Warde, who was talking
with Charles Desmond and Colonel Egerton, "has worked like a slave.  He
made a cricketer out of Fluff and a scholar out of Jonathan.  He's so mad
keen to see us win, that he's given me the jumps."

"You must keep cool," the Caterpillar murmured.  "I've just come from the
Trent coach.  Fluff has it from the brother who is playing that the Eton
bowling is weak.  But Strathpeffer, the eldest son, tells me the batsmen
are stronger than last year.  He seemed anxious to bet; so we have a
fiver about it.  They're taking the field."

The Eton Eleven walked towards the wicket, loudly cheered.  Caesar came
up in his pads, carrying his bat and gloves.  He shook hands with the
Caterpillar, and said, with a groan, that he had to take the first ball.

"Keep cool," said the Caterpillar.  "The bowling's weak; I have it from
Cosmo Kinloch.  They're in a precious funk."

"So am I," said the Duffer.

"But you're a bowler," said Desmond.  "If I get out first ball, I shall
cut my throat."

But Caesar looked alert, cool, and neither under- nor over-confident.

"You'll cut the ball, not your throat," said the Duffer.  Cutting was
Caesar's strong point.

The Caterpillar nodded, and spoke oracularly--

"My governor says he never shoots at a snipe without muttering to
himself, 'Snipe on toast.'  It steadies his nerves.  When you see the
ball leave the bowler's band, you say to yourself, 'Eton on toast.'"

"Your own, Caterpillar?"

"My own," said the Caterpillar, modestly.  "I don't often make a joke,
but that's mine.  Pass it on."

The other Harrovian about to go in beckoned to Desmond.

"Caesar won't be bowled first ball," said the Caterpillar.  "He's the
sort that rises to an emergency.  Can't we find a seat?"

They sat down and watched the Eton captain placing his field.  Desmond
and his companion were walking slowly towards the wickets amid Harrow
cheers.  The cheering was lukewarm as yet.  It would have fire enough in
it presently.  The Caterpillar pointed out some of the swells.

"That's old Lyburn.  Hasn't missed a match since '64.  Was brought here
once with a broken leg!  Carried in a litter, by Jove!  That fellow with
the long white beard is Lord Fawley.  He made 78 _not out_ in the days of
Charlemagne."

"It was in '53," said the Duffer, who never joked on really serious
subjects; "and he made 68, not 78.  He's pulling his beard.  I believe
he's as nervous as I am."

Presently the innumerable voices about them were hushed; all eyes turned
in one direction.  Desmond was about to take the first ball.  It was
delivered moderately fast, with a slight break.  Desmond played forward.

"Well played, sir!  Well pla-a-ayed!"

The shout rumbled round the huge circle.  The beginning and the end of a
great match are always thrilling.  The second and third balls were played
like the first.  John could hear Mr. Desmond saying to Warde, "He has
Hugo's style and way of standing--eh?"  And Warde replied, "Yes; but he's
a finer batsman.  Ah-h-h!"

The first real cheer burst like a bomb.  Desmond had cut the sixth ball
to the boundary.

Over!  The new bowler was a tall, thin boy with flaxen hair.

"That's Cosmo Kinloch, Fluff's brother," said John.

"I wonder they can't do better than that.  Even I knocked him all over
the shop at White Ladies last summer."

"He's come on, they tell me," said the Caterpillar.  "Good Lord, he
nearly had him first ball."

Fluff's brother bowled slows of a good length, with an awkward break from
the off to the leg.

"Teasers," said the Caterpillar, critically.  "Hullo!  No, my young
friend, that may do well enough in Shropshire, not here."

A ball breaking sharply from the off had struck the batsman's pad; he had
stepped in front of his wicket to cut it.  Country umpires are often
beguiled by bowlers into giving wrong decisions in such cases, not so
your London expert.  Cosmo Kinloch appealed--in vain.

"He'll send a short one down now," said John.  "You see."

And, sure enough, a long hop came to the off, curling inwards after it
pitched.  The Eton captain had nearly all his men on the off side.  The
Harrovian pulled the ball right round to the boundary.

"Well hit!"

"Well pulled!"

"Two 4's; that's a good beginning," said the Duffer.

A couple of singles followed, and then the first "10" went up amid cheers.

"Here's my governor," said the Duffer.  "He was three years in the Eleven
and Captain his last term."

"You've told us that a thousand times," said the Caterpillar.

The Rev. Septimus Duff greeted the boys warmly.  His eyes sparkled out of
a cheery, bearded face.  Look at him well.  An Harrovian of the
Harrovians this.  His grandfathers on the maternal and paternal side had
been friends at Harrow in Byron's time.  The Rev. Septimus wore rather a
shabby coat and a terrible hat, but the consummate Caterpillar, who
respected pedigrees, regarded him with pride and veneration.  He came up
from his obscure West Country vicarage to town just once a year--to see
the match.  If you asked him, he would tell you quite simply that he
would sooner see the match and his old friends than go to Palestine; and
the Rev. Septimus has yearned to visit Palestine ever since he left
Cambridge; and it is not likely that this great wish will ever be
gratified.  He is the father of three sons, but the Duffer is the first
to get into the Eleven.  Charles Desmond joins them.  At the moment,
Charles Desmond is supposed to be one of the most harried men in the
Empire.  Times are troublous.  A war-cloud, as large as Kruger's hand,
has just risen in the South, and is spreading itself over the whole
world.  But to-day the great Minister has left the cares of office in
Downing Street.  He hails the Rev. Septimus with a genial laugh and a
hearty grasp of the hand.

"Ah, Sep, upon your word of honour, now--would you sooner be here to see
the Duffer take half a dozen wickets, or be down in Somerset, bishop of
Bath and Wells?"

"When _you_ offer me the bishopric," replied the Rev.  Septimus, with a
twinkle, "I'll answer that question, my dear Charles, and not before."

"You old humbug!  You're so puffed up with sinful pride that you've stuck
your topper on to your head the wrong way about."

"Bless my soul," said the Duffer's father, "so I have."

"That topper of the governor's," the Duffer remarked solemnly, "has seen
twenty-five matches at least."

John looked at no hats; his eyes were on the pitch.  Another round of
cheers proclaimed that "20" had gone up.  Both boys are batting steadily;
no more boundary hits; a snick here, a snack there--and then--merciful
Heavens!--Caesar has cut a curling ball "bang" into short slip's hands.

Short slip--wretched youth--muffs it!  Derisive remarks from the Rev.
Septimus.

"Well caught!  Well held!  Tha-a-nks!"

The Caterpillar would pronounce this sort of chaff bad form in a
contemporary.  He removes his hat.

"By Jove!" says he.  "It's very warm."

Caesar times the next ball beautifully.  It glides past point and under
the ropes.

Early as it is, the ground seems to be packed with people.  Glorious
weather has allured everybody.  Stand after stand is filled up.  The
colour becomes kaleidoscopic.  The Rev. Septimus, during the brief
interval of an over, allows his eyes to stray round the huge circle.
Upon the ground are the youth, the beauty, the rank and fashion of the
kingdom, and, best of all, his old friends.  The Rev. Septimus has a
weakness, being, of course, human to the finger-tips.  He calls himself a
_laudator temporis acti_.  In his day, the match was less of a function.
The boys sat round upon the grass; behind them were the carriages and
coaches--you could drive on to the ground then!--and here and there, only
here and there, a tent or a small stand.  _Consule Planco_--the parson
loves a Latin tag--the match was an immense picnic for Harrovians and
Etonians.  And, my word, you ought to have heard the chaff when an
unlucky fielder put the ball on the floor.  Or, when a batsman interposed
a pad where a bat ought to have been.  Or, if a player was bowled first
ball.  Or, if he swaggered as he walked, the cynosure of all eyes, from
the pavilion to the pitch.  Upon this subject the Rev. Septimus will
preach a longer (and a more interesting) sermon than any you will hear
from his pulpit in Blackford-Orcas Church.

Loud cheers put an end to the parson's reminiscences.  Desmond's
companion has been clean bowled for a useful fifteen runs.  He walks
towards the pavilion slowly.  Then, as he hears the Harrow cheers, he
blushes like a nymph of sixteen, for he counts himself a failure.  Last
year he made a "duck" in his first innings, and five in the second.  No
cheers then.  This is his first taste of the honey mortals call success.
He has faced the great world, and captured its applause.

"When does Scaife go in?" the Rev. Septimus asks.

"Second wicket down."

More cheers as the second man in strolls down the steps.  A careful cove,
so the Duffer tells his father--one who will try to break the back of the
bowling.

"They're taking off Fluff's brother," the Caterpillar observes.

A thick-set young man holds the ball.  He makes some slight alteration in
the field.  The wicket-keeper stands back; the slips and point retreat a
few yards.  The ball that took the first wicket was the last of an over.
Desmond has to receive the attack of the new bowler.

The thick-set Etonian, having arranged the off side to his satisfaction,
prepares to take a long run.  He holds the ball in the left hand, runs
sideways at great speed, changes the ball from the left hand to the right
at the last moment, and seems to hurl both it and himself at the batsman.

"Greased lightning!" says John.

A dry summer has made the pitch rather fiery.  The ball, short-pitched,
whizzes just over Caesar's head.  A second and a third seem to graze his
cap.  Murmurs are heard.  Is the Eton bowler trying to kill or maim his
antagonist?  Is he deliberately endeavouring to establish a paralysing
"funk"?

But the fourth ball is a "fizzer"--the right length, a bailer,
terrifically fast, but just off the wicket.  Desmond snicks it between
short slip and third man; it goes to the boundary.

"That's what Caesar likes," says the Duffer.  "He can cut behind the
wicket till the cows come home."

"Cut--and come again," says the Caterpillar.

The fifth ball is played forward for a risky single.  The Rev. Septimus
forgets that times have changed.  And if they have, what of it?  He
hasn't.  His deep vibrant voice rolls across the lawn right up to the
batsman--

"Steady there!  Steady!"

And now the new-comer has to take the last ball of the over--his first.
Alas and alack!  The sixth ball is dead on to the middle stump.  The
Harrovian plays forward.  Man alive, you ought to have played back at
that!  The ball grazes the top edge of the bat's blade and flies straight
into the welcoming hands of the wicket-keeper.

Two wickets for 33.

Breathless suspense, broken by tumultuous cheers as Scaife strides on to
the ground.  His bat is under his arm; he is drawing on his gloves.
Thousands of men and as many women are staring at his splendid face and
figure.

"What a mover!" murmurs the Rev. Septimus.

Scaife strides on.  Upon his face is the expression John knows so well
and fears so much--the consciousness of power, the stern determination to
be first, to shatter previous records.  John can predict--and does so
with absolute certainty--what will happen.  For six overs the Demon will
treat every ball--good, bad, and indifferent--with the most distinguished
consideration.  And then, when his "eye" is in, he will give the Etonians
such leather-hunting as they never had before.

After a long stand made by Scaife and Desmond, Caesar is caught at
cover-point, but Scaife remains.  It is a Colossus batting, not a Harrow
boy.  The balls come down the pitch; the Demon's shoulders and chest
widen; the great knotted arms go up--crash!  First singles; then twos;
then threes; and then boundary after boundary.  To John--and to how many
others?--Scaife has been transformed into a tremendous human machine,
inexorably cutting and slicing, pulling and drawing--the embodied symbol
of force, ruthlessly applied, indefatigable, omnipotent.

The Eton captain, hopeful against odds, puts on a cunning and cool dealer
in "lobs."  Fluff is in, playing steadily, holding up his wicket, letting
the giant make the runs.  The Etonian delivers his first ball.  Scaife
leaves the crease.  Fluff sees the ball slowly spinning--harmless enough
till it pitches, and then deadly as a writhing serpent.  Scaife will not
let it pitch.  The ball curves slightly from the leg to the off.  Scaife
is facing the pavilion----

A stupendous roar bursts from the crowd.  The ball, hit with terrific
force, sails away over the green sward, over the ropes, over the heads of
the spectators, and slap on to the top of the pavilion.

Only four; but one of the finest swipes ever seen at Lord's.  Shade of
Mynn, come forth from the tomb to applaud that mighty stroke!

But the dealer in lobs knows that the man who leaves his citadel, leaves
it, sooner or later, not to return.  In the hope that Scaife, intoxicated
with triumph, will run out again, he pitches the next lob too much up--a
half-volley.  Scaife smiles.

John's prediction has been fulfilled.  A record has been established.
Never before in an Eton and Harrow match have two balls been hit over the
ropes in succession.  The crowds have lost their self-possession.  Men,
women, and children are becoming delirious.  The Rev. Septimus throws his
ancient topper into the air; the Caterpillar splits a brand-new pair of
delicate grey gloves.  Upon the tops of the coaches, mothers, sisters,
aunts, and cousins are cheering like Fourth-Form boys.


The Harrow first innings closed with 289 runs, Scaife carrying out his
bat for an almost flawless 126.  Desmond made 72; Fluff was in for
twenty-seven minutes--a great performance for him--and was caught in the
slips after compiling a useful 17.

But the remarkable feature of the innings was the short time in which so
many runs were made--exactly three hours.  The elevens went in to lunch,
as the crowd poured over the ground, laughing and chattering.  This is a
delightful hour to the Rev. Septimus.  He will walk to the wickets, and
wait there for his innumerable friends.  It will be, "Hullo, Sep!"  "By
Jove, here's dear old Sep!"  "Sep, you unfriendly beast, why do you never
come to see us?"  "Sep, when are you going to send that awful tile of
yours to the British Museum?"  And so on.

Twenty men, at least--some of them with names known wherever the Union
Jack waves--will ask the Rev. Sep to lunch with them; but the Rev. Sep
will say, as he has said these thirty years, that he doesn't come to
Lord's to "gorge."  A sandwich presently, and a glass of "fizz," if you
please; but time is precious.  A tall bishop strolls up--one of the
pillars of the Church, an eloquent preacher, and an autocrat in his
diocese.  Most people regard him with awe.  The Rev. Sep greets him with
a scandalous slap on the back, and addresses him, the apostolic one,
as--Lamper.[2]  And the Lord Bishop of Dudley says, like the others--

"Hullo, Sep!  We used to think you a slogger, but you never came anywhere
near that smite of Scaife's."

"I thought his smite was coming too near me," says the Rev. Sep, with a
shrewd glance at the pavilion.  "Lamper, old chap, I _am_ glad to see
your 'phiz' again."

And so they stroll off together, mighty prelate and humble country
parson, once again happy Harrow boys.

And now, before Eton goes in, we must climb on to the Trent coach.  Fluff
and his brother Cosmo, the Eton bowler, are lunching in other company,
but we shall find Colonel Egerton and the Caterpillar and Warde; so the
Hill slightly outnumbers the Plain, as the duke puts it.  Next to the
duchess sits Mrs. Verney.  The duke is torn nearly in two between his
desire that Fluff should make runs and that Cosmo, the Etonian, should
take wickets.  His Eton sons regard him as a traitor, a "rat" and Colonel
Egerton gravely offers him the corn-flowers out of his coat.

"You can laugh," the duke says seriously, "but when I see what Harrow has
done for Esmé, I'm almost sorry"--he looks at his youngest son (nearly,
but not quite, as delicate-looking as Fluff used to be)--"I'm almost
sorry that I didn't send Alastair there also."

Alastair smiles contemptuously.  "If you had," he says, "I should have
never spoken to you again.  Esmé is a forgiving chap, but you've wrecked
his life.  At least, that's my opinion."

After luncheon, the crowd on the lawn thickens.  The ladies want to see
the pitch, and, shall we add, to display their wonderful frocks.  The
enclosure at Ascot on Cup Day is not so gay and pretty a scene as this.
The Caterpillar, sly dog, has secured Iris Warde, and looks uncommonly
pleased with himself and his companion; a smart pair, but smart pairs are
common as gooseberries.  It is the year of picture hats and Gainsborough
dresses.

"England at its best," says Miss Iris.

"And in its best," the Caterpillar replies solemnly.

Iris Warde is as keen as her father's daughter ought to be.  She tells
the Caterpillar that when she was a small girl with only threepence a
week pocket-money, she used to save a penny a week for twelve weeks
preceding the match, so as to be able to put a shilling into the plate on
Sunday _if Harrow won_.

"And I dare say you'll marry an Etonian and wear light blue after all,"
growls the Caterpillar.

"Never!" says Miss Iris.

Now, amongst the black coats in the pavilion you see a white figure or
two.  The Elevens have finished lunch, and are mixing with the crowd.
Scaife is talking with a famous Old Carthusian, one of the finest living
exponents of cricket, sometime an "International" at football, and a
D.S.O.  The great man is very cordial, for he sees in Scaife an
All-England player.  Scaife listens, smiling.  Obviously, he is impatient
to begin again.  As soon as possible he collects his men, and leads them
into the field.  One can hear the policemen saying in loud, firm voices,
"Pass along, please; pass along!"  As if by magic the crowds on the lawn
melt away.  In a few minutes the Etonians come out of the pavilion.  The
sun shines upon their pale-blue caps and sashes, and upon faces slightly
pale also, but not yet blue.  For Eton has a strong batting team, and
Scaife and Desmond have proved that it is a batsman's wicket.

And now the connoisseurs, the really great players, settle themselves
down comfortably to watch Scaife field.  That, to them, is the great
attraction, apart from the contest between the rival schools.  Some of
these Olympians have been heard to say that Scaife's innings against weak
bowling was no very meritorious performance, although the two "swipes,"
they admit, were parlous knocks.  Still, Public School cricket is
kindergarten cricket, and if you've not been at Eton or Harrow, and if
you loathe a fashionable crowd, and if you think first-class fielding is
worth coming to Lord's to see, why, then, my dear fellow, look at Scaife!

Scaife stands at cover-point.  If you put up your binoculars, you will
see that he is almost on his toes.  His heels are not touching the
ground.  And he bends slightly, not quite as low as a sprinter, but so
low that he can start with amazing speed.  For two overs not a ball worth
fielding rolls his way.  Ah! that will be punished.  A long hop comes
down the pitch.  The Etonian squares his shoulders.  His eye, to be sure,
is on the ball, but in his mind's eye is the boundary; in his ear the
first burst of applause.  Bat meets ball with a smack which echoes from
the Tennis-Court to the stands across the ground.  Now watch Scaife!  He
dashes at top speed for the only point where his hands may intercept that
hard-hit ball.  And, by Heaven! he stops it, and flicks it up to the
wicket-keeper, who chips off the bails.

"How's that?"

"Not out!"

"Well fielded; well fielded, sir!"

"A very close squeak," says the Caterpillar.  "They won't steal many runs
from the Demon."

"Sometimes," says Miss Iris, "I really think that he is a demon."

The Caterpillar nods.  "You're more than half right, Miss Warde."

Presently, the first wicket falls; then the second soon after.  And the
score is under twenty.  The Rev. Septimus is beaming; the Bishop seated
beside him looks as if he were about to pronounce a benediction; Charles
Desmond is scintillating with wit and good humour.  Visions of a single
innings victory engross the minds of these three.  They are in the front
row of the pavilion, and they mean to see every ball of the game.

But soon it becomes evident that a determined stand is being made.  Runs
come slowly, but they come; the score creeps up--thirty, forty, fifty.
Fluff goes on to bowl.  On his day Fluff is tricky, but this, apparently,
is not his day.  The runs come more quickly.  The Rev. Septimus removes
his hat, wipes his forehead, and replaces his hat.  It is on the back of
his head, but he is unaware of that.  The Bishop appears now as if he
were reading a new commination--to wit, "Cursed is he that smiteth his
neighbour; cursed is he that bowleth half volleys."  The Minister is
frowning; things may look black in South Africa, but they're looking
blacker in St. John's Wood.

One hundred runs for two wickets.

The Eton cheers are becoming exasperating.  A few seats away Warde is
twiddling his thumbs and biting his lips.  Old Lord Fawley has slipped
into the pavilion for a brandy and soda.

At last!

Scaife takes off Fluff and puts on a fast bowler, changing his own place
in the field to short slip.  The ball, a first ball and very fast,
puzzles the batsman, accustomed to slows.  He mistimes it; it grazes the
edge of his bat, and whizzes off far to the right of Scaife, but the
Demon has it.  Somehow or other, ask of the spirits of the air--not of
the writer--somehow his wonderful right hand has met and held the ball.

"Well caught, sir; well caught!"

"That boy ought to be knighted on the spot," says Charles Desmond.  Then
the three generously applaud the retiring batsman.  He has played a
brilliant innings, and restored the confidence of all Etonians.

The Eton captain descends the steps; a veteran this, not a dashing
player, but sure, patient, and full of grit.  He asks the umpire to give
him middle and leg; then he notes the positions of the field.

"Whew-w-w-w!"

"D----n it!" ejaculates Charles Desmond.  Bishop and parson regard him
with gratitude.  There are times when an honest oath becomes expedient.
The Eton captain has cut the first ball into Fluff's hands, and Fluff has
dropped it!  Alastair Kinloch, from the top of the Trent coach, screams
out, "Jolly well muffed!"  The great Minister silently thanks Heaven that
point is the Duke's son and not his.

And, of course, the Eton captain never gives another chance till he is
dismissed with half a century to his credit.  Meantime five more wickets
have fallen.  Seven down for 191!  Eton leaves the field with a score of
226 against Harrow's 289.  Harrow goes in without delay, and one wicket
is taken for 13 runs before the stumps are drawn.  Charles Desmond looks
at the sky.

"Looks like rain to-night," he says anxiously.

And so ends Friday's play.


The morrow dawned grey, obscured by mist rising from ground soaked by two
hours' heavy rain.  You may be sure that all our friends were early at
Lord's, and that the pitch was examined by thousands of anxious eyes.
The Eton fast bowler was seen to smile.  Upon a similar wicket had he not
done the famous hat-trick only three weeks before?  The rain, however,
was over, and soon the sun would drive away the filmy mists.  No man
alive could foretell what condition the pitch would be in after a few
hours of blazing sunshine.  The Rev. Septimus told Charles Desmond that
he considered the situation to be critical, and, although he had read the
morning paper, he was not alluding even indirectly to South African
affairs.  Charles Desmond said that, other things being equal, the Hill
would triumph; but he admitted that other things were very far from
equal.  It looked as if Harrow would have to bat upon a treacherous
wicket, and Eton on a sound one.

At half-past ten punctually the men were in the field.  Scaife issued
last instructions.  "Block the bowling; don't try to score till you see
what tricks the ground will play.  A minute saved now may mean a quarter
of an hour to us later."  Caesar nodded cheerfully.  The fact that the
luck had changed stimulated every fibre of his being.  And he said that
he felt in his bones that this was going to be a famous match, like that
of '85--something never to be forgotten.

Charles Desmond spoke few words while his son was batting.  It was a
tradition among the Desmonds that they rose superior to emergency.  The
Minister wondered whether his Harry would rise or fall.  The fast bowler
delivered the first ball.  It bumped horribly.  The Rev. Septimus
shuddered and closed his eyes.  Caesar got well over it.  The third ball
was cut for three.  The fourth whizzed down--a wide.  The fast bowler
dipped the ball into the sawdust.

"It isn't all jam for him," whispered the Rev. Septimus.

"Well bowled--well bowled!"

Alas! the middle stump was knocked clean out of the ground.  Caesar's
partner, a steady, careful player, had been bowled by his first ball.

Two wickets for 17.

The crowd were expecting the hero, but Fluff was walking towards the
wickets, wondering whether he should reach them alive.  Never had his
heart beat as at this moment.  Scaife had come up to him as soon as he
had examined the pitch.

"Fluff, I am putting you in early because you are a fellow I can trust.
My first and last word is, hit at nothing that isn't wide of the wicket.
The ground will probably improve fast."

Fluff nodded.  A hive of bees seemed to have lodged in his head, and an
active automatic hammer in his heart; but he didn't dare tell the Demon
that funk, abject funk, possessed him, body and soul.

The second bowler began his first over.  He bowled slows.  Desmond played
the six balls back along the ground.  A maiden over.

And then that thick-set, muscular beast, for so Fluff regarded him,
stared fixedly at Fluff's middle stump.  Fluff glanced round.  The
wicket-keeper had a grim smile on his lips, for his billet was no easy
one.  Cosmo Kinloch at short slip looked as if it were a foregone
conclusion that Fluff would put the ball into his hands.  Then Fluff
faced the bowler.  Now for it!

The first ball was half a foot off the wicket, but Fluff let it go by.
The second came true enough.  Fluff blocked it.  The third flew past
Fluff's leg, but he just snicked it.  Desmond started to run, and then
stopped, holding up his hand.  Cheers rippled round the ring for the
first hit to the boundary.  That was a bit of sheer luck, Fluff reflected.

After this both boys played steadily for some ten minutes.  Then, very
slowly, Caesar began to score.  He had made about fifteen when he drove a
ball hard to the on, Fluff backing up.  Desmond, watching the travelling
ball, called to him to run.  It seemed to Desmond almost certain that the
ball would go to the boundary.  Too late he realized that it had been
magnificently fielded.  Desmond strained every nerve, but his bat had not
reached the crease when the bails flew to right and left.

Out!  And run out!

Three wickets for 41!

A quarter of an hour later Fluff was bowled with a yorker.  He had made
eleven runs, and kept up his wicket during a crisis.  Harrow cheered him
loudly.

And then came the terrible moment of the morning.  Scaife went in when
Fluff's wicket fell.  The ground had improved, but it was still
treacherous.  The fast bowler sent down a straight one.  It shot under
Scaife's bat and spread-eagled his stumps.

The wicket-keeper knows what the Harrow captain said, but it does not
bear repeating.  Every eye was on his scowling, furious face as he
returned to the pavilion; and the Rev. Septimus scowled also, because he
had always maintained that any Harrovian could accept defeat like a
gentleman.  Upon the other side of the ground the Caterpillar was saying
to his father, "I always said he was hairy at the heel."


It was admitted afterwards that the Duffer's performance was the one
really bright spot in Harrow's second innings.  Being a bowler, he went
in last but one.  It happened that Fluff's brother was in possession of
the ball.  It will never be known why the Duffer chose to treat Cosmo
Kinloch's balls with utter scorn and contempt.  The Duffer was tall,
strong, and a terrific slogger.  Nobody expected him to make a run, but
he made twenty in one over--all boundary hits.  When he left the wickets
he had added thirty-eight to the score, and wouldn't have changed places
with an emperor.  The Rev. Septimus followed him into the room where the
players change.

"My dear boy," he said, "I've never been able to give you a gold watch,
but you must take mine; here it is, and--and God bless you!"

But the Duffer swore stoutly that he preferred his own Waterbury.


Eton went in to make 211 runs in four hours, upon a wicket almost as
sound as it had been upon the Friday.  Scaife put the Duffer on to bowl.
The Demon had belief in luck.

"It's your day, Duffer," he said.  "Pitch 'em up."

The Duffer, to his sire's exuberant satisfaction, "pitched 'em up" so
successfully that he took four wickets for 33.  Four out of five!  The
other bowlers, however, being not so successful, Eton accumulated a
hundred runs.  The captains had agreed to draw stumps at 7.30.  To win,
therefore, the Plain must make another hundred in two hours; and three of
their crack batsmen were out.

After tea an amazing change took place in the temper of the spectators.
Conviction seized them that the finish was likely to be close and
thrilling; that the one thing worth undivided attention was taking place
in the middle of the ground.  As the minutes passed, a curious silence
fell upon the crowd, broken only by the cheers of the rival schools.  The
boys, old and young alike, were watching every ball, every stroke.  The
Eton captain was still in, playing steadily, not brilliantly; the Harrow
bowling was getting slack.

In the pavilion, the Rev. Septimus, Warde, and Charles Desmond were
sitting together.  Not far from them was Scaife's father, a big, burly
man with a square head and heavy, strongly-marked features.  He had never
been a cricketer, but this game gripped him.  He sat next to a
world-famous financier of the great house of Neuchatel, whose sons had
been sent to the Hill.  Run after run, run after run was added to the
score.  Scaife's father turned to Neuchatel.

"I'd write a cheque for ten thousand pounds," he said, "if we could win."

Lionel Neuchatel nodded.  "Yes," he muttered; "I have not felt so excited
since Sir Bevis won the Derby."

In the deep field Desmond was standing, miserable because he had nothing
to do.  No balls came his way; for the Eton captain had made up his mind
to win this match with singles and twos.  Very carefully he placed his
balls between the fielders; very carefully his partner followed his
chief's example.  No stealing of runs, no scoring off straight balls, no
gallery play--till victory was assured.

Poor Lord Fawley retired at this point into an inner room, pulling
savagely at his white beard.  Old Lyburn, who had been sitting beside
him, gurgling and gasping, staggered after him.  The Rev. Septimus kept
wiping his forehead.

"I can't stand this much longer," said Warde, in a hoarse whisper.

"Well hit, sir!  Well hit!"

The Eton cheering became frantic.  After nearly an hour's pawky,
uninteresting play, the Eton captain suddenly changed his tactics.  His
"eye" was in; now or never let him score.  A half-volley came down from
the pavilion end--a half-volley and off the wicket.  The Etonian put all
the strength and power he had suppressed so manfully into a tremendous
swipe, and hit the ball clean over the ropes.

"Do you want to double that bet?" said Strathpeffer to the Caterpillar.
They were standing on the top of the Trent coach.

"No, thanks."

"Give you two to one, Egerton?"

"Done--in fivers."

The unhappy bowler sent down another half-volley.  Once more the Etonian
smote, and smote hard; but this ball was not quite the same as the first,
although it appeared identical.  The ball soared up and up.  Would it
fall over the ropes?  Thousands of eyes watched its flight.  Desmond
started to run.  Golconda to a sixpence on the fall!  It is falling,
falling, falling.

"He'll never get there in time," says Charles Desmond.

"Yes he will," Warde answers savagely.

"He has!" screamed the Rev. Septimus.  "He--_has_!"

Pandemonium broke loose.  Grey-headed men threw their hats into the air;
M.P.'s danced; lovely women shrieked; every Harrovian on the ground
howled.  For Caesar held the ball fast in his lean brown hands.

The Eton captain walks slowly towards the pavilion.  He has to pass
Caesar on his way, and passing him he pauses.

"That was a glorious catch," he says, with the smile of a gallant
gentleman.

And as Harrow, as cordially as Eton, cheers the retiring chieftain, the
Caterpillar whispers to Mrs. Verney--

"Did you see that?  Did you see him stop to congratulate Caesar?"

"Yes," says Mrs. Verney.

"I hope Scaife saw it too," the Caterpillar replies coolly.  "That Eton
captain is cut out of whole cloth; no shoddy there, by Jove!"

And Desmond.  How does Desmond feel?  It is futile to ask him, because he
could not tell you, if he tried.  But we can answer the question.  If the
country that he wishes to serve crowns him with all the honours bestowed
upon a favoured son, never, _never_ will Caesar Desmond know again a
moment of such exquisite, unadulterated joy as this.


Six wickets down and 39 runs to get in less than half an hour!

Every ball now, every stroke, is a matter for cheers, derisive or
otherwise.  The Rev. Septimus need not prate of golden days gone by.
Boys at heart never change.  And the atmosphere is so charged with
electricity that a spark sets the firmament ablaze.

_Seven wickets for_ 192.

_Eight wickets for_ 197.

Signs of demoralization show themselves on both sides.  The bowling has
become deplorably feeble, the batting even more so.  Four more singles
are recorded.  Only ten runs remain to be made, with two wickets to fall.

And twelve minutes to play!

Scaife puts on the Duffer again.  The lips of the Rev. Sep are seen to
move inaudibly.  Is he praying, or cursing, because three singles are
scored off his son's first three balls?

"Well bowled--well bowled!"

A ball of fair length, easy enough to play under all ordinary
circumstances, but a "teaser" when tremendous issues are at stake, has
defeated one of the Etonians.  The last man runs towards the pitch
through a perfect hurricane of howls.  Warde rises.

"I can't stand it," he says, and his voice shakes oddly.  "You fellows
will find me behind the Pavvy after the match."

"I'd go with you," says the Rev. Septimus, in a choked tone, "but if I
tried to walk I should tumble down."

Charles Desmond says nothing.  But, pray note the expression so
faithfully recorded in _Punch_--the compressed lips, the stern frowning
brows, the protruded jaw.  The famous debater sees all fights to a
finish, and fights himself till he drops.

_Seven runs to make, one wicket to fall, and five minutes to play_!!!

Evidently the last man in has received strenuous instructions from his
chief.  The bowling has degenerated into that of anaemic girls--and two
whacks to the boundary mean--Victory.  The new-comer is the square,
thick-set fast bowler, the worst bat in the Eleven, but a fellow of
determination, a slogger and a run-getter against village teams.

He obeys instructions to the letter.  The Duffer's fifth ball goes to the
boundary.

Three runs to make and two and a half minutes to play!

The Duffer sends down the last ball.  The Rev. Septimus covers his eyes.
O wretched Duffer!  O thou whose knees are as wax, and whose arms are as
chop-sticks in the hands of a Griffin!  O egregious Duff!  O degenerate
son of a noble sire, dost thou dare at such a moment as this to attack
thine enemy with a--long hop?

The square, thick-set bowler shows his teeth as the ball pitches short.
Then he smites and runs.  Runs, because he has smitten so hard that no
hand, surely, can stop the whirling sphere.  Runs--ay--and so does the
Demon at cover point.  This is the Demon's amazing conjuring-trick--what
else can you call it?  And he has practised it so often, that he reckons
failure to be almost impossible.  To those watching he seems to spring
like a tiger at the ball.  By Heaven! he has stopped it--he's snapped it
up!  But if he despatches it to the wicket-keeper, it will arrive too
late.  The other Etonian is already within a couple of yards of the
crease.  Scaife does not hesitate.  He aims at the bowler's wicket
towards which the burly one is running as fast as legs a thought too
short can carry him.

He aims and shies--instantaneously.  He shatters the wicket.

"How's that?"

The appeal comes from every part of the ground.

And then, clearly and unmistakably, the umpire's fiat is spoken--

"Out!"

The Rev. Sep rises and rushes off, upsetting chairs, treading on toes,
bent only upon being the first to tell Warde that Harrow has won.

"_Io_!  _Io_!  _Io_!"



[1] The blue of the Harrow colours.

[2] Lamper, _i.e._ Lamp-post.




CHAPTER XIII

"IF I PERISH, I PERISH"

  "Since we deserved the name of friends,
    And thine effect so lives in me,
    A part of mine may live in thee
  And move thee on to noble ends."


The cheering at Bill upon the following Tuesday must be recorded,
inasmuch as it has, indirectly, bearing upon our story.  It will be
guessed that the enthusiasm, the uproar, the tumultuous excitement were
even greater than on a similar occasion some fifteen years before.
But, to his amazement, Desmond, not Scaife, was made the particular
hero of the hour.  Scaife's display of temper festered in the hearts of
boys who can forgive anything sooner than low breeding.  The Hill had
seen the Etonian stop to speak his cheery word of congratulation to
Caesar, and not the Caterpillar alone, but urchins of thirteen had made
comparisons.

Scaife, however, could not complain of his reception upon that
memorable Tuesday afternoon; the cheering must have been heard a mile
away.  But Desmond was acclaimed differently.  The cheers were no
louder--that was impossible--but afterwards, when the excitement had
simmered down, Caesar became the object of a special demonstration by
the Monitors and Sixth Form.  Nearly every boy of note in the Upper
School insisted upon shaking his hand or patting him on the back.
Scaife came up with the others, but he left the Yard almost immediately
and retired to his room.  He had won the great match; Desmond had saved
it; and the School apprehended the subtle difference.  More, Scaife
knew that John had gone up to Desmond with outstretched hands after the
match at Lord's.  He could hear John's eager voice, see the flame of
admiration in his eyes, as he said, "Oh, Caesar, I am glad it was you
who made that catch!"  And with those generous words, with that warm
clasp of the hand, Scaife had seen the barrier which he had built
between the friends dissolve like ice in the dog-days.


The attention of the Manor was now fixed upon the house-matches.  It
seemed probable that with four members of the School Eleven in the
team, the ancient house must prove invincible.  But to John's surprise,
as this delightful probability ripened into conviction, Warde betrayed
unwonted anxiety and even irritability.  Miss Iris confided to Desmond,
who paid her much court, that she couldn't imagine what was the matter
with papa.  And mamma, it transpired (from the same source), really
feared that the strain at Lord's had been too much, that her
indefatigable husband was about to break down.  Finally, John made up
his mind to ask a question.  He was second in command; he had a right
to ask the chief if anything were seriously amiss.  Accordingly, he
waited upon Warde after prayers.

But when he put his question, and expressed, modestly enough, his
anxiety and desire to help if he could, Warde bit his lips.  Then he
burst out violently--

"I am miserable, Verney."

John said nothing.  His tutor rose and began to pace up and down the
study; then, halting, facing John, he spoke quickly, with restless
gestures indicating volcanic disturbance.

"I'm between the devil and the deep sea," he said, "as many a better
man has been before me.  I thought I'd wiped out the grosser evils in
the Manor, but I haven't--I haven't.  Do you know that a fellow in this
house, perhaps two of 'em, but one at any rate, is getting out at night
and going up to town?  You needn't answer, Verney.  If you do know it,
you are powerless to prevent it, or it wouldn't occur."

"Thank you, sir."

"I can only guess who it is.  I am not certain.  And to make certain, I
must play the spy, creep and crawl, do what I loathe to do--suspect the
innocent together with the guilty.  It's almost breaking my heart."

"I can understand that, sir, after what you have done for us."

Warde smiled grimly.  "I don't think you do quite understand," he said
slowly.  "At this moment I am tempted, tempted as I never have been
tempted, to let things slide, to shut both eyes and ears, till this
term is over.  Next term"--he laughed harshly--"I shan't stand in such
an awkward place.  The deep sea will always be near me, but the
devil--the devil will be elsewhere."

John nodded.  His serious face expressed neither approval nor
disapproval to the man keenly watching it.  Afterwards Warde remembered
this impassivity.

"If I do not act"--Warde's voice trembled--"I am damned as a traitor in
my own eyes."

John had never doubted that his house-master would act.  As for
creeping and crawling, can peaks be scaled without creeping and
crawling?  Never----

"You are not to speak a word of warning," Warde continued vehemently.
"If you know what I don't know yet, still you cannot speak to me,
because the sinner in this case is a Sixth-Form boy.  You cannot speak
to me; and you will not speak to him, on your honour?"

There was interrogation in the last sentence.  John replied almost
inaudibly--

"I shall not speak--on my honour!"

"It is hard, hard indeed, that I should have to foul my own nest, but
it must be so.  Good night."

John went back to his room, calm without, terribly agitated within.
What ruthless spirit had driven him to Warde's study?  Yes; at last,
inexorably, discovery, disgrace, the ineffaceable brand of expulsion,
impended over the head of his enemy, to whom he was pledged to utter no
word of warning.  Like Warde, he did not know absolutely, but he
guessed that Scaife had spent another riotous night to town since the
match.  He had read it in the eyes glittering with excitement, in the
derisive smile of conscious power, in the magnetic audacity of Scaife's
glance.  And then he remembered Lawrence's parting words--

"It will be a fight to a finish, and, mark me, Warde will win!"

Two wretched days and nights passed.  More than once John spurred
himself to the point of going to Warde and saying, "Think what you like
of me, I am going to warn the boy I loathe that you are at his heels."
Still, always at the last moment he did not go.  Some power seemed to
restrain him.  But when he tried to analyse his feelings, he confessed
himself muddled.  He had obtained, nay, invited, Warde's confidence;
and he dared not abuse it.  It was a time of anguish.  He was unable to
concentrate his mind upon work or play, deprived of sleep, haunted by
the conviction that if Desmond knew all, he would turn from him for
ever.  Then, at the most difficult moment of his life, the way of
escape was opened.

Since the match, John and Caesar had resumed the former unrestrained
and continual intimacy and intercourse.  John was in and out of
Desmond's room, Desmond was in and out of John's room, at all hours.
They "found" together, of course, but it is not, fortunately, at meals
that boys or men discuss the things nearest to their hearts.  But at
night, just before lights were turned out, or just after, when an
Olympian is privileged to work a little longer by the light of the
useful "tolly," Caesar and Jonathan would talk freely of past, present,
and future.  It was during these much-valued minutes, or on Sunday
afternoons, that John would read to his friend the essays or verses
which always fired Desmond's admiration and enthusiasm.  To John's
intellectual activities Caesar played, so to speak, gallery; even as
John upon many an afternoon had sat stewing in the covered
racquet-court, applauding Desmond's service into the corner, or his hot
returns just above the line.  At home, in the holidays, the boys had
always met upon the same plane.  Of the two, John was the better rider
and shot.  Both were members of the Philathletic Club[1] of Harrow, and
the fact that Desmond was incomparably his superior as an athlete was
counterbalanced by John's fine intellectual attainments.  If John, at
times, wished that he could cut behind the wicket in Caesar's faultless
style, Desmond, on the other hand, spoke enviously of the Medal, or the
Essay, or some other of John's successes.  John spoke often and well in
the Debating Society, getting up his subjects with intelligence and
care.  So it was give-and-take between them, and this adjusted the
balance of their friendship, and without this no friendship can be
pronounced perfect.

None the less, free and delightful as this resumption of the old
intimacy had been, John knew Caesar too well not to perceive that
between them lay an unmentionable five weeks, during which something
had occurred.  From signs only too well interpreted before, John
guessed that Caesar was once more in debt to the Demon.  And finally,
Caesar confessed that he had been betting, that he had won, following
Scaife's advice, and then had lost.  The loss was greater than the
gain, and the difference, some five and twenty pounds, had been sent to
Scaife's bookmaker by Scaife.  As before, Scaife ridiculed the
possibility of such a debt causing his pal any uneasiness, but it
chafed Desmond consumedly.

Upon the Saturday of the semi-final house match, in which the Manor had
won a great victory by an innings and twenty-three runs, John went to
Desmond's room after prayers.  He noticed at once that his friend was
unusually excited.  John, however, attributed this to Caesar's big
score.  Success always inflamed Caesar, just as it seemed to
tranquillize John.  John began to talk, but he noticed that Caesar was
abstracted, answered in monosyllables, and twice looked at his watch.

"Have you an appointment, Caesar?"

"No.  What were you saying, Jonathan?"

"You look rather queer to-night."

"Do I?"  He laughed nervously.

"You're not bothering over that debt?"

This time Caesar laughed naturally.

"Rather not.  Why, that debt----"  He stopped.

"Is it paid?" said John.

"It will be.  Don't worry!"

But John looked worried.  He perceived that Caesar's finely-formed
hands were trembling, whenever they were still.

"Harry," said he--he never called Desmond Harry except when they were
at home--"Harry, what's wrong?"

"Why, nothing--nothing, that is, which amounts to anything."

"Harry, you are the worst liar in England.  Something is wrong.  Can't
you tell me?  You must.  I'm hanged if I leave you till you do tell me."

He looked steadily at Desmond.  In his clear grey eyes were tiny
dancing flecks of golden brown, which Desmond had seen once or twice
before,--which came whenever John was profoundly moved.  The dancing
flecks transformed themselves in Desmond's fancy into sprites, the airy
creatures of John's will, imposing John's wishes and commands.

"Scaife said I might tell you, if I liked."

"Scaife?"  John drew in his breath.  "Then Scaife wanted you to tell
me; I am sure of that."  He felt his way by the dim light of
smouldering suspicion.  If Scaife wanted John to know anything, it was
because such knowledge must prove pain, not pleasure.  John did not say
this.  Then, very abruptly, Desmond continued, "You swear that what I'm
about to tell you will be regarded as sacred?"

"Yes."

"It is a matter which concerns Scaife and me, not you.  You won't
interfere?"

"No."

"I'm going to London."

"_What_?"

"Don't look at me like that, you silly old ass!  It's not--not what you
think," he laughed nervously.  "I have bet Scaife twenty-five pounds,
the amount of my debt in fact, that the bill-of-fare of to-night's
supper at the Carlton Hotel will be handed to him after Chapel
to-morrow morning.  I bike up to town, and bike back.  If I don't go
this Saturday, I have one more chance before the term is over.  That's
all."

"That's all," repeated John, stupefied.

"If you can show me an easier way to make a 'pony,' I'll be obliged to
you."

"Scaife egged you on to this piece of folly?"

"No, he didn't."

"You may as well make a clean breast of it."

Bit by bit John extracted the facts.  Behind them, of course, stood
Scaife, loving evil for evil's sake, planting evil, gleaning evil,
deliberately setting about the devil's work.  Desmond, it appeared, had
persuaded Scaife not to go to town till the Lord's match was over.
Since the match Scaife had spent two nights in London, whetting an
inordinate appetite for forbidden fruit; exciting in Desmond also, not
an appetite for the fruit itself, but for the mad excitement of a
perilous adventure.  Then, when the thoughtless "I'd like a lark of
that sort" had been spoken, came the derisive answer, "You haven't the
nerve for it."  And then again the subtle leading of an ardent and
self-willed nature into the morass, Scaife pretending to dissuade a
friend, entreating him to consider the risk, urging him to go to bed,
as if he were a headstrong child.  And finally Desmond's challenge,
"Bet you I have the nerve," and its acceptance, protestingly, by the
other, and permission given that John should be told.

"And it's to-night?"

"I mean to have that bill-of-fare.  Do you think I'd back out now?"

In his mind's eye, our poor John was gazing down a long lane with no
turning at the end of it.  Could he make his friend believe that Scaife
had brought this thing to pass from no other motive than wishing to
hurt mortally an enemy by the hand of a friend?  No, never would such
an ingenuous youth as Caesar accept, or even listen to, such an
abominable explanation.

"Good night," said John.

"I see you're rather sick with me, Jonathan.  Remember, you made me
speak.  To-morrow morning we'll have a good laugh over it.  We'll walk
to the Haunted House, and I'll tell my tale.  I shall be on my way in
less than an hour."

John went back to his room.  The necessity for silence and thought had
become imperative.  What could he do?  It was certain that Warde was
waiting and watching.  He had inexhaustible patience.  Desmond, not the
Demon, would be caught and expelled.  John returned to Desmond's room.

"You've told me so much," he said; "tell me a little more.  How are you
going to do it?"

"To do what?"

"Get out of the house?  Get a bike--and all that?"

"Easy.  Lovell went out that way, and others.  You jump from the sill
of the first landing window into the horse-chestnut.  One must be able
to jump, of course; but I can jump.  Then you shin down the tree, nip
through the shrubbery, and over the locked wicket-gate."

"Yes," John said slowly, "over the gate."

"I borrowed a bike from one of the Cycle Corps, and have ridden