RENEW! RENEW!!

Remember that every yearly subscriber, either new or renewing, sending
us $2, receives a splendid new map of the United States and Canada--58 ×
41 inches--FREE. Or, if preferred, one of the books offered in another
column. It is not necessary to wait until a subscription expires before
renewing.



1841.     1884.

The Prairie Farmer

PROSPECTUS FOR 1884.

SEE INDUCEMENTS OFFERED

SUBSCRIBE NOW.

For forty-three years THE PRAIRIE FARMER has stood at the front
in agricultural journalism. It has kept pace with the progress and
development of the country, holding its steady course through all these
forty-three years, encouraging, counseling, and educating its thousands
of readers. It has labored earnestly in the interest of all who are
engaged in the rural industries of the country, and that it has labored
successfully is abundantly shown by the prominence and prestige it has
achieved, and the hold it has upon the agricultural classes.

Its managers are conscious from comparison with other journals of its
class, and from the uniform testimony of its readers, that it is
foremost among the farm and home papers of the country. It will not be
permitted to lose this proud position; we shall spare no efforts to
maintain its usefulness and make it indispensable to farmers,
stock-raisers, feeders, dairymen, horticulturalists, gardeners, and all
others engaged in rural pursuits. It will enter upon its forty-fourth
year under auspices, in every point of view, more encouraging than ever
before in its history. Its mission has always been, and will continue to
be--

To discuss the most approved practices in all agricultural and
horticultural pursuits.

To set forth the merits of the best breeds of domestic animals, and to
elucidate the principles of correct breeding and management.

To further the work of agricultural and horticultural organization.

To advocate industrial education in the correct sense of the term.

To lead the van in the great contest of the people against monopolies
and the unjust encroachments of capital.

To discuss the events and questions of the day without fear or favor.

To provide information concerning the public domain, Western soil,
climate, water, railroads, schools, churches, and society.

To answer inquiries on all manner of subjects coming within its sphere.

To furnish the latest and most important industrial news at home and
abroad.

To give full and reliable crop, weather, and market reports.

To present the family with pure, choice, and interesting literature.

To amuse and instruct the young folks.

To gather and condense the general news of the day.

To be, in brief, an indispensable and unexceptionable farm and home
companion for the people of the whole country.

The style and form of the paper are now exactly what they should be. The
paper used is of superior quality. The type is bold and clear. The
illustrations are superb. The departments are varied and carefully
arranged. The editorial force is large and capable. The list of
contributors is greatly increased, and embraces a stronger array of
talent than is employed on any similar paper in this country. We
challenge comparison with any agricultural journal in the land.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER is designed for all sections of the country.
In entering upon the campaign of 1884, we urge all patrons and friends
to continue their good works in extending the circulation of our paper.
On our part we promise to leave nothing undone that it is possible for
faithful, earnest work--aided by money and every needed mechanical
facility--to do to make the paper in every respect still better than it
has ever been before.



SPECIAL NOTICE

To each Subscriber who will remit us $2.00 between now and February 1st,
1884, we will mail a copy of THE PRAIRIE FARMER FOR ONE YEAR, AND ONE
OF OUR NEW STANDARD TIME COMMERCIAL MAPS OF THE UNITED STATES AND
CANADA--showing all the Counties, Railroads, and Principal Towns up to
date. This comprehensive map embraces all the country from the Pacific
Coast to Eastern New Brunswick, and as far north as the parallel of 52
deg., crossing Hudson's Bay. British Columbia; Manitoba, with its many
new settlements; and the line of the Canadian Pacific Railway, completed
and under construction, are accurately and distinctly delineated. It
extends so far south as to include Key West and more than half of the
Republic of Mexico. It is eminently adapted for home, school, and office
purposes. The retail price of the Map alone is $2.00. Size, 58 × 41
inches. Scale, about sixty miles to one inch.




READ THIS.

Another Special Offer.

[Illustration]

"The Little Detective."

Weighs 1/4 oz. to 25 lbs.

Every housekeeper ought to have this very useful scale. The weight of
article bought or sold may readily be known. Required proportions in
culinary operations are accurately ascertained. We have furnished
hundreds of them to subscribers, and they give entire satisfaction.
During January, 1884, to any person sending us THREE SUBSCRIBERS, at
$2.00 each, we will give one of these scales, and to each of the three
subscribers Ropp's Calculator, No. 1.



A meeting of farmers interested in ensilage will be held at 55
Beekman street, New York, Wednesday, January 23, at 12 o'clock. All
interested in the subject are invited to attend.


The Iowa State Horticultural Society will hold its annual
meeting at Des Moines, January 15-18. Prof. J.L. Budd, Ames, will
forward programmes on application. The usual reductions in railway and
hotel fares are expected.


Professor S.R. Thompson, Superintendent of the Nebraska
Agricultural College farm, has been chosen to represent Nebraska at the
meeting to be held at Washington, D.C., next week, for the purpose of
taking action in regard to contagious diseases of cattle. He requests
stock men and all others interested in the cattle industries of his
State to correspond with him, and make such suggestions as they may
think proper for guidance at the meeting.


Since its organization in 1853 to 1882 inclusive, the managers
of the Illinois State Fair have offered the following amounts in
premiums for live stock: Cattle, $70,406; horses and mules, $81,825;
sheep, $24,450; swine, $25,320; poultry, $8,214;--total $210,215, which
must be considered pretty substantial encouragement. The total offered
in premiums for all classes of exhibits has been $303,961. Thus a little
more than two thirds of the entire amount has been given to the breeders
and importers of stock.


The officers of the Northwestern Dairymen's Association say
that every indication warrants the conclusion that the coming convention
at Mankato, Minn., commencing February 12, will prove the grandest
success in the history of the association. A full array of the best
dairy talent of the entire Northwest will be present. The purpose is
both in the arrangement of the programme and in the conduct of the
discussions, to make of the coming convention an institute for study and
instruction which no intelligent and progressive farmer can afford to
miss.


The Missouri State Board of Agriculture asks the aid of one
competent man in every township in the State to give it estimates of
crops, etc., in his vicinity. The aim is to give as full and reliable
statistics for crop reports as it is possible to collect. The State
provides but $1,250 for the general expenses of the Board, and it is
thus dependent upon voluntary aid in the matter. The Board will defray
all expenses of postage and stationery. Competent persons willing to
undertake this work for the public good should address J.W. Sanborn,
Secretary, Columbus, Mo. Such persons will receive, free, the monthly
and annual reports of the Board.


In March of last year Secretary Fisher, of the Illinois State
Board of Agriculture, submitted his report for 1882 to Gov. Hamilton.
This report has just made its appearance. It has taken the State printer
ten months to get the volume printed and bound for distribution, a work
that any respectable job office in Chicago would have turned out in four
weeks without any extra exertion. The report is valuable, of course, but
it would have been worth a deal more had it appeared last April. Such
papers as the report of Prof. Forbes, State Entomologist, for instance,
might have been of immense benefit to the people of the State if the
information it contains regarding noxious insects had reached them in
early spring.




SEED SAMPLES.


We have letters from several parties desiring us to publish an offer
they make to send packages of seed corn and other seeds to any one
applying and inclosing stamps to pay for trouble and postage. Some of
these parties also send samples of the seed. There is one great
difficulty in the way of publishing this class of communications. Once
we begin, the door is open to the practice of petty frauds upon our
readers which we have no right to encourage or allow. Now we are almost
certain that all these writers, thus far, are honorable men, who wish to
confer a favor upon their brother farmers, and who do not wish to gain a
farthing in the transaction. But some of them are personally unknown to
us, and we do not feel like vouching for their responsibility, still
less so because it is difficult to tell who will next propose a similar
scheme. There is to be a brisk trade in seed corn during the next four
months, and parties having a well tested article will find no difficulty
in disposing of it at good prices, providing they can convince people
they have exactly what they claim. The way to do is to advertise the
seed corn in the regular way, giving as references such men as the
postmaster, justice of the peace, banker, etc., as may be most
convincing and convenient. We are as anxious as any one can be to see
the people supplied with well ripened and well cared-for corn grown in
the proper latitude, and we are equally anxious to guard them against
imposition.




THE PORK QUESTION IN EUROPE.


The question of admitting American pork into France is not yet settled.
The Corps Legislatif is again "all tore up" by rash statements made by
member M. Paul Bert, who has published a letter at Paris in which he
argues that the use of our pork must result in disease, and that a
general outbreak may be feared at any moment, so long as the products of
diseased swine are offered in French markets. He endeavors to strengthen
his position by pretending to quote from Dr. Detmers, Department of
Agriculture Inspector at the Chicago Stock Yards. He alleges that
Detmers has reported that diseased and dying hogs are sold daily in
Chicago, and then shipped as pork, bacon, and lard to Havre and
Bordeaux. To this audacious or mendacious charge Dr. Detmers replies as
follows:

    The statement made by M. Paul Bert, as contained in a cable
    dispatch from Paris, is not only a perversion of facts, but a
    falsehood cut from whole cloth. I never certified, wrote, or
    said that dead hogs are shipped to packing-houses, or that
    these carcasses are shipped abroad. All I ever said in regard
    to transportation of diseased or dead hogs is contained in my
    official reports to the Commissioner of Agriculture,
    Washington, and can be found in his annual reports of 1878
    and 1879, on pages 355 and 418 respectively, where it is
    accessible to everyone. I simply called attention to the
    transportation of diseased and dead hogs to the rendering
    tanks--entirely distinct from packing houses--as affording a
    means of spreading the then prevailing disease--swine plague,
    or so-called hog cholera.

    M. Paul Bert seems to be a true demagogue, otherwise he would
    not resort to a falsehood to please his constituents. I never
    in any manner, directly or indirectly, stated or intimated
    that packers are or ever were in collusion with dealers in
    diseased live stock. Moreover, the laws and regulations of
    the Chicago Stock Yards are such as to render it absolutely
    impossible that a dead hog should be smuggled into them, and
    if an animal should die while in the yards it is at once
    delivered to a soap-grease rendering establishment outside of
    the Stock Yards, and can not possibly get into a
    packing-house.

This reply came too late to have any effect upon French legislation, and
the decree of prohibition has been re-enacted. So far we notice no
marked effect upon the prices of pork products in this country, but
later it must result in depression. We notice the leading papers of the
United States are advocating the retaliatory measures proposed months
ago by THE PRAIRIE FARMER against European States interdicting
the importation of our meat products. We refer to the prohibition of
French and German adulterated and poisonous wines and liquors, and dry
goods and silk goods colored with poisonous dyes. It must come to this
at last if such totally unreasonable legislation against American
products is to continue in those countries.




CORN, WHEAT, AND COTTON.


The preliminary crop estimates by the Statistician of the Department of
Agriculture have been completed. He says the average yield of corn per
acre for 1883 was within a fraction of twenty-three bushels, which is 12
per cent less than the average for a series of several years past. The
quality is another thing.

It is doubtless true, Mr. Dodge says, that the quality of the corn north
of parallel forty is worse than for many years, increasing practically
the amount of shortage indicated by the number of bushels. As the whole
corn grown in 1883 in Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, and Dakota, added
to half that grown in Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Iowa, and Nebraska, would
make 400,000,000 bushels only--a fourth of the whole crop--so that the
possible depreciation of 40 per cent in all of it would be equivalent to
a 10 per cent reduction in the value of the entire crop. The Illinois
Department agents make the quality 31 per cent less than the average in
this State. An effort will be made later, after the worst of the crop
has been fed, to ascertain the feeding value of the year's product. It
is not proposed, however, to reduce the product to the equivalent of
merchantable corn, or "sound" corn, as no crop ever is free from
immaturity or imperfection. There always are some Northern fields caught
by frost, some neglected acres, some choked with weeds or flooded by
over-flows, and so on--corn, which is mainly "nubbins." What is intended
without reference to panic or exaggeration is to find out the exact
truth and then tell it. There is nothing gained, be it to farmers or
consumers, the Statistician adds, in suppressing truth on the one hand
or exaggerating the losses on the other. One feature of corn-growing in
1883 should prove a lesson to the farmers of the country; that is, the
general use of seed corn in the West, grown in lower latitudes. The
planting of Nebraska seed in Minnesota and Kansas seed in Illinois, has
demonstrated the folly of attempting to acclimatize the Southern maize
in the more Northern districts. Much loss from frost would have been
avoided had the seed been carefully selected from the best corn grown in
the immediate neighborhood.

The wheat crop is estimated, as before, slightly in excess of
400,000,000 bushels.

The cotton product, as shown by the December returns, is about 6,000,000
bales. There will be another investigation after the close of the cotton
harvest and the shipment of a large portion of the crop, when precise
results will be approached more nearly than has been possible hitherto.

The Department evidently feels a little "nettled" over the criticisms
that have been made upon its estimates of the last two corn crops. Again
we must protest that the amount of harvested corn in the West will fall
considerably below Mr. Dodge's figures. Whether or not the Department
sees fit to "reduce the product to the equivalent of merchantable corn"
such an estimate would be of interest, and when it gives the result of
the feeding quality of the corn, there will be something of a basis
furnished for such a calculation, especially as we shall have by that
time a pretty accurate account of the exported corn of the crop of 1883
and the amount "in sight," as the grain merchants say. It is true that
there is nothing gained to consumers by "suppressing truth on the one
hand or exaggerating losses on the other" but there is something lost to
consumers by overestimating yields at about the time the harvest is
ready and when speculators can use Government estimates to force down
prices.

The statistical machinery of the Department of Agriculture is far from
perfect, but it is the best the Government has supplied it with, and it
is not wise or fair to criticise its estimates too severely, based, as
they often must be, upon inadequate returns. The most that can be said
is that the Department should be exceedingly careful not to err on the
side that may result in injury to the producers, for, as we understand
it, it was created solely to advance their interests.




CHICAGO IN 1883.


Compared with the other great cities of the Union, and even with
previous years in her own history, Chicago had a prosperous business
year in 1883. The total trade of the year foots up $1,050,000,000, which
is a slight gain over that of 1882. The receipts of flour were 4,403,982
barrels; wheat, 20,312,065 bushels; corn, 74,459,948 bushels; oats,
37,750,442 bushels; rye, 5,662,420; barley, 10,591,619. Of cattle there
were received 1,878,944 head; hogs, 5,640,625; sheep, 749,917; horses,
15,255; dead hogs, 55,656. Of seeds, 122,582 tons; broom corn, 15,038
tons; butter, 53,987 tons; hides, 34,404 tons; wool, 20,122 tons;
potatoes, 13,000,000 bushels; coal, 4,042,356 tons; hay, 50,000 tons;
lumber, 1,848,817,000 ft.; shingles, 1,154,149 M.; salt, 1,096,587
barrels; cheese 23,590 tons. The total value of farm products of all
kinds is estimated at $402,000,000, which is $20,000,000 above the
valuation of that of 1882. The products of Chicago manufactures are
valued at $325,000,000. In 1881 the receipts of hogs amounted to
6,474,844 head, and in 1882, 5,817,504 head. The wholesale mercantile
trade has fallen off somewhat, as it has all over the country, owing to
depression that seems to be universal. In manufactures the city is
making wonderful development. In growth she is still unchecked and
without a rival in the world among large cities and business centres.




STRONG DRINK.


We often see in the papers the amount in dollars and cents, that strong
drink costs the people of this country. Some one has been making out
similar statistics for Great Britain, and finds that if the total house
rent is added to the rent of farms in the three divisions of the Kingdom
the total is $30,000,000 less than is usually spent for drink. Add
together the cost of the linen goods, cotton goods, coal, tea, coffee,
sugar, milk, butter and cheese and the total is only $45,000,000 in
excess of the sum spent in drink. And this is only the direct cost. The
indirect expense of drink--the crime and misery entailed, the cost of
prisons and almshouses, criminal courts and trials, the loss from
idleness, incapacity, blunders, sickness--towers above these figures in
colossal magnitude. Counting all these things it may be said of both
countries that strong drink costs more than sufficient to supply the
personal needs--food, clothing, and homes--of all the people. It is
indeed a fearful showing.




ANSWERS TO CORRESPONDENTS.


CHARLES DE LONG, Artesia, Miss.--THE PRAIRIE FARMER has the reputation
of knowing all about the prairies, north and south, and, therefore, I
appeal to it to tell me whether the Japan persimmon will be likely to be
hardy in this section, some portions of which is, as you probably know,
a prairie country?

ANSWER.--The Japan persimmon, Diospyros kaki, is, as we understand it,
an evergreen of sub-tropical origin, and will not be likely to fruit
satisfactorily far north of the region of the orange. Like the fig, in
your latitude, it may stand what frosts you have and, like it, attain
considerable growth, but you will seldom get a crop. We know
enterprising nurserymen are telling us it will grow and fruit as far
north as Washington; but we were told the same story about the
eucalyptus, which proved to be no more hardy than the orange. Our
authorities for these opinions may be regarded as first-class--no less
than LeBon Jardinier, who says it can not be grown and successfully
fruited outside the region of the orange. Recently, at a horticultural
exhibition at Nice, France, there was a fine show of the kakis
contributed by a gardener in the vicinity of Toulon, of which the
official report gives this account: "Among the newer exotics were the
kakis, of Japan, grown at Toulon. The fruit is about the size of an
average apple, a bright, orange-red in color, and the tree is very
productive. The Japanese make a great account of it, both as a fruit,
when ripe, and as a source for obtaining tannin, in its green state. It
appears to accommodate itself remarkably well to the climate of
Provence, and especially merits to be introduced into Algeria, where it
will even do better in all reasonable probability.". In respect to the
appearance of the fruit, it more nearly resembles in shape and size a
bell pepper, than an apple, but the color is orange-red, as described.
It is pretty sure to cut a great figure among the fruit products of
Florida, where its successful cultivation will lend additional
attractions to that already seductive State.

MRS. SARAH Y. STAPLES, DALLAS, TEXAS.--I do not ask you for a remedy for
the roup, with which my fowls have been recently affected; but for a
course of treatment to follow to prevent its return?

ANSWER--The roup may be brought upon healthy fowls if they are shut up
in narrow and unventilated quarters at night, and of days turned out in
cold or wet weather. And it will almost certainly follow if they are
confined under glass, as they sometimes are in winter, in abandoned
green-houses. In the first place, see fowls have a dry and airy roosting
place, but where they will be out of a draft or cold currents. Feed once
daily in the morning, the following compounded rations. Raw onions one
part, pork-cracklins one part, and bread or boiled potatoes one part,
chopped tolerably fine, but do not wet the mixture before feeding. If
you can substitute a few bits of garlic for twice the measure of onions,
it will be all the better for the health of the fowls, but they might
taint the taste of the eggs. If fowls are fed this mixture once daily,
it don't matter much what the other food is, whether corn or small
grain, though for laying mill-screenings or shrunken wheat is best.

ASA GRAY, ROCKFORD, ILL.--I have seen it stated the daily rations of the
cowboys of the Southwest, in certain sections and during some months,
was confined to raw beef, rock salt, and red peppers. How is it?

ANSWER.--We don't know. Will someone familiar with cowboys and their
manner of living report. However, all things considered, the ration is
not a bad one, for the reason that raw beef digests in half the time of
beef well cooked, and the large, sweet pepper of the Southwest deprived
of its seeds is not near as hot in the mouth as it is commonly
represented.

R. ROOT, CLARKSVILLE, IOWA. 1. Does the basket willow have to be
cultivated like a field crop? 2. Is there more than one kind, and if so
which is best? 3. What kind of soil is best adapted to its cultivation?

ANSWER.--1. In some respects, yes; the land having to be given over to
them exclusively. In France the cuttings are planted from twelve to
fifteen inches apart in order to obtain long and slender shoots. 2.
There are half a dozen cultivated in Europe, the best two being the
Salix rubra or red Osier, and the Salix vitellina or yellow Osier. But a
hardier variety, Salix viminalis, is commonly preferred in this country
where the cultivation, though often undertaken, has never been very
successful, from the fact that American labor can not compete with the
labor of women and children in Europe. 3. In cool climates having a
moist atmosphere the Osier willow is successfully grown where ordinary
crops thrive, but in warmer and drier sections low and moist land must
be chosen. Indeed the whole tribe of willows love cool, moist
situations, and the richer the soil the stronger and quicker the growth.
We should be glad to hear from correspondents who cultivate, or who live
where the Osier is grown and prepared for market, the details of the
whole industry.

B.F.J.




WAYSIDE NOTES.

BY A MAN OF THE PRAIRIE.


I don't know that I really ought to take any credit to myself for it,
but I hope I have done something toward increasing the number of farmer
correspondents for the hale old PRAIRIE FARMER. I can't help
noticing, as I do with pleasure, that the number is increasing.
Furthermore, the correspondents all write well, I mean, simply; they
seem to have something to say, and say it in a manner that can be
readily understood. Their writings are instructive, too. Well, I hope
this writing fever, like most others, will prove highly contagious, and
have a run through the entire PRAIRIE FARMER family. I know
from experience the malady is not a dangerous one. At least it don't do
the writers any harm; if the readers can stand what I say, I am
satisfied. The editor may boil down our communications, or chop them up
and serve them in any style he chooses, so that he presents all the good
we mean to say, and we will be satisfied. Will we not,
fellow-contributors?



Rufus Blanchard, for many years a leading map publisher of Chicago, told
me the other day, that in 1838 he was farming in Union county, Ohio.
That year he grew about 1,000 bushels of oats, some 250 bushels of
wheat, and raised 100 hogs. He sold his oats for eleven cents per
bushel, his wheat for twenty-five cents, and his hogs for one cent and a
quarter per pound. He hauled his grain to Columbus, forty miles, to
market, and took his pay in salt. I remarked that this was pretty rough
farming. "On the contrary," said he, "in those days we were happy as
clams. We had all the pork we wanted without cost, for our hogs fattened
themselves on the mast of the woods. We paid by toll for grinding our
wheat into flour. The woods supplied us with deer, turkeys, and many
other kinds of game. Our clothing was homespun. We had plenty of corn
meal and cheaply grown vegetables, and helped each other in sickness or
accident. If a neighbor's log house burned down, we all joined together
in putting him up a better one than he had before. We had pretty good
schools and interesting religious meetings without expensive pew rents
or style in dress. We visited each other and had plenty of sound
amusement. I never was so happy or so well contented in my life," he
added, and I believe him, for his face is wrinkled with care and
saddened by misfortune. It don't do, you see, to get too far removed
from this simple, natural life.



I am looking out for a little colder weather. The pond is not yet frozen
sufficiently for us to cut ice as we want it. But both my neighbor and
myself have gotten all things in readiness for the harvest. I like an
open winter pretty well, but I do want ice.



It seems to me that Dr. Detmers is always going off "half-cocked." He
once did the foreign cattle shipping interest great harm by an
ill-advised and unwarranted dispatch concerning the prevalence of
pleuro-pneumonia at the Chicago Stock Yards, and now I notice that his
alleged statements regarding diseased hogs and the disposal of them at
the same point have furnished the French Corps Legislatif an excuse for
enacting the decree prohibiting the introduction of American pork
products into France. Isn't it about time the Department of Agriculture
at Washington sat a little down on this man who writes too much with his
pen? Not that I would silence any man who sticks to facts, no matter
whose soap-bubble he pricks; but a simple alarmist who rushes into print
mainly for the pleasure it gives him to see his name in print, and to
know that he is talked about, deserves to be squelched. For aught I
know, though, Dr. Detmers has been misrepresented by the wily Frenchmen.
What has Dr. Loring to say on the subject?



But, after all, as I think the editor of THE PRAIRIE FARMER
himself said some months ago, this foreign agitation of the live stock
question may result in great good, inasmuch as it must lead to proper
legislation in this country against the introduction and spread of
contagious diseases among animals. It is without doubt the basis of the
proceedings at the Chicago cattle-growers' convention in November last,
and of the present movement for immediate Congressional action upon the
matter. The difficulty abroad will, I believe, prove short-lived.




LETTER FROM CHAMPAIGN.

With the exception of two days, the 22d and 23d, which were stormy and
gave us ten to twelve inches of snow, followed by a little sleet and
rain, the latter half of December has been as delightful as the first
half was, though a good deal colder. The sleighing since the 17th has
never been better; and as there is ten inches to a foot of solid snow
now lying on the ground, it is likely to last some time longer. The
sleet and rain formed a crust an inch and a half thick, and though it is
not very strong, it, together with the compact snow, makes getting down
to the grass beneath quite out of the question, and stock have to depend
on the stalk fields or be fed hay and corn.



This will make a heavier draft upon the grain and hay in reserve than
has been anticipated by those who depend on carrying their stock through
mostly on grass, and be sure to lessen the surplus and raise the price
of corn, oats, and hay accordingly. Corn in the field is drying out so
fast under the influence of the dry, cold weather, stock do not refuse
soft corn as they did after the first sharp frost in November and
December. It is now seen that it would have been better to have left all
the soft and some of the immature corn in the field, than to have husked
and cribbed it as many did and lost more than would be believed, if
reported, by mould and rot.



At any rate the fall wheat is safe so long as the present covering of
snow lasts, and this more than compensates for the loss of winter
pasture. The snow, as near as I can learn, covers all Illinois, except a
few counties on the west, and as usual, is quite as heavy in the
timbered regions of which Vandalia is near the center, as in Northern
Illinois. So far the cold season considerably resembles the winter of
1878-79, and let us hope it will continue to the end, that we may have
light snows and many of them, good sleighing and moderate temperature
through January and February.



It has mystified me, as I have do doubt it has many others, why European
Governments have had so much to say about trichinæ in the hog, of which
we have had scarcely any, and so little of hog cholera, of which we have
had a good deal. But the mystery is now cleared up. The sickness and
losses from hog cholera, have either by error or intention been reported
to the several European Governments as results of almost universal
trichiniasis, and they have acted accordingly. That it should be so,
seems surprising, but that it is so, we have the proof in the following
paragraph from a late number of the Journal D'Agriculteur Pratique. The
writer, Dr. Hector George, one of the regular contributors, in a long
article opposing rescinding the order prohibiting the importation of
American pork products into France, first quotes the report of the
Chicago Board of Health, that 8 per cent of hogs slaughtered in Chicago
are afflicted with trichinæ, goes on to say: "This per cent, however
considerable it may be, is far inferior to the reality if we judge from
an official dispatch addressed to Earl Granville by Mr. Crump, English
Consul at Philadelphia." in 1880 trichiniasis destroyed 700,000 hogs in
Illinois alone. According to an official report by Dr. Detmers to the
Government of the United States, the hogs sick or dead from trichiniasis
are hurried to the packing houses and are thereafter prepared and
immediately sent off to Europe.



M. Paul Bert, from whom we have recently heard on the same subject and
in the same strain, no doubt got his inspiration from the article in the
Journal D'Agriculteur Pratique after which he probably read the official
report of Dr. Detmers, to whom he refers, and like Dr. George, either
did not understand or intentionally misconstrued it for political
purposes. Perhaps what Dr. Detmers did report was bad enough and
extravagant enough, but it had exclusive reference to hog cholera then
prevalent, as any one can satisfy himself who will turn to the reports
or the Department of Agriculture for the several years 1879, 1880, and
1881. B.F.J.




A RECORD OF UNFASHIONABLE CROSSES IN SHORT-HORN CATTLE PEDIGREES; a book
of 240 pages; the only work of the kind in existence. Send for a
circular. F.P. & O.M. HEALY, Bedford, Taylor Co., Iowa.



REMEMBER _that $2.00 pays for_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER _from this
date to January 1, 1885; For $2.00 you get it for one year and a copy
of_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER COUNTY MAP OF THE UNITED STATES, FREE!
_This is the most liberal offer ever made by any first-class weekly
agricultural paper in this country._







POULTRY NOTES

Poultry-Raisers. Write for Your Paper.


CHAT WITH CORRESPONDENTS.


Notwithstanding the fact that I have repeatedly said I would not answer
questions unless they came through THE PRAIRIE FARMER the
people who, by ways and means best known to themselves, have managed to
obtain my address, keep right on asking questions by mail at a rate that
would drive me frantic if anything could. But nothing ever troubles me
long at a time, so I take your disregard of my wishes good naturedly, as
I take everything else that I can't help, and in the future I will
answer all questions whether they come through THE PRAIRIE
FARMER or not, sometime. To be sure "sometime" is not very
definite, but it is the best I can do. My poultry letters are "too
numerous to mention" and it requires no small amount of time to answer
them all; but I won't growl about that if you will only be patient and
not grumble if you don't get an answer "by return mail," or "in the next
paper." All questions of general interest will be answered in these
columns as soon as possible, while those that require an immediate
answer will be attended to by mail. Poultry raisers who desire
information that I can give, and who have not my address, can address
THE PRAIRIE FARMER. However, let me ask you not to write except
when necessary, and then please put your questions as plainly as
possible, and "be as brief as the nature of the subject will permit."

And when you are writing to me don't use postal cards. Postal cards are
only intended for the briefest of business messages, but lots of people
use them for nearly all their correspondence. I know one man who writes
love letters on postal cards. Most women and some men manage to make one
side of a 5 × 3 inch postal card do duty for four pages of commercial
note. They will write up and down and across lots and on the bias until
the whole thing is so hopelessly mixed and tangled up that if the
mystery of a woman's ways, or the fate of Charlie Ross were solved upon
one of these cards all the "experts" in the world could not unravel it.
A penny saved may be as good as a penny earned, and I have no objections
to your saving it in a legitimate way, but when it comes to saving it at
the expense of my time, patience, and eye-sight, I object most
decidedly. Hereafter I will not answer postals; I will not even read
them.

An Iowa woman writes: "If it is true that vaccination prevents chicken
cholera, how does it happen that fowls which had the genuine chicken
cholera last season took the disease again this season and died from the
effects of it? This happened on our place." I have puzzled my brains on
the same thing but I am not scientific enough to explain things that I
don't know anything about, so I leave that conundrum to be answered by
some of the learned people who have the whole theory of chicken cholera
at their tongues' end.

Several correspondents want to know how to get rid of rats in
poultry-houses. One man says that he firmly believes that there are more
rats than chickens in his poultry-house, and although he has tried half
a dozen different kinds of rat-traps he rarely catches anything in them.

I never found rat-traps much good; some of them would catch one or two,
but after that the rest of the tribe would fight shy of all such devices
for their undoing. A well trained rat terrier proved to be the best
rat-trap we ever had on the premises, and for the poultry raiser who
likes dogs a good ratter would be a good investment. Or you can use some
one of the "exterminators" that may be obtained at the drug stores.
Remove your fowls to some other building, prepare the poison according
to directions, and place it in the poultry-house. The best kinds to use
are those that make the rats thirsty and cause them to die immediately
after drinking; water can then be left in the hen house and the dead
rats will be found close by. When you have rat poison in the house see
that it is properly marked and put out of reach of children and careless
hired girls; and always see that all remnants of bait are taken care of.

A Nebraska man wants to know why his hens don't lay. Says they are
mostly early pullets, have a fairly comfortable poultry house, all the
grain they will eat twice a day, and plenty of fresh water at all times.

It seems to me that "all the grain they will eat twice a day" is rather
overdoing the grain business. Have some of that grain ground, mix with
boiled vegetables and feed warm every morning; also give green food and
raw bone, and my word for it your hens will soon "lay like sixty."

FANNY FIELD.




FEATHER ENDS.


Plymouth Rock pullets are not always early layers, for they
often grow for ten or twelve months before laying, though some say as
early as six months after being hatched. The best plan the keep Plymouth
Rocks is to get the pullets hatched as early as possible. April is as
late as should be desired, but a Plymouth Rock cock crossed on common
hens will produce pullets that may be hatched later.

N.Y. Times: A poultry-house should be large enough to be airy,
but if it is kept strictly clean and sweet it will do no harm to be
somewhat crowded. A house 24 feet long, 10 feet wide, 5 feet high behind
and 8 feet in front, and having four roosting poles, all on a level and
only a foot from the floor, will hold 60 to 80 fowls. This manner of
arranging the roosts prevents a good deal of quarreling to get on the
top perch.

Poultry-rearing for export appears to be largely on the increase in
Germany; and Rummelsburg, near Berlin, boasts of the largest goose
market probably in the world. There arrive daily at that station on an
average forty cars with geese and ducks. Every car contains about 1,500,
thus making about 400,000 birds shipped every week, or an annual total
of 20,000,000. The largest portion of these birds are reared and
fattened in the surrounding provinces, and thence dispatched to all
parts of Germany, England, Belgium, France, Switzerland, and other
European countries.

Farmers' Call: Turkeys do not require as warm quarters in
winter as do other fowls. They will rest on a cherry tree when the
mercury is frozen solid in the thermometer bulb, and then fly down in
the morning and wade through the snow to cool off. This is a hint to the
turkey raiser. Do not confine the turkeys in quarters too warm and
close, and be sure that they have three or four hours' exercise each day
in the open air. The turkey is really a hardy fowl and easily wintered
if you do not pet it too much. Be a little unkind to it in cold weather.
About all the shelter they will need is a wind-break. Give them plenty
of highly nutritious food.

Mr. Harrison Weir writes: "What the farmers should do is
this--they should produce their poultry of the finest quality, poultry
of the stamp of the old Dorking--plump birds, thick-skinned birds,
small-boned birds, and birds with little offal--fat them well, truss
them well, and send them to market. The white-legged beauties would take
the highest price, and, if well seen to, would very soon drive the
foreign fowls from our markets, and English gold would gladden the home
of the English henwife. I may mention that a neighboring farmer intends
rearing 3,000 chickens next spring, all to be off his ground before the
beginning of May, when the cattle will come out. He expects to get 75c.
a head, and I believe he will, and it will pay him if he does."

Poultry houses should be whitewashed inside and out. For the
inside we add two tablespoonfuls of carbolic acid or a pound of sulphur
to a pailful of the wash (to kill vermin); do not be afraid of putting
on too much, but apply the wash to every corner and crevice in the
building. If you have plank floors, clean them off nicely and put on
three or four inches of fresh earth. Dirt floors should be dug up the
depth of one foot. Wash your windows (if you have any in your house, and
if not you ought to have them), so that the fowls can see daylight, and
in bad weather they will enjoy the confinement of the poultry houses
much better. Wash off the roosts with kerosene oil at least once a week.
Take every nest box and wash inside and out, and put in clean straw,
sprinkling upon it some sulphur or loose tobacco. Observe these rules,
and your fowls will do better and keep healthier. We find this good
advice floating about and do not know its source. The hints are worth
remembering.



THE THROAT.--"_Brown's Bronchial Troches_" act directly on the organs
of the voice. They have an extraordinary effect in all disorders of the
throat.






THE APIARY

[Illustration]


KEEP BEES.


The beginning of the new year is a general time of settling accounts and
making resolutions for the future. The head of many a family is overcast
with gloom as he ascertains the true state of his affairs, and perceives
how little he has to show from the past year of toil. His family may
have been industrious in a general way, and yet been consumers only, and
not producers. We knew a farmer's family where there were three
daughters just budding into womanhood. On inquiring of the mother what
she had to sell to clothe her daughters with, she answered, Not a thing.
Have you no butter, eggs, fowls, honey, or bees-wax to sell from this
good farm? No, nothing. These girls were not idle! Oh no. They pounded
the organ, and the result was music as sweet as filing a saw; crocheted,
darned lace, and helped mother. When their father went to town they
asked him to bring them a pair of shoes, a bustle, or a necktie, with no
thought or care. And all the while the neighbors said "he was hard run."

There are few farmers' families that are so situated that they can not
care for a few colonies of bees. They not only need the sweets they
gather, but these industrious insects help to fertilize the bloom of
their orchards and meadows. Nature has appointed this insect, and it
alone, to do this work for her.

Honey can be used in many ways as a substitute for sugar--in canning
fruit, making cookies, and for other culinary purposes.

We would advise all those contemplating bee-keeping to start on a small
scale, if they have had no previous training. Two colonies are plenty,
and then let their knowledge increase in the same ratio as do their
bees. The next thing in order, after purchasing bees, should be a good
standard work on apiculture; and study it well. A person should be full
of theory, and then they are ready for practice. Those who are
energetic, willing to work, intelligent and willing, eager to learn,
observing, persevering, and attentive to their work, will rarely ever
fail in apiculture.

We have heard farmers say that bees will not flourish with the same care
given to other farm stock, and that they have not time to attend to
them. We would recommend to all such to try the experiment of procuring
a colony or two of beautiful Italians, in some good movable frame hive,
and present them to the family, with abundance of bee literature, and
see if they are not taken care of, especially if the almighty dollar
puts in an appearance.

MRS. L. HARRISON.




THE NEW BEES.


Prof. Cook, at the late Michigan Convention of Bee-keepers, spoke in
this wise on the topic of the New Bees:

"I have had no experience with the Cyprian bees, but I think more and
more of the Syrian. I find no trouble to handle them, and take my large
class of students, new to the business, right into the apiary. These
thirty or forty students daily manipulate the bees, doing everything
that the bee-keeper ever needs to do, and rarely ever get stung. I find
that the comb honey of the Syrians is excellent, that the bees go
readily into the sections. We did not get all our sections so that they
could be crated without the use of the separators; but I am not sure but
that it was more our fault than the fault of the bees. They are very
prolific, breeding even when there is no nectar to gather, and they
often gather when other bees are idle. I have this fall secured from Mr.
Frank Benton a Carniolan queen, and shall try crossing the Carniolans
with the Syrians. Perhaps we can thus secure a strain with the
amiability of the Carniolan, and the business of the Syrians."




HIVE AND HONEY HINTS.


Mr. Willingford, of Carlingford, Ontario, who had a crop of
several tons of honey this year, has taken it to England for sale.

Manufacturers of tobacco, of pickles, of cakes and cookies,
confectioners, and pork-packers are now using honey more extensively
than ever in the preparation of their specialties.

A singular instance of bee-swarming occurred a short time ago
in Singapore harbor, on board the British steamer Antonio, which at the
time was lying entirely outside the shipping in the roads. A swarm of
wild bees from the shore suddenly located themselves directly under the
sternpost of a boat lying above the deck, and all attempts to drive them
away proved unavailing, the chief officer being very severely stung in
endeavoring to get rid of them. They held to their position for several
days, and were eventually destroyed after the steamer had hauled
alongside the wharf.

Rev. L.L. Langstroth recently said: When I commenced
bee-keeping, a sting caused much swelling, but in time this trouble
passed away. Several years passed, during which I handled no bees, and
when I again attempted it, I found myself more susceptible to the poison
than ever, but by continuing to work with the bees, disregarding the
stings, my former indifference returned.

Ohio bee-keepers will discuss the following questions at the
Columbus meeting on the 14-16: How to winter bees successfully. How many
brood-frames are necessary in one hive? What can be done to prevent
adulteration of honey? How to create a home market for honey. How many
colonies can be kept in one locality? Can we do without separators? What
shall we do with second swarms? Which is the most salable
section--one-half, one, or two pounds? Which are best--deep or shallow
frames? Is it advisable to have a standard-size frame for all
bee-keepers?

Many are inquiring the proper way to let bees out on shares, so
as to have both parties satisfied. I do not know any such way, for the
most I have known in regard to letting bees out on shares resulted in
both parties being dissatisfied. But it all depends on what the
agreement is; and perhaps you had better have it down in writing. One
case I have recently heard of, the agreement was to divide the profits.
Well, it so happened that there was no profit, but there was a pretty
big loss; and as no provision had been made for this state of affairs,
each one felt disposed to put the loss on to the shoulders of the other.
I decided it would be about fair to divide the loss; but very likely
circumstances might make this not the right way after all. So says the
editor of Gleanings. It strikes us that he is all right, but if he had
said to bee-keepers "use the same common sense as to contracts that
people do in other kinds of business," he would have covered the whole
ground.



THE PRAIRIE FARMER

AND

YOUTH'S COMPANION

ONE YEAR, $3 FOR THE TWO.

It is not required that both papers be sent to one address, nor to the
same post-office.

Address PRAIRIE FARMER PUB. CO.,
150 Monroe Street, Chicago.



RAILROADS.

[Illustration]

A MAN WHO IS UNACQUAINTED WITH THE GEOGRAPHY OF THIS COUNTRY WILL SEE BY
EXAMINING THIS MAP THAT THE

CHICAGO, ROCK ISLAND & PACIFIC R'Y

By the central position of its line, connects the East and the West by
the shortest route, and carries passengers, without change of cars,
between Chicago and Kansas City, Council Bluffs, Leavenworth, Atchison,
Minneapolis and St. Paul. It connects in Union Depots with all the
principal lines of road between the Atlantic and the Pacific Oceans. Its
equipment is unrivaled and magnificent, being composed of Most
Comfortable and Beautiful Day Coaches, Magnificent Horton Reclining
Chair Cars, Pullman's Prettiest Palace Sleeping Cars, and the Best Line
of Dining Cars in the World. Three Trains between Chicago and Missouri
River Points. Two Trains between Chicago and Minneapolis and St. Paul,
via the Famous

"ALBERT LEA ROUTE."

A New and Direct Line, via Seneca and Kankakee, has recently been opened
between Richmond Norfolk, Newport News, Chattanooga, Atlanta, Augusta,
Nashville, Louisville, Lexington, Cincinnati Indianapolis and Lafayette,
and Omaha, Minneapolis and St. Paul and intermediate points.

All Through Passengers Travel on Fast Express Trains.

Tickets for sale at all principal Ticket Offices in the United States
and Canada.

Baggage checked through and rates of fare always as low as competitors
that offer less advantages.

For detailed information, get the Maps and Folders of the

GREAT ROCK ISLAND ROUTE,

At your nearest Ticket Office, or address

R.R. CABLE,
Vice-Pres. & Gen'l M'g'r,

E. ST. JOHN,
Gen'l Tkt. & Pass. Agt.

CHICAGO.



REMEMBER _that $2.00 pays for_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER
_from this date to January 1, 1885: For $2.00 you get it for one year
and a copy of_ THE PRAIRIE FARMER COUNTY MAP OF THE UNITED STATES,
FREE! _This is the most liberal offer ever made by any first-class
weekly agricultural paper in this country._






SILK CULTURE.


WOMEN IN SILK CULTURE.


The feminine portion of our population is getting to be mighty
independent. Instead of waiting, Micawber-like, for something (a man) to
turn up they are going to work to turn it up themselves. They would
rather make a living for themselves than have a man to make it for them.
They are teaching schools, operating telegraph instruments and
telephones, clerking, keeping books of account, type-writing, doing
short-hand reporting, lecturing, preaching, practicing law, and some
have so far fallen from grace as to be editing papers. But many of these
occupations present closed doors to our country girls and women. Many of
these can not leave their country homes, and these occupations, with the
exception of school teaching, can not be carried on in the country.
Others, who could leave home, are chary of braving the wiles and
temptations of the city, and their friends are still more loth to have
them go. The great need is some work, light, respectable, and yet fairly
remunerative, which our country lassies can carry on at home. School
teaching is possible, but teaching country district schools is the most
thankless of all drudgery, and, besides, a majority of our young women
are not able to endure the worry and close confinement. If it can be
made successful, sericulture offers by far the best opportunity to
country girls to earn their own pin money, or even their own living. It
can be engaged in at home; it is light, pleasant, and interesting work;
and there is no doubt that American silk can be produced of such a
quality that there will be a brisk demand for it at good prices. But if
all this be true the question at once presents itself, Why have not
American women engaged largely in sericulture?

The answer is that they have been appalled at the very outset by the
alleged expense of the undertaking. The promoters of the enterprise took
to writing books. There was an excuse for this amounting almost to a
necessity. To engage in silk culture, a person must be possessed of some
special knowledge. It is no harder than poultry or bee-keeping, but a
person to succeed at these must have some expert knowledge, and as
sericulture was a new thing, beginners must have books containing what
they needed. But these authors made the business much more difficult and
expensive than it should be. First of all, they laid it down as one of
the Medes and Persian laws of sericulture, that the worms must have
mulberry leaves to subsist upon. Mulberry sprouts are costly to begin
with; then the trees must grow at least two years, and should grow five
years, before the leaves are used. This, of itself, was enough to deter
but a very few from silk culture. But they made it appear, also, that
very expensive appliances for a cocoonery were necessary, and only the
most costly breeds of worms should be used, entailing greater expense
and difficulty. The books were, and for that matter are, filled with dry
scientific details of the internal construction of the worm and of its
habits--details which only confused the learner and which, though giving
an author material from which to deduce rules of instruction, should
have been omitted from the book and their place supplied with the rules
deduced. In short, it seemed to be the prime object to make sericulture
as hard and forbidding as possible, and to deter the people from it
rather than to induce them to engage in the work. For this very reason
there has been considerable popular indifference to it, and from the
agricultural press it has not received that attention which so promising
an industry deserves. I would not be so unjust as to leave the reader to
infer that all authors on sericulture have been thus guilty. There have
been some very few who from the very start have presented it in as easy
and practicable a light as was consistent with successful work. Nor
would I be ready to assert that those who have said it could not be made
financially profitable without mulberry groves, fancy priced worms, and
expensive appliances, have done so from base motives. Yet it would
appear as if not a few could be justly indicted of this; for they have
mulberry sprouts, fancy priced worms, and costly appliances to sell. And
perhaps it occurred to them that if they deterred the people generally
from taking hold of it, they would have less opposition and competition.

But be this as it may, the fact is that it is not necessary to have
mulberry groves, costly appliances, or even fancy priced worms (though
good worms only should be reared), in order to profitably engage in
sericulture. I know of no business presenting so promising an opening
that requires less capital. And I say this, having no axe to grind in
any way, simply for the sake of those girls and women who might make
money by it, and who would do so if they only knew the facts. I have no
book, no sprouts, no worms, nothing whatever, to sell.

I have said that the leaves of the mulberry are not essential to silk
growing. If this be true the greatest obstacle in the way of sericulture
becoming a great national industry will have been removed. And that it
is true is proven by the experience of not a few practical silk-growers.
Without exception those who have tested the matter say that the leaves
of the Osage-orange are equal to those of the mulberry, and some say
they are better. My position brings me into correspondence with the
leading specialists in agricultural pursuits, and among others with many
practical silk-growers. To-day I received letters from three
silk-growers, one in Illinois, one in Kansas, and one in California.
Each had fed the leaves of the Osage-orange exclusively for the last two
years, and with the best results. One said there was no doubt that they
were at least equal to the leaves of the mulberry, and the other two
pronounced them superior. One of our best authorities on sericulture,
Prof. Barricelli, has shown by means of chemical analyses and other
scientific data, that as nourishment for silk-worms the Osage is
superior to the mulberry. In fact, nine-tenths of the practical
silk-growers of the West, those who are making it not only practicable
but profitable, are now feeding Osage leaves exclusively. This should be
known by the people at large. There can be no monopoly of the
Osage-orange. No one can demand of the expectant silk culturist
exorbitant prices for Osage sprouts. In very few localities will it be
necessary to plant the Osage even. We have an abundance of Osage hedges,
particularly in the West. In such localities the silk culturist will be
at no expense whatever for food for the worms, and will not be under
even the necessity of waiting a couple of years for it to grow. When
this is more fully understood by the girls and women of the country, we
may expect silk culture to assume the importance of a profitable
national industry.

JOHN M. STAHL.



MEDICAL.

Weak Nervous Men

[Illustration:]

Whose DEBILITY, EXHAUSTED POWERS, premature decay and failure to
perform LIFE'S DUTIES properly are caused by excesses, errors of
youth, etc., will find a perfect and lasting restoration to ROBUST
HEALTH and VIGOROUS MANHOOD in

THE MARSTON BOLUS.

Neither stomach drugging nor instruments. This treatment of NERVOUS
DEBILITY and PHYSICAL DECAY is uniformly successful because based on
perfect diagnosis, NEW AND DIRECT METHODS and absolute THOROUGHNESS.
Full information and Treatise free.

Address Consulting Physician of
MARSTON REMEDY CO., 46W. 14th St., New York.



TWO LADIES MET ONE DAY.

One said to the other "By the way how is that Catarrh of yours?" "Why
it's simply horrid, getting worse every day." "Well, why don't you try
'DR. SYKES' SURE CURE,' I know it will cure you!" "Well, then I will,
for I've tried everything else."

Just six weeks afterward they met again and No. 1 said. "Why, how much
better you look, what's up! Going to get married, or what?" "Well, yes,
and it's all owing to 'DR. SYKES' SURE CURE FOR CATARRH;' oh, why
didn't I know of it before? it's simply wonderful."

Send 10 cents to Dr. C.R. Sykes, 181 Monroe street, Chicago, for
valuable book of full information, and mention the "Two Ladies."



30 DAYS' TRIAL

DR. DYE'S

[Illustration]

ELECTRO VOLTAIC BELT, and other ELECTRIC APPLIANCES. We will send on
Thirty Days' Trial, TO MEN, YOUNG OR OLD, who are suffering from NERVOUS
DEBILITY, LOST VITALITY, and those diseases of a PERSONAL NATURE
resulting from ABUSES and OTHER CAUSES. Speedy relief and complete
restoration to HEALTH, VIGOR and MANHOOD GUARANTEED. Send at once for
Illustrated Pamphlet free. Address

VOLTAIC BELT CO., MARSHALL, MICH.



CONSUMPTION.

I have a positive remedy for the above disease; by its use thousands of
cases of the worst kind and of long standing have been cured. In deed,
so strong is my faith in its efficacy, that I will send TWO BOTTLES
FREE, together with a VALUABLE TREATISE on this disease, to any
sufferer. Give Express & P.O. address. DR. T.A. SLOCUM, 181 Pearl St.,
N.Y.






PUBLICATIONS

THE YOUTH'S COMPANION

FOR 1884.

THE COMPANION presents below the Announcement of its Fifty-Seventh
Volume. Its unusual character, both in the range of its topics, and its
remarkably brilliant list of Contributors, will, we trust, be accepted
as a grateful recognition of the favor with which the paper has been
received by more than 300,000 subscribers.



Illustrated Serial Stories.

A Story of English Rustic Life, by Thomas Hardy.
The Foundling of Paris, by Alphonse Daudet.
A Boys' Story, by J.T. Trowbridge.
The Covenanter's Daughter, by Mrs. Oliphant.
A Story of Adventure, by C.A. Stephens.
My School at Orange Grove, by Marie B. Williams.



Science and Natural History.

Eccentricities of Insanity, by Dr. W.A. Butler.
Common Adulterations of Food, by Dr. J.C. Draper.
The Home Life of Oysters, and other Natural History Papers, by
    Arabella B. Buckley.
Wonders in Ourselves; or the Curiosities of the Human Body, by Dr.
    Austin Flint, Jr.
Insect Enemies of the Garden, the Orchard and the Wheat-Field, by
    A.S. Packard, Jr.
Demons of the Air and Water. A fascinating Series of Papers on
    Sanitary Science, by R. Ogden Doremus.
The Youth Of the Brain, "Speech in Man," "Animal Poisons and their
    Effects," and Other Papers, by Dr. W.A. Hammond.
Strange Ways Of Curing People. A Description of Curious
    Sanitaria,--the Peat, Mud, Sand, Whey, and Grape Cures, by William
    H. Rideing.



Encouragement and Advice.

Hints for Poor Farmers, by C.E. Winder.
The Failures of Great Men, by James Parton.
A Dietary for Nervous People, by Dr. W.A. Hammond.
Hints for Country House-Builders, by Calvert Vaux.
The Gift Of Memory, and Other Papers, giving Instances of Self-Help,
    by Samuel Smiles.
A New Profession for Young Men. The Opportunities for Young Men as
    Electrical Engineers, by Thomas A. Edison.
At the Age Of Twenty-One. A Series of Papers showing what Great Men
    had accomplished, and what they proposed doing, at that period of
    their lives, by Edwin P. Whipple.



Original Poems.

BY ALFRED TENNYSON,
VICTOR HUGO,
THE EARL OF LYTTON,
J.C. WHITTIER,
T.B. ALDRICH,
DR. CHARLES MACKAY,
And Many Others.



Illustrated Adventure and Travel.

Shark-Hunting, by T.B. Luce.
Four Amusing Stories, by C.A. Stephens.
Outwitted. An Indian Adventure, by Lieut. A. Chapin.
A Honeymoon in the Jungle, by Phil. Robinson.
Wrecked Upon a Volcanic Island, by Richard Heath.
Stories of the Cabins in the West, by E.J. Marston.
Adventures in the Mining Districts, by H. Fillmore.
The Capture of Some Infernal Machines, by William Howson.
Breaking in the Reindeer, and Other Sketches of Polar Adventure, by
    W.H. Gilder.
An American in Persia, by the American Minister Resident, Teheran,
    S.G.W. Benjamin.
China as Seen by a Chinaman, by the Editor of the Chinese American,
    Wong Chin Foo.
Stories Of Menageries. Incidents connected with Menagerie Life, and
    the Capture and Taming of Wild Beasts for Exhibition, by S.S. Cairns.
Boys Afoot in Italy and Switzerland. The Adventures of two English
    boys travelling abroad at an expense of one dollar a day, by Nugent
    Robinson.



Reminiscences and Anecdotes.

Stage-Driver Stories, by Rose Terry Cooke.
Stories of Saddle-Bag Preachers, by H.L. Winckley.
My First Visit to a Newspaper Office, by Murat Halstead.
Queen Victoria's Household and Drawing-Rooms, by H.W. Lucy.
Child Friendships of Charles Dickens, by his Daughter, Mamie
    Dickens.
Our Herbariums; Adventures in Collecting Them, by A Young Lady.
My Pine-Apple Farm, with incidents of Florida Life, by C.H. Pattee.
Bigwigs of the English Bench and Bar, by a London Barrister, W.L.
    Woodroffe.
At School with Sir Garnet Wolseley, and the Life of a Page of Honor in
    the Vice-Regal Court of Dublin, by Nugent Robinson.
Student Waiters. Some Humorous Incidents of a Summer Vacation in the
    White Mountains, by Child McPherson.



THE EDITORIALS OF THE COMPANION, without having any bias, will give
clear views of current events at home and abroad. THE CHILDREN'S PAGE
will sustain its reputation for charming pictures, poems, and stories
for the little ones.

ISSUED WEEKLY. SUBSCRIPTION PRICE, $1.75. SPECIMEN COPIES FREE.

SPECIAL OFFER.--To any one who subscribes now, and sends us $1.75, we
will send the Companion free to January 1st, 1884, and a full year's
subscription from that date.

Address,

PERRY MASON & CO.,
41 TEMPLE PLACE, BOSTON, MASS.

_Please mention where you read this Advertisement._






HOUSEHOLD.

    For nothing lovelier can be found
    In woman than to study _household_ good.--_Milton._


THE SCHOOL-MARM'S STORY.

    A frosty chill was in the air--
      How plainly I remember--
    The bright autumnal fires had paled,
      Save here and there an ember;
    The sky looked hard, the hills were bare,
    And there were tokens everywhere
      That it had come--November.

    I locked the time-worn school-house door,
      The village seat of learning.
    Across the smooth, well trodden path
      My homeward footstep turning;
    My heart a troubled question bore,
    And in my mind, as oft before,
      A vexing thought was burning.

    "Why is it up hill all the way?"
      Thus ran my meditations:
    The lessons had gone wrong that day
      And I had lost my patience.
    "Is there no way to soften care,
    And make it easier to bear
      Life's sorrows and vexations?"

    Across my pathway through the wood
      A fallen tree was lying;
    On this there sat two little girls,
      And one of them was crying.
    I heard her sob: "And if I could,
    I'd get my lessons awful good,
      But what's the use of trying?"

    And then the little hooded head
      Sank on the other's shoulder.
    The little weeper sought the arms
      That opened to enfold her.
    Against the young heart, kind and true,
    She nestled close, and neither knew
      That I was a beholder.

    And then I heard--ah! ne'er was known
      Such judgment without malice,
    Nor queenlier council ever heard
      In senate, house or palace!--
    "I should have failed there, I am sure,
    Don't be discouraged; try once more,
      And I will help you, Alice."

    "And I will help you." This is how
      To soften care and grieving;
    Life is made easier to bear
      By helping and by giving.
    Here was the answer I had sought,
    And I, the teacher, being taught
      The secret of true living.

    If "I will help you" were the rule.
      How changed beyond all measure
    Life would become! Each heavy load
      Would be a golden treasure;
    Pain and vexation be forgot;
    Hope would prevail in every lot,
      And life be only pleasure.

--_Wolstan Dixey._




A CHAT ABOUT THE FASHIONS.


Although the lady readers of THE PRAIRIE FARMER have probably
by this time made up the heavier part of their winter wardrobe, still a
few suggestions may not be out of place, for the "fashions" is a subject
of which we seldom tire.

In discussing the subject of silk and silk-culture at the late Woman's
Congress, Mrs Julia Ward Howe said that "although silk is said to be
depreciating in value, and is not quite as popular as formerly, yet we
must confess it lies very near the feminine heart," at which statement
an audible smile passed over the audience, as each one acknowledged to
herself its truth.

We are glad to see that wrappers are becoming quite "the thing" for
afternoon home wear, and a lady now need not feel at all out of place
receiving her callers in a pretty, gracefully made wrapper. The Watteau
wrapper is made of either silk or brocaded woolen goods, conveniently
short, the back cut square at the neck, and folded in a handsome Watteau
plait at the center, with a full ruche effect. A yolk portion of silk
fills in the open neck and is sewed flatly underneath to the back. The
side seams are curved so that a clinging effect is produced at the
sides. Jabbots of lace extending down the front, and a prettily bowed
ribbon at the right shoulder, with a standing collar at the neck, and a
linen choker collar give the finishing touches to the toilette.

Velvets and velveteens seem to be taking the place of silk, and are
really quite as cheap. In fact, velveteens are cheaper, as they are so
much wider. A suit of velveteen is fashionable for any occasion--for
receptions, church or street costume. The redingote or polonaise is very
stylish and pretty, especially for a tall, rather slight person. For a
young miss the close-fitting frock coat, with pointed vest effectively
disclosed between the cut-away edges of the coat fronts, is much worn.
The latter curve away from the shoulders and are nicely rounded off at
their lower front corners. An underarm dart gives a smooth adjustment
over each hip, and in these darts are inserted the back edges of the
vest. Buttons and buttonholes close the vest, but the coat fronts do not
meet at all. The coat and long-pointed overskirt can be made of any
heavy material, but the vest should be of silk; a deep box-plait on the
bottom of the underskirt made of silk to match the vest will make the
suit very stylish and pretty.

There ought to be great satisfaction among the wearers of bonnets and
hats this season, because they can so easily have what they want--big or
little, plain or decorated, as they please. For a person with dark hair,
gold braid loosely put around the edge of a velvet capote is very
becoming. Bunches of tips are worn much more than the long, drooping
plumes, though both are fashionable; while birds--sometimes as many as
three on a hat--are often preferred to either. We notice upon the street
a great many elegantly dressed ladies with but a single band of wide
velvet ribbon fastened somewhat carelessly around the bonnet and tied in
a bow under the chin. Unique it may be, but undoubtedly the taste of the
wearer, would be the verdict of the passer by. In fact, one can scarcely
be out of the fashion in the choice of a bonnet or hat, but care should
be taken that it be just the thing for the wearer, and that it be
properly put on.

I firmly believe in the doctrine that "good clothes tendeth toward
grace." What woman can not talk better when she knows she looks well?
She can then forget herself and lose all self-consciousness, which is a
state most devoutly to be desired by all women--particularly our young
women. So, girls, study your costumes, especially the "superfluities,"
or "furbelows," as they are wont to be called; make yourselves look as
pretty as you possibly can--and then forget yourselves.

I wish all our lady readers might have been here the holiday week, for
the stores were perfect bowers of beauty. It was a pretty sight in
itself to watch the crowds of happy-faced children, with their little
pocket-books in their hands, at the various counters buying presents for
father, mother, brothers, and sisters. Children always enjoy Christmas
more when they can make, as well as receive, presents. So I hope all our
little readers were made happy by both giving and receiving.

I am sorry I could not give you a more satisfactory talk on the
fashions, but our space is limited this week. I hope the ladies will not
forget that our "Household" department is open to them, and that they
will contribute anything that may be of interest to the others.

MARY HOWE.




A KITCHEN SILO.


The farmer's wife in the Netherlands has long been using a sort of a
silo. Probably she had been doing so for long years before M. Geoffrey
began experimenting with preserved stock food in France. The Netherland
housewife's silo consists of an earthenware jar about two feet tall.
Into one of these jars in summer time she places the kidney bean; in
another shelled green peas; in another broad beans, and so on. Making a
layer about six inches deep in each. She sprinkles a little salt on top
and presses the whole firmly down. Then she adds another layer and more
salt. She leaves a light weight on top to keep all well pressed down and
exclude the air, in the intervals between pickings for often the harvest
of a single day will not fill the jar. When full, she puts on a heavier
weight, and covers all with brown paper. She thus has green vegetables
preserved for winter. The ensilage is said to be "more or less good,
according to taste."



CHICKEN SALAD: Two common sized fowls, one teacup of good salad
oil, half a jar of French sweet mustard, the hard-boiled yolks of ten
eggs, half a pint of vinegar, one teaspoonful of cayenne pepper, eight
heads of celery, one teaspoon of salt or a little more if required. Cut
and mix the chicken and celery and set away in a cool place. Mash the
eggs to a paste with the oil, then add the vinegar and other things, mix
thoroughly, but do not pour it over the salad until about half an hour
before serving, as the celery may become wilted.



SOFT GINGERBREAD: One cup butter and two cups sugar well worked
together, three eggs well beaten in, one cup New Orleans molasses, one
cup good sweet milk and five cups of flour into which has been stirred
one teaspoonful baking powder, not heaped, two tablespoonfuls ground
cinnamon and one tablespoonful ground ginger. Bake in small dripping
pans not too full, as they will rise.



Mixture of two parts of glycerine, one part ammonia, and a
little rose water whitens and softens the hands.




OUR BOOKS.


BOOKS FREE!


Good books are valued by intelligent men and women more than silver and
gold. They are treasures in every home. They are to the mind what light
and heat are to plants. They

_STORE THE MIND WITH USEFUL KNOWLEDGE_;

the mind directs the hands. An intelligent man has an advantage over one
who is ignorant, whether he is a farmer, or mechanic, or merchant, and
is surer of success in his occupation. Think how

_LOSSES OF TIME AND MONEY MAY BE SAVED_

by having some book at hand containing just the information desired in
some line of the rural industries. We offer an excellent opportunity for
any one to obtain BOOKS FREE for himself or family, and also for
societies, farmers' clubs, and associations to make additions to a
library, or to start one.

These books comprise standard works, and the latest and best books for

Farmers,    Stockmen,
  Dairymen,   Fruit-Growers,
    Gardeners,   Florists,
      Poultrymen,  Apiarists,
        Silk-Culturists,  Housekeepers,
          Architects,    Etc., Etc.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING COMPANY will give to any person,
association, or club, who will obtain and send subscribers to THE
PRAIRIE FARMER (including both new subscribers and renewals), at the
regular price of the paper ($2) each, any of the books contained in our
Book List on the following terms:

For THREE subscribers, books to the amount of $1.50.

For FOUR subscribers, books to the amount of $2.00.

For FIVE subscribers, books to the amount of $2.50.

For SIX subscribers, books to the amount of $3.00.

For SEVEN subscribers, books to the amount of $3.50.

For EIGHT subscribers, books to the amount of $4.00

For TEN subscribers, books to the amount of $5.00.

_FOR TWELVE SUBSCRIPTIONS AND UPWARD_,

A DOLLAR'S WORTH OF BOOKS FOR EVERY TWO SUBSCRIPTIONS SENT AT $2.00
EACH.

All books given under these offers will be delivered at our office, No.
150 Monroe street.

If it is desired that they shall be forwarded by express, they will be
packed and delivered at the express office by us, the receiver to pay
cost of carriage.

Sent by mail to any part of the United States or Canada, the postage
will be seven cents on each dollar's worth of books.

It is necessary that parties to whom the books are given shall remit us
the postage before the books are sent.



A Dictionary Free!

This is no catchpenny affair, but a valuable lexicon. It is the popular

AMERICAN DICTIONARY,

on the basis of Webster, Worcester, Johnson, and other eminent American
and English authorities. It contains over 32,000 words, with accurate
definitions, proper spelling, and exact pronunciation; to which is added
a mass of valuable information. It is enriched with 400 illustrations.

REMEMBER,

every subscriber at the regular price of THE PRAIRIE FARMER
gets this Dictionary FREE, if preferred to our commercial map.



HERE IS ANOTHER.

ROPP'S CALCULATOR
And Account Book for 1884.

This is the most useful thing in the way of a memorandum book and
calculator ever issued. It is a work of nearly 80 pages of printed
matter and an equal number of blank leaves, ruled, for keeping accounts.
The contents include a vast array of practical calculations, 100,000 or
more in number, arranged for reference like a dictionary, so that a
farmer or business man may turn to the figures, and find the answer to
any problem in business.

There are three kinds. We use No. 3. Full leather; assorted colors, with
flap, slate pocket, and a renewable account book, ruled with divisions
or headings especially adapted to farmers' use. The retail price of
this book in leather is $1. We will send it FREE to every
subscriber to THE PRAIRIE FARMER who sends us $2. Or we will
send THREE copies of No. 1, the cheaper issue.



AND YET ANOTHER.

AMERICAN ETIQUETTE AND RULES OF POLITENESS.

It is the latest and best standard work recommended and endorsed by all
who have read it. The acknowledged authority. Beautifully and
appropriately illustrated; handsomely and substantially bound. It
contains 38 chapters, treating on all subjects relating to etiquette. We
send this book--plain edition, to any subscriber desiring it who sends
$2.00 for THE PRAIRIE FARMER year, or for two subscribers to
THE PRAIRIE FARMER at $2 each, we will send American Etiquette
bound in English cloth, burnished edges.

Our large and varied premium list will be issued in a few days. Send for
it.



MISCELLANEOUS.

TO PRESERVE THE HEALTH

Use the Magneton Appliance Co.'s

MAGNETIC LUNG PROTECTOR!

PRICE ONLY $5.

They are priceless to LADIES, GENTLEMEN, and CHILDREN with WEAK LUNGS;
no case of PNEUMONIA OR CROUP is ever known where these garments are
worn. They also prevent and cure HEART DIFFICULTIES, COLDS, RHEUMATISM,
NEURALGIA, THROAT TROUBLES, DIPHTHERIA, CATARRH, AND ALL KINDRED
DISEASES. Will WEAR any service for THREE YEARS. Are worn over the
under-clothing.

CATARRH, It is needless to describe the symptoms of this nauseous
disease that is sapping the life and strength of only too many of the
fairest and best of both sexes. Labor, study, and research in America,
Europe, and Eastern lands, have resulted in the Magnetic Lung Protector,
affording cure for Catarrh, a remedy which contains No Drugging of the
System, and with the continuous stream of Magnetism permeating through
the afflicted organs; MUST RESTORE THEM TO A HEALTHY ACTION. WE PLACE
OUR PRICE for this Appliance at less than one-twentieth of the price
asked by others for remedies upon which you take all the chances, and WE
ESPECIALLY INVITE the patronage of the MANY PERSONS who have tried
DRUGGING THE STOMACHS WITHOUT EFFECT.

HOW TO OBTAIN This Appliance. Go to your druggist and ask for them. If
they have not got them, write to the proprietors, enclosing the price,
in letter at our risk, and they will be sent to you at once by mail,
post paid.

Send stamp for the "New Departure in Medical Treatment WITHOUT
MEDICINE," with thousands of testimonials,

THE MAGNETON APPLIANCE CO.,
218 State Street, Chicago, Ill.

NOTE.--Send one dollar in postage stamps or currency (in letter
at our risk) with size of shoe usually worn, and try a pair of our
Magnetic Insoles, and be convinced of the power residing in our Magnetic
Appliances. Positively _no cold feet where they are worn, or money
refunded._



CLUB RATES.

To Our Readers.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER is the OLDEST, MOST RELIABLE, and the LEADING
AGRICULTURAL JOURNAL OF THE GREAT NORTHWEST, devoted exclusively to the
interests of the Farmer, Gardener, Florist, Stock Breeder, Dairyman,
Etc., and every species of Industry connected with that great portion of
the People of the World, the Producers. Now in the Forty-Second Year of
its existence, and never, during more than two score years, having
missed the regular visit to its patrons, it will continue to maintain
supremacy as a STANDARD AUTHORITY ON MATTERS PERTAINING TO AGRICULTURE
AND KINDRED PRODUCTIVE INDUSTRIES, and as a FRESH AND READABLE FAMILY
AND FIRESIDE JOURNAL. It will from time to time add new features of
interest, securing for each department the ablest writers of practical
experience.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER will discuss, without fear or favor, all topics of
interest properly belonging to a Farm and Fireside Paper, treat of the
most approved practices in AGRICULTURE, HORTICULTURE, BREEDING, ETC.;
the varied Machinery, Implements, and improvements in same, for use both
in Field and House; and, in fact, everything of interest to the
Agricultural community, whether in FIELD, MARKET, OR HOME CIRCLE.

IT WILL GIVE INFORMATION UPON THE PUBLIC DOMAIN, WESTERN SOILS,
CLIMATE, ETC.; ANSWER INQUIRIES on all manner of subjects which come
within its sphere; GIVE each week, full and RELIABLE MARKET, CROP,
AND WEATHER REPORTS; PRESENT the family with choice and INTERESTING
LITERATURE; amuse and INSTRUCT THE YOUNG FOLKS: AND, in a word, aim
to be, in every respect, AN INDISPENSABLE AND UNEXCEPTIONABLE FARM and
fireside COMPANION.

Terms of Subscription and 'Club Rates':

ONE COPY, 1 YEAR, postage paid      $ 2.00

TWO COPIES, "   "  "                  3.75

FIVE  "  "   sent at one time         8.75

TEN   "  "   sent at one time, and
        one to Club getter           16.00

TWENTY "  "   sent at one time, and
               one to Club getter    30.00

Address

The Prairie Farmer Publishing Co.,
Chicago. Ill.



SELF CURE FREE

Nervous   Lost      Weakness
Debility  Manhood   and Decay

A favorite prescription of a noted specialist (now retired.)
Druggists can fill it. Address

DR. WARD & CO., LOUISIANA, MO.






OUR YOUNG FOLKS


A TALK ABOUT THE LION.


We wonder how many of THE PRAIRIE FARMER boys and girls have
seen the lion, "king of beasts," as he is called. Perhaps not all of you
as yet, though many of you doubtless will as the years roll on--and, by
the way, you will find that the older you grow the more quickly will
they speed away. So be careful in this, the beautiful springtime of your
lives, to so cultivate and make ready the garden of your minds that the
coming manhood and womanhood may not only find you with well developed
arms and limbs and muscles, ready to face the world and to help lift
some of its burdens, but also with a mind that has kept even pace with
the body--because of constant _growth_.

We think we will have to depart from our usual natural history articles
some day, and have a talk with the boys and girls on this subject of
growth--growth in its largest, broadest sense, the mind, soul, and body
all growing together into the stature of a perfect man.

But to return to the lion. This animal is the largest of the cat family
and is found, only in Asia and Africa. The Asiatic lion is not so large
nor so fierce as the African, and has a much smaller mane. The mane of
the African lion is long and thick, and gives the animal a very noble
appearance; the female, however, has no mane. The lion is always of one
color, that is, without spots or stripes, generally tawny, though the
mane is dark sometimes nearly black. The lion gets its full growth when
seven or eight years old, and lives usually about twenty-five years,
though some have been known to live much longer in menageries.

These animals see much better in the night than in the day, so they
generally hide away during the day and search for food in the gray dawn
of the morning. They feed chiefly on antelopes, zebras, giraffes, and
wild cattle. It is said that the lion rarely attacks man, only in cases
of extreme hunger; indeed, they seem somewhat afraid of man. Dr.
Livingstone says that when the lion meets a man in daylight it will stop
two or three seconds to stare at him, then turn slowly round and walk
off a few steps, looking over its shoulder, then begin to trot, and when
at last he thinks he is no longer seen will bound away like a hare. The
Doctor says also, that the roar of the lion is very like the cry of the
ostrich, but the former roars only at night, however, while the latter
cries only by day.

Did you not think it wonderful when you saw for the first time, perhaps,
a keeper walk boldly into the lions' cage, when in their natural state
they are so very fierce and wild? Well, we think it is wonderful,
although the keepers tell us that they are easily tamed.

In ancient times they were used in many more ways than they are now.
Hanno, the Carthaginian general, had a lion to carry his baggage, and
Mark Antony often rode through the streets of Rome in a chariot drawn by
lions. A short time ago we read a story of a slave named Androclus, who,
while hiding away from his master in the deserts of Africa, cured a lion
of lameness by pulling a thorn out of its foot. The slave was afterward
caught, carried to Rome, and condemned to be eaten by the wild beasts.
He was thrown into a lion's den, but the beast, instead of killing him
fawned upon him and showed the greatest delight at seeing him; Androclus
was surprised to find that it was the same lion whose foot he had cured
in the desert. The Emperor, it is said, was so much pleased at the sight
that he gave the slave his pardon, and presented him also with the lion,
after which he used to lead the great beast tamely through the streets,
held simply by a little chain.

In modern times, also, lions have been known to exhibit strong
friendship for man. In 799, two lions in the Jardin des Plantes (Garden
of Plants), at Paris, became so fond of their keeper that when he was
taken sick they gave signs of the greatest sorrow, and when he recovered
and came back to them they rushed to meet him, roaring with joy,
meanwhile licking his hands and face.

Perhaps you have read of Theodorus, King of Abyssinia (he killed himself
in 1868), who used to keep several tame lions in his palace and treated
them almost like dogs.

Travelers tell us, too, that these great animals often show fondness for
other animals, as, for instance, an old lioness belonging to the Dublin
Zoological Gardens was taken sick, and was greatly annoyed by the rats.
At last a little terrier dog was put into the cage, but was received by
the lioness with a surly growl; finally when the old animal saw the
little dog could kill her enemies, the rats, she coaxed him to her, and
petted and fondled him, so that they soon became great friends.

The lion is a mammal of the order carnivora, or flesh-eating animals.

The word lion comes from the Latin leo, Greek leon, lion.

Would you like me to tell you next week about a bear I saw upon the
hills of Nova Scotia, near the scene of Longfellow's beautiful
Evangeline, a few months ago?

MARY HOWE.




A JACK-KNIFE GENIUS.


St. Louis Post-Dispatch: William Yohe claims to be the champion
jack-knife artist of the day, although he was born in St. Louis and not
Yankeedom. A reporter heard of this professional lacerator of pine
sticks and sought him out. It was not until the inside of an unused
Methodist church at Kirkwood, this county, was reached that Mr. Yohe and
his knife was cornered. The knife was slashing cigar-boxes to pieces at
railway speed when the reporter opened up with: "Are you the man who
makes an automatic world's fair and St. Louis Exposition with a knife?"

"No, that isn't what I call it. I am making what I call the Missouri
Pacific and Strasburg Cathedral Automatic Wonder, with the Golden Ark of
the Covenant. It will contain over 180,000 pieces and will have 1,100
moving and working figures."

All around the gaunt and dismantled church were piles of cigar-boxes and
laths and myriads of nicely-carved pieces of wood, apparently portions
of models of buildings. The whittler was a small man, with keen eyes and
ready tongue and about thirty-six years of age. In the course of an
hour's conversation he said in substance: "I didn't know that I was
anything extra of a whittler until about 1869, when, in a small way, I
made some models. I was in Texas working at millwrighting. The first
large piece I ever made was a model of a Bermuda castle. Afterward I
made Balmoral Castle, Bingen Castle, Miramar Castle, and the Texas State
Capitol at Austin. Solomon's Temple contained 12,268 pieces and had
1,369 windows. It is now on exhibition in Texas. The Austin Capitol
Building has 62,844 pieces and 561 moving people. Every room and
department in the building was given, with all the officers and
legislators. Everybody was represented, down to the man sawing wood in
the basement for the furnaces. All the figures were moved by a wooden
engine, which was run by sand falling on an overshot wheel. I made this
piece at odd moments in 1881.

"I have just hired this church and begun steady work. I shall sleep and
eat in this church until about May 1, next. The material? Yes, it does
take considerable. I have already used up 967 cigar boxes and 300 laths.
It will take in all 1,800 cigar boxes, 500 laths, and 500 feet of
lumber. The cigar boxes I get for one cent each. I used no tools except
my knife."



Little Johnny Botts found a garter snake in the park the other
day and he brought it home and hid it in the piano. When his sister's
young man opened the instrument that evening to play "For Goodness Sake"
he thought he had 'em and yelled like a Piute on the war-hath. They
won't believe in Johnny's innocence somehow, and his father said that
after dinner he'd attend to his case. When the family sat down to table
Johnny solemnly entered the room in his stocking feet and carrying a
pillow which he placed on his chair before sitting down. "What new
monkey shine is that?" growled old Botts. "S-s-s-h, pa," said Johnny
anxiously; "I was playing fireworks with Billy Simson this afternoon and
I swallowed a torpedo." "Did, eh?" "Yes, and if anything should touch me
kinder hard I might go off and all bust up."



THREE THOUSAND DOLLARS

in prizes is offered by the YOUTH'S COMPANION for the best
short stories either for boys, for girls, humorous stories, or stories
of adventure, to be sent them before May 20th, 1884. The terms and
conditions of the competition are issued in a circular--for which all
who desire to compete are invited to send.



Sin is very much like the ordinary North American mule. It may
be very tame and docile at the front, but in the rear there is always a
sly kick hidden away and you'd better be on your guard.




OUR BOOK TABLE

BOOKS RECEIVED.


ARIUS THE LIBYAN: AN IDYL OF THE PRIMITIVE CHURCH. Author unknown. NEW
YORK: D. Appleton & Co. CHICAGO: Jansen, McClurg & Co. 12mo. Cloth.
Price, $1.50.

This is a romance of the church in the latter part of the third and the
beginning of the fourth centuries. The scene is laid near Cyrene, A.D.
265. It is an exquisitely written idyl of primitive Christian life, and
can not fail to attract a great deal of attention, especially now that
the public mind is being turned in the direction of early church
history. It deals in a powerful, yet simple, manner with that subtle
question, the Trinity of the Godhead, and gives the reader many new
thoughts in connection with it. The characters portrayed awaken an
unusual degree of interest, being as they are, persons eminent in
history, both secular and religious. As one follows the story to its
close he can not but agree with the author, that Arius, the hero and
arch-heretic of the Nicene age, was "one of the grandest, purest, least
understood, and most systematically misrepresented characters in human
history." The latter portion of the book brings out, prominently, the
real character of Constantine, stigmatized by Arius as "that unbaptised
pagan, the flamen of Jupiter." The noble plan of the book and the grave
importance of the questions that agitate the characters, combine to make
it a valuable production to both believer and skeptic.


THE ORGANS OF SPEECH. By G.H. Von Meyer, Professor In Ordinary of
Anatomy at the University of Zurich. NEW YORK: D. Appleton &
Co. CHICAGO: Jansen, McClurg & Co. 12 mo. Cloth. Price $1.75.

This book is the forty-sixth volume in the international scientific
series, and needs no better introduction than the well-known name of the
author. The subject of the organs of speech and their application in the
formation of articulate sounds is treated in a masterly and exhaustive
manner. The object of the author has been not merely "to enter into the
field of discussion upon the various modifications of sounds, * * but to
bring forward a sufficient number of examples in confirmation of the
laws explained," in which purpose he has most admirably succeeded. The
work contains forty-seven wood cuts, and will be a valuable addition to
any library. We would recommend it especially to teachers of vocal music
and declamation.


FIFTY YEARS' RECOLLECTIONS. By Jeriah Bonham PEORIA, ILL.: J.W.
Franks & Sons. Sold by subscription.

This is a carefully compiled work, giving the author's observations and
reflections on the historical events of Illinois for the past fifty
years, it also gives very interesting and full biographical sketches of
many of the prominent men who have, during this time, figured in the
affairs of the State, so far as Mr. Bonham's personal acquaintanceship
and recollections extend. The sketches, condensed, yet complete, of the
sixteen Governors of Illinois, from Shadrach Bond, the first Governor,
down to the present time are especially interesting. The book will be
enjoyed by the old settlers of the State on account of its personal
reminiscences, which are all true, not drawn from the imagination.



The Youth's Companion, Boston, is another famous, and deservedly so,
American juvenile publication. It has attained an immense circulation.
Among its contributors are a score or more of the most talented American
authors. It is edited with great care and ability. See advertisement on
another page.



From W.D. Hoard, a report of the proceedings of the eleventh annual
Dairymen's Association of Wisconsin, held at Elk Horn, January 31 and
February 1-2, 1883. The pamphlet was compiled by D.W. Curtis, Secretary
of the association, Fort Atkinson, Wis.

The second edition of Bee-Keeping for Profit: A New System of Bee
Management, by Mrs. Lizzie E. Cotton, West Gorham, Me. Illustrated.
Price, $1.00.

Seventeenth annual report of the Northwestern Dairymen's Association,
with addresses and discussions delivered at the meeting held at Mankato,
Minn., February 14-16, 1883. R.P. McGlincy, Secretary, Elgin, Ill.

The Florida Annual. Edited by C.K. Munroe, 140 Nassau st., New Fork.
Price, 50 cts.

How to Become a Good Mechanic. The Industrial Publication Co., New York.
Price, 15 cents.

Tennessee Crop Report for November, 1883, with the report of the
Tennessee Weather Service. 49 South Market st., Nashville, Tenn.

From C.V. Riley, Bulletin No. 3 of U.S. Department of Agriculture:
Division of Entomology. Contains reports of observations and experiments
in the practical work of the Division, made under the direction of the
entomologist. With plates.

Landreth's Rural Register and Almanac. Philadelphia, Penn.



BREEDERS DIRECTORY.

The following list embraces the names of responsible and reliable
Breeders in their line, and parties wishing to purchase or obtain
information can feel assured that they will be honorably dealt with:

CATTLE.

Jersey.

Mills, Charles F.....................Springfield, Illinois

HORSES.

Clydesdales.

Mills, Charles F.....................Springfield, Illinois

SWINE.

Berkshire.

Mills, Charles F.....................Springfield, Illinois

Chester Whites.

W.A. Gilbert......................Wauwatosa Wis.

SHEEP.

Cotswold.

Mills, Charles F. ............. Springfield, Illinois



LIVE STOCK, Etc.

DR. W.A. PRATT.

IMPORTER AND BREEDER OF

THOROUGHBRED HOLSTEIN CATTLE

100 head on hand Oct. 1st.

DR. W.A. PRATT, Elgin, Ill.



SCOTCH COLLIE

SHEPHERD PUPS,

--FROM--

IMPORTED AND TRAINED STOCK

--ALSO--

NEWFOUNDLAND PUPS AND RAT TERRIER PUPS.

Concise and practical printed instruction in Training young Shepherd
Dogs, is given to buyers of Shepherd Puppies; or will be sent on receipt
of 25 cents in postage stamps.

For Printed Circular, giving full particulars about Shepherd Dogs,
enclose a 3-cent stamp, and address

N.H. PAAREN,

P.O. Box 326, CHICAGO. ILL.



MISCELLANEOUS.

I CURE FITS!

When I say cure I do not mean merely to stop them for a time and then
have them return again, I mean a radical cure. I have made the disease
of FITS, EPILEPSY or FALLING SICKNESS a life-long study. I warrant my
remedy to cure the worst cases. Because others have failed is no reason
for not now receiving a cure. Send at once for a treatise and a Free
Bottle of my infallible remedy. Give Express and Post Office. It costs
you nothing for a trial, and I will cure you. Address Dr. H.G. ROOT, 183
Pearl St., New York.



80 CARDS

BEST QUALITY.

New designs in Satin and Gold finish, with name, 10 cts. We offer $100
for a pack of cards any nicer work, or prettier styles.

_Samples free._ Eagle Card Works, New Haven, Ct.



MISCELLANEOUS.

SEEDS FOR THE GARDEN, FARM & FIELD.

ESTABLISHED 1845.

Our Annual Catalogue, mailed free on application, published first of
every January, contains full description and prices of RELIABLE
VEGETABLE, TREE, FIELD AND FLOWER SEED, SEED GRAIN, SEED CORN, SEED
POTATOES, ONION SETS, ETC; ALSO GARDEN DRILLS, CULTIVATORS, FERTILIZERS,
ETC., with full information for growing and how to get our Seeds.

Address PLANT SEED COMPANY,
Nos. 812 & 814 N. 4th St.,    ST. LOUIS, MO.



FAY GRAPES

CURRANT

HEADQUARTERS

ALL BEST NEW AND OLD.

SMALL FRUITS AND TREES. LOW TO DEALERS AND PLANTERS.
STOCK First-Class. Free Catalogues. GEO. S. JOSSELYN, Fredonia, N.Y.






LITERATURE

[Illustration]


ROBIN, DEAR ROBIN!


    Robin, dear Robin, could you come back to me,
      Back to the hame you'll never mair see,
    Could you sit down at evening and crack wi' me,
      Oh, what a proud, happy woman I'd be!
    On the white hearth the fire should burn clearly,
      Nothing of comfort or rest you should lack,
    And I would always be kindly and cheery,
      Could you come back to me--could you come back.

    Oh, Robin, Robin, I've miss'd you fu' sairly,
      Morning, and evening, and a' the day long;
    Many have treated me unca unfairly:
      O for your arm so tender and strong:
    If once again in your love I could hide me,
      Little I'd care though all else I should lack
    Sairly I'm needing your wisdom to guide me,
      Oh, my lost darling, if you could come back!

    Never again with frowns would I greet you;
      Never again to your love be unkind;
    Ever with kisses and smiles I would meet you;
      Oh, in the days that are gone I was blind!
    Oh, I was selfish, and foolish, and fretful,
      Now I remember--remember in vain;
    But I would never be cross or forgetful,
      Could you come back to me, darling, again!

    No, you will never come back to me--never!
      But I shall come to you, Robin, some day.
    Then you will ken a' my loving endeavor,
      Just to grow better since you went away.
    Yes, you will ken, in that happy to-morrow,
      I hae been true to you, darling--sae true!
    Asked my heart always, in joy or in sorrow,
      "Will it please Robin, the thing that I do?"

    Oh, in that wonderfu', wonderfu' meeting,
      What shall I say to him? what will he say?
    We shallna weary life's story repeating,
      Seeing the end o' the sorrowfu' way.
    With such a hope, then, how could I say truly,
      "Robin, dear Robin, come back unto me!"
    Heart, answer the thought sae wild and unruly,
      "Robin, dear Robin, I shall come unto thee!"

--_Harper's Weekly._




MRS. WIMBUSH'S REVENGE.

(_Concluded from last week._)


It was a large picnic party. Mr. Charles Brookshank had drawn Mrs.
Wimbush's arm through his own, and strolled away from the rest.

"How delightful it would be if one could know the language of birds, as
folks did in the old Hindu fairy tales! Would it not, Mr. Brookshank?"

"My dear Mrs. Wimbush, they do nothing the whole day long but make love
and cry 'Sweet, sweet!' I would I were a bird, to make love in music."

The widow sighed, but it was more like a purr of pleasure.

"What did I know of love till you came here?" continued Mr. Charles.
"Absolutely nothing--except," he added, with reservation, "in a
professional way. And then we lawyers generally see the dark side of the
picture--the damages and the decrees nisi. But your visit has brightened
my whole life. O Mrs. Wimbush, you can not have been blind to my secret!
You have seen it written legibly in my face, and have not interposed to
check its development. I see you understand me, just as by intuitive
fine feeling you can penetrate the meaning of Mendelssohn's Songs
without Words. Mrs. Wimbush, you have already far advanced toward
learning the birds' language. I may rely upon your consent?"

"Charles, this happiness is indeed too much," ejaculated the widow.

"You need never be separated from your daughter Carry. A home for one is
a home for both; and I will cherish her while I live."

"But, Charles dear, she may marry."

"Marry, ma'am? Bless my soul, of course she will! She will marry me! She
has said so, don't you see?"

Mrs. Wimbush never said another word, but fell flat down upon the grass.

"What on earth has got the woman?" thought Mr. Charles. "She couldn't
have taken it worse if I had proposed to murder her daughter."

In their walk they had strayed through the trees close to the outskirts
of another picnic party. Mr. Charles immediately ran to ask some fair
volunteer to come to the assistance of Mrs. Wimbush, who had fainted. At
hearing the name, an active middle-aged lady sprang up and followed him.
It was Mrs. Marrables. The sight of her mother brought Mrs. Wimbush
round quicker than any smelling bottle could have done. She sat up.

"Mother, Mr. Brookshank; Mr. Brookshank, my mother, Mrs. Marrables."
They bowed. "Have the goodness to leave us together, Mr. Charles." He
bowed and obeyed. "Mother," said Mrs. Wimbush, "what on earth brought
you here? I thought you were at Taunton."

"No, dear. I have been at Bournemouth three weeks, I came merely for
change. Only last week I heard of your being here, and should have
called, but have been so much occupied, and I felt sure of meeting you
somewhere, and thought the surprise might be the more agreeable. We've
had a most delightful picnic with the Mount Stewart folks. But what was
all this fainting about? One would think Mr. Brookshank had been
proposing to you."

"He certainly made me a proposal mother, but I was quite unprepared for
it, and was overcome."

"What an imaginative and sensitive-minded girl you must be, Matilda! You
make me feel quite young. When will you be old enough to attend to
business? You will accept him, of course? Well, do as you please; you
may reckon on my consent, you know. But I must get back to my party, and
perhaps you had better rejoin yours. Ta-ta."

Jilted for her daughter! It wasn't pleasant. When Mrs. Wimbush got home,
she blew up Carry for being so sly.

"Well, mamma," said Carry, "of course I thought you knew all about it. I
never made any secret of the affair. I knew very well that you had
rejected Mr. Tom, but I could not possibly suppose that was any reason
why I should refuse Charles. Of course he is older than I am, but he is
only five-and-thirty, and has a good position; and I am sure we shall
always give you a welcome; Charles said so."

"Well," thought Mrs. Wimbush, "he has money, and it will be all in the
family; that's at least a comfort."

The effect of the little episode of the last chapter was that the
brothers were made friends, and Tom recovered his spirits, and could
laugh heartily at what he had before supposed was his brother's rivalry.

Mrs. Wimbush repented her that she had rejected Mr. Tom. Her repentance
produced a salutary desire on her part to make atonement for the past.
She would have him yet. When a widow says so much as that about a man,
let him 'ware hawk.

A month went by, and behold Mrs Wimbush and Mr. Tom Brookshank seated
tete-a-tete at an evening party, where the music which was going on was
sufficiently loud to render private conversation inaudible save to those
to whom it was addressed.

"I fear," said the widow, affecting an absent manner, "I treated you
very unkindly, Mr. Tom. You took me so entirely by surprise, that,
really, I--hardly know what I said. I have been very unhappy about
it--very."

"Forgotten and forgiven," whispered Mr. Tom.

"How generous of you! you make me so glad! because now that your brother
Charles is going to marry my daughter, we shall be in some sort related,
and I could not bear you to think unkindly of me."

"No," said Mr. Tom, fidgeting a little, "I shall never do that."

"How droll!" said the widow. "Let me see, what will the relationship be?
You will be my son-in-law's brother, and consequently I shall be your
mother-in-law once removed. You will have a mother younger than
yourself, Mr. Tom. I hope you will not presume upon her youth to be a
bad boy."

"All this is very true," he answered; "but I see the relationship in a
far different light. I shall be your father-in-law, and consequently my
own brother's grandfather-in-law."

"You mistake, Mr. Tom. Don't you see that Carry--"

"No mistake at all about it, ma'am, for I've promised to marry your
mother, Mrs. Marrables!"

"Monster!" cried Mrs. Wimbush aloud, and went off shrieking.

The music stopped, and there was a great fuss. But above all the others
was heard the voice of Mrs. Marrables. "Don't be alarmed, pray. She is
subject to it; she went off just like that the other day at a picnic.
Poor young thing, a very little upsets her. Let me come to my little
gu-url, then."

They moved her into another room. Presently Mrs. Wimbush opened her
eyes. "Mother! how dare you come near me! Go away, do! You ought to be
ashamed of yourself, at your time of life!"

"My time of life! Why, I'm only fifty-four--about ten years older than
Tom. How can you talk so to your mother!"

"Mother, if you don't leave the room, I will. It's really disreputable
to have you for a mother. You've never done me any credit."

"My dear, I am so glad to think you feel well enough to leave the room
that I will remain."

Mrs. Wimbush got up and went home.

Jilted, first for her daughter, and next for her mother! This was too
much. Mrs. Wimbush went to church as regularly as any one, but revenge,
after all, is very sweet.

Six weeks afterward Mrs. Wimbush recovered sufficient fortitude to go
and call on her mother.

"Well, child, I'm glad you are going to be friendly; there is nothing
like harmony in a family circle. Let us consider the relationships into
which we are about to enter, that we may rightly judge of our
responsibilities and duties. I and my granddaughter are going to marry
two brothers--the consequence is, she and I will be sisters-in-law. But
as you are mother of my sister-in-law, you will nearly be my
mother-in-law, which is a very singular relationship for a daughter to
sustain toward her mother, especially when she is not the wife of one's
father-in-law. Now, as"--

"Wait a moment, dear mamma; I've news for you; I'm going to marry old
Unguent! Old Mr. Brookshank has asked me to be his wife, and I've
consented. The consequence is, I shall be head of the family, and
bona-fide mother-in-law to you all. I don't think we need trouble about
harmony, for we shall be a united family, more so than any I know of."

Before her marriage, Mrs. Marrables set to work to draw up a table of
the relationships involved by the three weddings. It is an extensive
work in three volumes, and when our readers see The Brookshank Family
advertised, they will know what it means.



OUR
New Clubbing List
FOR 1884.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER
IN CONNECTION
WITH OTHER JOURNALS.

We offer more liberal terms than ever before to those who desire to
take, in connection with THE PRAIRIE FARMER, either of the
following weekly or monthly periodicals. In all cases the order for
THE PRAIRIE FARMER and either of the following named journals
must be sent together, accompanied by the money; but we do not require
both papers to be sent to the same person or to the same post-office.

We send specimen copies only of THE PRAIRIE FARMER.

Our responsibility for other publications ceases on the receipt of the
first number; when such journals are not received within a reasonable
time, notify us, giving date of your order, also full name and address
of subscriber.

WEEKLIES.
                                    Price of   The two
                                    the two.     for

Harper's Weekly                         $6 00  $4 60
Harper's Bazar                           6 00   4 60
Harper's Young People                    3 50   2 55
New York Tribune                         4 00   2 50
Toledo Blade                             4 00   2 20
Chicago Times                            3 25   2 50
Chicago Tribune                          3 50   2 50
Chicago Inter-Ocean                      3 15   2 50
Chicago Journal                          3 25   2 50
Peck's Sun                               3 75   3 00
Milwaukee Sentinel                       3 00   2 50
Western Farmer (Madison, Wis.)           3 00   2 00
Burlington Hawkeye                       4 00   3 00
The Continent (Weekly Magazine)          6 00   4 00
Detroit Free Press, with Supplement      4 00   2 50
Detroit Free Press, State edition        3 50   2 20
Louisville Courier-Journal               3 75   3 00
St. Louis Globe-Democrat                 3 00   2 15
St. Louis Republican                     3 00   2 15
Scientific American                      5 20   4 15
Interior (Presbyterian)                  4 50   3 60
Standard (Baptist)                       4 70   3 60
Advance (Congregational)                 5 00   3 35
Alliance                                 4 00   3 00
New York Independent                     5 00   4 00
Christian Union                          5 00   4 00
Boston Pilot (Catholic)                  4 50   3 50
American Bee Journal                     4 00   3 00
Florida Agriculturist                    4 00   2 75
Breeder's Gazette                        5 00   3 50
Witness (N.Y.)                           3 50   3 00
Methodist (N.Y.)                         4 00   3 50
Chicago News                             3 00   2 50
Globe (Boston)                           3 00   2 75
Youth's Companion                        3 75   3 00
Weekly Novelist                          5 00   4 25
Ledger (Chicago)                         3 00   2 90


MONTHLIES.

Harper's Monthly                        $6 00  $4 50
Atlantic Monthly                         6 00   4 50
Appleton's Journal                       5 00   4 25
The Century                              6 00   4 50
North American Review                    7 00   5 50
Popular Science Monthly                  7 00   5 50
Lippincott's Magazine                    6 00   4 50
Godey's Lady's Book                      4 00   3 00
St. Nicholas                             5 00   3 50
Vick's Illustrated Magazine              3 25   2 25
Am. Poultry Journal (Chicago)            3 25   2 75
Gardener's Monthly                       4 00   3 00
Wide Awake                               4 50   3 00
Phrenological Journal                    4 00   3 00
American Agriculturist                   3 50   2 50
Poultry World                            3 25   2 75
Arthur's Home Magazine                   4 00   3 00
Andrews' Bazar                           3 00   2 40
Frank Leslie's Popular Monthly           5 00   4 00
Frank Leslie's Sunday Magazine           5 00   4 00
Frank Leslie's Ladies' Magazine          4 50   4 00
Our Little Ones                          3 50   3 00
Peterson's Magazine                      4 00   3 30
Art Amateur                              6 00   5 00
Demorest's Magazine                      4 00   3 00
Dio Lewis' Monthly                       4 50   3 50

For clubbing price with any publication in the United States not
included in the above list send us inquiry on postal card.



NOW Is the time to Subscribe for THE PRAIRIE FARMER. Price only
$2.00 per year. It is worth double the money.



PUBLICATIONS.

MARSHALL M. KIRKMAN'S BOOKS ON RAILROAD TOPICS.

DO YOU WANT TO BECOME A RAILROAD MAN

IF YOU DO, THE BOOKS DESCRIBED BELOW POINT THE WAY.


The most promising field for men of talent and ambition at the present
day is the railroad service. The pay is large in many instances, while
the service is continuous and honorable. Most of our railroad men began
life on the farm. Of this class is the author of the accompanying books
descriptive of railway operations, who has been connected continuously
with railroads as a subordinate and officer for 27 years. He was brought
up on a farm, and began railroading as a lad at $7 per month. He has
written a number of standard books on various topics connected with the
organization, construction, management and policy of railroads. These
books are of interest not only to railroad men but to the general reader
as well. They are indispensable to the student. They present every phase
of railroad life, and are written in an easy and simple style that both
interests and instructs. The books are as follows:

"RAILWAY EXPENDITURES--THEIR EXTENT,
OBJECT AND ECONOMY."--A Practical
Treatise on Construction and Operation.
In Two Volumes, 850 pages.                         $4.00

"HAND BOOK OF RAILWAY EXPENDITURES."--Practical
Directions for Keeping
the Expenditure Accounts.                           2.00

"RAILWAY REVENUE AND ITS COLLECTION."--And
Explaining the Organization of
Railroads.                                          2.50

"THE BAGGAGE PARCEL AND MAIL TRAFFIC
OF RAILROADS."--An interesting work
on this important service; 425 pages.               2.00

"TRAIN AND STATION SERVICE"--Giving
The Principal Rules and Regulations governing
Trains; 280 pages.                                  2.00

"THE TRACK ACCOUNTS OF RAILROADS."--And
how they should be kept. Pamphlet.                  1.00

"THE FREIGHT TRAFFIC WAY-BILL."--Its
Uses Illustrated and Described. Pamphlet.            .50

"MUTUAL GUARANTEE."--A Treatise on Mutual
Suretyship. Pamphlet.                                .50

Any of the above books will be sent post paid on receipt
of price, by

PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO.,
150 Monroe St.          CHICAGO, ILL.

Money should be remitted by express, or by draft check or post office
order.



FREE! FREE!!
TO ANY ADDRESS IN THE WORLD!

"THE RED RIVER VALLEY" "ILLUSTRATED."

AN ELEGANT EIGHT-PAGE PAPER

Full of the Most Desirable Information.
Send for "Publication P" to

JAMES B. POWER, LAND COM'R
St. Paul, Minneapolis & Manitoba Ry.,
St. PAUL. MINNESOTA



MAPS.

RAND, McNALLY & CO.'S
NEW RAILROAD
--AND--
COUNTY MAP
--OF THE--
UNITED STATES
--AND--
DOMINION OF CANADA.

Size, 4 × 2-1/2 feet, mounted on rollers to hang on the wall. This is an

ENTIRELY NEW MAP,

Constructed from the most recent and authentic sources.

--IT SHOWS--
_ALL THE RAILROADS,_
--AND--
EVERY COUNTY AND PRINCIPAL TOWN
--IN THE--
UNITED STATES AND CANADA.

A useful Map in every one's home, and place of business. PRICE, $2.00.

Agents wanted, to whom liberal inducements will be given. Address

RAND, McNALLY & CO.,
Chicago, Ill.

By arrangements with the publishers of this Map we are enabled to make
the following liberal offer: To each person who will remit us $2.25 we
will send copy of THE PRAIRIE FARMER One Year and THIS MAP
POSTPAID. Address

PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO.,
CHICAGO, ILL.



DRAINAGE.

PRACTICAL FARM DRAINAGE.

WHY, WHEN, and HOW TO TILE-DRAIN
--AND THE--
MANUFACTURE OF DRAIN-TILE.

By C.G. ELLOITT and J.J.W. BILLINGSLEY

PRICE, ONE DOLLAR.

For sale by

THE PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO.,
150 Monroe St., Chicago, Ill.



THE SHEPHERD'S MANUAL
A PRACTICAL TREATISE ON THE SHEEP.

Designed Especially for American Shepherds
BY HENRY STEWART.

Finely Illustrated

PRICE, $1.50, by mail, postpaid. Address

PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING CO., Chicago.






HUMOUROUS

[Illustration]


THE CARPENTER'S WOOING.

    "Oh, beam my life, my awl to me!"
      He cried, his flame addressing--
    "If I 'adze such a love as yours,
      I'd ask no other blessing!"
    "I am rejoist to hear you speak,"
      The maiden said with laughter--
    "For tho' I hammer guileless girl,
      It's plane what you are rafter.
    Now if file love you just a bit,
      What further can you ax me?
    Can--will you be content with that,
      Or will you further tacks me?"
    He looked handsaw her words were square--
      "No rival can displace me--
    Yes, one more favor I implore,
      And that is, dear Em, brace me!"

    She came full chisel to his arms;
      It really made him stair
    To have her make a bolt for him
      Before he could prepare.
    He tried to screw his courage up,
      And did his level best
    To nail the matter then and there,
      While clasped unto her breast.
    Says he: "It augers well for me,
      All seems to hinge on this;
    And, what is mortise plane to see
      The porch child wants a kiss."
    He kissed her lip, he kissed her cheek,
      And called her his adoored--
    He dons his claw-hammer next week,
      And she will share his board.

_--Detroit Free Press._




WHERE THE OLD MAIDS COME IN.


"Do you know, sir," inquired an American tourist of his companion, while
doing England, "can you inform me the reason for the fresh, healthful
appearance of the English people? Their complexion is far superior to
ours, or our countrymen over the herring pond."

"Well, I know what Prof. Huxley says."

"And what reason does he advance?"

"Well, Huxley says it is owing to the old maids."

"Owing to old maids! You surprise me."

"Fact. Huxley figures it out this way. Now, you know the English are
very fond of roast beef."

"But what has that to do with old maids?"

"Go slow. This genuine English beef is the best and most nutritious beef
in the world, and it imparts a beautiful complexion."

"Well, about the old maids?"

"Yes, you see the excellence of this English beef is due exclusively to
red clover. Do you see the point?"

"All but the old maids. They are still hovering in the shadows."

"Why, don't you see? This red clover is enriched, sweetened, and
fructified by bumble bees."

"But where do the old maids come in?" said the inquisitive American,
wiping his brow wearily.

"Why, it is as plain as the nose on your face. The only enemy of the
bumble bee is the field-mouse."

"But what have roast beef, red clover, bumble-bees, and field-mice got
to do with old maids?"

"Why, you must be very obtuse. Don't you perceive that the bumble-bees
would soon become exterminated by the field-mice if it were not for--"

"Old maids?"

"No, if it were not for cats, the old maids of Old England keep the
country thoroughly stocked up with cats, and so we can directly trace
the effects of the rosy English complexions to the benign cause of
English old maids, at least that's what Huxley says about it, and that's
just where the old maids come in. Science makes clear many mysterious
things."




"Those picture cards I brought back from Boston," remarked Mrs.
Partington, in a pensive mood. "They are momentums of the Art Loan
Imposition."

Don't give up in despair, girls. Naomi didn't marry until she was five
hundred and eighty years old--and then she was sorry she hadn't waited a
century longer.

"Is you gwine to get an overcoat this winter?" asked a darkey of a
companion. "Well I dunno how dat's gwine to be," was the reply. "I'se
done got my eye on a coat, but de fellah dat owns it keeps his eye on it
too."

Her nephew had just come home from his day school. "What have you been
learning this morning?" asked Mrs. Ramsbottom. "Mythology, aunt,"
answered the little man, "all about the heathen gods and goddesses."
"Then I must brush up my memory," said Mrs. Ramsbottom, "and ask you a
question or two. Now, first, who was Juniper?"

"What is a limited monarchy, Johnny?" "Well, my idea of a
limited monarchy is, where the ruler don't have much to rule." "Give an
example?" "An example! Lemme see! Well, if you was bossin' yourself, for
instance."

It was at the close of the wedding breakfast. One of the guests
arose, and, glass in hand, said: "I drink to the health of the
bridegroom. May he see many days like this." The intention was good, but
the bride looked as though something had displeased her.



ILLINOIS CENTRAL RAILROAD.

The elegant equipment of coaches and sleepers being added to its various
through routes is gaining it many friends. Its patrons fear no
accidents. Its perfect track of steel, and solid road-bed, are a
guarantee against them.



THE PRAIRIE FARMER

AND

YOUTH'S COMPANION

One year, $3 for the two.

It is not required that both papers be sent to one address, nor to the
same post-office.

Address PRAIRIE FARMER PUB CO.,
150 Monroe Street. Chicago.



MISCELLANEOUS.


ONE CENT

invested in a postal card and addressed as below

WILL

give to the writer full information as to the best lands in the United
States now for sale; how he can

BUY

them on the lowest and best terms, also the full text of the U.S. land
laws and how to secure

320 ACRES

of Government Lands in Northwestern Minnesota and Northeastern Dakota.

ADDRESS:

JAMES B. POWER,
Land and Emigration Commissioner,
ST. PAUL, MINN.



AGENTS WANTED, Male and Female, for Spence's Blue Book, a most
fascinating and salable novelty. Every family needs from one to a dozen.
Immense profits and exclusive territory. Sample mailed for 25 cts in
postage stamps. Address J.H. CLARSON, P.O. Box 2296, Philadelphia, Pa.




MEDICAL.

DISEASE CURED
Without Medicine.

_A Valuable Discovery for supplying Magnetism to the Human System.
Electricity and Magnetism utilized as never before for Healing the
Sick._


THE MAGNETON APPLIANCE CO.'s

MAGNETIC KIDNEY BELT!

FOR MEN IS

WARRANTED TO CURE
_Or Money refunded_, the following diseases without medicine:--_Pain in
the Back, Hips, Head, or Limbs, Nervous Debility, Lumbago, General
Debility, Rheumatism, Paralysis, Neuralgia, Sciatica, Diseases of the
Kidneys, Spinal Diseases, Torpid Liver_, GOUT SEMINAL EMISSIONS,
IMPOTENCY, ASTHMA, HEART DISEASE, DYSPEPSIA, CONSTIPATION, ERYSIPELAS,
INDIGESTION, HERNIA OR RUPTURE, CATARRH, PILES, EPILEPSY, DUMB AGUE,
ETC.

When any debility of the GENERATIVE ORGANS occurs, LOST VITALITY,
LACK OF NERVE FORCE AND VIGOR, WASTING WEAKNESS, and all those Diseases
of a personal nature, from whatever cause, the continuous stream of
Magnetism permeating through the parts, must restore them to a healthy
action. There is no mistake about this appliance.

TO THE LADIES:--If you are afflicted with LAME BACK, WEAKNESS OF THE
SPINE, FALLING OF THE WOMB, LEUCORRHOEA, CHRONIC INFLAMMATION AND
ULCERATION OF THE WOMB, INCIDENTAL HEMORRHAGE OR FLOODING, PAINFUL,
SUPPRESSED, AND IRREGULAR MENSTRUATION, BARRENNESS, AND CHANGE OF LIFE,
THIS IS THE BEST APPLIANCE AND CURATIVE AGENT KNOWN.

For all forms of FEMALE DIFFICULTIES it is unsurpassed by anything
before invented, both as a curative agent and as a source of power and
vitalization.

Price of either Belt with Magnetic Insoles, $10, sent by express C.O.D.,
and examination allowed, or by mail on receipt of price. In ordering
send measure of waist, and size of shoe. Remittance can be made in
currency, sent in letter at our risk.

The Magneton Garments are adapted to all ages, are worn over the
under-clothing (NOT NEXT TO THE BODY LIKE THE MANY GALVANIC AND
ELECTRIC HUMBUGS ADVERTISED SO EXTENSIVELY), and should be taken off at
night. They hold their POWER FOREVER, and are worn at all seasons of the
year.

Send stamp for the "New Departure in Medical treatment WITHOUT
MEDICINE," with thousands of testimonials.

THE MAGNETON APPLIANCE CO.,
218 STATE STREET. CHICAGO, ILL.

NOTE.--Send one dollar in postage stamps or currency (in letter
at our risk) with size of shoe usually worn, and try a pair of our
Magnetic Insoles, and be convinced of the power residing in our other
Magnetic Appliances. Positively no cold feet when they are worn, or
money refunded.



THE PRAIRIE FARMER is the Cheapest and Best Agricultural Paper
published. Only $2.00 per year.



SCALES.

U.S. STANDARD SCALES,
MANUFACTURED EXPRESSLY FOR
THE PRAIRIE FARMER

_Every Scale Guaranteed by the Manufacturers, and by Us, to be Perfect,
and to give the Purchaser Satisfaction._

The PRAIRIE FARMER Sent Two Years Free

To any person ordering either size Wagon Scale at prices given below.

[Illustration]

2-Ton Wagon or Farm Scale (Platform 6 × 12 feet), $35; 3-Ton (7 × 13),
$45; 5-Ton (8 × 14), $55. Beam Box, Brass Beam, Iron Levers, Steel
Bearings, and full directions for setting up.

THE PRAIRIE FARMER SENT 1 YEAR FREE!

To any person ordering either of the following Scales, at prices named
below.

[Illustration]

The Housekeeper's Scale--$4.00

Weighing accurately from 1/4 oz. to 25 lbs. This is also a valuable
Scale for Offices for Weighing Mail Matter. Tin Scoop, 50c. extra; Brass
75c. extra.

[Illustration]

The Family Scale--$7.00.

Weighs from 1/4 oz. to 240 lbs. Small articles weighed in Scoop, large
ones on Platform. Size of Platform, 10-1/2 × 13-1/2 in.

[Illustration]

The Prairie Farmer Scale--$10.00

Weighs from 2 oz. to 320 lbs. Size of Platform 14 × 19 inches. A
convenient Scale for Small Farmers, Dairymen, etc.

[Illustration]

Platform Scales--4 Sizes.
400 lbs., $15; 600 lbs., $20; 900 lbs., $24; 1,200 lbs., $28; Wheels and
Axles, $2 extra.

In ordering, give the Price and Description given above. All Scales
Boxed and Delivered at Depot in Chicago. Give full shipping directions.
Send money by Draft on Chicago or New York Post Office Order or
Registered Letter. Address

THE PRAIRIE FARMER PUBLISHING COMPANY, CHICAGO, ILL.



MISCELLANEOUS

[Illustration]

THE STANDARD REMINGTON TYPE-WRITER is acknowledged to be the only
rapid and reliable writing machine. It has no rival. These machines are
used for transcribing and general correspondence in every part of the
globe, doing their work in almost every language. Any young man or woman
of ordinary ability, having a practical knowledge of the use of this
machine may find constant and remunerative employment. All machines and
supplies, furnished by us, warranted. Satisfaction guaranteed or money
refunded. Send for circulars. WYCKOFF, SEAMANS & BENEDICT, 38 East
Madison St, Chicago, Ill.



GIVEN AWAY $10,000 IN PREMIUMS TO AGENTS Ladies or Gentlemen, selling
our NEW BOOK For particulars write for Circular C. RAND, McNALLY & CO.,
CHICAGO.



SEEDS

ALBERT DICKINSON,

Dealer in Timothy, Clover, Flax, Hungarian, Millet, Red Top, Blue
Grass, Lawn Grass, Orchard Grass, Bird Seeds, &c.

POP CORN.

Warehouses  {115, 117 & 119 Kinzie St.
            {104, 106, 108 & 110 Michigan St.
OFFICE.      115 Kinzie St.
CHICAGO, ILL.






GENERAL NEWS.


The Emma Bond case has been given to the jury.

Queen Victoria will go to Baden Baden in February.

The war feeling in France against China is increasing.

Four colored men were lynched at Yazoo, Miss., on Saturday
last.

Serious trouble is threatened between the Orangemen and the
Catholics of Ireland.

The works of the Lambert & Smith Wire Fence Company, at Joliet,
Ill., burned last week.

Mr. Villard is sick from nervous prostration. Rumor says he is
financially embarrassed.

It is expected that the Directors of the Suez Canal Company
will pay a dividend of 18 per cent this year.

John D. Leslie, a grain-dealer of Elkhart, Indiana, was ruined
by handling corn which failed to pass inspection.

Gen. Grant fell upon the sidewalk in New York, the other day,
and hurt his hip severely. He is recovering.

N.G. Ordway, Governor of Dakota, is charged with accepting
bribes in making appointments of County Commissioners.

Holloway, the great pill man of England, is said to be worth
$25,000,000. He spends $250,000 per year in advertising.

The extensive sewerage system which Boston has been several
years in constructing is at last finished, at a cost of $4,500,000.

Bradner Smith & Co, and the National Printing Company, Chicago,
were partially burned out on Sunday. Loss about $200,000.

Among the distinguished dead of the year may be mentioned
Chambord, Gambetta, Gortschakoff, Alexander H. Stephens, Karl Marx,
Schultze-Delitzsche, Turgeneff, and Prof. Anthon.

It is reported that the Salters' Company, one of the largest
and most successful of the London guilds, has decided to dispose of its
Irish lands, and is now offering them to tenants on twenty years' time.

During the year 1883, up to the close of business Saturday
night, 7,243,969 gallons of spirits were produced in the Chicago
distilleries. The total receipts of internal revenue in the first
district of Illinois for the year were $8,774,890.

The outcry over the houses of the poor has spread to Paris.
Alarming statistics are published of the increase of overcrowding and
the consequent spread of disease, and no less than 650 schemes of reform
have been presented to the Municipal Council. The deaths between 1870
and 1883 have increased per 100,000 inhabitants from 48 to 96 in
typhoid-fever, from 53 to 101 in diphtheria, from 11 to 74 in small-pox,
from 30 to 43 in measles, and from 7 to 18 in scarlet-fever.

Alarm has been created in French commercial circles by rumors
that the American Congress will make reprisals for the prohibition by
France of the importation of American salted meats by passing a law
increasing the duties on French wines or providing for the seizure of
French adulterations. The National, of Paris, says: "France must expect
that the Reprisals bill now before Congress, which was first directed
against Germany, will now be turned against France."

P.T. Barnum has just made his will. In order that there might
be no question as to his sanity upon which to ground contests after his
death, he had eminent physicians examine him, and secured their
attestation that he was of sound mind. The will and its codicils cover
more than 700 pages of legal cap, closely written, and disposes of real
estate and personal property of the value of $10,000,000 to twenty-seven
heirs. The property is in New York, Brooklyn, Bridgeport, Colorado, and
several other places. Mr. Barnum values his interest in the Barnum and
London Shows at $3,500,000. He gives largely to charitable institutions.

The number of lives lost by the more noticeable accidents of
last year give a total of 125,000, or over 342 for each of the 365 days
of 1883. These colossal figures are attained principally through the
results of three calamities--Ischia, Java, and Syria. Aside from the
earthquakes the year was unequaled in shipwrecks, cyclones, fire-scenes,
and mining horrors. Over thirty people were killed for each day in
January, the Newhall fire, the Russian circus horror, and the Cimbria
shipwreck being the principal of thirty calamities during the month.
Three hundred and ninety-eight people went down in the Cimbria alone.
Two hundred and seventy people burned in the circus at Berditcheff. The
panic later on at Sunderland, England, caused the death of 197 children
and 150 workmen were drowned like rats in the tub called the Daphne on
the Clyde. There were 1,697 murders, 107 executions, 135 lynchings, and
727 suicides.




MARKETS

MARKET REPORTS.


OFFICE OF THE PRAIRIE FARMER,
CHICAGO. Jan. 2, 1884.


FINANCIAL AND COMMERCIAL.

The general bank business of Chicago last week was rather dull. But few
new business contracts were made as everyone was waiting for the New
Year to begin before extending business.

In the loan market money was quoted throughout the week at 6@7 per cent
interest.

Eastern exchange opened Saturday at 25c off between banks, but
subsequently sales were made at 25c per $1,000 premium. The market
closed at 25@30c per $1,000 premium.

Railway stocks in New York with the exception of Northern Pacific were
firm on Saturday.

Government securities remain unchanged at last week's quotations.

4's coupons. 1907              Q. Apr.      123
4's reg., 1907                 Q. Apr.      122
4-1/2's coupon, 1891           Q. Mar.      114
4-1/2's registered, 1891       Q. Mar.      114
3's registered                 Q. Mar.      100


GRAIN AND PROVISIONS.

More was done on the Board of Trade in corn and hog products at the
close of the week than in wheat and other grains. The bears had
decidedly the best of it on Saturday. Wheat receipts were liberal and
everybody seemed willing to sell. Outside orders to purchase were
exceedingly light. There were many transactions in corn but prices
showed a gradual decline.

FLOUR was quiet at about the following rates.

Choice to favorite white winters              $5 25@5 50
Fair to good brands of white winters           4 75@5 00
Good to choice red winters                     5 00@5 50
Prime to choice springs                        4 75@5 00
Good to choice export stock, in sacks, extras  4 25@4 50
Good to choice export stock, double extras     4 50@4 65
Fair to good Minnesota springs                 4 75@5 25
Choice to fancy Minnesota springs              5 50@5 75
Patent springs                                 6 50@7 00
Low grades                                     2 25@3 50

WHEAT.--Red winter, No. 2 99@95c: car lots of spring, No. 2, sold at
93-3/4@97-3/4c; No. 3, do, 77-1/2@81c.

CORN.--Fluctuating but active. Car lots No 2, 57-3/4@58c; rejected,
46-1/2; new mixed, 48@48-1/4c.

OATS.--No. 2 in store, closed 32@33.

RYE.--May, in store 54@59.

BARLEY.--No. 2, 66@67c; No. 3, 44c.

FLAX.--Closed at $1 41.

TIMOTHY.--$1 23 per bushel. Little doing.

CLOVER.--Quiet at $5 90@6 15 for prime.

PROVISIONS.--Mess pork, January $14 02-1/2 per bbl; May, $14 52. Green
hams, 8-3/8c. per lb. Short ribs, $7 40 per cwt.

LARD.--January, $8 75; February, $9 07-1/2.


LUMBER.

Lumber unchanged. Quotations for green are as follows:

Short dimension per M                    $ 9 50@10 00
Long dimension, per M                     10 00@11 50
Boards and strips, No. 2                  11 00@13 00
Boards and strips, medium                 13 00@16 00
Boards and strips, No. 1 choice           16 00@20 00
Shingles, standard                         2 10@ 2 20
Shingles, choice                           2 25@ 2 30
Shingles, extra                            2 40@ 2 60
Lath                                       1 65@ 1 70


COUNTRY PRODUCE.

NOTE.--The quotations for the articles named in the following list are
generally for commission lots of goods and from first hands. While our
prices are based as near as may be on the landing or wholesale rates,
allowance must be made for selections and the sorting up for store
distribution.

BEANS.--Hand picked mediums $2 10@2 15. Hand picked navies. $2 20@2 25.

BUTTER.--Dull and without change. Choice to extra creamery, 32@35c per
lb.; fair to good do 26@30c; fair to choice dairy, 25@30c; common to
choice packing stock fresh and sweet, 20@25c; ladle packed 10@13c; fresh
made, streaked butter, 9@11c.

BRAN.--Quoted at $11 87-1/2@13 50 per ton; extra choice $13.

CHEESE.--Choice full-cream cheddars 12-1/2@13c per lb; medium quality do
9@10c; good to prime full cream flats 13@13-3/4c; skimmed cheddars
9@10c; good skimmed flats 6@7c; hard-skimmed and common stock 3@4c.

EGGS.--In a small way the best brands are quotable at 26@27c per dozen;
24@25c for good ice house stock; 16@20c per pickled.

HAY.--No 1 timothy $8 50@9 50 per ton; No 2 do $7 50@8 00; mixed do
$6 50; upland prairie $8 00@9 50; No 1 prairie $5 50@6 50; No 2 do
$4 50@5. Small bales sell at 25@50c per ton more than large bales.

HIDES AND PELTS.--Green-cured light hides 8c per lb; do heavy cows 8c;
No 2 damaged green-salted hides 6c; green-salted calf 12@12-1/2 cents;
green-salted bull 6 c; dry-salted hides 11 cents; No. 2 two-thirds
price; No. 1 dry flint 14@14-1/2c. Sheep pelts salable at 28@32c for the
estimated amount of wash wool on each pelt. All branded and scratched
hides are discounted 15 per cent from the price of No. 1.

HOPS.--Prime to choice New York State hops 22@26c per lb; Pacific coast
of 23@26c; fair to good Wisconsin 15@20c: Wisconsin 1882's 8@12c.

POULTRY.--Prices for live lots were: Turkeys 12@13c per lb; chickens,
7@8c; ducks 8@10c per lb.; geese 8@10c per lb. for full feathered.
Dressed turkeys sell at 1@2c per lb more than live offerings.

POTATOES.--Good to choice 35@40c per bu. on track; common to fair
25@30c. Illinois sweet potatoes range at $3@3 50 per bbl for yellow.
Baltimore stock at $2 25@2 75, and Jerseys at $5. Red are dull and
nominal.

TALLOW AND GREASE.--No 1 country tallow 7@7-1/4c per lb; No 2 do
6-1/4@6-1/2c. Prime white grease 6@6-1/2c; yellow 5-1/4@5-3/4c; brown
4-1/2@5.

VEGETABLES.--Cabbage, $8@12 per 100; celery, 35@40c per per doz bunches;
onions, $1 00@1 25 per bbl for yellow, and $1 for red; turnips, $1 35@ 1
50 per bbl for rutabagas, and $1 00 for white flat.

WOOL.--from store range as follows for bright wools from Wisconsin,
Illinois, Michigan Indiana, and Eastern Iowa--dark Western lots
generally ranging at 1@2c per lb. less.

Coarse and dingy tub                          25@30
Good medium tub                               31@34
Unwashed bucks' fleeces                       14@15
Fine unwashed heavy fleeces                   18@22
Fine light unwashed heavy fleeces             22@23
Coarse unwashed fleeces                       21@22
Low medium unwashed fleeces                   24@25
Fine medium unwashed fleeces                  26@27
Fine washed fleeces                           32@33
Coarse washed fleeces                         26@28
Low medium washed fleeces                     30@32
Fine medium washed fleeces                    34@35

Colorado and territory wools range as follows:

Lowest grades                                 14@16
Low medium                                    18@22
Medium                                        22@26
Fine                                          16@24

Wools from New Mexico:

Lowest grades                                 14@16
Part improved                                 16@17
Best improved                                 19@23

Burry from 2c to 10c off; black 2c to 5c off.


LIVE STOCK MARKETS.

The total receipts and shipments for last week were as follows:

                               Received.    Shipped.
Cattle                            27,295     11,368
Hogs                              89,505     22,450
Sheep                              9,417      4,856

CATTLE.--The above figures show a falling off of 18,850 head from the
previous week's receipts. This contraction on the part of shippers is
said to have been on account of advice from the commission men who argue
that the unusual demand during Christmas week following the previous
large supply would not be very large. Dressed-beef operators bought
freely and there was a general advance in prices. The quality of the
beef was not first-class. The highest price paid for the best was $6 65
per cwt. Sales were principally at $5@6. Common lots brought $4 25@4 95.
Some poor ones went at $4. Cows for butchers sold at $3@4, and inferior
lots at $2@2 90. Bulls brought from $2 to $4 75. A few car loads of
Texans sold at $3 50@4 50 per cwt. Veal calves brought $4@7 for 100 lbs.
Milch cows were lower as the supply has been large. There was a falling
off of about $10 per head; they sold for $25 to 55 per head.

HOGS.--During the past week they formed a strong combination to break
the market, all the 20 packing houses doing business here agreeing to
buy only a stipulated number of hogs each day. The plan worked as was
anticipated, and although the receipts for the week dropped to 89,000
against 187,470 during the previous week, there was a steady decline
from day to day. Shippers were good buyers, taking on an average 5,500
hogs daily, but city packers bought only about 11,000 or 12,000, leaving
at times upwards of 28,000 or 30,000 unsold at the close of the day.
Choice hogs declined only moderately, but other descriptions were very
weak. Up to date there have been packed in the West this season about
100,000 head more than to same time last year. The market closed on
Saturday at $4 65@5 90 for heavy; $4 60@5 30 for light, and $3 25@4 60
for skips and culls.

Note.--All sales of hogs are made subject to a shrinkage of 40 lbs for
piggy sows and 80 lbs for stags. Dead hogs sell for 1-1/2c per lb for