It is in place here to mention a legion of free mulattoes and blacks
from the Island of St. Domingo, a full account of whose services is
appended to this section, who fought under D'Estaing with great
distinction in the siege of Savannah, their bravery at that time
saving the patriot army from annihilation.

When the Revolutionary War had closed the brave black soldier who had
fought to give to the world a new flag whose every star should be a
star of hope to the oppressed, and whose trinity of colors should
symbolize Liberty, Equality and Fraternity, found his race, and in
some instances himself personally, encased in a cruel and stubborn
slavery. For the soldier himself special provision had been made in
both Northern and Southern colonies, but it was not always hearty or
effective. In October, 1783, the Virginia Legislature passed an act
for the relief of certain slaves who had served in the army whose
"former owners were trying to force to return to a state of servitude,
contrary to the principles of justice and their solemn promise." The
act provided that each and every slave who had enlisted "by the
appointment and direction of his owner" and had "been received as a
substitute for any free person whose duty or lot it was to serve" and
who had served faithfully during the term of such enlistment, unless
lawfully discharged earlier, should be fully and completely
emancipated and should be held and deemed free in as full and ample
manner as if each and every one of them were specially named in the
act. The act, though apparently so fair on its face, and interlarded
as it is with patriotic and moral phrases, is nevertheless very narrow
and technical, liberating only those who enlisted by the appointment
and direction of their owners, and who were accepted as substitutes,
and who came out of the army with good discharges. It is not hard to
see that even under this act many an ex-soldier might end his days in
slavery. The Negro had joined in the fight for freedom and when
victory is won finds himself a slave. He was both a slave and a
soldier, too often, during the war; and now at its close may be both a
veteran and a slave.

The second war with Great Britain broke out with an incident in which
the Negro in the navy was especially conspicuous. The Chesapeake, an
American war vessel was hailed, fired upon and forced to strike her
colors, by the British. She was then boarded and searched and four
persons taken from her decks, claimed as deserters from the English
navy. Three of these were Negroes and one white. The Negroes were
finally dismissed with a reprimand and the white man hanged. Five
years later hostilities began on land and no opposition was manifested
toward the employment of Negro soldiers. Laws were passed, especially
in New York, authorizing the formation of regiments of blacks with
white officers. It is remarkable that although the successful
insurrection of St. Domingo was so recent, and many refugees from that
country at that time were in the United States, and our country had
also but lately come into possession of a large French element by the
Louisiana purchase, there was no fear of a servile insurrection in
this country. The free colored men of New Orleans, under the
proclamation of the narrow-minded Jackson, rallied to the defence of
that city and bore themselves with commendable valor in that useless
battle. The war closed, however, and the glory of the Negro soldier
who fought in it soon expired in the dismal gloom of a race-slavery
becoming daily more wide-spread and hopeless.

John Brown's movement was military in character and contemplated the
creation of an army of liberated slaves; but its early suppression
prevented any display of Negro valor or genius. Its leader must ever
receive the homage due those who are so moved by the woes of others as
to overlook all considerations of policy and personal risk. As a plot
for the destruction of life it fell far short of the Nat Turner
insurrection which swept off fifty-seven persons within a few hours.
In purpose the two episodes agree. They both aim at the liberation of
the slave; both were led by fanatics, the reflex production of the
cruelty of slavery, and both ended in the melancholy death of their
heroic leaders. Turner's was the insurrection of the slave and was not
free from the mad violence of revenge; Brown's was the insurrection of
the friend of the slave, and was governed by the high and noble
purpose of freedom. The insurrections of Denmark Vesey in South
Carolina, in 1822, and of Nat Turner, in Virginia, in 1831, show
conclusively that the Negro slave possessed the courage, the cunning,
the secretiveness and the intelligence to fight for his freedom.
These two attempts were sufficiently broad and intelligent, when taken
into consideration with the enforced ignorance of the slave, to prove
the Negro even in his forlorn condition capable of daring great
things. Of the probable thousands who were engaged in the Denmark
Vesey insurrection, only fifteen were convicted, and these died
heroically without revealing anything connected with the plot.
Forty-three years later I met the son of Denmark Vesey, who rejoiced
in the efforts of his noble father, and regarded his death on the
gallows as a holy sacrifice to the cause of freedom. Turner describes
his fight as follows: "The white men, eighteen in number, approached
us to about one hundred yards, when one of them fired, and I
discovered about half of them retreating. I then ordered my men to
fire and rush on them. The few remaining stood their ground until we
approached within fifty yards, when they fired and retreated. We
pursued and overtook some of them whom we thought we left dead. After
pursuing them about two hundred yards, and rising a little hill, I
discovered they were met by another party, and had halted and were
reloading their guns. Thinking that those who retreated first and the
party who fired on us at fifty or sixty yards distant had all only
fallen back to meet others with ammunition, as I saw them reloading
their guns, and more coming up than I saw at first, and several of my
bravest men being wounded, the others became panic struck and
scattered over the field. The white men pursued and fired on us
several times. Hark had his horse shot under him, and I caught another
for him that was running by me; five or six of my men were wounded,
but none left on the field. Finding myself defeated here, I instantly
determined to go through a private way and cross the Nottoway River at
Cypress Bridge, three miles below Jerusalem, and attack that place in
the rear, as I expected they would look for me on the other road, and
I had a great desire to get there to procure arms and ammunition.
After going a short distance in this private way, accompanied by about
twenty men, I overtook two or three who told me the others were
dispersed in every direction. After trying in vain to collect a
sufficient force to proceed to Jerusalem, I determined to return, as I
was sure they would make back to their old neighborhood, where they
would rejoin me, make new recruits, and come down again. On my way
back I called on Mrs. Thomas', Mrs. Spencer's and several other
places. We stopped at Major Ridley's quarters for the night, and being
joined by four of his men, with the recruits made since my defeat, we
mustered now about forty strong.

After placing out sentinels, I lay down to sleep, but was quickly
aroused by a great racket. Starting up I found some mounted and others
in great confusion, one of the sentinels having given the alarm that
we were about to be attacked. I ordered some to ride around and
reconnoitre, and on their return the others being more alarmed, not
knowing who they were, fled in different ways, so that I was reduced
to about twenty again. With this I determined to attempt to recruit,
and proceed on to rally in the neighborhood I had left."[6]

No one can read this account, which is thoroughly supported by
contemporary testimony, without seeing in this poor misguided slave
the elements of a vigorous captain. Failing in his efforts he made his
escape and remained for two months in hiding in the vicinity of his
pursuers. One concerned in his prosecution says: "It has been said
that he was ignorant and cowardly and that his object was to murder
and rob for the purpose of obtaining money to make his escape. It is
notorious that he was never known to have a dollar in his life, to
swear an oath, or drink a drop of spirits. As to his ignorance, he
certainly never had the advantages of education, but he can read and
write (it was taught him by his parents) and for natural intelligence
and quickness of apprehension, is surpassed by few men I have ever
seen. As to his being a coward, his reason as given for not resisting
Mr. Phipps shows the decision of his character."[7]

The War of the Rebellion, now called the Civil War, effected the last
and tremendous step in the transition of the American Negro from the
position of a slave under the Republic to that of a soldier in its
armies. Both under officers of his own race at Port Hudson and under
white officers on a hundred battlefields, the Negro in arms proved
himself a worthy foeman against the bravest and sternest enemies that
ever assailed our nation's flag, and a worthy comrade of the Union's
best defenders. Thirty-six thousand eight hundred and forty-seven of
them gave their lives in that awful conflict. The entire race on this
continent and those of allied blood throughout the world are indebted
to the soldier-historian, Honorable George W. Williams, for the
eloquent story of their service in the Union Army, and for the
presentation of the high testimonials to the valor and worthiness of
the colored soldier as given by the highest military authority of the
century. From Chapter XVI of his book, "Negro Troops in the
Rebellion," the paragraphs appended at the close of this chapter are
quoted.


A.

HOW THE BLACK ST. DOMINGO LEGION SAVED THE PATRIOT ARMY IN THE SIEGE
OF SAVANNAH, 1779.

The siege and attempted reduction of Savannah by the combined French
and American forces is one of the events of our revolutionary war,
upon which our historians care little to dwell. Because it reflects
but little glory upon the American arms, and resulted so disastrously
to the American cause, its important historic character and
connections have been allowed to fade from general sight; and it
stands in the ordinary school text-books, much as an affair of shame.
The following, quoted from Barnes' History, is a fair sample of the
way in which it is treated:

"French-American Attack on Savannah.--In September, D'Estaing joined
Lincoln in besieging that city. After a severe bombardment, an
unsuccessful assault was made, in which a thousand lives were lost.
Count Pulaski was mortally wounded. The simple-hearted Sergeant Jasper
died grasping the banner presented to his regiment at Fort Moultrie.
D'Estaing refused to give further aid; thus again deserting the
Americans when help was most needed."

From this brief sketch the reader is at liberty to infer that the
attack was unwise if not fool-hardy; that the battle was unimportant;
and that the conduct of Count D'Estaing immediately after the battle
was unkind, if not unjust, to the Americans. While the paragraph does
not pretend to tell the whole truth, what it does tell ought to be the
truth; and this ought to be told in such a way as to give correct
impressions. The attack upon Savannah was well-planned and thoroughly
well considered; and it failed only because the works were so ably
defended, chiefly by British regulars, under brave and skillful
officers. In a remote way, which it is the purpose of this paper to
trace, that sanguinary struggle had a wider bearing upon the progress
of liberty in the Western World than any other one battle fought
during the Revolution.

But first let us listen to the story of the battle itself. Colonel
Campbell with a force of three thousand men, captured Savannah in
December, 1778; and in the January following, General Prevost arrived,
and by March had established a sort of civil government in Georgia,
Savannah being the capital. In April, the American general, Lincoln,
feeble in more senses than one, perhaps, began a movement against
Savannah by way of Augusta; but Prevost, aware of his purpose, crossed
into South Carolina and attempted an attack upon Charleston. Finding
the city too well defended, he contented himself with ravaging the
plantations over a wide extent of adjacent country, and returned to
Savannah laden with rich spoils, among which were included three
thousand slaves, of whose labor he made good use later.

The patriots of the South now awaited in hope the coming of the French
fleet; and on the first of September, Count D'Estaing appeared
suddenly on the coast of Georgia with thirty-three sail, surprised and
captured four British warships, and announced to the government of
South Carolina his readiness to assist in the recapture of Savannah.
He urged as a condition, however, that his ships should not be
detained long off so dangerous a coast, as is was now the hurricane
season, and there was neither harbor, road, nor offing for their
protection.

By means of small vessels sent from Charleston he effected a landing
in ten days, and four days thereafter, on the 16th, he summoned the
garrison to surrender to the arms of France. Although this demand was
made in the name of France for the plain reason that the American army
was not yet upon the spot, the loyalists did not fail to make it a
pretext for the accusation that the French were desirous of making
conquests in the war on their own account. In the meantime Lincoln
with the regular troops, was hurrying toward Savannah, and had issued
orders for the militia to rendezvous at the same place; and the
militia full of hope of a speedy, if not of a bloodless conquest, were
entering upon this campaign with more than ordinary enthusiasm.

During the time that the fleet had been off the coast, and especially
since the landing, the British had been very busy in putting the city
in a high state of defence, and in making efforts to strengthen the
garrison. Lieutenant-colonel Cruger, who had a small force at Sunbury,
the last place in Georgia that had been captured by the British, and
Lieutenant-colonel Maitland who was commanding a considerable force at
Beaufort, were ordered to report in haste with their commands at
Savannah. On the 16th, when the summons to surrender was received by
Prevost, Maitland had not arrived, but was hourly expected. Prevost
asked for a delay of twenty-four hours to consider the proposal, which
delay was granted; and on that very evening, Maitland with his force
arrived at Dawfuskie. Finding the river in the possession of the
French, his course for a time seemed effectually cut off. By the
merest chance he fell in with some Negro fishermen who informed him of
a passage known as Wall's cut, through Scull's creek, navigable for
small boats. A favoring tide and a dense fog enabled him to conduct
his command unperceived by the French, through this route, and thus
arrive in Savannah on the afternoon of the 17th, before the expiration
of the twenty-four hours. General Prevost had gained his point; and
now believing himself able to resist an assault, declined the summons
to surrender. Two armed ships and four transports were sunk in the
channel of the river below the city, and a boom in the same place laid
entirely across the river; while several small boats were sunk above
the town, thus rendering it impossible for the city to be approached
by water.

On the day of the summons to surrender, although the works were
otherwise well advanced, there were not ten cannon mounted in the
lines of Savannah; but from that time until the day of assault, the
men of the garrison, with the slaves they had captured, worked day and
night to get the defences of the city in the highest state of
excellence. Major Moncrief, chief of the engineers, is credited with
placing in position more than eighty cannons in a short time after the
call to surrender had been received.

The city itself at this time was but a mere village of frame buildings
and unpaved streets. Viewed as facing its assailants, it was protected
in its rear, or upon its north side, by the Savannah river; and on its
west side by a thick swamp or morass, which communicated with the
river above the city. The exposed sides were those of the east and
south. These faced an open country which for several miles was
entirely clear of woods. This exposed portion of the city was well
protected by an unbroken line of defences extending from the river
back to the swamp, the right and left extremes of the line consisting
of strong redoubts, while the centre was made up of seamen's batteries
in front, with impalements and traverses thrown up to protect the
troops from the fire of the besiegers. The whole extent of the works
was faced with an ample abattis.

[Illustration: Savannah River.]

To be still more particular: there were three redoubts on the right of
the line, and on the right of them quite near the swamp, was a
sailor's battery of nine pounders, covered by a company of the British
legion. The left redoubt of these three, was known as the Springhill
redoubt; and proved to be the objective of the final assault. Between
it and the centre, was another sailor's battery behind which were
posted the grenadiers of the 60th regiment, with the marines which had
been landed from the warships. On the left of the line near the river
were two redoubts, strongly constructed, with a massy frame of green
spongy wood, filled in with sand, and mounted with heavy cannon. The
centre, or space between these groups of redoubts, was composed, as
has been said, of lighter but nevertheless very effective works, and
was strongly garrisoned.

Having thus scanned the works, let us now take a glance at the men who
are to defend them. As all of the assaulting forces are not made up of
Americans, so all of the defenders are not foreigners. The centre
redoubt of the triplet on the right, was garrisoned by two companies
of militia, with the North Carolina regiment to support them; Captains
Roworth and Wylie, with the provincial corps of King's Rangers, were
posted in the redoubt on the right; and Captain Tawse with his corps
of provincial dragons, dismounted, in the left or Springhill redoubt,
supported by the South Caroline regiment. The whole of this force on
the right of the line, was under the command of the gallant
Lieutenant-colonel Maitland; and it was this force that made the
charge that barely failed of annihilating the American army. On the
left of the line, the Georgia loyalists garrisoned one of those massy
wooden sand-filled redoubts; while in the centre, cheek by jowl so to
speak, with two battalions of the seventy-first regiment, and two
regiments of Hessians, stood the New York Volunteers. All of these
corps were ready to act as circumstances should require and to support
any part of the line that might be attacked. The Negroes who worked on
these defences were under the direction of Major Moncrief.

The French troops had landed below the city and were formed facing the
British lines, with the river on their right. On their left, later,
assembled the American troops. The final dispositions were concluded
by September 22nd, and were as follows: The American troops under
Lincoln formed the left of the line, their left resting upon the swamp
and the entire division facing the Springhill redoubt and her two
sister defences; then came the division of M. de Noailles, composed of
nine hundred men. D'Estaing's division of one thousand men beside the
artillery, came next, and formed the centre of the French army. On
D'Estaing's right was Count Dillon's division of nine hundred men; on
the right of Dillon were the powder magazine, cattle depot, and a
small field hospital; on the right of the depot and a little in
advance, were Dejean's dragoons, numbering fifty men; upon the same
alignment and to the right of the dragoons were Rouvrais' Volunteer
Chasseurs, numbering seven hundred and fifty men; still further on to
the right and two hundred yards in advance of Rouvrais, was Framais,
comanding the Grenadier Volunteers, and two hundred men besides, his
right resting upon the swampy wood that bordered the river, thus
completely closing in the city on the land side. The frigate, La
Truite, and two galleys, lay within cannon shot of the town, and with
the aid of the armed store ship, La Bricole, and the frigate, La
Chimere, effectually cut off all communication by water.

On the 23rd, both the French and the Americans opened their trenches;
and on the 24th, a small detachment of the besieged made a sortie
against the French. The attack was easily repulsed, but the French
pursuing, approached so near the entrenchments of the enemy that they
were fired upon and several were killed. On the night of the 27th
another sortie was made which threw the besiegers into some confusion
and caused the French and Americans to fire upon each other.
Cannonading continued with but little result until October 8th.

The engineers were now of the opinion that a speedy reduction of the
city could not be accomplished by regular approaches; and the naval
officers were very anxious about the fleet, both because of the
dangers to which it was exposed from the sea, and also because with so
many men ashore it was in especial danger of being attacked and
captured by British men-of-war. These representations agreeing
altogether with D'Estaing's previously expressed wishes to leave the
coast as soon as possible, induced that officer and General Lincoln
to decide upon an attempt to storm the British works at once. It is
quite probable that this had been the purpose as a last resort from
the first. The preservation of the fleet was, however, the powerful
factor in determining the time and character of the assault upon
Savannah.

On the night of the eighth, Major L'Enfant, with a detachment
attempted to set fire to the abattis in order to clear the way for the
assault, but failed to through the dampness of the wood. The plan of
the assault may be quite accurately obtained from the orders given to
the American troops on the evening of the 8th by General Lincoln and
from the inferences to be drawn from the events of the morning of the
9th as they are recorded in history. At least two of the historians
who have left us accounts of the seige, Ramsey and McCall, were
present at the time, and their accounts may be regarded as original
authority. General Lincoln's orders were as follows:


     "Evening Orders. By General Lincoln.
     Watchword--Lewis.

     "The soldiers will be immediately supplied with 40 rounds of
     cartridges, a spare flint, and have their arms in good
     order. The infantry destined for the attack of Savannah will
     be divided into two bodies; first composed of the light
     troops under the command of Colonel Laurens; the second, of
     the continental battalions and the first battalion of the
     Charleston militia, except the grenadiers, who are to join
     the light troops. The whole will parade at 1 o'clock, near
     the left of the line, and march by platoons. The guards of
     the camp will be formed of the invalids, and be charged to
     keep the fires as usual in camp.

     "The cavalry under the command of Count Pulaski, will parade
     at the same time with the infantry and follow the left
     column of the French troops, precede the column of the
     American light troops; they will endeavor to penetrate the
     enemy's lines between the battery on the left of Springhill
     redoubt, and the next towards the river; having effected
     this, will pass to the left towards Yamacraw and secure such
     parties of the enemy as may be lodged in that quarter.

     "The artillery will parade at the same time, follow the
     French artillery, and remain with the corps de reserve until
     they receive further orders.

     "The whole will be ready by the time appointed, with the
     utmost silence and punctuality; and be ready to march the
     instant Count Dillon and General Lincoln shall order.

     "The light troops who are to follow the cavalry, will
     attempt to enter the redoubt on the left of the Springhill,
     by escalade if possible; if not by entrance into it, they
     are to be supported if necessary by the first South Carolina
     regiment; in the meantime the column will proceed with the
     lines to the left of the Springhill battery.

     "The light troops having succeeded against the redoubt will
     proceed to the left and attempt the several works between
     that and the river.

     "The column will move to the left of the French troops,
     taking care not to interfere with them.

     "The light troops having carried the work towards the river
     will form on the left of the column.

     "It is especially forbidden to fire a single gun before the
     redoubts are carried; or for any soldier to quit his rank to
     plunder without an order for that purpose; any who shall
     presume to transgress in either of these respects shall be
     reputed a disobeyer of military orders which is punishable
     with death.

     "The militia of the first and second brigades, General
     Williamson's and the second battalion of the Charleston
     militia will parade immediately under the command of General
     Huger; after draughting five hundred of them the remander of
     them will go into the trenches and put themselves under the
     commanding officer there; with the 500 he will march to the
     left of the enemy's line, remain as near them as he possibly
     can without being seen, until four o'clock in the morning,
     at which time the troops in the trenches will begin an
     attack upon the enemy; he will then advance and make his
     attack as near the river as possible; though this is only
     meant as a feint, yet should a favorable opportunity offer,
     he will improve it and push into the town.

     "In case of a repulse after taking Springhill redoubt, the
     troops will retreat and rally in the rear of redoubt; if it
     cannot be effected that way, it must be attempted by the
     same route at which they entered.

     "The second place of rallying (or the first if the redoubt
     should not be carried) will be at the Jews' burying-ground,
     where the reserve will be placed; if these two halts should
     not be effected, they will retire towards camp.

     "The troops will carry in their hats a piece of white paper
     by which they will be distinguished."

General Huger with his five hundred militia, covered by the river
swamp, crept quite close to the enemy's lines and delivered his attack
as directed. Its purpose was to draw attention to that quarter and if
possible cause a weakening of the strength in the left centre of the
line. What its real effect was, there is now no means of knowing.

Count Dillon, who during the siege had been on D'Estaing's right, and
who appears to have been second in command in the French army, in this
assault was placed in command of a second attacking column. His
purpose was to move to the right of General Huger, and keeping in the
edge of the swamps along the river, steal past the enemy's batteries
on the left, and attack him in the rear. Bancroft describes the
results of his efforts as follows: "The column under Count Dillon,
which was to have attacked the rear of the British lines, became
entangled in a swamp of which it should only have skirted the edge was
helplessly exposed to the British batteries and could not even be
formed." Here were the two strong sand-filled redoubts, mounted with
heavy cannon, and these may have been the batteries that stopped
Dillon's column.

Count Pulaski with his two hundred brave cavalrymen, undertook his
part in the deadly drama with ardor, and began that perilous ride
which had for its object: "to penetrate the enemy's lines, between the
battery on the left of the Springhill redoubt, and the next towards
the river." Balch describes it as an attempt to "penetrate into the
city by galloping between the redoubts." It was the anticipation of
the Crimean "Charge of the Light Brigade;" only in this case, no one
blundered; it was simply a desperate chance. Cannon were to the right,
left, and front, and the heroic charge proved in vain; the noble Pole
fell, banner[8] in hand, pierced with a mortal wound--another foreign
martyr to our dearly bought freedom.

The cavalry dash having failed, that much of the general plan was
blotted out. The feints may have been understood; it is said a
sergeant of the Charleston Grenadiers deserted during the night of the
8th and gave the whole plan of the attack to General Prevost, so that
he knew just where to strengthen his lines. The feints were
effectually checked by the garrison on the left, twenty-eight of the
Americans being killed: while Dillon's column was stopped by the
batteries near the river. This state of affairs allowed the whole of
Maitland's force to protect the Springhill redoubt and that part of
the line which was most threatened. The Springhill redoubt, as has
been stated, was occupied by the South Carolina regiment and a corps
of dragoons. This circumstance may account for the fact, that while
the three hundred and fifty Charleston militia occupied a most exposed
position in the attacking column, only one man among them was killed
and but six wounded. The battery on the left of this redoubt was
garrisoned by grenadiers and marines.

The attacking column now advanced boldly, under the command of
D'Estaing and Lincoln, the Americans consisting of six hundred
continental troops and three hundred and fifty Charleston militia,
being on the left, while the centre and right were made up of the
French forces. They were met with so severe and steady a fire that the
head of the column was soon thrown into confusion. They endured this
fire for fifty-five minutes, returning it as best they could, although
many of the men had no opportunity to fire at all. Two American
standards and one French standard, were placed on the British works,
but their bearers were instantly killed. It being found impossible to
carry any part of the works, a general retreat was ordered. Of the six
hundred continental troops, more than one-third had fallen, and about
one-fifth of the French. The Charleston militia had not suffered,
although they had bravely borne their part in the assault, and it had
certainly been no fault of theirs if their brethren behind the
embankments had not fired upon them. Count D'Estaing had received two
wounds, one in the thigh, and being unable to move, was saved by the
young naval lieutenant Truguet. Ramsey gives the losses of the battle
as follows: French soldiers 760; officers 61; Americans 312; total
1133.

As the army began its retreat, Lieutenant-colonel Maitland with the
grenadiers and marines, who were incorporated with the grenadiers,
charged its rear with the purpose of accomplishing its annihilation.
It was then that there occurred the most brilliant feat of the day,
and one of the bravest ever performed by foreign troops in the
American cause. In the army of D'Estaing was a legion of black and
mulatto freedmen, known as Fontages Legion, commanded by Vicount de
Fontages, a brave and experienced officer. The strength of this legion
is given variously from six hundred to over eight hundred men. This
legion met the fierce charge of Maitland and saved the retreating
army.

In an official record prepared in Paris, now before me, are these
words: "This legion saved the army at Savannah by bravely covering its
retreat. Among the blacks who rendered signal services at that time
were: Andre, Beauvais, Rigaud, Villatte, Beauregard, Lambert, who
latterly became generals under the convention, including Henri
Christophe, the future king of Haiti." This quotation is taken from a
paper secured by the Honorable Richard Rush, our minister to Paris in
1849, and is preserved in the Pennsylvania Historical Society. Henri
Christophe received a dangerous gunshot wound in Savannah. Balch says
in speaking of Fontages at Savannah: "He commanded there a legion of
mulattoes, according to my manuscript, of more than eight hundred men,
and saved the army after the useless assault on the fortifications, by
bravely covering the retreat."

It was this legion that formed the connecting link between the siege
of Savannah and the wide development of republican liberty on the
Western continent, which followed early in the present century. In
order to show this connection and the sequences, it will be necessary
to sketch in brief the history of this remarkable body of men,
especially that of the prominent individuals who distinguished
themselves at Savannah.

In 1779 the French colony of Saint Domingo was in a state of peace,
the population then consisting of white slave-holders, mulatto and
black freedmen (affranchis), and slaves. Count D'Estaing received
orders to recruit men from Saint Domingo for the auxiliary army; and
there being no question of color raised, received into the service a
legion of colored freedmen. There had been for years a colored militia
in Saint Domingo, and as early as 1716, the Marquis de Chateau Morant,
then governor of the colony, made one Vincent the Captain-general of
all the colored militia in the vicinity of the Cape. This Captain
Vincent died in 1780 at the reputed age of 120 years. He was certainly
of great age, for he had been in the siege of Carthegenia in 1697, was
taken prisoner, afterwards liberated by exchange and presented to
Louis XIV, and fought in the German war under Villars. Moreau de St.
Mery, in his description of Vincent, incidentally mentions the
Savannah expedition. He says: "I saw him (Vincent) the year preceding
his death, recalling his ancient prowess to the men of color who were
enrolling themselves for the expedition to Savannah; and showing in
his descendants who were among the first to offer themselves, that he
had transmitted his valor. Vincent, the good Captain Vincent, had a
most pleasing countenance; and the contrast of his black skin with his
white hair produced an effect that always commanded respect."

[Illustration: Hutchinson Island.]

The Haytian historian, Enclus Robin, says when the call for volunteers
reached Saint Domingo: "eight hundred young freedmen, blacks and
mulattoes, offered themselves to take part in the expedition;" that
they went and "fought valiantly; and returned to Saint Domingo covered
with glory." Madiou, another Haytian historian of the highest
respectability says: "A crowd of young men, black and colored,
enlisted with the French troops and left for the continent. They
covered themselves with glory in the siege of Savannah, under the
orders of Count D'Estaing."

What effect this experience had upon these volunteers may be inferred
from their subsequent history. Robin says: "These men who contributed
their mite toward American independence, had still their mothers and
sisters in slavery; and they themselves were subject to humiliating
discriminations. Should not France have expected from that very
moment, that they would soon use in their own cause, those very arms
which they had learned so well to use in the interests of others?"
Madiou says: "On their return to Saint Domingo they demanded for their
brothers the enjoyment of political rights." Beauvais went to Europe
and served in the army of France; but returned to fight for liberty in
Hayti, and was Captain-general in 1791; Rigaud, Lambert and Christophe
wrote their names--not in the sand. These are the men who dared to
stir Saint Domingo, under whose influence Hayti became the first
country of the New World, after the United States, to throw off
European rule. The connection between the siege of Savannah and the
independence of Hayti is traced, both as to its spirit, and
physically, through the black legion that on that occasion saved the
American army. How this connection is traced to the republics of South
America, I will allow a Haytian statesman and man of letters, honored
both at home and abroad, to relate. I translate from a work published
in Paris in 1885:

"The illustrious Bolivar, liberator and founder of five republics in
South America, undertook in 1811 his great work of shaking off the
yoke of Spain, and of securing the independence of those immense
countries which swelled the pride of the catholic crown--but failed.
Stripped of all resources he took flight and repaired to Jamaica,
where he implored in vain of the governor of that island, the help of
England. Almost in despair, and without means, he resolved to visit
Hayti, and appeal to the generosity of the black Republic for the
help necessary to again undertake that work of liberation which had
gone to pieces in his hands. Never was there a more solemn hour for
any man--and that man the representative of the destiny of South
America! Could he hope for success? After the English, who had every
interest in the destruction of Spanish colonial power, had treated him
with so much indifference, could he hope that a new-born nation, weak,
with microscopic territory, and still guarding anxiously its own
ill-recognized independence, would risk itself in an enterprise
hazardous as the one he represented? Full of doubt he came; but Petion
gave him a most cordial welcome.

"Taking the precautions that a legitimate sentiment of prudence
dictated at that delicate moment of our national existence, the
government of Port-au-Prince put to the disposition of the hero of
Boyaca and Carabobo, all the elements of which he had need--and
Bolivar needed everything. Men, arms and money were generously given
him. Petion did not wish to act openly for fear of compromising
himself with the Spanish government; it was arranged that the men
should embark secretly as volunteers; and that no mention of Hayti
should ever be made in any official act of Venezuela."

Bolivar's first expedition with his Haytian volunteers was a failure;
returning to the island he procured reinforcements and made a second
descent which was brilliantly successful. Haytian arms, money and men
turned Bolivar's disasters to victory; and the spirit of Western
liberty marched on to the redemption of South America. The liberation
of Mexico and all Central America, followed as a matter of course; and
the ground was thus cleared for the practical application of that
Continentalism enunciated in the Monroe doctrine.

The black men of the Antilles who fought in the siege of Savannah,
enjoy unquestionably the proud historical distinction of being the
physical conductors that bore away from our altars the sacred fire of
liberty to rekindle it in their own land; and also of becoming the
humble but important link that served to unite the Two Americas in the
bond of enlightened independence.

T.G. STEWARD, U.S.A.

Note:--In the preparation of the above paper I have been greatly
assisted by the Honorable L.J. Janvier, Charge d'affairs d' Haiti, in
London; by Right Reverend James Theodore Holly, bishop of Hayti, and
by Messrs. Charles and Frank Rudolph Steward of Harvard University. To
all of these gentlemen my thanks are here expressed. T.G.S.

Paper read at the session of the Negro Academy, Washington, D.C.,
1898.


B.

EXTRACTS FROM CHAPTER XVI "NEGRO TROOPS IN THE REBELLION"--WILLIAMS.

Adjutant-General Thomas in a letter to Senator Wilson, May 30, 1864,
says: "Experience proves that they manage heavy guns very well. Their
fighting qualities have also been fully tested a number of times, and
I am yet to hear of the first case where they did not fully stand up
to their work."

Major-General James G. Blunt writing of the battle of Honey Springs,
Arkansas, said of Negro troops: "The Negroes (First Colored Regiment)
were too much for the enemy, and let me here say that I never saw such
fighting as was done by that Negro regiment. They fought like
veterans, with a coolness and valor that is unsurpassed. They
preserved their line perfect throughout the whole engagement, and
although in the hottest of the fight, they never once faltered. Too
much praise cannot be awarded them for their gallantry. The question
that Negroes will fight is settled; besides, they make better soldiers
in every respect than any troops I have ever had under my command."

General Thomas J. Morgan, speaking of the courage of Negro troops in
the battle of Nashville, and its effect upon Major-General George H.
Thomas, says: "Those who fell nearest the enemy's works were colored.
General Thomas spoke very feelingly of the sight which met his eye as
he rode over the field, and he confessed that the Negro had fully
vindicated his bravery, and wiped from his mind the last vestige of
prejudice and doubt."


FOOTNOTES:

[6] Confession of Nat Turner, Anglo-African Magazine, Vol. 1, p. 338,
1859.

[7] Ibid.

[8] The presentation of this banner by the Moravian Nuns of Bethlehem
forms the text of the poem by Longfellow beginning--

    When the dying flame of day
    Through the chancel shot its ray,
    Far the glimmering tapers shed
    Faint light on the cowled head;
    And the censer burning swung
    Where, before the altar, hung
    The crimson banner, that with prayer
    Had been consecrated there.
    And the nuns' sweet hymn was heard the while,
    Sung low in the dint, mysterious aisle,
      "Take thy banner! may it wave
      Proudly o'er the good and brave;
      When the battle's distant wail
      Breaks the Sabbath of our vale,
      When the cannon's music thrills
      To the hearts of those lone hills.
      When the spear in conflict shakes,
      And the strong lance shivering breaks.



      "Take thy banner! and if e'er
      Thou should'st press the soldier's bier
      And the muffled drum shall beat
      To the tread of mournful feet,
      Then the crimson flag shall be
      Martial cloak and shroud for thee."
    The warrior took that banner proud,
    And it was his martial cloak and shroud.




CHAPTER III.

THE BLACK REGULARS OF THE ARMY OF INVASION IN THE SPANISH-AMERICAN
WAR.

     Organization of Negro Regiments in the Regular Army--First
     Move in the War--Chickamauga and Tampa--Note.


Altogether the colored soldiers in the Civil War took part and
sustained casualties in two hundred and fifty-one different
engagements and came out of the prolonged conflict with their
character so well established that up to the present hour they have
been able to hold an important place in the Regular Army of the United
States. No regiment of colored troops in the service was more renowned
at the close of the war or has secured a more advantageous position in
the history of that period than the Fifty-fourth Massachusetts
Regiment of Infantry. Recruited among the free colored people of the
North, many of them coming from Ohio, it was remarkable for the
intelligence and character of its men, and for the high purpose and
noble bearing of its officers. Being granted but half the pay per
month given to white soldiers, the regiment to a man, for eighteen
months refused to receive one cent from the Government. This was a
spectacle that the country could not longer stand. One thousand
volunteers fighting the country's battles without any compensation
rather than submit to a discrimination fatal to their manhood, aroused
such a sentiment that Congress was compelled to put them on the
pay-roll on equal footing with all other soldiers. By them the
question of the black soldier's pay and rations was settled in the
Army of the United States for all time. Every soldier, indeed every
man in the army, except the chaplain, now draws the pay of his grade
without regard to color, hair or race. By the time these lines reach
the public eye it is to be hoped that even the chaplain will be lifted
from his exceptional position and given the pay belonging to his rank
as captain.

(February 2, 1901, the bill became a law giving chaplains the full pay
of their grade.)

More than 185,000 blacks, all told, served in the army of the Union
during the War of the Rebellion, and the losses from their ranks of
men killed in battle were as heavy as from the white troops. Their
bravery was everywhere recognized, and in the short time in which they
were employed, several rose to commissions.

Perhaps the most notable act performed by a colored American during
the war was the capture and delivery to the United States forces of
the rebel steamer Planter, by Robert Smalls, of Charleston. Smalls was
employed as pilot on the Planter, a rebel transport, and was entirely
familiar with the harbors and inlets, of which there are many, on the
South Atlantic coast. On May 13, 1862, the Planter came to her wharf
in Charleston, and at night all the white officers went ashore,
leaving a colored crew of eight men on board in charge of Smalls.
Smalls hastily got his wife and three children on board, and at 2
o'clock on the morning of the 14th steamed out into the harbor,
passing the Confederate forts by giving the proper signals, and when
fairly out of reach, as daylight came, he ran up the Stars and Stripes
and headed his course directly toward the Union fleet, into whose
hands he soon surrendered himself and his ship. The act caused much
favorable comment and Robert Smalls became quite a hero. His
subsequent career has been in keeping with the high promise indicated
by this bold dash for liberty, and his name has received additional
lustre from gallant services performed in the war after, and in
positions of distinguished honor and responsibility in civil life. The
Planter, after being accepted by the United States, became a despatch
boat, and Smalls demonstrating by skill and bravery his fitness for
the position, was finally, as an act of imperative justice, made her
commander.

With the close of the Revolutionary War the prejudice against a
standing army was so great that the army was reduced to scarce six
hundred men, and the Negro as a soldier dropped out of existence. When
the War of 1812 closed sentiment with regard to the army had made but
little advancement, and consequently no place in the service was left
for Negro soldiers. In the navy the Negro still lingered, doing
service in the lower grades, and keeping up the succession from the
black heroes of '76 and 1812. When the War of the Rebellion closed the
country had advanced so far as to see both the necessity of a standing
army, and the fitness of the Negro to form a part of the army; and
from this position it has never receded, and if the lessons of the
Cuban campaign are rightly heeded, it is not likely to recede
therefrom. The value of the Regular Army and of the Black Regular were
both proven to an absolute demonstration in that thin line of blue
that compelled the surrender of Santiago.

In July, 1866, Congress passed an act adding eight new regiments of
infantry and four of calvary to the nineteen regiments of infantry and
six of calvary of which those arms of the Regular Army were at that
time composed, thus making the permanent establishment to consist of
five regiments of artillery, twenty-seven of infantry, and ten of
cavalry. Of the eight new infantry regiments to be formed, four were
to be composed of colored men; and of the four proposed for the
calvary arm, two were to be of colored men. The President was
empowered by the act also to appoint a chaplain for each of the six
regiments of colored troops. Under this law the Ninth and Tenth
Cavalry Regiments were organized.

In 1869 the infantry suffered further reduction, and the four colored
regiments organized under the law of 1866, numbered respectively the
38th, 39th, 40th and 41st, were consolidated into two regiments, and
numbered the 24th and 25th--the 38th and 41st becoming the former, and
the 39th and 40th the latter. Previous to this consolidation the
numbers between the old 19th and the 38th, which was the lowest number
borne by the new colored regiments, were filled in by dividing the old
three batallion regiments in the service, and making of the second and
third batallions of these regiments new regiments. The whole infantry
arm, by the law of 1869, was compressed into twenty-five regiments,
and in that condition the army remains to the present, to wit:[9] Ten
regiments of cavalry, five of artillery and twenty-five of infantry.

The number of men in a company and the number of companies in a
regiment have varied greatly within the past few months. Just previous
to the breaking out of the war a regiment of infantry consisted of
eight companies of about sixty men each, and two skeletonized
companies and the band--the whole organization carrying about five
hundred men; now a regiment of infantry consists of twelve companies
of 106 men each and with the non-commissioned staff numbers twelve
hundred and seventy-four men.

Since 1869, or for a period of thirty years, the colored American has
been represented in the Regular Army by these four regiments and
during this time these regiments have borne more than their
proportionate share in hard frontier service, including all sorts of
Indian campaigning and much severe guard and fatigue duty. The men
have conducted themselves so worthily as to receive from the highest
military authority the credit of being among our best troops. General
Miles and General Merritt,[10] with others who were active leaders in
the Indian wars of the West, have been unstinting in their praise of
the valor and skill of colored soldiers. They proved themselves not
only good individual fighters, but in some instances non-commissioned
officers exhibited marked coolness and ability in command.[11]

From 1869 to the beginning of the Hispano-American War there were in
the Regular Army at some time, as commissioned officers, the following
colored men, all from West Point, all serving with the cavalry, and
none rising higher than first-lieutenant, viz: John H. Alexander, H.O.
Flipper and Charles Young. H.O. Flipper was dismissed; Alexander died,
and Young became major in the volunteer service, and was placed in
command of the Ninth Battalion of Ohio Volunteers, discharging the
duties of his position in such a manner as to command general
satisfaction from his superior officers.[12]

These colored men while cadets at West Point endured hardships
disgraceful to their country, and when entering the army were not
given that cordial welcome by their brother officers, becoming an
"officer and gentleman," both to give and to receive. Of course there
were some noble exceptions, and this class of officers seems to be
steadily increasing, so that now it is no longer necessary, even on
the ground of expediency, to strive to adhere to the rule of only
white men for army officers. Of Alexander and Young it can be said
they have acquitted themselves well, the former enjoying the
confidence and esteem of his associates up to the time of his early
death--an event which caused deep regret--and the latter so impressing
the Governor of his State and the President as to secure for himself
the responsible position which he, at the time of this writing, so
worthily fills. Besides these line officers, five colored chaplains
have been appointed, all of whom have served successfully, one,
however, being dismissed by court-martial after many years of really
meritorious service, an event to be regretted, but by no means without
parallel.

Brief sketches of the history of these four colored regiments, as well
as of the others, have been recently made by members of them and
published in the Journal of the Military Service Institution and
subsequently in a large and beautiful volume edited by
Brigadier-General Theo. F. Rodenbough and Major William L. Haskin,
published by the Institution and designated "The Army of the United
States," a most valuable book of reference. From the sketches
contained therein the following summary is given.

The Twenty-fourth Infantry was organized, as we have seen, from the
38th and 41st Regiments, these two regiments being at the time
distributed in New Mexico, Louisiana and Texas, and the regiment
remained in Texas from the time of its organization in 1869 until
1880. Its first Lieutenant-Colonel was William R. Shafter. It was
from this regiment and the Tenth Cavalry that the escort of Paymaster
Wham was selected which made so brave a stand against a band of
robbers that attacked the paymaster that several of them were given
medals for distinguished gallantry, and others certificates of merit.
The Twenty-fifth Infantry was organized in New Orleans out of the
39th, that was brought from North Carolina for that purpose, and the
40th, that was then in Louisiana. It was organized during the month of
April, 1869, and early in 1870 moved to Texas, where it remained ten
years. In 1880 it moved to the Department of Dakota and remained in
the Northwest until it took the road for the Cuban war.

The Ninth Cavalry was organized in New Orleans during the winter of
1866-67. Its first Colonel was Edward Hatch and its first
Lieutenant-Colonel Wesley Merritt. From 1867 to 1890 it was in almost
constant Indian warfare, distinguishing itself by daring and
hardihood. From 1890 to the opening of the Cuban war it remained in
Utah and Nebraska, engaging in but one important campaign, that
against hostile Sioux during the winter of 1890-91, in which, says the
historian: "The regiment was the first in the field, in November, and
the last to leave, late in the following March, after spending the
winter, the latter part of which was terrible in its severity, under
canvas."

The Tenth Calvary was organized under the same law as was the Ninth,
and at the same time. Its place of rendezvous was Fort Leavenworth,
Kansas, and its first Colonel, Benjamin H. Grierson. This regiment was
the backbone of the Geronimo campaign force, and it finally succeeded
in the capture of that wily warrior. The regiment remained in the
Southwest until 1893, when it moved to Montana, and remained there
until ordered to Chickamauga for the war.

These four regiments were finely officered, well drilled and well
experienced in camp and field, particularly the cavalry regiments, and
it was of them that General Merritt said: "I have always found them
brave in battle." With such training and experience they were well
fitted to take their place in that selected host of fighting men which
afterwards became the Fifth Army Corps, placed under command of
Major-General William R. Shafter, the first Lieutenant-Colonel of the
Twenty-fourth Infantry.

When the news of the blowing up of our great battleship Maine, in the
harbor of Havana, with the almost total loss of her crew, flashed over
the country, carrying sadness to hundreds of homes, and arousing
feelings of deepest indignation whether justly or unjustly, it was
easy to predict that we should soon be involved in war with Spain. The
Cuban question, already chronic, had by speeches of Senators Thurston
and Proctor been brought to such a stage of aggravation that it needed
only an incident to set the war element in motion. That incident was
furnished by the destruction of the Maine. Thenceforth there was no
power in the land sufficient to curb the rapidly swelling tide of
popular hate, which manifested itself in the un-Christian but truly
significant mottoes: "Remember the Maine," "Avenge the Maine," and "To
hell with Spain." These were the outbreathings of popular fury, and
they represented a spirit quite like that of the mob, which was not to
be yielded to implicitly, but which could not be directly opposed.

The President did all in his power to stay this element of our
population and to lead the country to a more befitting attitude. He
and his advisers argued that Spain was to be resisted, and fought if
necessary, not on account of the Maine, not in the spirit of revenge,
but in the interest of humanity, and upon principles sanctioned even
by our holy religion. On behalf of the starving reconcentrados, and in
aid of the noble Cuban patriot, we might justly arm and equip
ourselves for the purpose of driving Spanish rule from the Western
Hemisphere.

This view appealed to all lovers of freedom, to all true patriots, and
to the Christian and philanthropist. It also afforded a superb
opportunity for the old leaders in the South, who were not entirely
relieved from the taint of secession, to come out and reconsecrate
themselves to the country and her flag. Hence, Southern statesmen, who
were utterly opposed to Negroes or colored men having any share in
ruling at home, became very enthusiastic over the aspirations of the
colored Cuban patriots and soldiers. The supporters, followers, and in
a sense, devotees of Maceo and Gomez, were worthy of our aid. The same
men, actuated by the same principles, in the Carolinas, in Louisiana
or in Mississippi, would have been pronounced by the same authorities
worthy of death.

The nation was, however, led into war simply to liberate Cuba from the
iniquitous and cruel yoke of Spain, and to save thousands of
impoverished Cubans from death by starvation. Great care was taken not
to recognize the Cuban government in any form, and it seemed to be
understood that we were to do the fighting both with our navy and our
army, the Cubans being invited to co-operate with us, rather than that
we should co-operate with them. We were to be the liberators and
saviors of a people crushed to the very gates of death. Such was the
platform upon which our nation stood before the world when the first
orders went forth for the mobilization of its forces for war. It was a
position worthy our history and character and gave to our national
flag a prouder meaning than ever. Its character as the emblem of
freedom shone out with awe-inspiring brilliancy amid the concourse of
nations.

While there was such a clamor for war in the newspapers and in the
public speeches of statesmen, both in and out of Congress, it is
remarkable that the utmost serenity prevailed in the army. Officers
and men were ready to fight if the stern necessity came, but they were
not so eager for the death-game as were the numerous editors' whose
papers were getting out extras every half-hour. It was argued by the
officers of rank that the Maine incident added nothing whatever to the
Cuban question; that it did not involve the Spanish Government; that
the whole subject might well be left to arbitration, and full respect
should be given to Spain's disclaimer. It was also held that to rush
into a war in order to prevent a few people from starving, might not
relieve them, and at the same time would certainly cost the lives of
many innocent men. Spain was revising her policy, and the benevolence
of the United States would soon bring bread to the door of every needy
Cuban. Such remarks and arguments as these were used by men who had
fought through one war and were ready to fight, through another if
they must; but who were willing to go to any reasonable length to
prevent it; and yet the men who used such arguments beforehand and
manifested such a shrinking from carnage, are among those to whom the
short Spanish War brought distinction and promotion. To their honor be
it said that the war which gave them fresh laurels was in no sense
brought about through their instigation.

As chaplain of the Twenty-fifth Infantry, stationed with the
headquarters of the regiment at Fort Missoula, where we had been for
ten years, the call for the war met me in the midst of my preparations
for Easter service. One young man, then Private Thomas C. Butler, who
was practicing a difficult solo for the occasion, before the year
closed became a Second Lieutenant, having distinguished himself in
battle; the janitor, who cared for my singing books, and who was my
chief school teacher, Private French Payne, always polite and
everywhere efficient, met his death from a Spanish bullet while on the
reserve before bloody El Caney.

It was on a bright day during the latter part of March and near the
close of the day as I was looking out of the front window of my
quarters that I saw the trumpeter of the guard come out of the
Adjutant's office with a dispatch in his hand and start on a brisk run
toward the quarters of the Commanding Officer. I immediately divined
what was in the wind, but kept quiet. In a few minutes "officers'
call" was sounded, and all the officers of the post hastened to the
administration building to learn the news.

When all were assembled the Commanding Officer desired to know of each
company officer how much time he would need to have his company ready
to move from the post to go to a permanent station elsewhere, and from
all officers how much time they would require to have their families
ready to quit the station. The answers generally were that all could
be ready within a week. It was finally agreed, however, to ask for ten
days.

Immediately the work of preparation began, although none knew where
the regiment was to go. At this time the order, so far as it was
understood at the garrison, was, that two companies were to go to Key
West, Florida, and the other companies of the regiment to Dry
Tortugas. One officer, Lieutenant V.A. Caldell, early saw through the
haze and said: "It means that we will all eventually land in Cuba."
While we were packing, rumors flew through the garrison, as indeed
through the country, thick and fast, and our destination was changed
three or four times a day. One hour we would be going to Key West, the
next to St. Augustine, the next to Tortugas. In this confusion I asked
an old frontier officer where he thought we would really go.
Regarding himself as an indicator and always capable of seeing the
amusing side of a subject, he replied: "I p'int toward Texas." Such
was the state of uncertainty as to destination, and yet all the time
the greatest activity prevailed in making ready for departure. Finally
definite orders came that we were to store our furniture in the large
gymnasium hall at the post and prepare to go in camp at Chickamauga
Park, Georgia.

Our regiment was at the time stationed as follows: Headquarters, four
companies and the band at Fort Missoula; two companies at Fort
Harrison, near Helena, and two companies at Fort Assinniboine, all in
Montana. The arrangements contemplated moving the regiment in two
sections, one composed of the Missoula troops to go over the Northern
Pacific Railroad, the other of the Fort Harrison and Fort Assinniboine
troops to go over the Great Northern Railroad, all to arrive in St.
Paul about the same time.

On the 10th of April, Easter Sunday, the battalion at Fort Missoula
marched out of post quite early in the morning, and at Bitter Root
Station took the cars for their long journey. Officers and men were
all furnished sleeping accommodations on the train. Arriving in the
city of Missoula, for the gratification of the citizens and perhaps to
avoid strain on the bridge crossing the Missoula River, the men were
disembarked from the train and marched through the principal streets
to the depot, the citizens generally turning out to see them off. Many
were the compliments paid officers and men by the good people of
Missoula, none perhaps more pleasing than that furnished by a written
testimonial to the regret experienced at the departure of the
regiment, signed by all the ministers of the city.

As the Twenty-fifth was the first regiment to move in the preparation
for war, its progress from Montana to Chickamauga was a marked event,
attracting the attention of both the daily and illustrated press. All
along the route they were greeted with enthusiastic crowds, who fully
believed the war with Spain had begun. In St. Paul, in Chicago, in
Terre Haute, in Nashville, and in Chattanooga the crowds assembled to
greet the black regulars who were first to bear forward the Starry
Banner of Union and Freedom against a foreign foe. What could be more
significant, or more fitting, than that these black soldiers, drilled
up to the highest standard of modern warfare, cool, brave and
confident, themselves a proof of American liberty, should be called
first to the front in a war against oppression? Their martial tread
and fearless bearing proclaimed what the better genius of our great
government meant for all men dwelling beneath the protection of its
honored flag.

As the Twenty-fifth Infantry was the first regiment to leave its
station, so six companies of it were first to go into camp on the
historic grounds of Chickamauga. Two companies were separated from the
regiment at Chattanooga and forwarded to Key West where they took
station under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel A.S. Daggett. The
remaining six companies, under command of Colonel A.S. Burt, were
conducted by General Boynton to a choice spot on the grounds, where
they pitched camp, their tents being the first erected in that
mobilization of troops which preceded the Cuban invasion, and theirs
being really the first camp of the war.

Soon came the Ninth Cavalry, the Tenth Cavalry and the Twenty-fourth
Infantry. While these were assembling there arrived on the ground also
many white regiments, cavalry, artillery and infantry, and it was
pleasing to see the fraternity that prevailed among black and white
regulars. This was especially noticeable between the Twenty-fifth and
Twelfth. In brigading the regiments no attention whatever was paid to
the race or color of the men. The black infantry regiments were placed
in two brigades, and the black cavalry likewise, and they can be
followed through the fortunes of the war in the official records by
their regimental numbers. During their stay in Chickamauga, and at Key
West and Tampa, the Southern newspapers indulged in considerable
malicious abuse of colored soldiers, and some people of this section
made complaints of their conduct, but the previous good character of
the regiments and the violent tone of the accusations, taken together
with the well-known prejudices of the Southern people, prevented their
complaints from having very great weight. The black soldiers held
their place in the army chosen for the invasion of Cuba, and for that
purpose were soon ordered to assemble in Tampa.

From the 10th of April, when the war movement began with the march of
the Twenty-fifth Infantry out of its Montana stations, until June
14th, when the Army of Invasion cleared Tampa for Cuba--not quite two
months--the whole energy of the War Department had been employed in
preparing the army for the work before it. The beginning of the war is
officially given as April 21st, from which time onward it was declared
a state of war existed between Spain and the United States, but
warlike movements on our side were begun fully ten days earlier, and
begun with a grim definiteness that presaged much more than a practice
march or spring manoeuver.

After arriving at Chickamauga all heavy baggage was shipped away for
storage, and all officers and men were required to reduce their field
equipage to the minimum; the object being to have the least possible
amount of luggage, in order that the greatest possible amount of
fighting material might be carried. Even with all this preparation
going on some officers were indulging the hope that the troops might
remain in camps, perfecting themselves in drill, until September, or
October, before they should be called upon to embark for Cuba. This,
however, was not to be, and it is perhaps well that it was not, as the
suffering and mortality in the home camps were almost equal to that
endured by the troops in Cuba. The suffering at home, also, seemed
more disheartening, because it appeared to be useless, and could not
be charged to any important changes in conditions or climate. It was
perhaps in the interest of humanity that this war, waged for
humanity's sake, should have been pushed forward from its first step
to its last, with the greatest possible dispatch, and that just enough
men on our side were sent to the front, and no more. It is still a
good saying that all is well that ends well.

The Chickamauga and Chattanooga National Military Park, the place
where our troops assembled on their march to Cuba, beautiful by
nature, especially in the full season of spring when the black
soldiers arrived there, and adorned also by art, has, next to
Gettysburg, the most prominent place among the historic battle-fields
of the Civil War. As a park it was established by an act of Congress
approved August 19, 1890, and contains seven thousand acres of rolling
land, partly cleared and partly covered with oak and pine timber.
Beautiful broad roads wind their way to all parts of the ground, along
which are placed large tablets recording the events of those dreadful
days in the autumn of 1863, when Americans faced Americans in bloody,
determined strife. Monuments, judiciously placed, speak with a mute
eloquence to the passer-by and tell of the valor displayed by some
regiment or battery, or point to the spot where some lofty hero gave
up his life. The whole park is a monument, however, and its definite
purpose is to preserve and suitably mark "for historical and
professional military study the fields of some of the most remarkable
manoeuvres and most brilliant fighting in the War of the Rebellion."
The battles commemorated by this great park are those of Chickamauga,
fought on September 19-20, and the battles around Chattanooga,
November 23-25, 1863. The battle of Chickamauga was fought by the Army
of the Cumberland, commanded by Major-General W.S. Rosecrans, on the
Union side, and the Army of Tennessee, commanded by General Braxton
Bragg, on the side of the Confederates. The total effective strength
of the Union forces in this battle was little less than 60,000 men,
that of the Confederates about 70,000. The total Union loss was 16,179
men, a number about equal to the army led by Shatter against Santiago.
Of the number reported as lost, 1,656 were killed, or as many as were
lost in killed, wounded and missing in the Cuban campaign. The
Confederate losses were 17,804, 2,389 being killed, making on both
sides a total killed of 4,045, equivalent to the entire voting
population of a city of over twenty thousand inhabitants. General
Grant, who commanded the Union forces in the battles around
Chattanooga, thus sums up the results: "In this battle the Union army
numbered in round figures about 60,000 men; we lost 752 killed, 4,713
wounded and 350 captured or missing. The rebel loss was much greater
in the aggregate, as we captured and sent North to be rationed there
over 6,100 prisoners. Forty pieces of artillery, over seven thousand
stand of small arms, many caissons, artillery wagons and baggage
wagons fell into our hands. The probabilities are that our loss in
killed was the heavier as we were the attacking party. The enemy
reported his loss in killed at 361, but as he reported his missing at
4,146, while we held over 6,000 of them as prisoners, and there must
have been hundreds, if not thousands, who deserted, but little
reliance can be placed upon this report."

In the battle of Chickamauga, when "four-fifths of the Union Army had
crumbled into wild confusion," and Rosecrans was intent only on saving
the fragments, General Thomas, who had commanded the Federal left
during the two days' conflict, and had borne the brunt of the fight,
still held his position. To him General James A. Garfield reported.
General Gordon Granger, without orders, brought up the reserves, and
Thomas, replacing his lines, held the ground until nightfall, when he
was joined by Sheridan. Bragg won and held the field, but Thomas
effectually blocked his way to Chattanooga, securing to himself
immediately the title of the "Rock of Chickamauga." His wonderful
resolution stayed the tide of a victory dearly bought and actually
won, and prevented the victors from grasping the object for which they
had fought. In honor of this stubborn valor, and in recognition of
this high expression of American tenacity, the camp established in
Chickamauga Park by the assembling army was called Camp George H.
Thomas.

The stay of the colored regulars at Camp George H. Thomas was short,
but it was long enough for certain newspapers of Chattanooga to give
expression to their dislike to negro troops in general and to those in
their proximity especially. The Washington Post, also, ever faithful
to its unsavory trust, lent its influence to this work of defamation.
The leading papers, however, both of Chattanooga and the South
generally, spoke out in rather conciliatory and patronizing tones, and
"sought to restrain the people of their section from compromising
their brilliant display of patriotism by contemptuous flings at the
nation's true and tried soldiers.

The 24th Infantry and the 9th Cavalry soon left for Tampa, Florida,
whither they were followed by the 10th Cavalry and the 25th Infantry,
thus bringing the entire colored element of the army together to
prepare for embarkation. The work done at Tampa is thus described
officially by Lieutenant-Colonel Daggett in general orders addressed
to the 25th Infantry, which he at that time commanded. On August 11th,
with headquarters near Santiago, after the great battles had been
fought and won, he thus reviewed the work of the regiment: "Gathered
from three different stations, many of you strangers to each other,
you assembled as a regiment for the first time in more than
twenty-eight years, on May 7, 1898, at Tampa, Florida. There you
endeavored to solidify and prepare yourselves, as far as the
oppressive weather would permit, for the work that appeared to be
before you." What is here said of the 25th might have been said with
equal propriety of all the regular troops assembled at Tampa.

In the meantime events were ripening with great rapidity. The historic
"first gun" had been fired, and the United States made the first naval
capture of the war on April 22, the coast trader Buena Ventura having
surrendered to the American gunboat Nashville. On the same day the
blockade of Cuban ports was declared and on the day following a call
was issued for 125,000 volunteers. On May 20th the news that a Spanish
fleet under command of Admiral Cervera had arrived at Santiago was
officially confirmed, and a speedy movement to Cuba was determined
upon.

Almost the entire Regular Army with several volunteer regiments were
organized into an Army of Invasion and placed under the command of
Major-General W.R. Shafter with orders to prepare immediately for
embarkation, and on the 7th and 10th of June this army went on board
the transports. For seven days the troops lay cooped up on the vessels
awaiting orders to sail, a rumor having gained circulation that
certain Spanish gunboats were hovering around in Cuban waters awaiting
to swoop down upon the crowded transports. While the Army of Invasion
was sweltering in the ships lying at anchor off Port Tampa, a small
body of American marines made a landing at Guantanamo, and on June
12th fought the first battle between Americans and Spaniards on Cuban
soil. In this first battle four Americans were killed. The next day,
June 13th, General Shafter's army containing the four colored
regiments, excepting those left behind to guard property, sailed for
Cuba.[13]

The whole number of men and officers in the expedition, including
those that came on transports from Mobile, amounted to about seventeen
thousand men, loaded on twenty-seven transports. The colored regiments
were assigned to brigades as follows: The Ninth Cavalry was joined
with the Third and Sixth Cavalry and placed under command of Colonel
Carrol; the Tenth Cavalry was joined with the Rough Riders and First
Regular Cavalry and fell under the command of General Young; the
Twenty-fourth Infantry was joined with the Ninth and Thirteenth
Infantry and the brigade placed under command of Colonel Worth and
assigned to the division commanded by General Kent, who, until his
promotion as Brigadier-General of Volunteers, had been Colonel of the
Twenty-fourth; the Twenty-fifth Infantry was joined with the First and
Fourth Infantry and the brigade placed under command of Colonel Evans
Miles, who had formerly been Major of the Twenty-fifth. All of the
colored regiments were thus happily placed so that they should be in
pleasant soldierly competition with the very best troops the country
ever put in the field, and this arrangement at the start proves how
strongly the black regular had entrenched himself in the confidence of
our great commanders.

Thus sailed from Port Tampa the major part of our little army of
trained and seasoned soldiers, representative of the skill and daring
of the nation.[14] In physique, almost every man was an athlete, and
while but few had seen actual war beyond an occasional skirmish with
Indians, all excepting the few volunteers, had passed through a long
process of training in the various details of marching, camping and
fighting in their annual exercises in minor tactics. For the first
time in history the nation is going abroad, by its army, to occupy the
territory of a foreign foe, in a contest with a trans-Atlantic power.
The unsuccessful invasions of Canada during the Revolutionary War and
the War of 1812 can hardly be brought in comparison with this movement
over sea. The departure of Decatur with his nine ships of war to the
Barbary States had in view only the establishment of proper civil
relations between those petty, half-civilized countries and the United
States. The sailing of General Shafter's army was only one movement in
a comprehensive war against the Kingdom of Spain. More than a month
earlier Commodore Dewey, acting under orders, had destroyed a fleet of
eleven war ships in the Philippines. The purpose of the war was to
relieve the Cubans from an inhumane warfare with their mother country,
and to restore to that unhappy island a stable government in harmony
with the ideas of liberty and justice.

Up to the breaking out of the Spanish War the American policy with
respect to Europe had been one of isolation. Some efforts had been
made to consolidate the sentiment of the Western world, but it had
never been successful. The fraternity of the American Republics and
the attempted construction of a Pan-American policy had been thus far
unfulfilled dreams. Canada was much nearer to the United States,
geographically and socially, than even Mexico, although the latter is
a republic. England, in Europe, was nearer than Brazil. The day came
in 1898, when the United States could no longer remain in political
seclusion nor bury herself in an impossible federation. Washington's
advice against becoming involved in European affairs, as well as the
direct corrollary of the Monroe Doctrine, were to be laid aside and
the United States was to speak out to the world. The business of a
European nation had become our business; in the face of all the world
we resolved to invade her territory in the interest of humanity; to
face about upon our own traditions and dare the opinions and arms of
the trans-Atlantic world by openly launching upon the new policy of
armed intervention in another's quarrel.

While the troops were mobilizing at Tampa preparatory to embarking for
Cuba the question came up as to why there were no colored men in the
artillery arm of the service, and the answer given by a Regular Army
officer was, that the Negro had not brains enough for the management
of heavy guns. It was a trifling assertion, of course, but at this
period of the Negro's history it must not be allowed to pass
unnoticed. We know that white men of all races and nationalities can
serve big guns, and if the Negro cannot, it must be because of some
marked difference between him and them. The officer said it was a
difference in "brains," i.e., a mental difference. Just how the
problem of aiming and firing a big gun differs from that of aiming and
firing small arms is not so easily explained. In both, the questions
of velocity, gravitation, wind and resistance are to be considered and
these are largely settled by mechanism, the adjustment of which is
readily learned; hence the assumption that a Negro cannot learn it is
purely gratuitous. Several of the best rifle shots known on this
continent are Negroes; and it was a Negro who summerized the whole
philosophy of rifle shooting in the statement that it all consists in
knowing _where_ to aim, and _how_ to pull--in knowing just what value
to assign to gravitation, drift of the bullet and force of the wind,
and then in being able to pull the trigger of the piece without
disturbing the aim thus judiciously determined. This includes all
there is in the final science and art of firing a rifle. If the Negro
can thus master the revolver, the carbine and the rifle, why may he
not master the field piece or siege gun?

But an ounce of fact in such things is worth more than many volumes of
idle speculation, and it is remarkable that facts so recent, so
numerous, and so near at hand, should escape the notice of those who
question the Negro's ability to serve the artillery organizations.
Negro artillery, both light and heavy, fought in fifteen battles in
the Civil War with average effectiveness; and some of those who fought
against them must either admit the value of the Negro artilleryman or
acknowledge their own inefficiency. General Fitz-Hugh Lee failed to
capture a Negro battery after making most vigorous attempts to that
end. This attempt to raise a doubt as to the Negro's ability to serve
in the artillery arm is akin to, and less excusable, than that other
groundless assertion, that Negro officers cannot command troops, an
assertion which in this country amounts to saying that the United
States cannot command its army. Both of these assertions have been
emphatically answered in fact, the former as shown above, and the
latter as will be shown later in this volume. These assertions are
only temporary covers, behind which discomfitted and retreating
prejudice is able to make a brief stand, while the black hero of five
hundred battle-fields, marches proudly by, disdaining to lower his gun
to fire a shot on a foe so unworthy. When the Second Massachusetts
Volunteers sent up their hearty cheers of welcome to the gallant old
Twenty-fifth, as that solid column fresh from El Caney swung past its
camp, I remarked to Sergeant Harris, of the Twenty-fifth: "Those men
think you are soldiers." "They know we are soldiers," was his reply.
When the people of this country, like the members of that
Massachusetts regiment, come to know that its black men in uniform are
soldiers, plain soldiers, with the same interests and feelings as
other soldiers, of as much value to the government and entitled from
it to the same attention and rewards, then a great step toward the
solution of the prodigious problem now confronting us will have been
taken.



     Note.--"I had often heard that the physique of the men of
     our regular army was very remarkable, but the first time I
     saw any large body of them, which was at Tampa, they
     surpassed my highest expectations. It is not, however, to be
     wondered at that, for every recruit who is accepted, on the
     average thirty-four are rejected, and that, of course, the
     men who present themselves to the recruiting officer already
     represent a physical 'elite'; but it was very pleasant to
     see and be assured, as I was at Tampa, by the evidences of
     my own eyes and the tape measure, that there is not a guard
     regiment of either the Russian, German or English army, of
     whose remarkable physique we have heard so much, that can
     compare physically, not with the best of our men, but simply
     with the average of the men of our regular army."--Bonsal.


FOOTNOTES:

[9] The army has been reorganized since. See Register.

[10] "My experience in this direction since the war is beyond that of
any officer of my rank in the army. For ten years I had the honor of
being lieutenant-colonel of the Ninth Cavalry, and during most of that
service I commanded garrisons composed in part of the Ninth Cavalry
and other organizations of cavalry and infantry. I have always found
the colored race represented in the army obedient, intelligent and
zealous in the discharge of duty, brave in battle, easily disciplined,
and most efficient in the care of their horses, arms and equipments.
The non-commissioned officers have habitually shown the qualities for
control in their position which marked them as faithful and sensible
in the discharge of their duties. I take pleasure in bearing witness
as above in the interest of the race you represent." WESLEY MERRITT.

[11] See chapter on Colored Officers.

[12] Young is now captain in the Ninth Cavalry.--T.G.S.

[13] The colored regulars were embarked on the following named ships:
The 9th Cavalry on the Miami, in company with the 6th Infantry; the
10th Cavalry on the Leona, in company with the 1st Cavalry; the 24th
Infantry on the City of Washington, in company with one battalion of
the 21st Infantry; the 25th infantry on board the Concho, in company
with the 4th Infantry.

[14] See Note, at the close of this chapter.




CHAPTER IV.

BRIEF SKETCH OF SPANISH HISTORY.


The following brief sketch of Spain, its era of greatness, the causes
leading thereto, and the reasons for its rapid decline, will be of
interest to the reader at this point in the narrative, as it will
bring into view the other side of the impending conflict:

Spain, the first in rank among the second-rate powers of Europe, by
reason of her possessions in the West Indies, especially Cuba, may be
regarded as quite a near neighbor, and because of her connection with
the discovery and settlement of the continent, as well as the
commanding part she at one time played in the world's politics, her
history cannot but awaken within the breasts of Americans a most
lively interest.

As a geographical and political fact, Spain dates from the earliest
times, and the Spanish people gather within themselves the blood and
the traditions of the three great continents of the Old World--Europe,
Asia and Africa--united to produce the mighty Spaniard of the 15th and
16th centuries. It would be an interesting subject for the
anthropologist to trace the construction of that people who are so
often spoken of as possessing the pure blood of Castile, and as the
facts should be brought to view, another proud fiction would dissipate
in thin air, as we should see the Spaniard arising to take his place
among the most mixed of mankind.

The Spain that we are considering now is the Spain that gradually
emerged from a chaos of conflicting elements into the unity of a
Christian nation. The dismal war between creeds gave way to the
greater conflict between religions, when Cross and Crescent contended
for supremacy, and this too had passed. The four stalwart Christian
provinces of Leon, Castile, Aragon and Navarre had become the four
pillars of support to a national throne and Ferdinand and Isabella
were reigning. Spain has now apparently passed the narrows and is
crossing the bar with prow set toward the open sea. She ends her war
with the Moors at the same time that England ends her wars of the
Roses, and the battle of Bosworth's field may be classed with the
capitulation of Granada. Both nations confront a future of about equal
promise and may be rated as on equal footing, as this new era of the
world opens to view.

What was this new era? Printing had been invented, commerce had
arisen, gunpowder had come into use, the feudal system was passing,
royal authority had become paramount, and Spain was giving to the
world its first lessons in what was early stigmatized as the "knavish
calling of diplomacy."

Now began the halcyon days of Spain, and what a breed of men she
produced! Read the story of their conquests in Mexico and Peru, as
told with so much skill and taste by our own Prescott; or read of the
grandeur of her national character, and the wonderful valor of her
troops, and the almost marvelous skill of her Alexander of Parma, and
her Spinola, as described by our great Motley, and you will see
something of the moral and national glory of that Spain which under
Charles V and Philip II awed the world into respectful silence.

Who but men of iron, under a commander of steel, could have conducted
to a successful issue the awful siege of Antwerp, and by a discipline
more dreadful than death, kept for so many years, armed control of the
country of the brave Netherlanders? A Farnese was there, who could
support and command an army, carry Philip and his puerile
idiosyncrasies upon his back and meet the fury of an outraged people
who were fighting on their own soil for all that man holds dear. Never
was wretched cause so ably led, never were such splendid talents so
unworthily employed.

Alexander of Parma, Cortez, the Pizarros, were representatives of that
form of human character that Spain especially developed. Skill and
daring were brought out in dazzling splendor, and success followed
their movements. Take a brief survey of the Empire under Charles V:
Himself Emperor of Germany; his son married to the Queen of England;
Turkey repulsed; France humbled, and all Europe practically within his
grasp. And what was Spain outside of Europe? In America she possessed
territory covering sixty degrees of latitude, owning Mexico, Central
America, Venezuela, New Granada, Peru and Chili, with vast parts of
North America, and the islands of Cuba, Jamaica and St. Domingo. In
Africa and Asia she had large possessions--in a word, the energies of
the world were at her feet. The silver and gold of America, the
manufactures and commerce of the Netherlands, combined to make her the
richest of nations.

The limits of the present purpose do not permit an exhaustive
presentation of her material strength in detail, nor are the means at
hand for making such an exhibit. We must be content with a general
picture, quoted directly from Motley. He says:

"Look at the broad magnificent Spanish Peninsula, stretching across
eight degrees of latitude and ten of longtitude, commanding the
Atlantic and the Mediterranean, with a genial climate, warmed in
winter by the vast furnace of Africa, and protected from the scorching
heats of summer by shady mountain and forest, and temperate breezes
from either ocean. A generous southern territory, flowing with oil and
wine, and all the richest gifts of a bountiful nature--splendid
cities--the new and daily expanding Madrid, rich in the trophies of
the most artistic period of the modern world; Cadiz, as populous at
that day as London, seated by the straits where the ancient and modern
systems of traffic were blending like the mingling of the two oceans;
Granada, the ancient, wealthy seat of the fallen Moors; Toledo,
Valladolid, and Lisbon, chief city of the recently conquered kingdom
of Portugal, counting with its suburbs a larger population than any
city excepting Paris, in Europe, the mother of distant colonies, and
the capital of the rapidly-developing traffic with both the
Indies--these were some of the treasures of Spain herself. But she
possessed Sicily also, the better portion of Italy, and important
dependencies in Africa, while the famous maritime discoveries of the
age had all enured to her aggrandizement. The world seemed suddenly to
have expanded its wings from East to West, only to bear the fortunate
Spanish Empire to the most dizzy heights of wealth and power. The most
accomplished generals, the most disciplined and daring infantry the
world has ever known, the best equipped and most extensive navy, royal
and mercantile, of the age, were at the absolute command of the
sovereign. Such was Spain."

Such is not Spain to-day. A quite recent writer, speaking of Spain
before the war, said, that although Spain in extent holds the sixth
place in the European states, "it really now subsists merely by the
sufferance of stronger nations." Thus has that nation, which three
centuries ago dominated the world, lost both its position and its
energy.

Without attempting to sketch chronologically, either this rise or this
decline, let us rather direct our efforts to an inquiry into the
causes of both the one and the other.

In attempting to explain the greatness of Spain we must give first
place to the vigor of the Spanish race. The great Spaniard was a
mighty compound. He had the blood of Rome mingled with the awful
torrent that gave birth to the soulless Goths and Vandals. In him also
flowed the hot blood of the Moors. He was both sturdy and fiery; he
had the fervor of the South with the tenacity of the North; the pride
of the Roman with the passion of the Moor. The Spanish race was
emphatically a rich race.

And then we must remember that this race had been forged in war.
Century after century, from the earliest times, they had lived with
their arms in their hands. First came the long war between the Arian
Vandals, and the Trinitarian natives; then the seven-hundred-year war
with the followers of Mahomed. The whole mission of life to them was
to fight.

Naturally there was developed in the people at large the most complete
unification and subjection. Individualism gave place almost entirely
to the common weal, and the spectacle was presented of a nation with
no political questions. Maccaulay maintains that human nature is such
that aggregations of men will always show the two principles of
radicalism and conservatism, and that two parties will exist in
consequence, one composed of those who are ever looking to a brighter
future, the other of those who are ever seeking to restore a
delightful past; but no such phenomena appear in the ascending period
of Spain's history. The whole nation moved as an organized army,
steadily forward, until its zenith was reached. This solidity was a
marked element of its strength.

Mr. Buckle recognizes this, and accounts for the harmonious movements
of the nation by the influence of two leading principles, which he is
pleased to call superstition and loyalty. The Arab invasion had
pressed upon the Christians with such force that it was only by the
strictest discipline that the latter had managed to survive. To secure
such discipline, and at the same time supply the people with the
steady enthusiasm necessary to support a war from century to century,
all the terrors and all the glories that could be derived from
religion were employed. The church and the state, the prince and the
priest, became as one, and loyalty and religion, devotion to the
standard and to the cross, were but different names for the same
principles and actions. Hence Spain emerged to greatness without the
least dream of liberty of either person, conscience or thought. Her
rallying cry was: For the Prince and the Church; not, For God and
Liberty. She went up to greatness the most loyal and the most
religious of nations; but Liberty, Justice and Truth were not upon her
banners.

Look over the territory settled and conquered by her, and what do we
see? Columbus, sailing under Spain, names the first land he discovers
San Salvador; the first settlement made in this country is St.
Augustine; the second, Sante Fe. Look down over the southern half of
our continent and such names as Espirito Santo, Corpus Christi, San
Diego, San Juan, San Jose, San Domingo attest the religious zeal of
the conquerors. They were missionaries of the Cross, robbing the
people of their gold and paying them off with religion.

Steadfast in the faith and sturdy in her loyalty, Spain resisted all
innovations with respect to her religious beliefs, and all
insurrections against her government. Her Alva and her Torquemada but
illustrated how strong was her conservatism, while her Isabella and
her Philip II show how grand and comprehensive and how persistent was
her aggressiveness, under the idea of spreading and upholding the true
faith. She not only meant to hold all she had of wealth and power, but
she aspired to universal dominion; already chief, she desired to be
sole, and this in the interest and name of the Holy Church.

The Reformation did not disturb Spain; it was crushed out within
twenty years. The spirit of liberty that had been growing in England
since Bosworth's Field, and that was manifesting itself in Germany and
the Netherlands, and that had begun to quiver even in France, did not
dare stir itself in Spain. Spain was united, or rather, was solidity
itself, and this solidity was both its strength and its death. England
was not so united, and England went steadily onward and upward; but
Spain's unity destroyed her, because it practically destroyed
individualism and presented the strange paradox of a strong nation of
weak men.

As a machine Spain in the sixteenth century was a marvel of power; as
an aggregation of thinking men, it was even then contemptible.
Ferdinand, Charles V and Philip II were able and illustrious rulers,
and they appeared at a time when their several characters could tell
on the immediate fortunes of Spain. They were warriors, and the nation
was entirely warlike. During this period the Spaniard overran the
earth, not that he might till the soil, but that he might rob the man
who did. With one hand he was raking in the gold and silver of Mexico
and Peru; with the other confiscating the profits of the trade and
manufactures of the Low Countries--and all in the name of the Great
God and Saints!

How was Spain overthrown? The answer is a short one. Spain, under
Philip II staked her all upon a religious war against the awakening
age. She met the Reformation within her own borders and extinguished
it; but thought had broken loose from its chains and was abroad in the
earth. England had turned Protestant, and Elizabeth was on the throne;
Denmark, Norway and Sweden, indeed all countries except Spain and
Italy had heard the echoes from Luther's trumpet blast. Italy
furnished the religion, and Spain the powder, in this unequal fight
between the Old and the New. Spain was not merely the representative
of the old, she WAS the old, and she armed her whole strength in its
behalf.

Here was a religion separated from all moral principle and devoid of
all softening sentiment--its most appropriate formula being, death to
all heretics. Death--not to tyrants, not to oppressors, not to robbers
and men-stealers--but death to _heretics_. It was this that equipped
her Armada.

The people were too loyal and too pious to THINK, and so were hurled
in a solid mass against the armed thought of the coming age, and a
mighty nation crumbled as in a day. With the destruction of her Armada
her warlike ascendancy passed and she had nothing to put in its place.
She had not tillers of the soil, mechanics or skilled merchants.
Business was taking the place of war all over the world, but Spain
knew only religion and war, hence worsted in her only field, she was
doomed.

From the days of Philip II her decline was rapid. Her territory
slipped from her as rapidly as it had been acquired. Her great domains
on our soil are now the seat of thriving communities of
English-speaking people. The whole continent of South America has
thrown off her yoke, though still retaining her language, and our
troops now embarked from Port Tampa are destined to wrest from her the
two only remaining colonies subject to her sway in the Western
World,--Cuba and Porto Rico. With all her losses hitherto, Spain has
not learned wisdom. Antagonistic to truth and liberty, she seems to
sit in the shadow of death, hugging the delusions that have betrayed
her, while all other people of earth are pressing onward toward light
and liberty.

The struggle in Cuba had been going on for years, and in that colony
of less than two millions of inhabitants, many of whom were Spaniards,
there was now an army four times as large as the standing army of the
United States. Against this army and against the Government of Spain a
revolt had been carried on previous to the present outbreak for a
period of ten years, and which had been settled by concessions on the
part of the home government. The present revolt was of two years'
standing when our government decided to interfere. The Cubans had
maintained disorder, if they had not carried on war; and they had
declined to be pacified. In their army they experienced no color
difficulties. Gomez, Maceo and Quintin Banderas were generals honored
and loved, Maceo especially coming to be the hero and idol of the
insurgents of all classes. And it can truthfully be said that no man
in either the Cuban or Spanish army, in all the Cuban struggle
previous to our intervention, has earned a loftier fame as patriot,
soldier and man of noble mould than ANTONIO MACEO.

Cuba, by far the most advanced of all the West Indian colonies; Cuba,
essentially Spanish, was destined to be the battle ground between our
troops and the veterans of Spain. The question to be settled was that
of Spain's sovereignty. Spain's right to rule over the colonies of
Cuba and Porto Rico was disputed by the United States, and this
question, and this alone, is to be settled by force of arms. Further
than this, the issue does not go. The dictum of America is: Spain
shall not rule. The questions of Annexation, Expansion and Imperialism
were not before us as we launched our forces to drive Spain out of the
West Indies. The Cuban flag was closely associated with our own
standard popularly, and "Cuba Libre" was a wide-spread sentiment in
June, 1898. "We are ready to help the Cubans gain their liberty" was
the honest expression of thousands who felt they were going forward in
a war for others.




CHAPTER V.

PASSAGE, LANDING, AND FIRST BATTLE IN CUBA.

     The Tenth Cavalry at Guasimas--The "Rescue of the Rough
     Riders"--Was There an Ambush?--Notes.


"The passage to Santiago was generally smooth and uneventful," says
General Shafter in his official report. But when the fact is called to
mind that the men had been on board a week before sailing, and were a
week more on the passage, and that "the conveniences on many of the
transports in the nature of sleeping accommodations, space for
exercise, closet accommodations, etc., were not all that could have
been desired," and that the opinion was general throughout the army
that the travel ration was faulty, it cannot be doubted that the trip
was a sore trial to the enlisted men at least. The monotonous days
passed in the harbor at Port Tampa, while waiting for orders to sail,
were unusually trying to the men. They were relieved somewhat by
bathing, swimming, gaming and chatting on the coming events. A soldier
who was in one of the colored regiments describes the inside life of
one of the transports as follows: "After some miles of railroad travel
and much hustling we were put on board the transport. I say _on
board_, but it is simply because we cannot use the terms _under
board_. We were huddled together below two other regiments and under
the water line, in the dirtiest, closest, most sickening place
imaginable. For about fifteen days we were on the water in this dirty
hole, but being soldiers we were compelled to accept this without a
murmur. We ate corn beef and canned tomatoes with our hard bread
until we were anything but half way pleased. In the fifth or sixth day
out to sea the water furnished us became muddy or dirty and well
flavored with salt, and remained so during the rest of the journey.
Then, the ship's cooks, knowing well our condition made it convenient
to themselves to sell us a glass of clean ice water and a small piece
of bread and tainted meat for the sum of seventy-five cents, or one
dollar, as the case might be."

A passage from Port Tampa, around the eastern end of Cuba, through the
Windward Passage, even in June, is ordinarily pleasant. On the deck of
a clean steamer, protected from the sun's rays by a friendly awning,
it may be put down as nearly an ideal pleasure trip; but crowded into
freight ships as these men were, many of them clad in thick and
uncomfortable clothing, reduced to the uninviting travel ration,
compelled to spend most of the time below decks, occupied with
thoughts of home and friends, and beset with forebodings of coming
events, it was very far from being to them a pastime. Of the thousands
who are going to Cuba to magnify the American flag, not all will
return. Occasionally the gay music of the bands would relieve the dull
routine and cause the spirits to rise under the effects of some
enlivening waltz or stirring patriotic air; or entering a school of
flying fish the men would be entertained to see these broad-finned
creatures dart from the waves like arrows from the bow, and after a
graceful flight of perhaps near two hundred yards drop again into the
sea; but taken altogether it was a voyage that furnishes little for
the historian.

The transports were so arranged as to present an interesting and
picturesque spectacle as they departed from our shores on their ocean
march. Forming in three columns, with a distance of about 1,000 yards
between the columns, and the vessels in the columns being distanced
from one another about 400 yards, the fleet was convoyed from Port
Tampa by small naval vessels until it reached a point between the Dry
Tortugas and Key West. Here it was met by the noble battleship Indiana
and nine other war vessels, thus making a convoy altogether of fifteen
fighting craft. Transports and convoy now made an armada of more than
forty ships, armed and manned by the audacious modern republic whose
flag waved from every masthead. Thus spreading out over miles of
smooth sea, moving quietly along by steam, carrying in its arms the
flower of the American army, every man of which was an athlete, this
fleet announced to the world the grim purpose of a nation aroused.

The weather from the time of leaving Port Tampa continued fine until
the fleet entered the passage between the western coast of Hayti and
the eastern end of Cuba, known as the Windward Passage, when the
breeze freshened and a rough sea began, continuing more or less up to
the time of landing. Rounding this eastern coast of Cuba the fleet
headed its course westerly and on the morning of the 20th was able to
determine its position as being off Guantanamo Bay, about fifty miles
east of Santiago. Here, eight days before, the first battle on Cuban
soil, in which four American marines were killed, had been fought.
About noon on the same day, the fleet came to a halt off Santiago
harbor, or a little to the west of the entrance to it, and Admiral
Sampson came on board. He and General Shafter soon after went ashore
to consult the Cuban General, Garcia, who was known to be in that
vicinity with about 4,000 well armed troops.

The voyage over, and the men having been crowded together on
shipboard for nearly two weeks, it was now expedient to get them on
shore as soon as possible. But it was necessary to find out beforehand
what defences were along the coast, and what forces of the enemy were
likely to be encountered in landing. The fleet lay off from the shore
about a mile, and it was no small undertaking to convey the 17,000 men
on board with all their arms and equipments to the shore in small
boats over a rough sea, especially should the landing be disputed. It
was to arrange for the landing and also to map out a general plan of
campaign that the three great leaders, Shafter, Sampson and Garcia met
at Aserradores on the afternoon of June 20th as the American fleet
stood guard over the harbor of Santiago.

General Garcia was already aware of the coming of the fleet, having
received a message from Major-General Miles two weeks previous. The
letter of General Miles ran as follows:


     Headquarters of the Army,
     In the Field, Tampa, Fla., June 2, 1898.

     Dear General:--I am very glad to have received your
     officers, General Enrique Collazo and Lieut.-Col. Carlos
     Hernandez, the latter of whom returns to-night with our best
     wishes for your success.

     It would be a very great assistance if you could have as
     large a force as possible in the vicinity of the harbor of
     Santiago de Cuba, and communicate any information by signals
     which Colonel Hernandez will explain to you either to our
     navy or to our army on its arrival, which we hope will be
     before many days.

     It would also assist us very much if you could drive in and
     harass any Spanish troops near or in Santiago de Cuba,
     threatening or attacking them at all points, and preventing,
     by every means, any possible re-enforcement coming to that
     garrison. While this is being done, and before the arrival
     of our army, if you can seize and hold any commanding
     position to the east or west of Santiago de Cuba, or both,
     that would be advantageous for the use of our artillery, it
     will be exceedingly gratifying to us."

To this General Garcia replied that he would "take measures at once to
carry out your (Miles') recommendation, but concentration of forces
will require some time. Roads bad and Cubans scattered. Will march
without delay." Admiral Sampson also cabled the Secretary of the Navy
that Garcia "regards his (Miles') wishes and suggestions as orders,
and immediately will take measures to concentrate forces at the points
indicated, but he is unable to do so as early as desired on account of
his expedition at Banes Port, Cuba, but will march without delay. All
of his subordinates are ordered to assist to disembark the United
States troops and to place themselves under orders." It was in
compliance with these requests that General Garcia had the five
thousand troops so near Santiago at the time he welcomed Shafter and
Sampson to his camp, as mentioned above, and there is every necessary
evidence that these Cuban troops took part in the fight about
Santiago. Says General Miles of Garcia: "He had troops in the rear as
well as on both sides of the garrison at Santiago before the arrival
of our troops."

It was agreed that the force of five hundred men under General
Castillo, posted near Daiquiri, should be increased to 1,000, and
should be prepared to make an attack upon the rear of the Spanish
garrison at Daiquiri on the morning of the 22nd, at which time the
debarkation would begin. General Rabi with about 500 men was also to
attack Cabanas at the same time, in the same manner, the transports
and war vessels so manoeuvring as to give the impression that a
landing was to be made at that place. While these attacks in the rear
were distracting the garrisons, the navy, by order of Admiral Sampson,
was to start up a vigorous bombardment of all the villages along the
coast, thus clearing the shore for the landing of the army. Thus did
the conference unite the hands of Americans and Cubans in the fight
against Spain on Cuban soil, and each was pledged to the other by the
expressions of good will. Having accomplished its work the important
conference closed, Admiral Sampson and General Shafter to return to
their ships, and General Garcia to carry out the part of the work
assigned to him, which he did with fidelity and success.[15]

According to orders published on the 20th, General Lawton's Division,
known as the Second Division, Fifth Army Corps, was to disembark
first. This Division contained the three following Brigades: The
First, General Ludlow's, composed of the Eighth and Twenty-second
Infantry (regulars) and the Second Massachusetts Volunteer Infantry;
the Second Brigade, General Miles', composed of the Fourth and
Twenty-fifth Infantry (regulars); the Third Brigade, General
Chaffee's, containing the Seventh, Twelfth and Seventeenth Infantry
(regulars). Next to follow was General Bates' Brigade, which was to
act as reserve to Lawton's Division. This Brigade consisted of the
Third and Twentieth Infantry (regulars) and one squadron of the Second
Cavalry, the only mounted troops in Shafter's army. The cavalry,
however, were not to disembark with the Brigade, but were to be the
last troops to leave the transports. After Bates' Brigade, was to
follow Wheeler's Dismounted Cavalry Division, containing the two
following Brigades: The First, composed of the Third, Sixth and Ninth
Cavalry (regulars); the Second, composed of the First and Tenth
Cavalry (regulars) and the First Volunteer Cavalry (Rough Riders). To
follow the Cavalry Division was to come the First Division, General
Kent's, containing the following troops: The First Brigade, General
Hawkins', consisting of the Sixth and Sixteenth Infantry (regulars)
and the Seventy-first New York Volunteer Infantry; the Second Brigade,
General Pearson's, consisting of the Second, Tenth and Twenty-first
Infantry (regulars); the Third Brigade, Colonel Wikoffs, made up of
the Ninth, Thirteenth and Twenty-fourth Infantry (regulars). Then,
lastly, was to depart the squadron of mounted cavalry.

Thus prepared, both on board the ships and on shore, the morning of
the 22nd dawned to witness the beginning of mighty operations. The war
vessels, drawn up in proper order, early began to hurl shot and shell
upon the towns, forts, blockhouses and clumps of trees that could be
discovered along the shore. The cannonading lasted between two and
three hours and was furious throughout. Meanwhile General Lawton's
Division began the work of going ashore. The sea was rough and the
passage to the shore was made in small boats furnished from the
transports and from the naval vessels, towed by steam launches
belonging to the navy. The larger of the boats were capable of
carrying ten or twelve men each, while the smaller ones could carry
but six or seven. During the passage to the shore several of the men
who had escaped thus far, were taken with seasickness, greatly to the
amusement of their more hardy companions. The landing was made at a
pier which had been used formerly as a railroad pier, but was now
abandoned and somewhat dilapidated. To get from the boats to the pier
in this rough sea was the most perilous part of the whole trip from
Tampa to Cuba. As the boats would rise on the waves almost level with
the landing place it was necessary to leap quickly from the boat to
the shore. In this way two cavalrymen of the Tenth lost their lives,
falling into the sea with their equipments on and sinking before help
could reach them. Some of the boats were rowed ashore and made a
landing on the beach some distance from the pier. By this method some
men of the Twenty-fifth tried to be the first to land, but failed,
that regiment landing, however, in the first body of troops to go
ashore, and being the second in order, in the invasion of the island.
By night of the 22nd more than one-third of the troops were on shore,
and by the evening of the 24th the whole army was disembarked
according to the program announced at the beginning, the squadron of
cavalry coming in at the close of the march to the shore.

The only national movement on our part deserving to be brought into
comparison with the expedition against the Spanish power in Cuba, is
that of fifty years earlier, when General Scott sailed at the head of
the army of invasion against Mexico. Some of the occurrences of that
expedition, especially connected with its landing, should be carefully
studied, and if the reports which have reached the public concerning
it are truthful, we would do well to consider how far the methods then
in use could be applied now. Scribner's recent history, published just
before the outbreak of the Spanish War, tells the story of that
expedition, so far as it tells it at all, in the following sentence:
"On the 7th of March, the fleet with Scott's army came to anchor a few
miles south of Vera Cruz, and two days later he landed his whole
force--nearly twelve thousand men--by means of surf-boats." A writer
in a recent number of _The Army and Navy Journal_ says General Worth's
Division of 4,500 men were landed in one hour, and the whole force was
landed in six hours, without accident or confusion. In the prosecution
of that unholy war, which lasted about a year, nearly three thousand
men were lost in battle and about as many more by disease, peace being
finally made by the cession of territory on the part of Mexico, the
United States paying in return much more than the territory was
worth. The twenty millions paid to Texas probably in great part went
into the coffers of the patriots who occupied that region, some of
whom had not been known as desirable citizens in the parts from which
they came, and had manifested their patriotism by leaving their
country for their country's good. The fifteen millions handed over to
Mexico looks like a contribution to a conscience fund, and an
atonement offered for an assault without provocation. The country
gained Arizona, New Mexico, California and finally Texas, but it lost
six thousand good men, the cost of the war, and all told, in
negotiations, about thirty million dollars, besides. However, it is
not always profitable to look up the harvests of war. There are always
two--the harvest of gain, and the harvest of loss. Death and debt are
reapers, as well as are honor and extent of territory.

The feelings of the six thousand American troops who landed on Cuban
soil on June 22nd, 1898, may well be imagined. Although they felt the
effects of the confinement to which they had been subjected while on
shipboard, there was very little sickness among them. Again possessed
of the free use of their limbs they swarmed the beach and open space
near the landing, making themselves at home, and confronting the
difficulties and perils that lay before them with a courage born of
national pride. Before them were the mountains with their almost
impassable roads, the jungles filled with poisonous plants and the
terrible prickly underbrush and pointed grass, in which skulked the
land crab and various reptiles whose bite or sting was dangerous;
twenty miles of this inhospitable country lay between them and
Santiago, their true objective. And somewhere on the road to that city
they knew they were destined to meet a well-trained foe, skilled in
all the arts of modern warfare, who would contest their advance. The
prospect, however, did not unnerve them, although they could well
conjecture that all who landed would not re-embark. Some in that six
thousand were destined never again to set foot on shipboard. Out of
the Twenty-fifth Infantry and the Tenth Cavalry men were to fall both
before Spanish bullets and disease ere these organizations should
assemble to return to their native shores. These thoughts did not
prevent the men from taking advantage of what nature had to offer
them.

"We landed in rowboats, amid, and after the cessation of the
bombardment of the little hamlet and coast by the men-of-war and
battle-ships," writes a brave soldier of the Twenty-fifth Infantry,
and adds immediately: "We then helped ourselves to cocoanuts which we
found in abundance near the landing." Ordinarily this statement, so
trivial and apparently unimportant, would not merit repetition, but in
its connection here it is significant as showing the immediate
tendency of the men to resort to the fruits of the country, despite
all warnings to the contrary. The two weeks' experience on board the
transports had made the finding of cocoanuts an event to be noted, and
the dry pulp and strongly flavored milk of this tropical fruit became
extremely grateful to the palate, even if not altogether safe for the
stomach. If ripe, however, the cocoanut could scarcely be more
ungenial to many, than the raw, canned tomatoes upon which they had in
part subsisted during the voyage. It is to be added that this report
of the finding of the cocoanuts is not the report of an old soldier,
but of a young and intelligent, first enlistment man.

Lawton's Division soon after landing, was ordered to move forward in
the direction of Santiago, on the road leading past Siboney. A staff
officer, writing of that movement, says: "General Lawton, with his
Division, in obedience to this order, pushed forward from Daiquiri
about five miles, when night overtook him and he bivouacked on the
road." An old soldier of the Twenty-fifth, writing me from the
hospital in Tampa, Florida, July 22nd, says of the same event: "After
the regiment landed we marched about four and a half miles through the
mountains; then we made camp." The old soldier says nothing of
cocoanuts, but makes his statement with as much accuracy as possible,
and with no waste of words. The novice describing the same thing says:
"A short distance ahead (from the shore) we bivouacked for the night.
We were soon lying in dreamland, so far from friends and home, indeed,
on a distant, distant shore." These two extracts show at once the
difference between the soldier produced by years of trial and training
on our plains, and the soldier who but yesterday was a civilian. With
the one the march is a short distance; with the other it is about four
and a half miles; one reports that they "made camp," the other talks
of dreamland, friend, home and distant shore; one expresses his
feelings, the other shows control of feeling and reserve in
expression.

That first night on Cuban soil, the night following June 22nd, was one
without events, but one of great concern to the commanders on shore
and on the fleet. The work of disembarking had gone on successfully,
and already about six thousand men were on shore. Nearly the whole of
Lawton's Division, with Bates' independent brigade, were bivouacked,
as we have seen, about five miles from Daiquiri, exactly where the
railroad crosses the wagon road leading to Siboney. General Wheeler's
troops--one brigade--were encamped on the open ground near the
landing, the remainder of his division being still on the transports.
The Twenty-fifth Infantry was with Lawton; the Tenth Cavalry was
ashore with Wheeler's troops. A detachment of the Twenty-fifth was put
on outpost duty on that night of their landing, and five miles within
Cuban territory they tramped their solitary beats, establishing and
guarding the majestic authority of the United States.

Lawton's orders were to seize and hold the town of Siboney at which
place Kent's Division, containing the Twenty-fourth, was to land. It
was then intended that the whole army should advance as rapidly as
would be consistent with supplying the men with rations toward
Santiago. Siboney was to be the base of supplies, and from this point
ammunition and food were to be conveyed to the front by wagons and
pack trains. General Shafter also intended that Lawton with his
division should lead the advance upon Santiago, but circumstances
beyond his control brought about a different result. On the morning of
the 23rd Lawton's division was in motion early, and before half-past
ten o'clock he was able to report that the Spaniards had evacuated
Siboney and were in full retreat, pursued by a body of Cubans under
direction of General Castillo; that the town was in his hands, and he
had also captured one locomotive and nearly one hundred cars loaded
with coal.

General Young's brigade of General Wheeler's cavalry division, got on
shore on the afternoon of the 23rd and after landing received verbal
orders to move out with three days' rations "to a good camping place
between Juraguacito and Siboney, on the road leading to Santiago de
Cuba." In obedience to these orders, at 4.30 in the afternoon Young
with the Rough Riders and a squadron from each of the First and Tenth
Regular Cavalry moved from the bivouack near the landing and arrived
at Siboney at about 7 o'clock. When General Young arrived at Siboney
he had with him the Rough Riders, the other troops having been delayed
by the crowded condition of the trail and the difficulty of following
after nightfall. Although these troops are always spoken of as
cavalry, the reader must not forget that they were dismounted and in
marching and fighting were the same as infantry.

General Young on arriving at Siboney reported to General Wheeler, who
had preceded him to the same place. The statements of the several
commanders here appear somewhat conflicting, although not
inexplicable. General Lawton says: "Yesterday afternoon, late, General
Wheeler and staff arrived and established his headquarters within the
limits of my command. Saw him after dark. Late last night Colonel
Wood's regiment of dismounted cavalry (Rough Riders) passed through my
camp at Division Headquarters, and later General Young, with some of
the dismounted Cavalry, and early this morning others of the
dismounted cavalry." Wheeler says that "in obedience to instructions
from the Major-General Commanding," given to him in person, he
proceeded, on June 23rd, to Siboney, but does not say at what hour. He
says he "rode out to the front and found that the enemy had halted and
established themselves at a point about three miles from Siboney." He
then informs us that "at 8 o'clock on that evening of the 23rd General
Young reached Siboney with eight troops of Colonel Wood's regiment (A,
B, D, E, F, G, K and L), 500 strong; Troops A, B, G and K, of the
First Cavalry, in all 244, and Troops A, B, E and I, of the Tenth
Cavalry, in all 220 men, making a total force of 964 men, which
included nearly all of my command which had disembarked. These troops
had marched from Daiquiri, 11 miles. With the assistance of General
Castillo a rough map of the country was prepared and the position of
the enemy fully explained, and I determined to make an attack."
Lieutenant Miley says that the whole brigade of Wheeler's troops
arrived in Siboney about dark and were occupying the same ground as
General Lawton ("In Cuba With Shafter," p. 76.) General Young says
that after reporting to General Wheeler he "asked and obtained from
General Wheeler authority to make a reconnoisance in force" for the
purpose of obtaining "positive information * * * as to the position
and movements of the enemy in front."

The distance from Daiquiri to Siboney was but eleven miles, and as the
troops left the former place at 4.30 it is probable that they were all
bivouacked near Siboney before 9 o'clock, as they were all together,
according to General Wheeler's report, at 5.45 on the morning of the
24th. General Young having discovered that there were two roads or
trails leading from Siboney northward toward the town of Sevilla
determined to make his reconnoisance by both these trails. He directed
Colonel Wood to move by the western trail and to keep a careful
lookout and to attack any Spaniards he might encounter, being careful
to join his right in the event of an engagement, with the left of the
column advancing by the eastern trail. Colonel Wood's column was the
left column and was composed of the Rough Riders only. The column
marching by the eastern trail was composed of the First and Tenth
Cavalry (regulars) and was under the command of General Young. It was
the intention of General Young by this column to gain the enemy's
left, and thus attack in front and left. As early as 7.20 a.m. Captain
Mills discovered the enemy exactly as had been described by General
Castillo. When this was done word was sent to Colonel Wood, who was
making his way to the front over a more difficult route than the one
by which General Young's column had marched. A delay was therefore
made on the part of General Young in order that the attack should
begin on both flanks at the same time. During this delay General
Wheeler arrived and was informed of the plans and dispositions for the
attack, and after examining the position gave his approval of what
had been done, whereupon General Young ordered the attack. General
Wheeler in speaking of the same event says: "General Young and myself
examined the position of the enemy. The lines were deployed and I
directed him to open fire with the Hotchkiss gun. The enemy replied
and the firing immediately became general." There can be no question
as to the planning of this fight nor as to the direction of the
American force in the fight so far as any general direction was
possible. Colonel Wood directed one column and General Young another,
while the plan of the attack undoubtedly originated with General
Young. General Wheeler conveys as much when he says: "General Young
deserves special commendation for his cool deliberate and skillful
management." General Young, if only the commander of the right column
consisting of two squadrons of regular cavalry, had not as large a
command, nor as difficult and important a one as had Colonel Wood, and
hence is not deserving of special commendation except upon the general
ground that he had supervision over the whole battle. This position is
taken by General Shafter in his report, who though admitting the
presence of the Division Commander, credits the battle to General
Young, the commander of the brigade. The reconnoissance in force for
which Young had obtained authority from General Wheeler on the night
of the 23rd had developed into a battle, and the plan had evolved
itself from the facts discovered. This plan General Wheeler approved,
but in no such way as to take the credit from its originator; and it
is doubtless with reference both to the plan and the execution that he
bestows on General Young the mead of praise. This statement of fact
does not in the least detract from either the importance or the
praiseworthiness of the part played by Colonel Wood. Both he and the
officers and men commanded by him received both from General Young
and from the division commander the most generous praise. The advance
of Wood's column was made with great difficulty owing to the nature of
the ground, and according to General Young's belief, he was in the
rear when at 7.20 in the morning Captain Mills discovered the enemy,
and a Cuban guide was dispatched to warn Wood, and a delay made to
allow time for him to come up. Colonel Wood, on the other hand, claims
to have discovered the enemy at 7.10 and to have begun action almost
immediately, so that it turned out as Young had planned, and "the
attack of both wings was simultaneous." The Spaniards were posted on a
range of high hills in the form of a "V," the opening being toward
Siboney, from which direction the attack came.

From Colonel Wood's report it appears that soon after the firing began
he found it necessary to deploy five troops to the right, and left,
leaving three troops in reserve. The enemy's lines being still beyond
his, both on the right and on the left, he hastily deployed two more
troops, which made the lines now about equal in length. The firing was
now "exceedingly heavy," and much of it at short range, but on account
of the thick underbrush it was not very effective; "comparatively few
of our men were injured." Captain Capron at this time received his
mortal wound and the firing became so terrific that the last remaining
troop of the reserve was absorbed by the firing line, and the whole
regiment ordered to advance very slowly. The Spanish line yielded and
the advance soon showed that in falling back the enemy had taken a new
position, about three hundred yards in front of the advancing
regiment. Their lines extended from 800 to 1,000 yards, and the firing
from their front was "exceedingly heavy" and effective. A "good many
men" were wounded, "and several officers," says Colonel Wood's
report. Still the advance was kept up, and the Spanish line was
steadily forced back. "We now began," says Colonel Wood, "to get a
heavy fire from a ridge on our right, which enfiladed our line." The
reader can at once see that although the Rough Riders were advancing
heroically, they were now in a very serious situation, with an
exceedingly heavy and effective fire striking them in front, and a
heavy, enfilading fire raking them from the right. Their whole
strength was on the line, and these two fires must have reduced their
effectiveness with great rapidity had it kept up, the Spaniards having
their range and firing by well-directed volleys. It was for the
regiment a moment of the utmost peril. Had they been alone they must
have perished.

It was from this perilous situation of Colonel Wood's command that one
of the most popular stories of the war originated, a story that
contained some truth, but which was often told in such a way as to
cause irritation, and in some instances it was so exaggerated or
mutilated in the telling as to be simply ridiculous. On the day after
the battle the story was told in Lawton's camp according to the
testimony of an intelligent soldier of the Twenty-fifth Infantry. His
words are: "The next day about noon we heard that the Tenth Cavalry
had met the enemy and that the Tenth Cavalry had rescued the Rough
Riders. We congratulated ourselves that although not of the same
branch of service, we were of the same color, and that to the eye of
the enemy we, troopers and footmen, all looked alike." According to
artists and cheap newspaper stories this rescuing occurred again and
again. A picture is extensively advertized as "an actual and
authoritative presentation of this regiment (the Tenth Cavalry) as it
participated in that great struggle, and their heroic rescue of the
Rough Riders on that memorable _July_ day." This especial rescuing
took place on _San Juan Hill_. The editor of a religious paper
declares that it was the _Twenty-fifth Infantry_ that rescued the
Rough Riders and that it was done at _El Caney_![16]

Before we go any farther let us see just what the Tenth Cavalry did do
in this fight. That their action was highly meritorious admits of no
doubt, and the laurels they won were never allowed to fade during the
whole campaign. General Wheeler speaks of them with the First Cavalry.
He says: "I was immediately with the troops of the First and Tenth
Regular Cavalry, dismounted, and personally noticed their brave and
good conduct." There were four troops of the Tenth engaged, composing
the First Squadron of that regiment, under command of Major Norval.
Troop A was commanded by Captain W.H. Beck, who was specially
commended by General Wheeler for good conduct. Second Lieutenant F.R.
McCoy was Captain Beck's assistant. This troop moved over to the left,
receiving the fire of the enemy, but making no response, the distance
being too great for effective carbine firing. This troop reached
Colonel Wood's right and made the line continuous so that there was
now a force in front of that ridge where the Spaniards were securely
entrenched and from which they were pouring their enfilading fire upon
Colonel Wood's line. Troop A, although coming into the line, did not
fire. Their presence, however, gave the Rough Riders the assurance
that their flank was saved. Troop E was commanded by Captain C.G.
Ayres with Second Lieutenant George Vidmar. This troop was placed by
General Young in support of Captain Watson's two Hotchkiss guns, and
also of the troops in their front. The troop was under fire one hour
and a quarter, during which they were in plain view of the Spaniards,
who also had their exact range. One man was killed and one wounded.
Their courage, coolness and discipline in this trying hour and a
quarter were of the very highest order. The troop commander says:
"Their coolness and fine discipline were superb." This troop did not
fire a shot. Thus one-half of the squadron moved to its positions and
held them without being able to do any damage to the enemy, as they
were carrying out to the letter their instructions, which were to fire
only when they could see the enemy. Troop B was commanded by Captain
J.W. Watson with H.O. Willard as Second Lieutenant. A detachment of
this troop was placed in charge of four Hotchkiss mountain guns. This
detachment opened fire upon the enemy, using the ammunition sparingly,
as they had but fifty rounds with them. Twenty-two shots were fired,
apparently with effect. The remainder of the troop under Lieutenant
Williard was ordered to move out to the extreme right, which would
place it beyond the line of the First Cavalry, thus bringing that
regiment between Troop A of the Tenth, which connected it with the
Rough Riders and Troop B, which was to be on its extreme right.
Lieutenant Williard's report of this movement is as follows:

     "I ordered the troop forward at once, telling them to take
     advantage of all cover available. In the meantime the
     volleys from the Spanish were coming in quite frequently and
     striking the ground on all sides near where we were. I found
     it very difficult to move the men forward after having found
     cover, and ran back to a portion of the troop near an old
     brick wall, and ordered them forward at once. They then made
     a dash forward, and in doing so three or four men were
     wounded, Private Russell severely. Who the others were I do
     not know. We encountered a severe fire directly after this
     move forward; and Private Wheeler was wounded in the left
     leg. There was a wire fence on our right, and such thick
     underbrush that we were unable to get through right there,
     so had to follow along the fence for some distance before
     being able to penetrate. Finally, was able to get the
     greater proportion of my men through, and about this time I
     met Lieutenants Fleming and Miller, Tenth Cavalry, moving
     through the thicket at my left. I there heard the order
     passed on 'not to fire ahead,' as there was danger of firing
     into our own forces. In the meantime there was shouting from
     the First Cavalry in our front, 'Don't fire on us in rear.'
     My troop had not fired a shot to my knowledge, nor the
     knowledge of any non-commissioned officers in the troop.
     About this time I found I was unable to keep the troop
     deployed, as they would huddle up behind one rock or tree,
     so I gave all sergeants orders to move out on the extreme
     right and to keep in touch with those on their left. Then,
     with a squad of about five men, I moved to the right front,
     and was unfortunate enough to lose the troop, i.e., I could
     see nothing of them except the men with me.

     "But as I had given explicit instructions to my sergeant, in
     case I was lost from them, to continue to advance until
     halted by some one in authority, I moved ahead myself,
     hoping to find them later on. In making a rush forward three
     men of my squad were lost from me in some way. I still had
     two men with me, Privates Combs and Jackson, and in the next
     advance made I picked up a First Cavalry sergeant who had
     fallen out from exhaustion. After a terrific climb up the
     ridge in front of me, and a very regular though ineffective
     fire from the enemy kept up until we were about sixty yards
     from the summit of hill, we reached the advance line of the
     First United States Cavalry, under command of Captain
     Wainwright. I then reported to him for orders, and moved
     forward when he next advanced. The firing had ceased, and no
     more shots were fired, to my knowledge, after this time.
     With the First Cavalry, Troop G, we followed along the right
     of the ridge and came down to the right front, encountering
     no opposition or fire from the enemy, but finding the
     enemy's breastworks in confusion, ammunition and articles of
     clothing scattered around; also one dead Spaniard and two
     Mauser rifles. At the foot of the ridge we met some of the
     First Volunteer Cavalry, and being utterly exhausted, I was
     obliged to lie down. Soon after, Captain Mills,
     adjutant-general of Second Brigade, Cavalry Division, came
     up to where I was and placed me in command of Troop K, First
     United States Cavalry, whose officers were wounded. I then
     marched them forward on the road to where General Wheeler
     was sitting, and received orders from Colonel Wood, First
     Volunteer Cavalry, to remain until further orders and make
     no further advance. Directly afterwards, learning the action
     was over, I reported back to General Young, and received
     orders to remain camped with the First Cavalry Squadron,
     where the action had closed. In the meantime, I should have
     stated that I found the principal part of my troop and
     collected them and left them under the first sergeant, when
     I went back to receive orders. So far as I know, and to the
     best of my knowledge, the men of my troop acted with the
     greatest bravery, advancing on an enemy who could not be
     seen, and subjected to a severe and heavy fire at each step,
     which was only rendered ineffective to a great degree by the
     poor marksmanship of the enemy, as many times we were in
     sight of them (I discovered this by observation after the
     engagement) while we could see nothing. We were also
     subjected to a severe reverse fire from the hills in our
     right rear, several men being wounded by this fire.
     Throughout the fight the men acted with exceptional
     coolness, in my judgment. The casualties were: Privates
     Russell, Braxton and Morris, severely wounded; Privates F.A.
     Miller, Grice, Wheeler and Gaines, slightly wounded, i.e.,
     less severely. None killed.

     Very respectfully,

     HENRY O. WILLIARD.
     June 24, 1898.
     Troop B, Tenth Cavalry, during action near La Guasima,
     Second Lieutenant, Tenth United States Cavalry, Commanding.


Troop I of the Tenth Cavalry was commanded by First Lieutenant R.J.
Fleming with Second Lieutenant A.M. Miller. This troop moved to the
right and wedged in between B Troop and the right of the First
Cavalry. Lieutenant Fleming discovered the enemy posted on the high
ridge immediately in front of his troop, and also extending to his
right, in front of B Troop. Moving his troop a little to the right so
as to secure room to advance without coming in contact with the First
Cavalry, he then directed his course straight toward the hill on which
he had located the enemy. The advance was made with great caution, the
men seeking cover wherever possible, and dashing across the open
spaces at full run. Thus they moved until the base of the steep part
of the hill was reached. This was found very difficult of ascent, not
only because of the rugged steepness, but also on account of the
underbrush, and the sharp-leaved grass, the cacti and Spanish bayonet,
that grow on all these hillsides. Paths had to be cut through these
prickly obstructions with knives and sabres. Consequently the advance
up that hill, though free from peril, was very slow and trying. Twice
during the advance the men obtained a view of their enemies and were
permitted to fire. The instructions were rigidly adhered to: No firing
only at the visible foe. Lieutenant Fleming says: "Owing to the
underbrush it was impossible for me to see but a very few men at a
time, but as they all arrived on the crest about the time I did, or
shortly after, they certainly advanced steadily." He says: "The entire
troop behaved with great coolness and obeyed every order." Farrier
Sherman Harris, Wagoner John Boland and Private Elsie Jones especially
distinguished themselves for coolness and gallantry. The aggressive
work of the Tenth Cavalry, therefore, appears to have been done by
Troops B and I, a detachment of the former troop serving the Hotchkiss
gun battery. Troop I was commanded by Lieutenant Fleming and by him
conducted to the front, although he admits that in their advance up
the slope of the hill he could see but very few of the men at a time,
and declares that their advance was certainly steady, because all
arrived at the crest of the hill simultaneously or nearly so.

Lieutenant Fleming does not show that his troop of excellent men were
in any sense _peculiarly_ dependent upon their white officers as some
have asserted. They advanced steadily, just as the regulars always do,
advanced noiselessly and without any reckless firing, and reached the
crest of the hill in order, although he could not see them as they
were making their advance. They kept their line despite all the
obstructions. Lieutenant Fleming also says that in moving to his
position he passed Troop B, which then "inclined to the right, and
during the remainder of the action was on my right." Troop B,
therefore, went through about the same experience as Troop I, and
being on the extreme right of the line may have been more directly in
front of that foe which Fleming says was in his front and to the
right. Why did not the officer who directed or led B Troop in its
advance upon the enemy report the action of his troop as vividly and
generously as did Lieutenant Fleming the men of Troop I? With not the
slightest reflection upon the gallant officer, he himself has the
manliness to say he was so unfortunate as to lose the troop. The
troop, however, did not become demoralized, but went into action under
command of its First Sergeant, _John Buck,[17] and remained on
Lieutenant Fleming's right during the action_. It has been proven more
than once that should the commissioned officers of a company or troop
of colored regulars be killed or incapacitated, the non-commissioned
officers can carry on the fight. Speaking of this same regiment it is
equally true that at San Juan the officers of Troops D and G were all
shot and the commands of these troops fell to their First Sergeants,
the first to Sergeant William H. Given, the second to Sergeant Saint
Foster, and it is generally understood that these two men were
appointed Lieutenants of Volunteers because of their success in
handling their troops in battle.

The entire attacking force at this end of the line, if we count only
those engaged in actual firing, consisted of two troops of the Tenth
Cavalry and two of the First Cavalry--four troops--while to the left
the entire eight troops were on the firing line. The action of the
troops of the First Cavalry was quite similar to that of the troops of
the Tenth Cavalry, and equally deserving of commendation. Of them all
General Young says:

     "The ground over which the right column advanced was a mass
     of jungle growth, with wire fences, not to be seen until
     encountered, and precipitous heights as the ridge was
     approached. It was impossible for the troops to keep in
     touch along the front, and they could only judge of the
     enemy from the sound and direction of his fire. However, had
     it not been for this dense jungle, the attack would not have
     been made against an overwhelming force in such a position.
     Headway was so difficult that advance and support became
     merged and moved forward under a continuous volley firing,
     supplemented by that of two rapid-fire guns. Return firing
     by my force was only made as here and there a small clear
     spot gave a sight of the enemy. The fire discipline of these
     particular troops was almost perfect. The ammunition
     expended by the two squadrons engaged in an incessant
     advance for one hour and fifteen minutes averaged less than
     ten rounds per man. The fine quality of these troops is also
     shown by the fact that there was not a single straggler, and
     in not one instance was an attempt made by any soldier to
     fall out in the advance to assist the wounded or carry back
     the dead. The fighting on the left flank was equally
     creditable and was remarkable, and I believe unprecedented,
     in volunter troops so quickly raised, armed and equipped."

The five hundred men of Colonel Wood's regiment were stretched over a
space of 800 to 1,000 yards, and were entirely without support or
reserve, and appear to have advanced to a point where this very strong
force on the right swept a good part of their line both with rifle
fire and the fire of their two machine guns. Men and officers were
falling under both the front and flank fire of the enemy, and had not
the squadrons of the First and Tenth made their successful assault
upon that ridge, which, according to General Wood's report, was "very
strongly held," the situation of the Rough Riders would have been
extreme. Because this successful assault was participated in by the
Tenth Cavalry the story arose that the Rough Riders were rescued by
that regiment. The fair statement would be: That the Regular Cavalry,
consisting of a squadron of the First and a squadron of the Tenth,
made their advance on the right at the precise moment to deliver the
Rough Riders from a fire that threatened their annihilation. The
marksmanship and coolness of the men of the Tenth have been specially
commented upon and their fire was described as very effective, but the
same remarks could be made of the men of the First, who fought side by
side with them. It is probable that the volunteers advanced more
rapidly than did the regulars, using more ammunition, and manifesting
a very high degree of courage and enthusiasm as well as deliberation;
but the regulars reached their objective at the proper time to turn
the battle's tide. Each advancing column was worthy to be companion to
the other.

General Wheeler said the fire was very hot for about an hour, and "at
8.30 sent a courier to General Lawton informing him that he was
engaged with a larger force of the enemy than was anticipated, and
asked that his force be sent forward on the Sevilla road as quickly as
possible." ("In Cuba With Shafter," p. 83.) General Lawton, however,
with the true instinct of a soldier had already sent orders to General
Chaffee to move forward with the First Brigade. The Second Brigade was
also in readiness to move and the men of the Twenty-fifth were
expecting to go forward to take a position on the right and if
possible a little to the rear of the Spanish entrenchments in order to
cut off their retreat. The rapid movements of the cavalry division,
however, rendered this unnecessary, and the routing of the foe gave to
the Americans an open country and cleared the field for the advance on
Santiago. The first battle had been fought, and the Americans had been
victorious, but not without cost. Sixteen men had been killed and
fifty-two wounded. In Colonel Wood's regiment eight had been killed
and thirty-four wounded; in the First Cavalry, seven killed and eight
wounded; in the Tenth Cavalry, one killed and ten wounded. The
percentage of losses to the whole strength of the several
organizations engaged was as follows: Rough Riders, over 8 per cent.;
First Cavalry, over 6 per cent.; Tenth Cavalry, 5 per cent. But if we
take those on the firing line as the base the rate per cent. of losses
among the regulars would be doubled, while that of the volunteers
would remain the same.

The strength of the enemy in this battle is given in the Spanish
official reports, according to Lieutenant Miley, at about five
hundred, and their losses are put at nine killed and twenty-seven
wounded. At the time of the fight it was supposed to be much larger.
General Young's report places the estimates at 2,000, and adds "that
it has since been learned from Spanish sources to have been 2,500. The
Cuban military authorities claim the Spanish strength was 4,000."
These figures are doubtless too high. The force overtaken at Las
Guasimas was the same force that evacuated Siboney at the approach of
Lawton and the force with which the Cubans had fought on the morning
of the 23rd. It may have consisted solely of the garrison from
Siboney, although it is more probable that it included also those from
Daiquiri and Jutici, as it is quite certain that all these troops
proceeded toward Santiago over the same road. The force at Siboney had
been given by the Cubans at 600, at Daiquiri at 300, and at Jutici at
150. If these had concentrated and the figures were correct, the
Spanish force at Guasimas was upwards of 1,000. If, however, it was
the force from Siboney alone, it was about as the Spanish official
report gives it. On this latter basis, however, the losses are out of
proportion, for while the attacking party lost a little less than 7
per cent. of its entire strength in killed and wounded, the losses of
the entrenched, defending party, were even a little greater, or over 7
per cent. of its strength. It is, therefore, probable that the Spanish
force was greater than officially reported and included the troops
from the other posts as well as those from Siboney. The engagement was
classed by General Shafter as unimportant, although its effect upon
our army was inspiring. It did not cut off the retreat of the Spanish
force, and the men who faced our army at Guasimas met them again in
the trenches before Santiago. General Shafter desired to advance with
his whole force, and cautioned strongly against any further forward
movement until the troops were well in hand. The two battles between
the Cubans and Spaniards, fought on the 23rd, in which the Cubans had
sixteen men wounded and two killed, were engagements of some
consequence, although we have no reports of them. There is no evidence
that the Cubans took part in the battle of Guasimas, although they
arrived on the grounds immediately after the firing ceased.

The story thus far told is, as the reader cannot fail to see,
directly from official records, and the conclusions arrived at are
those which result naturally from the facts as therein detailed. Not
one word is quoted from any but military men--actors in the affair. We
may now go briefly over the same ground, giving the views and
conclusions of able civilian correspondents who followed the army to
see what was done, and who were trained observers and skilled writers.
How have these able war journalists told the story of Las Guasimas?

To quote from Stephen Bonsal in substance, not in words, is to
contradict what General Shafter says officially in one particular, but
in no such way as to discredit the General, or to weaken Bonsal. It is
not a case of bringing two universal, antagonistic propositions face
to face, but a case where two men of different training look upon an
action from different standpoints and through different field-glasses.
General Shafter says of the collision of the Rough Riders with the
Spanish force: "There was no ambush as reported." As a military man,
he says there was no more concealment on the part of the Spanish force
than what an attacking party should expect, no more than what is usual
in modern warfare, hence he does not regard it as an ambush, and does
not officially take notice of any surprise or unexpected encounter on
the part of his force. To do so would be to reflect, however slightly,
upon the professional skill of the commander of the left column.
General Shafter thus says officially in a manly way: "There was no
ambush." Beyond this his duty does not call him to go, and he halts
his expressions exactly at this line, maintaining in his attitude all
the attributes of the true soldier, placing himself beyond criticism
by thus securing from attack the character of his subordinate.

Mr. Bonsal is a writer and author, accustomed to view actions in the
broader light of popular judgment, entirely free from professional
bias, and having no class-feeling or obligations to serve. His pen is
not official; his statements are not from the military standpoint; not
influenced in any way by considerations of personal weal or woe with
respect to others or himself. He says that one troop of the Rough
Riders, Troop L, commanded by Captain Capron, was leading the advance
of the regiment, and was in solid formation and within twenty-five
yards of its scouting line when it received the enemy's fire. This
troop was so far in the advance that it took the other troops of the
regiment more than a half hour to get up to it. The writer speaks of
the advance of that troop as having been made "in the fool-hardy
formation of a solid column along a narrow trail, which brought them,
in the way I have described, within point-blank range of the Spanish
rifles, and within the unobstructed sweep of their machine guns." He
sums up as follows: "And if it is to be ambushed when you receive the
enemy's fire perhaps a quarter of an hour before it was expected, and
when the troop was in a formation, and the only one in which, in view
of the nature of the ground it was possible to advance quickly, then
most certainly L Troop of the Rough Riders was ambushed by the
Spaniards on the morning of June 24th."

Mr. Bonsal also brings into clear view the part taken in this battle
by Lawton's Infantry. He shows by means of a simple map the trail by
which Miles' brigade, in which was the Twenty-fifth Infantry, moved in
order to flank the Spanish position, while Chaffee's brigade was
hurrying forward on the Royal Road to reinforce the line in front. A
letter from a soldier of the Twenty-fifth written soon after these
events fully confirms Mr. Bonsal in what he says concerning the
movement of Miles' brigade. The soldier says: "On the morning of the
24th the Rough Riders, Tenth and First Cavalry were to make an attack
on a little place where the Spanish were fortified. The Second Brigade
was to come on the right flank of these troops and a little in rear of
the fortifications; but by some misunderstanding, the former troops,
led by the Rough Riders, made an attack before we got our position,
and the result was a great many lives lost in the First Cavalry and
Rough Riders--only one in Tenth Cavalry, but many wounded. They
captured the fortification." This letter by a humble soldier, written
with no thought of its importance, shows how gallantly Lawton had
sprung to the rescue of Wheeler's division. According to Bonsal, who
says he obtained his information from Spanish officers who were
present in this fight, it was the information of the approach of this
brigade and of Chaffee's up the main road that caused the Spaniards to
withdraw rapidly from the position. The whole force was in imminent
danger of being captured. Another soldier of the Twenty-fifth wrote:
"The report came that the Twenty-fifth Infantry was to cut off the
Spanish retreat from a stronghold, toward Santiago." These glimpses
from soldiers' letters illustrate how clearly they comprehended the
work upon which they were sent, and show also how hearty and cordial
was the support which the infantry at that time was hurrying forward
to the advancing cavalry.

The official reports show that the strength of the Spanish position
was before the right of our line. Mr. Bonsal says: "Directly in front
of the Tenth Cavalry rose undoubtedly the strongest point in the
Spanish position--two lines of shallow trenches, strengthened by heavy
stone parapets." We must remember that so far as we can get the
disposition of these troops from official records, Troop A connected
the Rough Riders with the First Cavalry, and Troops I and B were on
the right of the First Cavalry. Troop A did not fire a shot; the
fighting, therefore, was done by Troops I and B on the extreme right
of the line, and it was on their front that "undoubtedly the strongest
point in the Spanish position" lay--nor should the reader forget that
at this very important moment Troop B was commanded by its First
Sergeant, Buck, Lieutenant Williard having by his own report been
"unfortunate enough to lose the troop." This is said with no
disparagement to Lieutenant Williard. It was merely one of the
accidents of battle.

Says Mr. Bonsal: "The moment the advance was ordered the black
troopers of the Tenth Cavalry forged ahead. They were no braver
certainly than any other men in the line, but their better training
enabled them to render more valuable services than the other troops
engaged. They had with them and ready for action their machine guns,
and shoved them right up to the front on the firing line, from where
they poured very effective fire into the Spanish trenches, which not
only did considerable execution, but was particularly effective in
keeping down the return fire of the Spaniards. The machine guns of the
Rough Riders were mislaid, or the mules upon which they had been
loaded could not be found at this juncture. It was said they had
bolted. It is certain, however, that the guns were not brought into
action, and consequently the Spaniards suffered less, and the Rough
Riders more, in the gallant charge they made up the hill in front of
them, after the Tenth Cavalry had advanced and driven the Spaniards
from their position on the right."

Corporal W.F. Johnson, B Troop, was the non-commissioned officer in
charge of the machine guns during the brief fight at Las Guasimas, and
his action was such as to call forth from the troop commander special
mention "for his efficiency and perfect coolness under fire." Here I
may be pardoned for calling attention to a notion too prevalent
concerning the Negro soldier in time of battle. He is too often
represented as going into action singing like a zany or yelling like a
demon, rather than as a man calculating the chances for life and
victory. The official reports from the Black Regulars in Cuba ought to
correct this notion. Every troop and company commander, who has
reported upon colored soldiers in that war, speaks of the coolness of
the men of his command. Captain Beck, of Troop A, Tenth Cavalry, in
the Guasimas fight, says: "I will add that the enlisted men of Troop
A, Tenth Cavalry, behaved well, silently and alertly obeying orders,
and without becoming excited when the fire of the enemy reached them."
The yell, in the charge of the regulars, is a part of the action, and
is no more peculiar to Negro troops than to the whites, only as they
may differ in the general timbre of voice. Black American soldiers
when not on duty may sing more than white troops, but in quite a long
experience among them I have not found the difference so very
noticeable. In all garrisons one will find some men more musically
inclined than others; some who love to sing and some who do not; some
who have voices adapted to the production of musical tones, and some
who have not, and it is doubtless owing to these constitutional
differences that we find differences in habits and expressions.

Lieutenant Miley, of General Shafter's staff, in his description of
the departure of General Shatter from General Garcia's tent, gives us
a glimpse of the character of the men that composed the Cuban army in
that vicinity.

     "While the interview was going on, the troops were being
     assembled to do honor to the General on his departure.
     Several companies were drawn up in front of the tent to
     present arms as he came out, and a regiment escorted him to
     the beach down the winding path, which was now lined on both
     sides by Cuban soldiers standing about a yard apart and
     presenting arms. The scene made a strong impression on all
     in the party, there seemed to be such an earnestness and
     fixedness of purpose displayed that all felt these soldiers
     to be a power. About fifty per cent. were blacks, and the
     rest mulattoes, with a small number of whites. They were
     very poorly clad, many without shirts or shoes, but every
     man had his gun and a belt full of ammunition."


B.

EXTRACT FROM A LETTER FROM A SOLDIER OF THE 10TH CAVALRY, TROOP B,
CONCERNING THE BATTLE OF LAS GUASIMAS:

     "... The platoon which escaped this ditch got on the right
     of the 1st Cavalry on the firing line, and pushed steadily
     forward under First Sergeant Buck, being then in two
     squads--one under Sergeant Thompson. On account of the
     nature of the ground and other natural obstacles, there were
     men not connected with any squads, but who advanced with the
     line.

     Both squads fired by volley and at will, at the command of
     the sergeants named; and their shots reached the enemy and
     were effective, as it is generally believed.

     Private W.M. Bunn, of Sergeant Thompson's squad, is reported
     to have shot a sharpshooter from a tree just in front of the
     enemy's work. Private Wheeler was shot twice in the advance.
     Sergeant Thompson's squad was once stopped from firing by
     General Wheeler's adjutant-general for fear of hitting the
     Rough Riders.

     It seems that two distinct battles were fought that day.
     Colonel Wood's command struck the enemy at about the tame
     time, or probably a Little before, ours did, and all unknown
     to the men in our ranks; and got themselves into a pretty
     tight squeeze. About the same time our force engaged the
     enemy and drew part of the attention they were giving the
     Rough Riders. This, the latter claimed, enabled them to
     continue the movement on the enemy's works.

     But as our command had an equal number of 1st and 10th
     Cavalrymen, I am of the opinion that the story of our saving
     the Rough Riders arose from the fact that as soon as the
     fight was over, the 1st Regular Cavalry was opening its arms
     to us, declaring that we, especially B Troop, had saved
     them; for the 1st Regular Cavalry was first in the attack in
     General Young's command; and when the enemy began to make it
     pretty warm, he ordered B and I Troops of the 10th forward
     on the right. Troop B was in the lead; and the alacrity
     with which these two troops moved to the front has always
     been praised by the 1st Cavalry; and they declare that that
     movement helped them wonderfully. In making this movement my
     troop had three or four men wounded; and later, when
     Sergeant Thompson's squad was fighting far to the front, it
     had in it several members of the 1st Cavalry, who are always
     glad to praise him.

     So, I think that by the Rough Riders first attributing their
     success, or their rescue from inevitable defeat, to the
     attack made by our command; and by the 1st Regular Cavalry's
     very generously, in the heat of success, bestowing upon us
     the honors of the day, it finally became a settled thing
     that we saved the whole battle.

     That evening, after the battle, I was met by Lieutenant
     Shipp, later killed at San Juan Hill, who, on inquiring and
     being told that I belonged to Troop B, congratulated me on
     its conduct, and said it had made a name for the regiment.
     Lieutenant Shipp was not in that fight, but had come up
     after it was over and had heard of us through the 1st
     Cavalry."


C.

     Sergeant John Buck was born September 10th, 1861, at Chapel
     Hill, Texas; enlisted in 10th Cavalry, November 6, 1880, and
     passed over ten years in active Indian service. He is a man
     of strong character, an experienced horseman and packer, and
     so commanded a portion of the firing line in the battle of
     June 24 as to elicit remarks of praise from officers of
     other troops "for his gallantry, coolness and good judgment
     under fire." Sergeant Thompson's good conduct in the same
     battle was noticeable also. Sergeant Buck was made second
     lieutenant in the 7th U.S. Volunteer Infantry and
     subsequently captain in the 48th United States Volunteers.


FOOTNOTES:

[15] See Note A at the end of this chapter.

[16] THE TWENTY-FIFTH AT EL-CANEY.

American valor never shone with greater luster than when the
Twenty-fifth Infantry swept up the sizzling hill of El-Caney to the
rescue of the rough riders. Two other regiments came into view of the
rough riders. But the bullets were flying like driving hail; the enemy
were in trees and ambushes with smokeless powder, and the rough riders
were biting the dust and were threatened with annihilation.

A rough rider described the feelings of his brigade when they saw the
other regiments appear and retreat. Finally this rough rider, a
Southerner, heard a well-known yell. And out of the distance moved a
regiment as if on dress parade, faces set like steel, keeping step
like a machine, their comrades falling here, there, everywhere, moving
into the storm of invisible death without one faltering step, passing
the rough riders, conquering up the hill, and never stopping until
with the rough riders El-Caney was won. This was the Twenty-fifth
Regiment (colored), United States Infantry, now quartered at Fort
Logan, Denver. We have asked the chaplain, T.G. Steward, to recite the
events at El-Caney. His modesty confines him to the barest recital of
"semi-official" records. But the charge of the Twenty-fifth is
deserving of comparison with that of "the Light Brigade" in the
Crimean War, or of Custer at the massacre of the Big Horn.

(Editorial in religious paper.)

[17] See Note C at the end of this chapter.




CHAPTER VI.

THE BATTLE OF EL CANEY.

     The Capture of the Stone Fort by the Twenty-fifth Infantry.


While the battle of Guasimas was going on, in which the Tenth Cavalry
took so conspicuous a part, the Twenty-fourth Infantry still remained
on board the City of Washington awaiting orders to land. During the
night of the 24th such orders were received by the authorities of the
transport, and they were directed to land their troops, but the
General Commanding, Brigadier-General Kent, did not hear of the matter
until some time the next morning. He relates the following
circumstances in his official report of the debarkation:

"At 9 a.m. of the 25th Lieutenant Cardin, of the Revenue Marine, came
aboard with orders for me to proceed to and disembark at Altares
(Siboney). This officer also handed me a letter from the corps
commander expressing his astonishment that I had remained away three
days."

General Kent also states in his report that his travel rations had
been exhausted seven days before and that but one meal of field
rations remained, and that the ship's supply both of water and
provisions was running low, and that in consequence of these facts as
well as for higher considerations he was very anxious to get on shore.
The debarkation followed as rapidly as possible, and that afternoon
General Kent reported in person to Major-General Wheeler, the troops
bivouacking for the night near the landing. The next day Colonel
Pearson, who commanded the Second Brigade of Kent's division, took
the Second Infantry and reconnoitred along the railroad toward the
Morro, going a distance of about six miles and returning in the
evening, having found no enemy in that vicinity, although evidences
were found that a force had recently retreated from a blockhouse
situated on the railroad about two miles from Aguadores.

On the day following, June 27th, the entire division moved out on the
road toward Santiago and encamped on the same ground that Lawton had
occupied the night previous. The Second Brigade took its place near
Savilla, while the Third Brigade, which included the Twenty-fourth
Infantry, went into camp at Las Guasimas, where the affair of the 24th
had occurred. The order of march had now partially fallen back to the
original plan: Lawton in advance, with whom was the Twenty-Fifth
Infantry; Wheeler next, with whom was the Ninth and Tenth Cavalry, and
Kent in the rear, who had, as we have just related, the Twenty-fourth
Infantry in his Third Brigade. In this order the army moved, so far as
it moved at all, until the morning of the 30th, when dispositions for
the general attack began.

The story of the great battle, or as it turned out, of the two great
battles, begins on this day, and the careers of the four colored
regiments are to be followed through the divisions of Lawton, Kent and
Wheeler. Let us begin, however, with General Shafter's official report
and his "Story of Santiago," as told in the "Century" of February,
1899.

From these sources it is learned that on June 30th General Shafter
reconnoitered the country about Santiago and determined upon a plan of
attack. Ascending a hill from which he could obtain a good view of the
city, and could also see San Juan Hill and the country about El Caney,
he observed afresh what had impressed itself upon all immediately
upon landing, to wit: That in all this country there were no good
roads along which to move troops or transport supplies. The General
says: "I had never seen a good road in a Spanish country, and Santiago
did not disappoint my expectations." The roads as he saw them from the
summit of the hill on June 30th were very poor, and indeed, little
better than bridle paths, except between El Caney and San Juan River
and the city. Within this region, a distance of from four to four and
a half miles, the roads were passable. El Caney lay about four miles
northeast of Santiago, and was strongly fortified, and, as events
proved, strongly garrisoned. This position was of great importance to
the enemy, because from it a force might come to attack the right
flank and rear of the American Army as it should make its attempt on
San Juan Hill. El Caney held the road from Guantanamo, at which point
an important Spanish force was posted. While General Shafter was
surveying the country from the hill at El Pozo and making what special
examination he could of the country toward San Juan Hills, Generals
Lawton and Chaffee were making a reconnoisance around El Caney. From
General Lawton's report it would appear that the work of
reconnoitering around El Caney was done chiefly by General Chaffee. He
says: "To General Adna R. Chaffee I am indebted for a thorough and
intelligent reconnoissance of the town of El Caney and vicinity prior
to the battle and the submission of a plan of attack which was
adopted. I consider General Chaffee one of the best practical soldiers
in the army and recommend him for special distinction for successfully
charging the stone fort mentioned in this report, the capture of which
practically closed the battle."

The general plan of attack as explained by General Shafter himself in
his "Century" article was "to put a brigade on the road between
Santiago and El Caney, to keep the Spaniards at the latter place from
retreating on the city, and then with the rest of Lawton's division
and the divisions of Wheeler and Kent, and Bates' brigade to attack
the Spanish position in front of Santiago." Before that he had said
that he wished to put a division in on the right of El Caney and
assault the town on that road. To Admiral Sampson on June 26th he
said: "I shall, if I can, put a large force in Caney, and one perhaps
still farther west, near the pipe-line conveying water to the city,
making my main attack from the northeast and east." His desire at this
time was to "get the enemy in my front and the city at my back." On
June 30th he had modified this plan so as to decide to place one
brigade on the road between El Caney and Santiago, with a view merely
to keeping the El Caney garrison from retreating into Santiago.

As he was explaining his plan to the division officers and others on
the afternoon of the 30th at his own headquarters, Lawton and Chaffee
were of the opinion that they could dispose of the Spaniards at El
Caney in two hours time. "Therefore," says the General, "I modified my
plan, assigning Lawton's whole division for the attack of El Caney and
directed Bates' independent brigade to his support." This last
modification of General Shafter's plan was made in deference to the
opinion of subordinates, and was based upon observations made
especially by General Chaffee.

The force assigned for the reduction of El Caney was to begin its work
early in the morning, and by ten or eleven o'clock at the outside it
was expected that the task would be accomplished and Lawton would join
Kent and Sumner in the assault upon San Juan. Early on the morning of
July 1st Capron's battery was got into position on a line running
directly north from Marianage on a hill about five hundred yards east
of Las Guasimas Creek. Lawton's division began its move on the
afternoon of the 30th, as did in fact the whole army, and bivouacked
that night near El Pozo. The Twenty-fifth Infantry, which belonged to
the Second Brigade, commanded by Colonel Miles, a former Major of the
Twenty-fifth, left El Pozo at daylight by way of the road leading
almost due north, and marched about one mile to the little town of
Marianage. Here a halt was made for an hour, from 6.30 to 7.30, during
which time reconnoitering parties were sent out to examine the ground
toward the Ducoureau House, which lay about one mile to the northward
of Marianage, and which had been designated by General Lawton as a
general rendezvous after the engagement should terminate.
Reconnoissance was made also to the front for the purpose of
discovering the enemy, and to ascertain the left of Ludlow's brigade.
This was the first brigade of Lawton's division and consisted of the
Eighth and Twenty-second Infantry and the Second Massachusetts, the
last named regiment being on the right. The Second Brigade was to
connect with this on its right and succeeded in finding the position
of the Second Massachusetts during this halt. At 11.30 Miles' brigade
was ordered to take position on the right of Ludlow's brigade, which
it did in the following order: The Fourth Infantry on the left,
joining with the Second Massachusetts on Ludlow's right; the
Twenty-fifth on the right, with its left joining on the Fourth
Infantry.

We must now review the progress of the battle so far as it is possible
to do so, from the firing of the first shot by Capron's battery up to
11.30, an hour long after the time at which it had been supposed that
El Caney would fall. Capron's reports are very brief. He says: "July
1--Fired shell and shrappnel into El Caney (ranged 2,400) 6.15 a.m. to
11.30 a.m." In another report he says: "Opened fire July 1, with shell
and shrappnel at 6.15 on Caney; range, 2,400 yards; continued until
11.30 a.m." He says that the battery "continued its fire against
specified objectives intermittently throughout the day under the
personal direction of the division commander." The forces we have so
far considered, consisting of Ludlow's and Miles' brigades, and of
Capron's battery, lay to the south of Caney, between it and Santiago,
Ludlow's brigade having been placed there to "cut off the retreat of
the garrison should it attempt to escape." Up to 11.30 there had been
no call for employing it for that purpose. The garrison had made no
attempt to escape. We must now go around to the east and north of
Caney. Here the Third Brigade, consisting of the Seventh, Twelfth and
Seventeenth Infantry, was posted, and early in the morning joined in
the attack, the brigade getting under fire before eight o'clock.
Colonel Carpenter, of the Seventh Regiment, says that one company of
his regiment, by General Chaffee's direction, was detached and sent
forward to reduce a blockhouse, well up on the hill, which commanded
the approach of his regiment to the field of action. After several
ineffectual attempts by the company, the Captain (Van Orsdale) was
directed to abandon the undertaking and rejoin the regiment, which
then took up a position on the crest of a hill running nearly parallel
with the Spanish lines. From this position the men crawled forward
about fifty yards and opened a deliberate fire upon the enemy, keeping
it up for about an hour, but as the losses of the regiment at this
time were considerable and the fire seemed to be without material
effect, the command was withdrawn to its position on the hill where
it found protection in a sunken road. In this condition this regiment
lay when Capron's battery made its lull at 11.30. The fearful fire
this regiment met can be estimated by the losses it sustained, which
during the day were as follows: Killed, 1 officer and 33 enlisted men;
wounded, 4 officers and 95 enlisted men; missing, 3 enlisted men. The
Seventeenth Regiment went into action on the right of the Seventh,
doing but little firing, as their orders were not to open fire unless
they could make the fire effective. Companies C and G fired a few
volleys; the remainder of the regiment did not fire at all. Four
enlisted men were killed and two officers severely wounded, one,
Lieutenant Dickinson, dying from his wounds within a few hours.
Several enlisted men were also wounded. At 11.30 this regiment was
lying on the right of the Seventh. The Twelfth Regiment began firing
between 6 and 7 in the morning and advanced to take its position on
the left of the Seventh Infantry. This regiment early reached a
position within 350 yards of the enemy, in which it found shelter in
the sunken road, "free from the enemy's fire." The regiment remained
in this position until about 4 o'clock in the afternoon, and, hence,
was there at 11.30 a.m. The losses of this regiment during the day
were, killed, 7 enlisted men; wounded, 2 officers and 31 enlisted men.
From these brief sketches the reader will now be able to grasp the
position of Lawton's entire division. Beginning on the south, from the
west, with Ludlow's brigade, consisting of the Twenty-second, Eighth
and Second Massachusetts, the line was continued by Miles' brigade of
the Fourth and Twenty-fifth Infantry; then passing over a considerable
space, we strike Chaffee's brigade, posted as has just been described.
General Bates' brigade probably arrived upon the field about noon.
This brigade consisted of the Third and Twentieth Infantry, and is
known as "Bates' Independent Brigade." The brigade is reported as
going into action about 1 o'clock and continuing in action until 4
o'clock. It took a position on the right, partially filling up the gap
between Miles and Chaffee. The first battalion of the Twentieth
Infantry went into action on the left of the Twenty-fifth Infantry's
firing line, and one company, A, took part in the latter part of the
charge by which the stone house was taken. Between 11.30, when
Capron's firing stopped, and when Miles' brigade was moved forward to
join the right of Ludlow's, and 12.20, when the battery recommenced,
the troops, including Bates' brigade, were either in the positions
described above or were moving to them. Noon had arrived and El Caney
is not taken; the garrison has not attempted to escape, but is sending
out upon its assailants a continuous and deadly fire. "Throughout the
heaviest din of our fire," says Colonel Carpenter, "could be heard the
peculiar high-keyed ring of the defiant enemy's shots."

Twelve o'clock on July 1st, 1898, was a most anxious hour for our army
in Cuba. The battle at El Caney was at a standstill and the divisions
of Kent and Sumner were in a most perilous situation. Bonsal's
description of the state of the battle at that time is pathetic.
Speaking of the artillery at El Caney--Capron's battery--he says it
was now apparent that this artillery, firing from its position of
twenty-four hundred yards, could do very little damage to the great
stone fort and earthworks north of the village. The shots were too few
and the metal used too light to be effectual. Three hours of the
morning had worn away and the advance of our men had been slowly made
and at great cost; all the approaches were commanded by Spanish
entrenchments and the fighting was very unequal. A soldier of the
Twenty-fifth says that when he came in sight of the battle at El
Caney, "the Americans were gaining no ground, and the flashes of the
Spanish mausers told us that the forces engaged were unequally
matched, the difference of position favoring the Spaniards." This view
was had about noon, or soon after. At that time "a succession of aides
and staff officers came galloping from headquarters with messages
which plainly showed that confusion, if not disaster, had befallen the
two divisions which, by the heavy firing, we had learned to our great
surprise, had become warmly engaged in the centre. The orders to
General Lawton from headquarters were at first peremptory in
character--he was to pull out of his fight and to move his division to
the support of the centre" (Bonsal). This call for Lawton arose from
the fact that about noon General Shafter received several dispatches
from Sumner, of the Cavalry Division, requiring assistance. General
Sumner felt the need of the assistance of every available man in the
centre of the line where he was carrying on his fight with the
Spaniards on Blue House Hill. This situation so impressed the General,
Shafter, that he finally wrote to Lawton, "You must proceed with the
remainder of your force and join on immediately upon Sumner's right.
If you do not the battle is lost." Shafter's idea then was to fall
back to his original plan of just leaving enough troops at El Caney to
prevent the garrison from going to the assistance of any other part of
the line. Shafter himself says: "As the fight progressed I was
impressed with the fact that we were meeting with a very stubborn
resistance at El Caney and I began to fear that I had made a mistake
in making two fights in one day, and sent Major Noble with orders to
Lawton to hasten with his troops along the Caney road, placing himself
on the right of Wheeler" (Sumner). Lawton now made a general advance,
and it is important to see just what troops did advance. The Seventh
Infantry did not move, for Lieutenant-Colonel Carpenter says that
after withdrawing "to the partial cover furnished by the road, the
regiment occupied this position from 8 o'clock a.m. until about 4.30
p.m." The Seventeenth did not move, for Captain O'Brien, commanding,
says the regiment took a position joining "its left with the right of
the Seventh Infantry" and that the regiment "remained in this position
until the battle was over." The Twelfth Infantry remained in its
shelter within 350 yards of the stone fort until about 4 p.m. Then we
have Chaffee's brigade on the north of the fort remaining stationary
and by their own reports doing but little firing. The Seventeenth
fired "for about fifty minutes" about noon, with remarkable precision,
but "it seemingly had no effect upon reducing the Spanish fire
delivered in our (their) front." The Seventh did not fire to any
extent. The Twelfth Infantry lay in its refuge "free from the enemy's
fire" and may have kept up an irregular fire.

About this time Bates' brigade entered the field and one battalion of
the Twentieth Infantry is reported to have joined the left of the
firing line of the Twenty-fifth. General Ludlow says there was a lull
from 12 to 1 p.m., "when the action again became violent, and at 3
p.m. the Third Brigade captured the stone fort with a rush and hoisted
the American flag." From Ludlow's brigade, Captain Van Horne,
commanding the Twenty-second Infantry, after the wounding of
Lieutenant-Colonel Patterson, says that the First Battalion of his
regiment took a position about 800 yards from the town and kept up
firing until the place surrendered. He does not say positively that
the firing was upon the town, but he had said just before that the
Second Battalion slowly moved forward, firing into the town from the
left, so that we may readily conclude from the context as well as from
the position that the First Battalion fired into the town also. Hence
it seems fair to exclude from the fort all of Ludlow's brigade, and it
is observable that Ludlow himself claims no part in the capture of
that stronghold.

General Bates says his brigade took position to the right of Colonel
Miles' brigade and pushed rapidly to the front. He then says that
after remaining sometime in the crossroad to the right of Miles'
brigade, under a heavy fire from the enemy, the brigade moved farther
"to the right to the assault of a small hill, occupied upon the top by
a stone fort and well protected by rifle pits. General Chaffee's
brigade charged them from the right, and the two brigades joining upon
the crest, opened fire from this point of vantage, lately occupied by
the Spanish, upon the village of El Caney." General Chaffee says it
was in consequence of the fire of General Bates' troops upon the fort
that the assault by the Twelfth Infantry was postponed.

In General Chaffee's report this statement occurs: "The action lasted
nearly throughout the day, terminating at about 4.30 p.m., at which
time the stone blockhouse was assaulted by Captain Haskell's battalion
of the Twelfth Infantry, under the personal direction of
Lieutenant-Colonel Comba, commanding the regiment. The resistance at
this point had been greatly affected by the fire of Capron's battery.
A few moments after the seizure of this point--the key to the
situation--my left was joined by General Bates with a portion of his
command." It is to be noted in connection with all of the above
statements that Major McCaskey, who commanded the Twentieth Infantry
(Bates brigade), says: "The First Battalion was moved to the right and
put into action on the left of the Twenty-fifth Infantry's firing
line, and one company, A, took part in the latter part of the charge
by which the stone house was taken." The two points to be noted here
are (1) that this battalion was on the left of the Twenty-fifth's
firing line, and (2) that one company took part in the charge upon the
stone house. When Chaffee's brigade charged the stone house from the
right some of Bates' troops, at least this Company A, from the
battalion near the firing line of the Twenty-fifth Infantry, took part
in the latter part of the charge. The two brigades, Bates' and
Chaffee's, joined immediately after the capture of the stone fort and
opened fire upon the town.

We have now traced the actions and the fortunes of the three following
brigades: Ludlow's Chaffee's and Bates'. But what has become of Miles'
brigade? Unfortunately, the Second Brigade has not been so well
reported as were the others engaged in the action at El Caney. We have
seen that it was ordered to take position on the right of Ludlow's
brigade at 11.30, when Capron's battery ceased its firing for the
fifty minutes. "We were detained in reaching our position by troops in
our front blocking the road," says the brigade commander. "We came
into action directly in front of the stone blockhouse at 12.30, and
from that hour until about 4.30, when the command 'cease firing' was
given, the blockhouse having been captured, my command was
continuously under fire." The reader will note in this report that the
brigade went into action at 12.30, several hours before the charge was
ordered by General Chaffee, and at least an hour and a half before,
according to the report of the commander of the Third Brigade, "this
fort was practically in the possession of the Twelfth Infantry." Major
Baker, who commanded the Fourth Infantry, says: "About 12 m. we
received orders directing us to take our place in the line of battle,
and arriving at the proper point the regiment was placed in line in
the following order: The First Battalion in the fighting line; the
Second Battalion in support and regimental reserve. In this order the
First Battalion, under my command, took up the advance toward the
blockhouse, to our right, south east of Caney." This battalion
advanced until it reached a position about 200 yards from the village,
where it remained, assisted by the Second Battalion until the capture
of the fort. Two companies of this First Battalion "fired into the
town and also into the blockhouse until its fall." A good part of the
fire of this regiment was directed upon the fort.

Colonel Miles says: "The brigade advanced steadily, with such scanty
cover as the ground afforded, maintaining a heavy fire on the stone
fort from the time the fight began until it ended." The reader is
asked to note particularly that this fire was continuous throughout
the fight; that it was characterized by the brigade commander as
"heavy," and that it was "on the stone fort". He says: "As the brigade
advanced across a plowed field in front of the enemy's position the
latter's sharpshooters in the houses in Caney enfiladed the left of
our line with a murderous fire. To silence it Major Baker, Fourth
Infantry, in command of the battalion of that regiment on the left of
our line of battle, directed it to turn its fire upon the town. In so
doing this battalion lost heavily, but its steady front and accurate
volleys greatly assisted the advance of the remainder of the brigade
upon the stone fort."

We have now these facts clearly brought out or suggested: That the
brigade took its place in line of battle soon after 12 o'clock; that
the Fourth Infantry was on the left; that the advance of the First
Battalion of the Fourth Infantry was "toward the blockhouse;" that
aside from the companies of the Fourth Infantry that fired into town,
"the remainder of the brigade advanced upon the stone fort." The
Fourth Infantry, holding the left of the line, however, reached a
position from which it could not advance, its commander having
"quickly perceived that an advance meant annihilation, as it would
involve not only a frontal, but also a flank fire from the town." Here
the Fourth Infantry remained, but continued to maintain a fire upon
both the blockhouse and the town.

There is but one more regiment in all of Lawton's division to be
accounted for, and that is the Twenty-fifth Infantry, holding the
right of Miles' brigade in this advance. This regiment was in place
in the line under its gallant and experienced commander,
Lieutenant-Colonel A.S. Daggett, and contributed its full share of
that "heavy fire on the stone fort from the time the fight began until
it ended." Major McCaskey says the First Battalion of his regiment
took a position on the left of the Twenty-fifth's firing line. The
statement seems erroneous, and one is inclined to believe that it was
originally written "on the right," instead of "on the left"; but it is
enough for our purpose now, that the firing line of the Twenty-fifth
is recognized well in advance. Major Baker, who commanded on the left
of the brigade line, and whose advance was stopped by the flank fire
from the village and a frontal fire from the fort, says: "as a matter
of fact the village of El Caney was not charged by any troops. Those
of Bates' brigade and the Twenty-fifth Infantry, after having carried
the stone fort (on a hill some 75 feet higher, and to the east of the
town,) fired into the village, and the Fourth Infantry continued its
fire. Nor was it charged by any of the troops to our left. Such a
charge would necessarily have been seen by us." Major Baker, who was
on the field and had the blockhouse in clear view, declares that some
of Bates' brigade and the Twenty-fifth Infantry carried the stone
fort. Major McCaskey says that one battalion of the Twentieth Infantry
(Bates' brigade) was on the left of the Twenty-fifth's firing line,
and that one company (A) took part in the latter part of the charge by
which the fort was taken. This battalion may be referred to by Major
Baker when he says: "Those of Bates' brigade and the Twenty-fifth
Infantry, after having carried, etc."

As there are some matters of dispute concerning the events which I am
now going to relate, I will present a soldier's statement before I go
to the official records. The soldier in writing to me after the battle
says: "I was left-guide of Company G (25th Infantry), and I received
orders from Lieutenant McCorkle to guide on Fourth Infantry, which
held the left flank. 'Forward, march! Guide left. Don't fire until you
see somebody; then fire to hit!' came the orders. Tramp! tramp! Crash!
crash! On we walked and stopped. We fired into the underbrush for
safety; then in another moment we were under Spanish fire. Balls flew
like bees, humming as they went. Soon we found ourselves up against a
network of Spanish trickery. Barbed-wire fences, ditches and creeks,
too numerous to think of. The only thing left was to go ahead or die;
or else retreat like cowards. We preferred to go ahead. At this first
fence Lieutenant McCorkle was taken to earth by a Spanish bullet.
Lieutenant Moss spoke out, 'Come ahead! Let's get at these Spaniards!'
A few moments more and he, too, was almost dead with exertion, loud
speaking, running and jumping, as onward we swept toward the Spanish
stronghold. The sun was exceedingly hot, as on the slope of a little
mound we rested for a few moments. We lay here about five minutes,
looking into the Spanish fort or blockhouse; we measured the distance
by our eyesight, then with our rifles; we began to cheer and storm,
and in a moment more, up the hill like a bevy of blue birds did the
Twenty-fifth fly. G and H Companies were the first to reach the summit
and to make the Spaniards fly into the city of El Caney, which lay
just behind the hill. When we reached the summit others soon began to
_mount our ladder_. We fired down into the city until nearly dusk."

The brigade made its advance under fire almost from the beginning. The
commander says it was continuously under fire from 12.30 to 4.30 p.m.
"The attack was begun by two companies in each regiment on the firing
line, strengthened by supports and reserves from the remaining
companies until the brigade had but two companies in reserve. At one
time in this hotly engaged contest the commanding officer of the
Twenty-Fifth Infantry sent me word that he needed troops on his right.
I then sent forward 40 Cubans, under command of Captains Jose' Varges
and Avelens Bravo, with Lieutenants Nicholas Franco and Tomas Repelao,
to form on the right of the Twenty-fifth, which was also the right of
the brigade. With these Cubans I ordered Private Henry Downey, Company
H, First Infantry, on duty as interpreter at the headquarters. These
men advanced on the stone fort with our line, fighting gallantly,
during which Lieutenant Nicholas Franco was mortally wounded and died
soon afterwards." (Col. Miles' report.)

From the soldier's story, as well as from the official report of the
brigade commander, it is conclusive that the real objective of the
Second Brigade was the stone fort, and that the Twenty-fifth Infantry,
which occupied the right of the line, had no other objective