XLVIII. "HE GIVETH HIS BELOVED SLEEP." (195)

Elizabeth Barrett Browning, 1809-1861, was born in London, married
the poet Robert Browning in 1846, and afterwards resided in Italy most of
the time till her death, which occurred at Florence. She was thoroughly
educated in severe and masculine studies, and began to write at a very
early age. Her "Essay on Mind," a metaphysical and reflective poem, was
written at the age of sixteen. She wrote very rapidly, and her friend, Miss
Mitford, tells us that "Lady Geraldine's Courtship," containing ninety-
three stanzas, was composed in twelve hours! She published several other
long poems, "Aurora Leigh" being one of the most highly finished. Mrs.
Browning is regarded as one of the most able female poets of modern
times; but her writings are often obscure, and some have doubted whether
she always clearly conceived what she meant to express. She had a warm
sympathy with all forms of suffering and distress. "He Giveth his Beloved
Sleep" is one of the most beautiful of her minor poems. The thought is an
amplification of verse 2d of Psalm cxxvii.
###


Of all the thoughts of God that are
Borne inward unto souls afar,
  Along the Psalmist's music deep,
Now tell me if that any is,
For gift or grace, surpassing this,--
  "He giveth his beloved, sleep!"

What would we give to our beloved?
The hero's heart to be unmoved,
  The poet's star-tuned harp, to sweep,
The patriot's voice, to teach and rouse,
The monarch's crown, to light the brows?--
  "He giveth his beloved, sleep."

What do we give to our beloved?
A little faith all undisproved,
  A little dust to overweep,
And bitter memories to make
The whole earth blasted for our sake,--
  "He giveth his beloved, sleep."

"Sleep soft, beloved!" we sometimes say,
But have no tune to charm away
  Sad dreams that through the eyelids creep.
But never doleful dream again
Shall break his happy slumber when
  "He giveth his beloved, sleep."

O earth, so full of dreary noises!
O men, with wailing in your voices!
  O delve'd gold, the wailers heap!
O strife, O curse, that o'er it fall!
God strikes a silence through you all,
  And "giveth his beloved, sleep."

His dews drop mutely on the hill;
His cloud above it saileth still,
  Though on its slope men sow and reap.
More softly than the dew is shed,
Or cloud is floated overhead,
  "He giveth his beloved, sleep."

Ay, men may wonder while they scan
A living, thinking, feeing man,
  Confirmed in such a rest to keep;
But angels say--and through the word
I think their happy smile is heard--
  "He giveth his beloved, sleep."

For me my heart, that erst did go
Most like a tired child at a show,
  That sees through tears the mummers leap,
Would now its wearied vision close,
Would childlike on his love repose
  Who "giveth his beloved, sleep."

And friends, dear friends,--when it shall be
That this low breath is gone from me,
  And round my bier ye come to weep,
Let one most loving of you all
Say, "Not a tear must o'er her fall;
  'He giveth his beloved, sleep.' "



XLIX. DESCRIPTION OF A SIEGE. (197)

"The skirts of the wood seem lined with archers, although only a few are
advanced from its dark shadow." "Under what banner?" asked Ivanhoe. "Under
no ensign which I can observe," answered Rebecca. "A singular novelty,"
muttered the knight, "to advance to storm such a castle without pennon or
banner displayed. Seest thou who they be that act as leaders?" "A knight
clad in sable armor is the most conspicuous," said the Jewess: "he alone
is armed from head to heel, and seems to assume the direction of all
around him."

"Seem there no other leaders?" exclaimed the anxious inquirer. "None of
mark and distinction that I can behold from this station," said Rebecca,
"but doubtless the other side of the castle is also assailed. They seem,
even now, preparing to advance. God of Zion protect us! What a dreadful
sight! Those who advance first bear huge shields and defenses made of
plank: the others follow, bending their bows as they come on. They raise
their bows! God of Moses, forgive the creatures thou hast made!"

Her description was here suddenly interrupted by the signal for assault,
which was given by the blast of a shrill bugle, and at once answered by a
flourish of the Norman trumpets from the battlements, which, mingled with
the deep and hollow clang of the kettledrums, retorted in notes of
defiance the challenge of the enemy. The shouts of both parties augmented
the fearful din, the assailants crying, "Saint George, for merry England!"
and the Normans answering them with loud cries of "Onward, De Bracy! Front
de Boeuf, to the rescue!"

"And I must lie here like a bedridden monk," exclaimed Ivanhoe, "while the
game that gives me freedom or death is played out by the hand of others!
Look from the window once again, kind maiden, and tell me if they yet
advance to the storm." With patient courage, strengthened by the interval
which she had employed in mental devotion, Rebecca again took post at the
lattice, sheltering herself, however, so as not to be exposed to the
arrows of the archers. "What dost thou see, Rebecca?" again demanded the
wounded knight. "Nothing but the cloud of arrows flying so thick as to
dazzle mine eyes, and to hide the bowmen who shoot them." "That can not
endure," said Ivanhoe. "If they press not right on, to carry the castle by
force of arms, the archery may avail but little against stone walls and
bulwarks. Look for the knight in dark armor, fair Rebecca, and see how he
bears himself; for as the leader is, so will his followers be."

"I see him not," said Rebecca. "Foul craven!" exclaimed Ivanhoe; "does he
blench from the helm when the wind blows highest?" "He blenches not! he
blenches not!" said Rebecca; "I see him now: he leads a body of men close
under the outer barrier of the barbacan. They pull down the piles and
palisades; they hew down the barriers with axes. His high black plume
floats abroad over the throng like a raven over the field of the slain.
They have made a breach in the barriers, they rush in, they are thrust
back! Front de Boeuf heads the defenders. I see his gigantic form above
the press. They throng again to the breach, and the pass is disputed, hand
to hand, and man to man. God of Jacob! it is the meeting of two fierce
tides, the conflict of two oceans moved by adverse winds;" and she turned
her head from the window as if unable longer to endure a sight so
terrible.

Speedily recovering her self-control, Rebecca again looked forth, and
almost immediately exclaimed, "Holy prophets of the law! Front de Boeuf
and the Black Knight fight hand to hand on the breach, amid the roar of
their followers, who watch the progress of the strife. Heaven strike with
the cause of the oppressed and of the captive!" She then uttered a loud
shriek, and exclaimed, "He is down! he is down!" "Who is down!" cried
Ivanhoe; "for our dear Lady's sake, tell me which has fallen!" "The Black
Knight," answered Rebecca, faintly; then instantly again shouted with
joyful eagerness--"But no! but no! the name of the Lord of Hosts be
blessed! he is on foot again, and fights as if there were twenty men's
strength in his single arm--his sword is broken--he snatches an ax from a
yeoman--he presses Front de Boeuf, blow on blow--the giant stoops and
totters like an oak under the steel of the woodman--he falls-he falls!"
"Front de Boeuf?" exclaimed Ivanhoe. "Front de Boeuf," answered the
Jewess; "his men rush to the rescue, headed by the haughty Templar,
--their united force compels the champion to pause--they drag Front de
Boeuf within the walls."

"The assailants have won the barriers, have they not?" said Ivanhoe. "They
have--they have--and they press the besieged hard upon the outer wall;
some plant ladders, some swarm like bees, and endeavor to ascend upon the
shoulders of each other; down go stones, beams, and trunks of trees upon
their heads, and as fast as they bear the wounded to the rear, fresh men
supply their places in the assault. Great God! hast thou given men thine
own image that it should be thus cruelly defaced by the hands of their
brethren!" "Think not of that," replied Ivanhoe; "this is no time for such
thoughts. Who yield? Who push their way?"

"The ladders are thrown down," replied Rebecca, shuddering; "the soldiers
lie groveling under them like crushed reptiles; the besieged have the
better." "Saint George strike for us!" said the knight; "do the false
yeomen give way?" "No," exclaimed Rebecca, "they bear themselves right
yeomanly; the Black Knight approaches the postern with his huge ax; the
thundering blows which he deals, you may hear them above all the din and
shouts of the battle; stones and beams are hailed down on the brave
champion; he regards them no more than if they were thistle down and
feathers."

"Saint John of Acre!" said Ivanhoe, raising himself joyfully on his couch,
"methought there was but one man in England that might do such a deed."
"The postern gate shakes," continued Rebecca; "it crashes--it is
splintered by his powerful blows--they rush in--the outwork is won! O God!
they hurry the defenders from the battlements--they throw them into the
moat! O men, if ye be indeed men, spare them that can resist no longer!"
"The bridge--the bridge which communicates with the castle--have they won
that pass?" exclaimed Ivanhoe. "No," replied Rebecca; "the Templar has
destroyed the plank on which they crossed--few of the defenders escaped
with him into the castle--the shrieks and cries which you hear, tell the
fate of the others. Alas! I see that it is still more difficult to look
upon victory than upon battle."

"What do they now, maiden?" said Ivanhoe; "look forth yet again--this is
no time to faint at bloodshed." "It is over, for a time," said Rebecca;
"our friends strengthen themselves within the outwork which they have
mastered." "Our friends," said Ivanhoe, "will surely not abandon an
enterprise so gloriously begun, and so happily attained; Oh no! I will put
my faith in the good knight whose ax has rent heart of oak and bars of
iron. Singular," he again muttered to himself, "if there can be two who
are capable of such achievements. It is,--it must be Richard Coeur de
Lion."

"Seest thou nothing else. Rebecca, by which the Black Knight may be
distinguished?" "Nothing," said the Jewess, "all about him is as black as
the wing of the night raven. Nothing can I spy that can mark him further;
but having once seen him put forth his strength in battle, methinks I
could know him again among a thousand warriors. He rushes to the fray as
if he were summoned to a banquet. There is more than mere strength; it
seems as if the whole soul and spirit of the champion were given to every
blow which he deals upon his enemies. God forgive him the sin of
bloodshed! it is fearful, yet magnificent, to behold how the arm and heart
of one man can triumph over hundreds."
                                                          -- Walter Scott.


NOTES.--Ivanhoe, a wounded knight, and Rebecca, a Jewess, had been
imprisoned in the castle of Reginald Front de Boeuf. The friends of the
prisoners undertake their rescue. At the request of Ivanhoe, who is unable
to leave his couch, Rebecca takes her stand near a window overlooking the
approach to the castle, and details to the knight the incidents of the
contest as they take place. Front de Boeuf and his garrison were Normans;
the besiegers, Saxons.

The castles of this time (twelfth century) usually consisted of a keep, or
castle proper, surrounded at some distance by two walls, one within the
other. Each wall was encircled on its outer side by a moat, or ditch,
which was filled with water, and was crossed by means of a drawbridge.
Before the main entrance of the outer wall was an outwork called the
barbacan, which was a high wall surmounted by battlements and turrets,
built to defend the gate and drawbridge. Here, also, were placed barriers
of palisades, etc., to impede the advance of an attacking force. The
postern gate was small, and was usually some distance from the ground; it
was used for the egress of messengers during a siege;


L. MARCO BOZZARIS. (202)

Fitz-Greene Halleck, 1790--1867, was born in Guilford, Connecticut. At the
age of eighteen he entered a banking house in New York, where he remained
a long time. For many years he was bookkeeper and assistant in business
for John Jacob Astor. Nearly all his poems were written before he was
forty years old, several of them in connection with his friend Joseph
Rodman Drake. His "Young America," however, was written but a few years
before his death. Mr. Halleck's poetry is carefully finished and musical;
much of it is sportive, and some satirical. No one of his poems is better
known than "Marco Bozzaris."
###


At midnight, in his guarded tent,
  The Turk was dreaming of the hour
When Greece, her knee in suppliance bent,
  Should tremble at his power.
In dreams, through camp and court he bore
The trophies of a conqueror;
  In dreams, his song of triumph heard;
Then wore his monarch's signet ring;
Then pressed that monarch's throne--a king:
As wild his thoughts, and gay of wing,
  As Eden's garden bird.

At midnight, in the forest shades,
  Bozzaris ranged his Suliote band,
True as the steel of their tried blades,
  Heroes in heart and hand.
There had the Persian's thousands stood,
There had the glad earth drunk their blood,
  On old Plataea's day:
And now there breathed that haunted air,
The sons of sires who conquered there,
With arms to strike, and soul to dare,
  As quick, as far as they.

An hour passed on--the Turk awoke;
  That bright dream was his last:
He woke--to hear his sentries shriek,
  "To arms! they come! the Greek! the Greek!"
He woke--to die mid flame and smoke,
And shout, and groan, and saber stroke,
  And death shots falling thick and fast
As lightnings from the mountain cloud;
And heard, with voice as trumpet loud,
  Bozzaris cheer his band:
"Strike--till the last armed foe expires;
Strike--for your altars and your fires;
Strike--for the green graves of your sires;
  God--and your native land!"

They fought--like brave men, long and well;
  They piled that ground with Moslem slain;
They conquered--but Bozzaris fell,
  Bleeding at every vein.
His few surviving comrades saw
His smile, when rang their proud hurrah,
  And the red field was won:
Then saw in death his eyelids close
Calmly, as to a night's repose,
  Like flowers at set of sun.

Come to the bridal chamber, Death!
  Come to the mother, when she feels
For the first time her firstborn's breath;
  Come when the blessed seals
That close the pestilence are broke,
And crowded cities wail its stroke;
Come in consumption's ghastly form,
The earthquake's shock, the ocean storm;
Come when the heart beats high and warm
  With banquet song, and dance, and wine:
And thou art terrible--the tear,
The groan, the knell, the pall, the bier,
And all we know, or dream, or fear
  Of agony, are thine.
But to the hero, when his sword
  Has won the battle for the free,
Thy voice sounds like a prophet's word;
And in its hollow tones are heard
  The thanks of millions yet to be.

Bozzaris! with the storied brave
  Greece nurtured in her glory's time,
Rest thee--there is no prouder grave
  Even in her own proud clime.
  We tell thy doom without a sigh,
For thou art Freedom's, now, and Fame's.
One of the few, the immortal names,
  That were not born to die.


NOTES.--Marco Bozzaris (b. about 1790, d. 1823) was a famous Greek
patriot. His family were Suliotes, a people inhabiting the Suli Mountains,
and bitter enemies of the Turks. Bozzaris was engaged in war against the
latter nearly all his life, and finally fell in a night attack upon their
camp near Carpenisi. This poem, a fitting tribute to his memory, has been
translated into modern Greek.

Plataea was the scene of a great victory of the Greeks over the Persians
in the year 479 B. C.

Moslem--The followers of Mohammed are called Moslems.



LI. SONG OF THE GREEK BARD. (205)

George Gordon Byron, Lord Byron, 1788-1824. This gifted poet was the son
of a profligate father and of a fickle and passionate mother. He was
afflicted with lameness from his birth; and, although he succeeded to his
great-uncle's title at ten years of age, he inherited financial
embarrassment with it. These may be some of the reasons for the morbid and
wayward character of the youthful genius. It is certain that he was not
lacking in affection, nor in generosity. In his college days, at
Cambridge, he was willful and careless of his studies. "Hours of
Idleness," his first book, appeared in 1807. It was severely treated by
the "Edinburgh Review," which called forth his "English Bards and Scotch
Reviewers," in 1809. Soon after, he went abroad for two years; and, on his
return, published the first two cantos of "Childe Harold's Pligrimage," a
work that made him suddenly famous. He married in 1815, but separated from
his wife after one year. Soured and bitter, he now left England, purposing
never to return. He spent most of the next seven years in Italy, where
most of his poems were written. The last year of his life was spent in
Greece, aiding in her struggle for liberty against the Turks. He died at
Missolonghi. As a man, Byron was impetuous, morbid and passionate. He was
undoubtedly dissipated and immoral, but perhaps to a less degree than has
sometimes been asserted. As a poet, he possessed noble powers, and he has
written much that will last; in general, however, his poetry is not
wholesome, and his fame is less than it once was.
###


The isles of Greece! the isles of Greece!
  Where burning Sappho loved and sung,
Where grew the arts of war and peace,--
  Where Delos rose, and Phoebus sprung!
Eternal summer gilds them yet,
But all, except their sun, is set.

The Scian and the Teian muse,
  The hero's harp, the lover's lute,
Have found the fame your shores refuse;
  Their place of birth alone is mute
To sounds which echo further west
Than your sires' "Islands of the Blest."

The mountains look on Marathon,
  And Marathon looks on the sea;
And musing there an hour alone,
  I dreamed that Greece might still be free;
For, standing on the Persian's grave,
I could not deem myself a slave.

A king sat on the rocky brow
  Which looks o'er sea-born Salamis;
And ships, by thousands, lay below,
  And men in nations,--all were his!
He counted them at break of day,--
And when the sun set, where were they?

And where are they? And where art thou,
  My country? On thy voiceless shore
The heroic lay is tuneless now,--
  The heroic bosom beats no more!
And must thy lyre, so long divine,
Degenerate into hands like mine?

Must we but weep o'er days more blest?
  Must we but blush? Our fathers bled.
Earth! render back from out thy breast
  A remnant of our Spartan dead!
Of the three hundred, grant but three,
To make a new Thermopylae!

What! silent still and silent all?
  Ah! no;--the voices of the dead
Sound like a distant torrent's fall,
  And answer, "Let one living head,
But one, arise,--we come, we come!"
'Tis but the living who are dumb!

In vain--in vain!--strike other chords;
  Fill high the cup with Samian wine!
Leave battles to the Turkish hordes,
  And shed the blood of Scio's vine!
Hark! rising to the ignoble call,
How answers each bold Bacchanal!

You have the Pyrrhic dance as yet;
  Where is the Pyrrhic phalanx gone?
Of two such lessons, why forget
  The nobler and the manlier one?
You have the letters Cadmus gave;
Think ye he meant them for a slave?

Fill high the howl with Samian wine!
  We will not think of themes like these!
It made Anacreon's song divine:
  He served, but served Polycrates,
A tyrant; but our masters then
Were still, at least, Our countrymen.

The tyrant of the Chersonese
 Was freedom's best and bravest friend;
That tyrant was Miltiades!
Oh that the present hour would lend
Another despot of the kind!
Such chains as his were sure to bind.

Fill high the bowl with Samian wine!
  Our virgins dance beneath the shade;
I see their glorious, black eyes shine;
  But gazing on each glowing maid,
My own the burning tear-drop laves,
To think such breasts must suckle slaves.

Place me on Sunium's marbled steep,
  Where nothing save the waves and I
May hear our mutual murmurs sweep;
  There, swanlike, let me sing and die:
A land of slaves shall ne'er be mine,--
Dash down yon cup of Samian wine!


NOTES.--Sappho was a Greek poetess living on the island of Lesbos, about
600 B. C. Delos is one of the Grecian Archipelago, and is of volcanic
origin. The ancient Greeks believed that it rose from the sea at a stroke
from Neptune's trident, and was moored fast to the bottom by Jupiter. It
was the supposed birthplace of Phoebus, or Apollo. The island of Chios, or
Scios, is one of the places which claim to be the birthplace of Homer.
Teios, or Teos, a city in Ionia, is the birthplace of the Greek poet
Anacreon. The Islands of the Blest, mentioned in ancient poetry, were
imaginary islands in the west, where, it was believed, the favorites of
the gods were conveyed without dying.

At Marathon. (490 B. C.), on the east coast, of Greece, 11,000 Greeks,
under the generalship of Miltiades, routed 110,000 Persians. The island of
Salamis lies very near the Greek coast: in the narrow channel between, the
Greek fleet almost destroyed (480 B.C.) that of Xerxes, the Persian king,
who witnessed the contest from a throne on the mountain side. Thermopylae
is a narrow mountain pass in Greece, where Leonidas, with 300 Spartans and
about 1,100 other Greeks, held the entire Persian army in check until
every Spartan, except one, was slain. Samos is one of the Grecian
Archipelago, noted for its cultivation of the vine and olive.

A Bacchanal was a disciple of Bacchus, the god of wine. Pyrrhus was a
Greek, and one of the greatest generals of the world. The phalanx was an
almost invincible arrangement of troops, massed in close array, with their
shields overlapping one another, and their spears projecting; this form of
military tactics was peculiar to the Greeks.

Polycrates seized the island of Samos, and made himself tyrant: he was
entrapped and crucified in 522 B. C. Chersonese is the ancient name for a
peninsula. Sunium is the name of a promontory southeast of Athens.



LII. NORTH AMERICAN INDIANS. (209)

Charles Sprague, 1791-1875, was born in Boston, and received his education
in the public schools of that city. For sixteen years he was engaged in
mercantile pursuits, as clerk and partner. In 1820 he became teller in a
bank; and, from 1825, he filled the office of cashier of the Globe Bank
for about forty years. In 1829 be gave his most famous poem, "Curiosity,"
before the Phi Beta Kappa society, in Cambridge. An active man of business
all his days, he has written but little either in prose or poetry, but
that little is excellent in quality, graceful, and pleasing.

The address from which this extract is taken, was delivered before the
citizens of Boston, July 4th, 1825.
###


Not many generations ago, where you now sit, encircled with all that
exalts and embellishes civilized life, the rank thistle nodded in the wind
and the wild fox dug his hole unscared. Here lived and loved another race
of beings. Beneath the same sun that rolls over your head, the Indian
hunter pursued the panting deer; gazing on the same moon that smiles for
you, the Indian lover wooed his dusky mate. Here the wigwam blaze beamed
on the tender and helpless, and the council fire glared on the wise and
daring. Now they dipped their noble limbs in your sedgy lakes, and now
they paddled the light canoe along your rocky shores. Here they warred;
the echoing whoop, the bloody grapple, the defying death song, all were
here; and when the tiger strife was over, here curled the smoke of peace.

Here, too, they worshiped; and from many a dark bosom went up a fervent
prayer to the Great Spirit. He had not written his laws for them on tables
of stone, but he had traced them on the tables of their hearts. The poor
child of nature knew not the God of Revelation, but the God of the
universe he acknowledged in everything around. He beheld him in the star
that sank in beauty behind his lonely dwelling; in the sacred orb that
flamed on him from his midday throne; in the flower that snapped in the
morning breeze; in the lofty pine that defied a thousand whirlwinds; in
the timid warbler that never left its native grove; in the fearless eagle,
whose untired pinion was wet in clouds; in the worm that crawled at his
feet; and in his own matchless form, glowing with a spark of that light,
to whose mysterious source he bent in humble though blind adoration.

And all this has passed away. Across the ocean came a pilgrim bark,
bearing the seeds of life and death. The former were sown for you; the
latter sprang up in the path of the simple native. Two hundred years have
changed the character of a great continent, and blotted forever from its
face a whole, peculiar people. Art has usurped the bowers of nature, and
the anointed children of education have been too powerful for the tribes
of the ignorant. Here and there a stricken few remain; but how unlike
their bold, untamable progenitors. The Indian of falcon glance and lion
bearing, the theme of the touching ballad, the hero of the pathetic tale
is gone, and his degraded offspring crawls upon the soil where he walked
in majesty, to remind us how miserable is man when the foot of the
conqueror is on his neck.

As a race they have withered from the land. Their arrows are broken, their
springs are dried up, their cabins are in the dust. Their council fire has
long since gone out on the shore, and their war cry is fast fading to the
untrodden west. Slowly and sadly they climb the distant mountains, and
read their doom in the setting sun. They are shrinking before the mighty
tide which is pressing them away; they must soon hear the roar of the last
wave which will settle over them forever. Ages hence, the inquisitive
white man, as he stands by some growing city, will ponder on the structure
of their disturbed remains, and wonder to what manner of persons they
belonged. They will live only in the songs and chronicles of their
exterminators. Let these be faithful to their rude virtues as men, and pay
due tribute to their unhappy fate as a people.



LIII. LOCHIEL'S WARNING. (211)

Thomas Campbell, 1777-1844, was a descendant of the famous clan of
Campbells, in Kirnan, Scotland, and was born at Glasgow. At the age of
thirteen he entered the university in that city, from which he graduated
with distinction, especially as a Greek scholar; his translations of Greek
tragedy were considered without parallel in the history of the university.
During the first year after graduation, he wrote several poems of minor
importance. He then removed to Edinburgh and adopted literature as his
profession; here his "Pleasures of Hope" was published in 1799, and
achieved immediate success. He traveled extensively on the continent, and
during his absence wrote "Lochiel's Warning," "Hohenlinden," and other
minor poems. In 1809 he published "Gertrude of Wyoming;" from 1820 to 1830
he edited the "New Monthly Magazine." In 1826 he was chosen lord rector of
the University of Glasgow, to which office he was twice reelected. He was
active in founding the University of London. During the last years of his
life he produced but little of note. He died at Boulogne, in France.
During most of his life he was in straitened pecuniary circumstances, and
ill-health and family afflictions cast a melancholy over his later years.
His poems were written with much care, and are uniformly smooth and
musical.
###


Seer. Lochiel! Lochiel! beware of the day
      When the Lowlands shall meet thee in battle array!
      For a field of the dead rushes red on my sight,
      And the clans of Culloden are scattered in fight.
      They rally, they bleed, for their kingdom and crown;
      Woe, woe to the riders that trample them down!
      Proud Cumberland prances, insulting the slain,
      And their hoof-beaten bosoms are trod to the plain.
      But hark! through the fast-flashing lightning of war,
      What steed to the desert flies frantic and far?
      'T is thine, O Glenullin! whose bride shall await
      Like a love-lighted watch fire all night at the gate.
      A steed comes at morning,--no rider is there,
      But its bridle is red with the sign of despair.
      Weep, Albin! to death and captivity led!
      Oh, weep! but thy tears can not number the dead:
      For a merciless sword on Culloden shall wave,--
      Culloden! that reeks with the blood of the brave.

Loch. Go preach to the coward, thou death-telling seer!
      Or, if gory Culloden so dreadful appear,
      Draw, dotard, around thy old wavering sight,
      This mantle, to cover the phantoms of fright.

Seer. Ha! laugh'st thou, Lochiel, my vision to scorn?
      Proud bird of the mountain thy plume shall be torn!
      Say, rushed the bold eagle exultingly forth
      From his home in the dark-rolling clouds of the north?
      Lo! the death shot of foemen outspeeding, he rode
      Companionless, bearing destruction abroad;
      But down let him stoop from his havoc on high!
      Ah! home let him speed, for the spoiler is nigh.
      Why flames the far summit? Why shoot to the blast
      Those embers, like stars from the firmament cast?
      'T is the fire shower of ruin, all dreadfully driven
      From his eyrie that beacons the darkness of heaven,
      O crested Lochiel! the peerless in might,
      Whose banners arise on the battlements' height,
      Heaven's fire is around thee, to blast and to burn;
      Return to thy dwelling! all lonely return!
      For the blackness of ashes shall mark where it stood,
      And a wild mother scream o'er her famishing brood.

Loch. False wizard, avaunt! I have marshaled my clan,
      Their swords are a thousand, their bosoms are one!
      They are true to the last of their blood and their breath,
      And like reapers descend to the harvest of death.
      Then welcome be Cumberland's steed to the shock!
      Let him dash his proud foam like a wave on the rock!
      But woe to his kindred, and woe to his cause,
      When Albin her claymore indignantly draws;
      When her bonneted chieftains to victory crowd,
      Clanronald the dauntless, and Moray the proud,
      All plaided and plumed in their tartan array--

Seer. --Lochiel, Lochiel, beware of the day!
      For, dark and despairing, my sight I may seal,
      But man can not cover what God would reveal:
      'T is the sunset of life gives me mystical lore,
      And coming events cast their shadows before.
      I tell thee, Culloden's dread echoes shall ring
      With the bloodhounds that bark for thy fugitive king.
      Lo! anointed by heaven with the vials of wrath,
      Behold where he flies on his desolate path!
      Now, in darkness and billows, he sweeps from my sight:
      Rise, rise! ye wild tempests, and cover his flight!
      'Tis finished. Their thunders are hushed on the moors;
      Culloden is lost, and my country deplores.
      But where is the ironbound prisoner? Where?
      For the red eye of battle is shut in despair.
      Say, mounts he the ocean wave, banished, forlorn,
      Like a limb from his country, cast bleeding and torn?
      Ah no! for a darker departure is near;
      The war drum is muffled, and black is the bier;
      His death bell is tolling; O mercy, dispel
      Yon sight that it freezes my spirit to tell!
      Life flutters convulsed in his quivering limbs,
      And his blood-streaming nostril in agony swims.
      Accursed be the fagots that blaze at his feet,
      Where his heart shall be thrown ere it ceases to beat,
      With the smoke of its ashes to poison the gale--

Loch. Down, soothless insulter! I trust not the tale:
      For never shall Albin a destiny meet
      So black with dishonor, so foul with retreat.
      Though my perishing ranks should be strewed in their gore,
      Like ocean weeds heaped on the surf-beaten shore,
      Lochiel, untainted by flight or by chains,
      While the kindling of life in his bosom remains,
      Shall victor exult, or in death be laid low,
      With his back to the field and his feet to the foe!
      And leaving in battle no blot on his name,
      Look proudly to heaven from the deathbed of fame.


NOTES.--Lochiel was a brave and influential Highland chieftain. He
espoused the cause of Charles Stuart, called the Pretender, who claimed
the British throne. In the preceding piece, he is supposed to be marching
with the warriors of his clan to join Charles's army. On his way he is met
by a Seer, who having, according to the popular superstition, the gift of
second-sight, or prophecy, forewarns him of the disastrous event of the
enterprise, and exhorts him to return home and avoid the destruction which
certainly awaits him, and which afterward fell upon him at the battle of
Culloden, in 1746. In this battle the Highlanders were commanded by
Charles in person, and the English by the Duke of Cumberland. The
Highlanders wore completely routed, and the Pretender's rebellion brought
to a close. He himself shortly afterward made a narrow escape by water
from the west of Scotland; hence the reference to the fugitive king.

Albin is the poetic name of Scotland, more particularly the Highlands. The
ironbound prisoner refers to Lochiel.



LIV. ON HAPPINESS OF TEMPER. (215)

Oliver Goldsmith, 1728-1774. This eccentric son of genius was an Irishman;
his father was a poor curate. Goldsmith received his education at several
preparatory schools, at Trinity College, Dublin, at Edinburgh, and at
Leyden. He was indolent and unruly as a student, often in disgrace with
his teachers; but his generosity, recklessness, and love of athletic
sports made him a favorite with his fellow-students. He spent some time in
wandering over the continent, often in poverty and want. In 1756 he
returned to England, and soon took up his abode in London. Here he made
the acquaintance and friendship of several notable men, among whom were
Johnson and Sir Joshua Reynolds. "The Traveler" was published in 1764, and
was soon followed by the "Vicar of Wakefield." He wrote in nearly all
departments of literature, and always with purity, grace, and fluency. His
fame as a poet is secured by the "Traveler" and the "Deserted Village;" as
a dramatist, by "She Stoops to Conquer;" as a satirist, by the "Citizen of
the World;" and as a novelist by the "Vicar of Wakefield." In his later
years his writings were the source of a large income, but his gambling,
careless generosity, and reckless extravagance always kept him in
financial difficulty, and he died heavily in debt. His monument is in
Westminster Abbey.
##


Writers of every age have endeavored to show that pleasure is in us, and
not in the objects offered for our amusement. If the soul be happily
disposed, everything becomes capable of affording entertainment, and
distress will almost want a name. Every occurrence passes in review, like
the figures of a procession; some may be awkward, others ill-dressed, but
none but a fool is on that account enraged with the master of ceremonies.

I remember to have once seen a slave, in a fortification in Flanders, who
appeared no way touched with his situation. He was maimed, deformed, and
chained; obliged to toil from the appearance of day till nightfall, and
condemned to this for life; yet, with all these circumstances of apparent
wretchedness, he sang, would have danced, but that he wanted a leg, and
appeared the merriest, happiest man of all the garrison. What a practical
philosopher was here! A happy constitution supplied philosophy, and though
seemingly destitute of wisdom he was really wise. No reading or study had
contributed to disenchant the fairyland around him. Everything furnished
him with an opportunity of mirth; and though some thought him, from his
insensibility, a fool, he was such an idiot as philosophers should wish to
imitate.

They who, like that slave, can place themselves all that side of the world
in which everything appears in a pleasant light, will find something in
every occurrence to excite their good humor. The most calamitous events,
either to themselves or others, can bring no new affliction; the world is
to them a theater, in which only comedies are acted. All the bustle of
heroism, or the aspirations of ambition, seem only to heighten the
absurdity of the scene, and make the humor more poignant. They feel, in
short, as little anguish at their own distress, or the complaints of
others, as the undertaker, though dressed in black, feels sorrow at a
funeral. Of all the men I ever read of, the famous Cardinal de Retz
possessed this happiness in the highest degree. When fortune wore her
angriest look, and he fell into the power of Cardinal Mazarin, his most
deadly enemy, (being confined a close prisoner in the castle of
Valenciennes,) he never attempted to support his distress by wisdom or
philosophy, for he pretended to neither. He only laughed at himself' and
his persecutor, and seemed infinitely pleased at his new situation. In
this mansion of distress, though denied all amusements, and even the
conveniences of life, and entirely cut off from all intercourse with his
friends, he still retained his good humor, laughed at the little spite of
his enemies, and carried the jest so far as to write the life of his
jailer.

All that the wisdom of the proud can teach, is to be stubborn or sullen
under misfortunes. The Cardinal's example will teach us to be good-
humored in circumstances of the highest affliction. It matters not whether
our good humor be construed by others into insensibility or idiotism,--it
is happiness to ourselves; and none but a fool could measure his
satisfaction by what the world thinks of it.

The happiest fellow I ever knew, was of the number of those good-natured
creatures that are said to do no harm to anybody but themselves. Whenever
he fell into any misery, he called it "seeing life," If his head was
broken by a chairman, or his pocket picked by a sharper, he comforted
himself by imitating the Hibernian dialect of the one, or the more
fashionable cant of the other. Nothing came amiss to him. His inattention
to money matters had concerned his father to such a degree that all
intercession of friends was fruitless. The old gentleman was on his
deathbed. The whole family (and Dick among the number) gathered around
him.

"I leave my second son, Andrew," said the expiring miser, "my whole
estate, and desire him to be frugal." Andrew, in a sorrowful tone (as is
usual on such occasions), prayed heaven to prolong his life and health to
enjoy it himself. "I recommend Simon, my third son, to the care of his
elder brother, and leave him, besides, four thousand pounds." "Ah,
father!" cried Simon (in great affliction, to be sure), "may heaven give
you life and health to enjoy it yourself!" At last, turning to poor Dick:
"As for you, you have always been a sad dog; you'll never come to good;
you'll never be rich; I leave you a shilling to buy a halter." "Ah,
father!" cries Dick, without any emotion, "may heaven give you life and
health to enjoy it yourself!"


NOTES.--Cardinal de Retz, Jean Francois Paul de Gondi (b. 1614, d. 1679),
was leader of the revolt against Jules Mazarin (b. 1602, d. 1661), the
prime minister of France during the minority of Louis XIV. This led to a
war which lasted four or five years. After peace had been concluded, and
Louis XIV. established on the throne, Mazarin was reinstated in power, and
Cardinal de Retz was imprisoned.

Flanders, formerly part of the Netherlands, is now included in Belgium,
Holland and France.



LV. THE FORTUNE TELLER. (218)

Henry Mackenzie, 1745-1831, was born in Edinburgh, educated at the
university there, and died in the same city. He was an attorney by
profession, and was the associate of many famous literary men residing at
that time in Edinburgh. His fame as a writer rests chiefly on two novels,
"The Man of Feeling" and "The Man of the World;" both were published
before the author was forty years old.
###


Harley sat down on a large stone by the wayside, to take a pebble from his
shoe, when he saw, at some distance, a beggar approaching him. He had on a
loose sort of coat, mended with different-colored rags, among which the
blue and russet were predominant. He had a short, knotty stick in his
hand, and on the top of it was stuck a ram's horn; he wore no shoes, and
his stockings had entirely lost that part of them which would have covered
his feet and ankles; in his face, however, was the plump appearance of
good humor; he walked a good, round pace, and a crook-legged dog trotted
at his heels.

"Our delicacies," said Harley to himself, "are fantastic; they are not in
nature! That beggar walks over the sharpest of these stones barefooted,
whilst I have lost the most delightful dream in the world from the
smallest of them happening to get into my shoe." The beggar had by this
time come up, and, pulling off a piece of a hat, asked charity of Harley.
The dog began to beg, too. It was impossible to resist both; and, in
truth, the want of shoes and stockings had made both unnecessary, for
Harley had destined sixpence for him before.

The beggar, on receiving it, poured forth blessings without number; and,
with a sort of smile on his countenance, said to Harley that if he wanted
to have his fortune told--Harley turned his eye briskly upon the beggar;
it was an unpromising look for the subject of a prediction, and silenced
the prophet immediately. "I would much rather learn" said Harley, "what it
is in your power to tell me. Your trade must be an entertaining one; sit
down on this stone, and let me know something of your profession; I have
often thought of turning fortune teller for a week or two, myself."

"Master," replied the beggar, "I like your frankness much, for I had the
humor of plain dealing in me from a child; but there is no doing with it
in this world,--we must do as we can; and lying is, as you call it, my
profession. But I was in some sort forced to the trade, for I once dealt
in telling the truth. I was a laborer, sir, and gained as much as to make
me live. I never laid by, indeed, for I was reckoned a piece of a wag, and
your wags, I take it, are seldom rich, Mr. Harley." "So," said Harley,
"you seem to know me." "Ay, there are few folks in the country that I do
n't know something of. How should I tell fortunes else?" "True,--but go on
with your story; you were a laborer, you say, and a wag; your industry, I
suppose, you left with your old trade; but your humor you preserved to be
of use to you in your new."

"What signifies sadness, sir? A man grows lean on 't. But I was brought to
my idleness by degrees; sickness first disabled me, and it went against my
stomach to work, ever after. But, in truth, I was for a long time so weak
that I spit blood whenever I attempted to work. I had no relation living,
and I never kept a friend above a week when I was able to joke. Thus I was
forced to beg my bread, and a sorry trade I have found it, Mr. Harley. I
told all my misfortunes truly, but they were seldom believed; and the few
who gave me a half-penny as they passed, did it with a shake of the head,
and an injunction not to trouble them with a long story. In short, I found
that people do n't care to give alms without some security for their
money,--such as a wooden leg, or a withered arm, for example. So I changed
my plan, and instead of telling my own misfortunes, began to prophesy
happiness to others.

"This I found by much the better way. Folks will always listen when the
tale is their own, and of many who say they do not believe in fortune
telling, I have known few on whom it had not a very sensible effect. I
pick up the names of their acquaintance; amours and little squabbles are
easily gleaned from among servants and neighbors; and, indeed, people
themselves are the best intelligencers in the world for our purpose. They
dare not puzzle us for their own sakes, for everyone is anxious to hear
what he wishes to believe; and they who repeat it, to laugh at it when
they have done, are generally more serious than their hearers are apt to
imagine. With a tolerably good memory, and some share of cunning, I
succeed reasonably well as a fortune teller. With this, and showing the
tricks of that dog, I make shift to pick up a livelihood.

"My trade is none of the most honest, yet people are not much cheated
after all, who give a few half-pence for a prospect of happiness, which I
have heard some persons say, is all a man can arrive at in this world. But
I must bid you good day, sir; for I have three miles to walk before noon,
to inform some boarding-school young ladies whether their husbands are to
be peers of the realm or captains in the army; a question which I promised
to answer them by that time."

Harley had drawn a shilling from his pocket; but Virtue bade him to
consider on whom he was going to bestow it. Virtue held back his arm; but
a milder form, a younger sister of Virtue's, not so severe as Virtue, nor
so serious as Pity, smiled upon him; his fingers lost their compression;
nor did Virtue appear to catch the money as it fell. It had no sooner
reached the ground than the watchful cur (a trick he had been taught)
snapped it up; and, contrary to the most approved method of stewardship,
delivered it immediately into the hands of his master.



LVI. RIENZI'S ADDRESS TO THE ROMANS. (221)

Mary Russell Mitford, 1786-1855. She was the daughter of a physician, and
was born in Hampshire, England. At twenty years of age, she published
three volumes of poems; and soon after entered upon literature as a
lifelong occupation. She wrote tales, sketches, poems, and dramas. "Our
Village" is the best known of her prose works; the book describes the
daily life of a rural people, is simple but finished in style, and is
marked by mingled humor and pathos. Her most noted drama is "Rienzi." Miss
Mitford passed the last forty years of her life in a little cottage in
Berkshire, among a simple, country people, to whom she was greatly
endeared by her kindness and social virtues.
###


I come not here to talk. You know too well
The story of our thraldom. We are slaves!
The bright sun rises to his course, and lights
A race of slaves! He sets, and his last beams
Fall on a slave; not such as, swept along
By the full tide of power, the conqueror led
To crimson glory and undying fame;
But base, ignoble slaves; slaves to a horde
Of petty tyrants, feudal despots, lords,
Rich in some dozen paltry villages;
Strong in some hundred spearmen; only great
In that strange spell,--a name.

              Each hour, dark fraud,
Or open rapine, or protected murder,
Cries out against them. But this very day,
An honest man, my neighbor,--there he stands,--
Was struck--struck like a dog, by one who wore
The badge of Ursini; because, forsooth,
He tossed not high his ready cap in air,
Nor lifted up his voice in servile shouts,
At sight of that great ruffian! Be we men,
And suffer such dishonor? men, and wash not
The stain away in blood? Such shames are common.
I have known deeper wrongs; I that speak to ye,
I had a brother once--a gracious boy,
Full of all gentleness, of calmest hope,
Of sweet and quiet joy,--there was the look
Of heaven upon his face, which limners give
To the beloved disciple.

                                How I loved
That gracious boy! Younger by fifteen years,
Brother at once, and son! He left my side,
A summer bloom on his fair cheek; a smile
Parting his innocent lips. In one short hour,
That pretty, harmless boy was slain! I saw
The corse, the mangled corse, and then I cried
For vengeance! Rouse, ye Romans! rouse, ye slaves!
Have ye brave sons? Look in the next fierce brawl
To see them die. Have ye fair daughters? Look
To see them live, torn from your arms, distained,
Dishonored; and if ye dare call for justice,
Be answered by the lash.

                               Yet this is Rome,
That sat on her seven hills, and from her throne
Of beauty ruled the world! and we are Romans.
Why, in that elder day, to be a Roman
Was greater than a king!

                         And once again,--
Hear me, ye walls that echoed to the tread
Of either Brutus! Once again, I swear,
The eternal city shall be free.


NOTES.--Rienzi (b. about 1312, d. 1354) was the last of the Roman
tribunes. In 1347 he led a successful revolt against the nobles, who by
their contentions kept Rome in constant turmoil. He then assumed the title
of tribune, but, after indulging in a life of reckless extravagance and
pomp for a few months, he was compelled to abdicate, and fly for his life.
In 1354 he was reinstated in power, but his tyranny caused his
assassination the same year.

The Ursini wore one of the noble families of Rome.

This lesson is especially adapted for drill on inflection, emphasis, and
modulation.



LVll. CHARACTER OF THE PURITAN FATHERS OF NEW ENGLAND. (223)

One of the most prominent features which distinguished our forefathers,
was their determined resistance to oppression. They seemed born and
brought up for the high and special purpose of showing to the world that
the civil and religious rights of man--the rights of self-government, of
conscience, and independent thought--are not merely things to be talked of
and woven into theories, but to be adopted with the whole strength and
ardor of the mind, and felt in the profoundest recesses of the heart, and
carried out into the general life, and made the foundation of practical
usefulness, and visible beauty, and true nobility.

Liberty, with them, was an object of too serious desire and stern resolve
to be personified, allegorized, and enshrined. They made no goddess of it,
as the ancients did; they had no time nor inclination for such trifling;
they felt that liberty was the simple birthright of every human creature;
they called it so; they claimed it as such; they reverenced and held it
fast as the unalienable gift of the Creator, which was not to be
surrendered to power, nor sold for wages.

It was theirs, as men; without it, they did not esteem themselves men;
more than any other privilege or possession, it was essential to their
happiness, for it was essential to their original nature; and therefore
they preferred it above wealth, and ease, and country; and, that they
might enjoy and exercise it fully, they forsook houses, and lands, and
kindred, their homes, their native soil, and their fathers' graves.

They left all these; they left England, which, whatever it might have been
called, was not to them a land of freedom; they launched forth on the
pathless ocean, the wide, fathomless ocean, soiled not by the earth
beneath, and bounded, all round and above, only by heaven; and it seemed
to them like that better and sublimer freedom, which their country knew
not, but of which they had the conception and image in their hearts; and,
after a toilsome and painful voyage, they came to a hard and wintry coast,
unfruitful and desolate, but unguarded and boundless; its calm silence
interrupted not the ascent of their prayers; it had no eyes to watch, no
ears to hearken, no tongues to report of them; here, again, there was an
answer to their soul's desire, and they were satisfied, and gave thanks;
they saw that they were free, and the desert smiled.

I am telling an old tale; but it is one which must be told when we speak
of those men. It is to be added, that they transmitted their principles to
their children, and that, peopled by such a race, our country was always
free. So long as its inhabitants were unmolested by the mother country in
the exercise of their important rights, they submitted to the form of
English government; but when those rights were invaded, they spurned even
the form away.

This act was the Revolution, which came of course and spontaneously, and
had nothing in it of the wonderful or unforeseen. The wonder would have
been if it had not occurred. It was, indeed, a happy and glorious event,
but by no means unnatural; and I intend no slight to the revered actors in
the Revolution when I assert that their fathers before them were as free
as they--every whit as free.

The principles of the Revolution were not the suddenly acquired property
of a few bosoms: they were abroad in the land in the ages before; they had
always been taught, like the truths of the Bible; they had descended from
father to son, down from those primitive days, when the Pilgrim,
established in his simple dwelling, and seated at his blazing fire, piled
high from the forest which shaded his door, repeated to his listening
children the story of his wrongs and his resistance, and bade them
rejoice, though the wild winds and the wild beasts were howling without,
that they had nothing to fear from great men's oppression.

Here are the beginnings of the Revolution. Every settler's hearth was a
school of independence; the scholars were apt, and the lessons sunk
deeply; and thus it came that our country was always free; it could not be
other than free.

As deeply seated as was the principle of liberty and resistance to
arbitrary power in the breasts of the Puritans, it was not more so than
their piety and sense of religious obligation. They were emphatically a
people whose God was the Lord. Their form of government was as strictly
theocratical, if direct communication be excepted, as was that of the
Jews; insomuch that it would be difficult to say where there was any civil
authority among them entirely distinct from ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

Whenever a few of them settled a town, they immediately gathered
themselves into a church; and their elders were magistrates, and their
code of laws was the Pentateuch. These were forms, it is true, but forms
which faithfully indicated principles and feelings; for no people could
have adopted such forms, who were not thoroughly imbued with the spirit,
and bent on the practice, of religion.

God was their King; and they regarded him as truly and literally so, as if
he had dwelt in a visible palace in the midst of their state. They were
his devoted, resolute, humble subjects; they undertook nothing which they
did not beg of him to prosper; they accomplished nothing without rendering
to him the praise; they suffered nothing without carrying their sorrows to
his throne; they ate nothing which they did not implore him to bless.

Their piety was not merely external; it was sincere; it had the proof of a
good tree in bearing good fruit; it produced and sustained a strict
morality. Their tenacious purity of manners and speech obtained for them,
in the mother country, their name of Puritans, which, though given in
derision, was as honorable an appellation as was ever bestowed by man on
man.

That there were hypocrites among them, is not to be doubted; but they were
rare. The men who voluntarily exiled themselves to an unknown coast, and
endured there every toil and hardship for conscience' sake, and that they
might serve God in their own manner, were not likely to set conscience at
defiance, and make the service of God a mockery; they were not likely to
be, neither were they, hypocrites. I do not know that it would be
arrogating too much for them to say, that, on the extended surface of the
globe, there was not a single community of men to be compared with them,
in the respects of deep religious impressions and an exact performance of
moral duty.
                                                      F. W. P. Greenwood.

NOTE.--The Pentateuch is the first five books of the Old Testament. The
word is derived from two Greek words, (pente), five, and (tenchos), book.



LVIII. LANDING OF THE PILGRIM FATHERS. (226)

Felicia Dorothea Hemans, 1794-1835, was born in Liverpool. Her father,
whose name was Browne, was an Irish merchant. She spent her childhood in
Wales, began to write poetry at a very early age, and was married when
about eighteen to Captain Hemans. By this marriage, she became the mother
of five sons; but, owing to differences of taste and disposition, her
husband left her at the end of six years; and by mutual agreement they
never again lived together. Mrs. Hemans now made literature a profession,
and wrote much and well. In 1826 Prof. Andrews Norton brought out an
edition of her poems in America, where they became popular, and have
remained so.

Mrs. Hemans's poetry is smooth and graceful, frequently tinged with a
shade of melancholy, but never despairing, cynical, or misanthropic. It
never deals with the highest themes, nor rises to sublimity, but its
influence is calculated to make the reader truer, nobler, and purer.
###


The breaking waves dashed high
  On a stern and rock-bound coast,
And the woods against a stormy sky
  Their giant branches tossed;

And the heavy night hung dark,
  The hills and waters o'er,
When a band of exiles moored their bark
  On the wild New England shore.

Not as the conqueror comes,
  They, the true-hearted, came;
Not with the roll of the stirring drums.
  And the trumpet that sings of fame.

Not as the flying come,
  In silence, and in fear;--
They shook the depths of the desert gloom
  With their hymns of lofty cheer.

Amidst the storm they sang,
  And the stars heard, and the sea;
And the sounding aisles of the dim woods rang
  To the anthem of the free!

The ocean eagle soared
  From his nest by the white wave's foam;
And the rocking pines of the forest roared,--
  This was their welcome home.

There were men with hoary hair
  Amidst that pilgrim band:
Why had they come to wither there,
  Away from their childhood's land?

There was woman's fearless eye,
  Lit by her deep love's truth;
There was manhood's brow, serenely high,
  And the fiery heart of youth.

What sought they thus afar?
  Bright jewels of the mine?
The wealth of seas, the spoils of war?
  They sought a faith's pure shrine!

Ay, call it holy ground,
  The soil where first they trod:
They have left unstained what there they found,--
  Freedom to worship God.


NOTE.--The Pilgrim Fathers landed at Plymouth, Mass, Dec. 11th (Old
Style), 1620. The rock on which they first stepped, is in Water Street of
the village, and is covered by a handsome granite canopy, surmounted by a
colossal statue of Faith.



LIX. NECESSITY OF EDUCATION. (228)

We must educate! We must educate! or we must perish by our own prosperity.
If we do not, short will be our race from the cradle to the grave. If, in
our haste to be rich and mighty, we outrun our literary and religious
institutions, they will never overtake us; or only come up after the
battle of liberty is fought and lost, as spoils to grace the victory, and
as resources of inexorable despotism for the perpetuity of our bondage.

But what will become of the West if her prosperity rushes up to such a
majesty of power, while those great institutions linger which are
necessary to form the mind, and the conscience, and the heart of the vast
world? It must not be permitted. And yet what is done must be done
quickly; for population will not wait, and commerce will not cast anchor,
and manufactures will not shut off the steam, nor shut down the gate, and
agriculture, pushed by millions of freemen on their fertile soil, will not
withhold her corrupting abundance.

And let no man at the East quiet himself, and dream of liberty, whatever
may become of the West. Our alliance of blood, and political institutions,
and common interests, is such, that we can not stand aloof in the hour of
her calamity, should it ever come. Her destiny is our destiny; and the day
that her gallant ship goes down, our little boat sinks in the vortex!

The great experiment is now making, and from its extent and rapid filling
up, is making in the West, whether the perpetuity of our republican
institutions can be reconciled with universal suffrage. Without the
education of the head and heart of the nation, they can not be; and the
question to be decided is, can the nation, or the vast balance power of
it, be so imbued with intelligence and virtue as to bring out, in laws and
their administration, a perpetual self-preserving energy. We know that the
work is a vast one, and of great difficulty; and yet we believe it can be
done.

I am aware that our ablest patriots are looking out on the deep, vexed
with storms, with great forebodings and failings of heart, for fear of the
things that are coming upon us; and I perceive a spirit of impatience
rising, and distrust in respect to the perpetuity of our republic; and I
am sure that these fears are well founded, and am glad that they exist. It
is the star of hope in our dark horizon. Fear is what we need, as the ship
needs wind on a rocking sea, after a storm, to prevent foundering. But
when our fear and our efforts shall correspond with our danger, the danger
is past.

For it is not the impossibility of self-preservation which threatens us;
nor is it the unwillingness of the nation to pay the price of the
preservation, as she has paid the price of the purchase of our liberties.
It is inattention and inconsideration, protracted till the crisis is past,
and the things which belong to our peace are hid from our eyes. And
blessed be God, that the tokens of a national waking up, the harbinger of
God's mercy, are multiplying upon us!

We did not, in the darkest hour, believe that God had brought our fathers
to this goodly land to lay the foundation of religious liberty, and
wrought such wonders in their preservation, and raised their descendants
to such heights of civil and religious liberty, only to reverse the
analogy of his providence, and abandon his work.

And though there now be clouds, and the sea roaring, and men's hearts
failing, we believe there is light behind the cloud, and that the
imminence of our danger is intended, under the guidance of Heaven, to call
forth and apply a holy, fraternal fellowship between the East and the
West, which shall secure our preservation, and make the prosperity of our
nation durable as time, and as abundant as the waves of the sea.

I would add, as a motive to immediate action, that if we do fail in our
great experiment of self-government, our destruction will be as signal as
the birthright abandoned, the mercies abused, and the provocation offered
to beneficent Heaven. The descent of desolation will correspond with the
past elevation.

No punishments of Heaven are so severe as those for mercies abused; and no
instrumentality employed in their infliction is so dreadful as the wrath
of man. No spasms are like the spasms of expiring liberty, and no wailing
such as her convulsions extort.

It took Rome three hundred years to die; and our death, if we perish, will
be as much more terrific as our intelligence and free institutions have
given us more bone, sinew, and vitality. May God hide from me the day when
the dying agonies of my country shall begin! O thou beloved land, bound
together by the ties of brotherhood, and common interest, and perils! live
forever--one and undivided!
                                                          --Lyman Beecher.



LX. RIDING ON A SNOWPLOW. (231)

Benjamin Franklin Taylor, 1822-1887, was born at Lowville, New York, and
graduated at Madison University, of which his father was president. Here
he remained as resident graduate for about five years. His "Attractions of
Language" was published in 1845. For many years Mr. Taylor was literary
editor of the "Chicago Journal." He wrote considerably for the magazines,
and was the author of many well-known fugitive pieces, both in prose and
verse. He also published several books, of which "January and June,"
"Pictures in Camp and Field," "The World on Wheels," "Old-time Pictures
and Sheaves of Rhyme," "Between the Gates," and "Songs of Yesterday," are
the best known. In his later years, Mr. Taylor achieved some reputation as
a lecturer. His writings are marked by an exuberant fancy.
###


Did you ever ride on a snowplow? Not the pet and pony of a thing that is
attached to the front of an engine, sometimes, like a pilot; but a great
two-storied monster of strong timbers, that runs upon wheels of its own,
and that boys run after and stare at as they would after and at an
elephant. You are snow-bound at Buffalo. The Lake Shore Line is piled with
drifts like a surf. Two passenger trains have been half-buried for twelve
hours somewhere in snowy Chautauqua. The storm howls like a congregation
of Arctic bears. But the superintendent at Buffalo is determined to
release his castaways, and clear the road to Erie. He permits you to be a
passenger on the great snowplow; and there it is, all ready to drive.
Harnessed behind it, is a tandem team of three engines. It does not occur
to you that you are going to ride on a steam drill, and so you get aboard.


It is a spacious and timbered room, with one large bull's eye window,--an
overgrown lens. The thing is a sort of Cyclops. There are ropes, and
chains, and a windlass. There is a bell by which the engineer of the first
engine can signal the plowman, and a cord whereby the plowman can talk
back. There are two sweeps, or arms, worked by machinery, on the sides.
You ask their use, and the superintendent replies, "When, in a violent
shock, there is danger of the monster's upsetting, an arm is put out, on
one side or the other, to keep the thing from turning a complete
somersault." You get one idea, and an inkling of another. So you take out
your Accident Policy for three thousand dollars, and examine it. It never
mentions battles, nor duels, nor snowplows. It names "public conveyances."
Is a snowplow a public conveyance? You are inclined to think it is neither
that nor any other kind that you should trust yourself to, but it is too
late for consideration.

You roll out of Buffalo in the teeth of the wind, and the world is turned
to snow. All goes merrily. The machine strikes little drifts, and they
scurry away in a cloud. The three engines breathe easily; but by and by
the earth seems broken into great billows of dazzling white. The sun comes
out of a cloud, and touches it up till it out-silvers Potosi. Houses lie
in the trough of the sea everywhere, and it requires little imagination to
think they are pitching and tossing before your eyes. A great breaker
rises right in the way. The monster, with you in it, works its way up and
feels of it. It is packed like a ledge of marble. Three whistles! The
machine backs away and keeps backing, as a gymnast runs astern to get sea
room and momentum for a big jump; as a giant swings aloft a heavy sledge,
that it may come down with a heavy blow.

One whistle! You have come to a halt. Three pairs of whistles one after
the other! and then, putting on all steam, you make for the drift. The
superintendent locks the door, you do not quite understand why, and in a
second the battle begins. The machine rocks and creaks in all its joints.
There comes a tremendous shock. The cabin is as dark as midnight. The
clouds of flying snow put out the day. The labored breathing of the
locomotives behind you, the clouds of smoke and steam that wrap you up as
in a mantle, the noonday eclipse of the sun, the surging of the ship, the
rattling of chains, the creak of timbers as if the craft were aground and
the sea getting out of its bed to whelm you altogether, the doubt as to
what will come,--all combine to make a scene of strange excitement for a
landlubber.

You have made some impression on the breaker, and again the machine backs
for a fair start, and then another plunge, and shock, and twilight. And
so, from deep cut to deep cut, as if the season had packed all his winter
clothes upon the track, until the stalled trains are reached and passed;
and then, with alternate storm and calm, and halt and shock, till the way
is cleared to Erie.

It is Sunday afternoon, and Erie--"Mad Anthony Wayne's" old
headquarters--has donned its Sunday clothes, and turned out by hundreds to
see the great plow come in,--its first voyage over the line. The
locomotives set up a crazy scream, and you draw slowly into the depot. The
door opened at last, you clamber down, and gaze up at the uneasy house in
which you have been living. It looks as if an avalanche had tumbled down
upon it,--white as an Alpine shoulder. Your first thought is gratitude
that you have made a landing alive. Your second, a resolution that, if
again you ride a hammer, it will not be when three engines have hold of
the handle!


NOTES.--Chautauqua is the most western county in the state of New York; it
borders on Lake Erie.

The Cyclops are described in Grecian mythology as giants having only one
eye, which was circular, and placed in the middle of the forehead.

Cerro de Potosi is a mountain in Bolivia, South America, celebrated for
its mineral wealth. More than five thousand mines have been opened in it;
the product is chiefly silver.

"Mad Anthony Wayne" (b. 1745, d. 1796), so called from his bravery and
apparent recklessness, was a famous American officer during the
Revolution. In 1794 be conducted a successful campaign against the Indians
of the Northwest, making his headquarters at Erie, Pa.



LXI. THE QUARREL OF BRUTUS AND CASSIUS. (234)

Cas. That you have wronged me doth appear in this:
     You have condemned and noted Lucius Pella
     For taking bribes here of the Sardians;
     Wherein my letters, praying on his side,
     Because I knew the man, were slighted off.
     Bru. You wronged yourself to write in such a case.
Cas. In such a time as this, it is not meet
     That every nice offense should bear his comment.
Bru. Yet let me tell you, Cassius, you yourself
     Are much condemned to have an itching palm,
     To sell and mart your offices for gold
     To undeservers.
Cas.                  I an itching palm!
     You know that you are Brutus that speak this,
     Or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.
Bru. The name of Cassius honors this corruption,
     And chastisement doth therefore hide his head.
Cas. Chastisement!
Bru. Remember March, the ides of March remember!
     Did not great Julius bleed for justice' sake?
     What villain touched his body, that did stab,
     And not for justice? What! shall one of us,
     That struck the foremost man of all this world
     But for supporting robbers; shall we now
     Contaminate our fingers with base bribes,
     And sell the mighty space of our large honors
     For so much trash as may be graspe'd thus?
     I had rather be a dog, and bay the moon,
     Than such a Roman.
Cas.                   Brutus, bay not me;
     I'll not endure it: you forget yourself,
     To hedge me in; I am a soldier, I,
     Older in practice, abler than yourself
     To make conditions.
Bru.                    Go to; you are not, Cassius.
Cas. I am.
Bru. I say you are not.
Cas. Urge me no more, I shall forget myself:
     Have mind upon your health; tempt me no further.
Bru. Away, slight man!
Cas. Is't possible?
Bru.                Hear me, for I will speak.
     Must I give way and room to your rash choler?
     Shall I be frighted when a madman stares?
Cas. O ye gods! ye gods! must I endure all this?
Bru. All this! Ay, more: fret till your proud heart break;
     Go, show your slaves how choleric you are,
     And make your bondmen tremble. Must I budge?
     Must I observe you? Must I stand and crouch
     Under your testy humor? By the gods,
     You shall digest the venom of your spleen,
     Though it do split you; for, from this day forth,
     I'll use you for my mirth, yea for my laughter,
     When you are waspish.
Cas.                      Is it come to this?
Bru. You say you are a better soldier;
     Let it appear so; make your vaunting true,
     And it shall please me well: for mine own part,
     I shall be glad to learn of noble men.
Cas. You wrong me every way; you wrong me, Brutus;
     I said, an elder soldier, not a better:
     Did I say "better"?
Bru.                     If you did, I care not.
Cas. When Caesar lived, he durst not thus have moved me.
Bru. Peace, peace! you durst not so have tempted him.
Cas. I durst not?
Bru. No.
Cas. What! durst not tempt him?
Bru.                            For your life, you durst not.
Cas. Do not presume too much upon my love;
     I may do that I shall be sorry for.
Bru. You have done that you should be sorry for.
     There is no terror, Cassius, in your threats;
     For I am armed so strong in honesty
     That they pass by me as the idle wind,
     Which I respect not. I did send to you
     For certain sums of gold, which you denied me;--
     For I can raise no money by vile means:
     By heaven! I had rather coin my heart,
     And drop my blood for drachmas, than to wring
     From the hard hands of peasants their vile trash
     By any indirection.--I did send
     To you for gold to pay my legions,
     Which you denied me: was that done like Cassius?
     Should I have answered Caius Cassius so?
     When Marcus Brutus grows so covetous,
     To lock such rascal counters from his friends,
     Be ready, gods, with an your thunderbolts;
     Dash him to pieces!
Cas.                     I denied you not.
Bru. You did.
Cas. I did not: he was but a fool that brought
     My answer back. Brutus hath rived my heart:
     A friend should bear his friend's infirmities,
     But Brutus makes mine greater than they are.
Bru. I do not, till you practice them on me.
Cas. You love me not.
Bru.                  I do not like your faults.
Cas. A friendly eye could never see such faults.
Bru. A flatterer's would not, though they do appear
     As huge as high Olympus.
Cas. Come, Antony, and young Octavius, come,
     Revenge yourselves alone on Cassius,
     For Cassius is aweary of the world;
     Hated by one he loves; braved by his brother;
     Checked like a bondman; all his faults observed,
     Set in a notebook, learned, and conned by rate,
     To cast into my teeth. Oh, I could weep
     My spirit from mine eyes! There is my dagger,
     And here my naked breast; within, a heart
     Dearer than Plutus' mine, richer than gold:
     If that thou be'st a Roman, take it forth:
     I, that denied thee gold, will give my heart:
     Strike, as thou didst at Caesar; for, I know,
     When thou didst hate him worst, thou lovedst him better
     Than ever thou lovedst Cassius.
Bru.                                 Sheathe your dagger:
     Be angry when you will, it shall have scope;
     Do what you will, dishonor shall be humor.
     O Cassius, you are yoked with a lamb
     That carries anger as the flint bears fire;
     Who, much enforced, shows a hasty spark,
     And straight is cold again.
Cas.                             Hath Cassius lived
     To be but mirth and laughter to his Brutus,
     When grief, and blood ill-tempered, vexeth him?
Bru. When I spoke that, I was ill-tempered, too.
Cas. Do you confess so much? Give me your hand.

238    ECLECTIC SERIES.

Bru. And my heart, too.
Cas.                   O Brutus!
Bru.                             What's the matter?
Cas. Have you not love enough to bear with me,
     When that rash humor which my mother gave me
     Makes me forgetful?
Bru.                     Yes, Cassius; and, from henceforth,
     When you are over earnest with your Brutus,
     He'll think your mother chides, and leave you so.

                    Shakespeare.--Julius Caesar, Act iv, Scene iii.


NOTES.--Ides (pro. idz) was a term used in the Roman calendar. It fell on
the fifteenth day of March, May, July, and October, and on the thirteenth
of other months. On the ides of March, 44 B. C., Julius Caesar was
murdered by Brutus, Cassius, and other conspirators. The populace were
aroused to indignation, and the conspirators were compelled to fly.

Indirection; i. e., dishonest means.

Antony and Octavius, who, with Lepidus, formed the triumvirate now
governing Rome, were at this time marching against the forces of Brutus
and Cassius.

Plutus, in ancient mythology, the god of wealth.



LXII. THE QUACK. (238)

John Tobin, 1770-1804, a solicitor, was born at Salisbury, England, and
died on shipboard near Cork. He wrote several comedies, the most popular
being "The Honeymoon," from which this extract is taken; it was published
in 1805.
###


SCENE--The Inn. Enter HOSTESS followed by LAMPEDO, a Quack Doctor.

Host.  Nay, nay; another fortnight.
       Lamp. It can't be.
       The man's as well as I am: have some mercy!
       He hath been here almost three weeks already.
Host.  Well, then, a week.
Lamp.  We may detain him a week. (Enter BALTHAZAR, the patient,
       from behind, in his nightgown, with a drawn sword.)
       You talk now like a reasonable hostess,
       That sometimes has a reckoning with her conscience.
Host.  He still believes he has an inward bruise.
Lamp.  I would to heaven he had! or that he'd slipped
       His shoulder blade, or broke a leg or two,
       (Not that I bear his person any malice,)
       Or luxed an arm, or even sprained his ankle!
Host.  Ay, broken anything except his neck.
Lamp.  However, for a week I'll manage him,
       Though he had the constitution of a horse--
       A farrier should prescribe for him.
Balth. A farrier! (Aside. )
       Lamp. To-morrow, we phlebotomize again;
       Next day, my new-invented patent draught;
       Then, I have some pills prepared;
       On Thursday, we throw in the bark; on Friday--
Balth. (Coming forward.) Well, sir, on Friday--what, on Friday? Come,
       Proceed.
Lamp.  Discovered!

   They (Host.,Lamp.) fall on their knees.

Host.  Mercy, noble sir!
Lamp.  We crave your mercy!
Balth. On your knees? 'tis well!
       Pray! for your time is short.
Host.  Nay, do not kill us.
Balth. You have been tried, condemned, and only wait
       For execution. Which shall I begin with?
Lamp.  The lady, by all means, sir.
Balth. Come, prepare. (To the hostess.)
Host.  Have pity by the weakness of my sex!
Balth. Tell me, thou quaking mountain of gross flesh,
       Tell me, and in a breath, how many poisons--
       If you attempt it--(To LAMPEDO, who is making off)
              you have cooked up for me?
Host.  None, as I hope for mercy!
Balth. Is not thy wine a poison?
Host.  No indeed, sir;
       'T is not, I own, of the first quality;
       But--
Balth. What?
Host.  I always give short measure, sir,
       And ease my conscience that way.
Balth. Ease your conscience!
       I'll ease your conscience for you.
Host.  Mercy, sir!
Balth. Rise, if thou canst, and hear me.
Host.  Your commands, sir?
Balth. If, in five minutes, all things are prepared
       For my departure, you may yet survive.
Host.  It shall be done in less.
Balth. Away, thou lumpfish. (Exit hostess.)
Lamp.  So! now comes my turn! 't is all over with me!
       There's dagger, rope, and ratsbane in his looks!
Baith. And now, thou sketch and outline of a man!
       Thou thing that hast no shadow in the sun!
       Thou eel in a consumption, eldest born
       Of Death and Famine! thou anatomy
       Of a starved pilchard!
Lamp.  I do confess my leanness. I am spare,
       And, therefore, spare me.
Balth. Why wouldst thou have made me
       A thoroughfare, for thy whole shop to pass through?
Lamp.  Man, you know, must live.
Balth. Yes: he must die, too.
Lamp. For my patients' sake!
Balth. I'll send you to the major part of them--
       The window, sir, is open;-come, prepare.
       Lamp. Pray consider!
       I may hurt some one in the street.


[Illustration: Lampedo and Hostess kneeling, with hands folded, pleading
with Balthazar, who is standing over them, holding a sword. Several small
glass bottles are on the table by the wall and scattered on the floor.]


Balth. Why, then,
       I'll rattle thee to pieces in a dicebox,
       Or grind thee in a coffee mill to powder,
       For thou must sup with Pluto:--so, make ready!
       Whilst I, with this good smallsword for a lancet,
       Let thy starved spirit out (for blood thou hast none),
       And nail thee to the wall, where thou shalt look
       Like a dried beetle with a pin stuck through him.
Lamp.  Consider my poor wife.
Balth. Thy wife!
Lamp.  My wife, sir.
Balth. Hast thou dared think of matrimony, too?
       Thou shadow of a man, and base as lean!
Lamp.  O spare me for her sake!
       I have a wife, and three angelic babes,
       Who, by those looks, are well nigh fatherless.
Balth. Well, well! your wife and children shall plead for you.
       Come, come; the pills! where are the pills? Produce them.
Lamp.  Here is the box.
Balth. Were it Pandora's, and each single pill
       Had ten diseases in it, you should take them.
Lamp.  What, all?
Balth. Ay, all; and quickly, too. Come, sir, begin--
       (LAMPEDO takes one.) That's well!--Another.
Lamp.  One's a dose.
Balth. Proceed, sir.
Lamp.  What will become of me?
       Let me go home, and set my shop to rights,
       And, like immortal Caesar, die with decency.
Balth. Away! and thank thy lucky star I have not
       Brayed thee in thine own mortar, or exposed thee
       For a large specimen of the lizard genus.
Lamp.  Would I were one!--for they can feed on air.
Balth. Home, sir! and be more honest.
Lump.  If I am not,
       I'll be more wise, at least.


NOTEs.--Pluto, in ancient mythology, the god of the lower world.

Pandora is described in the Greek legends as the first created woman. She
was sent by Jupiter to Epimetheus as a punishment, because the latter's
brother, Prometheus, had stolen fire from heaven. When she arrived among
men, she opened a box in which were all the evils of mankind, and
everything escaped except Hope.



LXIII. RIP VAN WINKLE. (242)

The appearance of Rip, with his long, grizzled beard, his rusty fowling
piece, his uncouth dress, and an army of women and children at his heels,
soon attracted the attention of the tavern politicians. They crowded
around him, eying him from head to foot with great curiosity. The orator
bustled up to him, and, drawing him partly aside, inquired on which side
he voted. Rip stared in vacant stupidity. Another short but busy little
fellow pulled him by the arm, and, rising on tiptoe, inquired in his ear
"whether he was Federal or Democrat."

Rip was equally at a loss to comprehend the question; when a knowing,
self-important old gentleman, in a sharp cocked hat, made his way through
the crowd, putting them to the right and left with his elbows as he
passed, and planting himself before Van Winkle, with one arm akimbo, the
other resting on his cane, his keen eyes and sharp hat, penetrating, as it
were, into his very soul, demanded, in an austere tone, what brought him
to the election with a gun on his shoulder, and a mob at his heels, and
whether he meant to breed a riot in the village.

"Alas! gentlemen," cried Rip, somewhat dismayed, "I am a poor, quiet man,
a native of the place, and a loyal subject of the king, God bless him!"
Here a general shout burst from the bystanders.--"A tory! a tory! a spy! a
refugee! hustle him! away with him!" It was with great difficulty that the
self-important man in the cocked hat restored order; and, having a tenfold
austerity of brow, demanded again of the unknown culprit, what he came
there for, and whom he was seeking. The poor man humbly assured him that
he meant no harm, but merely came there in search of some of his
neighbors, who used to keep about the tavern. "Well, who are they? name
them."

Rip bethought himself a moment, and inquired, "Where's Nicholas Vedder?"
There was a silence for a little while, when an old man replied, in a
thin, piping voice, "Nicholas Vedder! why he is dead and gone these
eighteen years! There was a wooden tombstone in the churchyard that used
to tell all about him, but that's rotten and gone too." "Where's Brom
Dutcher?" "Oh, he went off to the army in the beginning of the war. Some
say he was killed at the storming of Stony Point; others say he was
drowned in a squall at the foot of Anthony's Nose. I don't know; he never
came back again."

"Where's Van Bummel, the schoolmaster?" "He went off to the wars,  too;
was a great militia general, and is now in Congress." Rip's heart died
away at hearing of these sad changes in his home and friends, and finding
himself thus alone in the world. Every answer puzzled him, too, by
treating of such enormous lapses of time, and of matters which he could
not understand--war, Congress, Stony Point. He had no courage to ask after
any more friends, but cried out in despair, "Does nobody here know Rip Van
Winkle?"

"Oh, Rip Van Winkle!" exclaimed two or three. "Oh, to be sure! That's Rip
Van Winkle yonder, leaning against the tree." Rip looked, and beheld a
precise counterpart of himself as he went up the mountain; apparently as
lazy, and certainly as ragged. The poor fellow was now completely
confounded; he doubted his own identity, and whether he was himself or
another man. In the midst of his bewilderment, the man in the cocked hat
demanded who he was, and what was his name.

"God knows!" exclaimed he, at his wit's end. "I'm not myself; I'm somebody
else; that's me yonder; no, that's somebody else got into my shoes. I was
myself last night; but I fell asleep on the mountain, and they've changed
my gun, and everything's changed, and I'm changed, and I can't tell what's
my name or who I am!"

The bystanders began now to look at each other, nod, wink significantly,
and tap their fingers against their foreheads. There was a whisper, also,
about securing the gun, and keeping the old fellow from doing mischief, at
the very suggestion of which the self-important man in the cocked hat
retired with some precipitation. At this critical moment, a fresh, comely
woman pressed through the throng to get a peep at the gray-bearded man.
She had a chubby child in her arms, which, frightened at his looks, began
to cry. "Hush, Rip!" cried she, "hush, you little fool! the old man won't
hurt you."

The name of the child, the air of the mother, the tone of her voice, all
awakened a train of recollections in his mind. "What is your name, my good
woman?" asked he. "Judith Gardenier." "And your father's name?" "Ah, poor
man! Rip Van Winkle was his name; but it's twenty years since he went away
from home with his gun, and never has been heard of since; his dog came
home without him; but whether he shot himself, or was carried away by the
Indians, nobody can tell. I was then but a little girl."

Rip had but one question more to ask; but he put it with a faltering
voice: "Where's your mother?" "Oh, she, too, died but a short time since;
she broke a blood vessel in a fit of passion at a New England peddler."
There was a drop of comfort, at least, in this intelligence. The honest
man could contain himself no longer. He caught his daughter and her child
in his arms. "I am your father!" cried he. "Young Rip Van Winkle once, old
Rip Van Winkle now! Does nobody know poor Rip Van Winkle?"

All stood amazed, until an old woman, tottering out from among the crowd,
put her hand to her brow, and, peering under it in his face for a moment,
exclaimed, "Sure enough! it is Rip Van Winkle! it is himself! Welcome home
again, old neighbor! Why, where have you been these twenty long years?"
Rip's story was soon told, for the whole twenty years had been to him but
as one night.

To make a long story short, the company broke up and returned to the more
important concerns of the election. Rip's daughter took him home to live
with her. She had a snug, well-furnished house, and a stout, cheery farmer
for a husband, whom Rip recollected for one of the urchins that used to
climb upon his back. Rip now resumed his old walks and habits. He soon
found many of his former cronies, though all rather the worse for the wear
and tear of time, and preferred making friends among the rising
generation, with whom he soon grew into great favor.
                                                                 --Irving.

NOTES.--Rip Van Winkle, according to Irving's story in "The Sketch Book,"
was a great drunkard, and was driven from his home in the Catskill
Mountains, one night, by his wife. Wandering among the mountains, he fell
in with the ghosts of Hendrick Hudson and his crew, with whom he played a
game of ninepins. Upon drinking the liquor which they offered him,
however, he immediately fell into a deep sleep which lasted for twenty
years. The above lesson recounts the events that befell him when he
returned to his native village. In the meantime the Revolution of 1776 had
taken place.

The Federals and the Democrats formed the two leading political parties of
that time.

Stony Point is a promontory on the Hudson, at the entrance of the
Highlands, forty-two miles from New York. It was a fortified post during
the Revolution, captured by the British, and again retaken by the
Americans under Wayne. Anthony's Nose is also a promontory on the Hudson,
about fifteen miles above Stony Point.



LXIV. BILL AND JOE. (246)

Oliver Wendell Holmes, 1809-1894, was the son of Abiel Holmes, D.D. He was
born in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and graduated at Harvard in 1829, having
for classmates several men who have since become distinguished. After
graduating, he studied law for about one year, and then turned his
attention to medicine. He studied his profession in Paris, and elsewhere
in Europe, and took his degree at Cambridge in 1836. In 1838 he was
appointed Professor of Anatomy and Physiology in Dartmouth College. He
remained here but a short time, and then returned to Boston and entered on
the practice of medicine. In 1847 he was appointed professor at Harvard,
filling a similar position to the one held at Dartmouth. He discharged the
duties of his professorship for more than thirty years, with great
success. Literature was never his profession; yet few American authors
attained higher success, both as a poet and as a prose writer. His poems
are lively and sparkling, abound in wit and humor, but are not wanting in
genuine pathos. Many of them were composed for special occasions. His
prose writings include works on medicine, essays, and novels; several
appeared first as contributions to the "Atlantic Monthly." He gained
reputation, also, as it popular lecturer. In person, Dr. Holmes was small
and active, with a face expressive of thought and vivacity.
###


Come, dear old comrade, you and I
Will steal an hour from days gone by--
The shining days when life was new,
And all was bright as morning dew,
The lusty days of long ago,
When you were Bill and I was Joe.

Your name may flaunt a titled trail
Proud as a cockerel's rainbow tail,
And mine as brief appendix wear
As Tam O'Shanter's luckless mare;
To-day, old friend, remember still
That I am Joe and you are Bill.

You've won the great world's envied prize,
And grand you look in people's eyes,
With HON. and LL. D.,
In big, brave letters fair to see,--
Your fist, old fellow! Off they go!--
How are you, Bill? How are you, Joe?

You've worn the judge's ermined robe;
You've taught your name to half the globe;
You've sung mankind a deathless strain;
You've made the dead past live again:
The world may call you what it will,
But you and I are Joe and Bill.

The chaffing young folks stare and say,
"See those old buffers, bent and gray;
They talk like fellows in their teens;
Mad, poor old boys! That's what it means"
And shake their heads; they little know
The throbbing hearts of Bill and Joe--

How Bill forgets his hour of pride,
While Joe sits smiling at his side;
How Joe, in spite of time's disguise,
Finds the old schoolmate in his eyes,--
Those calm, stern eyes, that melt and fill,
As Joe looks fondly up to Bill.

Ah! pensive scholar, what is fame?
A fitful tongue of leaping flame;
A giddy whirlwind's fickle gust,
That lifts a pinch of mortal dust;
A few swift years, and who can show
Which dust was Bill, and which was Joe.

The weary idol takes his stand,
Holds out his bruised and aching hand,
While gaping thousands come and go--
How vain it seems, this empty show!--
Till all at once his pulses thrill:
'T is poor old Joe's, "God bless you, Bill!"

And shall we breathe in happier spheres
The names that pleased our mortal ears;
In some sweet lull of heart and song
For earth born spirits none too long,
Just whispering of the world below
When this was Bill, and that was Joe?

No matter; while our home is here,
No sounding name is half so dear;
When fades at length our lingering day,
Who cares what pompous tombstones say?
Read on the hearts that love us still,
Hic jacet Joe. Hic jacet Bill.


NOTE.--Hic jacet (pro. hic ja'cet) is a Latin phrase, meaning here lies.
It is frequently used in epitaphs.



LXV. SORROW FOR THE DEAD. (249)

The sorrow for the dead is the only sorrow from which we refuse to be
divorced. Every other wound we seek to heal; every other affliction, to
forget; but this wound we consider it a duty to keep open. This affliction
we cherish, and brood over in solitude. Where is the mother who would
willingly forget the infant that has perished like a blossom from her
arms, though every recollection is a pang? Where is the child that would
willingly forget a tender parent, though to remember be but to lament?
Who, even in the hour of agony, would forget the friend over whom he
mourns?

No, the love which survives the tomb is one of the noblest attributes of
the soul. If it has its woes, it has likewise its delights: and when the
overwhelming burst of grief is calmed into the gentle tear of
recollection; when the sudden anguish and the convulsive agony over the
present ruins of all that we most loved, is softened away into pensive
meditation on all that it was in the days of its loveliness, who would
root out such a sorrow from the heart? Though it may, sometimes, throw a
passing cloud over the bright hour of gayety, or spread a deeper sadness
over the hour of gloom; yet, who would exchange it even for the song of
pleasure, or the burst of revelry? No, there is a voice from the tomb
sweeter than song. There is a remembrance of the dead, to which we turn
even from the charms of the living.

Oh, the grave! the grave! It buries every error, covers every defect,
extinguishes every resentment! From its peaceful bosom spring none but
fond regrets and tender recollections. Who can look down upon the grave
even of an enemy, and not feel a compunctious throb, that he should have
warred with the poor handful of earth that lies moldering before him? But
the grave of those we loved--what a place for meditation! There it is that
we call up, in long review, the whole history of virtue and gentleness,
and the thousand endearments lavished upon us, almost unheeded in the
daily intercourse of intimacy; there it is that we dwell upon the
tenderness, the solemn, awful tenderness of the parting scene; the bed of
death, with all its stifled griefs, its noiseless attendance, its mute,
watchful assiduities! the last testimonies of expiring love! the feeble,
fluttering, thrilling,--oh! how thrilling!--pressure of the hand! the last
fond look of the glazing eye turning upon us, even from the threshold of
existence! the faint, faltering accents, struggling in death to give one
more assurance of affection!

Ay, go to the grave of buried love, and meditate! There settle the account
with thy conscience for every past benefit unrequited; every past
endearment unregarded, of that departed being, who can never--never--
never return to be soothed by thy contrition! If thou art a child, and
hast ever added a sorrow to the soul, or a furrow to the silvered brow of
an affectionate parent; if thou art a husband, and hast ever caused the
fond bosom that ventured its whole happiness in thy arms to doubt one
moment of thy kindness or thy truth; if thou art a friend, and hast ever
wronged, in thought, or word, or deed, the spirit that generously confided
in thee; if thou hast given one unmerited pang to that true heart, which
now lies cold and still beneath thy feet; then be sure that every unkind
look, every ungracious word, every ungentle action, will come thronging
back upon thy memory, and knocking dolefully at thy soul; then be sure
that thou wilt lie down sorrowing and repentant on the grave, and utter
the unheard groan, and pour the unavailing tear; more deep, more bitter,
because unheard and unavailing.

Then weave thy chaplet of flowers, and strew the beauties of nature about
the grave; console thy broken spirit, if thou canst, with these tender,
yet futile, tributes of regret: but take warning by the bitterness of
this, thy contrite affliction over the dead, and henceforth be more
faithful and affectionate in the discharge of thy duties to the living.
                                                             --Irving.



LXVI. THE EAGLE. (251)

James Gates Percival, 1795-1856, was born at Berlin, Connecticut, and
graduated at Yale College in 1815, at the head of his class. He was
admitted to the practice of medicine in 1820, and went to Charleston,
South Carolina. In 1824 he was appointed Professor of Chemistry at West
Point, a position which he held but a few months. In 1854 he was appointed
State Geologist of Wisconsin, and died at Hazel Green, in that state. Dr.
Percival was eminent as a geographer, geologist, and linguist. He began to
write poetry at an early age, and his fame rests chiefly upon his writings
in this department. In his private life, Percival was always shy, modest,
and somewhat given to melancholy. Financially, his life was one of
struggle, and he was often greatly straitened for money.
###

Bird of the broad and sweeping wing!
  Thy home is high in heaven,
Where the wide storms their banners fling,
  And the tempest clouds are driven.
Thy throne is on the mountain top;
  Thy fields, the boundless air;
And hoary peaks, that proudly prop
  The skies, thy dwellings are.

Thou art perched aloft on the beetling crag,
  And the waves are white below,
And on, with a haste that can not lag,
  They rush in an endless flow.
Again thou hast plumed thy wing for flight
  To lands beyond the sea,
And away, like a spirit wreathed in light,
  Thou hurriest, wild and free.

Lord of the boundless realm of air!
  In thy imperial name,
The hearts of the bold and ardent dare
  The dangerous path of fame,
Beneath the shade of thy golden wings,
  The Roman legions bore,
From the river of Egypt's cloudy springs,
  Their pride, to the polar shore.

For thee they fought, for thee they fell,
  And their oath on thee was laid;
To thee the clarions raised their swell,
  And the dying warrior prayed.
Thou wert, through an age of death and fears,
  The image of pride and power,
Till the gathered rage of a thousand years,
  Burst forth in one awful hour.

And then, a deluge of wrath, it came,
  And the nations shook with dread;
And it swept the earth, till its fields were flame,
  And piled with the mingled dead.
Kings were rolled in the wasteful flood,
  With the low and crouching slave;
And together lay, in a shroud of blood,
  The coward and the brave.

NOTES.--Roman legions. The Roman standard was the image of an eagle. The
soldiers swore by it, and the loss of it was considered a disgrace.

One awful hour. Alluding to the destruction of Rome by the northern
barbarians.



LXVII. POLITICAL TOLERATION. (253)

Thomas Jefferson, 1743-1826, the third President of the United States, and
the author of the Declaration of Independence, was born in Albemarle
County, Virginia. He received most of his early education under private
tutors, and at the age of seventeen entered William and Mary College,
where he remained two years. At college, where he studied industriously,
he formed the acquaintance of several distinguished men, among them was
George Wythe, with whom he entered on the study of law. At the age of
twenty-four he was admitted to the bar, and soon rose to high standing in
his profession. In 1775 he entered the Colonial Congress, having
previously served ably in the legislature of his native state. Although
one of the youngest men in Congress, he soon took a foremost place in that
body. He left Congress in the fall of 1776, and, as a member of the
legislature, and later as Governor of Virginia, he was chiefly
instrumental in effecting several important reforms in the laws of that
state,--the most notable were the abolition of the law of primogeniture,
and the passage of a law making all religious denominations equal. From
1785 to 1789 he was Minister to France. On his return to America he was
made Secretary of State, in the first Cabinet. While in this office, he
became the leader of the Republican or Anti-Federalist party, in
opposition to the Federalist party led by Alexander Hamilton. From 1801 to
1809 he was President. On leaving his high office, he retired to his
estate at "Monticello," where he passed the closing years of his life, and
died on the 4th of July, just fifty years after the passage of his famous
Declaration. His compatriot, and sometimes bitter political opponent, John
Adams, died on the same day.

Mr. Jefferson, who was never a ready public speaker, was a remarkably
clear and forcible writer; his works fill several large volumes. In
personal character, he was pure and simple, cheerful, and disposed to look
on the bright side. His knowledge of life rendered his conversation highly
attractive. The chief enterprise of his later years was the founding of
the University of Virginia, at Charlottesville.
###


During the contest of opinion through which we have passed, the animation
of discussions and of exertions has sometimes worn an aspect which might
impose on strangers, unused to think freely and to speak and to write what
they think; but this being now decided by the voice of the nation,
announced according to the rules of the constitution, all will, of course,
arrange themselves under the will of the law, and unite in common efforts
for the common good.

All, too, will bear in mind this sacred principle, that, though the will
of the majority is, in all cases, to prevail, that will, to be rightful,
must be reasonable; that the minority possess their equal rights, which
equal laws must protect, and to violate which would be oppression. Let us
then, fellow-citizens, unite with one heart and one mind.

Let us restore to social intercourse that harmony and affection, without
which liberty, and even life itself, are but dreary things; and let us
reflect, that, having banished from our land that religious intolerance
under which mankind so long bled and suffered, we have gained little if we
countenance a political intolerance as despotic, as wicked, and capable of
as bitter and bloody persecutions.

During the throes and convulsions of the ancient world; during the
agonizing spasms of infuriated man, seeking, through blood and slaughter,
his long-lost liberty; it was not wonderful that the agitation of the
billows should reach even this distant and peaceful shore; that this
should be more felt and feared by some, and less by others, and should
divide opinions as to measures of safety.

But every difference of opinion is not a difference of principle. We have
called by different names brethren of the same principle. We are all
Republicans; we are all Federalists. If there be any among us who would
wish to dissolve this Union, or to change its republican form, let them
stand undisturbed as monuments of the safety with which error of opinion
may be tolerated when reason is left free to combat it.

I know, indeed, that some honest men fear that a republican government can
not be strong; that this government is not strong enough. But would the
honest patriot, in the full tide of successful experiment, abandon a
government which has so far kept us free and firm, on the theoretic and
visionary fear that this government, the world's best hope, may, by
possibility, want energy to preserve itself? I trust not; I believe this,
on the contrary, the strongest government on earth.

I believe it to be the only one where every man, at the call of the law,
would fly to the standard of the law, and would meet invasions of the
public order as his own personal concern. Sometimes it is said that man
can not be trusted with the government of himself. Can he, then, be
trusted with the government of others, or have we found angels, in the
form of kings, to govern him? Let history answer this question. Let us,
then, with courage and confidence, pursue our own federal and republican
principles; our attachment to union and representative government.

NOTE.--At the time of Jefferson's election, party spirit ran very high. He
had been defeated by John Adams at the previous presidential election, but
the Federal party, to which Adams belonged, became weakened by their
management during difficulties with France; and now Jefferson had been
elected president over his formerly successful rival. The above selection
is from his inaugural address.



LXVIII. WHAT CONSTITUTES A STATE? (255)

Sir William Jones, 1746-1794, was the son of an eminent mathematician; he
early distinguished himself by his ability as a student. He graduated at
Oxford, became well versed in Oriental literature, studied law, and wrote
many able books. In 1783 he was appointed Judge of the Supreme Court of
Judicature in Bengal. He was a man of astonishing learning, upright life,
and Christian principles.
###


  What constitutes a state?
Not high-raised battlement or labored mound,
  Thick wall or moated gate;
Not cities proud with spires and turrets crowned;
  Not bays and broad-armed ports,
Where, laughing at the storm, rich navies ride;
  Not starred and spangled courts,
Where low-browed baseness wafts perfume to pride.

  No:--men, high-minded men,
With powers as far above dull brutes endued
  In forest, brake, or den,
As beasts excel cold rocks and brambles rude,--
  Men who their duties know,
But know their rights, and, knowing, dare maintain,
  Prevent the long-aimed blow,
And crush the tyrant while they rend the chain:
  These constitute a state;
And sovereign Law, that state's collected will,
  O'er thrones and globes elate,
Sits empress, crowning good, repressing ill.


LXIX. THE BRAVE AT HOME. (256)

Thomas Buchanan Read, 1822-1872, an American poet and painter, was born in
Chester County, Pennsylvania. At the age of seventeen he entered a
sculptor's studio in Cincinnati. Here he gained reputation as a painter of
portraits. From this city he went to New York, Boston, and Philadelphia,
and soon after to Florence, Italy. In the later years of his life, he
divided his time between Cincinnati, Philadelphia, and Rome. His complete
poetical works fill three volumes. Several of his most stirring poems
relate to the Revolutionary War, and to the late Civil War in America.
Many of his poems are marked by vigor and a ringing power, while
smoothness and delicacy distinguish others, no less.
###


The maid who binds her warrior's sash,
  And, smiling, all her pain dissembles,
The while beneath the drooping lash,
  One starry tear-drop hangs and trembles;
Though Heaven alone records the tear,
  And fame shall never know her story,
Her heart has shed a drop as dear
  As ever dewed the field of glory!

The wife who girds her husband's sword,
  'Mid little ones who weep and wonder,
And bravely speaks the cheering word,
  What though her heart be rent asunder;--
Doomed nightly in her dreams to hear
  The bolts of war around him rattle,--
Has shed as sacred blood as e'er
  Was poured upon the field of battle!

The mother who conceals her grief,
  While to her breast her son she presses,
Then breathes a few brave words and brief,
  Kissing the patriot brow she blesses;
With no one but her loving God,
  To know the pain that weighs upon her,
Sheds holy blood as e'er the sod
  Received on Freedom's field of honor!


NOTE.--The above selection is from the poem entitled "The Wagoner of the
Alleghanies."



LXX. SOUTH CAROLINA. (257)

Robert Young Hayne, 1791-1840, was born in Colleton District, South
Carolina, and studied and practiced law at Charleston. He was early
elected to the State Legislature, and became Speaker of the House and
Attorney-general of the state. He entered the Senate of the United States
at the age of thirty-one. He was Governor of South Carolina during the
"Nullification" troubles in 1832 and 1833. Mr. Hayne was a clear and able
debater, and a stanch advocate of the extreme doctrine of "State Rights."
In the Senate he opposed the Tariff Bill of 1828; and, out of this
struggle, grew his famous debate with Daniel Webster in 1830. The
following selection is an extract from Mr. Hayne's speech on that
memorable occasion.
###


If there be one state in the Union, Mr. President, that may challenge
comparison with any other, for a uniform, zealous, ardent, and
uncalculating devotion to the Union, that state is South Carolina. Sir,
from the very commencement of the Revolution, up to this hour, there is no
sacrifice, however great, she has not cheerfully made; no service she has
ever hesitated to perform.

She has adhered to you in your prosperity; but in your adversity she has
clung to you with more than filial affection. No matter what was the
condition of her domestic affairs; though deprived of her resources,
divided by parties, or surrounded by difficulties, the call of the country
has been to her as the voice of God. Domestic discord ceased at the sound;
every man became at once reconciled to his brethren, and the sons of
Carolina were all seen, crowding to the temple, bringing their gifts to
the altar of their common country.

What, sir, was the conduct of the South, during the Revolution? Sir, I
honor New England for her conduct in that glorious struggle. But great as
is the praise which belongs to her, I think at least equal honor is due to
the South. Never were there exhibited, in the history of the world, higher
examples of noble daring, dreadful suffering, and heroic endurance, than
by the whigs of Carolina, during the Revolution. The whole state, from the
mountains to the sea, was overrun by an overwhelming force of the enemy.
The fruits of industry perished on the spot where they were produced, or
were consumed by the foe.

The plains of Carolina drank up the most precious blood of her citizens.
Black, smoking ruins marked the places which had been the habitation of
her children. Driven from their homes into the gloomy and almost
impenetrable swamps, even there the spirit of liberty survived, and South
Carolina, sustained by the example of her Sumters and her Marions, proved,
by her conduct, that though her soil might be overrun, the spirit of her
people was invincible.


NOTES.--Thomas Sumter (b. 1734, d. 1832) was by birth a Virginian, but
during the Revolution commanded South Carolina troops. He was one of the
most active and able of the Southern generals, and, after the war, was
prominent in politics. He was the last surviving general of the
Revolution.

Francis Marion (b. 1732, d. 1795), known as the "Swamp Fox," was a native
South Carolinian, of French descent. Marion's brigade became noted during
the Revolution for its daring and surprising attacks. See Lesson CXXXV.



LXXI. MASSACHUSETTS AND SOUTH CAROLINA. (259)

Daniel Webster, 1782-1852. This celebrated American statesman and orator
was born in Salisbury, New Hampshire. His father, Ebenezer Webster, was a
pioneer settler, a soldier in the Old French War and the Revolution, and a
man of ability and strict integrity, Daniel attended the common school in
his youth, and fitted for college under Rev. Samuel Wood, of Boseawen,
graduating at Dartmouth in 1801. He spent a few months of his boyhood at
"Phillips Academy," Exeter, where he attained distinction as a student,
but was so diffident that he could never give a declamation before his
class. During his college course, and later, he taught school several
terms in order to increase his slender finances. He was admitted to the
bar in Boston in 1805. For the next eleven years, he practiced his
profession in his native state. In 1812 he was elected to the United
States House of Representatives, and at once took his place as one of the
most prominent men of that body. In 1816 he removed to Boston; and in 1827
he was elected to the United States Senate, where he continued for twelve
years. In 1841 he was made Secretary of State, and soon after negotiated
the famous "Ashburton Treaty" with England, settling the northern boundary
of the United States. In 1845 he returned to the Senate; and in 1850 he
was re-appointed Secretary of State, and continued in office till his
death. He died at his country residence in Marshfield, Massachusetts.

Mr. Webster's fame rests chiefly on his state papers and his speeches in
Congress; but he took a prominent part in some of the most famous law
cases of the present century. Several of his public addresses on
occasional themes are well known, also. As a speaker, he was dignified and
stately, using clear, straightforward, pure English. He had none of the
tricks of oratory. He was large of person, with a massive head, a swarthy
complexion, and deep-set, keen, and lustrous eyes. His grand presence
added much to his power as a speaker.
###


The eulogium pronounced on the character of the State of South Carolina by
the honorable gentleman, for her Revolutionary and other merits, meets my
hearty concurrence. I shall not acknowledge that the honorable member goes
before me, in regard for whatever of distinguished talent or distinguished
character South Carolina has produced. I claim part of the honor; I
partake in the pride of her great names. I claim them for countrymen, one
and all--the Laurenses, the Rutledges, the Pinckneys, the Sumters, the
Marions--Americans all--whose fame is no more to be hemmed in by state
lines than their talents and patriotism were capable of being
circumscribed within the same narrow limits.

In their day and generation, they served and honored the country, and the
whole country, and their renown is of the treasures of the whole country.
Him whose honored name the gentleman himself bears,--does he suppose me
less capable of gratitude for his patriotism, or sympathy for his
suffering, than if his eyes had first opened upon the light in
Massachusetts, instead of South Carolina? Sir, does he suppose it in his
power to exhibit in Carolina a name so bright as to produce envy in my
bosom? No, sir,--increased gratification and delight rather. Sir, I thank
God that, if I am gifted with little of the spirit which is said to be
able to raise mortals to the skies, I have yet none, as I trust, of that
other spirit which would drag angels down.

When I shall be found, sir, in my place here in the Senate, or elsewhere,
to sneer at public merit because it happened to spring up beyond the
little limits of my own state or neighborhood; when I refuse for any such
cause, or for any cause, the homage due to American talent, to elevated
patriotism, to sincere devotion to liberty and the country; or if I see an
uncommon endowment of Heaven; if I see extraordinary capacity or virtue in
any son of the South; and if, moved by local prejudice, or gangrened by
state jealousy, I get up here to abate a tithe of a hair from his just
character and just fame, may my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth!

Mr. President, I shall enter on no encomium upon Massachusetts. She needs
none. There she is; behold her, and judge for yourselves. There is her
history; the world knows it by heart. The past, at least, is secure. There
is Boston, and Concord, and Lexington, and Bunker Hill; and there they
will remain forever. And, sir, where American Liberty raised its first
voice, and where its youth was nurtured and sustained, there it still
lives, in the strength of its manhood, and full of its original spirit. If
discord and disunion shall wound it; if party strife and blind ambition
shall hawk at and tear it; if folly and madness, if uneasiness under
salutary restraint, shall succeed to separate it from that Union, by which
alone its existence is made sure, it will stand, in the end, by the side
of that cradle in which its infancy was rocked; it will stretch forth its
arm, with whatever of vigor it may still retain, over the friends who
gathered around it; and it will fall at last, if fall it must, amid the
proudest monuments of its glory and on the very spot of its origin.


NOTES.--The Laurenses were of French descent. Henry Laurens was appointed
on the commission with Franklin and Jay to negotiate the treaty of peace
at Paris at the close of the Revolution. His son, John Laurens, was an aid
and secretary of Washington, who was greatly attached to him.

The Rutledges were of Irish descent. John Rutledge was a celebrated
statesman and lawyer. He was appointed Chief Justice of the United States,
but the Senate, for political reasons, refused to confirm his appointment.


Edward Rutledge, brother of the preceding, was Governor of South Carolina
during the last two years of his life.

The Pinckneys were an old English family who emigrated to Charleston in
1687. Charles Cotesworth Pinckney and his brother Thomas were both active
participants in the Revolution. The former was an unsuccessful candidate
for the presidency of the United States, in 1800.

Thomas was elected governor of South Carolina in 1789. In the war of 1812
he served as major-general.

Charles Pinckney, a second cousin of the two already mentioned, was four
times elected governor of his state.



LXXII. THE CHURCH SCENE FROM EVANGELINE. (262)

Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, 1807-1882, the son of Hon. Stephen Longfellow,
an eminent lawyer of Portland, Maine, was born in that city. He graduated,
at the age of eighteen, at Bowdoin College. He was soon appointed to the
chair of Modern Languages and Literature in that institution, and, to fit
himself further for his work, he went abroad and spent four years in
Europe. He remained at Bowdoin till 1835, when he was appointed to the
chair of Modern Languages and Belles-lettres in Harvard University. On
receiving this appointment, he again went to Europe and remained two
years. He resigned his professorship in 1854, and after that time resided
in Cambridge, pursuing his literary labors and giving to the public, from
time to time, the fruits of his pen. In 1868 he made a voyage to England,
where he was received with extraordinary marks of honor and esteem. In
addition to Mr. Longfellow's original works, both in poetry and in prose,
he distinguished himself by several translations; the most famous is that
of the works of Dante.

Mr. Longfellow's poetry is always elegant and chaste, showing in every
line traces of his careful scholarship. Yet it is not above the popular
taste or comprehension, as is shown by the numerous and varied editions of
his poems. Many of his poems treat of historical themes; "Evangeline,"
from which the following selection is taken, is esteemed by many as the
most beautiful of all his longer poems; it was first published in 1847.
###


So passed the morning away. And lo! with a summons sonorous
Sounded the bell from its tower, and over the meadows a drumbeat.
Thronged erelong was the church with men. Without, in the churchyard,
Awaited the women. They stood by the graves, and hung on the headstones
Garlands of autumn leaves and evergreens fresh from the forest.
Then came the guard from the ships, and marching proudly among them
Entered the sacred portal. With loud and dissonant clangor
Echoed the sound of their brazen drums from ceiling and casement,--
Echoed a moment only, and slowly the ponderous portal
Closed, and in silence the crowd awaited the will of the soldiers.

Then uprose their commander, and spake from the steps of the altar,
Holding aloft in his hands, with its seals, the royal commission.
"You have convened this day," he said, "by his Majesty's orders.
Clement and kind has he been; but how you have answered his kindness,
Let your own hearts reply! To my natural make and my temper
Painful the task is I do, which to you I know must be grievous.
Yet must I bow and obey, and deliver the will of our monarch;
Namely, that all your lands, and dwellings, and cattle of all kinds
Forfeited be to the crown; and that you yourselves from this province
Be transported to other lands. God grant you may dwell there
Ever as faithful subjects, a happy and peaceable people!
Prisoners now I declare you; for such is his Majesty's pleasure!"

As, when the air is serene in the sultry solstice of summer,
Suddenly gathers a storm, and the deadly sling of the hailstones
Beats down the farmer's corn in the field and shatters his windows,
Hiding the sun, and strewing the ground with thatch from the house roofs,
Bellowing fly the herds, and seek to break their inclosure;
So on the hearts of the people descended the words of the speaker.
Silent a moment they stood in speechless wonder, and then rose
Louder and ever louder a wail of sorrow and anger,
And, by one impulse moved, they madly rushed to the doorway.

Vain was the hope of escape; and cries and fierce imprecations
Rang through the house of prayer; and high o'er the heads of the others
Rose, with his arms uplifted, the figure of Basil the blacksmith,
As, on a stormy sea, a spar is tossed by the billows.
Flushed was his face and distorted with passion; and wildly he shouted,--
"Down with the tyrants of England! we never have sworn them allegiance!
Death to these foreign soldiers, who seize on our homes and our harvests!"
More he fain would have said, but the merciless hand of a soldier
Smote him upon the mouth, and dragged him down to the pavement.

In the midst of the strife and tumult of angry contention,
Lo! the door of the chancel opened, and Father Felician
Entered, with serious mien, and ascended the steps of the alter.
Raising his reverend hand, with a gesture he awed into silence
All that clamorous throng; and thus he spake to his people;
Deep were his tones and solemn; in accents measured and mournful
Spake he, as, after the tocsin's alarum, distinctly the clock strikes.

"What is this that ye do, my children? what madness has seized you?
Forty years of my life have I labored among you, and taught you,
Not in word alone, but in deed, to love one another!
Is this the fruit of my toils, of my vigils and prayers and privations?
Have you so soon forgotten all the lessons of love and forgiveness?
This is the house of the Prince of Peace, and would you profane it
Thus with violent deeds and hearts overflowing with hatred?
Lo! where the crucified Christ from his cross is gazing upon you!
See! in those sorrowful eyes what meekness and holy compassion!
Hark! how those lips still repeat the prayer, 'O Father, forgive them!'
Let us repeat that prayer in the hour when the wicked assail us,
Let us repeat it now, and say, 'O Father, forgive them.' "

Few were his words of rebuke, but deep in the hearts of his people
Sank they, and sobs of contrition succeeded the passionate outbreak,
While they repeated his prayer, and said, "O Father, forgive them!"


NOTE.--Nova Scotia was first settled by the French, but, in 1713, was
ceded to the English. The inhabitants refusing either to take the oath of
allegiance or to bear arms against their fellow-countrymen in the French
and Indian War, it was decided to remove the whole people, and distribute
them among the other British provinces. This was accordingly done in 1755.
The villages were burned to the ground, and the people hurried on board
the ships in such a way that but a few families remained undivided.

Longfellow's poem of "Evangeline" is founded on this incident, and the
above selection describes the scene where the male inhabitants of
Grand-Pre' are assembled in the church, and the order for their banishment
is first made known to them.


LXXIII. SONG OF THE SHIRT. (266)

Thomas Hood, 1798-1845, the son of a London bookseller, was born in that
city. He undertook, after leaving school, to learn the art of an engraver,
but soon gave up the business, and turned his attention to literature. His
lighter pieces, exhibiting his skill as a wit and punster, soon became
well known and popular. In 1821 he became subeditor of the "London
Magazine," and formed the acquaintance of the literary men of the
metropolis. The last years of his life were clouded by poverty and ill
health. Some of his most humorous pieces were written on a sick bed. Hood
is best known as a joker--a writer of "whims and oddities"--but he was no
mere joker. Some of his pieces are filled with the tenderest pathos; and a
gentle spirit, in love with justice and humanity, pervades even his
lighter compositions. His "Song of the Shirt" first appeared in the
"London Punch."
###


With fingers weary and worn,
  With eyelids heavy and red,
A woman sat, in unwomanly rags,
  Plying her needle and thread:
Stitch! stitch! stitch!
  In poverty, hunger, and dirt,
And still with a voice of dolorous pitch,
  She sang the "Song of the Shirt!"

  "Work! work! work!
While the cock is crowing aloof!
  And work! work! work!
Till the stars shine through the roof!
  It is oh to be a slave
Along with the barbarous Turk,
  Where woman has never a soul to save,
If this is Christian work!

  "Work! work! work!
Till the brain begins to swim;
  Work! work! work!
Till the eyes are heavy and dim!
  Seam, and gusset, and band,
Band, and gusset, and seam,
  Till over the buttons I fall asleep,
And sew them on in a dream!

  "O men, with sisters dear!
   O men, with mothers and wives!
It is not linen you're wearing out,
  But human creatures' lives!
    Stitch! stitch! stitch!
  In poverty, hunger, and dirt,--
Sewing at once, with a double thread,
  A shroud as well as a shirt.

 "But why do I talk of Death?
  That Phantom of grisly bone,
I hardly fear his terrible shape,
  It seems so like my own;
  It seems so like my own,
  Because of the fasts I keep;
O God! that bread should be so dear,
  And flesh and blood so cheap!

  "Work! work! work!
My labor never flags;
  And what are its wages? A bed of straw,
A crust of bread--and rags,
  That shattered roof--and this naked floor--
A table--a broken chair--
  And a wall so blank, my shadow I thank
For sometimes falling there.

  "Work! work! work!
From weary chime to chime!
  Work! work! work!
As prisoners work for crime!
  Band, and gusset, and seam,
  Seam, and gusset, and band,
Till the heart is sick, and the brain benumbed,
  As well as the weary hand.

  "Work! work! work!
In the dull December light,
  And work! work! work!
When the weather is warm and bright;
While underneath the eaves
  The brooding swallows cling,
As if to show me their sunny backs,
  And twit me with the spring.

  "Oh but to breathe the breath
  Of the cowslip and primrose sweet!
With the sky above my head,
  And the grass beneath my feet!
For only one short hour
  To feel as I used to feel,
Before I knew the woes of want,
  And the walk that costs a meal!

  "Oh but for one short hour,--
  A respite, however brief!
No blessed leisure for love or hope,
  But only time for grief!
A little weeping would ease my heart,
  But in their briny bed
My tears must stop, for every drop
  Hinders needle and thread."

With fingers weary and worn,
  With eyelids heavy and red,
A woman sat, in unwomanly rags,
  Plying her needle and thread:
    Stitch! stitch! stitch!
  In poverty, hunger, and dirt,
And still with a voice of dolorous pitch--
Would that its tone could reach the rich!
  She sang this "Song of the Shirt."



LXXIV. DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND. (269)

Edouard Rene Lefebvre-Laboulaye, 1811-1883, was a French writer of note.
Most of his works involve questions of law and politics, and are
considered high authority on the questions discussed. A few works, such as
"Abdallah," from which the following extract is adapted, were written as a
mere recreation in the midst of law studies; they show great imaginative
power. Laboulaye took great interest in the United States, her people, and
her literature; and many of his works are devoted to American questions.
He translated the works of Dr. William E. Channing into French.
###


Mansour, the Egyptian merchant, one day repaired to the cadi on account of
a suit, the issue of which troubled him but little. A private conversation
with the judge had given him hopes of the justice of his cause. The old
man asked his son Omar to accompany him in order to accustom him early to
deal with the law.

The cadi was seated in the courtyard of the mosque. He was a fat,
good-looking man, who never thought, and talked little, which, added to
his large turban and his air of perpetual astonishment, gave him a great
reputation for justice and gravity.

The spectators were numerous; the principal merchants were seated on the
ground on carpets, forming a semicircle around the magistrate. Mansour
took his seat a little way from the sheik, and Omar placed himself between
the two, his curiosity strongly excited to see how the law was obeyed, and
how it was trifled with in case of need.

The first case called was that of a young Banian, as yellow as an orange,
with loose flowing robes and an effeminate air, who had lately landed from
India, and who complained of having been cheated by one of Mansour's
rivals.

"Having found a casket of diamonds among the effects left by my father,"
said he, "I set out for Egypt, to live there on the proceeds of their
sale. I was obliged by bad weather to put into Jidda, where I soon found
myself in want of money. I went to the bazaar, and inquired for a dealer
in precious stones. The richest, I was told, was Mansour; the most honest,
Ali, the jeweler. I applied to Ali.

"He welcomed me as a son, as soon as he learned that I had diamonds to
sell, and carried me home with him. He gained my confidence by every kind
of attention, and advanced me all the money I needed. One day, after
dinner, at which wine was not wanting, he examined the diamonds, one by
one, and said, 'My child, these diamonds are of little value; my coffers
are full of such stones. The rocks of the desert furnish them by
thousands.'

"To prove the truth of what he said, he opened a box, and, taking
therefrom a diamond thrice as large as any of mine, gave it to the slave
that was with me. 'What will become of me?' I cried; 'I thought myself
rich, and here I am, poor, and a stranger.'

"'My child,' replied Ali, 'Leave this casket with me, and I will give you
a price for it such as no one else would offer. Choose whatever you wish
in Jidda, and in two hours I will give you an equal weight of what you
have chosen in exchange for your Indian stones.'

"On returning home, night brought reflection. I learned that Ali had been
deceiving me. What he had given to the slave was nothing but a bit of
crystal. I demanded my casket. Ali refused to restore it. Venerable
magistrate, my sole hope is in your justice."

It was now Ali's turn to speak. "Illustrious cadi," said he, "It is true
that we made a bargain, which I am ready to keep, The rest of the young
man's story is false. What matters it what I gave the slave? Did I force
the stranger to leave the casket in my hands? Why does he accuse me of
treachery? Have I broken my word, and has he kept his?"

"Young man," said the cadi to the Banian, "have you witnesses to prove
that Ali deceived you? If not, I shall put the accused on his oath, as the
law decrees." A Koran was brought. Ali placed his hand on it, and swore
three times that he had not deceived the stranger. "Wretch," said the
Banian, "thou art among those whose feet go down to destruction. Thou hast
thrown away thy soul."

Omar smiled, and while Ali was enjoying the success of his ruse, he
approached the stranger, and asked, "Do you wish me to help you gain the
suit?" "Yes," was the reply; "but you are only a child--you can do
nothing."

"Have confidence in me a few moments," said Omar; "accept Ali's bargain;
let me choose in your stead, and fear nothing."

The stranger bowed his head, and murmured, "What can I fear after having
lost all?" Then, turning to the cadi, and bowing respectfully, "Let the
bargain be consummated," said he, "since the law decrees it, and let this
young man choose in my stead what I shall receive in payment."

A profound silence ensued. Omar rose, and, bowing to the cadi, "Ali," said
he to the jeweler, "you have doubtless brought the casket, and can tell us
the weight thereof."

"Here it is," said Ali; "it weighs twenty pounds. Choose what you will; if
the thing asked for is in Jidda, you shall have it within two hours,
otherwise the bargain is null and void."

"What we desire," said Omar, raising his voice, "is ants' wings, half male
and half female. You have two hours in which to furnish the twenty pounds
you have promised us." "This is absurd," cried the jeweler; "it is
impossible. I should need half a score of persons and six months labor to
satisfy so foolish a demand."

"Are there any winged ants in Jidda?" asked the cadi. "Of course,"
answered the merchants, laughing; "they are one of the plagues of Egypt.
Our houses are full of them, and it would be doing us a great service to
rid us of them."

"Then Ali must keep his promise or give back the casket," said the cadi.
"This young man was mad to sell his diamonds weight for weight; he is mad
to exact such payment. So much the better for Ali the first time: so much
the worse for him the second.  Justice has not two weights and measures.
Every bargain holds good before the law. Either furnish twenty pounds of
ants' wings, or restore the casket to the Banian." "A righteous judgment,"
shouted the spectators, wonder-struck at such equity.


[Illustration: In front of a middle-eastern building; a man seated with a
sword and water-pipe, facing a crowd. A small boy with his left arm
outstreached, is speaking to the man. A taller young man stands to the
right of the small boy; an older man stands further to the right.]


The stranger, beside himself with joy, took from the casket three diamonds
of the finest water; he forced them on Omar, who put them in his girdle,
and seated himself by his father, his gravity unmoved by the gaze of the
assembly. "Well done," said Mansour; "but it is my turn now; mark me well,
and profit by the lesson I shall give you. Stop, young man!" he cried to
the Banian, "we have an account to settle."

"The day before yesterday," continued he, "this young man entered my shop,
and, bursting into tears, kissed my hand and entreated me to sell him a
necklace which I had already sold to the Pasha of Egypt, saying that his
life and that of a lady depended upon it. 'Ask of me what you will, my
father,' said he, 'but I must have these gems or die.'

"I have a weakness for young men, and, though I knew the danger of
disappointing my master the pasha, I was unable to resist his
supplications. 'Take the necklace,' said I to him, 'but promise to give
whatever I may ask in exchange.' 'My head itself, if you will,' he
replied, 'for you have saved my life,' We were without witnesses, but,"
added Mansour, turning to the Banian, "is not my story true?"

"Yes," said the young man, "and I beg your pardon for not having satisfied
you sooner: you know the cause. Ask of me what you desire."

"What I desire," said Mansour, "is the casket with all its contents.
Illustrious magistrate, you have declared that all bargains hold good
before the law; this young man has promised to give me what I please; now
I declare that nothing pleases me but these diamonds."

The cadi raised his head and looked about the assembly, as if to
interrogate the faces, then stroked his beard, and relapsed into his
meditations.

"Ali is defeated," said the sheik to Omar, with a smile, "The fox is not
yet born more cunning than the worthy Mansour."

"I am lost!" cried the Banian. "O Omar, have you saved me only to cast me
down from the highest pinnacle of joy to the depths of despair? Persuade
your father to spare me, that I may owe my life to you a second time."

"Well, my son," said Mansour, "doubtless you are shrewd, but this will
teach you that your father knows rather more than you do. The cadi is
about to decide: try whether you can dictate his decree."

"It is mere child's play," answered Omar, shrugging his shoulders; "but
since you desire it, my father, you shall lose your suit." He rose, and
taking a piaster from his girdle, put it into the hand of the Banian, who
laid it before the judge.

"Illustrious cadi," said Omar, "this young man is ready to fulfill his
engagement. This is what he offers Mansour--piaster. In itself this coin
is of little value; but examine it closely, and you will see that it is
stamped with the likeness of the sultan, our glorious master. May God
destroy and confound all who disobey his highness!

"It is this precious likeness that we offer you," added he, turning to
Mansour; "if it pleases you, you are paid; to say that it displeases you
is an insult to the pasha, a crime punishable by death; and I am sure that
our worthy cadi will not become your accomplice--he who has always been
and always will be the faithful servant of an the sultans."

When Omar had finished speaking, all eyes turned toward the cadi, who,
more impenetrable than ever, stroked his face and waited for the old man
to come to his aid. Mansour was agitated and embarrassed. The silence of
the cadi and the assembly terrified him, and he cast a supplicating glance
toward his son.

"My father," said Omar, "permit this young man to thank you for the lesson
of prudence which you have given him by frightening him a little. He knows
well that it was you who sent me to his aid, and that all this is a farce.
No one is deceived by hearing the son oppose the Father, and who has ever
doubted Mansour's experience and generosity?"

"No one," interrupted the cadi, starting up like a man suddenly awakened
from a dream, "and I least of all; and this is why I have permitted you to
speak, my young Solomon. I wished to honor in you the wisdom of your
father; but another time avoid meddling with his highness's name; it is
not safe to sport with the lion's paws. The matter is settled. The
necklace is worth a hundred thousand piasters, is it not, Mansour? This
madcap, shall give you, therefore, a hundred thousand piasters, and all
parties will be satisfied."


NOTES--A cadi in the Mohammedan countries corresponds to our magistrate.

A sheik among the Arabs and Moors, may mean simply an old man, or, as in
this case, a man of eminence.

A Banian is a Hindoo merchant, particularly one who visits foreign
countries on business.

Jidda is a city in Arabia, on the Red Sea

A pasha is the governor of a Turkish province.

The Turkish piaster was formerly worth twenty-five cents: it is now worth
only about eight cents.



LXXV. THANATOPSIS. (275)

To him who in the love of Nature holds
Communion with her visible forms, she speaks
A various language: for his gayer hours
She has a voice  of gladness, and a smile
And eloquence of beauty; and she glides
Into his darker musings, with a mild
And healing sympathy, that steals away
Their sharpness, ere he is aware.
                             When thoughts
Of the last hitter hour come like a blight
Over thy spirit, and sad images
Of the stern agony, and shroud, and pall,
And breathless darkness, and the narrow house,
Make thee to shudder, and grow sick at heart;--
Go forth, under the open sky, and list
To Nature's teachings, while from all around--
Earth and her waters, and the depths of air--
Comes a still voice,--

                     Yet a few days, and thee
The all-beholding sun shall see no more
In all his course; nor yet in the cold ground,
Where thy pale form was laid, with many tears,
Nor in the embrace of ocean, shall exist
Thy image. Earth, that nourished thee, shall claim
Thy growth, to be resolved to earth again;
And, lost each human trace, surrendering up
Thine individual being, shalt thou go
To mix forever with the elements;
To be a brother to the insensible rock
And to the sluggish clod, which the rude swain
Turns with his share, and treads upon. The oak
Shall send his roots abroad, and pierce thy mold.

  Yet not to thine eternal resting place
Shalt thou retire alone, nor couldst thou wish
Couch more magnificent. Thou shalt lie down
With patriarchs of the infant world,--with kings,
The powerful of the earth,--the wise, the good,
Fair forms, and hoary seers of ages past,--
All in one mighty sepulcher.

                                 The hills,
Rock-ribbed, and ancient as the sun; the vales
Stretching in pensive quietness between;
The venerable woods; rivers that move
In majesty, and the complaining brooks,
That make the meadows green; and, poured round all,
Old Ocean's gray and melancholy waste,--
Are but the solemn decorations all
Of the great tomb of man. The golden sun,
The planets, all the infinite host of heaven,
Are shining on the sad abodes of death,
Through the still lapse of ages.

                              All that tread
The globe are but a handful to the tribes
That slumber in its bosom. Take the wings
Of morning, pierce the Barcan wilderness,
Or lose thyself in the continuous woods
Where rolls the Oregon, and hears no sound
Save his own dashings,--yet the dead are there:
And millions in those solitudes, since first
The flight of years began, have laid them down
In their last sleep,--the dead reign there alone.

So shalt thou rest; and what if thou withdraw
In silence from the living, and no friend
Take note of thy departure? All that breathe
Will share thy destiny. The gay will laugh
When thou art gone, the solemn brood of care
Plod on, and each one as before will chase
His favorite phantom; yet all these shall leave
Their mirth and their employments, and shall come
And make their bed with thee. As the long train
Of ages glide away, the sons of men--
The youth in life's green spring, and he who goes
In the full strength of years, matron and maid,
The speechless babe, and the gray-headed man
Shall one by one be gathered to thy side
By those who in their turn shall follow them.

  So live, that when thy summons comes to join
The innumerable caravan, which moves
To that mysterious realm, where each shall take
His chamber in the silent halls of death,
Thou go not, like the quarry slave at night,
Scourged to his dungeon, but, sustained and soothed
By an unfaltering trust, approach thy grave,
Like one who wraps the drapery of his couch
About him, and lies down to pleasant dreams.
--Bryant.

NOTES.--Thanatopsis is composed of two Greek words, thanatos, meaning
death, and opsis, a view. The word, therefore, signifies a view of death,
or reflections on death.

Barca is in the northeastern part of Africa: the southern and eastern
portions of the country are a barren desert.

The Oregon (or Columbia) River is the most important river of the United
States emptying into the Pacific. The Lewis and Clark Expedition
(1803-1806) had first explored the country through which it flows only
five years before the poem was written.



LXXVI. INDIAN JUGGLERS. (278)

William Hazlitt, 1778-1830, was born in Maidstone, England. His father was
a Unitarian clergyman, and he was sent to a college of that denomination
to be educated for the ministry; but having a greater taste for art than
theology, he resolved, on leaving school, to devote himself to painting.
He succeeded so well in his efforts as to meet the warmest commendation of
his friends, but did not succeed in satisfying his own fastidious taste.
On this account he threw away his pencil and took up his pen. His works,
though numerous, are, with the exception of a life of Napoleon, chiefly
criticisms on literature and art.

Hazlitt is thought to have treated his contemporaries with an unjust
severity; but his genial appreciation of the English classics, and the
thorough and loving manner in which he discusses their merits, make his
essays the delight of every lover of those perpetual wellsprings of
intellectual pleasure. His "Table Talk," "Characters of Shakespeare's
Plays," "Lectures on the English Poets," and "Lectures on the Literature
of the Elizabethan Age," are the works that exhibit his style and general
merits in their most favorable light.
###


Coming forward and seating himself on the ground, in his white dress and
tightened turban, the chief of the Indian jugglers begins with tossing up
two brass balls, which is what any of us could do, and concludes by
keeping up four at the same time, which is what none of us could do to
save our lives, not if we were to take our whole lives to do it in.

Is it then a trifling power we see at work, or is it not something next to
miraculous? It is the utmost stretch of human ingenuity, which nothing but
the bending the faculties of body and mind to it from the tenderest
infancy with incessant, ever-anxious application up to manhood, can
accomplish or make even a slight approach to. Man, thou art a wonderful
animal, and thy ways past finding out! Thou canst do strange things, but
thou turnest them to small account!

To conceive of this extraordinary dexterity, distracts the imagination and
makes admiration breathless. Yet it costs nothing to the performer, any
more than if it were a mere mechanical deception with which he had nothing
to do, but to watch and laugh at the astonishment of the spectators. A
single error of a hair's breadth, of the smallest conceivable portion of
time, would be fatal; the precision of the movements must be like a
mathematical truth; their rapidity is like lightning.

To catch four balls in succession, in less than a second of time, and
deliver them back so as to return with seeming consciousness to the hand
again; to make them revolve around him at certain intervals, like the
planets in their spheres; to make them chase each other like sparkles of
fire, or shoot up like flowers or meteors; to throw them behind his back,
and twine them round his neck like ribbons, or like serpents; to do what
appears an impossibility, and to do it with all the ease, the grace, the
carelessness imaginable; to laugh at, to play with the glittering
mockeries, to follow them with his eye as if he could fascinate them with
its lambent fire, or as if he had only to see that they kept time with the
music on the stage--there is something in all this which he who does not
admire may be quite sure he never really admired anything in the whole
course of his life. It is skill surmounting difficulty, and beauty
triumphing over skill. It seems as if the difficulty, once mastered,
naturally resolved itself into ease and grace, and as if, to be overcome
at all, it must be overcome without an effort. The smallest awkwardness or
want of pliancy or self-possession would stop the whole process. It is the
work of witchcraft, and yet sport for children.

Some of the other feats are quite as curious and wonderful--such as the
balancing the artificial tree, and shooting a bird from each branch
through a quill--though none of them have the elegance or facility of the
keeping up of the brass balls. You are in pain for the result, and glad
when the experiment is over; they are not accompanied with the same
unmixed, unchecked delight as the former; and I would not give much to be
merely astonished without being pleased at the same time. As to the
swallowing of the sword, the police ought to interfere to prevent it.

When I saw the Indian juggler do the same things before, his feet were
bare, and he had large rings on his toes, which he kept turning round all
the time of the performance, as if they moved of themselves.

The hearing a speech in Parliament drawled or stammered out by the
honorable member or the noble lord, the ringing the changes on their
commonplaces, which anyone could repeat after them as well as they, stirs
me not a jot,--shakes not my good opinion of myself. I ask what there is
that I can do as well as this. Nothing. What have I been doing all my
life? Have I been idle, or have I nothing to show for all my labor and
pains? Or have I passed my time in pouring words like water into empty
sieves, rolling a stone up a hill and then down again, trying to prove an
argument in the teeth of facts, and looking for causes in the dark, and
not finding them? Is there no one thing in which I can challenge
competition, that I can bring as an instance of exact perfection, in which
others can not find a flaw?

The utmost I can pretend to is to write a description of what this fellow
can do. I can write a book: so can many others who have not even learned
to spell. What abortions are these essays! What errors, what ill-pieced
transitions, what crooked reasons, what lame conclusions! How little is
made out, and that little how ill! Yet they are the best I can do.

I endeavor to recollect all I have ever heard or thought upon a subject,
and to express it as neatly as I can. Instead of writing on four subjects
at a time, it is as much as I can manage, to keep the thread of one
discourse clear and unentangled. I have also time on my hands to correct
my opinions and polish my periods; but the one I can not, and the other I
will not, do. I am fond of arguing; yet, with a good deal of pains and
practice, it is often much as I can do to beat my man, though he may be a
very indifferent hand. A common fencer would disarm his adversary in the
twinkling of an eye, unless he were a professor like himself. A stroke of
wit will sometimes produce this effect, but there is no such power or
superiority in sense or reasoning. There is no complete mastery of
execution to be shown there; and you hardly know the professor from the
impudent pretender or the mere clown.



LXXVII. ANTONY OVER CAESAR'S DEAD BODY. (281)

           Friends, Romans, countrymen, lend me your ears:
         I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him.
         The evil that men do lives after them;
         The good is oft interred with their bones;
         So let it be with Caesar. The noble Brutus
         Hath told you Caesar was ambitious:
         If it were so, it was a grievous fault,
         And grievously hath Caesar answered it.
         Here, under leave of Brutus and the rest--
         For Brutus is an honorable man;
         So are they all, all honorable men--
         Come I to speak in Caesar's funeral.

         He was my, friend, faithful and just to me:
         But Brutus says he was ambitious;
         And Brutus is an honorable man.
         He hath brought many captives home to Rome,
         Whose ransoms did the general coffers fill:
         Did this in Caesar seem ambitious?
         When that the poor have cried, Caesar hath wept:
         Ambition should be made of sterner stuff:
         Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;
         And Brutus is an honorable man.

         You all did see, that on the Lupercal,
         I thrice presented him a kingly crown,
         Which he did thrice refuse. Was this ambition?
         Yet Brutus says he was ambitious;
         And, sure, he is an honorable man.
         I speak not to disprove what Brutus spoke,
         But here I am to speak what I do know.
         You all did love him once, not without cause;
         What cause withholds you, then, to mourn for him?
         O judgment! thou art fled to brutish beasts,
         And men have lost their reason. Bear with me;
         My heart is in the coffin there with Caesar,
         And I must pause till it come back to me.

         But yesterday the word of Caesar might
         Have stood against the world; now lies he there,
         And none so poor to do him reverence.
         O masters! if I were disposed to stir
         Your hearts and minds to mutiny and rage,
         I should do Brutus wrong, and Cassius wrong,
         Who, you all know, are honorable men.
         I will not do them wrong; I rather choose
         To wrong the dead, to wrong myself and you,
         Than I will wrong such honorable men.

         But here's a parchment with the seal of Caesar;
         I found it in his closet; 't is his will:
         Let but the commons hear this testament--
         Which, pardon me, I do not mean to read--
         And they would go and kiss dead Caesar's wounds,
         And dip their napkins in his sacred blood;
         Yea, beg a hair of him for memory,
         And, dying, mention it within their wills,
         Bequeathing it as a rich legacy
         Unto their issue.

Citizen. We'll hear the will: read it, Mark Antony.
All.     The will, the will; we will hear Caesar's will.
Ant.     Have patience, gentle friends, I must not read it;
         It is not meet you know how Caesar loved you.
         You are not wood, you are not stones, but men;
         And, being men, hearing the will of Caesar,
         It will inflame you, it will make you mad;
         'T is good you know not that you are his heirs;
         For, if you should, Oh what would come of it!
Cit.     Read the will; we'll hear it, Antony;
         You shall read the will, Caesar's will.
Ant.     Will you be patient? Will you stay awhile?
         I have o'ershot myself to tell you of it:
         I fear I wrong the honorable men
         Whose daggers have stabbed Caesar. I do fear it.
Cit.     They were traitors: honorable men!
All.     The will! the testament!
Ant.     You will compel me, then, to read the will?
         Then make a ring about the corpse of Caesar,
         And let me show you him that made the will.

                (He comes down from the pulpit.)

         If you have tears, prepare to shed them now.
         You all do know this mantle: I remember
         The first time ever Caesar put it on;
         'T was on a summer's evening, in his tent,
         That day he overcame the Nervii;
         Look! in this place, ran Cassius' dagger through:
         See what a rent the envious Casca made:
         Through this, the well belove'd Brutus stabbed;
         And, as he plucked his cursed steel away,
         Mark how the blood of Caesar followed it,
         As rushing out of doors, to be resolved
         If Brutus so unkindly knocked, or no;
         For Brutus, as you know, was Caesar's angel:
         Judge, O you gods, how dearly Caesar loved him!

         This was the most unkindest cut of all;
         For, when the noble Caesar saw him stab,
         Ingratitude, more strong than traitors' arms,
         Quite vanquished him: then burst his mighty heart;
         And, in his mantle muffling up his face,
         Even at the base of Pompey's statua,
         Which all the while ran blood, great Caesar fell.

         Oh, what a fall was there, my countrymen!
         Then I, and you, and all of us fell down,
         Whilst bloody treason flourished over us.
         Oh, now you weep; and, I perceive, you feel
         The dint of pity: these are gracious drops.
         Kind souls, what, weep you when you but behold
         Our Caesar's vesture wounded? Look you here,
         Here is himself, marred, as you see, with traitors.
1st Cit. O piteous spectacle!
2d Cit.  O noble Caesar!
3d Cit.  We will be revenged!
All.     Revenge! About! Seek! Burn! Fire!
         Kill! Slay! Let not a traitor live.
Ant.     Stay, countrymen.
1st Cit. Peace there! hear the noble Antony.
2d Cit.  We'll hear him, we'll follow him, we'll die with him.
Ant.     Good friends, sweet friends, let me not stir you up
         To such a sudden flood of mutiny.
         They that have done this deed are honorable:
         What private griefs they have, alas, I know not,
         That made them do it; they are wise and honorable,
         And will, no doubt, with reasons answer you.

         I come not, friends, to steal away your hearts:
         I am no orator, as Brutus is;
         But, as you know me all, a plain, blunt man,
         That love my friend; and that they know full well
         That gave me public leave to speak of him:
         For I have neither wit, nor words, nor worth,
         Action, nor utterance, nor the power of speech,
         To stir men's blood: I only speak right on:
         I tell you that which you yourselves do know;
         Show you sweet Caesar's wounds, poor, poor, dumb mouths,
         And bid them speak for me: but were I Brutus,
         And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony
         Would ruffle up your spirits, and put a tongue
         In every wound of Caesar, that should move
         The stones of Rome to rise and mutiny.

                  Shakespeare.--Julius Caesar, Act iii, Scene ii.


NOTES.--Gaius Julius Caesar (b. 102, d. 44 B. C.) was the most remarkable
genius of the ancient world, Caesar ruled Rome as imperator five years and
a half, and, in the intervals of seven campaigns during that time, spent
only fifteen months in Rome. Under his rule Rome was probably at her best,
and his murder at once produced a state of anarchy.

The conspirators against Caesar--among whom were Brutus, Cassius and
Casca--professed to be moved by honest zeal for the good of Rome; but
their own ambition was no doubt the true motive, except with Brutus.

Mark Antony was a strong friend of Julius Caesar. Upon the latter's death,
Antony, by his funeral oration, incited the people and drove the
conspirators from Rome.

The Lupercal was a festival of purification and expiation held in Rome on
the 15th of February. Antony was officiating as priest at this festival
when he offered the crown to Caesar.

In his will Caesar left to every citizen of Rome a sum of money, and
bequeathed his private gardens to the public.

The Nervii were one of the most warlike tribes of Celtic Gaul. Caesar
almost annihilated them in 57 B. C.

Pompey, once associated with Caesar in the government of Rome, was
afterwards at war with him. He was murdered by those who thought to
propitiate Caesar, but the latter wept when Pompey's head was sent to him,
and had the murderers put to death.

Statua is the Latin form of statue, in common use in Shakespeare's time;
this form is required here by the meter.



LXXVIII. THE ENGLISH CHARACTER. (286)

William Hickling Prescott, 1796-1859, the historian, was the son of
William Prescott, an eminent jurist, and the grandson of Col. William
Prescott, who commanded the Americans at the battle of Bunker Hill. He was
born in Salem, Massachusetts, graduated at Harvard University in 1814, and
died in Boston. Just as he was completing his college course, the careless
sport of a fellow-student injured one of his eyes so seriously that he
never recovered from it. He had intended to adopt law as his profession;
but, from his detective eyesight, he was obliged to choose work in which
he could regulate his hours of labor, and could employ the aid of a
secretary. He chose to be a historian; and followed his choice with
wonderful system, perseverance, and success till the close of his life.
His works are: "The Reign of Ferdinand and Isabella," "The Conquest of
Mexico," "The Conquest of Peru," "The Reign of Philip II," and a volume of
"Miscellanies." He had not completed the history of Philip at the time of
his death. As a writer of history, Mr. Prescott ranks with the first for
accuracy, precision, clearness, and beauty of style. As a man, he was
genial, kind-hearted and even-tempered.
###


On the whole, what I have seen raises my preconceived estimate of the
English character. It is full of generous, true, and manly qualities; and
I doubt if there ever was so high a standard of morality in an aristocracy
which has such means for self-indulgence at its command, and which
occupies a position that secures it so much deference. In general, they do
not seem to abuse their great advantages. The respect for religion--at
least for the forms of it--is universal, and there are few, I imagine, of
the great proprietors who are not more or less occupied with improving
their estates, and with providing for the comfort of their tenantry, while
many take a leading part in the great political movements of the time.
There never was an aristocracy which combined so much practical knowledge
and industry with the advantages of exalted rank.

The Englishman is seen to most advantage in his country home. For he is
constitutionally both domestic and rural in his habits. His fireside and
his farm--these are the places in which one sees his simple and warm-
hearted nature more freely unfolded. There is a shyness in an Englishman,
--a natural reserve, which makes him cold to strangers, and difficult to
approach. But once corner him in his own house, a frank and full expansion
will be given to his feelings that we should look for in vain in the
colder Yankee, and a depth not to be found in the light and superficial
Frenchman,--speaking of nationalities, not of individualities.

The Englishman is the most truly rural in his tastes and habits of any
people in the world. I am speaking of the higher classes. The aristocracy
of other countries affect the camp and the city. But the English love
their old castles and country seats with a patriotic love. They are fond
of country sports. Every man shoots or hunts. No man is too old to be in
the saddle some part of the day, and men of seventy years and more follow
the hounds, and, take a five-barred gate at a leap. The women are good
whips, are fond of horses and dogs, and other animals. Duchesses have
their cows, their poultry, their pigs,--all watched over and provided with
accommodations of Dutch-like neatness. All this is characteristic of the
people. It may be thought to detract something from the feminine graces
which in other lands make a woman so amiably dependent as to be nearly
imbecile. But it produces a healthy and blooming race of women to match
the hardy Englishman,--the finest development of the physical and moral
nature which the world has witnessed. For we are not to look on the
English gentleman as a mere Nimrod. With all his relish for field sports
and country usages, he has his house filled with collections of art and
with extensive libraries. The tables of the drawing-rooms are covered with
the latest works, sent down by the London publisher. Every guest is
provided with an apparatus for writing, and often a little library of
books for his own amusement. The English country gentleman of the present
day is anything but a Squire Western, though he does retain all his relish
for field sports.

The character of an Englishman, under its most refined aspect, has some
disagreeable points which jar unpleasantly on the foreigner not accustomed
to them. The consciousness of national superiority, combined with natural
feelings of independence, gives him an air of arrogance, though it must be
owned that this is never betrayed in his own house,--I may almost say in
his own country. But abroad, when he seems to institute a comparison
between himself and the people he is thrown with, it becomes so obvious
that he is the most unpopular, not to say odious, person in the world.
Even the open hand with which he dispenses his bounty will not atone for
the violence he offers to national vanity.

There are other defects, which are visible even in his most favored
circumstances. Such is his bigotry, surpassing everything in a quiet
passive form, that has been witnessed since the more active bigotry of the
times of the Spanish Philips. Such, too, is the exclusive, limited range
of his knowledge and conceptions of all political and social topics and
relations. The Englishman, the cultivated Englishman, has no standard of
excellence borrowed from mankind. His speculation never travels beyond his
own little--great little--island. That is the world to him. True, he
travels, shoots lions among the Hottentots, chases the grizzly bear over
the Rocky Mountains, kills elephants in India and salmon on the coast of
Labrador, comes home, and very likely makes a book. But the scope of his
ideas does not seem to be enlarged by all this. The body travels, not the
mind. And, however he may abuse his own land, he returns home as hearty a
John Bull, with all his prejudices and national tastes as rooted, as
before. The English--the men of fortune--all travel. Yet how little
sympathy they show for other people or institutions, and how slight is the
interest they take in them! They are islanders, cut off from the great
world. But their island is, indeed, a world of its own. With all their
faults, never has the sun shone--if one may use the expression in
reference to England--all a more noble race, or one that has done more for
the great interests of humanity.

NOTES.--Nimrod is spoken of in Genesis (x. 9) as "a mighty hunter." Thus
the name came to be applied to any one devoted to hunting.

Squire Western is a character in Fielding's "Tom Jones." He is represented
as an ignorant, prejudiced, irascible, but, withal, a jolly, good-humored
English country gentleman.



LXXIX. THE SONG OF THE POTTER. (290)

Turn, turn, my wheel! Turn round and round,
Without a pause, without a sound:
  So spins the flying world away!
This clay, well mixed with marl and sand,
Follows the motion of my hand;
For some must follow, and some command,
  Though all are made of clay!

Turn, turn, my wheel! All things must change
To something new, to something strange;
  Nothing that is can pause or stay;
The moon will wax, the moon will wane,
The mist and cloud will turn to rain,
The rain to mist and cloud again,
  To-morrow be to-day.

Turn, turn, my wheel! All life is brief;
What now is bud will soon be leaf,
  What now is leaf will soon decay;
The wind blows east, the wind blows west;
The blue eggs in the robin's nest
Will soon have wings and beak and breast,
  And flutter and fly away.

Turn, turn, my wheel! This earthen jar
A touch can make, a touch can mar;
  And shall it to the Potter say,
What makest thou? Thou hast no hand?
As men who think to understand
A world by their Creator planned,
  Who wiser is than they.

Turn, turn, my wheel! 'Tis nature's plan
The child should grow into the man,
  The man grow wrinkled, old, and gray;
In youth the heart exults and sings,
The pulses leap, the feet have wings;
In age the cricket chirps, and brings
  The harvest home of day.

Turn, turn, my wheel! The human race,
Of every tongue, of every place,
  Caucasian, Coptic, or Malay,
All that inhabit this great earth,
Whatever be their rank or worth,
Are kindred and allied by birth,
  And made of the same clay.

Turn, turn, my wheel! What is begun
At daybreak must at dark be done,
  To-morrow will be another day;
To-morrow the hot furnace flame
Will search the heart and try the frame,
And stamp with honor or with shame
  These vessels made of clay.

Stop, stop, my wheel! Too soon, too soon
The noon will be the afternoon,
  Too soon to-day be yesterday;
Behind us in our path we cast
The broken potsherds of the past,
And all are ground to dust at last,
  And trodden into clay.
                                  --Longfellow.

NOTE.--Coptic was formerly the language of Egypt. and is preserved in the
inscriptions of the ancient monuments found there; it has now given place
entirely to Arabic.



LXXX. A HOT DAY IN NEW YORK. (292)

William Dean Howells, 1837--, was born in Belmont County. Ohio. In boyhood
he learned the printer's trade, at which he worked for several years. He
published a volume of poems in 1860, in connection with John J. Piatt.
From 1861 to 1865 he was United States Consul at Venice. On his return he
resided for a time in New York City, and was one of the editors of the
"Nation." In 1871 he was appointed editor in chief of the "Atlantic
Monthly." He held the position ten years, and then retired in order to
devote himself to his own writings. Since then, he has been connected with
other literary magazines. Mr. Howells has written several books: novels
and sketches: his writings are marked by an artistic finish, and a keen
but subtile humor. The following selection is an extract from "Their
Wedding Journey."
###


When they alighted, they took their way up through one of the streets of
the great wholesale businesses, to Broadway. On this street was a throng
of trucks and wagons, lading and unlading; bales and boxes rose and sank
by pulleys overhead; the footway was a labyrinth of packages of every
shape and size; there was no flagging of the pitiless energy that moved
all forward, no sign of how heavy a weight lay on it, save in the reeking
faces of its helpless instruments.

It was four o'clock, the deadliest hour of the deadly summer day. The
spiritless air seemed to have a quality of blackness in it, as if filled
with the gloom of low-hovering wings. One half the street lay in shadow,
and one half in sun; but the sunshine itself was dim, as if a heat greater
than its own had smitten it with languor. Little gusts of sick, warm wind
blew across the great avenue at the corners of the intersecting streets.
In the upward distance, at which the journeyers looked, the loftier roofs
and steeples lifted themselves dim out of the livid atmosphere, and far up
and down the length of the street swept a stream of tormented life.

All sorts of wheeled things thronged it, conspicuous among which rolled
and jarred the gaudily painted stages, with quivering horses driven each
by a man who sat in the shade of a branching, white umbrella, and suffered
with a moody truculence of aspect, and as if he harbored the bitterness of
death in his heart for the crowding passengers within, when one of them
pulled the strap about his legs, and summoned him to halt.

Most of the foot passengers kept to the shady side, and to the
unaccustomed eyes of the strangers they were not less in number than at
any other time, though there were fewer women among them. Indomitably
resolute of soul, they held their course with the swift pace of custom,
and only here and there they showed the effect of the heat.

One man, collarless, with waistcoat unbuttoned, and hat set far back from
his forehead, waved a fan before his death-white, flabby face, and set
down one foot after the other with the heaviness of a somnambulist.
Another, as they passed him, was saying huskily to the friend at his side,
"I can't stand this much longer. My hands tingle as if they had gone to
sleep; my heart--" But still the multitude hurried on, passing, repassing,
encountering, evading, vanishing into shop doors, and emerging from them,
dispersing down the side streets, and swarming out of them.

It was a scene that possessed the beholder with singular fascination, and
in its effect of universal lunacy, it might well have seemed the last
phase of a world presently to be destroyed. They who were in it, but not
of it, as they fancied--though there was no reason for this--looked on it
amazed, and at last their own errands being accomplished, and themselves
so far cured of the madness of purpose, they cried with one voice that it
was a hideous sight, and strove to take refuge from it in the nearest
place where the soda fountain sparkled.

It was a vain desire. At the front door of the apothecary's hung a
thermometer, and as they entered they heard the next comer cry out with a
maniacal pride in the affliction laid upon mankind, "Ninety-seven
degrees!" Behind them, at the door, there poured in a ceaseless stream of
people, each pausing at the shrine of heat, before he tossed off the
hissing draught that two pale, close-clipped boys served them from either
side of the fountain. Then, in the order of their coming, they issued
through another door upon the side street, each, as he disappeared,
turning his face half round, and casting a casual glance upon a little
group near another counter.

The group was of a very patient, half-frightened, half-puzzled looking
gentleman who sat perfectly still on a stool, and of a lady who stood
beside him, rubbing all over his head a handkerchief full of pounded ice,
and easing one hand with the other when the first became tired. Basil
drank his soda, and paused to look upon this group, which he felt would
commend itself to realistic sculpture as eminently characteristic of the
local life, and, as "The Sunstroke," would sell enormously in the hot
season.

"Better take a little more of that," the apothecary said, looking up from
his prescription, and, as the organized sympathy of the seemingly
indifferent crowd, smiling very kindly at his patient, who thereupon
tasted something in the glass he held.

"Do you still feel like fainting?" asked the humane authority. "Slightly,
now and then," answered the other, "but I'm hanging on hard to the bottom
curve of that icicled S on your soda fountain, and I feel that I'm all
right as long as I can see that. The people get rather hazy occasionally,
and have no features to speak of. But I do n't know that I look very
impressive myself," he added in the jesting mood which seems the natural
condition of Americans in the face of an embarrassments.

"Oh, you'll do!" the apothecary answered, with a laugh; but he said, in an
answer to an anxious question from the lady, "He mustn't be moved for an
hour yet," and gayly pestled away at a prescription, while she resumed her
office of grinding the pounded ice round and round upon her husband's
skull. Isabel offered her the commiseration of friendly words, and of
looks kinder yet, and then, seeing that they could do nothing, she and
Basil fell into the endless procession, and passed out of the side door.

"What a shocking thing," she whispered. "Did you see how all the people
looked, one after another, so indifferently at that couple, and evidently
forgot them the next instant? It was dreadful. I should n't like to have
you sun-struck in New York."

"That's very considerate of you; but place for place, if any accident must
happen to me among strangers, I think I should prefer to have it in New
York. The biggest place is always the kindest as well as the cruelest
place. Amongst the thousands of spectators the good Samaritan as well as
the Levite would be sure to be. As for a sunstroke, it requires peculiar
gifts. But if you compel me to a choice in the matter, then I say give me
the busiest part of Broadway for a sunstroke. There is such experience of
calamity there that you could hardly fall the first victim to any
misfortune."



LXXXI. DISCONTENT.--AN ALLEGORY. (295)

Joseph Addison, 1672-1719, the brilliant essayist and poet, has long
occupied an exalted place in English literature. He was the son of an
English clergyman, was born in Wiltshire, and educated at Oxford; he died
at "Holland House" (the property of his wile, to whom he had been married
but about two years), and was buried in Westminster Abbey. Several years
of his life were spent in the political affairs of his time, he held
several public offices, and was, for ten years, a member of Parliament.
His fame as an author rests chiefly upon his "Hymns," his tragedy of
"Cato," and his "Essays" contributed principally to the "Tatler" and the
"Spectator." The excellent style of his essays, their genial wit and
sprightly humor, made them conspicuous in an age when coarseness,
bitterness, and exaggeration deformed the writings of the most eminent:
and these characteristics have given them an unquestioned place among the
classics of our language.

Mr. Addison was shy and diffident, but genial and lovable; his moral
character was above reproach, excepting that he is said to have been too
fond of wine.
###


It is a celebrated thought of Socrates, that if all the misfortunes of
mankind were cast into a public stock, in order to be equally distributed
among the whole species, those who now think themselves the most unhappy,
would prefer the share they are already possessed of before that which
would fall to them by such a division. Horace has carried this thought a
great deal farther, and supposes that the hardships or misfortunes we lie
under, are more easy to us than those of any other person would be, in
case we could change conditions with him.

As I was ruminating on these two remarks, and seated in my elbowchair, I
insensibly fell asleep; when, on a sudden, methought there was a
proclamation made by Jupiter, that every mortal should bring in his griefs
and calamities, and throw them together in a heap. There was a large plain
appointed for this purpose. I took my stand in the center of it, and saw,
with a great deal of pleasure, the whole human species marching one after
another, and throwing down their several loads, which immediately grew up
into a prodigious mountain, that seemed to rise above the clouds.

There was a certain lady of a thin, airy shape, who was very active in
this solemnity. She carried a magnifying glass in one of her hands, and
was clothed in a loose, flowing robe, embroidered with several figures of
fiends and specters, that discovered themselves in a thousand chimerical
shapes as her garment hovered in the wind. There was something wild and
distracted in her looks. Her name was Fancy. She led up every mortal to
the appointed place, after having officiously assisted him in making up
his pack, and laying it upon his shoulders. My heart melted within me to
see my fellow-creatures groaning under their respective burdens, and to
consider that prodigious bulk of human calamities which lay before me.

There were, however, several persons who gave me great diversion upon this
occasion. I observed one bringing in a  fardel, very carefully concealed
under an old embroidered cloak, which, upon his throwing it into the heap,
I discovered to be poverty. Another, after a great deal of puffing, threw
down his luggage, which, upon examining, I found to be his wife.

There were multitudes of lovers saddled with very whimsical burdens,
composed of darts and flames; but, what was very odd, though they sighed
as if their hearts would break under these bundles of calamities, they
could not persuade themselves to cast them into the heap, when they came
up to it; but, after a few faint efforts, shook their heads, and marched
away as heavy loaden as they came.

I saw multitudes of old women throw down their wrinkles, and several young
ones who stripped themselves of a tawny skin. There were very great heaps
of red noses, large lips, and rusty teeth. The truth of it is, I was
surprised to see the greatest part of the mountain made up of bodily
deformities. Observing one advancing toward the heap with a larger cargo
than ordinary upon his back, I found, upon his near approach, that it was
only a natural hump, which he disposed of with great joy of heart among
this collection of human miseries.

There were, likewise, distempers of all sorts, though I could not but
observe that there were many more imaginary than real. One little packet I
could not but take notice of, which was a complication of all the diseases
incident to human nature, and was in the hand of a great many fine people.
This was called the spleen. But what most of all surprised me was, that
there was not a single vice or folly thrown into the whole heap: at which
I was very much astonished, having concluded within myself that everyone
would take this opportunity of getting rid of his passions, prejudices,
and frailties.

I took notice in particular of a very profligate fellow, who, I did not
question, came loaden with his crimes, but upon searching into his bundle,
I found that instead of throwing his guilt from him, he had only laid down
his memory. He was followed by another worthless rogue, who flung away his
modesty instead of his ignorance.

When the whole race of mankind had thus cast their burdens, the phantom
which had been so busy on this occasion, seeing me an idle spectator of
what passed, approached toward me. I grew uneasy at her presence, when, of
a sudden, she held her magnifying glass full before my eyes. I no sooner
saw my face in it, but was startled at the shortness of it, which now
appeared to me in its utmost aggravation. The immoderate breadth of the
features made me very much out of humor with my own countenance, upon
which I threw it from me like a mask. It happened very luckily that one
who stood by me had just before thrown down his visage, which, it seems,
was too long for him. It was, indeed, extended to a most shameful length;
I believe the very chin was, modestly speaking, as long as my whole face.
We had both of us an opportunity of mending ourselves; and all the
contributions being now brought in, every man was at liberty to exchange
his misfortunes for those of another person.

As we stood round the heap, and surveyed the several materials of which it
was composed, there was scarcely a mortal in this vast multitude who did
not discover what he thought pleasures and blessings of life, and wondered
how the owners of them ever came to look upon them as burthens and
grievances. As we were regarding very attentively this confusion of
miseries, this chaos of calamity, Jupiter issued out a second
proclamation, that everyone was now at liberty to exchange his affliction,
and to return to his habitation with any such other bundle as should be
delivered to him. Upon this, Fancy began again to bestir herself, and,
parceling out the whole heap with incredible activity, recommended to
everyone his particular packet. The hurry and confusion at this time was
not to be expressed. Some observations, which I made upon the occasion, I
shall communicate to the public.

A venerable, gray-headed man, who had laid down the colic, and who, I
found, wanted an heir to his estate, snatched up an undutiful son that had
been thrown into the heap by an angry father. The graceless youth, in less
than a quarter of an hour, pulled the old gentleman by the beard, and had
liked to have knocked his brains out; so that meeting the true father, who
came toward him with a fit of the gripes, he begged him to take his son
again, and give him back his colic; but they were incapable, either of
them, to recede from the choice they had made. A poor galley slave, who
had thrown down his chains, took up the gout in their stead, but made such
wry faces that one might easily perceive he was no great gainer by the
bargain.

The female world were very busy among themselves in bartering for
features; one was trucking a lock of gray hairs for a carbuncle; and
another was making over a short waist for a pair of round shoulders; but
on all these occasions there was not one of them who did not think the new
blemish, as soon as she had got it into her possession, much more
disagreeable than the old one.

I must not omit my own particular adventure. My friend with the long
visage had no sooner taken upon him my short face, but he made such a
grotesque figure in it, that as I looked upon him, I could not forbear
laughing at myself, insomuch that I put my own face out of countenance.
The poor gentleman was so sensible of the ridicule, that I found he was
ashamed of what he had done. On the other side, I found that I myself had
no great reason to triumph, for as I went to touch my forehead, I missed
the place, and clapped my finger upon my upper lip. Besides, as my nose
was exceedingly prominent, I gave it two or three unlucky knocks as I was
playing my hand about my face, and aiming at some other part of it.

I saw two other gentlemen by me who were in the same ridiculous
circumstances. These had made a foolish swap between a couple of thick
bandy legs and two long trapsticks that had no calves to them. One of
these looked like a man walking upon stilts, and was so lifted up into the
air, above his ordinary height, that his head turned round with it, while
the other made such awkward circles, as he attempted to walk, that he
scarcely knew how to move forward upon his new supporters. Observing him
to be a pleasant kind of a fellow, I stuck my cane in the ground, and told
him I would lay him a bottle of wine that he did not march up to it on a
line that I drew for him, in a quarter of an hour.

The heap was at last distributed among the two sexes, who made a most
piteous sight, as they wandered up and down under the pressure of their
several burthens. The whole plain was filled with murmurs and complaints,
groans and lamentations. Jupiter, at length taking compassion on the poor
mortals, ordered them a second time to lay down their loads, with a design
to give everyone his own again. They discharged themselves with a great
deal of pleasure; after which, the phantom who had led them into such
gross delusions, was commanded to disappear. There was sent in her stead a
goddess of a quite different figure: her motions were steady and composed,
and her aspect serious but cheerful. She every now and then cast her eyes
toward heaven, and fixed them upon Jupiter. Her name was Patience. She had
no sooner placed herself by the Mount of Sorrows, but, what I thought very
remarkable, the whole heap sunk to such a degree that it did not appear a
third part so big as it was before. She afterward returned every man his
own proper calamity, and, teaching him how to bear it in the most
commodious manner, he marched off with it contentedly, being very well
pleased that he had not been left to his own choice as to the kind of evil
which fell to his lot.

Beside the several pieces of morality to be drawn out of this vision, I
learnt from it never to repine at my own misfortunes, or to envy the
happiness of another, since it is impossible for any man to form a right
judgment of his neighbor's sufferings; for which reason, also, I have
determined never to think too lightly of another's complaints, but to
regard the sorrows of my fellow-creatures with sentiments of humanity and
compassion.

NOTES.--Horace (b. 65, d. 8 B. C.) was a celebrated Roman poet.

Jupiter, according to mythology, was the greatest of the Greek and Roman
gods; he was thought to be the supreme ruler of both mortals and
immortals.



LXXXII. JUPITER AND TEN. (301)

James T. Fields, 1817-1881, was born at Portsmouth, New Hampshire. For
many years he was partner in the well-known firm of Ticknor & Fields
(Later Fields, Osgood & Co.), the leading publishers of standard American
literature. For eight years, he was chief editor of the "Atlantic
Monthly;" and, after he left that position, he often enriched its pages by
the productions of his pen. During his latter years Mr. Fields gained some
reputation as a lecturer. His literary abilities were of no mean order:
but he did not do so much in producing literature himself, as in aiding
others in its production.
###


Mrs. Chub was rich and portly,
  Mrs. Chub was very grand,
Mrs. Chub was always reckoned
  A lady in the land.

You shall see her marble mansion
  In a very stately square,--
Mr. C. knows what it cost him,
  But that's neither here nor there.

Mrs. Chub was so sagacious,
  Such a patron of the arts,
And she gave such foreign orders
  That she won all foreign hearts.

Mrs. Chub was always talking,
  When she went away from home,
Of a most prodigious painting
  Which had just arrived from Rome.

"Such a treasure," she insisted,
  "One might never see again!"
"What's the subject?" we inquired.
  "It is Jupiter and Ten!"

"Ten what?" we blandly asked her
  For the knowledge we did lack,
"Ah! that I can not tell you,
  But the name is on the back.

"There it stands in printed letters,--
  Come to-morrow, gentlemen,--
Come and see our splendid painting,
  Our fine Jupiter and Ten!"

When Mrs. Chub departed,
  Our brains began to rack,--
She could not be mistaken
  For the name was on the back.

So we begged a great Professor
  To lay aside his pen,
And give some information
  Touching "Jupiter and Ten."

And we pondered well the subject,
  And our Lempriere we turned,
To find out who the Ten were;
  But we could not, though we burned.

But when we saw the picture,--
  O Mrs. Chub! Oh, fie! O!
We perused the printed label,
  And 't was JUPITER AND IO!

NOTES.--John Lempriere, an Englishman, was the author of a "Classical
Dictionary" which until the middle of the present century was the chief
book of reference on ancient mythology.

Io is a mythical heroine of Greece, with whom Jupiter was enamored.



LXXXIII. SCENE FROM "THE POOR GENTLEMAN."

George Colman, 1762-1836, was the son of George Colman, a writer of
dramas, who in 1777 purchased the "Haymarket Theater," in London. Owing to
the illness of the father, Colman the younger assumed the management of
the theater in 1785, which post he held for a long time. He was highly
distinguished as a dramatic author and wit. "The Poor Gentleman," from
which the following selection is adapted, is perhaps the best known of his
works.
###


SIR ROBERT BRAMBLE and HUMPHREY DOBBINS.

Sir R. I'll tell you what, Humphrey Dobbins, there is not a syllable of
sense in all you have been saying. But I suppose you will maintain there
is.

Hum. Yes.

Sir R. Yes! Is that the way you talk to me, you old boor? What's my name?

Hum. Robert Bramble.

Sir R. An't I a baronet? Sir Robert Bramble, of Blackberry Hall, in the
county of Kent? 'T is time you should know it, for you have been my
clumsy, two-fisted valet these thirty years: can you deny that?

Hum. Hem!

Sir R. Hem? What do you mean by hem? Open that rusty door of your mouth,
and make your ugly voice walk out of it. Why don't you answer my question?


Hum. Because, if I contradict you, I shall tell you a lie, and whenever I
agree with you, you are sure to fall out.

Sir R. Humphrey Dobbins. I have been so long endeavoring to beat a few
brains into your pate that all your hair has tumbled off before my point
is carried.

Hum. What then? Our parson says my head is an emblem of both our honors.

Sir R. Ay; because honors, like your head, are apt to be empty.

Hum. No; but if a servant has grown bald under his master's nose, it looks
as if there was honesty on one side, and regard for it on the other.

Sir R. Why, to be sure, old Humphrey, you are as honest as a--pshaw! the
parson means to palaver us; but, to return to my position, I tell you I do
n't like your flat contradiction.

Hum. Yes, you do.

Sir R. I tell you I don't. I only love to hear men's arguments. I hate
their flummery.

Hum. What do you call flummery?

Sir R. Flattery, blockhead! a dish too often served up by paltry poor men
to paltry rich ones.

Hum. I never serve it up to you.

Sir R. No, you give me a dish of a different description.

Hum. Hem! what is it?

Sir R. Sauerkraut, you old crab

Hum. I have held you a stout tug at argument this many a year.

Sir R. And yet I could never teach you a syllogism. Now mind, when a poor
man assents to what a rich man says, I suspect he means to flatter him:
now I am rich, and hate flattery. Ergo--when a poor man subscribes to my
opinion, I hate him.

Hum. That's wrong.

Sir R. Very well; negatur; now prove it.

Hum. Put the case then, I am a poor man.

Sir R. You an't, you scoundrel. You know you shall never want while I have
a shilling.

Hum. Bless you!

Sir R. Pshaw! Proceed.

Hum. Well, then, I am a poor--I must be a poor man now, or I never shall
get on.

Sir R. Well, get on, be a poor man.

Hum. I am a poor man, and I argue with you, and convince you, you are
wrong; then you call yourself a blockhead, and I am of your opinion: now,
that's no flattery.

Sir R. Why, no; but when a man's of the same opinion with me, he puts an
end to the argument, and that puts an end to the conversation, and so I
hate him for that. But where's my nephew Frederic?

Hum. Been out these two hours.

Sir R. An undutiful cub! Only arrived from Russia last night, and though I
told him to stay at home till I rose, he's scampering over the fields like
a Calmuck Tartar.

Hum. He's a fine fellow.

Sir R. He has a touch of our family. Don't you think he is a little like
me, Humphrey?

Hum. No, not a bit; you are as ugly an old man as ever I clapped my eyes
on.

Sir R. Now that's plaguy impudent, but there's no flattery in it, and it
keeps up the independence of argument. His father, my brother Job, is of
as tame a spirit--Humphrey, you remember my brother Job?

Hum. Yes, you drove him to Russia five and twenty years ago.

Sir R. I did not drive him.

Hum. Yes, you did. You would never let him be at peace in the way of
argument.

Sir R. At peace! Zounds, he would never go to war.

Hum. He had the merit to be calm.

Sir R. So has a duck pond. He was a bit of still life; a chip; weak water
gruel; a tame rabbit, boiled to rags, without sauce or salt. He received
my arguments with his mouth open, like a poorbox gaping for half-pence,
and, good or bad, he swallowed them all without any resistance. We could
n't disagree, and so we parted.

Hum. And the poor, meek gentleman went to Russia for a quiet life.

Sir R. A quiet life! Why, he married the moment he got there, tacked
himself to the shrew relict of a Russian merchant, and continued a
speculation with her in furs, flax, potashes, tallow, linen, and leather;
what's the consequence? Thirteen months ago he broke.

Hum. Poor soul, his wife should have followed the business for him. Sir R.
I fancy she did follow it, for she died just as he broke, and now this
madcap, Frederic, is sent over to me for protection. Poor Job, now he is
in distress, I must not neglect his son.

Hum. Here comes his son; that's Mr. Frederic.

   Enter FREDERIC.

Fred. Oh, my dear uncle, good morning! Your park is nothing but beauty.

Sir R. Who bid you caper over my beauty? I told you to stay in doors till
I got up.

Fred. So you did, but I entirely forgot it.

Sir R. And pray, what made you forget it?

Fred. The sun.

Sir R. The sun! he's mad; you mean the moon, 1 believe.

Fred. Oh, my dear uncle, you don't know the effect of a fine spring
morning upon a fellow just arrived from Russia. The day looked bright,
trees budding, birds singing, the park was so gay that I took a leap out
of your old balcony, made your deer fly before me like the wind, and
chased them all around the park to get an appetite for breakfast, while
you were snoring in bed, uncle.

Sir R. Oh, oh! So the effect of English sunshine upon a Russian, is to
make him jump out of a balcony, and worry my deer.

Fred. I confess it had that influence upon me.

Sir R. You had better be influenced by a rich old uncle, unless you think
the sun likely to leave you a fat legacy.

Fred. I hate legacies.

Sir R. Sir, that's mighty singular. They are pretty solid tokens, at
least.

Fred. Very melancholy tokens, uncle; they are the posthumous dispatches
Affection sends to Gratitude, to inform us we have lost a gracious friend.

Sir R. How charmingly the dog argues!

Fred. But I own my spirits ran away with me this morning. I will obey you
better in future; for they tell me you are a very worthy, good sort of old
gentleman.

Sir R. Now who had the familiar impudence to tell you that? Fred. Old
rusty, there.

Sir R. Why Humphrey, you didn't?

Hum. Yes, but I did though.

Fred, Yes, he did, and on that score I shall be anxious to show you
obedience, for 't is as meritorious to attempt sharing a good man's heart,
as it is paltry to have designs upon a rich man's money. A noble nature
aims its attentions full breast high, uncle; a mean mind levels its dirty
assiduities at the pocket.

Sir R. (Shaking him by the hand.) Jump out of every window I have in my
house; hunt my deer into high fevers, my fine fellow! Ay, that's right.
This is spunk, and plain speaking. Give me a man who is always flinging
his dissent to my doctrines smack in my teeth.

Fred. I disagree with you there, uncle.

Hum. And so do I.

Fred. You! you forward puppy! If you were not so old, I'd knock you down.

Sir R. I'll knock you down, if you do. I won't have my servants thumped
into dumb flattery.

Hum. Come, you are ruffled. Let us go to the business of the morning.

Sir R. I hate the business of the morning. Don't you see we are engaged in
discussion. I tell you, I hate the business of the morning.

Hum. No you don't.

Sir R. Don't I? Why not?

Hum. Because 't is charity.

Sir R. Pshaw! Well, we must not neglect the business, if there be any
distress in the parish. Read the list, Humphrey.

Hum. (Taking out a paper and reading.) "Jonathan Huggins, of Muck Mead, is
put in prison for debt."

Sir R. Why, it was only last week that Gripe, the attorney, recovered two
cottages for him by law, worth sixty pounds.

Hum. Yes, and charged a hundred for his trouble; so seized the cottages
for part of his bill, and threw Jonathan into jail for the remainder.

Sir R. A harpy! I must relieve the poor fellow's distress.

Fred. And I must kick his attorney.

Hum. (Reading.) "The curate's horse is dead."

Sir R. Pshaw! There's no distress in that.

Hum. Yes, there is, to a man that must go twenty miles every Sunday to
preach three sermons, for thirty pounds a year.

Sir R. Why won't the vicar give him another nag?

Hum. Because 't is cheaper to get another curate ready mounted.

Sir R. Well, send him the black pad which I purchased last Tuesday, and
tell him to work him as long as he lives. What else have we upon the list?

Hum. Something out of the common; there's one Lieutenant Worthington, a
disabled officer and a widower, come to lodge at Farmer Harrowby's, in the
village; he is, it seems, very poor, and more proud than poor, and more
honest than proud.

Sir R. And so he sends to me for assistance? Hum. He'd see you hanged
first! No, he'd sooner die than ask you or any man for a shilling! There's
his daughter, and his wife's aunt, and an old corporal that served in the
wars with him, he keeps them all upon his half pay.

Sir R. Starves them all, I'm afraid, Humphrey.

Fred. (Going.) Good morning, uncle.

Sir R. You rogue, where are you running now?

Fred. To talk with Lieutenant Worthington.

Sir R. And what may you be going to say to him?

Fred. I can't tell till I encounter him; and then, uncle, when I have an
old gentleman by the hand, who has been disabled in his country's service,
and is struggling to support his motherless child, a poor relation, and a
faithful servant, in honorable indigence, impulse will supply me with
words to express my sentiments.

Sir R. Stop, you rogue; I must be before you in this business.

Fred. That depends on who can run the fastest; so, start fair, uncle, and
here goes.--(Runs out.)

Sir R. Stop, stop; why, Frederic--a jackanapes--to take my department out
of my hands! I'll disinherit the dog for his assurance.

Hum. No, you won't.

Sir R. Won't I? Hang me if I--but we'll argue that point as we go. So,
come along Humphrey.

NOTES.-Ergo (pro. er'go) is a Latin word meaning therefore. Negatur (pro.
ne-ga'tur) is a Latin verb, and means it is denied.

The Tartars are a branch of the Mongolian race, embracing among other
tribes the Calmucks. The latter are a fierce, nomadic people inhabiting
parts of the Russian and Chinese empires.



LXXXIV. MY MOTHER'S PICTURE. (310)

William Cowper, 1731-1800, was the son of an English clergyman; both his
parents were descended from noble families. He was always of a gentle,
timid disposition; and the roughness of his schoolfellows increased his
weakness in this respect. He studied law, and was admitted to the bar, but
never practiced his profession. When he was about thirty years of age, he
was appointed to a clerkship in the House of Lords, but could not summon
courage to enter upon the discharge of its duties. He was so disturbed by
this affair that he became insane, sought to destroy himself, and had to
be consigned to a private asylum. Soon after his recovery, he found a
congenial home in the family of the Rev. Mr. Unwin. On the death of this
gentleman, a few years later, he continued to reside with his widow till
her death, a short time before that of Cowper. Most of this time their
home was at Olney. His first writings were published in 1782. He wrote
several beautiful hymns, "The Task," and some minor poems. These, with his
translations of Homer and his correspondence, make up his published works.
His life was always pure and gentle; he took great pleasure in simple,
natural objects, and in playing with animals. His insanity returned from
time to time, and darkened his life at its close. When six years of age,
he lost his mother; and the following selection is part of a touching
tribute to her memory, written many years later.
###


Oh that those lips had language! Life has passed
With me but roughly since I heard them last.
My mother, when I learned that thou wast dead,
Say, wast thou conscious of the tears I shed?
Hovered thy spirit o'er thy sorrowing son,
Wretch even then, life's journey just begun?
Perhaps thou gavest me, though unfelt, a kiss,
Perhaps a tear, if souls can weep in bliss.
Ah, that maternal smile! it answers--Yes!

I heard the bell tolled on thy burial day;
I saw the hearse that bore thee slow away;
And, turning from my nursery window, drew
A long, long sigh, and wept a last adieu!
But was it such? It was. Where thou art gone,
Adieus and farewells are a sound unknown.
May I but meet thee on that peaceful shore,
The parting word shall pass my lips no more.

Thy maidens, grieved themselves at my concern,
Oft gave me promise of thy quick return;
What ardently I wished, I long believed;
And, disappointed still, was still deceived;
By expectation, every day beguiled,
Dupe of to-morrow, even when a child.
Thus many a sad to-morrow came and went,
Till, all my stock of infant sorrows spent,
I learned at last submission to my lot;
But, though I less deplored thee, ne'er forgot.

My boast is not that I deduce my birth
From loins enthroned, and rulers of the earth;
But higher far my proud pretensions rise,--
The son of parents passed into the skies.
And now, farewell!   Time, unrevoked, has run
His wonted course, yet what I wished is done.

By Contemplation's help, not sought in vain,
I seem to have lived my childhood o'er again;
To have renewed the joys that once were mine,
Without the sin of violating thine;
And, while the wings of Fancy still are free,
And I can view this mimic show of thee,
Time has but half succeeded in his theft,--
Thyself removed, thy power to soothe me left.



LXXXV. DEATH OF SAMSON. (312)

John Milton, 1608-1674, was born in London--eight years before the
greatest English poet, Shakespeare, died. His father followed the
profession of a scrivener, in which he acquired a competence. As a boy,
Milton was exceedingly studious, continuing his studies till midnight. He
graduated at Christ's College, Cambridge, where his singular beauty, his
slight figure, and his fastidious morality caused his companions to
nickname him "the lady of Christ's." On leaving college he spent five
years more in study, and produced his lighter poems. He then traveled on
the continent, returning about the time the civil war broke out. For a time
he taught a private school, but soon threw himself with all the power of
his able and tried pen into the political struggle. He was the champion of
Parliament and of Cromwell for about twenty years. On the accession of
Charles II., he concealed himself for a time, but was soon allowed to live
quietly in London. His eyesight had totally failed in 1654; but now, in
blindness, age, family affliction, and comparative poverty, he produced
his great work "Paradise Lost." In 1667 he sold the poem for 5 Pounds in
cash, with a promise of 10 Pounds more on certain contingencies; the sum
total received by himself and family for the immortal poem, was 23 Pounds.
Later, he produced "Paradise Regained" and "Samson Agonistes," from the
latter of which the following extract is taken. Milton is a wonderful
example of a man, who, by the greatness of his own mind, triumphed over
trials, afflictions, hardships, and the evil influence of bitter political
controversy.
###

Occasions drew me early to this city;
And, as the gates I entered with sunrise,
The morning trumpets festival proclaimed
Through each high street: little I had dispatched,
When all abroad was rumored that this day
Samson should be brought forth, to show the people
Proof of his mighty strength in feats and games.
I sorrowed at his captive state,
But minded not to be absent at that spectacle.

The building was a spacious theater
Half-round, on two main pillars vaulted high,
With seats where all the lords, and each degree
Of sort, might sit in order to behold;
The other side was open, where the throng
On banks and scaffolds under sky might stand:
I among these aloof obscurely stood.
The feast and noon grew high, and sacrifice
Had filled their hearts with mirth, high cheer, and wine,
When to their sports they turned. Immediately
Was Samson as a public servant brought,
In their state livery clad: before him pipes
And timbrels; on each side went arme'd guards;
Both horse and foot before him and behind,
Archers and slingers, cataphracts, and spears.
At sight of him the people with a shout
Rifted the air, clamoring their god with praise,
Who had made their dreadful enemy their thrall.

He, patient, but undaunted, where they led him,
Came to the place; and what was set before him,
Which without help of eye might be essayed,
To heave, pull, draw, or break, he still performed
All with incredible, stupendous force,
None daring to appear antagonist.

At length for intermission sake, they led him
Between the pillars; he his guide requested,
As overtired, to let him lean awhile
With both his arms on those two massy pillars,
That to the arche'd roof gave main support.

He unsuspicious led him; which when Samson
Felt in his arms, with head awhile inclined,
And eyes fast fixed, he stood, as one who prayed,
Or some great matter in his mind revolved:
At last, with head erect, thus cried aloud:--
"Hitherto, lords, what your commands imposed
I have performed, as reason was, obeying,
Not without wonder or delight beheld;
Now, of my own accord, such other trial
I mean to show you of my strength yet greater,
As with amaze shall strike all who behold."

This uttered, straining all his nerves, he bowed;
As with the force of winds and waters pent
When mountains tremble, those two massy pillars
With horrible convulsion to and fro
He tugged, he shook, till down they came, and drew
The whole roof after them with burst of thunder
Upon the heads of all who sat beneath,--
Lords, ladies, captains, counselors, or priests,
Their choice nobility and flower, not only
Of this, but each Philistian city round,
Met from all parts to solemnize this feast.
Samson, with these immixed, inevitably
Pulled down the same destruction on himself;
The vulgar only 'scaped who stood without.

NOTE.--The person supposed to be speaking is a Hebrew who chanced to be
present at Gaza when the, incidents related took place. After the
catastrophe he rushes to Manoah, the father of Samson, to whom and his
assembled friends he relates what he saw. (Cf. Bible, Judges xvi, 23.)



LXXXVI.  AN EVENING ADVENTURE. (315)

Not long since, a gentleman was traveling in one of the counties of
Virginia, and about the close of the day stopped at a public house to
obtain refreshment and spend the night. He had been there but a short
time, before an old man alighted from his gig, with the apparent intention
of becoming his fellow guest at the same house.

As the old man drove up, he observed that both the shafts of his gig were
broken, and that they were held together by withes, formed from the bark
of a hickory sapling. Our traveler observed further that he was plainly
clad, that his knee buckles were loosened, and that something like
negligence pervaded his dress. Conceiving him to be one of the honest
yeomanry of our land, the courtesies of strangers passed between them, and
they entered the tavern. It was about the same time, that an addition of
three or four young gentlemen was made to their number; most, if not all
of them, of the legal profession.

As soon as they became conveniently accommodated, the conversation was
turned, by one of the latter, upon the eloquent harangue which had that
day been displayed at the bar. It was replied by the other that he had
witnessed, the same day, a degree of eloquence no doubt equal, but it was
from the pulpit. Something like a sarcastic rejoinder was made as to the
eloquence of the pulpit, and a warm and able altercation ensued, in which
the merits of the Christian religion became the subject of discussion.
From six o'clock until eleven, the young champions wielded the sword of
argument, adducing with ingenuity and ability everything that could be
said pro and con.

During this protracted period, the old gentleman listened with the
meekness and modesty of a child, as if he were adding new information to
the stores of his own mind; or perhaps he was observing, with a
philosophic eye, the faculties of the youthful mind, and how new energies
are evolved by repeated action; or perhaps, with patriotic emotion, he was
reflecting upon the future destinies of his country, and on the rising
generation, upon whom those future destinies must devolve; or, most
probably, with a sentiment of moral and religious feeling, he was
collecting an argument which no art would be "able to elude, and no force
to resist." Our traveler remained a spectator, and took no part in what
was said.

At last one of the young men, remarking that it was impossible to combat
with long and established prejudices, wheeled around, and with some
familiarity exclaimed, "Well, my old gentleman, what think you of these
things?" "If," said the traveler, "a streak of vivid lightning had at that
moment crossed the room, their amazement could not have been greater than
it was from what followed." The most eloquent and unanswerable appeal that
he had ever heard or read, was made for nearly an hour by the old
gentleman. So perfect was his recollection, that every argument urged
against the Christian religion was met in the order in which it was
advanced. Hume's sophistry on the subject of miracles, was, if possible,
more perfectly answered than it had already been done by Campbell. And in
the whole lecture there was so much simplicity and energy, pathos and
sublimity, that not another word was uttered.

"An attempt to describe it," said the traveler, "would be an attempt to
paint the sunbeams." It was now a matter of curiosity and inquiry who the
old gentleman was. The traveler concluded that it was the preacher from
whom the pulpit eloquence was heard; but no, it was John Marshall, the
Chief Justice of the United States.

NOTES.--David Hume (b. 1711, d. 1776) was a celebrated Scotch historian
and essayist. His most important work is "The History of England." He was
a skeptic in matters of religion, and was a peculiarly subtle writer.

George Campbell (b. 1719, d. 1796) was a distinguished Scotch minister. He
wrote "A Dissertation on Miracles," ably answering Hume's "Essay on
Miracles."

John Marshall (b. 1755, d. 1835) was Chief Justice of the United States
from 1801 until his death. He was an eminent jurist, and wrote a "Life of
Washington," which made him famous as an author.



LXXXVII. THE BAREFOOT BOY. (317)

John Greenleaf Whittier, 1807-1892, was born in Haverhill, Mass., and,
with short intervals of absence, he always resided in that vicinity. His
parents were Friends or "Quakers," and he always held to the same faith.
He spent his boyhood on a farm, occasionally writing verses for the papers
even then. Two years of study in the academy seem to have given him all
the special opportunity for education that he ever enjoyed. In 1829 he
edited a newspaper in Boston, and the next year assumed a similar position
in Hartford. For two years he was a member of the Massachusetts
legislature. In 1836 he edited an anti-slavery paper in Philadelphia, and
was secretary of the American Anti-Slavery Society. Mr. Whittier wrote
extensively both in prose and verse. During the later years of his life he
published several volumes of poems, and contributed frequently to the
pages of the "Atlantic Monthly." An earnest opponent of slavery, some of
his poems bearing on that subject are fiery and even bitter; but, in
general, their sentiment is gentle, and often pathetic. As a poet, he took
rank among those most highly esteemed by his countrymen. "Snow-Bound,"
published in 1805, is one of the longest and best of his poems. Several of
his shorter pieces are marked by much smoothness and sweetness.
###


Blessings on thee, little man,
Barefoot boy, with cheek of tan!
With thy turned-up pantaloons,
And thy merry whistled tunes;
With thy red lip, redder still
Kissed by strawberries on the hill;
With the sunshine on thy face,
Through thy torn brim's jaunty grace;
From my heart I give thee joy,--
I was once a barefoot boy!
Prince thou art,--the grown-up man
Only is republican.
Let the million-dollared ride!
Barefoot, trudging, at his side,
Thou hast more than he can buy
In the reach of ear and eye,--
Outward sunshine, inward joy:
Blessings on thee, barefoot boy!

Oh for boyhood's painless play,
Sleep that wakes in laughing day,
Health that mocks the doctor's rules,
Knowledge never learned of schools,
Of the wild bee's morning chase,
Of the wild flower's time and place,
Flight of fowl and habitude
Of the tenants of the wood;
How the tortoise bears his shell,
How the woodchuck digs his cell,
And the ground mole sinks his well
How the robin feeds her young,
How the oriole's nest is hung;
Where the whitest lilies blow,
Where the freshest berries grow,
Where the groundnut trails its vine,
Where the wood grape's clusters shine;
Of the black wasp's cunning way,
Mason of his walls of clay,
And the architectural plans
Of gray hornet artisans!--
For, eschewing books and tasks,
Nature answers all he asks;
Hand in hand with her he walks,
Face to face with her he talks,
Part and parcel of her joy,--
Blessings on thee, barefoot boy!

Oh for boyhood's time of June,
Crowding years in one brief moon,
When all things I heard or saw
Me, their master, waited for.
I was rich in flowers and trees,
Humming birds and honeybees;
For my sport the squirrel played,
Plied the snouted mole his spade;
For my taste the blackberry cone
Purpled over hedge and stone;
Laughed the brook for my delight
Through the day and through the night,
Whispering at the garden wall,
Talked with me from fall to fall;
Mine the sand-rimmed pickerel pond,
Mine the walnut slopes beyond,
Mine, on bending orchard trees,
Apples of Hesperides!
Still, as my horizon grew,
Larger grew my riches too;
All the world I saw or knew
Seemed a complex Chinese toy,
Fashioned for a barefoot boy!

Oh for festal dainties spread,
Like my bowl of milk and bread,--
Pewter spoon and bowl of wood,
On the doorstone, gray and rude!
O'er me, like a regal tent,
Cloudy-ribbed, the sunset bent,
Purple-curtained, fringed with gold,
Looped in many a wind-swung fold;
While for music came the play
Of the pied frog's orchestra;
And to light the noisy choir,
Lit the fly his lamp of fire.
I was monarch: pomp and joy
Waited on the barefoot boy!

Cheerily, then, my little man,
Live and laugh, as boyhood can!
Though the flinty slopes be hard,
Stubble-speared the new-mown sward,
Every morn shall lead thee through
Fresh baptisms of the dew;
Every evening from thy feet
Shall the cool wind kiss the heat:
All too soon these feet must hide
In the prison cells of pride,
Lose the freedom of the sod,
Like a colt's for work be shod,
Made to tread the mills of toil,
Up and down in ceaseless moil:
Happy if their track be found
Never on forbidden ground;
Happy if they sink not in
Quick and treacherous sands of sin.
Ah! that thou shouldst know thy joy
Ere it passes, barefoot boy!


NOTE.--The Hesperides, in Grecian mythology, were four sisters (some
traditions say three, and others, seven) who guarded the golden apples
given to Juno as a wedding present. The locality of the garden of the
Hesperides is a disputed point with mythologists.



[Illustration: A well-dressed man is reaching for a glove while facing
three ferocious lions. Several people are observing him from the safety of
a raised platform.]


LXXXVIII.  THE GLOVE AND THE LIONS. (321)

James Henry Leigh Hunt, 1784-1859. Leigh Hunt, as he is commonly called,
was prominent before the public for fifty years as "a writer of essays,
poems, plays, novels, and criticisms." He was born at Southgate,
Middlesex, England. His mother was an American lady. He began to write for
the public at a very early age. In 1808, In connection with his brother,
he established "The Examiner," a newspaper advocating liberal opinions in
politics. For certain articles offensive to the government, the brothers
were fined 500 Pounds each and condemned to two years' imprisonment. Leigh
fitted up his prison like a boudoir, received his friends here, and wrote
several works during his confinement. Mr. Hunt was intimate with Byron,
Shelley, Moore, and Keats, and was associated with Byron and Shelley in
the publication of a political and literary journal. His last years were
peacefully devoted to literature, and in 1847 he received a pension from
the government.
###

King Francis was a hearty king, and loved a royal sport,
And one day, as his lions fought, sat looking on the court;
The nobles filled the benches round, the ladies by their side,
And 'mongst them sat the Count de Lorge, with one for whom he sighed:
And truly 't was a gallant thing to see that crowning show,
Valor and love, and a king above, and the royal beasts below.

Ramped and roared the lions, with horrid laughing jaws;
They bit, they glared, gave blows like beams, a wind went with their paws;
With wallowing might and stifled roar, they rolled on one another:
Till all the pit, with sand and mane, was in a thunderous smother;
The bloody foam above the bars came whizzing through the air:
Said Francis, then, "Faith, gentlemen, we're better here than there."

De Lorge's love o'erheard the king,--a beauteous, lively dame,
With smiling lips, and sharp, bright eyes, which always seemed the same;
She thought, "The Count, my lover, is brave as brave call be,
He surely would do wondrous things to show his love for me;
King, ladies, lovers, all look on; the occasion is divine;
I'll drop my glove to prove his love; great glory will be mine."

She dropped her glove to prove his love, then looked at him and smiled;
He bowed, and in a moment leaped among the lions wild;
The leap was quick, return was quick, he soon regained his place,
Then threw the glove, but not with love, right in the lady's face.
"In faith," cried Francis, "rightly done!" and he rose from where he sat;
"No love," quoth he, "but vanity, sets love a task like that."


NOTE.--King Francis. This is supposed to have been Francis I. of France
(b. 1494, d. 1547). He was devoted to sports of this nature.



LXXXIX. THE FOLLY OF INTOXICATION. (322)


Iago.    What, are you hurt, lieutenant?
Cassio.  Ay, past all surgery.
Iago.    Marry, heaven forbid!
Cas.     Reputation, reputation, reputation! Oh, I have
         lost my reputation! I have lost the immortal part of myself,
         and what remains is bestial. My reputation! Iago, my reputation!

Iago.    As I am an honest man, I thought you had received some
         bodily wound; there is more sense in that than in reputation.
         Reputation is an idle and most false imposition: oft got without
         merit, and lost without deserving: you have lost no reputation at
         all, unless you repute yourself such a loser. What, man! there
         are ways to recover the general again. Sue to him again, and he's
         yours.

Cas.     I will rather sue to be despised than to deceive so good a
         commander with so slight, so drunken, and so indiscreet an
         officer. Drunk? and speak parrot? and squabble? swagger? swear?
         and discourse fustian with one's own shadow? O thou invisible
         spirit of wine, if thou hast no name to be known by, let us call
         thee devil!

Iago.    What was he that you followed with your sword? What had he
         done to you?

Cas.     I know not.

Iago.    Is't possible?

Cas.     I remember a mass of things, but nothing distinctly; a quarrel,
         but nothing wherefore. Oh that men should put an enemy in their
         mouths to steal away their brains! that we should, with joy,
         revel, pleasure, and applause, transform ourselves into beasts!

Iago.    Why, but you are now well enough: how came you thus
         recovered?

Cas.     It hath pleased the devil, Drunkenness, to give place to the
         devil, Wrath; one unperfectness shows me another, to make me
         frankly despise myself.

Iago.    Come, you are too severe a moraler. As the time, the place, and
         the condition of this country stands, I could heartily wish this
         had not befallen; but since it is as it is, mend it for your own
         good.

Cas.     I will ask him for my place again: he shall tell me I am a
         drunkard! Had I as many mouths as Hydra, such an answer would
         stop them all. To be now a sensible man, by and by a fool, and
         presently a beast! Oh strange!--Every inordinate cup is
         unblessed, and the ingredient is a devil! Iago.  Come, come; good
         wine is a good familiar creature, if it be well used; exclaim no
         more against it. And, good lieutenant, I think you think I love
         you.

Cas.     I have well approved it, sir,--I, drunk!

Iago.    You or any man living may be drunk at a time, man. I'll tell you
         what you shall do. Our general's wife is now the general. Confess
         yourself freely to her; importune her help to put you in your
         place again. She is of so free, so kind, so apt, so blessed a
         disposition, she holds it a vice in her goodness not to do more
         than she is requested. This broken joint between you and her
         husband, entreat her to splinter; and, my fortunes against any
         lay worth naming, this crack of your love shall grow stronger
         than it was before.

Cas.     You advise me well.

Iago.    I protest in the sincerity of love and honest kindness.

Cas.     I think it freely, and betimes in the morning, I will beseech
         the virtuous Desdemona to undertake for me; I am desperate of my
         fortunes if they check me here.

Iago.    You are in the right. Good night, lieutenant, I must to the watch.

Cas.     Good night, honest Iago.
                                 Shakespeare.--Othello, Act ii, Scene iii.

NOTES.--Iago is represented as a crafty, unscrupulous villain. He applies
for the position of lieutenant under Othello, but the latter has already
appointed Cassio--who is honest, but of a weak character--to that
position; he, however, makes Iago his ensign. Then Iago, to revenge
himself for this and other fancied wrongs, enters upon a systematic course
of villainy, part of which is to bring about the intoxication of Cassio,
and his consequent discharge from the lieutenancy.

The Hydra was a fabled monster of Grecian mythology, having nine heads,
one of which was immortal.

Desdemona was the wife of Othello.



XC. STARVED ROCK. (325)

Francis Parkman, 1823-1893, the son of a clergyman of the same name, was
born in Boston, and graduated at Harvard University in 1844. He spent more
than twenty years in a careful study of the early French explorations and
settlements in America; and he published the fruits of his labor in twelve
large volumes. Although troubled with an affection of the eyes, which
sometimes wholly prevented reading or writing, his work was most carefully
and successfully done. His narratives are written in a clear and animated
style, and his volumes are a rich contribution to American history.
###


The cliff called "Starved Rock," now pointed out to travelers as the chief
natural curiosity of the region, rises, steep on three sides as a castle
wall, to the height of a hundred and twenty-five feet above the river. In
front, it overhangs the water that washes its base; its western brow looks
down on the tops of the forest trees below; and on the east lies a wide
gorge, or ravine, choked with the mingled foliage of oaks, walnuts, and
elms; while in its rocky depths a little brook creeps down to mingle with
the river.

From the rugged trunk of the stunted cedar that leans forward from the
brink, you may drop a plummet into the river below, where the catfish and
the turtles may plainly be seen gliding over the wrinkled sands of the
clear and shallow current. The cliff is accessible only from the south,
where a man may climb up, not without difficulty, by a steep and narrow
passage. The top is about an acre in extent.

Here, in the month of December, 1682, La Salle and Tonty began to entrench
themselves. They cut away the forest that crowned the rock, built
storehouses and dwellings of its remains, dragged timber up the rugged
pathway, and encircled the summit with a palisade. Thus the winter was
passed, and meanwhile the work of negotiation went prosperously on. The
minds of the Indians had been already prepared. In La Salle they saw their
champion against the Iroquois, the standing terror of all this region.
They gathered around his stronghold like the timorous peasantry of the
Middle Ages around the rock-built castle of their feudal lord.

From the wooden ramparts of St. Louis,--for so he named his fort,--high
and inaccessible as an eagle's nest, a strange scene lay before his eye.
The broad, flat valley of the Illinois was spread beneath him like a map,
bounded in the distance by its low wall of wooded hills. The river wound
at his feet in devious channels among islands bordered with lofty trees;
then, far on the left, flowed calmly westward through the vast meadows,
till its glimmering blue ribbon was lost in hazy distance.

There had been a time, and that not remote, when these fair meadows were a
waste of death and desolation, scathed with fire, and strewn with the
ghastly relics of an Iroquois victory. Now, all was changed. La Salle
looked down from his rock on a concourse of wild human life. Lodges of
bark and rushes, or cabins of logs, were clustered on the open plain, or
along the edges of the bordering forests. Squaws labored, warriors lounged
in the sun, naked children whooped and gamboled on the grass.

Beyond the river, a mile and a half on the left, the banks were studded
once more with the lodges of the Illinois, who, to the number of six
thousand, had returned, since their defeat, to this their favorite
dwelling place. Scattered along the valley, among the adjacent hills, or
over the neighboring prairie, were the cantonments of a half score of
other tribes, and fragments of tribes, gathered under the protecting aegis
of the French.


NOTES.--The curious elevation called Starved Rock is on the south side of
Illinois River, between La Salle and Ottawa. There is a legend according
to which it is said that over one hundred years ago, a party of Illinois
Indians took refuge here from the Pottawatomies; their besiegers, however,
confined them so closely that the whole party perished of starvation, or,
as some say, of thirst. From this circumstance the rock takes its name.

La Salle (b. 1643, d. 1687) was a celebrated French explorer and fur
trader. He established many forts throughout the Mississippi Valley,--
among them, Fort St. Louis, in 1683.

Tonty was an Italian, who formerly served in both the French army and
navy, and afterwards joined La Salle in his explorations.



XCI. PRINCE HENRY AND FALSTAFF. (327)

PRINCE HENRY and POINS, in a back room, in a tavern.
Enter FALSTAFF, GADSHILL, BARDOLPH, and PETO.

Poins. Welcome, Jack. Where hast thou been?

Falstaff. A plague of all cowards, I say, and a vengeance too! marry, and
amen! Give me a cup of sack, boy. Ere I lead this life long, I'll sew
nether stocks, and mend them, and foot them, too. A plague of all cowards!
Give me a cup of sack, rogue. Is there no virtue extant? (He drinks, and
then continues.) You rogue, here's lime in this sack, too; there is
nothing but roguery to be found in villainous man: yet a coward is worse
than a cup of sack with lime in it. A villainous coward! Go thy ways, old
Jack; die when thou wilt: if manhood, good manhood, be not forgot upon the
face of the earth, then am I a shotten herring. There live not three good
men unhanged, in England; and one of them is fat and grows old; a bad
world, I say! I would I were a weaver; I could sing psalms, or anything. A
plague of all cowards, I say still.

Prince Henry. How now, woolsack?  What mutter you?

Fal. A king's son! If I do not beat thee out of thy kingdom with a dagger
of lath, and drive all thy subjects afore thee like a flock of wild geese,
I'll never wear hair on my face more. You, Prince of Wales!

P. Henry. Why, you baseborn dog! What's the matter?

Fal. Are you not a coward? Answer me to that; and Poins there?

Poins. Ye fat braggart, an ye call me coward, I'll stab thee.

Fal. I call thee coward? I'll see thee gibbeted ere I call thee coward:
but I would give a thousand pounds I could run as fast as thou canst. You
are straight enough in the shoulders, you care not who sees your back:
call you that backing of your friends? A plague upon such backing! Give me
them that will face me. Give me a cup of sack. I am a rogue, if I have
drunk to-day.

P. Henry. O villain! thy lips ate scarce wiped since thou drunkest last.

Fal. All's one for that. A plague of all cowards, still say 1. (He
drinks.)

P. Henry. What's the matter?

Fal. What's the matter! There be four of us here have ta'en a thousand
pounds this morning.

P. Henry. Where is it, Jack? where is it?

Fal. Where is it? Taken from us it is; a hundred upon poor four of us.

P. Henry. What! a hundred, man?

Fal. I am a rogue, if I were not at half-sword with a dozen of them two
hours together. I have 'scaped by miracle. I am eight times thrust through
the doublet; four, through the hose; my buckler cut through and through;
my sword hacked like a handsaw; look here! (shows his sword.) I never
dealt better since I was a man; all would not do. A plague of all cowards!
Let them speak (pointing to GADSHILL, BARDOLPH, and PETO); if they speak
more or less than truth, they are villains and the sons of darkness.

P. Henry. Speak, sirs; how was it?

Gadshill. We four set upon some dozen--

Fal. Sixteen, at least, my lord.

Gad. And bound them.

Peta. No, no, they were not bound.

Fal. You rogue, they were bound, every man of them; or I am a Jew,
else--an Ebrew Jew.

Gad. As we were sharing, some six or seven fresh men set upon us--

Fal. And unbound the rest; and then come in the other.

P. Henry. What! fought ye with them all?

Fal. All? I know not what ye call all; but if I fought not with fifty of
them, I am a bunch of radish: if there were not two or three and fifty
upon poor old Jack, then I am no two-legged creature.

P. Henry. Pray heaven, you have not murdered some of them.

Fal. Nay, that's past praying for; for I have peppered two of them; two I
am sure I have paid; two rogues in buckram suits. I tell thee what, Hal,
if I tell thee a lie, spit in my face, and call me a horse. Thou knowest
my old ward; (he draws his sword and stands if about to fight) here I lay,
and thus I bore my point. Four rogues in buckram let drive at me--

P. Henry. What! four? Thou saidst but two even now.

Fal. Four, Hal; I told thee four.

Poins. Ay, ay, he said four.

Fal. These four came all afront, and mainly thrust at me. I made no more
ado, but took all their seven points in my target, thus.

P. Henry. Seven? Why, there were but four, even now.

Fal. In buckram?

Poins. Ay, four, in buckram suits.

Fal. Seven, by these hilts, or I am a villain else.

P. Henry. Prithee, let him alone; we shall have more anon.

Fal. Dost thou hear me, Hal?

P. Henry. Ay, and mark thee, too, Jack.

Fal. Do so, for it is worth the listening to. These nine in buckram, that
I told thee of--

P. Henry. So, two more already.

Fal. Their points being broken, began to give me ground; but I followed me
close, came in foot and hand; and, with a thought, seven of the eleven I
paid.

P. Henry. O, monstrous! eleven buckram men grown out of two!

Fal. But three knaves, in Kendal green, came at my back, and let drive at
me; for it was so dark, Hal, that thou couldst not see thy hand.

P. Henry. These lies are like the father of them; gross as a mountain,
open, palpable. Why, thou clay-brained, nott-pated fool; thou greasy
tallow keech--

Fal. What! Art thou mad! Art thou mad? Is not the truth the truth?

P. Henry. Why, how couldst thou know these men in Kendal green, when it
was so dark thou couldst not see thy hand? Come, tell us your reason; what
sayest thou to this?

Poins. Come, your reason, Jack, your reason.

Fal. What, upon compulsion? No, were I at the strappado, or all the racks
in the world, I would not tell you on compulsion. Give you a reason on
compulsion! If reasons were as plentiful as blackberries, I would give no
man a reason on compulsion, I.

P. Henry. I'll be no longer guilty of this sin: this sanguine coward, this
horseback breaker, this huge hill of flesh--

Fal. Away! you starveling, you eel skin, you dried neat's tongue, you
stockfish! Oh for breath to utter what is like thee!--you tailor's yard,
you sheath, you bow case, you--

P. Henry. Well, breathe awhile, and then to it again; and when thou hast
tired thyself in base comparisons, hear me speak but this.

Poins. Mark, Jack.

P. Henry. We two saw you four set on four; you bound them, and were
masters of their wealth. Mark now, how a plain tale shall put you down.
Then did we two set on you four, and with a word outfaced you from your
prize, and have it; yea, and can show it you here in the house.--And,
Falstaff, you carried yourself away as nimbly, with as quick dexterity,
and roared for mercy, and still ran and roared, as ever I heard a calf.
What a slave art thou, to hack thy sword as thou hast done, and then say
it was in fight! What trick, what device, what starting hole, canst thou
now find out to hide thee from this open and apparent shame?

Poins. Come, let's hear, Jack. What trick hast thou now?

Fal. Why, I knew ye as well as he that made ye. Why, bear ye, my masters:
was it for me to kill the heir apparent? Should I turn upon the true
prince? Why, thou knowest I am as valiant as Hercules; but beware
instinct; the lion will not touch the true prince; instinct is a great
matter; I was a coward on instinct. I shall think the better of myself and
thee during my life; I for a valiant lion, and thou for a true prince.
But, lads, I am glad you have the money. Hostess, clap to the doors. Watch
to-night, pray to-morrow. Gallants, lads, boys, hearts of gold; all the
titles of good-fellowship come to you! What! shall we be merry? Shall we
have a play extempore?

P. Henry. Content; and the argument shall be thy running away.

Fal. Ah, no more of that, Hal, an thou lovest me!

                         Shakespeare.-Henry IV, Part I, Act ii, Scene iv.


NOTES.--The lime is a fruit allied to the lemon, but smaller, and more
intensely sour.

The strappado was an instrument of torture by which the victim's limbs
were wrenched out of joint and broken.

Hercules is a hero of fabulous history, remarkable for his great strength
and wonderful achievements.



XCII. STUDIES. (332)

Sir Francis Bacon, 1561-1626. This eminent man was the youngest son of Sir
Nicholas Bacon, lord keeper of the seal in the early part of Elizabeth's
reign, and Anne Bacon, one of the most learned women of the time, daughter
of Sir Anthony Cooke. He was born in London, and educated at Cambridge. He
was a laborious and successful student, but even in his boyhood conceived
a great distrust of the methods of study pursued at the seats of
learning,--methods which he exerted his great powers to correct in his
maturer years. Much of his life was spent in the practice of law, in the
discharge of the duties of high office, and as a member of Parliament;
but, to the end of life, he busied himself with philosophical pursuits,
and he will be known to posterity chiefly for his deep and clear writings
on these subjects. His constant direction in philosophy is to break away
from assumption and tradition, and to be led only by sound induction based
on a knowledge of observed phenomena. His "Novum Organum" and "Advancement
of Learning" embody his ideas on philosophy and the true methods of
seeking knowledge.

Bacon rose to no very great distinction during the reign of Elizabeth;
but, under James I, he was promoted to positions of great honor and
influence. In 1618 he was made Baron of Verulam; and, three years later,
he was made Viscount of St. Albans. During much of his life, Bacon was in
pecuniary straits, which was doubtless one reason of his downfall; for, in
1621, he was accused of taking bribes, a charge to which he pleaded
guilty. His disgrace followed, and he passed the last years of his life in
retirement. Among the distinguished names in English literature, none
stands higher in his department than that of Francis Bacon.
###


Studies serve for delight, for ornament, and for ability. Their chief use
for delight is in privateness, and retiring; for ornament, is in
discourse; and for ability, is in the judgment and disposition of
business; for expert men can execute, and perhaps judge of the
particulars, one by one; but the general counsels, and the plots and
marshaling of affairs, come best from those that are learned.

To spend too much time in studies, is sloth; to use them too much for
ornament, is affectation; to make judgment wholly by their rules, is the
humor of a scholar; they perfect nature and are perfected by experience--
for natural abilities are like natural plants, that need pruning by study;
and studies themselves do give forth directions too much at large, except
they be bounded in by experience. Crafty men contemn studies, simple men
admire them, and wise men use them, for they teach not their own use; but
that is a wisdom without them, and above them, won by observation.

Read not to contradict and confute, nor to believe and take for granted,
nor to find talk and discourse, but to weigh and consider. Some books are
to be tasted, others to be swallowed, and some few to be chewed and
digested; that is, some books are to be read only in parts; others to be
read, but not curiously; and some few to be read wholly, and with
diligence and attention. Some books also may he read by deputy, and
extracts made of them by others; but that would be only in the less
important arguments, and the meaner sort of books; else distilled books
are like common distilled waters, flashy things.

Reading maketh a full man, conference a ready man, and writing an exact
man; and, therefore, if a man write little, he had need have a great
memory; if he confer little, he had need have a present wit; and if he
read little, he had need have much cunning, to seem to know that he doth
not. Histories make men wise; poets, witty; the mathematics, subtle;
natural philosophy, deep; moral philosophy, grave; logic and rhetoric,
able to contend.



XCIII. SURRENDER OF GRANADA. (334)

Sir Edward George Bulwer-Lytton, 1806-1873, was born in Norfolk County,
England. His father died when he was young; his mother was a woman of
strong literary tastes, and did much to form her son's mind. In 1844, by
royal license, he took the surname of Lytton from his mother's family.
Bulwer graduated at Cambridge. He began to publish in 1826, and his novels
and plays followed rapidly. "Pelham," "The Caxtons," "My Novel," "What
will he do with it?" and "Kenelm  Chillingly" are among the best known of
his numerous novels; and "The Lady of Lyons" and "Richelieu" are his most
successful plays. His novels are extensively read on the continent, and
have been translated into most of the languages spoken there. "Leila, or
the Siege of Granada," from which this selection is adapted, was published
in 1840.
###


Day dawned upon Granada, and the beams of the winter sun, smiling away the
clouds of the past night, played cheerily on the murmuring waves of the
Xenil and the Darro. Alone, upon a balcony commanding a view of the
beautiful landscape, stood Boabdil, the last of the Moorish kings. He had
sought to bring to his aid all the lessons of the philosophy he had
cultivated.

"What are we," thought the musing prince, "that we should fill the world
with ourselves--we kings? Earth resounds with the crash of my falling
throne; on the ear of races unborn the echo will live prolonged. But what
have I lost? Nothing that was necessary to my happiness, my repose:
nothing save the source of all my wretchedness, the Marah of my life!
Shall I less enjoy heaven and earth, or thought or action, or man's more
material luxuries of food or sleep--the common and the cheap desires of
all? Arouse thee, then, O heart within me! Many and deep emotions of
sorrow or of joy are yet left to break the monotony of existence. . . .
But it is time to depart." So saying, he descended to the court, flung
himself on his barb, and, with a small and saddened train, passed through
the gate which we yet survey, by a blackened and crumbling tower,
overgrown with vines and ivy; thence, amidst gardens now appertaining to
the convent of the victor faith, he took his mournful and unwitnessed way.

When he came to the middle of the hill that rises above those gardens, the
steel of the Spanish armor gleamed upon him, as the detachment sent to
occupy the palace marched over the summit in steady order and profound
silence. At the head of this vanguard, rode, upon a snow-white palfrey,
the Bishop of Avila, followed by a long train of barefooted monks. They
halted as Boabdil approached, and the grave bishop saluted him with the
air of one who addresses an infidel and inferior. With the quick sense of
dignity common to the great, and yet more to the fallen, Boabdil felt, but
resented not, the pride of the ecclesiastic. "Go, Christian," said he,
mildly, "the gates of the Alhambra are open, and Allah has bestowed the
palace and the city upon your king; may his virtues atone the faults of
Boabdil!" So saying, and waiting no answer, he rode on without looking to
the right or the left. The Spaniards also pursued their way.

The sun had fairly risen above the mountains, when Boabdil and his train
beheld, from the eminence on which they were, the whole armament of Spain;
and at the same moment, louder than the tramp of horse or the clash of
arms, was heard distinctly the solemn chant of Te Deum, which preceded the
blaze of the unfurled and lofty standards. Boabdil, himself still silent,
heard the groans and exclamations of his train; he turned to cheer or
chide them, and then saw, from his own watchtower, with the sun shining
full upon its pure and dazzling surface, the silver cross of Spain. His
Alhambra was already in the hands of the foe; while beside that badge of
the holy war waved the gay and flaunting flag of St. Iago, the canonized
Mars of the chivalry of Spain. At that sight the King's voice died within
him; he gave the rein to his barb, impatient to close the fatal
ceremonial, and did not slacken his speed till almost within bowshot of
the first ranks of the army.

Never had Christian war assumed a more splendid and imposing aspect. Far
as the eye could reach, extended the glittering and gorgeous lines of that
goodly power, bristling with sunlit spears and blazoned banners; while
beside, murmured, and glowed, and danced, the silver and laughing Xenil,
careless what lord should possess, for his little day, the banks that
bloomed by its everlasting course. By a small mosque halted the flower of
the army. Surrounded by the archpriests of that mighty hierarchy, the
peers and princes of a court that rivaled the Rolands of Charlemagne, was
seen the kingly form of Ferdinand himself, with Isabel at his right hand,
and the highborn dames of Spain, relieving, with their gay colors and
sparkling gems, the sterner splendor of the crested helmet and polished
mail. Within sight of the royal group, Boabdil halted, composed his aspect
so as best to conceal his soul, and, a little in advance of his scanty
train, but never in mien and majesty more a king, the son of Abdallah met
his haughty conqueror.

At the sight of his princely countenance and golden hair, his comely and
commanding beauty, made more touching by youth, a thrill of compassionate
admiration ran through that assembly of the brave and fair. Ferdinand and
Isabel slowly advanced to meet their late rival,--their new subject; and,
as Boabdil would have dismounted, the Spanish king placed his hand upon
his shoulder. "Brother and prince," said he, "forget thy sorrows; and may
our friendship hereafter console thee for reverses, against which thou
hast contended as a hero and a king--resisting man, but resigned at length
to God."

Boabdil did not affect to return this bitter but unintentional mockery of
compliment, He bowed his head, and remained a moment silent; then
motioning to his train, four of his officers approached, and, kneeling
beside Ferdinand, proffered to him, upon a silver buckler, the keys of the
city. "O king!" then said Boabdil, "accept the keys of the last hold which
has resisted the arms of Spain! The empire of the Moslem is no more. Thine
are the city and the people of Granada; yielding to thy prowess, they yet
confide in thy mercy." "They do well," said the king; "our promises shall
not be broken. But since we know the gallantry of Moorish cavaliers, not
to us, but to gentler hands, shall the keys of Granada be surrendered."

Thus saying, Ferdinand gave the keys to Isabel, who would have addressed
some soothing flatteries to Boabdil, but the emotion and excitement were
too much for her compassionate heart, heroine and queen though she was;
and when she lifted her eyes upon the calm and pale features of the
fallen monarch, the tears gushed from them irresistibly, and her voice
died in murmurs. A faint flush overspread the features of Boabdil, and
there was a momentary pause of embarrassment, which the Moor was the first
to break.

"Fair queen," said he, with mournful and pathetic dignity, "thou canst
read the heart that thy generous sympathy touches and subdues; this is thy
last, nor least glorious conquest. But I detain ye; let not my aspect
cloud your triumph. Suffer me to say farewell." "Farewell, my brother,"
replied Ferdinand, "and may fair fortune go with you! Forget the past!"
Boabdil smiled bitterly, saluted the royal pair with profound and silent
reverence, and rode slowly on, leaving the army below as he ascended the
path that led to his new principality beyond the Alpuxarras. As the trees
snatched the Moorish cavalcade from the view of the king, Ferdinand
ordered the army to recommence its march; and trumpet and cymbal presently
sent their music to the ear of the Moslems.

Boabdil spurred on at full speed, till his panting charger halted at the
little village where his mother, his slaves, and his faithful wife,
Amine--sent on before--awaited him. Joining these, he proceeded without
delay upon his melancholy path. They ascended that eminence which is the
pass into the Alpuxarras. From its height, the vale, the rivers, the
spires, and the towers of Granada broke gloriously upon the view of the
little band. They halted mechanically and abruptly; every eye was turned
to the beloved scene. The proud shame of baffled warriors, the tender
memories of home, of childhood, of fatherland, swelled every heart, and
gushed from every eye.

Suddenly the distant boom of artillery broke from the citadel, and rolled
along the sunlit valley and crystal river. A universal wail burst from the
exiles; it smote,--it overpowered the heart of the ill-starred king, in
vain seeking to wrap himself in Eastern pride or stoical philosophy. The
tears gushed from his eyes, and he covered his face with his hands. The
band wound slowly on through the solitary defiles; and that place where
the king wept is still called The Last Sigh of the Moor.


NOTES.--Granada was the capital of an ancient Moorish kingdom of the same
name, in the southeastern part of Spain. The Darro River flows through it,
emptying into the Xenil (or Jenil) just outside the city walls. King
Ferdinand of Spain drove out the Moors, and captured the city in 1492.

Marah. See Exodus xv. 23.

Avila is an episcopal city in Spain, capital of a province of the same
name.

The Te Deum is an ancient Christian hymn, composed by St. Ambrose; it is
so called from the first Latin words, "Te Deum laudamus," We praise thee,
O God.

Mars, in mythology, the god of war.

The Alhambra is the ancient palace of the Moorish kings, at Granada.

Allah is the Mohammedan name for the Supreme Being.

Roland was a nephew of Charlemagne, or Charles the Great, emperor of the
West and king of France. He was one of the most famous knights of the
chivalric romances.

The Alpuxarras is a mountainous region in the old province of Granada,
where the Moors were allowed to remain some time after their subjugation
by Ferdinand.



XCIV. HAMLET'S SOLILOQUY. (339)

To be, or not to be; that is the question:--
Whether 't is nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles,
And by opposing end them? To die,--to sleep,--
No more: and by a sleep to say we end
The heartache and the thousand natural shocks
That flesh is heir to,--'t is a consummation
Devoutly to be wished. To die,--to sleep:--
To sleep! perchance to dream:--ay, there's the rub;
For in that sleep of death what dreams may come
When we have shuffled off this mortal coil,
Must give us pause. There's the respect
That makes calamity of so long life;
For who would bear the whips and scorns of time,
The oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely,
The pangs of despised love, the law's delay,
The insolence of office, and the spurns
That patient merit of the unworthy takes,
When he himself might his quietus make
With a bare bodkin? Who would fardels bear,
To grunt and sweat under a weary life,
But that the dread of something after death,--
The undiscovered country from whose bourn
No traveler returns,--puzzles the will
And makes us rather bear those ills we have
Than fly to others that we know not of?
Thus conscience doth make cowards of us all;
And thus the native hue of resolution
Is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of thought,
And enterprises of great pith and moment
With this regard their currents turn awry,
And lose the name of action.
                             Shakespeare.--Hamlet, Act iii, Scene i.



XCV. GINEVRA. (340)

Samuel Rogers, 1763-1855, was the son of a London banker, and, in company
with his father, followed the banking business for some years. He began to
write at an early age, and published his "Pleasures of Memory," perhaps
his most famous work, in 1792. The next year his father died, leaving him
an ample fortune. He now retired from business and established himself in
an elegant house in St. James's Place. This house was a place of resort
for literary men during fifty years. In 1822 he published his longest
poem, "Italy," after which he wrote but little. He wrote with care,
spending, as he said, nine years on the "Pleasures of Memory," and sixteen
on "Italy." "His writings are remarkable for elegance of diction, purity
of taste, and beauty of sentiment." It is said that he was very agreeable
in conversation and manners, and benevolent in his disposition; but he was
addicted to ill-nature and satire in some of his criticisms.
###


  If thou shouldst ever come by choice or chance
To Modena,--where still religiously
Among her ancient trophies, is preserved
Bologna's bucket (in its chain it hangs
Within that reverend tower, the Guirlandine),--
Stop at a palace near the Reggio gate,
Dwelt in of old by one of the Orsini.
Its noble gardens, terrace above terrace,
And rich in fountains, statues, cypresses,
Will long detain thee; through their arche'd walks,
Dim at noonday, discovering many a glimpse
Of knights and dames such as in old romance,
And lovers such as in heroic song,--
Perhaps the two, for groves were their delight,
That in the springtime, as alone they sate,
Venturing together on a tale of love.
Read only part that day.--A summer sun
Sets ere one half is seen; but, ere thou go,
Enter the house--prithee, forget it not--
And look awhile upon a picture there.

  'T is of a lady in her earliest youth,
The very last of that illustrious race,
Done by Zampieri--but by whom I care not.
He who observes it, ere he passes on,
Gazes his fill, and comes and comes again,
That he may call it up when far away.

  She sits, inclining forward as to speak,
Her lips half-open, and her finger up,
As though she said, "Beware!" her vest of gold,
Broidered with flowers, and clasped from head to foot,
An emerald stone in every golden clasp;
And on her brow, fairer than alabaster,
A coronet of pearls. But then her face,
So lovely, yet so arch, so full of mirth,
The overflowings of an innocent heart,--
It haunts me still, though many a year has fled,
Like some wild melody!

                          Alone it hangs
Over a moldering heirloom, its companion,
An oaken chest, half-eaten by the worm,
But richly carved by Antony of Trent
With scripture stories from the life of Christ;
A chest that came from Venice, and had held
The ducal robes of some old ancestors--
That, by the way, it may be true or false--
But don't forget the picture; and thou wilt not,
When thou hast heard the tale they told me there.

  She was an only child; from infancy
The joy, the pride, of an indulgent sire;
The young Ginevra was his all in life,
Still as she grew, forever in his sight;
And in her fifteenth year became a bride,
Marrying an only son, Francesco Doria,
Her playmate from her birth, and her first love.

  Just as she looks there in her bridal dress,
She was all gentleness, all gayety,
Her pranks the favorite theme of every tongue.
But now the day was come, the day, the hour;
Now, frowning, smiling, for the hundredth time,
The nurse, that ancient lady, preached decorum:
And, in the luster of her youth, she gave Her hand,
with her heart in it, to Francesco.

  Great was the joy; but at the bridal feast,
When all sate down, the bride was wanting there.
Nor was she to be found! Her father cried,
" 'Tis but to make a trial of our love!"
And filled his glass to all; but his hand shook,
And soon from guest to guest the panic spread.
'T was but that instant she had left Francesco,
Laughing and looking back and flying still,
Her ivory tooth imprinted on his finger.
But now, alas! she was not to be found;
Nor from that hour could anything be guessed,
But that she was not!--Weary of his life,
Francesco flew to Venice, and forthwith
Flung it away in battle with the Turk.
Orsini lived; and long was to be seen
An old man wandering as in quest of something,
Something he could not find--he knew not what.
When he was gone, the house remained a while
Silent and tenantless--then went to strangers.

  Full fifty years were past, and all forgot,
When on an idle day, a day of search
'Mid the old lumber in the gallery,
That moldering chest was noticed; and 't was said
By one as young, as thoughtless as Ginevra,
"Why not remove it from its lurking place?"
'T was done as soon as said; but on the way
It burst, it fell; and lo! a skeleton,
With here and there a pearl, an emerald stone,
A golden clasp, clasping a shred of gold.
All else had perished, save a nuptial ring,
And a small seal, her mother's legacy,
Engraven with a name, the name of both,
"Ginevra."---There then had she found a grave!
Within that chest had she concealed herself,
Fluttering with joy, the happiest of the happy;
When a spring lock, that lay in ambush there,
Fastened her down forever!

NOTES.--The above selection is part of the poem, "Italy." Of the story
Rogers says, "This story is, I believe, founded on fact; though the time
and place are uncertain. Many old houses in England lay claim to it."

Modena is the capital of a province of the same name in northern Italy.

Bologna's bucket. This is affirmed to be the very bucket which Tassoni, an
Italian poet, has celebrated in his mock heroics as the cause of a war
between Bologna and Modena.

Reggio is a city about sixteen miles northwest of Modena.

The Orsini. A famous Italian family in the Middle Ages.

Zampieri, Domenichino (b. 1581, d. 1641), was one of the most celebrated
of the Italian painters.



XCVI. INVENTIONS AND DISCOVERIES. (344)

John Caldwell Calhoun, 1782-1850. This great statesman, and champion of
southern rights and opinions, was born in Abbeville District, South
Carolina. In the line of both parents, he was of Irish Presbyterian
descent. In youth he was very studious, and made the best use of such
opportunities for education as the frontier settlement afforded. He
graduated at Yale College in 1804, and studied law at Litchfield,
Connecticut. In 1808 he was elected to the Legislature of South Carolina;
and, three years later, he was chosen to the National House of
Representatives. During the six years that he remained in the House, he
took an active and prominent part in the stirring events of the time. In
1817 he was appointed Secretary of War, and held the office seven years.
From 1825 to 1832 he was Vice President of the United States. He then
resigned this office, and took his seat as senator from South Carolina. In
1844 President Tyler called him to his Cabinet as Secretary of State; and,
in 1845, he returned to the Senate, where he remained till his death.
During all his public life Mr. Calhoun was active and outspoken. His
earnestness and logical force commanded the respect of those who differed
most widely from him in opinion. He took the most advanced ground in favor
of "State Rights," and defended slavery as neither morally nor politically
wrong. His foes generally conceded his honesty, and respected his ability;
while his friends regarded him as little less than an oracle.

In private life Mr. Calhoun was highly esteemed and respected. His home
was at "Fort Hill," in the northwestern district of South Carolina; and
here he spent all the time he could spare from his public duties, in the
enjoyments of domestic life and in cultivating his plantation. In his home
he was remarkable for kindness, cheerfulness, and sociability.
###


To comprehend more fully the force and bearing of public opinion, and to
form a just estimate of the changes to which, aided by the press, it will
probably lead, politically and socially, it will be necessary to consider
it in connection with the causes that have given it an influence so great
as to entitle it to be regarded as a new political element. They will,
upon investigation, be found in the many discoveries and inventions made
in the last few centuries.

All these have led to important results. Through the invention of the
mariner's compass, the globe has been circumnavigated and explored; and
all who inhabit it, with but few exceptions, are brought within the sphere
of an all-pervading commerce, which is daily diffusing over its surface
the light and blessings of civilization.

Through that of the art of printing, the fruits of observation and
reflection, of discoveries and inventions, with all the accumulated stores
of previously acquired knowledge, are preserved and widely diffused. The
application of gunpowder to the art of war has forever settled the long
conflict for ascendency between civilization and barbarism, in favor of
the former, and thereby guaranteed that, whatever knowledge is now
accumulated, or may hereafter be added, shall never again be lost.

The numerous discoveries and inventions, chemical and mechanical, and the
application of steam to machinery, have increased many fold the productive
powers of labor and capital, and have thereby greatly increased the number
who may devote themselves to study and improvement, and the amount of
means necessary for commercial exchanges, especially between the more and
the less advanced and civilized portions of the globe, to the great
advantage of both, but particularly of the latter.

The application of steam to the purposes of travel and transportation, by
land and water, has vastly increased the facility, cheapness, and rapidity
of both: diffusing, with them, information and intelligence almost as
quickly and as freely as if borne by the winds; while the electrical wires
outstrip them in velocity, rivaling in rapidity even thought itself.

The joint effect of all this has been a great increase and diffusion of
knowledge; and, with this, an impulse to progress and civilization
heretofore unexampled in the history of the world, accompanied by a mental
energy and activity unprecedented.

To all these causes, public opinion, and its organ, the press, owe their
origin and great influence. Already they have attained a force in the more
civilized portions of the globe sufficient to be felt by all governments,
even the most absolute and despotic. But, as great as they now are, they
have, as yet, attained nothing like their maximum force. It is probable
that not one of the causes which have contributed to their formation and
influence, has yet produced its full effect; while several of the most
powerful have just begun to operate; and many others, probably of equal or
even greater force, yet remain to be brought to light.

When the causes now in operation have produced their full effect, and
inventions and discoveries shall have been exhausted--if that may ever
be--they will give a force to public opinion, and cause changes, political
and social, difficult to be anticipated. What will be their final bearing,
time only can decide with any certainty.

That they will, however, greatly improve the condition of man ultimately,
it would be impious to doubt; it would be to suppose that the all-wise and
beneficent Being, the Creator of all, had so constituted man as that the
employment of the high intellectual faculties with which He has been
pleased to endow him, in order that he might develop the laws that control
the great agents of the material world, and make them subservient to his
use, would prove to him the cause of permanent evil, and not of permanent
good.


NOTE.--This selection is an extract from "A Disquisition on Government."
Mr. Calhoun expected to revise his manuscript before it was printed, but
death interrupted his plans.



XCVII. ENOCH ARDEN AT THE WINDOW. (347)

Alfred Tennyson, 1809-1892, was born in Somerby, Lincolnshire, England;
his father was a clergyman noted for his energy and physical stature.
Alfred, with his two older brothers, graduated at Trinity College,
Cambridge. His first volume of poems appeared in 1830; it made little
impression, and was severely treated by the critics. On the publication of
his third series, in 1842, his poetic genius began to receive general
recognition. On the death of Wordsworth he was made poet laureate, and he
was then regarded as the foremost living poet of England. "In Memoriam,"
written in memory of his friend Arthur Hallam, appeared in 1850; the
"Idyls of the King," in 1858; and "Enoch Arden," a touching story in
verse, from which the following selection is taken, was published in 1864.
In 1883 he accepted a peerage as Baron Tennyson of Aldworth, Sussex, and
of Freshwater, Isle of Wight.
###


  But Enoch yearned to see her face again;
"If I might look on her sweet face again
And know that she is happy." So the thought
Haunted and harassed him, and drove him forth,
At evening when the dull November day
Was growing duller twilight, to the hill.
There he sat down gazing on all below;
There did a thousand memories roll upon him,
Unspeakable for sadness. By and by
The ruddy square of comfortable light,
Far-blazing from the rear of Philip's house,
Allured him, as the beacon blaze allures
The bird of passage, till he mildly strikes
Against it, and beats out his weary life.

  For Philip's dwelling fronted on the street,
The latest house to landward; but behind,
With one small gate that opened on the waste,
Flourished a little garden, square and walled:
And in it throve an ancient evergreen,
A yew tree, and all round it ran a walk
Of shingle, and a walk divided it:
But Enoch shunned the middle walk, and stole
Up by the wall, behind the yew; and thence
That which he better might have shunned, if griefs
Like his have worse or better, Enoch saw.

  For cups and silver on the burnished board
Sparkled and shone; so genial was the hearth:
And on the right hand of the hearth he saw
Philip, the slighted suitor of old times,
Stout, rosy, with his babe across his knees;
And o'er her second father stooped a girl,
A later but a loftier Annie Lee,
Fair-haired and tall, and from her lifted hand
Dangled a length of ribbon and a ring
To tempt the babe, who reared his creasy arms,
Caught at and ever missed it, and they laughed:
And on the left hand of the hearth he saw
The mother glancing often toward her babe,
But turning now and then to speak with him,
Her son, who stood beside her tall and strong,
And saying that which pleased him, for he smiled.

  Now when the dead man come to life beheld
His wife, his wife no more, and saw the babe,
Hers, yet not his, upon the father's knee,
And all the warmth, the peace, the happiness.
And his own children tall and beautiful,
And him, that other, reigning in his place,
Lord of his rights and of his children's love,
Then he, tho' Miriam Lane had told him all,
Because things seen are mightier than things heard,
Staggered and shook, holding the branch, and feared
To send abroad a shrill and terrible cry,
Which in one moment, like the blast of doom,
Would shatter all the happiness of the hearth.

  He, therefore, turning softly like a thief,
Lest the harsh shingle should grate underfoot,
And feeling all along the garden wall,
Lest he should swoon and tumble and be found,
Crept to the gate, and opened it, and closed,
As lightly as a sick man's chamber door,
Behind him, and came out upon the waste.
And there he would have knelt but that his knees
Were feeble, so that falling prone he dug
His fingers into the wet earth, and prayed.

  "Too hard to bear! why did they take me thence?
O God Almighty, blessed Savior, Thou
That did'st uphold me on my lonely isle,
Uphold me, Father, in my loneliness
A little longer! aid me, give me strength
Not to tell her, never to let her know.
Help me not to break in upon her peace.
My children too! must I not speak to these?
They know me not. I should betray myself.
Never!--no father's kiss for me!--the girl
So like her mother, and the boy, my son!"

  There speech and thought and nature failed a little,
And he lay tranced; but when he rose and paced
Back toward his solitary home again,
All down the long and narrow street he went
Beating it in upon his weary brain,
As tho' it were the burden of a song,
"Not to tell her, never to let her know."

NOTE.--Enoch Arden had been wrecked on an uninhabited island, and was
supposed to be dead. After many years he was rescued, and returned home,
where he found his wife happily married a second time. For her happiness,
he kept his existence a secret, but soon died of a broken heart.



XCVIII. LOCHINVAR. (350)

Oh, young Lochinvar is come out of the west,
Through all the wide Border his steed was the best;
And save his good broadsword, he weapon had none,
He rode all unarmed, and he rode all alone!
So faithful in love, and so dauntless in war,
There never was knight like the young Lochinvar!

He stayed not for brake, and he stopped not for stone,
He swam the Eske River where ford there was none;
But ere he alighted at Netherby gate,
The bride had consented, the gallant came late:
For a laggard in love, and a dastard in war,
Was to wed the fair Ellen of brave Lochinvar!

So boldly he entered the Netherby hall,
Among bridesmen, and kinsmen, and brothers, and all:
Then spoke the bride's father, his hand on his sword--
For the poor craven bridegroom said never a word--
"Oh, come ye in peace here, or come ye in war,
Or to dance at our bridal, young Lord Lochinvar?"

"I long wooed your daughter, my suit you denied;--
Love swells like the Solway, but ebbs like its tide--
And now am I come, with this lost love of mine,
To lead but one measure, drink one cup of wine.
There are maidens in Scotland more lovely by far,
That would gladly be bride to the young Lochinvar."

The bride kissed the goblet; the knight took it up,
He quaffed off the wine, and he threw down the cup.
She looked down to blush, and she looked up to sigh,
With a smile on her lips, and a tear in her eye.
He took her soft hand, ere her mother could bar,
"Now tread we a measure!" said young Lochinvar.

So stately his form, and so lovely her face,
That never a hall such a galliard did grace;
While her mother did fret, and her father did fume,
And the bridegroom stood dangling his bonnet and plume;
And the bridemaidens whispered, "'Twere better by far
To have matched our fair cousin with young Lochinvar."

One touch to her hand, and one word in her ear,
When they reached the hall door, and the charger stood near,
So light to the croup the fair lady he swung,
So light to the saddle before her he sprung!
"She is won! we are gone, over bank, bush, and scaur:
They'll have fleet steeds that follow," quoth young Lochinvar.

There was mounting 'mong Graemes of the Netherby clan;
Forsters, Fenwicks, and Musgraves, they rode and they ran;
There was racing and chasing on Cannobie Lee,
But the lost bride of Netherby ne'er did they see.
So daring in love, and so dauntless in war,
Have ye e'er heard of gallant like young Lochinvar?
                                                      -- Walter Scott.


NOTES.--The above selection is a song taken from Scott's poem of
"Marmion." It is in a slight degree founded on a ballad called "Katharine
Janfarie," to be found in the "Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border."

The Solway Frith, on the southwest coast of Scotland, is remarkable for
its high spring tides.

Bonnet is the ordinary name in Scotland for a man's cap.



XCIX.  SPEECH ON THE TRIAL OF A MURDERER. (352)

Against the prisoner at the bar, as an individual, I can not have the
slightest prejudice. I would not do him the smallest injury or injustice.
But I do not affect to be indifferent to the discovery and the punishment
of this deep guilt. I cheerfully share in the opprobrium, how much soever
it may be, which is cast on those who feel and manifest an anxious concern
that all who had a part in planning, or a hand in executing this deed of
midnight assassination, may be brought to answer for their enormous crime
at the bar of public justice.

This is a most extraordinary case. In some respects it has hardly a
precedent anywhere; certainly none in our New England history. This bloody
drama exhibited no suddenly excited, ungovernable rage. The actors in it
were not surprised by any lionlike temptation springing upon their virtue,
and overcoming it before resistance could begin. Nor did they do the deed
to glut savage vengeance, or satiate long-settled and deadly hate. It was
a cool, calculating, money-making murder. It was all "hire and salary, not
revenge." It was the weighing of money against life; the counting out of
so many pieces of silver against so many ounces of blood.

An aged man, without an enemy in the world, in his own house, and in his
own bed, is made the victim of a butcherly murder for mere pay. Truly,
here is a new lesson for painters and poets. Whoever shall hereafter draw
the portrait of murder, if he will show it as it has been exhibited in an
example, where such example was last to have been looked for, in the very
bosom of our New England society, let him not give it the grim visage of
Moloch, the brow knitted by revenge, the face black with settled hate, and
the bloodshot eye emitting livid fires of malice. Let him draw, rather, a
decorous, smooth-faced, bloodless demon; a picture in repose, rather than
in action; not so much an example of human nature in its depravity, and in
its paroxysms of crime, as an infernal nature, a fiend in the ordinary
display and development of his character.

The deed was executed with a degree of self-possession and steadiness
equal to the wickedness with which it was planned. The circumstances, now
clearly in evidence, spread out the whole scene before us. Deep sleep had
fallen on the destined victim, and on all beneath his roof. A healthful
old man, to whom sleep was sweet,--the first sound slumbers of the night
held him in their soft but strong embrace. The assassin enters through the
window, already prepared, into an unoccupied apartment. With noiseless
foot he paces the lonely hall, half-lighted by the moon; he winds up the
ascent of the stairs, and reaches the door of the chamber. Of this, he
moves the lock by soft and continued pressure till it turns on its hinges
without noise; and he enters, and beholds his victim before him. The room
was uncommonly open to the admission of light. The face of the innocent
sleeper was turned from the murderer, and the beams of the moon, resting
on the gray locks of his aged temple, showed him where to strike. The
fatal blow is given! and the victim passes, without a struggle or a
motion, from the repose of sleep to the repose of death!

It is the assassin's purpose to make sure work; and he yet plies the
dagger, though it was obvious that life had been destroyed by the blow of
the bludgeon. He even raises the aged arm, that he may not fail in his aim
at the heart; and replaces it again over the wounds of the poniard! To
finish the picture, he explores the wrist for the pulse! He feels for it,
and ascertains that it beats no longer! It is accomplished. The deed is
done. He retreats, retraces his steps to the window, passes out through it
as he came in, and escapes. He has done the murder; no eye has seen him,
no ear has heard him. The secret is his own, and it is safe!

Ah! gentlemen, that was a dreadful mistake. Such a secret can be safe
nowhere. The whole creation of God has neither nook nor corner where the
guilty can bestow it, and say it is safe. Not to speak of that eye which
glances through all disguises, and beholds everything as in the splendor
of noon; such secrets of guilt are never safe from detection, even by men.
True it is, generally speaking, that "murder will out." True it is that
Providence hath so ordained, and doth so govern things, that those who
break the great law of Heaven by shedding man's blood, seldom succeed in
avoiding discovery. Especially, in a case exciting so much attention as
this, discovery must come, and wilt come, sooner or later. A thousand eyes
turn at once to explore every man, everything, every circumstance
connected with the time and place; a thousand ears catch every whisper; a
thousand excited minds intensely dwell on the scene, shedding all their
light, and ready to kindle the slightest circumstance into a blaze of
discovery.

Meantime, the guilty soul can not keep its own secret. It is false to
itself, or rather it feels an irresistible impulse of conscience to be
true to itself. It labors under its guilty possession, and knows not what
to do with it. The human heart was not made for the residence of such an
inhabitant. It finds itself preyed on by a torment, which it dares not
acknowledge to God nor man. A vulture is devouring it, and it can ask no
sympathy or assistance either from heaven or earth. The secret which the
murderer possesses soon comes to possess him; and, like the evil spirits
of which we read, it overcomes him, and leads him whithersoever it will.
He feels it beating at his heart, rising to his throat, and demanding
disclosure. He thinks the whole world sees it in his face, reads it in his
eyes, and almost hears its workings in the very silence of his thoughts.
It has become his master. It betrays his discretion, it breaks down his
courage, it conquers his prudence. When suspicions from without begin to
embarrass him, and the net of circumstance to entangle him, the fatal
secret struggles with still greater violence to burst forth. It must be
confessed, it will be confessed; there is no refuge from confession but
suicide, and suicide is confession.
                                                       --Daniel Webster.


NOTE.--The above extract is from Daniel Webster's argument in the trial of
John F. Knapp for the murder of Mr. White, a very wealthy and respectable
citizen of Salem, Mass, Four persons were arrested as being concerned in
the conspiracy; one confessed the plot and all the details of the crime,
implicating the others, but he afterwards refused to testify in court. The
man who, by this confession, was the actual murderer, committed suicide,
and Mr. Webster's assistance was obtained in prosecuting the others. John
F. Knapp was convicted as principal, and the other two as accessaries in
the murder.



C. THE CLOSING YEAR. (355)

George Denison Prentice, 1802-1870, widely known as a political writer, a
poet, and a wit, was born in Preston, Connecticut, and graduated at Brown
University in 1823. He studied law, but never practiced his profession. He
edited a paper in Hartford for two years; and, in 1831, he became editor
of the "Louisville Journal," which position he held for nearly forty
years. As an editor, Mr. Prentice was an able, and sometimes bitter,
political partisan, abounding in wit and satire; as a poet, he not only
wrote gracefully himself, but he did much by his kindness and sympathy to
develop the poetical talents of others. Some who have since taken high
rank, first became known to the world through the columns of the
"Louisville Journal."
###


'T is midnight's holy hour, and silence now
Is brooding like a gentle spirit o'er
The still and pulseless world. Hark! on the winds,
The bell's deep notes are swelling; 't is the knell
Of the departed year.

                       No funeral train
Is sweeping past; yet, on the stream and wood,
With melancholy light, the moonbeams rest
Like a pale, spotless shroud; the air is stirred
As by a mourner's sigh; and, on yon cloud,
That floats so still and placidly through heaven,
The spirits of the Seasons seem to stand--
Young Spring, bright Summer, Autumn's solemn form,
And Winter, with his aged locks--and breathe
In mournful cadences, that come abroad
Like the far wind harp's wild and touching wail,
A melancholy dirge o'er the dead year,
Gone from the earth forever.

                             'Tis a time
For memory and for tears. Within the deep,
Still chambers of the heart, a specter dim,
Whose tones are like the wizard voice of Time,
Heard from the tomb of ages, points its cold
And solemn finger to the beautiful
And holy visions, that have passed away,
And left no shadow of their loveliness
On the dead waste of life. That specter lifts
The coffin lid of Hope, and Joy, and Love,
And, bending mournfully above the pale,
Sweet forms that slumber there, scatters dead flowers
O'er what has passed to nothingness.

                                     The year
Has gone, and, with it, many a glorious throng
Of happy dreams. Its mark is on each brow,
Its shadow in each heart. In its swift course
It waved its scepter o'er the beautiful,
And they are not. It laid its pallid hand
Upon the strong man; and the haughty form
Is fallen, and the flashing eye is dim.
It trod the hall of revelry, where thronged
The bright and joyous; and the tearful wail
Of stricken ones is heard, where erst the song
And reckless shout resounded. It passed o'er
The battle plain, where sword, and spear, and shield
Flashed in the light of midday; and the strength
Of serried hosts is shivered, and the grass,
Green from the soil of carnage, waves above
The crushed and moldering skeleton. It came,
And faded like a wreath of mist at eve;
Yet, ere it melted in the viewless air,
It heralded its millions to their home
In the dim land of dreams.

                            Remorseless Time!--
Fierce spirit of the glass and scythe!--what power
Can stay him in his silent course, or melt
His iron heart to pity! On, still on
He presses, and forever. The proud bird,
The condor of the Andes, that can soar
Through heaven's unfathomable depths, or brave
The fury of the northern hurricane,
And bathe his plumage in the thunder's home,
Furls his broad wings at nightfall, and sinks down
To rest upon his mountain crag; but Time
Knows not the weight of sleep or weariness;
And Night's deep darkness has no chain to bind
His rushing pinion.

                    Revolutions sweep
O'er earth, like troubled visions o'er the breast
Of dreaming sorrow; cities rise and sink
Like bubbles on the water; fiery isles
Spring blazing from the ocean, and go back
To their mysterious caverns; mountains rear
To heaven their bald and blackened cliffs, and bow
Their tall heads to the plain; new empires rise,
Gathering the strength of hoary centuries,
And rush down, like the Alpine avalanche,
Startling the nations; and the very stars,
Yon bright and burning blazonry of God,
Glitter awhile in their eternal depths,
And, like the Pleiad, loveliest of their train,
Shoot from their glorious spheres, and pass away,
To darkle in the trackless void; yet Time,
Time the tomb builder, holds his fierce career,
Dark, stern, all pitiless, and pauses not
Amid the mighty wrecks that strew his path,
To sit and muse, like other conquerors,
Upon the fearful ruin he has wrought.



CI. A NEW CITY IN COLORADO. (358)

Helen Hunt Jackson, 1830-1885, was the daughter of the late Professor
Nathan W. Fiske, of Amherst College. She was born in Amherst, and educated
at Ipswich, Massachusetts, and at New York. Mrs. Jackson was twice
married. In the latter years of her life, she became deeply interested in
the Indians, and wrote two books, "Ramona," a novel, and "A Century of
Dishonor," setting forth vividly the wrongs to which the red race has been
subjected. She had previously published several books of prose and poetry,
less important but charming in their way. The following selection is
adapted from "Bits of Travel at Home."
###


Garland City is six miles from Fort Garland. The road to it from the fort
lies for the last three miles on the top of a sage-grown plateau. It is
straight as an arrow, looks in the distance like a brown furrow on the
pale gray plain, and seems to pierce the mountains beyond. Up to within an
eighth of a mile of Garland City, there is no trace of human habitation.
Knowing that the city must be near, you look in all directions for a
glimpse of it; the hills ahead of you rise sharply across your way. Where
is the city? At your very feet, but you do not suspect it.

The sunset light was fading when we reached the edge of the ravine in
which the city lies. It was like looking unawares over the edge of a
precipice; the gulch opened beneath us as suddenly as if the earth had
that moment parted and made it. With brakes set firm, we drove cautiously
down the steep road; the ravine twinkled with lights, and almost seemed to
flutter with white tents and wagon tops. At the farther end it widened,
opening out on an inlet of the San Luis Park; and, in its center, near
this widening mouth, lay the twelve-days-old city. A strange din arose
from it.

"What is going on?" we exclaimed. "The building of the city," was the
reply. "Twelve days ago there was not a house here. To-day there are one
hundred and five, and in a week more there will be two hundred; each man
is building his own home, and working day and night to get it done ahead
of his neighbor. There are four sawmills going constantly, but they can't
turn out lumber half fast enough. Everybody has to be content with a board
at a time. If it were not for that, there would have been twice as many
houses done as there are."

We drove on down the ravine. A little creek on our right was half hid in
willow thickets. Hundreds of white tents gleamed among them: tents with
poles; tents made by spreading sailcloth over the tops of bushes; round
tents; square tents; big tents; little tents; and for every tent a camp
fire; hundreds of white-topped wagons, also, at rest for the night, their
great poles propped up by sticks, and their mules and drivers lying and
standing in picturesque groups around them.

It was a scene not to be forgotten. Louder and louder sounded the chorus
of the hammers as we drew near the center of the "city;" more and more the
bustle thickened; great ox teams swaying unwieldily about, drawing logs
and planks, backing up steep places; all sorts of vehicles driving at
reckless speed up and down; men carrying doors; men walking along inside
of window sashes,--the easiest way to carry them; men shoveling; men
wheeling wheelbarrows; not a man standing still; not a man with empty
hands; every man picking up something, and running to put it down
somewhere else, as in a play; and, all the while, "Clink! clink! clink!"
ringing above the other sounds,--the strokes of hundreds of hammers, like
the "Anvil Chorus."

"Where is Perry's Hotel?" we asked. One of the least busy of the throng
spared time to point to it with his thumb, as he passed us. In some
bewilderment we drew up in front of a large unfinished house, through the
many uncased apertures of which we could see only scaffoldings, rough
boards, carpenters' benches, and heaps of shavings. Streams of men were
passing in and out through these openings, which might be either doors or
windows; no steps led to any of them.

"Oh, yes! oh, yes! can accommodate you all!" was the landlord's reply to
our hesitating inquiries. He stood in the doorway of his dining-room; the
streams of men we had seen going in and out were the fed and the unfed
guests of the house. It was supper time; we also were hungry. We peered
into the dining room: three tables full of men; a huge pile of beds on the
floor, covered with hats and coats; a singular wall, made entirely of
doors propped upright; a triangular space walled off by sailcloth,--this
is what we saw. We stood outside, waiting among the scaffolding and
benches. A black man was lighting the candles in a candelabrum made of two
narrow bars of wood nailed across each other at right angles, and
perforated with holes. The candles sputtered, and the hot fat fell on the
shavings below.

"Dangerous way of lighting a room full of shavings," some one said. The
landlord looked up at the swinging candelabra and laughed. "Tried it
pretty often," he said. "Never burned a house down yet."

I observed one peculiarity in the speech at Garland City. Personal
pronouns, as a rule, were omitted; there was no time for a superfluous
word.

"Took down this house at Wagon Creek," he continued, "just one week ago;
took it down one morning while the people were eating breakfast; took it
down over their heads; putting it up again over their heads now."

This was literally true. The last part of it we ourselves were seeing
while he spoke, and a friend at our elbow had seen the Wagon Creek crisis.


"Waiting for that round table for you," said the landlord; " 'll bring the
chairs out here's fast's they quit 'em. That's the only way to get the
table."

So, watching his chances, as fast as a seat was vacated, he sprang into
the room, seized the chair and brought it out to us; and we sat there in
our "reserved seats," biding the time when there should be room enough
vacant at the table for us to take our places.

What an indescribable scene it was! The strange-looking wall of propped
doors which we had seen, was the impromptu, wall separating the bedrooms
from the dining-room. Bedrooms? Yes, five of them; that is, five
bedsteads in a row, with just space enough between them to hang up a
sheet, and with just room enough between them and the propped doors for a
moderate-sized person to stand upright if he faced either the doors or the
bed. Chairs? Oh, no! What do you want of a chair in a bedroom which has a
bed in it? Washstands? One tin basin out in the unfinished room. Towels?
Uncertain.

The little triangular space walled off by the sailcloth was a sixth
bedroom, quite private and exclusive; and the big pile of beds on the
dining-room floor was to be made up into seven bedrooms more between the
tables, after everybody had finished supper.

Luckily for us we found a friend here,--a man who has been from the
beginning one of Colorado's chief pioneers; and who is never, even in the
wildest wilderness, without resources of comfort.

"You can't sleep here," he said. "I can do better for you than this."

"Better!"

He offered us luxury. How movable a thing is one's standard of comfort! A
two-roomed pine shanty, board walls, board floors, board ceilings, board
partitions not reaching to the roof, looked to us that night like a
palace. To have been entertained at Windsor Castle would not have made us
half so grateful.

It was late before the "city" grew quiet; and, long after most of the
lights were out, and most of the sounds had ceased, I heard one solitary
hammer in the distance, clink, clink, clink. I fell asleep listening to
it.



CII. IMPORTANCE OF THE UNION. (362)

Mr. President: I am conscious of having detained you and the Senate much
too long. I was drawn into the debate with no previous deliberation, such
as is suited to the discussion of so grave and important a subject. But it
is a subject of which my heart is full, and I have not been willing to
suppress the utterance of its spontaneous sentiments. I can not, even now,
persuade myself to relinquish it, without expressing once more my deep
conviction, that, since it respects nothing less than the union of the
states, it is of most vital and essential importance to the public
happiness.

I profess, sir, in my career hitherto, to have kept steadily in view the
prosperity and honor of the whole country, and the preservation of our
federal Union. It is to that Union we owe our safety at home, and our
consideration and dignity abroad. It is to that Union that we are chiefly
indebted for whatever makes us most proud of our country. That Union we
reached only by the discipline of our virtues, in the severe school of
adversity. It had its origin in the necessities of disordered finance,
prostrate commerce, and ruined credit. Under its benign influences, these
great interests immediately awoke, as from the dead, and sprang forth with
newness of life. Every year of its duration has teemed with fresh proofs
of its utility and its blessings; and, although our territory has
stretched out wider and wider, and our population spread farther and
farther, they have not outrun its protection or its benefits. It has been
to us all a copious fountain of national, social, and personal happiness.

I have not allowed myself, sir, to look beyond the Union, to see what
might lie hidden in the dark recess behind. I have not coolly weighed the
chances of preserving liberty, when the bonds that unite us together shall
be broken asunder. I have not accustomed myself to hang over the precipice
of disunion, to see whether, with my short sight, I can fathom the depth
of the abyss below; nor could I regard him as a safe counselor in the
affairs of this government, whose thoughts should be mainly bent on
considering, not how the Union should be best preserved, but how tolerable
might be the condition of the people when it shall be broken up and
destroyed.

While the Union lasts, we have high, exciting, gratifying prospects spread
out before us, for us and our children. Beyond that, I seek not to
penetrate the veil. God grant that in my day, at least, that curtain may
not rise. God grant that on my vision never may be opened what lies
behind. When my eyes shall be turned to behold, for the last time, the sun
in heaven, may I not see him shining on the broken and dishonored
fragments of a once glorious Union; on States dissevered, discordant,
belligerent; on a land rent with civil feuds, or drenched, it may be, in
fraternal blood.

Let their last feeble and lingering glance rather behold the gorgeous
ensign of the Republic, now known and honored throughout the earth, still
full high advanced, its arms and trophies streaming in their original
luster, not a stripe erased or polluted, not a single star
obscured--bearing for its motto no such miserable interrogatory as, What
is all this worth? nor those other words of delusion and folly, Liberty
first, and Union afterwards--but everywhere, spread all over in characters
of living light, blazing on all its ample folds, as they float over the
sea and over the land, and in every wind under the whole heavens, that
other sentiment, dear to every true American heart--Liberty and Union, now
and forever, one and inseparable!
                                                        --Daniel Webster.

NOTE.--This selection is the peroration of Mr. Webster's speech in reply
to Mr. Hayne during the debate in the Senate on Mr. Foot's Resolution in
regard to the Public Lands.



CIII. THE INFLUENCES OF THE SUN. (364)

John Tyndall, 1820-1893, one of the most celebrated modern
scientists, was an Irishman by birth. He was a pupil of the distinguished
Faraday. In 1853 he was appointed Professor of Natural Philosophy in the
Royal Institution of London. He is known chiefly for his brilliant
experiments and clear writing respecting heat, light, and sound. He also
wrote one or two interesting books concerning the Alps and their glaciers.
He visited America, and delighted the most intelligent audiences by his
scientific lectures and his brilliant experiments. The scientific world is
indebted to him for several remarkable discoveries.
###


As surely as the force which moves a clock's hands is derived from the arm
which winds up the clock, so surely is all terrestrial power drawn from
the sun. Leaving out of account the eruptions of volcanoes, and the ebb
and flow of the tides, every mechanical action on the earth's surface,
every manifestation of power, organic and inorganic, vital and physical,
is produced by the sun. His warmth keeps the sea liquid, and the
atmosphere a gas, and all the storms which agitate both are blown by the
mechanical force of the sun. He lifts the rivers and the glaciers up to
the mountains; and thus the cataract and the avalanche shoot with an
energy derived immediately from him.

Thunder and lightning are also his transmitted strength. Every fire that
burns and every flame that glows, dispenses light and heat which
originally belonged to the sun. In these days, unhappily, the news of
battle is familiar to us, but every shock and every charge is an
application or misapplication of the mechanical force of the sun. He blows
the trumpet, he urges the projectile, he bursts the bomb. And, remember,
this is not poetry, but rigid mechanical truth.

He rears, as I have said, the whole vegetable world, and through it the
animal; the lilies of the field are his workmanship, the verdure of the
meadows, and the cattle upon a thousand hills. He forms the muscles, he
urges the blood, he builds the brain. His fleetness is in the lion's foot;
he springs in the panther, he soars in the eagle, he slides in the snake.
He builds the forest and hews it down, the power which raised the tree,
and which wields the ax, being one and the same. The clover sprouts and
blossoms, and the scythe of the mower swings, by the operation of the same
force.

The sun digs the ore from our mines, he rolls the iron; he rivets the
plates, he boils the water; he draws the train. He not only grows the
cotton, but he spins the fiber and weaves the web. There is not a hammer
raised, a wheel turned, or a shuttle thrown, that is not raised, and
turned, and thrown by the sun.

His energy is poured freely into space, but our world is a halting place
where this energy is conditioned. Here the Proteus works his spells; the
selfsame essence takes a million shapes and hues, and finally dissolves
into its primitive and almost formless form. The sun comes to us as heat;
he quits us as heat; and between his entrance and departure the multiform
powers of our globe appear. They are all special forms of solar power--the
molds into which his strength is temporarily poured in passing from its
source through infinitude.

NOTE.--Proteus (pro. Pro'te-us) was a mythological divinity. His
distinguishing characteristic was the power of assuming different shapes.



CIV. COLLOQUIAL POWERS OF FRANKLIN. (366)

William Wirt, 1772-1834, an American lawyer and author, was born at
Bladensburg, Maryland. Left an orphan at an early age, he was placed in
care of his uncle. He improved his opportunities for education so well
that he became a private tutor at fifteen. In 1792 he was admitted to the
bar, and began the practice of law in Virginia; he removed to Richmond in
1799. From 1817 to 1829 he was Attorney-general of the United States. His
last years were spent in Baltimore. Mr. Wirt was the author of several
books; his "Letters of a British Spy," published in 1803, and "Life of
Patrick Henry," published in 1817, are the best known of his writings.
###


Never have I known such a fireside companion. Great as he was both as a
statesman and philosopher, he never shone in a light more winning than
when he was seen in a domestic circle. It was once my good fortune to pass
two or three weeks with him, at the house of a private gentleman, in the
back part of Pennsylvania, and we were confined to the house during the
whole of that time by the unintermitting constancy and depth of the snows.
But confinement never could be felt where Franklin was an inmate; His
cheerfulness and his colloquial powers spread around him a perpetual
spring.

When I speak, however, of his colloquial powers, I do not mean to awaken
any notion analogous to that which Boswell has given us of Johnson. The
conversation of the latter continually reminds one of the "pomp and
circumstance of glorious war." It was, indeed, a perpetual contest for
victory, or an arbitrary or despotic exaction of homage to his superior
talents. It was strong, acute, prompt, splendid, and vociferous; as loud,
stormy, and sublime as those winds which he represents as shaking the
Hebrides, and rocking the old castle which frowned on the dark-rolling sea
beneath.

But one gets tired of storms, however sublime they may be, and longs for
the more orderly current of nature. Of Franklin, no one ever became tired.
There was no ambition of eloquence, no effort to shine in anything which
came from him. There was nothing which made any demand upon either your
allegiance or your admiration. His manner was as unaffected as infancy. It
was nature's self. He talked like an old patriarch; and his plainness and
simplicity put you at once at your ease, and gave you the full and free
possession and use of your faculties. His thoughts were of a character to
shine by their own light, without any adventitious aid. They only required
a medium of vision like his pure and simple style, to exhibit to the
highest advantage their native radiance and beauty.

His cheerfulness was unremitting. It seemed to be as much the effect of a
systematic and salutary exercise of the mind, as of its superior
organization. His wit was of the first order. It did not show itself
merely in occasional coruscations[1]; but, without any effort or force on
his part, it shed a constant stream of the purest light over the whole of
his discourse. Whether in the company of commons or nobles, he was always
the same plain man; always most perfectly at his ease, with his faculties
in full play, and the full orbit of his genius forever clear and
unclouded.

[Transcriber's Footnote 1: coruscations: flashes of light.]

And then, the stores of his mind were inexhaustible. He had commenced life
with an attention so vigilant that nothing had escaped his observation;
and a judgment so solid that every incident was turned to advantage. His
youth had not been wasted in idleness, nor overcast by intemperance. He
had been, all his life, a close and deep reader, as well as thinker; and
by the force of his own powers, had wrought up the raw materials which he
had gathered from books, with such exquisite skill and felicity, that he
has added a hundred fold to their original value, and justly made them his
own.

NOTES.--Benjamin Franklin (b. 1706, d. 1790) was one of the most prominent
men in the struggle of the American colonies for liberty. He was renowned
as a statesman, and, although not an author by profession, was a very
prolific writer. His "Autobiography," which was first printed in France,
is now a household volume in America. See page 431.

Boswell, James, (b. 1740, d. 1795,) was a Scotch lawyer, and is chiefly
known as the biographer of Dr. Johnson, of whom he was the intimate friend
and companion.

Johnson, Samuel. See biographical notice, page 78.



CV. THE DREAM OF CLARENCE. (368)

SCENE--Room in the Tower of London. Enter CLARENCE and BRAKENBURY.

Brak. Why looks your grace so heavily to-day?
Clar. O, I have passed a miserable night,
      So full of ugly sights, of ghastly dreams,
      That, as I am a Christian, faithful man,
      I would not spend another such a night,
      Though 't were to buy a world of happy days,
      So full of dismal terror was the time!
Brak. What was your dream? I long to hear you tell it.
Clar. Methoughts, that I had broken from the Tower,
      And was embarked to cross to Burgundy;
      And, in my company, my brother Gloster;
      Who, from my cabin, tempted me to walk
      Upon the hatches; thence we looked toward England,
      And cited up a thousand fearful times,
      During the wars of York and Lancaster,
      That had befallen us. As we paced along
      Upon the giddy footing of the hatches,
      Methought that Gloster stumbled; and, in falling,
      Struck me, that thought to stay him, overboard,
      Into the tumbling billows of the main.
      Oh, then, methought, what pain it was to drown!
      What dreadful noise of waters in mine ears!
      What ugly sights of death within mine eyes!
      Methought I saw a thousand fearful wrecks;
      Ten thousand men that fishes gnawed upon;
      Wedges of gold, great anchors, heaps of pearl,
      Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels,
      All scattered in the bottom of the sea.
      Some lay in dead men's skulls; and, in those holes
      Where eyes did once inhabit, there were crept,
      As 't were in scorn of eyes, reflecting gems,
      Which wooed the slimy bottom of the deep,
      And mocked the dead bones that lay scattered by.
Brak. Had you such leisure in the time of death,
      To gaze upon the secrets of the deep?
Clar. Methought I had; and often did I strive
      To yield the ghost: but still the envious flood
      Kept in my soul, and would not let it forth
      To seek the empty, vast, and wandering air;
      But smothered it within my panting bulk,
      Which almost burst to belch it in the sea.
Brak. Awaked you not with this sore agony?
Clar. Oh, no; my dream was lengthened after life;
      Oh, then began the tempest to my soul,
      Who passed, methought, the melancholy flood,
      With that grim ferryman which poets write of,
      Unto the kingdom of perpetual night.
      The first that there did greet my stranger soul,
      Was my great father-in-law, renowne'd Warwick;
      Who cried aloud, "What scourge for perjury
      Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?"
      And so he vanished. Then came wandering by
      A shadow like an angel, with bright hair
      Dabbled in blood; and he shrieked out aloud:
      "Clarence is come! false, fleeting, perjured Clarence!
      That stabbed me in the field by Tewksbury:
      Seize on him, Furies, take him to your torments!"
      With that, methoughts, a legion of foul fiends
      Environed me, and howled in mine ears
      Such hideous cries, that, with the very noise,
      I, trembling, waked, and, for a season after,
      Could not believe but that I was in hell;
      Such terrible impression made the dream.
Brak. No marvel, lord, though it affrighted you;
      I am afraid, methinks, to hear you tell it.
Clar. O Brakenbury, I have done those things,
      Which now bear evidence against my soul,
      For Edward's sake; and see how he requites me!
      O God! if my deep prayers can not appease thee,
      But thou wilt be avenged on my misdeeds,
      Yet execute thy wrath in me alone:
      Oh, spare my guiltless wife and my poor children!
      --I pray thee, gentle keeper, stay by me;
      My soul is heavy, and I fain would sleep.
Brak. I will, my lord: God give your grace good rest!

          CLARENCE reposes himself on a chair.

      Sorrow breaks seasons and reposing hours,
      Makes the night morning, and the noontide night.

                          Shakespeare.--Richard III, Act i, Scene iv.


NOTES.--The houses of York and Lancaster were at war for the possession of
the English throne. The Duke of Clarence and the Duke of Gloster were
brothers of King Edward IV., who was head of the house of  York. Clarence
married the daughter of the Earl of Warwick, and joined the latter in
several insurrections against the king. They finally plotted with Queen
Margaret of the Lancaster party for the restoration of the latter house to
the English throne, but Clarence betrayed Warwick and the Queen, and
killed the latter's son at the battle of Tewksbury. Through the plots of
Gloster, Clarence was imprisoned in the Tower of London, and there
murdered.

Brakenbury was lieutenant of the Tower.

The ferryman referred to is Charon, of Greek mythology, who was supposed
to ferry the souls of the dead over the river Acheron to the infernal
regions.



CVI. HOMEWARD BOUND. (371)

Richard H. Dana, Jr., 1815-1882, was the son of Richard H. Dana, the poet.
He was born in Cambridge, Mass. In his boyhood be had a strong desire to
be a sailor, but by his father's advice chose a student's life, and
entered Harvard University. At the age of nineteen an affection of the
eyes compelled him to suspend his studies. He now made a voyage to
California as a common sailor, and was gone two years. On his return, he
resumed his studies and graduated in 1837. He afterwards studied law, and
entered upon an active and successful practice. Most of his life was spent
in law and politics, although he won distinction in literature.

The following extract is from his "Two Years before the Mast," a book
published in 1840, giving an account of his voyage to California. This
book details, in a most clear and entertaining manner, the everyday life
of a common sailor on shipboard, and is the best known of all Mr. Dana's
works.
###


It is usual, in voyages round the Cape from the Pacific, to keep to the
eastward of the Falkland Islands; but, as there had now set in a strong,
steady, and clear southwester, with every prospect of its lasting, and we
had had enough of high latitudes, the captain determined to stand
immediately to the northward, running inside the Falkland Islands.
Accordingly, when the wheel was relieved at eight o'clock, the order was
given to keep her due north, and all hands were turned up to square away
the yards and make sail.

In a moment the news ran through the ship that the captain was keeping her
off, with her nose straight for Boston, and Cape Horn over her taffrail.
It was a moment of enthusiasm. Everyone was on the alert, and even the two
sick men turned out to lend a hand at the halyards. The wind was now due
southwest, and blowing a gale to which a vessel close-hauled could have
shown no more than a single close-reefed sail; but as we were going before
it, we could carry on. Accordingly, hands were sent aloft and a reef
shaken out of the topsails, and the reefed foresail set. When we came to
masthead the topsail yards, with all hands at the halyards, we struck up,
"Cheerly, men," with a chorus which might have been heard halfway to
Staten Island.

Under her increased sail, the ship drove on through the water. Yet she
could bear it well; and the captain sang out from the quarter-deck--
"Another reef out of that fore topsail, and give it to her." Two hands
sprang aloft; the frozen reef points and earings were cast adrift, the
halyards manned, and the sail gave out her increased canvas to the gale.
All hands were kept on deck to watch the effect of the change. It was as
much as she could well carry, and with a heavy sea astern, it took two men
at the wheel to steer her.

She flung the foam from her bows; the spray breaking aft as far as the
gangway. She was going at a prodigious rate. Still, everything held.
Preventer braces were reeved and hauled taut; tackles got upon the
backstays; and everything done to keep all snug and strong. The captain
walked the deck at a rapid stride, looked aloft at the sails, and then to
windward; the mate stood in the gangway, rubbing his hands, and talking
aloud to the ship--"Hurrah, old bucket! the Boston girls have got hold of
the towrope!" and the like; and we were on the forecastle looking to see
how the spars stood it, and guessing the rate at which she was
going,--when the captain called out--"Mr. Brown, get up the topmast
studding sail! What she can't carry she may drag!"

The mate looked a moment; but he would let no one be before him in daring.
He sprang forward,--"Hurrah, men! rig out the topmast studding sail boom!
Lay aloft, and I'll send the rigging up to you!" We sprang aloft into the
top; lowered a girtline down, by which we hauled up the rigging; rove the
tacks and halyards; ran out the boom and lashed it fast, and sent down the
lower halyards as a preventer. It was a clear starlight night, cold and
blowing; but everybody worked with a will. Some, indeed, looked as though
they thought the "old man" was mad, but no one said a word.

We had had a new topmast studding sail made with a reef in it,--a thing
hardly ever heard of, and which the sailors had ridiculed a good deal,
saying that when it was time to reef a studding sail it was time to take
it in. But we found a use for it now; for, there being a reef in the
topsail, the studding sail could not be set without one in it also. To be
sure, a studding sail with reefed topsails was rather a novelty; yet there
was some reason in it, for if we carried that away, we should lose only a
sail and a boom; but a whole topsail might have carried away the mast and
all.

While we were aloft, the sail had been got out, bent to the yard, reefed,
and ready for hoisting. Waiting for a good opportunity, the halyards were
manned and the yard hoisted fairly up to the block; but when the mate came
to shake the cat's-paw out of the downhaul, and we began to boom end the
sail, it shook the ship to her center. The boom buckled up and bent like a
whipstick, and we looked every moment to see something go; but, being of
the short, tough upland spruce, it bent like whalebone, and nothing could
break it. The carpenter said it was the best stick he had ever seen.

The strength of all hands soon brought the tack to the boom end, and the
sheet was trimmed down, and the preventer and the weather brace hauled
taut to take off the strain. Every rope-yarn seemed stretched to the
utmost, and every thread of canvas; and with this sail added to her, the
ship sprang through the water like a thing possessed. The sail being
nearly all forward, it lifted her out of the water, and she seemed
actually to jump from sea to sea. From the time her keel was laid, she had
never been so driven; and had it been life or death with everyone of us,
she could not have borne another stitch of canvas.

Finding that she would bear the sail, the hands we're sent below, and our
watch remained on deck. Two men at the wheel had as much as they could do
to keep her within three points of her course, for she steered as wild as
a young colt. The mate walked the deck, looking at the sails, and then
over the side to see the foam fly by her,--slapping his hands upon his
thighs and talking to the ship--"Hurrah, you jade, you've got the scent!
you know where you're going!" And when she leaped over the seas, and
almost out of the water, and trembled to her very keel, the spars and
masts snapping and creaking, "There she goes!--There she
goes--handsomely!--As long as she cracks, she holds!"--while we stood
with the rigging laid down fair for letting go, and ready to take in sail
and clear away if anything went.

At four bells we have the log, and she was going eleven knots fairly; and
had it not been for the sea from aft which sent the chip home, and threw
her continually off her course, the log would have shown her to have been
going somewhat faster. I went to the wheel with a young fellow from the
Kennebec, who was a good helmsman; and for two hours we had our hands
full. A few minutes showed us that our monkey jackets must come off; and,
cold as it was, we stood in our shirt sleeves in a perspiration, and were
glad enough to have it eight bells and the wheels relieved. We turned in
and slept as well as we could, though the sea made a constant roar under
her bows, and washed over the forecastle like a small cataract.


NOTES.--The Falkland Islands are a group in the Atlantic just east of Cape
Horn.

Bells. On shipboard time is counted in bells, the bell being struck every
half hour.



CVII. IMPEACHMENT OF WARREN HASTINGS. (375)

Thomas Babington Macaulay, 1800-1859, was born in the village of Rothley,
Leicestershire. On his father's side, he descended from Scotch Highlanders
and ministers of the kirk. His education began at home, and was completed
at Trinity College, Cambridge. While a student, he gained much reputation
as a writer and a debater. In 1826 he was admitted to the bar. In 1825
began his connection with the "Edinburgh Review," which continued twenty
years. Some of his most brilliant essays appeared first in its pages. He
was first chosen to Parliament in 1830, and was reelected several times.
In 1840 his essays and some other writings were collected and published
with the title of "Miscellanies." His  "Lays of Ancient Rome" was
published in 1842. His "History of England" was published near the close
of his life. In 1857 he was given the title of Baron Macaulay. "His style
is vigorous, rapid in its movement, and brilliant; and yet, with all its
splendor, has a crystalline clearness. Indeed, the fault generally found
with his style is, that it is so constantly brilliant that the vision is
dazzled and wearied with its excessive brightness." He has sometimes been
charged with sacrificing facts to fine sentences.

In his statesmanship, Macaulay was always an earnest defender of liberty.
His first speech in Parliament was in support of a bill to remove the
civil disabilities of the Jews, and his whole parliamentary career was
consistent with this wise and liberal beginning.
###


The place in which the impeachment of Warren Hastings was conducted, was
worthy of such a trial. It was the great hall of William Rufus; the hall
which had resounded with acclamations at the inauguration of thirty kings;
the hall which had witnessed the just sentence of Bacon, and the just
absolution of Somers; the hall where the eloquence of Strafford had for a
moment awed and melted a victorious party inflamed with just resentment;
the hall where Charles had confronted the High Court of Justice with the
placid courage which half redeemed his fame.

Neither military nor civil pomp was wanting. The avenues were lined with
grenadiers. The streets were kept clear by cavalry. The peers, robed in
gold and ermine, were marshaled by heralds. The judges, in their vestments
of state, attended to give advice on points of law. The long galleries
were crowded by such an audience as has rarely excited the fears or the
emulation of an orator. There were gathered together, from all parts of a
great, free, enlightened, and prosperous realm, grace and female
loveliness, wit and learning, the representatives of every science and of
every art.

There were seated around the queen, the fair-haired, young daughters of
the house of Brunswick. There the embassadors of great kings and
commonwealths gazed with admiration on a spectacle which no other country
in the world could present. There Siddons, in the prime of her majestic
beauty, looked with emotion on a scene surpassing all the imitations of
the stage. There Gibbon, the historian of the Roman Empire, thought of the
days when Cicero pleaded the cause of Sicily against Verres; and when,
before a senate which had still some show of freedom, Tacitus thundered
against the oppressor of Africa. There, too, were seen, side by side, the
greatest painter and the greatest scholar of the age; for the spectacle
had allured Reynolds from his easel and Parr from his study.

The sergeants made proclamation. Hastings advanced to the bar, and bent
his knee. The culprit was indeed not unworthy of that great presence. He
had ruled an extensive and populous country; had made laws and treaties;
had sent forth armies; had set up and pulled down princes; and in his high
place he had so borne himself, that all had feared him, that most had
loved him, and that hatred itself could deny him no title to glory, except
virtue. A person, small and emaciated, yet deriving dignity from a
carriage which, while it indicated deference to the court, indicated,
also, habitual self-possession and self-respect; a high and intellectual
forehead; a brow, pensive, but not gloomy; a mouth of inflexible decision;
a face, pale and worn, but serene, on which a great and well-balanced mind
was legibly written: such was the aspect with which the great proconsul
presented himself to his judges.

The charges, and the answers of Hastings, were first read. This ceremony
occupied two whole days. On the third, Burke rose. Four sittings of the
court were occupied by his opening speech, which was intended to be a
general introduction to all the charges. With an exuberance of thought and
a splendor of diction, which more than satisfied the highly raised
expectations of the audience, he described the character and institutions
of the natives of India; recounted the circumstances in which the Asiatic
Empire of Britain had originated; and set forth the constitution of the
Company and of the English Presidencies.

Having thus attempted to communicate to his hearers an idea of eastern
society, as vivid as that which existed in his own mind, he proceeded to
arraign the administration of Hastings, as systematically conducted in
defiance of morality and public law. The energy and pathos of the great
orator extorted expressions of unwonted admiration from all; and, for a
moment, seemed to pierce even the resolute heart of the defendant. The
ladies in the galleries, unaccustomed to such displays of eloquence,
excited by the solemnity of the occasion, and perhaps not unwilling to
display their taste and sensibility, were in a state of uncontrollable
emotion. Handkerchiefs were pulled out; smelling bottles were handed
round; hysterical sobs and screams were heard, and some were even carried
out in fits.

At length the orator concluded. Raising his voice, till the old arches of
Irish oak resounded--"Therefore," said he, "hath it with all confidence
been ordered by the Commons of Great Britain, that I impeach Warren
Hastings of high crimes and misdemeanors. I impeach him in the name of the
Commons House of Parliament, whose trust he has betrayed. I impeach him in
the name of the English nation, whose ancient honor he has sullied. I
impeach him in the name of the people of India, whose rights he has
trodden under foot, and whose country he has turned into a desert. Lastly,
in the name of human nature itself, in the name of both sexes, in the name
of every age, in the name of every rank, I impeach the common enemy and
oppressor of all."


NOTES.--Warren Hastings (b. 1732, d. 1818) was Governor-general of British
India. He was impeached for maladministration, but, after a trial which
extended from Feb. 13th, 1788, to April 23d, 1795, and occupied one
hundred and forty-eight days, he was acquitted by a large majority on each
separate count of the impeachment.

William Rufus, or William II. (b. 1056, d. 1100), built Westminster Hall
in which the trial was held. Bacon; see biographical notice, pages 332 and
333. Somers, John (b. 1651. d. 1716) was impeached for maladministration
while holding the office of lord chamberlain. Strafford, Thomas Wentworth,
earl of, (b. 1593, d. 1641,) was impeached for his mismanagement while
governor of Ireland. He conducted his own defense with such eloquence that
the original impeachment was abandoned, although he was immediately
condemned for high treason and executed. Charles I. (b. 1600, d. 1649),
after a war with Parliament, in which the rights of the people were at
issue, was captured, tried, and condemned to death.

The House of Brunswick is one of the oldest families of Germany. A branch
of this family occupies the British throne. Siddons, Sarah (b. 1755, d.
1831), was a famous English actress. Gibbon, Edward (b. 1737, d. 1794),
was a celebrated English historian. Cicero; see note on page 156. Tacitus
(b. about 55, d. after 117 A. D.) was a Roman orator and historian, who
conducted the prosecution of Marius, proconsul of Africa. Reynolds, Sir
Joshua (b. 1723, d. 1792), an English portrait painter of note. Parr,
Samuel (b. 1747, d. 1825), was an English author. Burke, Edmund; see
biographical sketch accompanying the following lesson.



CVIII. DESTRUCTION OF THE CARNATIC.

Edmund Burke, 1730-1797, one of the most able and brilliant of England's
essayists, orators, and statesmen, was born in Dublin, and was the son of
an able lawyer. He graduated at Trinity College, Dublin, in 1748. As a
student, he was distinguished for ability and industry. From 1750 to 1766
he was in London writing for periodicals, publishing books, or serving as
private secretary. His work on "The Sublime and Beautiful" appeared in
1756. From 1766 to 1794 he was a member of Parliament, representing at
different times different constituencies. On the first day of his
appearance in the House of Commons he made a successful speech. "In the
three principal questions which excited his interest, and called forth the
most splendid displays of his eloquence--the contest with the American
Colonies, the impeachment of Warren Hastings, and the French
Revolution--we see displayed a philanthropy the most pure, illustrated by
a genius the most resplendent." Mr. Burke's foresight, uprightness,
integrity, learning, magnanimity, and eloquence made him one of the most
conspicuous men of his time; and his writings stand among the noblest
contributions to English literature.
###


When at length Hyder Ali found that he had to do with men who either would
sign no convention, or whom no treaty and no signature could bind, and who
were the determined enemies of human intercourse itself, he decreed to
make the country possessed by these incorrigible and predestinated
criminals a memorable example to mankind. He resolved, in the gloomy
recesses of a mind capacious of such things, to leave the whole Carnatic
an everlasting monument of vengeance, and to put perpetual desolation as a
barrier between him and those against whom the faith which holds the moral
elements of the world together was no protection.

He became at length so confident of his force, so collected in his might,
that he made no secret whatsoever of his dreadful resolution. Having
terminated his disputes with every enemy and every rival, who buried their
mutual animosities in their common detestation against the creditors of
the Nabob of Arcot, he drew from every quarter whatever a savage ferocity
could add to his new rudiments in the arts of destruction; and compounding
all the materials of fury, havoc, and desolation into one black cloud, he
hung for a while on the declivities of the mountains.

Whilst the authors of all these evils were idly and stupidly gazing on
this menacing meteor which blackened all their horizon, it suddenly burst,
and poured down the whole of its contents upon the plains of the Carnatic.

Then ensued a scene of woe, the like of which no eye had seen, no heart
conceived, and which no tongue can adequately tell. All the horrors of war
before known or heard of, were mercy to that new havoc. A storm of
universal fire blasted every field, consumed every house, destroyed every
temple. The miserable inhabitants, flying from their flaming villages, in
part were slaughtered; others, without regard to sex, to age, to the
respect of rank, or sacredness of function,--fathers torn from children,
husbands from wives, enveloped in a whirlwind of cavalry, and, amidst the
goading spears of drivers, and the trampling of pursuing horses,--were
swept into captivity, in an unknown and hostile land.

Those who were able to evade this tempest, fled to the walled cities; but
escaping from fire, sword, and exile, they fell into the jaws of famine.
The alms of the settlement of Madras, in this dreadful exigency, were
certainly liberal, and all was done by charity that private charity could
do; but it was a people in beggary; it was a nation which stretched out
its hands for food.

For months together these creatures of sufferance, whose very excess and
luxury in their most plenteous days had fallen short of the allowance of
our austerest fasts, silent, patient, resigned, without sedition or
disturbance, almost without complaint, perished by a hundred a day in the
streets of Madras; every day seventy at least laid their bodies in the
streets, or on the glacis of Tanjore, and expired of famine in the granary
of India.

I was going to wake your justice toward this unhappy part of our
fellow-citizens, by bringing before you some of the circumstances of this
plague of hunger. Of all the calamities which beset and waylay the life of
man, this comes the nearest to our heart, and is that wherein the proudest
of us all feels himself to be nothing more than he is.

But I find myself unable to manage it with decorum. These details are of a
species of horror so nauseous and disgusting; they are so degrading to the
sufferers and to the hearers; they are so humiliating to human nature
itself, that, on better thoughts, I find it more advisable to throw a pall
over this hideous object, and to leave it to your general conceptions.

For eighteen months, without intermission, this destruction raged from the
gates of Madras to the gates of Tanjore; and so completely did these
masters in their art, Hyder Ali, and his more ferocious son, absolve
themselves of their impious vow, that when the British armies traversed,
as they did, the Carnatic, for hundreds of miles in all directions,
through the whole line of their march they did not see one man--not one
woman--not one child--not one four-footed beast of any description
whatever! One dead, uniform silence reigned over the whole region.

With the inconsiderable exceptions of the narrow vicinage of some few
forts, I wish to be understood as speaking literally;--I mean to produce
to you more than three witnesses, who will support this assertion in its
full extent. That hurricane of war passed through every part of the
central provinces of the Carnatic. Six or seven districts to the north and
to the south (and these not wholly untouched) escaped the general ravage.


NOTES.--This selection is an extract from Burke's celebrated speech in
Parliament, in 1785, on the Nabob of Arcot's debts; it bore upon the
maladministration of Hastings.

Arcot, a district in India, had been ceded to the British on condition
that they should pay the former ruler's debts. These were found to be
enormous, and the creditors proved to be individuals in the East India
Company's employ. The creditors, for their private gain, induced the Nabob
to attempt the subjugation of other native princes, among whom was Hyder
Ali. The latter at first made successful resistance, and compelled the
Nabob and his allies to sign a treaty. The treaty was not kept, and the
destruction above recounted took place.

The Carnatic is a province in British India, on the eastern side of the
peninsula; it contains about 50,000 square miles. Madras is a city, and
Tanjore a town, in this province.



CIX. THE RAVEN.

Edgar Allan Poe, 1809-1849, was born in Boston, and died in Baltimore. He
was left a destitute orphan at an early age, and was adopted by Mr. John
Allan, a wealthy citizen of Richmond. He entered the University of
Virginia, at Charlottesville, where he excelled in his studies, and was
always at the head of his class; but he was compelled to leave on account
of irregularities. He was afterwards appointed a cadet at West Point, but
failed to graduate there for the same reason. Poe now quarreled with his
benefactor and left his house never to return. During the rest of his
melancholy career, he obtained a precarious livelihood by different
literary enterprises. His ability as a writer gained him positions with
various periodicals in Richmond, New York, and Philadelphia, and during
this time he wrote some of his finest prose. The appearance of "The Raven"
in 1845, however, at once made Poe a literary lion. He was quite
successful for a time, but then fell back into his dissipated habits which
finally caused his death. In his personal appearance, Poe was neat and
gentlemanly; his face was expressive of intellect and sensibility; and his
mental powers in some directions were of a high order. His writings show
care, and a great degree of skill in their construction; but their effect
is generally morbid.
###


  Once upon a midnight dreary,
  While I pondered, weak and weary,
Over many a quaint and curious
    Volume of forgotten lore--
  While I nodded, nearly napping,
  Suddenly there came a tapping,
  As of some one gently rapping,
    Rapping at my chamber door.
  "'Tis some visitor," I muttered,
    "Tapping at my chamber door
      Only this, and nothing more."

  Ah, distinctly I remember,
  It was in the bleak December,
And each separate dying ember
    Wrought its ghost upon the floor.
  Eagerly I wished the morrow;
  Vainly I had sought to borrow
  From my books surcease of sorrow
    Sorrow for the lost Lenore--
For the rare and radiant maiden
    Whom the angels name Lenore--
      Nameless here for evermore.

  And the silken, sad, uncertain
  Rustling of each purple curtain
Thrilled me,--filled me with fantastic
    Terrors, never felt before;
  So that now, to still the beating
  Of my heart, I stood repeating,
    " 'Tis some visitor entreating
    Entrance at my chamber door
  Some late visitor entreating
    Entrance at my chamber door;
      This it is, and nothing more."

  Presently my soul grew stronger;
  Hesitating then no longer,
"Sir," said I, "or Madam, truly
    Your forgiveness I implore;
  But the fact is I was napping,
  And so gently you came rapping,
  And so faintly you came tapping,
    Tapping at my chamber door,
That I scarce was sure I heard you."--
    Here I opened wide the door;
      Darkness there, and nothing more.

  Deep into that darkness peering,
  Long I stood there, wondering, fearing,
Doubting, dreaming dreams no mortals
    Ever dared to dream before;
  But the silence was unbroken,
  And the stillness gave no token,
  And the only word there spoken
    Was the whispered word, "Lenore!"
This I whispered, and an echo
    Murmured back the word, "Lenore!"
      Merely this, and nothing more.

  Back into the chamber turning,
  All my soul within me burning,
Soon again I heard a tapping,
    Something louder than before.
  "Surely," said I, "surely, that is
  Something at my window lattice;
  Let me see then, what thereat is,
    And this mystery explore--
Let my heart be still a moment,
    And this mystery explore;--
      'Tis the wind, and nothing more."

  Open here I flung the shutter.
  When, with many a flirt and flutter,
In there stepped a stately Raven
    Of the saintly days of yore;
  Not the least obeisance made he;
  Not a minute stopped or stayed he,
  But, with mien of lord or lady,
    Perched above my chamber door--
Perched upon a bust of Pallas
    Just above my chamber door--
      Perched, and sat, and nothing more.

  Then this ebony bird beguiling
  My sad fancy into smiling,
By the grave and stern decorum
    Of the countenance it wore,
  "Though thy crest be shorn and shaven,
  Thou," I said, "art sure no craven,
  Ghastly, grim, and ancient Raven,
    Wandering from the nightly shore,
Tell me what thy lordly name is
    On the night's Plutonian shore!"
      Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

  Much I marveled this ungainly
  Fowl to hear discourse so plainly,
Though its answer little meaning--
    Little relevancy bore;
  For we can not help agreeing
  That no living human being
  Ever yet was blest with seeing
    Bird above his chamber door--
Bird or beast upon the sculptured
    Bust above his chamber door,
      With such name as "Nevermore."

  But the Raven, sitting lonely
  On that placid bust, spoke only
That one word, as if his soul in
    That one word he did outpour.
  Nothing farther then he uttered,
  Not a feather then he fluttered,
  Till I scarcely more than muttered,
    "Other friends have flown before--
On the morrow he will leave me,
    As my Hopes have flown before."
      Then the bird said, "Nevermore."

  Startled at the stillness broken
  By reply so aptly spoken,
"Doubtless," said I, "what it utters
    Is its only stock and store,
  Caught from some unhappy master
  Whom unmerciful Disaster
  Followed fast and followed faster
    Till his songs one burden bore--
Till the dirges of his Hope that
    Melancholy burden bore
      Of 'Never--nevermore.' "

  But the Raven still beguiling
  All my sad soul into smiling,
Straight I wheeled a cushioned seat in
    Front of bird, and bust, and door;
  Then, upon the velvet sinking,
  I betook myself to linking
  Fancy unto fancy, thinking
    What this ominous bird of yore--
What this grim, ungainly, ghastly,
    Gaunt, and ominous bird of yore
      Meant in croaking "Nevermore."

  This I sat engaged in guessing,
  But no syllable expressing
To the fowl whose fiery eyes now
    Burned into my bosom's core;
  This and more I sat divining,
  With my head at ease reclining
  On the cushion's velvet lining
    That the lamplight gloated o'er,
But whose velvet violet lining,
    With the lamplight gloating o'er
      She shall press, ah, nevermore!

  Then, methought, the air grew denser,
  Perfumed from an unseen censer
Swung by Seraphim, whose footfalls
    Tinkled on the tufted floor.
  "Wretch," I cried, "thy God hath lent thee--
  By these angels he hath sent thee
  Respite--respite and nepenthe [1]
    From thy memories of Lenore!
Quaff, oh quaff this kind nepenthe,
    And forget this lost Lenore!"
      Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."