[Illustration: THE NEW YORK HOSPITAL, DUANE STREET AND BROADWAY

The building to the left was erected in 1808 for the exclusive use of
patients suffering from mental disorders.]


A PSYCHIATRIC MILESTONE

BLOOMINGDALE HOSPITAL CENTENARY

1821-1921

                            "Cum corpore ut una
Crescere sentimus, pariterque senescere mentem."
                                --LUCRETIUS

PRIVATELY PRINTED

BY THE SOCIETY OF THE NEW YORK HOSPITAL

1921


ANNIVERSARY COMMITTEE

HOWARD TOWNSEND
BRONSON WINTHROP
R. HORACE GALLATIN




PREFACE


The opening of Bloomingdale Asylum on June 1, 1821, was an important
event in the treatment of mental disorders and in the progress of
humanitarian and scientific work in America. Hospital treatment for
persons suffering from mental disorders had been furnished by the New
York Hospital since its opening in 1792, and the Governors had given
much thought and effort to securing the facilities needed. The treatment
consisted, however, principally in the administration of drugs and the
employment of such other physical measures as were in vogue at that
time. Little attempt was made to study the minds of the patients or to
treat them by measures directed specifically to influencing their
thoughts, feelings, and behavior, and what treatment of this character
there was had for its object little more than the repression of
excitement and disordered activity. The value and importance of
treatment directed to the mind had, indeed, been long recognized, but in
practice it had been subordinated to treatment of the actual and assumed
physical disorders to which the mental state of the patient was
attributed, and, in the few hospitals where persons suffering from
mental disorders were received, means for its application were almost or
quite entirely lacking. The establishment of Bloomingdale Asylum for the
purpose of ascertaining to what extent the recovery of the patients
might be accomplished by moral as well as by purely medical treatment
marked, therefore, the very earliest stages of the development in
America of the system of study and treatment of mental disorders which
with increasing amplification and precision is now universally employed.

A hundred years of growth and activity in the work thus established have
now been accomplished, and it seemed fitting to the Governors of the
Hospital that the event should be commemorated in a way that would be
appropriate to its significance and importance. It was decided that the
principal place in the celebration should be given to the purely medical
and scientific aspects of the work, with special reference to the
progress which had been made in the direction of the practical
usefulness of psychiatry in the treatment of illness generally, and in
the management of problems of human behavior and welfare. Arrangements
were made for four addresses by physicians of conspicuous eminence in
their particular fields, and invitations to attend the exercises were
sent to the leading psychiatrists, psychologists, and neurologists of
America, and to others who were known to be specially interested in the
field of study and practice in which the Hospital is engaged. It was
felt that, in view of the place which France and England had held in the
movement in which Bloomingdale Asylum had its origin, it would add
greatly to the interest and value of the celebration if representatives
of these countries were present and made addresses. How fortunate it
was, then, that it became possible to welcome from France Dr. Pierre
Janet, who stands pre-eminent in the field of psychopathology, and from
England Dr. Richard G. Rows, whose contributions to the study and
treatment of the war neuroses and to the relation between psychic and
physical reactions marked him as especially qualified to present the
more advanced view-point of British psychiatry. The other two principal
addresses were made by Dr. Adolf Meyer, who, by reason of his scientific
contributions and his wonderfully productive practical work in clinical
and organized psychiatry and in mental hygiene, is the acknowledged
leader of psychiatry in America, and by Dr. Lewellys F. Barker, who,
because of his eminence as an internist and of the extent to which he
has advocated and employed psychiatric knowledge and methods in his
practice, has contributed greatly to interesting and informing
physicians concerning the value and importance of psychiatry in general
medical practice. The addresses given by these distinguished physicians,
representing advanced views in psychiatry held in Europe and America,
were peculiarly appropriate to the occasion and to the object of the
celebration. They were supplemented by an historical review of the
origin and development of the Hospital and of its work by Mr. Edward W.
Sheldon, President of the Society of the New York Hospital, and by a
statement concerning the medical development, made by Dr. William L.
Russell, the Medical Superintendent. The greetings of the New York
Academy of Medicine were presented in an interesting address by Dr.
George D. Stewart, President of the Academy.

Of scarcely less significance and interest than the addresses was the
pageant presented on the lawn during the intermission between the
sessions, depicting scenes and incidents illustrating the origin and
development of the Hospital, and of psychiatry and mental hygiene. The
text and the scenes displayed were prepared by Dr. Charles I. Lambert,
First Assistant Physician of the Hospital, and by Mrs. Adelyn Wesley,
who directed the performance and acted as narrator. The performers were
persons who were connected with the Hospital, twenty-two of whom were
patients.

The celebration was held on May 26, 1921. The weather was exceptionally
clear, with bright sunshine and moderate temperature. The grounds, in
their Spring dress of fresh leaves and flowers, were especially
beautiful. This added much to the attractiveness of the occasion and the
pleasure of those who attended. Luncheon was served on the lawn in front
of the Brown Villa and the pageant was presented on the adjoining
recreation grounds. The beauty of the day and the surroundings, the
character of the addresses and of the speakers, the remarkable felicity
and grace with which they were introduced by the President, the dignity
and noble idealism of his closing words, and the distinguished character
of the audience, all contributed to make the celebration one of
exceptional interest and value to those who were present, and a notable
event in the history of the Hospital.

For the purpose of preserving, and of perhaps extending to some who were
not present, the spirit of the occasion, and of placing in permanent
form an account of the proceedings and the addresses which were made,
this volume has been published by the Society of the New York Hospital.

WILLIAM L. RUSSELL.




CONTENTS

                                                                       Page
PREFACE                                                                 vii

INVOCATION                                                                3
  REV. FRANK H. SIMMONDS

HISTORICAL REVIEW                                                         7
  EDWARD W. SHELDON, ESQ.
    President of the Society of the New York Hospital

"THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF PSYCHIATRY TO THE UNDERSTANDING OF LIFE PROBLEMS"  17
  ADOLF MEYER, M.D.
    Director of the Henry Phipps Psychiatric Clinic, Johns Hopkins
      Hospital, and Professor of Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins University,
      Baltimore, Maryland

"THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHIATRY IN GENERAL MEDICAL PRACTICE"               55
  LEWELLYS F. BARKER, M.D.
    Professor of Clinical Medicine, Johns Hopkins Medical School,
      Baltimore, Maryland

GREETINGS FROM THE NEW YORK ACADEMY OF MEDICINE                          79
  GEORGE D. STEWART, M.D.
    President of the Academy

"THE BIOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF MENTAL ILLNESS"                          89
  RICHARD G. ROWS, M.D.
    Director of the Section on Mental Illnesses of the Special
      Neurological Hospital, Tooting, London, England

"THE RELATION OF THE NEUROSES TO THE PSYCHOSES"                         115
  PIERRE JANET, M.D.
    Professor of Psychology, College de France

"THE MEDICAL DEVELOPMENT OF BLOOMINGDALE HOSPITAL"                      147
  WILLIAM L. RUSSELL, M.D.
    Medical Superintendent

THE TABLEAU-PAGEANT                                                     171

NAMES OF THOSE WHO ATTENDED THE EXERCISES                               177

APPENDIX I                                                              191
  COMMUNICATIONS FROM DR. BEDFORD PIERCE
    Medical Superintendent of The Retreat, York, England
  EXTRACT FROM MINUTES OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE RETREAT,
    APRIL 30, 1921.
  TRANSCRIPT FROM THE VISITORS BOOK OF THE RETREAT, 1803-17.

APPENDIX II                                                             195
  A LETTER ON PAUPER LUNATIC ASYLUMS FROM SAMUEL TUKE TO
    THOMAS EDDY, 1815.

APPENDIX III                                                            200
  THOMAS EDDY'S COMMUNICATION TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS, APRIL, 1815.

APPENDIX IV                                                             209
  EXTRACTS FROM THE MINUTES OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS IN RELATION TO
    ACTION TAKEN RESPECTING THOS. EDDY'S COMMUNICATION DATED
    APRIL, 1815.

APPENDIX V                                                              212
  ADDRESS TO THE PUBLIC BY THE GOVERNORS, 1821.

APPENDIX VI                                                             216
  BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE SOCIETY OF THE NEW YORK HOSPITAL, 1821
    AND 1921.

APPENDIX VII                                                            218
  ORGANIZATION OF BLOOMINGDALE HOSPITAL, 1821 AND 1921.




ILLUSTRATIONS

New York Hospital and Lunatic Asylum, 1808       _Frontispiece_
                                                    FACING PAGE
Bloomingdale Asylum, 1821                                     2
Bloomingdale Asylum, 1894                                    80
Bloomingdale Hospital, 1921                                 148
The Tableau-Pageant                                         172
Thomas Eddy                                                 195




THE SOCIETY OF THE NEW YORK HOSPITAL




[Illustration: BLOOMINGDALE ASYLUM

As it appeared when it was opened in 1821. It was located near the seven
mile stone on the Bloomingdale Road, now 116th Street and Broadway.]




BLOOMINGDALE HOSPITAL CENTENARY


The One Hundredth Anniversary of the establishment of Bloomingdale
Hospital as a separate department for mental diseases of The Society of
the New York Hospital was celebrated at the Hospital at White Plains on
Thursday, May 26, 1921. The addresses were given in the Assembly Hall.

Mr. Edward W. Sheldon, the President of the Society, acted as Chairman.


MORNING SESSION

The exercises opened with an invocation by the Reverend Frank H.
Simmonds, rector of Grace Episcopal Church at White Plains:

Oh, most mighty and all-merciful God, whose power is over all Thy works,
who willest that all men shall glorify Thee in the constant bringing to
perfection those powers of Thine which shall more and more make perfect
the beings of Thy creation, we glorify Thee in the gift of Thy Divine
Son Jesus Christ, the Great Physician of our souls, the Sun of
Righteousness arising with healing in His wings, who disposeth every
great and little incident to the glory of God the Father, and to the
comfort of them that love and serve him, we render thanks to Thee and
glorify Thy Name, this day, which brings to completion the hundredth
anniversary of this noble institution's birthday. Oh, Thou, who didst
put it into the hearts and minds of men to dedicate their lives and
fortunes to the advancement of science and medicine for the sick and
afflicted, we render Thee most high praise and hearty thanks for the
grace and virtue of the founders of this institution--men whose names
are written in the Golden Book of life as those who loved their fellow
men.

We praise Thee for such men as Thomas Eddy, James Macdonald, Pliny
Earle, and these endless others, who from age to age have held high the
torch of knowledge and have kept before them the golden rule of service.
Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren,
ye have done it unto me.

Be pleased, oh merciful Father, to bless this day and gathering. Lift up
and enlighten our hearts and minds to a higher perception of all that is
noble, all that is true, all that is merciful. Awaken our dull senses to
the full knowledge of light in Thee, and may all that is said and done
be with the guiding of Thy Holy Spirit.

We pray for the continued blessing of this institution and hospital, and
on all those who are striving to bring out of darkness those unhappy
souls, into the pure light of understanding.

Bless the Governors, physicians, and nurses, direct their judgments,
prosper their undertakings, and dispose their ministry that the world
may feel the blessing and comfort of life in the prevention of disease
and the preservation of health. And may we all be gathered in this
nation to a more perfect unity of life and purpose in the desire to
spend and be spent in the service of our fellow men.

We ask it all in the name and through the mediation of Thy Son Jesus
Christ, our Lord. Amen.




ADDRESS BY
MR. EDWARD W. SHELDON

MR. SHELDON


It is with profound gratification that the Governors welcome your
generous presence to-day on an occasion which means so much to us and
which has perhaps some general significance. For we are met in honor of
what is almost a unique event in our national history, the centennial
anniversary celebration of an exclusively psychopathic hospital. A
summary of its origin and development may be appropriate.

A hundred and fifty years ago the only institutions on this side of the
Atlantic which cared for mental diseases were the Pennsylvania Hospital,
chartered in 1751, a private general hospital which had accommodations
for a few mental cases, and the Eastern State Hospital for the insane,
at Williamsburg, Virginia, a public institution incorporated in 1768. No
other one of the thirteen Colonies had a hospital of any kind, general
or special. With a view of remedying this deplorable lack in New York,
steps were taken in 1769 to establish an adequate general hospital in
the City of New York. This resulted in the grant, on June 11, 1771, of
the Royal Charter of The Society of the New York Hospital. Soon
afterward the construction of the Hospital buildings began on a spacious
tract on lower Broadway opposite Pearl Street, in which provision was
also to be made for mental cases; but before any patients could be
admitted, an accidental fire, in February, 1775, consumed the interior
of the buildings. Reconstruction was immediately undertaken and
completed early in the spring of 1776. But by that time the
Revolutionary War was in full course, and the buildings were taken over
by the Continental authorities as barracks for troops, and were
surrounded by fortifications. When the British captured the city in
September, 1776, they made the same use of the buildings for their own
troops, who remained there until 1783. A long period of readjustment
then ensued, and it was not until January, 1791, that the Hospital was
at last opened to patients. In September, 1792, the Governors directed
the admission of the first mental case, and for the hundred and
twenty-nine years since that time the Society has continuously devoted a
part of its effort to the care of the mentally diseased. After a few
years a separate building for them was deemed desirable, and was
constructed. The State assisted this expansion of the Hospital by
appropriating to the Society $12,500 a year for fifty years. This new
building housed comfortably seventy-five patients, but ten years later
even this proved inadequate in size and undesirable in surroundings. In
the meanwhile a wave of reform in the care of the insane was rising in
Europe under the influence of such benefactors as Philippe Pinel in
France, and William and Samuel Tuke in England. Thomas Eddy, a
philanthropic Quaker Governor of the Society, who was then its Treasurer
and afterward in succession its Vice-President and President, becoming
aware of this movement, and having made a special study of the care and
cure of mental affections, presented a communication to the Governors in
which he advocated a change in the medical treatment, and in particular
the adoption of the so-called moral management similar to that pursued
by the Tukes at The Retreat, in Yorkshire, England. This memorable
communication was printed by the Governors, and constitutes one of the
first of the systematic attempts made in the United States to put this
important medical subject on a humane and scientific basis. To carry out
his plan, Mr. Eddy urged the purchase of a large tract of land near the
city and the erection of suitable buildings. He ventured the moderate
estimate that the population of the city, then about 110,000, might be
doubled by 1836, and quadrupled by 1856. In fact, it was more than
doubled in those first twenty years, and sextupled in the second
twenty. He was justified, therefore, in believing that the hospital
site on lower Broadway would soon be surrounded by a dense population,
and quite unsuited for the efficient care of mental diseases. The
Governors gave these recommendations immediate and favorable
consideration. Various tracts of land, containing in all about
seventy-seven acres, and lying on the historic Harlem Heights between
what are now Riverside Drive and Columbus Avenue, and 107th and 120th
Streets, were subsequently bought by the Society for about $31,000. To
aid in the construction and maintenance of the necessary hospital
buildings, the Legislature, by an act reciting that there was no other
institution in the State where insane patients could be accommodated,
and that humanity and the interest of the State required that provision
should be made for their care and cure, granted an additional annual
appropriation of $10,000 to the Society from 1816 until 1857. The main
Hospital, built of brownstone, stood where the massive library of
Columbia University now is, and the brick building still standing at the
northeast corner of Broadway and 116th Street was the residence of the
Medical Superintendent. The only access to this site by land was over
what was known as the Bloomingdale Road, running from Broadway and 23d
Street through the Bloomingdale district on the North River to 116th
Street, and from that fact our institution assumed the name of
Bloomingdale Asylum, or, as it is now called, Bloomingdale Hospital.
This beautiful elevated site overlooking the Hudson River and the Harlem
River was admirably fitted for its purpose. The spacious tract of land,
laid out in walks and gardens, an extensive grove of trees, generous
playgrounds and ample greenhouses, combined to give the spot unusual
beauty and efficiency. This notable work finished, the Governors of the
Society issued on May 10, 1821, an "Address to the Public"[1] which
marks so great an advance in psychiatry in our country that it deserves
study. The national character of the institution was indicated in the
opening paragraph, where it announced that the Asylum would be open for
the reception of patients from any part of the United States on the
first of the following June. Accommodation for 200 patients was
provided, and to these new surroundings were removed on that day all the
mental cases then under treatment at the New York Hospital on lower
Broadway.

In this retired and ideal spot the work of Bloomingdale Hospital was
successfully prosecuted for three-quarters of a century. But the seven
miles that separated it from the old hospital was steadily built over,
and before fifty years had gone the growth of the city had passed the
asylum grounds. Foreseeing that they could not maintain that verdant
oasis intact for many years longer, the Governors, in 1868, bought this
300-acre tract on the outskirts of the Village of White Plains. After
prolonged consideration of the time and method of development of the
property, final plans were adopted in December, 1891, construction was
begun May 1, 1892, and two years later, under the direction of our
Medical Superintendent, Dr. Samuel B. Lyon, all the patients were moved
from the old to this new Bloomingdale. The cost of the new buildings was
about $1,500,000. From time to time the original Bloomingdale site was
sold and now supplies room, among other structures, for Columbia
University, Barnard College, the Cathedral of St. John the Divine, St.
Luke's Hospital, the Woman's Hospital, and the National Academy of
Design. With the proceeds of those sales of the old Bloomingdale, not
only was the cost of the new Bloomingdale met, but the permanent
endowment of the Society was substantially increased, and Thomas Eddy
was proved to have been both a wise humanitarian and a far-sighted
steward of charitable funds.

In their "Address to the Public" to which I have referred, issued when
Bloomingdale Hospital was opened in 1821, the Governors of the Society
spoke of the new conception of moral treatment of the mentally afflicted
which had been established in several European hospitals and which was
supplanting the harsh and cruel usage of former days, as "one of the
noblest triumphs of pure and enlightened benevolence." In that same
spirit those founders dedicated themselves to the conduct of this
institution. Their devotion to the work was impressive. Looking back on
those early days we see a constant personal attention to the details of
institutional life that commands admiration. The standards then set have
become a tradition that has been preserved unbroken for a hundred years.
Humane methods of care, the progressively best that medical science can
devise, the utilization of a growingly productive pursuit of research,
have consistently marked the administration of this great trust. The
Governors of to-day are as determined as any of their predecessors to
maintain that ideal of "pure and enlightened benevolence." New paths are
opening and larger resources are becoming available. Under the guidance
of our distinguished Medical Superintendent, with his able and devoted
staff of physicians, a broader and more intensive development is
already under way. Animated by that resolve and cheered by that
prospect, we may thus confidently hope, as we begin the second century
of Bloomingdale's career, for results not less fruitful and gratifying
than those which we celebrate to-day.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: Address of the Governors of the New York Hospital, to the
Public, relative to the Asylum for the Insane at Bloomingdale, New York,
May 10th, 1821. Reprinted by Bloomingdale Hospital Press, White Plains,
May 26, 1921. See Appendix V, p. 212.]




ADDRESS BY
DR. ADOLF MEYER


_The Chairman_: In celebrating our centenary we are naturally dealing
also with the larger subject of general psychiatry. Our success in this
discussion should be materially promoted by the presence with us of Dr.
Adolf Meyer, Professor of Psychiatry in the Medical School of Johns
Hopkins University, and Director of the Phipps Psychiatric Clinic, of
Baltimore. Before taking up this important work in that famous medical
centre, Dr. Meyer was actively engaged for several years in psychopathic
work in New York. He will speak to us on "THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF
PSYCHIATRY TO THE UNDERSTANDING OF LIFE PROBLEMS."


DR. MEYER

When Dr. Russell honored me with the invitation to speak at this
centenary celebration of the renowned Bloomingdale Hospital, my
immediate impulse was to choose as my topic a phase of psychiatric
development to which this Hospital has especially contributed through
our greatly missed August Hoch and his deeply appreciated coworker
Amsden. I have in mind the great gain in concreteness of the physician's
work with mind and the resulting contribution of psychiatry to a better
knowledge of human life and its problems. The great gain this passing
century is able to hand on to its successor is the clearer recognition
of just what the psychiatrist actually works with and works on.

Of all the divisions of medicine, psychiatry has suffered longest from
man's groping for a conception of his own nature. Psychiatry means,
literally, the healing of souls. What then do we actually mean by soul
or by psyche? This question has too long been treated as a disturbing
puzzle.

To-day we feel that modern psychiatry has found itself--through the
discovery that, after all, the uncritical common-sense view of mind and
soul is not so far remote from a critical common-sense view of the
individual and its life activity, freed from the forbidding and
confusing assumptions through which the concept of mind and soul has
been held in bewildering awe.

Strange to say, good old Aristotle was nearer an understanding than most
of the wise men and women that have succeeded him for these more than
two thousand years. He saw in the psyche what he called the form and
realization or fulfilment of the human organism; he would probably now
say with us, the activity and function as an individual or person.

Through the disharmonies and inevitable disruption of a
self-disorganizing civilization, the Greek and Roman world was plunged
into the dark centuries during which the perils of the soul and the
sacrificial attainment of salvation by monastic life and crusades
threatened to overshadow all other concern. This had some inevitable
results: it favored all those views through which the soul became like a
special thing or substance, in contrast to and yet a counterpart of the
physical body. As long as there was no objective experimental science,
the culminating solution of life problems had to be intrusted to that
remarkable development of religious philosophy which arose from the
blending of Hebrew religion and tradition and the loftiest products of
the Greek mind, in the form which St. Paul and the early Church fathers
gave to the teachings of Christ. From being the form and activation, or
function, of the organism in life, the soul feature of man was given an
appearance in which it could neither be grasped nor understood, nor
shaped, nor guided by man when it got into trouble. From the Middle Ages
there arose an artificial soul and an artificial world of souls
presented as being in eternal conflict with the evil of the flesh--_and
thus the house of human nature was divided against itself_.

Science of the nineteenth century came nearer bringing mind and body
together again. The new astronomical conception of the world and the
growing objective experimental science gradually began to command
confidence, and from being a destroyer of excessively dogmatic notions,
science began to rise to its modern constructive and creative position.
But the problem of _mind_ remained on a wrong basis and still does so
even with most scientists. Too much had been claimed for the psyche, and
because of the singling out of a great world of spirit, the world of
fact had been compromised and left cold and dry and unattractive and
unpromising. No doubt it was necessary that the scientist should become
hardened and weaned from all misleading expectation, and shy of all the
spurious claims of sordid superstition and of childish fancy. He may
have been unduly radical in cutting out everything that in any way
recalled the misleading notions. In the end, we had to go through a
stage of psychology without a "soul," and lately even a psychology
without "consciousness," so that we might be safe from unscientific
pretensions. All the gyrations no doubt tended to retard the wholesome
practical attack upon the problems in the form in which we find them in
our common-sense life.

The first effort at a fresh start tried to explain everything rather
one-sidedly out of the meagre knowledge of the body. Spinoza had said in
his remarkable Ethics (III, Prop. II, Schol.): "Nobody has thus far
determined what the body can do, _i.e._, nobody has as yet shown by
experience and trial what the body can do by the laws of nature alone in
so far as nature is considered merely as corporeal and extended, and
what it cannot do save when determined by mind."

This challenge of Spinoza's had to be met. With some investigators this
seemed very literally all there was to be done about the study of
man--to show how far the body could explain the activity we call "the
mind." The unfortunate feature was that they thought they had to start
with a body not only with mind and soul left out but also with
practical disregard of the whole natural setting. They studied little
more than corpses and experimental animals, and many a critic wondered
how such a corpse or a frog could ever show any mind, normal or
abnormal. To get things balanced again, the vision of man had to expand
to take a sane and practical view of all of human life--not only of its
machinery.

The human organism can never exist without its setting in the world. All
we are and do is of the world and in the world. The great mistake of an
overambitious science has been the desire to study man altogether as a
mere sum of parts, if possible of atoms, or now of electrons, and as a
machine, detached, by itself, because at least some points in the
simpler sciences could be studied to the best advantage with this method
of the so-called elementalist. It was a long time before willingness to
see the large groups of facts, in their broad relations as well as in
their inner structure, finally gave us the concept and vision of
integration which now fits man as a live unit and transformer of energy
into the world of fact and makes him frankly a consciously integrated
psychobiological individual and member of a social group.

It is natural enough that man should want to travel on the road he knows
and likes best. The philosopher uses his logic and analysis and
synthesis. The introspectionist wants to get at the riddle of the
universe by crawling into the innermost depth of his own self-scrutiny,
even at the risk--to use a homely phrase--of drawing the hole in after
him and losing all connection with the objective world. The physicist
follows the reverse course. He gives us the appreciation of the
objective world around and in us. The chemist follows out the analytic
and synthetic possibilities of his atoms and elements, and the biologist
the growth and reproduction and multiplication of cells. Each sees an
open world of possibilities and is ready to follow as far as facts will
carry and as far as the imagination will soar. Each branch has created
its rules of the game culminating in the concept of objective science,
and the last set of facts to bring itself under the rules of objective
science, and to be accepted, has been man as a unit and personality.

The mind and soul of man have indeed had a hard time. To this day,
investigators have suffered under the dogma that mind must be treated as
purely subjective entity, something that can be studied only by
introspection, or at least only with ultra-accurate instruments--always
with the idea that common sense is all wrong in its psychology.
Undoubtedly it was, so long as it spoke of a mind and soul as if what
was called so had to be, even during life, mysterious and inaccessible,
something quite different from any other fact of natural-history study.

The great step was taken when all of life was seen again in its broad
relations, without any special theory but frankly as common sense finds
it, viz., as the activities and behavior of definite individuals--very
much as Aristotle had put it--"living organisms in their 'form' or
activity and behavior." Psychology had to wake up to studying other
minds as well as one's own. Common sense has always been willing to
study other persons besides our own selves, and that exactly as we study
single organs--viz., for what they are and do and for the conditions of
success and failure. Nor do we have to start necessarily from so-called
elements. Progress cannot be made merely out of details. It will not do
merely to pile up fragments and to expect the aggregates to form
themselves. It also takes a friend of facts with the capacity for
mustering and unifying them, as the general musters his army. Biology
had to have evolutionists and its Darwin to get on a broad basis to
start with, and human biology, the life of man, similarly had to be
conceived in a new spirit, with a clear recognition of the opportunities
for the study of detail about the brain and about the conditions for
its working and its proper support, but also with a clear vision of the
whole man and all that his happiness and efficiency depend upon.

All this evolution is strongly reflected in the actual work of
psychiatry and medicine. For a time, it looked to the physician as if
the physiology and pathology of the body had to make it their ambition
to make wholly unnecessary what traditional psychology had accumulated,
by turning it all into brain physiology. The "psychological" facts
involved were undoubtedly more difficult to control, so much so that one
tried to cut them out altogether. As if foreshadowing the later academic
"psychology without soul and consciousness," the venerable
Superintendent of Utica, Dr. Gray, was very proud when in 1870 he had
eliminated the "mental and moral causes" from his statistics of the
Utica State Hospital, hiding behind the dogma that "mind cannot become
diseased, but only the body." To-day "mental and moral causes" are
recognized again in truer form--no longer as mere ideas and
uninvestigated suppositions taken from uncritical histories, but as
concrete and critically studied life situations and life factors and
life problems. Our patients are not sick merely in an abstract mind, but
by actually living in ways which put their mind and the entire organism
and its activity in jeopardy, and we are now free to see how this
happens--since we study the biography and life history, the resources of
adaptation and of shaping the life to success or to failure.

The study of life problems always concerns itself with the interaction
of an individual organism with life situations. The first result of a
recognition of this fact was a more whole-hearted and practical concept
of personality.

In 1903 I put together for the first time my analysis of the neurotic
personality, which was soon followed by a series of studies on the
influences of the mental factors, and in 1908 a paper on "What Do
Histories of Cases of Insanity Teach Us Concerning Preventive Mental
Hygiene During the Years of School Life?" All this was using for
psychiatry the growing appreciation of a broad biological view-point in
its concrete application. It was a reaction against the peculiar fear of
studying the facts of life simply and directly as we find and experience
them--scoffed at because it looked as if one was not dealing with
dependable and effective data. Many of the factors mentioned as causes
do not have the claimed effects with sufficient regularity. It is quite
true that not everybody is liable to any serious upset by several of the
handicaps sometimes found to be disastrous during the years of
development; but we have learned to see more clearly why the one person
does and the other does not suffer. Evidently, not everybody who is
reserved and retiring need be in danger of mental disorder, yet there
are persons of just this type of make-up that are less able than others
to stand the strains of isolation, of inferiority feeling, of exalted
ambitions and one-sided longings, intolerable desires, etc. The same
individual difference of susceptibility holds even for alcohol. With
this recognition we came to lay stress again on the specific factors
which make for the deterioration of habits, for tantrums with
imaginations, and for drifting into abnormal behavior, and conditions
incompatible with health.

It was at this point that our great indebtedness to the Bloomingdale
Hospital began. Dr. August Hoch, then First Assistant of the
Bloomingdale Hospital, began to swing more and more toward the
psychobiological trend of views, and with his devoted and very able
friend Amsden he compiled that remarkable outline,[2] which was the
first attempt to reduce the new ideals of psychobiology to a practical
scheme of personality study--that clear and plain questionnaire going
directly at human traits and reactions such as we all know and can see
at work without any special theories or instruments.

After studying in each patient all the non-mental disorders such as
infections, intoxications, and the like, we can now also attack the
problems of life which can be understood only in terms of plain and
intelligible human relations and activities, and thus we have learned to
meet on concrete ground the real essence of mind and soul--the plain and
intelligible human activities and relations to self and others. There
are in the life records of our patients certain ever-returning
tendencies and situations which a psychiatry of exclusive brain
speculation, auto-intoxications, focal infections, and internal
secretions could never have discovered.

Much is gained by the frank recognition that man is fundamentally a
social being. There are reactions in us which only contacts and
relations with other human beings can bring out. We must study men as
mutual reagents in personal affections and aversions and their
conflicts; in the desires and satisfactions of the simpler appetites for
food and personal necessities; in the natural interplay of anticipation
and fulfilment of desires and their occasional frustration; in the
selection of companionship which works helpfully or otherwise--for the
moment or more lastingly throughout the many vicissitudes of life. All
through we find situations which create a more or less personal bias and
chances for success or failure, such as simpler types of existence do
not produce. They create new problems, and produce some individuals of
great sensitiveness and others with immunity--and in this great field
nothing will replace a simple study of the life factors and the social
and personal life problems and their working--the study of the real mind
and the real soul--_i.e._, human life itself. Looking back then this
practical turn has changed greatly the general view as to what should be
the chief concern of psychology. One only need take up a book on
psychology to see what a strong desire there always was to contrast a
pure psychology and an applied psychology, and to base a new science
directly on the new acquisitions of the primary sciences such as anatomy
and histology of the nervous system. There was a quest for the elements
of mind and their immediate correlation with the latest discoveries in
the structure of the brain. The centre theory and the cell and neurone
theory seemed obligatory starting-points. To-day we have become shy of
such postulates of one-sided not sufficiently functional materialism. We
now call for an interest in psychobiological facts in terms of critical
common sense and in their own right--largely a product of psychiatry.
There always is a place for elements, but there certainly is also a
place for the large momentous facts of human life just as we find and
live it.

Thus psychiatry has opened to us new conceptions and understandings of
the relation of child and mother, child and father, the child as a
reagent to the relations between mother and father, brothers and
sisters, companions and community--in the competitions of real concrete
life. It has furnished a concrete setting for the interplay of emotions
and their effects.

It has led us from a cold dogma of blind heredity and a wholesale
fatalistic asylum scheme, to an understanding of individual, familiar,
and social adjustments, and a grasp on the factors which we can consider
individually and socially modifiable. We have passed from giving mere
wholesale advice to a conscientious study of the problems of each unit,
and at the same time we have developed a new and sensible approach to
mental hygiene and prevention, as expressed in the comprehensive surveys
of State and community work and even more clearly in the development of
helps to individuals in finding themselves, and in the work in schools
to reach those who need a special adaptation of aims and means. To the
terrible emergency of the war it was possible to bring experienced men
and women as physicians and nurses, and how much was done, only those
can appreciate who have seen the liberality with which all the
hospitals, and Bloomingdale among the first, contributed more than their
quota of help, and all the assistance that could possibly be offered to
returning victims for their readjustment.

It is natural enough that psychiatry should have erred in some respects.
We had forced upon us the herding together of larger numbers of patients
than can possibly be handled by one human working unit or working group.
The consequence was that there arose a narrowing routine and wholesale
classifications and a loss of contact with the concrete needs of the
individual case; that very often progress had to come from one-sided
enthusiasts or even outsiders, who lost the sense of proportion and
magnified points of relative importance until they were supposed to
explain everything and to be cure-alls. We are all inclined to sacrifice
at the altar of excessive simplicity, especially when it suits us; we
become "single-taxers" and favor wholesale legislation and exclusive
State care when our sense for democratic methods has gone astray. Human
society has dealt with the great needs of psychiatry about as it has
dealt with the objects of charity, only in some ways more stingily, with
a shrewd system and unfortunately often with a certain dread of the
workers themselves and of their enthusiasm and demands. Law and
prejudice surrounded a great share of the work with notions of stigma
and hopelessness and weirdness--while to those who see the facts in
terms of life problems there can be but few more inspiring tasks than
watching the unfolding of the problematic personality, seeking and
finding its proper settings, and preventing the clashes and gropings in
maladjustments and flounderings of fancy and the faulty use and
nutrition of the brain and of the entire organism.

What a difference between the history of a patient reported and studied
and advised by the well-trained psychiatrist of to-day and the account
drawn up by the statistically minded researcher or the physician who
wants to see nothing but infections or chemistry and hypotheses of
internal secretion. What a different chance for the patient in his
treatment, in contrast to what the venerable Galt of Virginia reports as
the conception of treatment recommended by a great leader of a hundred
years ago: "Mania in the first stage, if caused by study, requires
separation from books. Low diet and a few gentle doses of purging
physic; if pulse tense, ten or twelve ounces of blood [not to be given
but to be taken!]. In the high grade, catch the patient's eye and look
him out of countenance. Be always dignified. Never laugh at or with
them. Be truthful. Meet them with respect. Act kindly toward them in
their presence. If these measures fail, coercion if necessary.
Tranquillizing chair. Strait waistcoat. Pour cold water down their
sleeves. The shower bath for fifteen or twenty minutes. Threaten them
with death. Chains seldom and the whip never required. Twenty to forty
ounces of blood, unless fainting occurs previously; ... etc."

To-day an understanding of the life history, of the patient's somatic
and functional assets and problems, likes and dislikes, the problem
presented by the family, etc.!

So much for the change within and for psychiatry. How about psychiatry's
contribution beyond its own narrower sphere? It has led us on in
philosophy, it has brought about changes in our attitude to ethics, to
social study, to religion, to law, and to life in general. Psychiatric
work has undoubtedly intensified the hunger for a more objective and yet
melioristic and really idealistic philosophical conception of reality,
such as has been formulated in the modern concept of integration.

Philosophical tradition, logic, and epistemology alike had all conspired
to make as great a puzzle as possible of the nature of mental life, of
life itself, and of all the fundamental principles, so much so that as
a result anything resembling or suggesting philosophy going beyond the
ordinary traditions has got into poor repute in our colleges and
universities and among those of practical intelligence. The consequence
is that the student and the physician are apt to be hopeless and
indifferent concerning any effort at orderly thinking on these
problems.[3]

Most of us grew up with the attitude of a fatalistic intellectual
hopelessness. How could we ever be clear on the relation of mind and
body? How could mind and soul ever arise out of matter? How can we
harmonize strict science with what we try to do in our treatment of
patients? How can we, with our mechanistic science, speak of effort, and
of will to do better? How can we meet the invectives against the facts
of matter on the part of the opposing idealistic philosophies and their
uncritical exploitations in "New Thought"--_i.e._, really the revival of
archaic thought? It is not merely medical usefulness that forced these
broad issues on many a thinking physician, but having to face the facts
all the time in dealing with a living human world. The psychopathologist
had to learn to do more than the so-called "elementalist" who always
goes back to the elements and smallest units and then is apt to shirk
the responsibility of making an attempt to solve the concrete problems
of greater complexity. The psychiatrist has to study individuals and
groups as wholes, as complex units, as the "you" or "he" or "she" or
"they" we have to work with. We recognize that throughout nature we have
to face the general principle of unit-formation, and the fact that the
new units need not be like a mere sum of the component parts but can be
an actually new entity not wholly predictable from the component parts
and known only through actual experience with the specific product.
Hydrogen and oxygen, it is true, can form simple mixtures, but when they
make an actual chemical integration we get a new specific type of
substance, water, behaving and dividing according to its own laws and
properties in a way not wholly predictable from just what we know of
hydrogen and oxygen as such. Analogy prompts us to see in plants and
animals products of physics and chemistry and organization, although the
peculiarity of the product makes us recognize certain specificities of
life not contained in the theory of mere physics and chemistry. All the
facts of experience prompt us to see in mentation a biological function,
and we are no longer surprised to find this product of integration so
different from the nature and functions of all the component parts. All
the apparent discontinuities in the intrinsic harmony of facts, on the
one hand, and the apparent impossibility of accounting for new features
and peculiarities of the new units, are shown to be a general feature of
nature and of facts: integration is not mere summation, but a creation
of ever-new types and units, with superficial discontinuities and with
their own new denominators of special peculiarities; hence there is no
reason to think of an insurmountable and unique feature in the origin of
life, nor even of mentally integrated life; no need of special mystical
sparks of life, of a mysterious spirit, etc.; but--and this is the
important point--also no need of denying the existence of all the
evidence there may be of facts which we imply when we use the deeply
felt concepts of mind and soul. In other words, we do not have to be
mind-shy nor body-shy any longer.

The inevitable problem of having to study other persons as well as
ourselves necessarily leads us on to efforts at solution of other
philosophical problems, the problem of integrating materialism and
idealism, mechanism and relative biological determinism and purpose,
etc. Man has to live with the laws of physics and chemistry unbroken and
in harmony with all that is implied in the laws of heredity and growth
and function of a biological organism. Yet what might look like a
limitation is really his strength and safe foundation and stability. On
this ground, man's biological make-up has a legitimate sphere of growth
and expansion shared by no other type of being. We pass into every new
moment of time with a preparedness shown in adaptive and constructive
activity as well as structure, most plastic and far-reaching in the
greatest feat of man, that of imagination. Imagination is not a mere
duplication of reality in consciousness and subjectivity; it is a
substitute in a way, but actually an amplification, and often a real
addition to what we might otherwise call the "crude world," integrated
in the real activities of life, a new creation, an ever-new growth, seen
in its most characteristic form in choice and in any new volition. Hence
the liberating light which integration and the concepts of growth and
time throw on the time-honored problem of absolute and relative
determinism and on the relation of an ultra-strict "science" with common
sense.

In logic, too, we are led to special assertions. We are forced to
formulate "open definitions," _i.e._, we have to insist on the open
formulation of tendencies rather than "closed definitions." We deal with
rich potentialities, never completely predictable.

This background and the demands of work in guiding ourselves and others
thus come to lead us also into practical ethics, with a new conception
of the relation of actual and experimental determinism and of what "free
will" we may want to speak of, with a new emphasis on the meaning of
choice, of effort, and of new creation out of new possibilities
presented by the ever-newly-created opportunities of ever-new time. We
get a right to the type of voluntaristic conception of man which most of
us live by--with a reasonable harmony between our science and our
pragmatic needs and critical common sense.

The extent to which we can be true to the material foundations and yet
true to a spiritual goal, ultimately measures our health and natural
normality and the value of our morality. _Nature shapes her aims
according to her means._ Would that every man might realize this simple
lesson and maxim--there would be less call for a rank and wanton
hankering for relapses into archaic but evidently not wholly outgrown
tendencies to the assumption of "omnipotence of thought," revived again
from time to time as "New Thought." Psychiatry restores to science and
to the practical mind the right to reinclude rationally and
constructively what a narrower view of science has, for a time at least,
handed over unconditionally to uncritical fancy. But the only way to
make unnecessary astrology and phrenology and playing with mysticism and
with Oliver Lodge's fancies of the revelation of his son Raymond, is to
recognize the true needs and yearnings of man and to show nature's real
ways of granting appetites and satisfactions that are wholesome.

Hereby we have indeed a contribution to biologically sound idealism: a
clearer understanding of how to blend fact and ambition, nature and
ideal--an ability to think scientifically and practically and yet
idealistically of matters of real life.

To come back to more concrete problems again, a wider grasp of what
psychiatry may well furnish us helps toward a new ethical goal in our
social conscience. The nineteenth century brought us the boon and the
bane of industrialism. More and more of the pleasures and satisfactions
of creation and production and of the natural rewards of the daily labor
drifted away from the sight and control of the worker, who now rarely
sees the completed result of his work as the farmer or the artisan used
to do. Few workers have the experience of getting satisfaction from
direct pride in the end result; as soon as the product is available, a
set of traders carries it to the markets and a set of financiers
determines, in fact may already have determined, the reward--just as the
reward of the farmer is often settled for him by astounding
speculations long before the crop is at hand. There is a field for a new
conscience heeding the needs of fundamental satisfactions of man so well
depicted by Carlton Parker, and psychiatric study furnishes much
concrete material for this new conscience in industrial relations--with
a better knowledge of the human needs of all the participants in the
great game of economic life.

Psychiatry gives us also a new appreciation of the religious life and
needs of our race. Man's religion shows in his capacity to feel and
grasp his relations and responsibility toward the largest unit or force
he can conceive, and his capacity for faith and hope in a deeper and
more lasting interdependence of individual and race with the Ruler or
rules of the Universe. Whatever form it may take expresses his capacity
to feel himself in humility and faith, and yet with determination, a
more or less responsible part of the greatest unit he can grasp. The
form this takes is bound to vary individually. As physicians we learn to
respect the religious views of our fellow beings, whatever they may be;
because we are sure that we have the essentials in common; and with this
emphasis on what we have in common, we can help in attaining the
individually highest attainable truth without having to be destructive.
We all recognize relations that go beyond individual existence, lasting
and "more than biological" relations, and it is the realization of these
conceptions intellectually and emotionally true to our individual and
group nature that constitutes our various religions and faiths.
Emphasizing what we have in common, we become tolerant of the idea that
probably the points on which we differ are, after all, another's best
way of expressing truths which our own nature may picture differently
but would not want to miss in, or deny to, the other. One of the
evidences of the great progress of psychiatry is that we have learned to
be more eager to see what is sane and strong and constructively valuable
even in the strange notions of our patients, and less eager to call them
queer and foolish. A delusion may contain another person's attempt at
stating truth. The goal of psychiatry and of sound common sense is truth
free of distortion. Many a strange religious custom and fancy has been
brought nearer our understanding and appreciation since we have learned
to respect the essential truth and individual and group value of fancy
and feeling even in the myths and in the religious conceptions of all
races.

Among the most interesting formulations and potential contributions of
psychiatry are those reaching out toward jurisprudence. Psychiatry deals
pre-eminently with the variety and differences of human personalities.
To correct or supplement a human system apparently enslaved by concern
about precedent and baffling rules of evidence inherited from the days
of cruel and arbitrary kings, the demand for justice has called for
certain remedies. Psychiatry still plays a disgraceful rôle in the
so-called expert testimony, largely a prostitution of medical authority
in the service of legal methods. Yet, out of it all there has arisen the
great usefulness of the psychiatrist in the juvenile and other courts.
There it is shown that if psychiatry is to help, it should be taken for
granted that the person indicted on a charge should thereby become
subject to a complete and unreserved study of all the facts, subject to
cross-examination, to be sure, but before all accessible to complete and
unreserved study. This would mean a substantial participation of law in
the promotion of knowledge of facts and constructive activity, and a
conception of indeterminate sentence not merely in the service of
leniency but in the service of the best protection of the public, and,
if necessary, lasting detention of those who cannot be reformed, before
they have had to do their worst. Whoever is clearly indicted for
breaking the laws of social compatibility should not merely invite a
spirit of revenge, but should, through the indictment, surrender
automatically to legalized authority endowed with the right and duty of
an unlimited investigation of the facts as they are.

Looking back then, you can see how the history of the human thought
about what we call mind and psyche displayed some strange reactions of
the practical man, the scientist, the philosopher, and theologian toward
one of the most important and practical problems. It is difficult to
realize what it means to arrive at ever-more-workable formulations and
methods of approach. We do not have to be mind-shy _or_ body-shy any
longer. To-day we can attack the facts as we find them, without that
disturbing obsession of having to translate them first into something
artificial before we can really study them and work with them. Since we
have reached a sane pluralism with a justifiable conviction of the
fundamental consistency of it all, a satisfaction with what we modestly
call formulation rather than definition and with an appreciation of
relativity, we have at last an orderly and natural field and method from
which nobody need shy.

The century that has passed since the inspiration of a few men of the
Society of the New York Hospital to provide for the mentally sick has
cleared the atmosphere a great deal. We can start the second century
freer and unhampered in many ways. Much has been added, and more than
ever do we appreciate the position of just such a hospital as that of
Bloomingdale as a centre of healing and as a leader of public opinion
and as a contributor to progress.

The Bloomingdale Hospital has a remarkable function. It is a more or
less privileged forerunner in standards and policies. Without having to
carry the burdens of the whole State with its sweeping and sometimes
distant power and its forced economy, a semiprivate hospital like
Bloomingdale aims to minister to a slightly select group, especially
those who are in the difficult position of greater sensitiveness but
moderate means in days of sickness. It serves the part of our community
which more than any other sets the pace of the civilization about
us--the intelligent aspiring workers who may not have reached the goal
of absolute financial independence. It creates the standard of which we
may dream that it might become the standard of the whole State.

When we review the roster of Superintendents--from John Neilson to Pliny
Earle and from Charles Nichols, Tilden Brown, and Samuel Lyon down to
the present head, our highly esteemed friend and coworker William L.
Russell--and the names of the members of the staff, many of whom have
reached the highest places in the profession, and last, but not least,
the names of the Governors of The Society of the New York Hospital, we
cannot help being impressed by the forceful representation of both the
profession and the public, and we recognize the wide range of influence.

Instead of depending on frequently changing policies regulated from the
outside under the influence of the greater and lesser lights and
exigencies of State and municipal organization, the New York Hospital
has its self-perpetuating body of Governors chosen from the most
public-spirited and thoughtful representatives of our people.
Bloomingdale thus has always had a remarkable Board of Governors, who,
from contact with the General Hospital and with this special division,
are in an unusual position to see the practical aspects of the great
change that is now taking place. You see how the division of psychiatry
has developed from practically a detention-house to an asylum, and
finally to a hospital with all the medical equipment and laboratories of
the General Hospital. And you begin to see psychiatry, with its methods
of study and management of life problems as well as of specific brain
diseases, infections, and gastrointestinal and endocrine conditions,
become more and more helpful, even a necessity, in the wards and
dispensary of the General Hospital on 16th Street. The layman cannot,
perhaps, delve profitably into the details of such a highly and broadly
specialized type of work. But he can readily take a share in the best
appreciation of the general philosophy and policy of it all.

The shaping of the policy of a semiprivate hospital is not quite as
simple as shaping that of a State Hospital with its well-defined
districts and geographically marked zones of responsibility.
Bloomingdale has its sphere of influence marked by qualitative selection
rather than by a formal consideration. It does not pose as an invidious
contrast to the State Hospital, and yet it is intended to solve in a
somewhat freer and more privileged manner the problem of providing for
the mentally sick of a more or less specific hospital constituency, the
constituency of the New York Hospital; and since it reaches the most
discriminating and thinking part of our population, it has the most
wonderful opportunity to shape public opinion. Like all psychiatrical
institutions, it has to live down the traditional notions of the
half-informed public; it has to make conspicuous the change of spirit
and the better light in which we see our field and responsibilities.
This organization can show that it is not mere insanity but the working
out of life problems that such a hospital as this is concerned with. The
conditions for which it cares are many. Some of them are all that which
tradition and law stamp as insanity. But see what a change.
Seventy-five per cent of the patients are voluntary admissions; and more
and more will be able to use the helps when they begin to feel the need,
not merely when it becomes an enforced necessity.

By creating for this Hospital a liberal foundation, by completing its
equipment so as to make possible a free exchange of patients and of
workers from the Hospital in the city and this place in the country,
much has been done and more will be done to set a living example of the
very spirit of modern psychopathology and psychiatry. We know now that
from 10 to 40 per cent of the patients of the gynecologist, the
gastroenterologist, and the internist generally would be better treated
if a study of the life problems were added to that of the special organs
and functions. To meet this need it should be possible to have enough
workers in this branch of the Hospital to take their share of the
consulting and co-operation work in the wards and dispensary of the
General Hospital, and perhaps even in the schools provided for the same
type of people from which you draw your patients. The grouping of the
patients can be such that the old prejudices need not reach far into the
second century of the life of the Hospital. With a man of the vision and
practical experience of Dr. Russell, there is no need for an outsider to
conjure up a picture of special practical achievements as I have done
of the more general principles to-day.

An institution is more than a human life. Many ambitions combine and
become part of a group spirit permeating the organization and reaching
their fulfilment in the succession of leaders. The life and growth and
happy self-realization of an institution is not the bricks and
mortar--it is a living and elastic entity--never too stable, never too
finished, a growing and plastic plant--to use a metaphor that has
slipped in perhaps without arousing all the implications the term plant
might carry and does carry.

Some years ago my wife celebrated her birthday and told her colored cook
jocosely: "Geneva, I am a hundred years old to-day." The cook's jaw
dropped and then she suddenly remarked: "Lord! you don't look dat ole."
That is the way I feel about Bloomingdale Hospital as we see it to-day
pulsating with ever-fresh life and ever-fresh problems! How different
from a simple human being, after all! The heart and wisdom of many a man
and woman has gone into the perpetuation of what a few thoughtful men
started in 1821 and the result is that it is ever renewing its youth.

Many a dream has been realized and many a dream has given way to
another. Here and there the past may make itself felt too much. But the
spirit and its growth show in recruiting ever-new lives to meet the
present day and the days to come, and this all the more so if we can
show the younger generation that every effort is likely to have its
reasonable direct support. We all want a man like Dr. William L. Russell
to have the fullest opportunity to bring to its best expression the rich
and well-tried wisdom of over twenty-five years of devoted work in the
field. This is no doubt a time of stress when many personal and general
sacrifices may be needed to bring about the fruition and culmination of
the labors of the present generation. Yet is it not a clear opportunity
and duty, so that those who are growing up in the ranks to-day may
really be encouraged to get a solid training, always animated by the
conviction that one can be sure of the practical reward for toiling
through the many years of preparation in a psychiatric career, whether
it be as a physician or as a nurse or as an administrator?

I cannot help feeling as I stand here that I am in a way representing
not only my own sentiments and convictions but those of our dear old
friend Hoch. We all wish that he might be with us to express himself the
warm feelings toward the Bloomingdale Hospital and its active
representatives, from the managers to the humblest workers. Hoch in his
modesty could probably not have been brought to state fully and frankly
his own share in the achievements of this Hospital. But I know how much
he would have liked to be here to express especially the warmth of
appreciation we all entertain of what our friend William L. Russell
means to us and has meant to us all through the nearly twenty-five years
of our friendship and of working together. We delight in seeing him
bring to further fruition the admirable work he did at Willard, and
later for all the State hospitals; and that which we see him do at all
times for sanity in the progress of practical psychiatry, and now
especially in the guidance of this institution. We delight in seeing his
master mind given more and more of a master's chance for the practical
expression of his ideals and convictions concerning the duties and
opportunities of such a hospital as Bloomingdale.

Our thanks and best wishes to those who invited us to stand here to-day
at the cradle of a second century of Bloomingdale Hospital! It is a
noteworthy gathering that joins here in good wishes to those who have
shaped this ever-new Bloomingdale. With a tribute to our thoughtful and
enthusiastic friend in internal medicine, Lewellys F. Barker, to our
English coworker, Richard G. Rows, to the illustrious champion of French
psychopathology, Pierre Janet, to our friend and leader in practical
psychiatry, William L. Russell, to our friends and coworkers of the
Bloomingdale staff, and especially also to the Board of Governors who
shape the policy and control the finances, and exercise the leadership
of public opinion, I herewith express my sincerest thanks and best
wishes.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 2: A Guide to the Descriptive Study of the Personality, with
Special Reference to the Taking of Anamneses of Cases with Psychoses, by
Dr. August Hoch and Dr. George S. Amsden.]

[Footnote 3: See, for instance, Moebius, The Hopelessness of All
Psychology, reviewed in the Psychological Bulletin, vol. IV, 1907, pp.
170-179.]




ADDRESS BY
DR. LEWELLYS F. BARKER


_The Chairman_:--The Johns Hopkins Medical School lends us also to-day
Dr. Lewellys F. Barker, its Professor of Clinical Medicine. Dr. Barker
has done so much to define and settle the contradictions of mind and
matter, and has clarified so much, and in fields so varied, as teacher,
research worker, and practitioner, that we welcome this opportunity of
listening to his discussion of "THE IMPORTANCE OF PSYCHIATRY IN GENERAL
MEDICAL PRACTICE."


DR. BARKER

We have met to-day to celebrate the hundredth anniversary of the
founding of a hospital that, in its simpler beginnings and in its
evolution to the complex and highly organized activities of the present,
has served an eminently practical purpose and has played an important
rôle in the development of the science and art of psychiatry in America.
I desire, as a representative of general medicine, and, especially, of
internal medicine, to add, on this occasion, my congratulations to those
of the spokesmen of other groups, and, at the same time to express the
hope that this institution, historically so significant for the century
just past, may maintain its relative influence and reputation in the
centuries to come.

The interest taken in psychiatry by the general practitioner and by the
consulting internist has been growing rapidly of late. Some of the
reasons for this growth of interest and heightening of appreciation I
have drawn attention to on an earlier occasion.[4] Psychiatry as a whole
was for a long time as widely separated from general medicine as
penology is to-day, and for similar reasons. It was a long time before
persons that manifested extraordinary abnormalities of thought, feeling,
and behavior were regarded as deserving medical study and care, and even
when a humanitarian movement led to their transfer from
straight-jackets, chains, and prison cells to "asylums for the insane,"
these institutions were, for practical reasons, so divorced from the
homes of the people and from general hospitals that psychiatry had, and
could at the time have, but little intercourse with general medicine or
with general society. Mental disorders were moral and legal problems
rather than biological, social, and medical problems. Their genesis was
wholly misunderstood, and legal, medical, social, religious, and
philosophic prejudices went far toward preventing any rational
scientific mode of approach to the questions involved or any formulation
of investigative procedures that promised to be fruitful. Even to-day
the same prejudices are all too inhibitory; but thanks to the
unprecedented development of the natural sciences during the period
since this hospital was founded, we are witnessing, in our time, a rapid
transformation of thought and opinion concerning both the normal and the
disordered mind, a transformation that is reaching all circles of human
beings, bidding fair to compel the strongholds of tradition and
prejudice to relax, and inviting the whole-hearted co-operation of
workers in all fields in a common task of overcoming some of the
greatest difficulties by which civilization and human progress are
confronted. And though the brunt of this task is borne and must be borne
by the shoulders of medical men, physicians assume the burden
cheerfully, now that they know that they can count upon the intelligent
support and the cordial sympathy of an ever-enlarging extra-medical
aggregate. No better illustration could be given, perhaps, of the change
in the status of psychiatry in this country and in the world than the
contents of the programme of our meeting to-day at which a distinguished
investigator from London tells us of the biological significance of
mental disorders, an eminent authority from Paris explains the
relationship between certain diseases of the nervous system and these
disorders, and a leading psychiatrist of this country speaks upon the
contributions of psychiatry to the understanding of the problems of
life. Psychiatry, like each of the other branches of medicine, has come
to be recognized as one of the subdivisions of the great science of
biology, free to make use of the scientific method, in duty bound to
diffuse the knowledge that it gains, and privileged to contribute
abundantly to the lessening of human suffering and the enhancement of
human joys. General practitioners of medicine and medical
specialists--at least the more enlightened of them--welcome the
developing science of psychiatry, are eager to hasten its progress, and
will gladly share in applying its discoveries to the early diagnosis,
the cure, and the prevention of disease.

That the majority of medical and surgical specialists and even most of
the widely experienced general practitioners, though constantly coming
in contact with major and minor psychic disturbances, are, however,
still far from realizing the full meaning and value of the principles
and technic of modern psychology and of the newer psychiatry must, I
fear, be frankly admitted.[5] But dare we blame these practitioners for
their ignorance of, apathy regarding, and even antipathy to, the psychic
and especially the psychotic manifestations of their patients? Ought we
not rather to try to understand the reasons for this ignorance, this
apathy, and this aversion, all three of which seem astonishing to many
of our well-trained psychologists and psychopathologists? Are there not
definite conditions that explain and at least partially excuse the
defects in knowledge and interest and the errors in attitude manifested
by those whom we would be glad to see cognizant and enthusiastically
participant? Psychiatrists, who have taught us to understand and rescue
various types of "sinners" and "social offenders" will, I feel sure,
avoid any moralistic attitude when discussing the shortcomings of their
brethren in the general medical profession, and will, instead, seek to
discover and to remove their causes.

As an internist who values highly the gifts that modern psychology and
psychiatry have been making to medicine, I have given some thought to
the conditions and causes that may be responsible for these professional
delinquencies that you deplore. Though this is not the time nor the
place fully to discuss them, the mere mention of some of the causes and
conditions will, perhaps, contribute to comprehension and pardon, and
may serve to stimulate us all to livelier corrective activity. Let me
enumerate some of them:

(1) A social stigma still attaches, despite all our efforts to abolish
it, to mental disorders and has, to a certain extent, been transferred
to those that study and treat patients manifesting these disorders.

(2) The organization of our general education is very defective since it
fails to make clear to each student man's place in the universe and any
orderly view of the world and man; it fails adequately to enlighten the
student regarding the processes of life as adaptations of organisms to
their environment, man, himself, being such an organism reacting
physically and psychically to his surroundings in ways either favorable
or unfavorable to his own preservation and that of his species; it fails
to teach the student that the human organism represents a bundle of
instincts each with its knowing, its feeling, and its striving
component, that what we call "knowledge" and what we call "character"
are gradual developments in each person, and that if we know how they
have developed in a particular person we possess clues to the way that
person will react under a given stimulus, that is to say, what he will
think, how he will feel, and how he will act; and it fails, again,
properly to instruct students regarding the interrelationships of
members of different social groups (familial, civic, economic,
occupational, ethical, national, racial, etc.); in other words, our
general educational organization is as yet far from successful in
inculcating philosophical, biological, psychological, and sociological
conceptions that are adequate symbols of reality.

(3) Though our medical schools have made phenomenal advances in the
organization and equipment of their institutes and in provision for
teaching and research in a large number of preclinical and clinical
sciences, they have up to now almost wholly ignored normal psychology,
psychiatry, and mental hygiene. The majority of the professors in these
schools are so absorbed by the morphological, physical, and chemical
aspects of their subjects, that students rarely get from them any
inkling of the psychobiological aspect, any adequate knowledge of human
motives, or any satisfactory data regarding human behavior, normal or
abnormal.[6] It is only recently and only in a few schools that
psychiatric clinics have been established as parts of the teaching
hospitals, that medical students have been able to come into direct
contact over an appreciable period of time with the objects of
psychiatric study, that the psychic manifestations of patients have
received any direct and particular attention in the general medical and
surgical wards, and that there has been any free and constant reciprocal
exchange of thought and opinion between students of the somatic on the
one hand and students of the psychic on the other.

(4) The language of the psychiatrist is unique and formidable. The names
he has applied to motives and impulses, to symptoms and syndromes, are
foreign to the tongue of the general practitioner who is so awed by
them that he withdraws from them and remains humbly reticent in a state
of enomatophobia; or, if he be more tough-minded, he may be amused by,
or contemptuous of, what he refers to as "psychiatric jargon" or
"pseudoscientific gibberish." There is, furthermore, a dearth of
concise, authoritative, well-written text-books on psychiatry, and the
general medical journals rarely print psychiatric papers designed to
interest the average practitioner. The most widely diffused psychiatric
reports of our time are the sensational news items of the daily press.

(5) The overemphasis of psychogenetic factors to the apparent neglect of
important somatogenic factors by some psychiatrists has tended to arouse
suspicion regarding the soundness of the opinions and methods of
psychiatric workers in the minds of men thoroughly imbued with
mechanistic conceptions and impressed with the results of medical
researches based upon them. The ardor of the psychoanalysts, also,
though in part doubtless justified by experience, has, it is to be
feared, excited a certain amount of antipathy among the uninitiated.

(6) The fears of insanity prevalent among the laity and the repugnance
of patients to any idea that they may be "psychotic" or "psychoneurotic"
(words that, in their opinion, refer to "imaginary symptoms," or to
symptoms that they could abolish if they would but "buck up" and exert
their "wills") undoubtedly exert a reflex influence upon practitioners
who put the "soft pedal" on the psychobiological reactions and "pull out
the stop" that amplifies the significance of any abnormal physical
findings.

(7) Psychotherapy, to the mind of the average medical practitioner, is
(or has been) something mysterious or occult. He uses much psychotherapy
himself but it is nearly always applied unconsciously and indirectly
through some form of physical or chemical therapy that he believes will
cure. He is usually quite devoid of insight into the effect of his own
expressed beliefs and bodily attitudes upon the adjusting mechanisms of
his patients. Conscious and direct psychotherapy is left by the average
practitioner to New Thoughters, Christian Scientists, quacks, and
charlatans. If he were to use psychotherapy consciously and were to
receive a professional fee for it he would feel that he was being paid
for a value that the patient had not received. A highly respected
colleague once privately criticised a paper of mine (read before the
Association of American Physicians) on the importance of psychotherapy.
"What you said is true," he remarked; "we all use psychotherapy but we
are a little ashamed of it; and it is better not to talk about it." Even
he did not realize that every psychotherapy is also a physical therapy.

(8) The rise of specialism, through division of labor and
intensification of interests restricted to limited fields, in practical
medicine, the necessary result and to a large extent also a cause of the
rapid growth of knowledge and technic has brought with it many
advantages, but also some special difficulties, among them (a) the
impossibility any longer of any single practitioner, unaided, to study
and treat a patient as well as he can be studied and treated by a
co-ordinated group whose special analytical studies in single domains
are adequately synthesized by a competent integrator, and (b) in the
absence of such group work, the tendency to one-sided study, partial
diagnosis, and incomplete and unsatisfactory therapy. Through the rise
of specialism, it is true, psychiatry itself has arisen and the
psychiatrist, like the skilled integrating internist, is interested in
the synthesis of the findings in all domains, for only through such
synthetic studies, such integration of the functional activities of the
whole organism, is it possible to gain a global view of the patient as a
person, to make a complete somatic, psychic, and social diagnosis, and
to plan a regimen for him that will ensure the best adjustment possible
of his internal and external relationships.[7]

Working in a diagnostic group myself as an integrating internist, I have
been much helped by the reports of personality studies made by skilful
psychiatrists; these are linked with the special reports on the several
bodily domains (cardiovascular, respiratory, hæmic, dental, digestive,
urogenital, locomotor, neural, metabolic, and endocrine) in order
finally to arrive at an adequately co-ordinated and (subordinated) total
diagnosis from which the clues for an appropriate therapeutic regimen
can safely be drawn. If group practice is to grow and be successful in
this country, as I think likely, groups must see to it that psychiatry,
as well as the other medical and surgical specialties, is properly
represented in their make-up.[8] From now on, too, general practitioners
should, as Southard emphasized, be urged to be at least as familiar
with the general principles and methods of the psychiatrist as they are
with those of the gynecologist, the dermatologist, and the
pædiatrist.[9] Well organized group-diagnosis and general will then help
to counteract the inhibiting influence of earlier isolated specialism
upon the appreciation of psychiatry.

This enumeration of some of the causes of the ignorance and apathy
(existent hitherto) in the general profession regarding psychiatry may
perhaps suffice as explanation. These causes are, fortunately, rapidly
being removed. We are entering upon an era in which psychiatry will be
recognized as one of the most important specialties in medicine, an era
that will demand alliance and close communion among psychiatrists,
internists, and the representatives of the various medical and surgical
specialties.

The internist and the psychiatrist will ever have a common interest in
the obscure problems of etiology and pathogenesis of diseases and
anomalies that are accompanied by abnormalities of thought, feeling, and
behavior. Progress in this direction is bound to be slow for the studies
are exceptionally complex and there are many impediments to be removed.
Though the problems are deep and difficult, they are doubtless soluble
by the mind of man, and they exert an uncommon fascination upon those
who visualize them. Causes may be internal or external, and are often a
combination of both. The tracing of the direct and indirect
relationships between these causes and the abnormal cerebral functioning
upon which the disturbances of psychobiological adjustment seem to
depend is the task of pathogenesis. The internist who has studied the
infantile cerebropathies with their resulting imbecilities, syphilis
followed by general paresis, typhoid fever and its toxic delirium,
chronic alcoholism with its characteristic psychoses, cerebral
thrombosis with its aphasias, agnosias, and apraxias, thalmic syndromes
due to vascular lesions with their unilateral pathological feeling-tone,
frontal-lobe tumors with joke-making, uncus tumors with hallucinations
of taste and smell, lethargic encephalitis with its disturbance of the
general consciousness and its psychoneurotic sequelæ (lesions in the
globus pallidus and their motor consequences), pulmonary tuberculosis
with its euphoria, and endocrinopathies like myxoedema and exophthalmic
goitre with their pathological mental states, is encouraged to proceed
with his clinical-pathological-etiological studies in full assurance
that they will steadily contribute to advances in psychiatry. The
eclectic psychiatrist who is examining mental symptoms and
symptom-complexes ever more critically, who is seeking for parallel
disturbances in physiological processes and who considers both
psychogenesis and somatogenesis in attempting to account for
psychobiological maladjustments will welcome, we can feel sure, any help
that internal medicine and general and special pathology can yield.

These studies in pathogenesis and etiology are fundamentally necessary
for the development of a rational therapy and prophylaxis. Already much
that is of applicable value in practice has been achieved. The internist
shares with the psychiatrist the desire that knowledge of the facts
regarding care, cure, and prevention of mental disorders may become
widely disseminated among medical men and at least to some extent among
the laity. Experts in psychiatry firmly believe that at least half of
the mental disturbances now prevalent could have been prevented, if,
during the childhood and adolescence of those afflicted, the facts and
principles of existing knowledge and the practical resources now
available could have been applied.

We have recently had an excellent illustration of the benefits of
applied psychiatry in the remarkable results achieved during the great
war through the activities of the head of the neuropsychiatric division
of the Surgeon General's office and his staff[10] and those of the
senior consultant in neuropsychiatry and his divisional associates in
the American Expeditionary Force. In no other body of recruits and in no
other army than the American was a comparable success arrived at, and
the credit for this is due to American applied psychiatry and its wisely
chosen official representatives.

The active campaign for the preservation of the mental health of our
people and for a better understanding and care of persons presenting
abnormal mental symptoms carried on during the past decade by the
National Committee for Mental Hygiene marks a new epoch in preventive
medicine.[11]

The prevention of at least a large proportion of abnormal mental states
through the timely application of the principles of mental hygiene is
now recognized as a practically realizable ideal. Many important reforms
are now in process throughout the United States, no small part of them
directly attributable to the active efforts of our leading psychiatrists