[Frontispiece: Jesus of Nazareth]






JESUS OF NAZARETH

A BIOGRAPHY


BY

JOHN MARK



D. APPLETON AND COMPANY

NEW YORK : : LONDON : : MCMXXII




COPYRIGHT 1922, BY

D. APPLETON AND COMPANY




FOREWORD

"Jesus of Nazareth, a Biography, by John Mark," recognizes the author
of the second Gospel as that "John, whose surname was Mark" (Acts
15:37), whom Barnabas chose as companion when he sailed for Cyprus on
his second missionary journey.  In making use of the new title, the
plan of the Editor is to present "The Gospel: According to Mark" as it
would be printed were it written in the twentieth rather than the first
century.

Mark's Gospel has been chosen for this purpose to make available in
more readable form this timely portion of the Bible.  In John Mark the
missionary is revealed a man of action.  This characteristic influences
strongly the point of view and style of his writing.  As John, the
beloved disciple, in "The Revelation" beholds the victorious Christ as
"the Lion of the tribe of Judah," foretold by the prophets, so Mark
sees Jesus of Nazareth as the strong, vigorous man of action; he writes
of His mighty works in swift narrative at times so vivid it flashes
like a burst of flame, as though the facts presented must have been on
fire in the heart of the author.  Written for the practical, energetic
Roman, the Editor feels that this biography of Jesus of Nazareth
exactly fits the mood of our own time, with its emphasis upon the
practical and its insistence that the man of action, the doer, is the
man for the hour.

Printed like a modern book, but in the fine old King James' version, it
is believed that all Bible lovers will welcome their old friend, "The
Gospel: According to Mark," in its new literary dress; it is hoped,
too, that in this popular form book buyers and lovers of good
literature may be led to purchase a book which needs only to be
thoroughly and thoughtfully read to be greatly reverenced.




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

    I.  HAIL, THE GALILEAN
   II.  A TEACHER WITH AUTHORITY
  III.  A BROTHER TO ALL WHO DO THE WILL OF GOD
   IV.  THE WISDOM OF THE AGES
    V.  LORD OF LIFE AND LOVE
   VI.  IS NOT HE THE CARPENTER?
  VII.  NEVER A MAN LIKE HIM
 VIII.  "THOU ART THE CHRIST"
   IX.  STRONG SON OF GOD
    X.  MASTER OF MEN BUT SERVANT OF ALL
   XI.  HE THAT COMETH IN THE NAME OF THE LORD
  XII.  IN CONFLICT WITH SCRIBES AND PHARISEES
 XIII.  JERUSALEM THAT KILLETH THE PROPHETS
  XIV.  DESPISED AND REJECTED BY FRIEND AND FOE
   XV.  CRUCIFIED, DEAD AND BURIED
  XVI.  JESUS OF NAZARETH RISES FROM THE DEAD




JESUS OF NAZARETH


CHAPTER I

HAIL, THE GALILEAN

The beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ, the Son of God; as it is
written in the prophets, "Behold, I send my messenger before thy face,
which shall prepare thy way before thee.  The voice of one crying in
the wilderness.  Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths
straight."

John did baptize in the wilderness, and preach the baptism of
repentance for the remission of sins.  And there went out unto him all
the land of Judaea, and they of Jerusalem, and were all baptized of him
in the river of Jordan, confessing their sins.  And John was clothed
with camel's hair, and with a girdle of a skin about his loins; and he
did eat locusts and wild honey; and preached, saying:

"There cometh one mightier than I after me, the latchet of whose shoes
I am not worthy to stoop down and unloose.  I indeed have baptized you
with water: but he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost."

And it came to pass in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth of
Galilee, and was baptized of John in Jordan.  And straightway coming up
out of the water, he saw the heavens opened, and the Spirit like a dove
descending upon him: and there came a voice from heaven, saying:

"Thou art my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased."

And immediately the spirit driveth him into the wilderness.  And he was
there in the wilderness forty days, tempted of Satan; and was with the
wild beasts; and the angels ministered unto him.

Now after that John was put in prison, Jesus came into Galilee,
preaching the gospel of the kingdom of God, and saying:

"The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye,
and believe the gospel."

Now as he walked by the sea of Galilee, he saw Simon and Andrew his
brother casting a net into the sea: for they were fishers.  And Jesus
said unto them:

"Come ye after me, and I will make you to become fishers of men."

And straightway they forsook their nets, and followed him.

And when he had gone a little farther thence, he saw James the son of
Zebedee, and John his brother, who also were in the ship mending their
nets.  And straightway he called them: and they left their father
Zebedee in the ship with the hired servants, and went after him.

And they went into Capernaum; and straightway on the sabbath day he
entered into the synagogue, and taught.  And they were astonished at
his doctrine: for he taught them as one that had authority, and not as
the scribes.  And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean
spirit; and he cried out, saying:

"Let us alone; what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth?
Art thou come to destroy us?  I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of
God."

And Jesus rebuked him, saying, "Hold thy peace, and come out of him."
And when the unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud voice,
he came out of him.  And they were all amazed, insomuch that they
questioned among themselves, saying:

"What thing is this? what new doctrine is this? for with authority
commandeth he even the unclean spirits, and they do obey him."

And immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the region round
about Galilee.

And forthwith, when they were come out of the synagogue, they entered
into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John.  But Simon's
wife's mother lay sick of a fever, and anon they tell him of her.  And
he came and took her by the hand, and lifted her up; and immediately
the fever left her, and she ministered unto them.

And at even, when the sun did set, they brought unto him all that were
diseased, and them that were possessed with devils.  And all the city
was gathered together at the door.  And he healed many that were sick
of divers diseases, and cast out many devils; and suffered not the
devils to speak, because they knew him.

And in the morning, rising up a great while before day, he went out,
and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed.  And Simon and
they that were with him followed after him.  And when they had found
him, they said unto him, "All men seek for thee."

And he said unto them, "Let us go into the next towns, that I may
preach there also; for therefore came I forth."

And he preached in their synagogues throughout all Galilee, and cast
out devils.  And there came a leper to him, beseeching him, and
kneeling down to him, and saying unto him, "If thou wilt, thou canst
make me clean."  And Jesus, moved with compassion, put forth his hand,
and touched him, and saith unto him, "I will; be thou clean."

And as soon as he had spoken, immediately the leprosy departed from
him, and he was cleansed.  And he straitly charged him, and forthwith
sent him away; and saith unto him, "See thou say nothing to any man:
but go thy way, shew thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing
those things which Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them."

But he went out, and began to publish it much, and to blaze abroad the
matter, insomuch that Jesus could no more openly enter into the city,
but was without in desert places: and they came to him from every
quarter.




CHAPTER II

A TEACHER WITH AUTHORITY

And again he entered into Capernaum after some days; and it was noised
that he was in the house.  And straightway many were gathered together,
insomuch that there was no room to receive them, no, not so much as
about the door: and he preached the word unto them.  And they come unto
him, bringing one sick of the palsy, which was borne of four.  And when
they could not come nigh unto him for the press, they uncovered the
roof where he was: and when they had broken it up, they let down the
bed wherein the sick of the palsy lay.  When Jesus saw their faith, he
said unto the sick of the palsy:

"Son, thy sins be forgiven thee."

But there were certain of the scribes sitting there, and reasoning in
their hearts:

"Why doth this man thus speak blasphemies?  Who can forgive sins but
God only?"

And immediately when Jesus perceived in his spirit that they so
reasoned within themselves, he said unto them:

"Why reason ye these things in your hearts?  Whether is it easier to
say to the sick of the palsy, 'Thy sins be forgiven thee;' or to say,
'Arise, and take up thy bed, and walk?'  But that ye may know that the
Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, (he saith to the sick
of the palsy,) I say unto thee, 'Arise, and take up thy bed, and go thy
way into thine house.'"

And immediately he arose, took up the bed, and went forth before them
all; insomuch that they were all amazed, and glorified God, saying:

"We never saw it on this fashion."

And he went forth again by the sea side; and all the multitude resorted
unto him, and he taught them.

And as he passed by, he saw Levi the son of Alphaeus sitting at the
receipt of custom, and said unto him:

"Follow me."

And he arose and followed him.

And it came to pass, that, as Jesus sat at meat in his house, many
publicans and sinners sat also together with Jesus and his disciples:
for there were many, and they followed him.  And when the scribes and
Pharisees saw him eat with publicans and sinners, they said unto his
disciples:

"How is it that he eateth and drinketh with publicans and sinners?"

When Jesus heard it, he saith unto them;

"They that are whole have no need of the physician, but they that are
sick: I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance."

And the disciples of John and of the Pharisees used to fast: and they
come and say unto him:

"Why do the disciples of John and of the Pharisees fast, but thy
disciples fast not?"

And Jesus said unto them:

"Can the children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is
with them?  As long as they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot
fast.  But the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away
from them, and then shall they fast in those days.  No man also seweth
a piece of new cloth on an old garment: else the new piece that filled
it up taketh away from the old, and the rent is made worse.  And no man
putteth new wine into old bottles: else the new wine doth burst the
bottles, and the wine is spilled, and the bottles will be marred: but
new wine must be put into new bottles."

And it came to pass, that he went through the corn fields on the
sabbath day; and his disciples began, as they went, to pluck the ears
of corn.  And the Pharisees said unto him:

"Behold, why do they on the sabbath day that which is not lawful?"

And he said unto them:

"Have ye never read what David did, when he had need, and was an
hungered, he, and they that were with him?  How he went into the house
of God in the days of Abiathar the high priest, and did eat the
shewbread, which is not lawful to eat but for the priests, and gave
also to them which were with him?"

And he said unto them:

"The sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath: therefore
the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath."




CHAPTER III

A BROTHER TO ALL WHO DO THE WILL OF GOD

And he entered again into the synagogue; and there was a man there
which had a withered hand.  And they watched him, whether he would heal
him on the sabbath day; that they might accuse him.

And he saith unto the man which had the withered hand:

"Stand forth."

And he saith unto them:

"Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath days, or to do evil? to save
life, or to kill?"

But they held their peace.

And when he had looked round about on them with anger, being grieved
for the hardness of their hearts, he saith unto the man:

"Stretch forth thine hand."

And he stretched it out: and his hand was restored whole as the other.
And the Pharisees went forth, and straightway took counsel with the
Herodians against him, how they might destroy him.

But Jesus withdrew himself with his disciples to the sea: and a great
multitude from Galilee followed him, and from Judaea, and from
Jerusalem, and from Idumaea, and from beyond Jordan; and they about
Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, when they had heard what great
things he did, came unto him.  And he spake to his disciples, that a
small ship should wait on him because of the multitude, lest they
should throng him.  For he had healed many; insomuch that they pressed
upon him for to touch him, as many as had plagues.  And unclean
spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him, and cried, saying:

"Thou art the Son of God."

And he straitly charged them that they should not make him known.

And he goeth up into a mountain, and calleth unto him whom he would:
and they came unto him.  And he ordained twelve, that they should be
with him, and that he might send them forth to preach, and to have
power to heal sicknesses, and to cast out devils: and Simon he surnamed
Peter; and James the son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James; and
he surnamed them Boanerges, which is.  The sons of thunder: and Andrew,
and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and James the son
of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus, and Simon the Canaanite, and Judas
Iscariot, which also betrayed him.

And they went into an house.  And the multitude cometh together again,
so that they could not so much as eat bread.  And when his friends
heard of it, they went out to lay hold on him: for they said:

"He is beside himself."

And the scribes which came down from Jerusalem said:

"He hath Beelzebub, and by the prince of the devils casteth he out
devils."

And he called them unto him, and said unto them in parables:

"How can Satan cast out Satan?  And if a kingdom be divided against
itself, that kingdom cannot stand.  And if a house be divided against
itself, that house cannot stand.  And if Satan rise up against himself,
and be divided, he cannot stand, but hath an end.  No man can enter
into a strong man's house, and spoil his goods, except he will first
bind the strong man; and then he will spoil his house.  Verily I say
unto you.  All sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and
blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme: but he that shall
blaspheme against the Holy Ghost hath never forgiveness, but is in
danger of eternal damnation."

Because they said, "He hath an unclean spirit."

There came then his brethren and his mother, and, standing without,
sent unto him, calling him.  And the multitude sat about him, and they
said unto him:

"Behold, thy mother and thy brethren without seek for thee."

And he answered them, saying:

"Who is my mother, or my brethren?"

And he looked round about on them which sat about him, and said:

"Behold my mother and my brethren!  For whosoever shall do the will of
God, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother."




CHAPTER IV

THE WISDOM OF THE AGES

And he began again to teach by the sea side: and there was gathered
unto him a great multitude, so that he entered into a ship, and sat in
the sea; and the whole multitude was by the sea on the land.  And he
taught them many things by parables, and said unto them in his doctrine:

"Hearken; Behold, there went out a sower to sow: and it came to pass,
as he sowed, some fell by the way side, and the fowls of the air came
and devoured it up.  And some fell on stony ground, where it had not
much earth; and immediately it sprang up, because it had no depth of
earth: but when the sun was up, it was scorched; and because it had no
root, it withered away.  And some fell among thorns, and the thorns
grew up, and choked it, and it yielded no fruit.  And other fell on
good ground, and did yield fruit that sprang up and increased; and
brought forth, some thirty, and some sixty, and some an hundred."

And he said unto them:

"He that hath ears to hear, let him hear."

And when he was alone, they that were about him with the twelve asked
of him the parable.  And he said unto them:

"Unto you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God: but
unto them that are without, all these things are done in parables: that
seeing they may see, and not perceive; and hearing they may hear, and
not understand; lest at any time they should be converted, and their
sins should be forgiven them."

And he said unto them:

"Know ye not this parable?  And how then will ye know all parables?
The sower soweth the word.  And these are they by the way side, where
the word is sown; but when they have heard, Satan cometh immediately,
and taketh away the word that was sown in their hearts.  And these are
they likewise which are sown on stony ground; who, when they have heard
the word, immediately receive it with gladness; and have no root in
themselves, and so endure but for a time: afterward, when affliction or
persecution ariseth for the word's sake, immediately they are offended.
And these are they which are sown among thorns; such as hear the word,
and the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of riches, and the
lusts of other things entering in, choke the word, and it becometh
unfruitful.  And these are they which are sown on good ground; such as
hear the word, and receive it, and bring forth fruit, some thirtyfold,
some sixty, and some an hundred."

And he said unto them:

"Is a candle brought to be put under a bushel, or under a bed? and not
to be set on a candlestick?  For there is nothing hid, which shall not
be manifested; neither was anything kept secret, but that it should
come abroad.  If any man have ears to hear, let him hear."

And he said unto them:

"Take heed what ye hear: with what measure ye mete, it shall be
measured to you; and unto you that hear shall more be given.  For he
that hath, to him shall be given: and he that hath not, from him shall
be taken even that which he hath."

And he said:

"So is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into the
ground; and should sleep, and rise night and day, and the seed should
spring and grow up, he knoweth not how.  For the earth bringeth forth
fruit of herself; first the blade, then the ear, after that the full
corn in the ear.  But when the fruit is brought forth, immediately he
putteth in the sickle, because the harvest is come."

And he said:

"Whereunto shall we liken the kingdom of God? or with what comparison
shall we compare it?  It is like a grain of mustard seed, which, when
it is sown in the earth, is less than all the seeds that be in the
earth: but when it is sown, it groweth up, and becometh greater than
all herbs, and shooteth out great branches; so that the fowls of the
air may lodge under the shadow of it."

And with many such parables spake he the word unto them, as they were
able to hear it.  But without a parable spake he not unto them: and
when they were alone, he expounded all things to his disciples.

And the same day, when the even was come, he saith unto them:

"Let us pass over unto the other side."

And when they had sent away the multitude, they took him even as he was
in the ship.  And there were also with him other little ships.  And
there arose a great storm of wind, and the waves beat into the ship, so
that it was now full.  And he was in the hinder part of the ship,
asleep on a pillow; and they awake him, and say unto him:

"Master, carest thou not that we perish?"

And he arose, and rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea:

"Peace, be still."

And the wind ceased, and there was a great calm.

And he said unto them:

"Why are ye so fearful?  How is it that ye have no faith?"

And they feared exceedingly, and said one to another:

"What manner of man is this, that even the wind and the sea obey him?"




CHAPTER V

LORD OF LIFE AND LOVE

And they came over unto the other side of the sea, into the country of
the Gadarenes.  And when he was come out of the ship, immediately there
met him out of the tombs a man with an unclean spirit, who had his
dwelling among the tombs; and no man could bind him, no, not with
chains: because that he had been often bound with fetters and chains,
and the chains had been plucked asunder by him, and the fetters broken
in pieces: neither could any man tame him.  And always, night and day,
he was in the mountains, and in the tombs, crying, and cutting himself
with stones.  But when he saw Jesus afar off, he ran and worshipped
him, and cried with a loud voice, and said:

"What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the most high God?  I
adjure thee by God, that thou torment me not."

For he said unto him: "Come out of the man, thou unclean spirit," And
he asked him: "What is thy name?"

And he answered, saying:

"My name is Legion: for we are many."

And he besought him much that he would not send them away out of the
country.  Now there was there nigh unto the mountains a great herd of
swine feeding.  And all the devils besought him, saying:

"Send us into the swine, that we may enter into them."

And forthwith Jesus gave them leave.  And the unclean spirits went out,
and entered into the swine: and the herd ran violently down a steep
place into the sea, (they were about two thousand;) and were choked in
the sea.  And they that fed the swine fled, and told it in the city,
and in the country.  And they went out to see what it was that was
done.  And they come to Jesus, and see him that was possessed with the
devil, and had the legion, sitting, and clothed, and in his right mind:
and they were afraid.  And they that saw it told them how it befell to
him that was possessed with the devil, and also concerning the swine.
And they began to pray him to depart out of their coasts.

And when he was come into the ship, he that had been possessed with the
devil prayed him that he might be with him.  Howbeit Jesus suffered him
not, but saith unto him:

"Go home to thy friends, and tell them how great things the Lord hath
done for thee, and hath had compassion on thee."

And he departed, and began to publish in Decapolis how great things
Jesus had done for him: and all men did marvel.

And when Jesus was passed over again by ship unto the other side, much
people gathered unto him: and he was nigh unto the sea.  And, behold,
there cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by name; and
when he saw him, he fell at his feet, and besought him greatly, saying:

"My little daughter lieth at the point of death: I pray thee, come and
lay thy hands on her, that she may be healed; and she shall live."

And Jesus went with him; and much people followed him, and thronged
him.  And a certain woman, which had an issue of blood twelve years,
and had suffered many things of many physicians, and had spent all that
she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse, when she had
heard of Jesus, came in the press behind, and touched his garment.  For
she said:

"If I may touch but his clothes, I shall be whole."

And straightway the fountain of her blood was dried up; and she felt in
her body that she was healed of that plague.  And Jesus, immediately
knowing in himself that virtue had gone out of him, turned him about in
the press, and said:

"Who touched my clothes?"

And his disciples said unto him:

"Thou seest the multitude thronging thee, and sayest thou, 'Who touched
me?'"

And he looked round about to see her that had done this thing.  But the
woman fearing and trembling, knowing what was done in her, came and
fell down before him, and told him all the truth.  And he said unto her:

"Daughter, thy faith hath made thee whole; go in peace, and be whole of
thy plague."

While he yet spake, there came from the ruler of the synagogue's house
certain which said:

"Thy daughter is dead: why troublest thou the Master any further?"

As soon as Jesus heard the word that was spoken, he saith unto the
ruler of the synagogue:

"Be not afraid, only believe."

And he suffered no man to follow him, save Peter, and James, and John
the brother of James.  And he cometh to the house of the ruler of the
synagogue, and seeth the tumult, and them that wept and wailed greatly.
And when he was come in, he saith unto them:

"Why make ye this ado, and weep?  The damsel is not dead, but sleepeth."

And they laughed him to scorn.  But when he had put them all out, he
taketh the father and the mother of the damsel, and them that were with
him, and entereth in where the damsel was lying.  And he took the
damsel by the hand, and said unto her:

"_Talitha cumi_;" which is, being interpreted, "Damsel, I say unto
thee, arise."

And straightway the damsel arose, and walked; for she was of the age of
twelve years.  And they were astonished with a great astonishment.  And
he charged them straitly that no man should know it; and commanded that
something should be given her to eat.




CHAPTER VI

IS NOT HE THE CARPENTER?

And he went out from thence, and came into his own country; and his
disciples follow him.  And when the sabbath day was come, he began to
teach in the synagogue: and many hearing him were astonished, saying:

"From whence hath this man these things and what wisdom is this which
is given unto him, that even such mighty works are wrought by his
hands?  Is not this the carpenter, the son of Mary, the brother of
James, and Joses, and of Juda, and Simon?  And are not his sisters here
with us?"

And they were offended at him.

But Jesus said unto them:

"A prophet is not without honour, but in his own country, and among his
own kin, and in his own house."

And he could there do no mighty work, save that he laid his hands upon
a few sick folk, and healed them.  And he marvelled because of their
unbelief.

And he went round about the villages, teaching.

And he called unto him the twelve, and began to send them forth by two
and two; and gave them power over unclean spirits; and commanded them
that they should take nothing for their journey, save a staff only; no
scrip, no bread, no money in their purse: but be shod with sandals; and
not put on two coats.  And he said unto them:

"In what place soever ye enter into an house, there abide till ye
depart from that place.  And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear
you, when ye depart thence, shake off the dust under your feet for a
testimony against them.  Verily I say unto you, It shall be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha in the day of judgment, than for that
city."

And they went out, and preached that men should repent.  And they cast
out many devils, and anointed with oil many that were sick, and healed
them.

And king Herod heard of him; (for his name was spread abroad;) and he
said:

"That John the Baptist was risen from the dead, and therefore mighty
works do shew forth themselves in him."  Others said: "That it is
Elias."  And others said:

"That it is a prophet, or as one of the prophets."  But when Herod
heard thereof, he said: "It is John, whom I beheaded: he is risen from
the dead."

For Herod himself had sent forth and laid hold upon John, and bound him
in prison for Herodias' sake, his brother Philip's wife: for he had
married her.  For John had said unto Herod: "It is not lawful for thee
to have thy brother's wife."  Therefore Herodias had a quarrel against
him, and would have killed him; but she could not: for Herod feared
John, knowing that he was a just man and an holy, and observed him; and
when he heard him, he did many things, and heard him gladly.  And when
a convenient day was come that Herod on his birthday made a supper to
his lords, high captains, and chief estates of Galilee; and when the
daughter of the said Herodias came in, and danced, and pleased Herod
and them that sat with him, the king said unto the damsel: "Ask of me
whatsoever thou wilt and I will give it thee."  And he sware unto her,
"Whatsoever thou shalt ask of me, I will give it thee, unto the half of
my kingdom."  And she went forth, and said unto her mother, "What shall
I ask?"  And she said, "The head of John the Baptist."  And she came in
straightway with haste unto the king, and asked, saying, "I will that
thou give me by and by in a charger the head of John the Baptist."  And
the king was exceeding sorry; yet for his oath's sake, and for their
sakes which sat with him, he would not reject her.  And immediately the
king sent an executioner, and commanded his head to be brought: and he
went and beheaded him in the prison, and brought his head in a charger,
and gave it to the damsel: and the damsel gave it to her mother.  And
when his disciples heard of it, they came and took up his corpse, and
laid it in a tomb.

And the apostles gathered themselves together unto Jesus, and told him
all things, both what they had done, and what they had taught.  And he
said unto them:

"Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place, and rest awhile."

For there were many coming and going, and they had no leisure so much
as to eat.  And they departed into a desert place by ship privately.
And the people saw them departing, and many knew him, and ran afoot
thither out of all cities, and outwent them, and came together unto
him.  And Jesus, when he came out, saw much people, and was moved with
compassion toward them, because they were as sheep not having a
shepherd: and he began to teach them many things.  And when the day was
now far spent, his disciples came unto him, and said:

"This is a desert place, and now the time is far passed: send them
away, that they may go into the country round about, and into the
villages, and buy themselves bread: for they have nothing to eat."

He answered and said unto them:

"Give ye them to eat."

And they say unto him:

"Shall we go and buy two hundred pennyworth of bread, and give them to
eat?"

He saith unto them:

"How many loaves have ye?  Go and see."  And when they know, they say,
"Five, and two fishes."

And he commanded them to make all sit down by companies upon the green
grass.  And they sat down in ranks, by hundreds, and by fifties.  And
when he had taken the five loaves and the two fishes, he looked up to
heaven, and blessed, and brake the loaves, and gave them to his
disciples to set before them; and the two fishes divided he among them
all.  And they did all eat, and were filled.  And they took up twelve
baskets full of the fragments, and of the fishes.  And they that did
eat of the loaves were about five thousand men.

And straightway he constrained his disciples to get into the ship, and
to go to the other side before unto Bethsaida, while he sent away the
people.  And when he had sent them away, he departed into a mountain to
pray.  And when even was come, the ship was in the midst of the sea,
and he alone on the land.  And he saw them toiling in rowing; for the
wind was contrary unto them: and about the fourth watch of the night he
cometh unto them, walking upon the sea, and would have passed by them.
But when they saw him walking upon the sea, they supposed it had been a
spirit, and cried out: for they all saw him, and were troubled.  And
immediately he talked with them, and saith unto them:

"Be of good cheer: it is I; be not afraid."

And he went up unto them into the ship; and the wind ceased: and they
were sore amazed in themselves beyond measure, and wondered.  For they
considered not the miracle of the loaves: for their heart was hardened.

And when they had passed over, they came into the land of Gennesaret,
and drew to the shore.  And when they were come out of the ship,
straightway they knew him, and ran through that whole region round
about, and began to carry about in beds those that were sick, where
they heard he was.  And whithersoever he entered, into villages, or
cities, or country, they laid the sick in the streets, and besought him
that they might touch if it were but the border of his garment: and as
many as touched him were made whole.




CHAPTER VII

NEVER A MAN LIKE HIM

Then came together unto him the Pharisees, and certain of the scribes,
which came from Jerusalem.  And when they saw some of his disciples eat
bread with defiled, that is to say, with unwashen, hands, they found
fault.  (For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash their
hands oft, eat not, holding the tradition of the elders.  And when they
come from the market, except they wash, they eat not, and many other
things there be, which they have received to hold, as the washing of
cups, and pots, brasen vessels, and of tables.)  Then the Pharisees and
scribes asked him:

"Why walk not thy disciples according to the tradition of the elders,
but eat bread with unwashen hands?"

He answered and said unto them:

"Well hath Esaias prophesied of you hypocrites, as it is written, 'This
people honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.
Howbeit in vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the
commandments of men.'  For laying aside the commandment of God, ye hold
the tradition of men, as the washing of pots and cups; and many other
such like things ye do."

And he said unto them:

"Full well ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep your own
tradition.  For Moses said: 'Honour thy father and thy mother'; and,
'Whoso curseth father or mother, let him die the death:' but ye say,
'If a man shall say to his father or mother, "It is Corban," (that is
to say, a gift,) by whatsoever thou mightest be profited by me; he
shall be free.'  And ye suffer him no more to do ought for his father
or his mother; making the word of God of none effect through your
tradition, which ye have delivered: and many such like things do ye."

And when he had called all the people unto him, he said unto them:

"Hearken unto me every one of you, and understand: there is nothing
from without a man, that entering into him can defile him: but the
things which come out of him, those are they that defile the man.  If
any man have ears to hear, let him hear."

And when he was entered into the house from the people, his disciples
asked him concerning the parable.  And he saith unto them:

"Are ye so without understanding also?  Do ye not perceive, that
whatsoever thing from without entereth into the man, it cannot defile
him; because it entereth not into his heart, but into the belly, and
goeth out into the draught, purging all meats?"  And he said, "That
which cometh out of the man, that defileth the man.  For from within,
out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries,
fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit,
lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness: all these
evil things come from within, and defile the man."

And from thence he arose, and went into the borders of Tyre and Sidon,
and entered into an house, and would have no man know it: but he could
not be hid.  For a certain woman, whose young daughter had an unclean
spirit, heard of him, and came and fell at his feet: the woman was a
Greek, a Syrophenician by nation; and she besought him that he would
cast forth the devil out of her daughter.  But Jesus said unto her:

"Let the children first be filled: for it is not meet to take the
children's bread, and to cast it unto the dogs."

And she answered and said unto him:

"Yes, Lord: yet the dogs under the table eat of the children's crumbs."

And he said unto her, "For this saying go thy way; the devil is gone
out of thy daughter."  And when she was come to her house, she found
the devil gone out, and her daughter laid upon the bed.

And again, departing from the coasts of Tyre and Sidon, he came unto
the sea of Galilee, through the midst of the coasts of Decapolis.  And
they bring unto him one that was deaf, and had an impediment in his
speech; and they beseech him to put his hand upon him.  And he took him
aside from the multitude, and put his fingers into his ears, and he
spit, and touched his tongue; and looking up to heaven, he sighed, and
saith unto him, "Ephphatha," that is, "Be opened."

And straightway his ears were opened, and the string of his tongue was
loosed, and he spake plain.  And he charged them that they should tell
no man: but the more he charged them, so much the more a great deal
they published it; and were beyond measure astonished, saying:

"He hath done all things well: he maketh both the deaf to hear, and the
dumb to speak."




CHAPTER VIII

"THOU ART THE CHRIST"

In those days the multitude being very great, and having nothing to
eat, Jesus called his disciples unto him, and saith unto them:

"I have compassion on the multitude, because they have now been with me
three days, and have nothing to eat: and if I send them away fasting to
their own houses, they will faint by the way: for divers of them came
from far."

And his disciples answered him: "From whence can a man satisfy these
men with bread here in the wilderness?"

And he asked them: "How many loaves have ye?"

And they said: "Seven."

And he commanded the people to sit down on the ground: and he took the
seven loaves, and gave thanks, and brake, and gave to his disciples to
set before them; and they did set them before the people.  And they had
a few small fishes: and he blessed, and commanded to set them also
before them.  So they did eat, and were filled: and they took up of the
broken meat that was left seven baskets.  And they that had eaten were
about four thousand: and he sent them away.

And straightway he entered into a ship with his disciples, and came
into the parts of Dalmanutha.  And the Pharisees came forth, and began
to question with him, seeking of him a sign from heaven, tempting him.
And he sighed deeply in his spirit, and saith:

"Why doth this generation seek after a sign?  Verily I say unto you.
There shall no sign be given unto this generation."

And he left them, and entering into the ship again departed to the
other side.

Now the disciples had forgotten to take bread, neither had they in the
ship with them more than one loaf.  And he charged them, saying:

"Take heed, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, and of the leaven of
Herod."

And they reasoned among themselves, saying, "It is because we have no
bread."  And when Jesus knew it, he saith unto them:

"Why reason ye, because ye have no bread?  Perceive ye not yet, neither
understand?  Have ye your heart yet hardened?  Having eyes, see ye not,
and having ears, hear ye not, and do ye not remember?  When I brake the
five loaves among five thousand, how many baskets full of fragments
took ye up?"

They say unto him, "Twelve."

"And when the seven among four thousand, how many baskets full of
fragments took ye up?"

And they said, "Seven."

And he said unto them, "How is it that ye do not understand?"

And he cometh to Bethsaida; and they bring a blind man unto him, and
besought him to touch him.  And he took the blind man by the hand, and
led him out of the town; and when he had spit on his eyes, and put his
hands upon him, he asked him if he saw ought.  And he looked up, and
said:

"I see men as trees, walking."

After that he put his hands again upon his eyes, and made him look up:
and he was restored, and saw every man clearly.  And he sent him away
to his house, saying: "Neither go into the town, nor tell it to any in
the town."

And Jesus went out, and his disciples, into the towns of Caesarea
Philippi: and by the way he asked his disciples, saying unto them:

"Whom do men say that I am?"

And they answered, "John the Baptist: but some say, Elias; and others,
One of the prophets."

And he saith unto them, "But whom say ye that I am?"

And Peter answereth and saith unto him, "Thou art the Christ."

And he charged them that they should tell no man of him.

And he began to teach them, that the Son of man must suffer many
things, and be rejected of the elders, and of the chief priests, and
scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again.  And he spake
that saying openly.  And Peter took him and began to rebuke him.  But
when he had turned about and looked on his disciples, he rebuked Peter,
saying:

"Get thee behind me, Satan: for thou savourest not the things that be
of God, but the things that be of men."

And when he had called the people unto him with his disciples also, he
said unto them:

"Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross, and follow me.  For whosoever will save his life shall lose it;
but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel's, the
same shall save it.  For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain
the whole world, and lose his own soul?  Or what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul?  Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and
of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall
the Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father
with the holy angels."

And he said unto them:

"Verily I say unto you.  That there be some of them that stand here,
which shall not taste of death, till they have seen the kingdom of God
come with power."




CHAPTER IX

STRONG SON OF GOD

And after six days, Jesus taketh with him Peter, and James, and John,
and leadeth them up into an high mountain apart by themselves: and he
was transfigured before them.  And his raiment became shining,
exceeding white as snow; so as no fuller on earth can white them.  And
there appeared unto them Elias with Moses: and they were talking with
Jesus.

And Peter answered and said to Jesus, "Master, it is good for us to be
here: and let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for
Moses, and one for Elias."  For he wist not what to say; for they were
sore afraid.  And there was a cloud that overshadowed them: and a voice
came out of the cloud, saying:

"This is my beloved Son: hear him."

And suddenly, when they had looked round about, they saw no man any
more, save Jesus only with themselves.

And as they came down from the mountain, he charged them that they
should tell no man what things they had seen, till the Son of man were
risen from the dead.  And they kept that saying with themselves,
questioning one with another what the rising from the dead should mean.

And they asked him, saying, "Why say the scribes that Elias must first
come?"

And he answered and told them, "Elias verily cometh first, and
restoreth all things; and how it is written of the Son of man, that he
must suffer many things, and be set at nought.  But I say unto you,
That Elias is indeed come, and they have done unto him whatsoever they
listed, as it is written of him."

And when he came to his disciples, he saw a great multitude about them,
and the scribes questioning with them.  And straightway all the people,
when they beheld him, were greatly amazed, and running to him saluted
him.

And he asked the scribes, "What question ye with them?"

And one of the multitude answered and said, "Master, I have brought
unto thee my son, which hath a dumb spirit; and wheresoever he taketh
him he teareth him: and he foameth, and gnasheth with his teeth, and
pineth away: and I spake to thy disciples that they should cast him
out; and they could not."

He answereth him, and saith, "O faithless generation, how long shall I
be with you?  How long shall I suffer you?  Bring him unto me."

And they brought him unto him: and when he saw him, straightway the
spirit tare him; and he fell on the ground, and wallowed foaming.  And
he asked his father, "How long is it ago since this came unto him?"

And he said, "Of a child.  And ofttimes it hath cast him into the fire,
and into the waters, to destroy him: but if thou canst do any thing,
have compassion on us, and help us."

Jesus said unto him, "If thou canst believe, all things are possible to
him that believeth."

And straightway the father of the child cried out, and said with tears,
"Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief."

When Jesus saw that the people came running together, he rebuked the
foul spirit, saying unto him:

"Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge thee, come out of him, and enter
no more into him."

And the spirit cried, and rent him sore, and came out of him: and he
was as one dead; insomuch that many said, "He is dead."  But Jesus took
him by the hand, and lifted him up; and he arose.  And when he was come
into the house, his disciples asked him privately:

"Why could not we cast him out?"

And he said unto them, "This kind can come forth by nothing, but by
prayer and fasting."

And they departed thence, and passed through Galilee; and he would not
that any man should know it.  For he taught his disciples, and said
unto them:

"The Son of man is delivered into the hands of men, and they shall kill
him; and after that he is killed, he shall rise the third day."

But they understood not that saying, and were afraid to ask him.

And he came to Capernaum: and being in the house he asked them, "What
was it that ye disputed among yourselves by the way?"

But they held their peace: for by the way they had disputed among
themselves, who should be the greatest.  And he sat down, and called
the twelve, and saith unto them:

"If any man desire to be first, the same shall be last of all, and
servant of all."

And he took a child, and set him in the midst of them; and when he had
taken him in his arms, he said unto them:

"Whosoever shall receive one of such children in my name, receiveth me:
and whosoever shall receive me, receiveth not me, but him that sent me."

And John answered him, saying, "Master, we saw one casting out devils
in thy name, and he followeth not us: and we forbade him, because he
followeth not us."

But Jesus said, "Forbid him not: for there is no man which shall do a
miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of me.  For he that is
not against us is on our part.  For whosoever shall give you a cup of
water to drink in my name, because ye belong to Christ, verily I say
unto you, he shall not lose his reward.  And whosoever shall offend one
of these little ones that believe in me, it is better for him that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the sea.
And if thy hand offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter
into life maimed, than having two hands to go into hell, into the fire
that never shall be quenched: where their worm dieth not, and the fire
is not quenched.  And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off: it is better
for thee to enter halt into life, than having two feet to be cast into
hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched: where their worm
dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.  And if thine eye offend thee,
pluck it out: it is better for thee to enter into the kingdom of God
with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast into hell fire: where
their worm dieth not, and the fire is not quenched.  For every one
shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice shall be salted with
salt.  Salt is good: but if the salt have lost his saltness, wherewith
will ye season it?  Have salt in yourselves, and have peace one with
another."




CHAPTER X

MASTER OF MEN BUT SERVANT OF ALL

And he arose from thence, and cometh into the coasts of Judaea by the
farther side of Jordan: and the people resort unto him again; and, as
he was wont, he taught them again.  And the Pharisees came to him, and
asked him, "Is it lawful for a man to put away his wife?" tempting him.

And he answered and said unto them:

"What did Moses command you?"

And they said, "Moses suffered to write a bill of divorcement, and to
put her away."

And Jesus answered and said unto them:

"For the hardness of your heart he wrote you this precept.  But from
the beginning of the creation God made them male and female.  For this
cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and cleave to his wife;
and they twain shall be one flesh: so then they are no more twain, but
one flesh.  What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put
asunder."

And in the house his disciples asked him again of the same matter.

And he saith unto them:

"Whosoever shall put away his wife, and marry another, committeth
adultery against her.  And if a woman shall put away her husband, and
be married to another, she committeth adultery."

And they brought young children to him, that he should touch them: and
his disciples rebuked those that brought them.  But when Jesus saw it,
he was much displeased, and said unto them:

"Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for
of such is the kingdom of God.  Verily I say unto you.  Whosoever shall
not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not enter
therein."

And he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them, and blessed
them.

And when he was gone forth into the way, there came one running, and
kneeled to him, and asked him, "Good Master, what shall I do that I may
inherit eternal life?"

And Jesus said unto him, "Why callest thou me good?  There is none good
but one, that is, God.  Thou knowest the commandments, 'Do not commit
adultery,' 'Do not kill,' 'Do not steal,' 'Do not bear false witness,'
'Defraud not,' 'Honour thy father and mother.'"

And he answered and said unto him, "Master, all these have I observed
from my youth."

Then Jesus beholding him loved him, and said unto him, "One thing thou
lackest: go thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the poor,
and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, take up the cross,
and follow me."

And he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved: for he had great
possessions.

And Jesus looked round about, and saith unto his disciples:

"How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God!"

And the disciples were astonished at his words.  But Jesus answereth
again, and saith unto them:

"Children, how hard is it for them that trust in riches to enter into
the kingdom of God!  It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of
a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God."

And they were astonished out of measure, saying among themselves, "Who
then can be saved?"

And Jesus looking upon them saith, "With men it is impossible, but not
with God: for with God all things are possible."

Then Peter began to say unto him, "Lo, we have left all, and have
followed thee." And Jesus answered and said:

"Verily I say unto you.  There is no man that hath left house, or
brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or
lands, for my sake, and the gospel's, but he shall receive an
hundredfold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and
mothers, and children, and lands, with persecutions; and in the world
to come eternal life.  But many that are first shall be last; and the
last first."

And they were in the way going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus went before
them: and they were amazed; and as they followed, they were afraid.
And he took again the twelve, and began to tell them what things should
happen unto him, saying:

"Behold, we go up to Jerusalem; and the Son of man shall be delivered
unto the chief priests, and unto the scribes; and they shall condemn
him to death, and shall deliver him to the Gentiles: and they shall
mock him, and shall scourge him, and shall spit upon him, and shall
kill him: and the third day he shall rise again."

And James and John, the sons of Zebedee, come unto him, saying,
"Master, we would that thou shouldest do for us whatsoever we shall
desire."

And he said unto them, "What would ye that I should do for you?"

They said unto him, "Grant unto us that we may sit, one on thy right
hand, and the other on thy left hand, in thy glory."

But Jesus said unto them, "Ye know not what ye ask; can ye drink of the
cup that I drink of, and be baptized with the baptism that I am
baptized with?"

And they said unto him, "We can."

And Jesus said unto them, "Ye shall indeed drink of the cup that I
drink of; and with the baptism that I am baptized withal shall ye be
baptized: but to sit on my right hand and on my left hand is not mine
to give; but it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared."

And when the ten heard it, they began to be much displeased with James
and John.  But Jesus called them to him, and saith unto them:

"Ye know that they which are accounted to rule over the Gentiles
exercise lordship over them; and their great ones exercise authority
upon them.  But so shall it not be among you: but whosoever will be
great among you, shall be your minister: and whosoever of you will be
the chiefest, shall be servant of all.  For even the Son of man came
not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a
ransom for many."

And they came to Jericho: and as he went out of Jericho with his
disciples and a great number of people, blind Bartimaeus, the son of
Timasus, sat by the highway side begging.  And when he heard that it
was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry out, and say, "Jesus, thou son
of David, have mercy on me."

And many charged him that he should hold his peace: but he cried the
more a great deal, "Thou son of David, have mercy on me."

And Jesus stood still, and commanded him to be called.  And they call
the blind man, saying unto him, "Be of good comfort, rise; he calleth
thee."  And he, casting away his garment, rose, and came to Jesus.

And Jesus answered and said unto him, "What wilt thou that I should do
unto thee?"

The blind man said unto him, "Lord, that I might receive my sight."

And Jesus said unto him, "Go thy way; thy faith hath made thee whole."
And immediately he received his sight, and followed Jesus in the way.




CHAPTER XI

HE THAT COMETH IN THE NAME OF THE LORD

And when they came nigh to Jerusalem, unto Bethphage and Bethany, at
the mount of Olives, he sendeth forth two of his disciples, and saith
unto them:

"Go your way into the village over against you: and as soon as ye be
entered into it, ye shall find a colt tied, whereon never man sat;
loose him, and bring him.  And if any man say unto you, 'Why do ye
this?' say ye, 'The Lord hath need of him;' and straightway he will
send him hither."

And they went their way, and found the colt tied by the door without in
a place where two ways met; and they loose him.  And certain of them
that stood there said unto them, "What do ye, loosing the colt?"  And
they said unto them even as Jesus had commanded: and they let them go.
And they brought the colt to Jesus, and cast their garments on him; and
he sat upon him.  And many spread their garments in the way: and others