STORIES OF ACHIEVEMENT, VOLUME IV

Authors and Journalists

Edited by

ASA DON DICKINSON

Authors and Journalists

 JEAN JACQUES ROUSSEAU
 ROBERT BURNS
 CHARLOTTE BRONTE
 CHARLES DICKENS
 HORACE GREELEY
 LOUISA M. ALCOTT
 HENRY GEORGE
 WILLIAM H. RIDEING
 JACOB A. RIIS
 HELEN KELLER







[Frontispiece: Robert Burns]





Garden City ---- New York
Doubleday, Page & Company
1925
Copyright, 1916, by
Doubleday, Page & Company
All Rights Reserved




ACKNOWLEDGMENT

In the preparation of this volume the publishers have received from
several houses and authors generous permissions to reprint copyright
material.  For this they wish to express their cordial gratitude.  In
particular, acknowledgments are due to the Houghton Mifflin Company for
permission to reprint the sketch of Horace Greeley; to Little, Brown &
Co. for permission to reprint passages from "The Life, Letters, and
Journals of Louisa May Alcott"; to Mr. Henry George, Jr., for the
extract from his life of his father; to William H. Rideing for
permission to reprint extracts from his book "Many Celebrities and a
Few Others"; to the Macmillan Company for permission to use passages
from "The Making of an American," by Jacob A. Riis; to Miss Helen
Keller for permission to reprint from "The Story of My Life."




CONTENTS


AUTHORS AND JOURNALISTS

JEAN JACQUES ROUSSEAU
  The Man to Whom Expression was Travail

ROBERT BURNS
  The Ploughman-poet

HORACE GREELEY
  How the Farm-boy Became an Editor

CHARLES DICKENS
  The Factory Boy

CHARLOTTE BRONTE
  The Country Parson's Daughter

LOUISA MAY ALCOTT
  The Journal of a Brave and Talented Girl

HENRY GEORGE
  The Troubles of a Job Printer

JACOB RIIS
  "The Making of an American"

WILLIAM H. RIDEING
  Rejected Manuscripts

HELEN ADAMS KELLER
  How She Learned to Speak




JEAN JACQUES ROUSSEAU

(1712-1778)

THE MAN TO WHOM EXPRESSION WAS TRAVAIL

From the "Confessions of Rousseau."

It is strange to hear that those critics who spoke of Rousseau's
"incomparable gift of expression," of his "easy, natural style," were
ludicrously incorrect in their allusions.  From his "Confessions" we
learn that he had no gift of clear, fluent expression; that he was by
nature so incoherent that he could not creditably carry on an ordinary
conversation; and that the ideas which stirred Europe, although
spontaneously conceived, were brought forth and set before the world
only after their progenitor had suffered the real pangs of labor.

But after all it is the same old story over again.  Great things are
rarely said or done easily.

Two things very opposite unite in me, and in a manner which I cannot
myself conceive.  My disposition is extremely ardent, my passions
lively and impetuous, yet my ideas are produced slowly, with great
embarrassment and after much afterthought.  It might be said my heart
and understanding do not belong to the same individual.  A sentiment
takes possession of my soul with the rapidity of lightning, but instead
of illuminating, it dazzles and confounds me; I feel all, but see
nothing; I am warm but stupid; to think I must be cool.  What is
astonishing, my conception is clear and penetrating, if not hurried: I
can make excellent impromptus at leisure, but on the instant could
never say or do anything worth notice.  I could hold a tolerable
conversation by the post, as they say the Spaniards play at chess, and
when I read that anecdote of a duke of Savoy, who turned himself round,
while on a journey, to cry out "_a votre gorge, marchand de Paris_!" I
said, "Here is a trait of my character!"

This slowness of thought, joined to vivacity of feeling, I am not only
sensible of in conversation, but even alone.  When I write, my ideas
are arranged with the utmost difficulty.  They glance on my imagination
and ferment till they discompose, heat, and bring on a palpitation;
during this state of agitation I see nothing properly, cannot write a
single word, and must wait till all is over.  Insensibly the agitation
subsides, the chaos acquires form, and each circumstance takes its
proper place.  Have you never seen an opera in Italy where during the
change of scene everything is in confusion, the decorations are
intermingled, and any one would suppose that all would be overthrown;
yet by little and little, everything is arranged, nothing appears
wanting, and we feel surprised to see the tumult succeeded by the most
delightful spectacle.  This is a resemblance of what passes in my brain
when I attempt to write; had I always waited till that confusion was
past, and then pointed, in their natural beauties, the objects that had
presented themselves, few authors would have surpassed me.

Thence arises the extreme difficulty I find in writing; my manuscripts,
blotted, scratched, and scarcely legible, attest the trouble they cost
me; nor is there one of them but I have been obliged to transcribe four
or five times before it went to press.  Never could I do anything when
placed at a table, pen in hand; it must be walking among the rocks, or
in the woods; it is at night in my bed, during my wakeful hours, that I
compose; it may be judged how slowly, particularly for a man who has
not the advantage of verbal memory, and never in his life could retain
by heart six verses.  Some of my periods I have turned and returned in
my head five or six nights before they were fit to be put to paper:
thus it is that I succeed better in works that require laborious
attention than those that appear more trivial, such as letters, in
which I could never succeed, and being obliged to write one is to me a
serious punishment; nor can I express my thoughts on the most trivial
subjects without it costing me hours of fatigue.  If I write
immediately what strikes me, my letter is a long, confused, unconnected
string of expressions, which, when read, can hardly be understood.

It is not only painful to me to give language to my ideas but even to
receive them.  I have studied mankind, and think myself a tolerable
observer, yet I know nothing from what I see, but all from what I
remember, nor have I understanding except in my recollections.  From
all that is said, from all that passes in my presence, I feel nothing,
conceive nothing, the exterior sign being all that strikes me;
afterward it returns to my remembrance; I recollect the place, the
time, the manner, the look, and gesture, not a circumstance escapes me;
it is then, from what has been done or said, that I imagine what has
been thought, and I have rarely found myself mistaken.

So little master of my understanding when alone, let any one judge what
I must be in conversation, where to speak with any degree of ease you
must think of a thousand things at the same time: the bare idea that I
should forget something material would be sufficient to intimidate me.
Nor can I comprehend how people can have the confidence to converse in
large companies, where each word must pass in review before so many,
and where it would be requisite to know their several characters and
histories to avoid saying what might give offence.  In this particular,
those who frequent the world would have a great advantage, as they know
better where to be silent, and can speak with greater confidence; yet
even they sometimes let fall absurdities; in what predicament then must
he be who drops as it were from the clouds?  It is almost impossible he
should speak ten minutes with impunity.

In a tête-à-tête there is a still worse inconvenience; that is, the
necessity of talking perpetually, at least, the necessity of answering
when spoken to, and keeping up the conversation when the other is
silent.  This insupportable constraint is alone sufficient to disgust
me with variety, for I cannot form an idea of a greater torment than
being obliged to speak continually without time for recollection.  I
know not whether it proceeds from my mortal hatred of all constraint;
but if I am obliged to speak, I infallibly talk nonsense.  What is
still worse, instead of learning how to be silent when I have
absolutely nothing to say, it is generally at such times that I have a
violent inclination; and, endeavoring to pay my debt of conversation as
speedily as possible, I hastily gabble a number of words without ideas,
happy when they only chance to mean nothing; thus endeavoring to
conquer or hide my incapacity, I rarely fail to show it.

I think I have said enough to show that, though not a fool, I have
frequently passed for one, even among people capable of judging; this
was the more vexatious, as my physiognomy and eyes promised otherwise,
and expectation being frustrated, my stupidity appeared the more
shocking.  This detail, which a particular occasion gave birth to, will
not be useless in the sequel, being a key to many of my actions which
might otherwise appear unaccountable; and have been attributed to a
savage humor I do not possess.  I love society as much as any man, was
I not certain to exhibit myself in it, not only disadvantageously, but
totally different from what I really am.  The plan I have adopted of
writing and retirement is what exactly suits me.  Had I been present,
my worth would never have been known, no one would ever have suspected
it; thus it was with Madam Dupin, a woman of sense, in whose house I
lived for several years; indeed, she has often since owned it to me:
though on the whole this rule may be subject to some exceptions. . . .

The heat of the summer was this year (1749) excessive.  Vincennes is
two leagues from Paris.  The state of my finances not permitting me to
pay for hackney coaches, at two o'clock in the afternoon, I went on
foot, when alone, and walked as fast as possible, that I might arrive
the sooner.  The trees by the side of the road, always lopped,
according to the custom of the country, afforded but little shade, and
exhausted by fatigue, I frequently threw myself on the ground, being
unable to proceed any farther.  I thought a book in my hand might make
me moderate my pace.  One day I took the _Mercure de France_, and as I
walked and read, I came to the following question proposed by the
academy of Dijon, for the premium of the ensuing year: Has the progress
of sciences and arts contributed to corrupt or purify morals?

The moment I had read this, I seemed to behold another world, and
became a different man.  Although I have a lively remembrance of the
impression it made upon me, the detail has escaped my mind, since I
communicated it to M. de Malesherbes in one of my four letters to him.
This is one of the singularities of my memory which merits to be
remarked.  It serves me in proportion to my dependence upon it; the
moment I have committed to paper that with which it was charged, it
forsakes me, and I have no sooner written a thing than I had forgotten
it entirely.  This singularity is the same with respect to music.
Before I learned the use of notes I knew a great number of songs; the
moment I had made a sufficient progress to sing an air of art set to
music, I could not recollect any one of them; and, at present, I much
doubt whether I should be able entirely to go through one of those of
which I was the most fond.  All I distinctly recollect upon this
occasion is, that on my arrival at Vincennes, I was in an agitation
which approached a delirium.  Diderot perceived it; I told him the
cause, and read to him the prosopopoeia of Fabricius, written with a
pencil under a tree.  He encouraged me to pursue my ideas, and to
become a competitor for the premium.  I did so, and from that moment I
was ruined.

All the rest of my misfortunes during my life were the inevitable
effect of this moment of error.

My sentiments became elevated with the most inconceivable rapidity to
the level of my ideas.  All my little passions were stifled by the
enthusiasm of truth, liberty, and virtue; and, what is most
astonishing, this effervescence continued in my mind upward of five
years, to as great a degree, perhaps, as it has ever done in that of
any other man.  I composed the discourse in a very singular manner, and
in that style which I have always followed in my other works, I
dedicated to it the hours of the night in which sleep deserted me; I
meditated in my bed with my eyes closed, and in my mind turned over and
over again my periods with incredible labor and care; the moment they
were finished to my satisfaction, I deposited in my memory, until I had
an opportunity of committing them to paper; but the time of rising and
putting on my clothes made me lose everything, and when I took up my
pen I recollected but little of what I had composed.  I made Madam le
Vasseur my secretary; I had lodged her with her daughter and husband
nearer to myself; and she, to save me the expense of a servant, came
every morning to make my fire, and to do such other little things as
were necessary.  As soon as she arrived I dictated to her while in bed
what I had composed in the night, and this method, which for a long
time I observed, preserved me many things I should otherwise have
forgotten.

As soon as the discourse was finished, I showed it to Diderot.  He was
satisfied with the production, and pointed out some corrections he
thought necessary to be made.  However, this composition, full of force
and fire, absolutely wants logic and order; of all the works I ever
wrote, this is the weakest in reasoning, and the most devoid of number
and harmony.  With whatever talent a man may be born, the art of
writing is not easily learned.

I sent off this piece without mentioning it to anybody, except, I
think, to Grimm.

The year following (1750), not thinking more of my discourse, I learned
it had gained the premium at Dijon.  This news awakened all the ideas
which had dictated it to me, gave them new animation, and completed the
fermentation of my heart of that first leaves of heroism and virtue
which my father, my country, and Plutarch had inspired in my infancy.
Nothing now appeared great in my eyes but to be free and virtuous,
superior to fortune and opinion, and independent of all exterior
circumstances; although a false shame, and the fear of disapprobation
at first prevented me from conducting myself according to these
principles, and from suddenly quarrelling with the maxims of the age in
which I lived, I from that moment took a decided resolution to do
it. . . .




ROBERT BURNS

(1759-1796)

THE PLOUGHMAN-POET

A note of pride in his humble origin rings throughout the following
pages.  The ploughman poet was wiser in thought than in deed, and his
life was not a happy one.  But, whatever his faults, he did his best
with the one golden talent that Fate bestowed upon him.  Each book that
he encountered was made to stand and deliver the message that it
carried for him.  Sweethearting and good-fellowship were his bane, yet
he won much good from his practice of the art of correspondence with
sweethearts and boon companions.  And although Socrates was perhaps
scarcely a name to him, he studied always to follow the Athenian's
favourite maxim, _Know thyself_; realizing, with his elder brother of
Warwickshire, that "the chiefest study of mankind is man."


From an autobiographical sketch sent to Dr. Moore.

[_To Dr. Moore_]

MAUCHLINE, August 2, 1787.

For some months past I have been rambling over the country, but I am
now confined with some lingering complaints, originating, as I take it,
in the stomach.  To divert my spirits a little in this miserable fog of
ennui, I have taken a whim to give you a history of myself.  My name
has made some little noise in this country; you have done me the honour
to interest yourself very warmly in my behalf; and I think a faithful
account of what character of a man I am, and how I came by that
character, may perhaps amuse you in an idle moment.  I will give you an
honest narrative, though I know it will be often at my own expense; for
I assure you, sir, I have, like Solomon, whose character, excepting in
the trifling affair of wisdom, I sometimes think I resemble--I have, I
say, like him turned my eyes to behold madness and folly, and like him,
too, frequently shaken hands with their intoxicating friendship.  After
you have perused these pages, should you think them trifling and
impertinent, I only beg leave to tell you that the poor author wrote
them under some twitching qualms of conscience, arising from a
suspicion that he was doing what he ought not to do; a predicament he
has more than once been in before.

I have not the most distant pretensions to assume that character which
the pye-coated guardians of escutcheons call a gentleman.  When at
Edinburgh last winter I got acquainted in the _Herald's_ office; and,
looking through that granary of honors, I there found almost every name
in the kingdom; but for me,

      My ancient but ignoble blood
  Has crept thro' scoundrels ever since the flood.

Gules, purpure, argent, etc., quite disowned me.

My father was of the north of Scotland, the son of a farmer, and was
thrown by early misfortunes on the world at large; where, after many
years' wanderings and sojournings, he picked up a pretty large quantity
of observation and experience, to which I am indebted for most of my
little pretensions to wisdom.  I have met with few who understood men,
their manners and their ways, equal to him; but stubborn, ungainly
integrity, and headlong, ungovernable irascibility, are disqualifying
circumstances; consequently, I was born a very poor man's son.  For the
first six or seven years of my life my father was gardener to a worthy
gentleman of small estate in the neighbourhood of Ayr.  Had he
continued in that station, I must have marched off to be one of the
little underlings about a farmhouse; but it was his dearest wish and
prayer to have it in his power to keep his children under his own eye
till they could discern between good and evil; so with the assistance
of his generous master, my father ventured on a small farm on his
estate.

At those years, I was by no means a favourite with anybody.  I was a
good deal noted for a retentive memory, a stubborn, sturdy something in
my disposition, and an enthusiastic, idiotic piety.  I say idiotic
piety because I was then but a child.  Though it cost the schoolmaster
some thrashings, I made an excellent English scholar; and by the time I
was ten or eleven years of age, I was a critic in substantives, verbs,
and particles.  In my infant and boyish days, too, I owe much to an old
woman who resided in the family, remarkable for her ignorance,
credulity, and superstition.  She had, I suppose, the largest
collection in the country of tales and songs concerning devils, ghosts,
fairies, brownies, witches, warlocks, spunkies, kelpies, elf-candles,
dead-lights, wraiths, apparitions, cantraips, giants, enchanted towers,
dragons, and other trumpery.  This cultivated the latent seeds of
poetry; but had so strong an effect on my imagination that to this hour
in my nocturnal rambles I sometimes keep a sharp lookout in suspicious
places; and though nobody can be more sceptical than I am in such
matters, yet it often takes an effort of philosophy to shake off these
idle terrors.

The earliest composition that I recollect taking pleasure in was "The
Vision of Mirza," and a hymn of Addison's beginning, "How are thy
servants blest, O Lord!"  I particularly remember one half-stanza which
was music to my boyish ear--

  For though on dreadful whirls we hung
  High on the broken wave--

I met with these pieces in Mason's English Collection, one of my
schoolbooks.  The first two books I ever read in private, and which
gave me more pleasure than any two books I ever read since, were "The
Life of Hannibal" and "The History of Sir William Wallace."  Hannibal
gave my young ideas such a turn that I used to strut in raptures up and
down after the recruiting drum and bagpipe and wish myself tall enough
to be a soldier; while the story of Wallace poured a Scottish prejudice
into my veins, which will boil along there till the floodgates of life
shut in eternal rest.

Polemical divinity about this time was putting the country half mad,
and I, ambitious of shining in conversation parties on Sundays, between
sermons, at funerals, etc., used a few years afterward to puzzle
Calvinism with so much heat and indiscretion that I raised a hue and
cry of heresy against me, which has not ceased to this hour.

My vicinity to Ayr was of some advantage to me.  My social disposition,
when not checked by some modifications of spirited pride, was like our
catechism definition of infinitude, without bounds or limits.  I formed
several connections with other younkers, who possessed superior
advantages; the youngling actors who were busy in the rehearsal of
parts, in which they were shortly to appear on the stage of life,
where, alas! I was destined to drudge behind the scenes.  It is not
commonly at this green age that our young gentry have a just sense of
the immense distance between them and their ragged playfellows.  It
takes a few dashes into the world to give the young, great man that
proper, decent, unnoticing disregard for the poor, insignificant,
stupid devils, the mechanics and peasantry around him, who were,
perhaps, born in the same village.  My young superiors never insulted
the clouterly appearance of my plough-boy carcase, the two extremes of
which were often exposed to all the inclemencies of all the seasons.
They would give me stray volumes of books; among them, even then, I
could pick up some observations, and one, whose heart, I am sure, not
even the "Munny Begum" scenes have tainted, helped me to a little
French.  Parting with these my young friends and benefactors, as they
occasionally went off for the East or West Indies, was often to me a
sore affliction; but I was soon called to more serious evils.  My
father's generous master died, the farm proved a ruinous bargain; and
to clench the misfortune, we fell into the hands of a factor, who sat
for the picture I have drawn of one in my tale of "Twa Dogs."  My
father was advanced in life when he married; I was the eldest of seven
children, and he, worn out by early hardships, was unfit for labour.
My father's spirit was soon irritated, but not easily broken.  There
was a freedom in his lease in two years more, and to weather these two
years, we retrenched our expenses.  We lived very poorly; I was a
dexterous ploughman for my age; and the next eldest to me was a brother
(Gilbert), who could drive the plough very well, and help me to thrash
the corn.  A novel-writer might, perhaps, have viewed these scenes with
some satisfaction, but so did not I; my indignation yet boils at the
recollection of the scoundrel factor's insolent, threatening letters,
which used to set us all in tears.

This kind of life--the cheerless gloom of a hermit, with the unceasing
moil of a galley slave, brought me to my sixteenth year; a little
before which period I first committed the sin of rhyme.  You know our
country custom of coupling a man and woman together as partners in the
labours of harvest.  In my fifteenth autumn my partner was a bewitching
creature, a year younger than myself.  My scarcity of English denies me
the power of doing her justice in that language, but you know the
Scottish idiom: she was a "bonnie, sweet, sonsie (engaging) lass."  In
short, she, altogether unwittingly to herself, initiated me in that
delicious passion, which, in spite of acid disappointment, gin-horse
prudence, and bookworm philosophy, I hold to be the first of human
joys, our dearest blessing here below!  How she caught the contagion I
cannot tell; you medical people talk much of infection from breathing
the same air, the touch, etc., but I never expressly said I loved her.
Indeed I did not know myself why I liked so much to loiter behind with
her when returning in the evening from our labours; why the tones of
her voice made my heartstrings thrill like an Aeolian harp; and
particularly why my pulse beat such a furious ratan, when I looked and
fingered over her little hand to pick out the cruel nettle-stings and
thistles.  Among her other love-inspiring qualities, she sung sweetly;
and it was her favourite reel to which I attempted giving an embodied
vehicle in rhyme.  I was not so presumptuous as to imagine that I could
make verses like printed ones, composed by men who had Greek and Latin;
but my girl sung a song which was said to be composed by a small
country laird's son, on one of his father's maids with whom he was in
love; and I saw no reason why I might not rhyme as well as he; for,
excepting that he could smear sheep, and cast peats, his father living
in the moorlands, he had no more scholar-craft than myself.

Thus with me began love and poetry, which at times have been my only,
and till within the last twelve months have been my highest, enjoyment.
My father struggled on till he reached the freedom in his lease, when
he entered on a larger farm, about ten miles farther in the country.
The nature of the bargain he made was such as to throw a little ready
money into his hands at the commencement of his lease, otherwise the
affair would have been impracticable.  For four years we lived
comfortably here, but a difference commencing between him and his
landlord as to terms, after three years' tossing and whirling in the
vortex of litigation, my father was just saved from the horrors of a
jail by a consumption which, after two years' promises, kindly stepped
in, and carried him away, to where the wicked cease from troubling, and
where the weary are at rest!

It is during the time that we lived on this farm that my little story
is most eventful.  I was, at the beginning of this period, perhaps the
most ungainly, awkward boy in the parish--no hermit was less acquainted
with the ways of the world.  What I knew of ancient story was gathered
from Salmon's and Guthrie's Geographical Grammars; and the ideas I had
formed of modern manners, of literature, and criticism, I got from the
_Spectator_.  These, with Pope's Works, some Plays of Shakespeare,
Tull, and Dickson on Agriculture, The "Pantheon," Locke's "Essay on the
Human Understanding," Stackhouse's "History of the Bible," Justice's
"British  Gardener's  Directory," Boyle's "Lectures," Allan Ramsay's
Works, Taylor's "Scripture Doctrine of Original Sin," "A Select
Collection of English Songs," and Hervey's "Meditations," had formed
the whole of my reading.  The collection of songs was my companion, day
and night.  I pored over them driving my cart, or walking to labour,
song by song, verse by verse; carefully noting the true, tender, or
sublime, from affectation and fustian.  I am convinced I owe to this
practice much of my critic-craft, such as it is.

In my seventeenth year, to give my manners a brush, I went to a country
dancing-school.  My father had an unaccountable antipathy against these
meetings, and my going was, what to this moment I repent, in opposition
to his wishes.  My father, as I said before, was subject to strong
passions; from that instance of disobedience in me he took a sort of
dislike to me, which, I believe, was one cause of the dissipation which
marked my succeeding years.  I say dissipation, comparatively with the
strictness, and sobriety, and regularity of Presbyterian country life;
for though the will-o'-wisp meteors of thoughtless whim were almost the
sole lights of my path, yet early ingrained piety and virtue kept me
for several years afterward within the line of innocence.  The great
misfortune of my life was to want an aim.  I had felt early some
stirrings of ambition, but they were the blind gropings of Homer's
Cyclops round the walls of his cave.  I saw my father's situation
entailed on me perpetual labour.  The only two openings by which I
could enter the temple of fortune were the gate of niggardly economy or
the path of little chicaning bargain-making.  The first is so
contracted an aperture I never could squeeze myself into it; the last I
always hated--there was contamination in the very entrance!  Thus
abandoned of aim or view in life, with a strong appetite for
sociability, as well from native hilarity as from a pride of
observation and remark; a constitutional melancholy or hypochondriasm
that made me fly solitude; add to these incentives to social life my
reputation for bookish knowledge, a certain wild, logical talent, and a
strength of thought, something like the rudiments of good sense; and it
will not seem surprising that I was generally a welcome guest where I
visited, or any great wonder that always, where two or three met
together, there was I among them.  But far beyond all other impulses of
my heart was a leaning toward the adorable half of humankind.  My heart
was completely tinder, and was eternally lighted up by some goddess or
other; and, as in every other warfare in this world, my fortune was
various; sometimes I was received with favour, and sometimes I was
mortified with a repulse.  At the plough, scythe, or reap-hook I feared
no competitor, and thus I set absolute want at defiance; and as I never
cared further for my labours than while I was in actual exercise, I
spent the evenings in the way after my own heart.

Another circumstance in my life which made some alteration in my mind
and manners was that I spent my nineteenth summer on a smuggling coast,
a good distance from home, at a noted school, to learn mensuration,
surveying, dialling, etc., in which I made a pretty good progress.  But
I made a greater progress in the knowledge of mankind.  The contraband
trade was at that time very successful, and it sometimes happened to me
to fall with those who carried it on.  Scenes of swaggering riot and
roaring dissipation were, till this time, new to me; but I was no enemy
to social life.

My reading meantime was enlarged with the very important addition of
Thomson's and Shenstone's Works.  I had seen human nature in a new
phase; and I engaged several of my schoolfellows to keep up a literary
correspondence with me.  This improved me in composition.  I had met
with a collection of letters by the wits of Queen Anne's reign, and
pored over them most devoutly.  I kept copies of any of my own letters
that pleased me, and a comparison between them and the composition of
most of my correspondents flattered my vanity.  I carried this whim so
far that, though I had not three farthings' worth of business in the
world, yet almost every post brought me as many letters as if I had
been a broad plodding son of the day-book and ledger.

My life flowed on much in the same course till my twenty-third year.
The addition of two more authors to my library gave me great pleasure:
Sterne and Mackenzie--"Tristram Shandy" and the "Man of Feeling"--were
my bosom favourites.  Poesy was still a darling walk for my mind, but
it was only indulged in according to the humour of the hour.  I had
usually half a dozen or more pieces on hand; I took up one or other, as
it suited the momentary tone of the mind, and dismissed the work as it
bordered on fatigue.  My passions, when once lighted up, raged like so
many devils, till they got vent in rhyme; and then the conning over my
verses, like a spell, soothed all into quiet!  None of the rhymes of
those days are in print, except "Winter, a Dirge," the eldest of my
printed pieces; "The Death of Poor Maillie," "John Barleycorn," and
Songs First, Second, and Third.  Song Second was the ebullition of that
passion which ended the forementioned school business.

My twenty-third year was to me an important era.  Partly through whim,
and partly that I wished to set about doing something in life, I joined
a flax-dresser in a neighbouring town (Irvine), to learn the trade.
This was an unlucky affair.  As we were giving a welcome carousal to
the new year, the shop took fire and burned to ashes, and I was left,
like a true poet, not worth a sixpence.

I was obliged to give up this scheme, the clouds of misfortune were
gathering thick round my father's head; and, what was worst of all, he
was visibly far gone in a consumption; and to crown my distresses, a
beautiful girl, whom I adored, and who had pledged her soul to meet me
in the field of matrimony, jilted me, with peculiar circumstances of
mortification.  The finishing evil that brought up the rear of this
infernal file was my constitutional melancholy being increased to such
a degree that for three months I was in a state of mind scarcely to be
envied by the hopeless wretches who have got their mittimus--depart
from me, ye cursed!

From this adventure I learned something of a town life; but the
principal thing which gave my mind a turn was a friendship I formed
with a young fellow, a very noble character, but a hapless son of
misfortune.  He was the son of a simple mechanic; but a great man in
the neighbourhood taking him under his patronage, gave him a genteel
education, with a view of bettering his situation in life.  The patron
dying just as he was ready to launch out into the world, the poor
fellow in despair went to sea; where, after a variety of good and ill
fortune, a little before I was acquainted with him he had been set on
shore by an American privateer, on the wild coast of Connaught,
stripped of everything.  I cannot quit this poor fellow's story without
adding that he is at this time master of a large West Indiaman
belonging to the Thames.

His mind was fraught with independence, magnanimity, and every manly
virtue.  I loved and admired him to a degree of enthusiasm, and of
course strove to imitate him.  In some measure I succeeded; I had pride
before, but he taught it to flow in proper channels.  His knowledge of
the world was vastly superior to mine, and I was all attention to
learn. . . .  My reading only increased while in this town by two stray
volumes of "Pamela," and one of "Ferdinand Count Fathom," which gave me
some idea of novels.  Rhyme, except some religious pieces that are in
print, I had given up; but meeting with Fergusson's Scottish Poems, I
strung anew my wildly sounding lyre with emulating vigour.  When my
father died his all went among the hell-hounds that growl in the kennel
of justice; but we made a shift to collect a little money in the family
amongst us, with which to keep us together; my brother and I took a
neighbouring farm.  My brother wanted my hare-brained imagination, as
well as my social and amorous madness; but in good sense, and every
sober qualification, he was far my superior.

I entered on this farm with a full resolution, "come, go to, I will be
wise!"  I read farming books, I calculated crops; I attended markets;
and, in short, in spite of the devil, and the world, and the flesh, I
believe I should have been a wise man; but the first year, from
unfortunately buying bad seed, the second from a late harvest, we lost
half our crops.  This overset all my wisdom, and I returned, "like the
dog to his vomit, and the sow that was washed, to her wallowing in the
mire."

I now began to be known in the neighbourhood as a maker of rhymes.  The
first of my poetic offspring that saw the light was a burlesque
lamentation on a quarrel between two reverend Calvinists, both of them
figuring in my "Holy Fair."  I had a notion myself that the piece had
some merit; but, to prevent the worst, I gave a copy of it to a friend,
who was very fond of such things, and told him that I could not guess
who was the author of it, but that I thought it pretty clever.  With a
certain description of the clergy, as well as laity, it met with a roar
of applause.  "Holy Willie's Prayer" next made its appearance, and
alarmed the kirk-session so much, that they held several meetings to
look over their spiritual artillery, if haply any of it might be
pointed against profane rhymers.  Unluckily for me, my wanderings led
me on another side, within point-blank shot of their heaviest metal.
This is the unfortunate story that gave rise to my printed poem, "The
Lament."  This was a most melancholy affair, which I cannot yet bear to
reflect on, and had very nearly given me one or two of the principal
qualifications for a place among those who have lost the chart, and
mistaken the reckoning of rationality.  I gave up my part of the farm
to my brother; in truth, it was only nominally mine; and made what
little preparation was in my power for Jamaica.

But before leaving my native country forever, I resolved to publish my
poems.  I weighed my productions as impartially as was in my power; I
thought they had merit; and it was a delicious idea that I should be
called a clever fellow, even though it should never reach my ears--a
poor Negro driver--or perhaps a victim to that inhospitable clime, and
gone to the world of spirits!  I can truly say that, poor and unknown
as I then was, I had pretty nearly as high an idea of myself and of my
works as I have at this moment, when the public has decided in their
favour.  It ever was my opinion that the mistakes and blunders, both in
a rational and religious point of view, of which we see thousands daily
guilty, are owing to their ignorance of themselves.  To know myself had
been all along my constant study.  I weighed myself alone; I balanced
myself with others.  I watched every means of information, to see how
much ground I occupied as a man and as a poet; I studied assiduously
Nature's design in my formation--where the lights and shades in my
character were intended.  I was pretty confident my poems would meet
with some applause; but at the worst, the roar of the Atlantic would
deafen the voice of censure, and the novelty of West Indian scenes make
me forget neglect.  I threw off six hundred copies, of which I had got
subscriptions for about three hundred and fifty.  My vanity was highly
gratified by the reception I met with from the public; and besides I
pocketed, all expenses deducted, nearly twenty pounds.  This sum came
very seasonably, as I was thinking of indenting myself for want of
money to procure my passage.  As soon as I was master of nine guineas,
the price of wafting me to the torrid zone, I took a steerage passage
in the first ship that was to sail from the Clyde, for

  Hungry ruin had me in the wind.


I had been for some days skulking from covert to covert, under all the
terrors of a jail; as some ill-advised people had uncoupled the
merciless pack of the law at my heels.  I had taken the last farewell
of my few friends; my chest was on the road to Greenock; I had composed
the last song I should ever measure in Caledonia--"The Gloomy Night Is
Gathering Fast," when a letter from Dr. Blacklock to a friend of mine
overthrew all my schemes by opening new prospects to my poetic
ambition.  The doctor belonged to a set of critics for whose applause I
had not dared to hope.  His opinion, that I would meet with
encouragement in Edinburgh for a second edition, fired me so much, that
away I posted for that city, without a single acquaintance, or a single
letter of introduction.  The baneful star that had so long shed its
blasting influence in my zenith for once made a revolution to the
nadir; and a kind Providence placed me under the patronage of one of
the noblest of men, the Earl of Glencairn.  _Oublie moi, grand Dieu, si
jamais je l'oublie_  [Forget me, Great God, if I ever forget him!].

I need relate no further.  At Edinburgh I was in a new world; I mingled
among many classes of men, but all of them new to me, and I was all
attention to "catch" the characters and "the manners living as they
rise."  Whether I have profited, time will show.


POETS ARE BORN--THEN MADE

[_To Dr. Moore_]

ELLISLAND, 4th January, 1789.

. . . The character and employment of a poet were formerly my pleasure,
but are now my pride.  I know that a very great deal of my late _éclat_
was owing to the singularity of my situation and the honest prejudice
of Scotsmen; but still, as I said in the preface to my first edition, I
do look upon myself as having some pretensions from nature to the
poetic character.  I have not a doubt but the knack, the aptitude, to
learn the muses' trade, is a gift bestowed by Him "who forms the secret
bias of the soul"; but I as firmly believe that _excellence_ in the
profession is the fruit of industry, labour, attention, and pains.  At
least I am resolved to try my doctrine by the test of experience.
Another appearance from the press I put off to a very distant day, a
day that may never arrive--but poesy I am determined to prosecute with
all my vigour.  Nature has given very few, if any, of the profession,
the talents of shining in every species of composition.  I shall try
(for until trial it is impossible to know) whether she has qualified me
to shine in any one.


THE KINDLY CRITIC IS THE POET'S BEST FRIEND

[_To Mr. Moore_]

The worst of it is, by the time one has finished a piece, it has been
so often viewed and reviewed before the mental eye that one loses, in a
good measure, the power of critical discrimination.  Here the best
criterion I know is a friend--not only of abilities to judge, but with
good nature enough like a prudent teacher with a young learner to
praise a little more than is exactly just, lest the thin-skinned animal
fall into that most deplorable of all diseases--heart-breaking
despondency of himself.  Dare I, sir, already immensely indebted to
your goodness, ask the additional obligation of your being that friend
to me? . . .




HORACE GREELEY

(1811-1872)

HOW THE FARM-BOY BECAME AN EDITOR

Horace Greeley, the farmer's son, lived most of his life in the
metropolis, yet he always looked like a farmer, and most people would
be willing to admit that he retained the farmer's traditional goodness
of heart, if not quite all of his traditional simplicity.  His judgment
was keen and shrewd, and for many years the cracker-box philosophers of
the village store impatiently awaited the sorting of the mail chiefly
that they might learn what "Old Horace" had to say about some new
picture in the kaleidoscope of politics.


From "Captains of Industry," by James Parton.  Houghton, Mifflin & Co.,
1884.

I have seldom been more interested than in hearing Horace Greeley tell
the story of his coming to New York, in 1831, and gradually working his
way into business there.

He was living at the age of twenty years with his parents in a small
log-cabin in a new clearing of Western Pennsylvania, about twenty miles
from Erie.  His father, a Yankee by birth, had recently moved to that
region and was trying to raise sheep there, as he had been accustomed
to do in Vermont.  The wolves were too numerous there.

It was part of the business of Horace and his brother to watch the
flock of sheep, and sometimes they camped out all night, sleeping with
their feet to the fire, Indian fashion.  He told me that occasionally a
pack of wolves would come so near that he could see their eyeballs
glare in the darkness and hear them pant.  Even as he lay in the loft
of his father's cabin he could hear them howling in the fields.  In
spite of all their care, the wolves killed in one season a hundred of
his father's sheep, and then he gave up the attempt.

The family were so poor that it was a matter of doubt sometimes whether
they could get food enough to live through the long winter, and so
Horace, who had learned the printer's trade in Vermont, started out on
foot in search of work in a village printing office.  He walked from
village to village, and from town to town, until at last he went to
Erie, the largest place in the vicinity.

There he was taken for a runaway apprentice, and certainly his
appearance justified suspicion.  Tall and gawky as he was in person,
with tow-coloured hair, and a scanty suit of shabbiest homespun, his
appearance excited astonishment or ridicule wherever he went.  He had
never worn a good suit of clothes in his life.  He had a singularly
fair, white complexion, a piping, whining voice, and these
peculiarities gave the effect of his being wanting in intellect.  It
was not until people conversed with him that they discovered his worth
and intelligence.  He had been an ardent reader from his childhood up,
and had taken of late years the most intense interest in politics and
held very positive opinions, which he defended in conversation with
great earnestness and ability.

A second application at Erie procured him employment for a few months
in the office of the Erie _Gazette_, and he won his way, not only to
the respect, but to the affection of his companions and his employer.
That employer was Judge J. M. Sterrett, and from him I heard many
curious particulars of Horace Greeley's residence in Erie.  As he was
only working in the office as a substitute, the return of the absentee
deprived him of his place, and he was obliged to seek work elsewhere.
His employer said to him one day:

"Now, Horace, you have a good deal of money coming to you; don't go
about the town any longer in that outlandish rig.  Let me give you an
order on the store.  Dress up a little, Horace."

The young man looked down on his clothes as though he had never seen
them before, and then said, by way of apology:

"You see, Mr. Sterrett, my father is on a new place, and I want to help
him all I can."

In fact, upon the settlement of his account at the end of his seven
months' labour, he had drawn for his personal expenses six dollars
only.  Of the rest of his wages he retained fifteen dollars for
himself, and gave all the rest, amounting to about a hundred and twenty
dollars, to his father, who, I am afraid, did not make the very best
use of all of it.

With the great sum of fifteen dollars in his pocket, Horace now
resolved upon a bold movement.  After spending a few days at home, he
tied up his spare clothes in a bundle, not very large, and took the
shortest road through the woods that led to the Erie Canal.  He was
going to New York, and he was going cheap!

A walk of sixty miles or so, much of it through the primeval forest,
brought him to Buffalo, where he took passage on the Erie Canal, and
after various detentions he reached Albany on a Thursday morning just
in time to see the regular steamboat of the day move out into the
stream.  At ten o'clock on the same morning he embarked on board of a
towboat, which required nearly twenty-four hours to descend the river,
and thus afforded him ample time to enjoy the beauty of its shores.

On the 18th of August, 1831, about sunrise, he set foot in the city of
New York, then containing about two hundred thousand inhabitants. . . .
He had managed his affairs with such strict economy that his journey of
six hundred miles had cost him little more than five dollars, and he
had ten left with which to begin life in the metropolis.  This sum of
money and the knowledge of the printer's trade made up his capital.
There was not a person in all New York, as far as he knew, who had ever
seen him before.

His appearance, too, was much against him, for although he had a really
fine face, a noble forehead, and the most benign expression I ever saw
upon a human countenance, yet his clothes and bearing quite spoiled
him.  His round jacket made him look like a tall boy who had grown too
fast for his strength; he stooped a little and walked in a
loose-jointed manner.  He was very bashful, and totally destitute of
the power of pushing his way, or arguing with a man who said, "No" to
him.  He had brought no letters of recommendation, and had no kind of
evidence to show that he had even learned his trade.

The first business was, of course, to find an extremely cheap
boarding-house, as he had made up his mind only to try New York as an
experiment, and, if he did not succeed in finding work, to start
homeward while he still had a portion of his money.  After walking a
while he went into what looked to him like a low-priced tavern, at the
corner of Wall and Broad streets.

"How much do you charge for board?" he asked the barkeeper, who was
wiping his decanters, and putting his bar in trim for the business of
the day.

The barkeeper gave the stranger a look-over and said to him:

"I guess we're too high for you."

"Well, how much do you charge?"

"Six dollars."

"Yes, that's more than I can afford."

He walked on until he descried on the North River, near Washington
Market, a boarding-house so very mean and squalid that he was tempted
to go in and inquire the price of board there.  The price was two
dollars and a half a week.

"Ah!" said Horace, "that sounds more like it."

In ten minutes more he was taking his breakfast at the landlord's
table.  Mr. Greeley gratefully remembered this landlord, who was a
friendly Irishman by the name of McGorlick.  Breakfast done, the
newcomer sallied forth in quest of work, and began by expending nearly
half of his capital in improving his wardrobe.  It was a wise action.
He that goes courting should dress in his best, particularly if he
courts so capricious a jade as Fortune.

Then he began the weary round of the printing offices, seeking for work
and finding none, all day long.  He would enter an office and ask in
his whining note:

"Do you want a hand?"

"No," was the inevitable reply, upon receiving which he left without a
word.  Mr. Greeley chuckled as he told the reception given him at the
office of the _Journal of Commerce_, a newspaper he was destined to
contend with for many a year in the columns of the _Tribune_.

"Do you want a hand?" he said to David Hale, one of the owners of the
paper.

Mr. Hale looked at him from head to foot, and then said:

"My opinion is, young man, that you're a runaway apprentice, and you'd
better go home to your master."

The applicant tried to explain, but the busy proprietor merely replied:

"Be off about your business, and don't bother us."

The young man laughed good-humouredly and resumed his walk.  He went to
bed Saturday night thoroughly tired and a little discouraged.  On
Sunday he walked three miles to attend a church, and remembered to the
end of his days the delight he had, for the first time in his life, in
hearing a sermon that he entirely agreed with.  In the meantime he had
gained the good will of his landlord and the boarders, and to that
circumstance he owed his first chance in the city.  His landlord
mentioned his fruitless search for work to an acquaintance who happened
to call that Sunday afternoon.  That acquaintance, who was a shoemaker,
had accidently heard that printers were wanted at No. 85 Chatham Street.

At half-past five on Monday morning Horace Greeley stood before the
designated house, and discovered the sign, "West's Printing Office,"
over the second story, the ground floor being occupied as a bookstore.
Not a soul was stirring up stairs or down.  The doors were locked, and
Horace sat down on the steps to wait.  Thousands of workmen passed by;
but it was nearly seven before the first of Mr. West's printers
arrived, and he, too, finding the door locked, sat down by the side of
the stranger, and entered into conversation with him.

"I saw," said the printer to me many years after, "that he was an
honest, good young man, and being a Vermonter myself, I determined to
help him if I could."

Thus, a second time in New York already, _the native quality of the
man_ gained him, at the critical moment, the advantage that decided his
destiny.  His new friend did help him, and it was very much through his
urgent recommendation that the foreman of the printing office gave him
a chance.  The foreman did not in the least believe that the
green-looking young fellow before him could set in type one page of the
polyglot Testament for which help was needed.

"Fix up a case for him," said he, "and we'll see if he _can_ do
anything."

Horace worked all day with silent intensity, and when he showed to the
foreman at night a printer's proof of his day's work, it was found to
be the best day's work that had yet been done on that most difficult
job.  It was greater in quantity and much more correct.  The battle was
won.  He worked on the Testament for several months, making long hours
and earning only moderate wages, saving all his surplus money, and
sending the greater part of it to his father, who was still in debt for
his farm and not sure of being able to keep it.

Ten years passed.  Horace Greeley from journeyman printer made his way
slowly to partnership in a small printing office.  He founded the _New
Yorker_, a weekly paper, the best periodical of its class in the United
States.  It brought him great credit and no profit.

In 1840, when General Harrison was nominated for the Presidency against
Martin Van Buren, his feelings as a politician were deeply stirred, and
he started a little campaign paper called _The Log-Cabin_, which was
incomparably the most spirited thing of the kind ever published in the
United States.  It had a circulation of unprecedented extent, beginning
with forty-eight thousand, and rising week after week until it reached
ninety thousand.  The price, however, was so low that its great sale
proved rather an embarrassment than a benefit to the proprietors, and
when the campaign ended the firm of Horace Greeley & Co. was rather
more in debt than it was when the first number of _The Log-Cabin_ was
published.

The little paper had given the editor two things which go far toward
making a success in business: great reputation and some confidence in
himself.  The first penny paper had been started.  The New York
_Herald_ was making a great stir.  The _Sun_ was already a profitable
sheet.  And now the idea occurred to Horace Greeley to start a daily
paper which should have the merits of cheapness and abundant news,
without some of the qualities possessed by the others.  He wished to
found a cheap daily paper that should be good and salutary as well as
interesting.  The last number of _The Log-Cabin_ announced the
forthcoming _Tribune_, price one cent.

The editor was probably not solvent when he conceived the scheme, and
he borrowed a thousand dollars of his old friend, James Coggeshall,
with which to buy the indispensable material.  He began with six
hundred subscribers, printed five thousand of the first number, and
found it difficult to give them all away.  The _Tribune_ appeared on
the day set apart in New York for the funeral procession in
commemoration of President Harrison, who died a month after his
inauguration.

It was a chilly, dismal day in April, and all the town was absorbed in
the imposing pageant.  The receipts during the first week were
ninety-two dollars; the expenses five hundred and twenty-five.  But the
little paper soon caught public attention, and the circulation
increased for three weeks at the rate of about three hundred a day.  It
began its fourth week with six thousand; its seventh week with eleven
thousand.  The first number contained four columns of advertisements;
the twelfth, nine columns; the hundredth, thirteen columns.

In a word, the success of the paper was immediate and very great.  It
grew a little faster than the machinery for producing it could be
provided.  Its success was due chiefly to the fact that the original
idea of the editor was actually carried out.  He aimed to produce a
paper which should morally benefit the public.  It was not always
right, but it always meant to be.




CHARLES DICKENS

(1812-1870)

THE FACTORY BOY

This factory boy felt in his heart that he was qualified for a better
position in life, and great was his humiliation at the wretched
meanness of his surroundings.  But his demeanor must have been
admirable, for he succeeded not only in retaining the respect of his
associates, but also in winning their regard.  In his case, as in that
of so many others, it was darkest just before the dawn of a better day.

They are his own words which follow:


An autobiographical fragment from Forster's "Life."

In an evil hour for me, as I often bitterly thought . . . James Lamert,
who had lived with us in Bayham Street, seeing how I was employed from
day to day, and knowing what our domestic circumstances then were,
proposed that I should go into the blacking warehouse, to be as useful
as I could, at a salary, I think, of six shillings a week.  I am not
clear whether it was six or seven.  I am inclined to believe, from my
uncertainty on this head, that it was six at first, and seven
afterward.  At any rate, the offer was accepted very willingly by my
father and mother, and on a Monday morning I went down to the blacking
warehouse to begin my business life.

It is wonderful to me how I could have been so easily cast away at such
an age.  It is wonderful to me that, even after my descent into the
poor little drudge I had been since we came to London, no one had
compassion enough on me--a child of singular abilities, quick, eager,
delicate, and soon hurt, bodily or mentally--to suggest that something
might have been spared, as certainly it might have been, to place me at
any common school.  Our friends, I take it, were tired out.  No one
made any sign.  My father and mother were quite satisfied.  They could
hardly have been more so if I had been twenty years of age,
distinguished at a grammar school, and going to Cambridge.

Our relative had kindly arranged to teach me something in the
dinner-hour, from twelve to one, I think it was, every day.  But an
arrangement so incompatible with counting-house business soon died
away, from no fault of his or mine; and for the same reason, my small
work-table, and my grosses of pots, my papers, string, scissors,
paste-pot, and labels, by little and little, vanished out of the recess
in the counting-house, and kept company with the other small
work-tables, grosses of pots, papers, string, scissors, and paste-pots,
downstairs.  It was not long before Bob Fagin and I, and another boy
whose name was Paul Green, but who was currently believed to have been
christened Poll (a belief which I transferred, long afterward again, to
Mr. Sweedlepipe, in "Martin Chuzzlewit"), worked generally side by
side.  Bob Fagin was an orphan, and lived with his brother-in-law, a
waterman.  Poll Green's father had the additional distinction of being
a fireman, and was employed at Drury Lane Theatre, where another
relation of Poll's, I think his little sister, did imps in the
pantomimes.

No words can express the secret agony of my soul as I sunk into this
companionship; compared these every-day associates with those of my
happier childhood; and felt my early hopes of growing up to be a
learned and distinguished man crushed in my breast.  The deep
remembrance of the sense I had of being utterly neglected and hopeless;
of the shame I felt in my position; of the misery it was to my young
heart to believe that, day by day, what I had learned, and thought, and
delighted in, and raised my fancy and my emulation up by, was passing
away from me, never to be brought back any more, cannot be written.  My
whole nature was so penetrated with the grief and humiliation of such
considerations that even now, famous and caressed and happy, I often
forget in my dreams that I have a dear wife and children; even that I
am a man; and wander desolately back to that time of my life.

I know I do not exaggerate, unconsciously and unintentionally, the
scantiness of my resources and the difficulties of my life.  I know
that if a shilling or so were given me by any one, I spent it in a
dinner or a tea.  I know that I worked, from morning to night, with
common men and boys, a shabby child.  I know that I tried, but
ineffectually, not to anticipate my money, and to make it last the week
through; by putting it away in a drawer I had in the counting-house,
wrapped into six little parcels, each parcel containing the same
amount, and labelled with a different day.  I know that I have lounged
about the streets, insufficiently and unsatisfactorily fed.  I know
that, but for the mercy of God, I might easily have been, for any care
that was taken of me, a little robber or a little vagabond.


A LITTLE GENTLEMAN

But I held some station at the blacking warehouse, too.  Besides that
my relative at the counting-house did what a man so occupied, and
dealing with a thing so anomalous, could, to treat me as one upon a
different footing from the rest, I never said, to man or boy, how it
was that I came to be there, or gave the least indication of being
sorry that I was there.  That I suffered in secret, and that I suffered
exquisitely, no one ever knew but I.  How much I suffered, it is, as I
have said already, utterly beyond my power to tell.  No man's
imagination can overstep the reality.  But I kept my own counsel, and I
did my work.  I knew from the first that if I could not do my work as
well as any of the rest I could not hold myself above slight and
contempt.  I soon became at least as expeditious and as skilful with my
hands as either of the other boys.  Though perfectly familiar with
them, my conduct and manners were different enough from theirs to place
a space between us.  They and the men always spoke of me as "the young
gentleman."  A certain man (a soldier once) named Thomas, who was the
foreman, and another man Harry, who was the carman, and wore a red
jacket, used to call me "Charles" sometimes in speaking to me; but I
think it was mostly when we were very confidential, and when I had made
some efforts to entertain them over our work with the results of some
of the old readings, which were fast perishing out of my mind.  Poll
Green uprose once, and rebelled against the "young gentleman" usage;
but Bob Fagin settled him speedily.

My rescue from this kind of existence I considered quite hopeless, and
abandoned as such, altogether; though I am solemnly convinced that I
never, for one hour, was reconciled to it, or was otherwise than
miserably unhappy.  I felt keenly, however, the being so cut off from
my parents, my brothers, and sisters; and, when my day's work was done,
going home to such a miserable blank.  And _that_, I thought, might be
corrected.  One Sunday night I remonstrated with my father on this head
so pathetically and with so many tears that his kind nature gave way.
He began to think that it was not quite right.  I do believe he had
never thought so before, or thought about it.  It was the first
remonstrance I had ever made about my lot, and perhaps it opened up a
little more than I intended.  A back-attic was found for me at the
house of an insolvent court agent, who lived in Lant Street in the
Borough, where Bob Sawyer lodged many years afterward.  A bed and
bedding were sent over for me, and made up on the floor.  The little
window had a pleasant prospect of a timber-yard; and when I took
possession of my new abode, I thought it was a paradise.


A FRIEND IN NEED

Bob Fagin was very good to me on the occasion of a bad attack of my old
disorder, cramps.  I suffered such excruciating pain that time that
they made a temporary bed of straw in my old recess in the
counting-house, and I rolled about on the floor, and Bob filled empty
blacking-bottles with hot water, and applied relays of them to my side,
half the day.  I got better, and quite easy toward evening; but Bob
(who was much bigger and older than I) did not like the idea of my
going home alone, and took me under his protection.  I was too proud to
let him know about the prison; and after making several efforts to get
rid of him, to all of which Bob Fagin, in his goodness, was deaf, shook
hands with him on the steps of a house near Southwark Bridge on the
Surrey side, making believe that I lived there.  As a finishing piece
of reality in case of his looking back, I knocked at the door, I
recollect, and asked, when the woman opened it, if that was Mr. Robert
Fagin's house.

My usual way home was over Blackfriars Bridge, and down that turning in
the Blackfriars Road which has Rowland Hill's chapel on one side, and
the likeness of a golden dog licking a golden pot over a shop door on
the other.  There are a good many little low-browed old shops in that
street, of a wretched kind; and some are unchanged now.  I looked into
one a few weeks ago, where I used to buy bootlaces on Saturday nights,
and saw the corner where I once sat down on a stool to have a pair of
ready-made half-boots fitted on.  I have been seduced more than once,
in that street on a Saturday night, by a show-van at a corner; and have
gone in, with a very motley assemblage, to see the Fat Pig, the Wild
Indian, and the Little Lady.  There were two or three hat manufactories
there then (I think they are there still); and among the things which,
encountered anywhere, or under any circumstances, will instantly recall
that time, is the smell of hat-making.

I was such a little fellow, with my poor white hat, little jacket, and
corduroy trousers, that frequently, when I went into the bar of a
strange public-house for a glass of ale or porter to wash down the
saveloy and the loaf I had eaten in the street, they didn't like to
give it me.  I remember, one evening (I had been somewhere for my
father, and was going back to the Borough over Westminster Bridge),
that I went into a public-house in Parliament Street, which is still
there, though altered, at the corner of the short street leading into
Cannon Row, and said to the landlord behind the bar, "What is your very
best--the VERY _best_--ale a glass?"  For the occasion was a festive
one, for some reasons: I forget why.  It may have been my birthday, or
somebody else's.  "Twopence," says he.  "Then," says I, "just draw me a
glass of that, if you please, with a good head to it."  The landlord
looked at me, in return, over the bar, from head to foot, with a
strange smile on his face; and instead of drawing the beer, looked
round the screen and said something to his wife, who came out from
behind it, with her work in her hand, and joined him in surveying me.
Here we stand, all three, before me now, in my study in Devonshire
Terrace.  The landlord in his shirt-sleeves, leaning against the bar
window-frame; his wife looking over the little half-door; and I, in
some confusion, looking up at them from outside the partition.  They
asked me a good many questions, as what my name was, how old I was,
where I lived, how I was employed, etc., etc.  To all of which, that I
might commit nobody, I invented appropriate answers.  They served me
with the ale, though I suspect it was not the strongest on the
premises; and the landlord's wife, opening the little half-door and
bending down, gave me a kiss that was half-admiring and
half-compassionate, but all womanly and good, I am sure.


DELIVERANCE AT LAST

At last, one day, my father and the relative so often mentioned
quarrelled; quarrelled by letter, for I took the letter from my father
to him which caused the explosion, but quarrelled very fiercely.  It
was about me.  It may have had some backward reference, in part, for
anything I know, to my employment at the window.  All I am certain of
is that, soon after I had given him the letter, my cousin (he was a
sort of cousin by marriage) told me he was very much insulted about me;
and that it was impossible to keep me after that.  I cried very much,
partly because it was so sudden, and partly because in his anger he was
violent about my father, though gentle to me.  Thomas, the old soldier,
comforted me, and said he was sure it was for the best.  With a relief
so strange that it was like oppression, I went home.

My mother set herself to accommodate the quarrel, and did so next day.
She brought home a request for me to return next morning, and a high
character of me, which I am very sure I deserved.  My father said I
should go back no more, and should go to school.  I do not write
resentfully or angrily, for I know how all these things have worked
together to make me what I am, but I never afterward forgot, I never
shall forget, I never can forget, that my mother was warm for my being
sent back.

From that hour until this at which I write no word of that part of my
childhood, which I have now gladly brought to a close, has passed my
lips to any human being.  I have no idea how long it lasted; whether
for a year, or much more, or less.  From that hour until this, my
father and my mother have been stricken dumb upon it.  I have never
heard the least allusion to it, however far off and remote, from either
of them.  I have never, until I now impart it to this paper, in any
burst of confidence with any one, my own wife not excepted, raised the
curtain I then dropped, thank God.


Dickens sent the following sketch of his early career to Wilkie
Collins.  It will be noted that he omits all reference to his
experiences in the blacking factory.  The _naïve_ touches of
self-appreciation are delightful to the true lover of "The Inimitable."


TAVISTOCK HOUSE, June 6, 1856.

I have never seen anything about myself in print which has much
correctness in it--any biographical account of myself I mean.  I do not
supply such particulars when I am asked for them by editors and
compilers, simply because I am asked for them every day.  If you want
to prime Forgues, you may tell him, without fear of anything wrong,
that I was born at Portsmouth on the 7th of February, 1812; that my
father was in the Navy Pay Office; that I was taken by him to Chatham
when I was very young, and lived and was educated there till I was
twelve or thirteen, I suppose; that I was then put to a school near
London, where (as at other places) I distinguished myself like a brick;
that I was put in the office of a solicitor, a friend of my father's,
and didn't much like it; and after a couple of years (as well as I can
remember) applied myself with a celestial or diabolical energy to the
study of such things as would qualify me to be a first-rate
parliamentary reporter--at that time a calling pursued by many clever
men who were young at the Bar; that I made my debut in the gallery (at
about eighteen, I suppose), engaged on a voluminous publication no
longer in existence, called the _Mirror of Parliament_; that when the
_Morning Chronicle_ was purchased by Sir John Easthope and acquired a
large circulation, I was engaged there, and that I remained there until
I had begun to publish "Pickwick," when I found myself in a condition
to relinquish that part of my labours; that I left the reputation
behind me of being the best and most rapid reporter ever known, and
that I could do anything in that way under any sort of circumstances,
and often did.  (I daresay I am at this present writing the best
shorthand writer in the world.)

That I began, without any interest or introduction of any kind, to
write fugitive pieces for the old _Monthly Magazine_, when I was in the
gallery for the _Mirror of Parliament_; that my faculty for descriptive
writing was seized upon the moment I joined the _Morning Chronicle_,
and that I was liberally paid there and handsomely acknowledged, and
wrote the greater part of the short descriptive "Sketches by Boz" in
that paper; that I had been a writer when I was a mere baby, and always
an actor from the same age; that I married the daughter of a writer to
the signet in Edinburgh, who was the great friend and assistant of
Scott, and who first made Lockhart known to him.

And that here I am.

Finally, if you want any dates of publication of books, tell Wills and
he'll get them for you.

This is the first time I ever set down even these particulars, and,
glancing them over, I feel like a wild beast in a caravan describing
himself in the keeper's absence.

Ever faithfully.


The following letter, criticising the work of an inexperienced author,
is valuable in itself, and reveals clearly the essential kindliness of
the man.


OFFICE OF HOUSEHOLD WORDS,
  Monday, June 1, 1857.

MY DEAR STONE:

I know that what I am going to say will not be agreeable; but I rely on
the authoress's good sense; and say it knowing it to be the truth.

These "Notes" are destroyed by too much smartness.  It gives the
appearance of perpetual effort, stabs to the heart the nature that is
in them, and wearies by the manner and not by the matter.  It is the
commonest fault in the world (as I have constant occasion to observe
here) but it is a very great one.  Just as you couldn't bear to have an
épergne or a candlestick on your table, supported by a light figure
always on tip-toe and evidently in an impossible attitude for the
sustainment of its weight, so all readers would be more or less
oppressed and worried by this presentation of everything in one smart
point of view, when they know it must have other, and weightier, and
more solid properties.  Airiness and good spirits are always
delightful, and are inseparable from notes of a cheerful trip; but they
should sympathize with many things as well as see them in a lively way.
It is but a word or a touch that expresses this humanity, but without
that little embellishment of good nature there is no such thing as
humour.  In this little MS. everything is too much patronized and
condescended to, whereas the slightest touch of feeling for the rustic
who is of the earth earthy, or of sisterhood with the homely servant
who has made her face shine in her desire to please, would make a
difference that the writer can scarcely imagine without trying it.  The
only relief in the twenty-one slips is the little bit about the chimes.
It is a relief, simply because it is an indication of some kind of
sentiment.  You don't want any sentiment laboriously made out in such a
thing.  You don't want any maudlin show of it.  But you do want a
pervading suggestion that it is there.  It makes all the difference
between being playful and being cruel.  Again I must say, above all
things--especially to young people writing: For the love of God don't
condescend!  Don't assume the attitude of saying, "See how clever I am,
and what fun everybody else is!"  Take any shape but that.

I observe an excellent quality of observation throughout, and think the
boy at the shop, and all about him, particularly good.  I have no doubt
whatever that the rest of the journal will be much better if the writer
chooses to make it so.  If she considers for a moment within herself,
she will know that she derived pleasure from everything she saw,
because she saw it with innumerable lights and shades upon it, and
bound to humanity by innumerable fine links; she cannot possibly
communicate anything of that pleasure to another by showing it from one
little limited point only, and that point, observe, the one from which
it is impossible to detach the exponent as the patroness of a whole
universe of inferior souls.  This is what everybody would mean in
objecting to these notes (supposing them to be published), that they
are too smart and too flippant.

As I understand this matter to be altogether between us three, and as I
think your confidence and hers imposes a duty of friendship on me, I
discharge it to the best of my ability.  Perhaps I make more of it than
you may have meant or expected; if so, it is because I am interested
and wish to express it.  If there had been anything in my objection not
perfectly easy of removal, I might, after all, have hesitated to state
it; but that is not the case.  A very little indeed would make all this
gayety as sound and wholesome and good-natured in the reader's mind as
it is in the writer's.

Affectionately always.


"THE INFINITE CAPACITY FOR TAKING PAINS"

[_To his sixth son, Henry Fielding Dickens, born in 1849_]

BALTIMORE, U. S.,

TUESDAY, February 11, 1868.

MY DEAR HARRY:

I should have written to you before now but for constant and arduous
occupation. . . .  I am very glad to hear of the success of your
reading, and still more glad that you went at it in downright earnest.
I should never have made my success in life if I had been shy of taking
pains, or if I had not bestowed upon the least thing I have ever
undertaken exactly the same attention and care that I have bestowed
upon the greatest.  Do everything at your best.  It was but this last
year that I set to and learned every word of my readings; and from ten
years ago to last night, I have never read to an audience but I have
watched for an opportunity of striking out something better somewhere.
Look at such of my manuscripts as are in the library at Gad's, and
think of the patient hours devoted year after year to single
lines. . . .

Ever, my dear Harry,

Your affectionate Father.


"FAREWELL?  MY BLESSING SEASON THIS IN THEE"

[Dickens's last child, Edward Bulwer Lytton Dickens, was born in 1852.
At sixteen he went to Australia, with this parting word from his
father:]

MY DEAREST PLORN:

I write this note to-day because your going away is much upon my mind,
and because I want you to have a few parting words from me to think of
now and then at quiet times.  I need not tell you that I love you
dearly, and am very, very sorry in my heart to part with you.  But this
life is half made up of partings, and these pains must be borne.  It is
my comfort and my sincere conviction that you are going to try the life
for which you are best fitted.  I think its freedom and wildness more
suited to you than any experiment in a study or office would ever have
been; and without that training, you could have followed no other
suitable occupation.

What you have already wanted until now has been a set, steady, constant
purpose.  I therefore exhort you to persevere in a thorough
determination to do whatever you have to do as well as you can do it.
I was not so old as you are now when I first had to win my food, and do
this out of this determination, and I have never slackened in it since.

Never take a mean advantage of any one in any transaction, and never be
hard upon people who are in your power.  Try to do to others as you
would have them do to you, and do not be discouraged if they fail
sometimes.  It is much better for you that they should fail in obeying
the greatest rule laid down by our Saviour than that you should.  I put
a New Testament among your books for the very same reasons, and with
the very same hopes that made me write an easy account of it for you,
when you were a little child.  Because it is the best book that ever
was, or will be, known in the world; and because it teaches you the
best lessons by which any human creature, who tries to be truthful and
faithful to duty, can possibly be guided.  As your brothers have gone
away, one by one, I have written to each such words as I am now writing
to you, and have entreated them all to guide themselves by this Book,
putting aside the interpretations and inventions of man.  You will
remember that you have never at home been harassed about religious
observances or mere formalities.  I have always been anxious not to
weary my children with such things before they are old enough to form
opinions respecting them.  You will therefore understand the better
that I now most solemnly impress upon you the truth and beauty of the
Christian Religion, as it came from Christ Himself, and the
impossibility of your going far wrong if you humbly but heartily
respect it.  Only one thing more on this head.  The more we are in
earnest as to feeling it, the less we are disposed to hold forth about
it.  Never abandon the wholesome practice of saying your own private
prayers, night and morning.  I have never abandoned it myself, and I
know the comfort of it.  I hope you will always be able to say in after
life that you had a kind father.  You cannot show your affection for
him so well, or make him so happy, as by doing your duty.




CHARLOTTE BRONTË

(1816-1855)

THE COUNTRY PARSON'S DAUGHTER

Mrs. Gaskell's "Life of Charlotte Brontë" is one of the great
biographies of literature, but like other works on the same theme, it
is really a history of the Brontë family during the period of
Charlotte's life.  The individuals of this family were for many years
as closely associated with one another as they were closely hidden from
the outside world.  The personality of each was influenced by its
house-mates to an unusual degree.  They studied each other and they
studied every book that came within reach.  Themselves they knew well:
the world, through books only.  This probably accounts for the weird
and even morbid character of much of their work.  Their vivid
imaginations, unchecked by experience, in a commonplace world were
allowed free play, and as a result we find some of the most original
creations in the whole realm of literature.

The life of the Brontë sisterhood should convince the literary aspirant
that the creative imagination is sufficient unto itself and independent
of the stimulus of contact with the busy hum of men.  If it be
necessary, the literary genius by divination can portray life without
seeing it.  Bricks are produced without straw.


From "Life of Charlotte Brontë," by Mrs. E. C. Gaskell.

But the children did not want society.  To small infantine gayeties
they were unaccustomed.  They were all in all to each other.  I do not
suppose that there ever was a family more tenderly bound to each other.
Maria read the newspapers, and reported intelligence to her younger
sisters which it is wonderful they could take an interest in.  But I
suspect that they had no "children's books," and their eager minds
"browzed undisturbed among the wholesome pasturage of English
literature," as Charles Lamb expresses it.  The servants of the
household appear to have been much impressed with the little Brontës'
extraordinary cleverness.  In a letter which I had from him on this
subject, their father writes: "The servants often said they had never
seen such a clever little child" (as Charlotte), "and that they were
obliged to be on their guard as to what they said and did before her.
Yet she and the servants always lived on good terms with each
other. . . ."

I return to the father's letter.  He says:

"When mere children, as soon as they could read and write, Charlotte
and her brothers and sisters used to invent and act little plays of
their own in which the Duke of Wellington, my daughter Charlotte's
hero, was sure to come off conqueror; when a dispute would not
unfrequently arise amongst them regarding the comparative merits of
him, Bonaparte, Hannibal, and Caesar.  When the argument got warm, and
rose to its height, as their mother was then dead, I had sometimes to
come in as arbitrator, and settle the dispute according to the best of
my judgment.  Generally, in the management of these concerns, I
frequently thought that I discovered signs of rising talent, which I
had seldom or never before seen in any of their age. . . .  A
circumstance now occurs to my mind which I may as well mention.  When
my children were very young, when, as far as I can remember, the oldest
was about ten years of age, and the youngest about four, thinking they
knew more than I had yet discovered, in order to make them speak with
less timidity, I deemed that if they were put under a sort of cover I
might gain my end; and happening to have a mask in the house, I told
them all to stand and speak boldly from under cover of the mask.

"I began with the youngest (Anne, afterward Acton Bell), and asked what
a child like her most wanted; she answered, 'Age and experience.'  I
asked the next (Emily, afterward Ellis Bell) what I had best do with
her brother Branwell, who was sometimes a naughty boy; she answered,
'Reason with him, and when he won't listen to reason, whip him.'  I
asked Branwell what was the best way of knowing the difference between
the intellects of men and women; he answered, 'By considering the
difference between them as to their bodies.'  I then asked Charlotte
what was the best book in the world; she answered, 'The Bible.'  And
what was the next best; she answered, 'The Book of Nature.'  I then
asked the next what was the best mode of education for a woman; she
answered, 'That which would make her rule her house well.'  Lastly I
asked the oldest what was the best mode of spending time; she answered,
'By laying it out in preparation for a happy eternity.'

"I may not have given precisely their words, but I have nearly done so,
as they made a deep and lasting impression on my memory.  The
substance, however, was exactly what I have stated."

The strange and quaint simplicity of the mode taken by the father to
ascertain the hidden characters of his children, and the tone and
character of these questions and answers, show the curious education
which was made by the circumstances surrounding the Brontës.  They knew
no other children.  They knew no other modes of thought than what were
suggested to them by the fragments of clerical conversation which they
overheard in the parlour, or the subjects of village and local interest
which they heard discussed in the kitchen.  Each had their own strong
characteristic flavour.

They took a vivid interest in the public characters, and the local and
foreign politics discussed in the newspapers.  Long before Maria Brontë
died, at the age of eleven, her father used to say he would converse
with her on any of the leading topics of the day with as much freedom
and pleasure as with any grown-up person. . . .

Miss Branwell instructed the children at regular hours in all she could
teach, making her bed-chamber into their schoolroom.  Their father was
in the habit of relating to them any public news in which he felt an
interest; and from the opinions of his strong and independent mind they
would gather much food for thought; but I do not know whether he gave
them any direct instruction.  Charlotte's deep, thoughtful spirit
appears to have felt almost painfully the tender responsibility which
rested upon her with reference to her remaining sisters.  She was only
eighteen months older than Emily; but Emily and Anne were simply
companions and playmates, while Charlotte was motherly friend and
guardian to both; and this loving assumption of duties beyond her years
made her feel considerably older than she really was.

I have had a curious packet confided to me, containing an immense
amount of manuscript, in an inconceivably small space; tales, dramas,
poems, romances, written principally by Charlotte, in a hand which is
almost impossible to decipher without the aid of a magnifying
glass. . . .

As each volume contains from sixty to a hundred pages . . . the amount
of the whole seems very great, if we remember that it was all written
in about fifteen months.  So much for the quantity; the quality strikes
me as of singular merit for a girl of thirteen or fourteen.  Both as a
specimen of her prose style at this time, and also as revealing
something of the quiet domestic life led by these children, I take an
extract from the introduction to "Tales of the Islanders," the title of
one of their "Little Magazines":


"JUNE the 31st, 1829.

"The play of the 'Islanders' was formed in December, 1827, in the
following manner: One night, about the time when cold sleet and stormy
fogs of November are succeeded by the snowstorms and high, piercing
night-winds of confirmed winter, we were all sitting round the warm
blazing kitchen fire, having just concluded a quarrel with Tabby
concerning the propriety of lighting a candle, from which she came off
victorious, no candle having been produced.  A long pause succeeded,
which was at last broken by Branwell saying in a lazy manner, 'I don't
know what to do.'  This was echoed by Emily and Anne.

"Tabby.  'Wha ya may go t'bed.'

"Branwell.  'I'd rather do anything than that.'

"Charlotte.  'Why are you so glum to-night, Tabby?  Oh! suppose we had
each an island of our own.'

"Branwell.  'If we had I would choose the Island of Man.'

"Charlotte.  'And I would choose the Isle of Wight.'

"Emily.  'The Isle of Arran for me.'

"Anne.  'And mine should be Guernsey.'

"We then chose who would be chief men in our Islands.  Branwell chose
John Bull, Astley Cooper, and Leigh Hunt; Emily, Walter Scott, Mr.
Lockhart, Johnny Lockhart; Anne, Michael Sadler, Lord Bentinck, Sir
Henry Halford.  I chose the Duke of Wellington and two sons,
Christopher North and Co., and Mr. Abernethy.  Here our conversation
was interrupted by the, to us, dismal sound of the clock striking
seven, and we were summoned off to bed.  The next day we added many
others to our list of men, till we got almost all the chief men of the
kingdom.  After this, for a long time, nothing worth noticing occurred.
In June, 1828, we erected a school on a fictitious island, which was to
contain 1,000 children.  The manner of the building was as follows: The
island was fifty miles in circumference, and certainly appeared more
like the work of enchantment than anything real," etc. . . .


There is another scrap of paper in this all but illegible handwriting,
written about this time, and which gives some idea of the sources of
their opinions. . . .


"Papa and Branwell are gone for the newspaper, the Leeds
_Intelligencer_, a most excellent Tory newspaper, edited by Mr. Wood,
and the proprietor, Mr. Henneman.  We take two, and see three,
newspapers a week.  We take the Leeds _Intelligencer_, Tory, and the
Leeds _Mercury_, Whig, edited by Mr. Baines, and his brother,
son-in-law, and his two sons, Edward and Talbot.  We see the _John
Bull_; it is a high Tory, very violent.  Mr. Driver lends us it, as
likewise _Blackwood's Magazine_, the most able periodical there is.
The editor is Mr. Christopher North, an old man seventy-four years of
age; the 1st of April is his birthday; his company are Timothy Tickler,
Morgan O'Doherty, Macrabin Mordecai, Mullion, Warnell, and James Hogg,
a man of most extraordinary genius, a Scottish shepherd.  Our plays
were established, 'Young Men,' June, 1826; 'Our Fellows,' July, 1827;
'Islanders,' December, 1827.  These are our three great plays that are
not kept secret.  Emily's and my best plays were established the 1st of
December, 1827; the others March, 1828.  Best plays mean secret plays,
they are very nice ones.  All our plays are very strange ones.  Their
nature I need not write on paper, for I think I shall always remember
them.  The 'Young Men's' play took its rise from some wooden soldiers
Branwell had; 'Our Fellows' from 'Aesop's Fables'; and the 'Islanders'
from several events which happened.  I will sketch out the origin of
our plays more explicitly if I can.  First, 'Young Men.'  Papa brought
Branwell some wooden soldiers at Leeds; when papa came home it was
night, and we were in bed, so next morning Branwell came to our door
with a box of soldiers.  Emily and I jumped out of bed, and I snatched
up one and exclaimed, 'This is the Duke of Wellington!  This shall be
the Duke!'  When I had said this Emily likewise took one up and said it
should be hers; when Anne came down, she said one should be hers.  Mine
was the prettiest of the whole, and the tallest, and the most perfect
in every part.  Emily's was a grave-looking fellow, and we called him
'Gravey.'  Anne's was a queer little thing, much like herself, and we
called him 'Waiting-boy.'  Branwell chose his, and called him
'Buonaparte.'"


The foregoing extract shows something of the kind of reading in which
the little Brontës were interested; but their desire for knowledge must
have been excited in many directions, for I find a "list of painters
whose works I wish to see," drawn up by Charlotte Brontë when she was
scarcely thirteen: "Guido Reni, Julio Romano Titian, Raphael, Michael
Angelo, Coreggio, Annibal Carracci, Leonardo da Vinci, Fra Bartolomeo,
Carlo Cignani, Vandyke, Rubens, Bartolomeo Ramerghi."

Here is this little girl, in a remote Yorkshire parsonage, who has
probably never seen anything worthy the name of a painting in her life
studying the names and characteristics of the great old Italian and
Flemish masters, whose works she longs to see some time, in the dim
future that lies before her!  There is a paper remaining which contains
minute studies of, and criticisms upon, the engravings in "Friendship's
Offering for 1829," showing how she had early formed those habits of
close observation and patient analysis of cause and effect, which
served so well in after-life as handmaids to her genius.

The way in which Mr. Brontë made his children sympathize with him in
his great interest in politics must have done much to lift them above
the chances of their minds being limited or tainted by petty local
gossip.  I take the only other remaining personal fragment out of
"Tales of the Islanders"; it is a sort of apology, contained in the
introduction to the second volume, for their not having been continued
before; the writers have been for a long time too busy and lately too
much absorbed in politics:


"Parliament was opened, and the great Catholic question was brought
forward, and the Duke's measures were disclosed, and all was slander,
violence, party spirit, and confusion.  Oh, those six months, from the
time of the King's speech to the end!  Nobody could write, think, or
speak on any subject but the Catholic question, and the Duke of
Wellington, and Mr. Peel.  I remember the day when the _Intelligence
Extraordinary_ came with Mr. Peel's speech in it, containing the terms
on which the Catholics were to be let in!  With what eagerness papa
tore off the cover, and how we all gathered round him, and with what
breathless anxiety we listened, as one by one they were disclosed, and
explained, and argued upon so ably and so well; and then when it was
all out, how aunt said that she thought it was excellent, and that the
Catholics could do no harm with such good security.  I remember also
the doubts as to whether it would pass the House of Lords, and the
prophecies that it would not; and when the paper came which was to
decide the question, the anxiety was almost dreadful with which we
listened to the whole affair; the opening of the doors, the hush; the
royal dukes in their robes, and the great duke in green sash and
waistcoat; the rising of all the peeresses when he rose; the reading of
his speech--papa saying that his words were like precious gold; and
lastly, the majority of one to four (sic) in favour of the Bill.  But
this is a digression."


This must have been written when she was between thirteen and fourteen.

She was an indefatigable student; constantly reading and learning; with
a strong conviction of the necessity and value of education very
unusual in a girl of fifteen.  She never lost a moment of time, and
seemed almost to grudge the necessary leisure for relaxation and
play-hours, which might be partly accounted for by the awkwardness in
all games occasioned by her shortness of sight.  Yet, in spite of these
unsociable habits, she was a great favourite with her school-fellows.
She was always ready to try and do what they wished, though not sorry
when they called her awkward, and left her out of their sports.  Then,
at night, she was an invaluable story-teller, frightening them almost
out of their wits as they lay in bed.  On one occasion the effect was
such that she was led to scream out loud, and Miss Wooler, coming
upstairs, found that one of the listeners had been seized with violent
palpitations, in consequence of the excitement produced by Charlotte's
story.

Her indefatigable craving for knowledge tempted Miss Wooler on into
setting her longer and longer tasks of reading for examination; and
toward the end of the two years that she remained as a pupil at Roe
Head, she received her first bad mark for an imperfect lesson.  She had
had a great quantity of Blair's "Lectures on Belles-Lettres" to read;
and she could not answer some of the questions upon it; Charlotte
Brontë had a bad mark.  Miss Wooler was sorry, and regretted that she
had over-tasked so willing a pupil.  Charlotte cried bitterly.  But her
school-fellows were more than sorry--they were indignant.  They
declared that the infliction of ever so slight a punishment on
Charlotte Brontë was unjust--for who had tried to do her duty like
her?--and testified their feeling in a variety of ways, until Miss
Wooler, who was in reality only too willing to pass over her good
pupil's first fault, withdrew the bad mark. . . .

After her return home she employed herself in teaching her sisters over
whom she had had superior advantages.  She writes thus, July 21, 1832,
of her course of life at the parsonage:


"An account of one day is an account of all.  In the morning, from nine
o'clock till half-past twelve, I instruct my sisters, and draw; then we
walk till dinner-time.  After dinner I sew till tea-time, and after tea
I either write, read, or do a little fancywork, or draw, as I please.
Thus, in one delightful though somewhat monotonous course, my life is
passed.  I have been out only twice to tea since I came home.  We are
expecting company this afternoon, and on Tuesday next we shall have all
the female teachers of the Sunday-school to tea."


It was about this time that Mr. Brontë provided his children with a
teacher in drawing, who turned out to be a man of considerable talent
but very little principle.  Although they never attained to anything
like proficiency, they took great interest in acquiring this art;
evidently from an instinctive desire to express their powerful
imaginations in visible forms.  Charlotte told me that at this period
of her life drawing and walking out with her sisters formed the two
great pleasures and relaxations of her day. . . .

Quiet days, occupied in teaching and feminine occupations in the house,
did not present much to write about; and Charlotte was naturally driven
to criticise books.

Of these there were many in different plights, and according to their
plight, kept in different places.  The well bound were ranged in the
sanctuary of Mr. Brontë's study; but the purchase of books was a
necessary luxury to him, and as it was often a choice between binding
an old one, or buying a new one, the familiar volume, which had been
hungrily read by all the members of the family, was sometimes in such a
condition that the bedroom shelf was considered its fitting place.  Up
and down the house were to be found many standard works of a solid
kind.  Sir Walter Scott's writings, Wadsworth's and Southey's poems
were among the lighter literature; while, as having a character of
their own--earnest, wild, and occasionally fanatical, may be named some
of the books which came from the Branwell side of the family--from the
Cornish followers of the saintly John Wesley--and which are touched on
in the account of the works to which Caroline Helstone had access in
"Shirley":  "Some venerable Lady's Magazines, that had once performed a
voyage with their owner, and undergone a storm"--(possibly part of the
relics of Mrs. Brontë's possessions, contained in the ship wrecked on
the coast of Cornwall)--"and whose pages were stained with salt water;
some mad Methodist Magazines full of miracles and apparitions, and
preternatural warnings, ominous dreams, and frenzied fanaticism; and
the equally mad Letters of Mrs. Elizabeth Rowe from the Dead to the
Living."

Mr. Brontë encouraged a taste for reading in his girls; and though Miss
Branwell kept it in due bounds by the variety of household occupations,
in which she expected them not merely to take a part, but to become
proficients, thereby occupying regularly a good portion of every day,
they were allowed to get books from the circulating library at
Keighley; and many a happy walk up those long four miles must they have
had burdened with some new book into which they peeped as they hurried
home.  Not that the books were what would generally be called new; in
the beginning of 1833 the two friends [Charlotte and "E.," a school
friend] seem almost simultaneously to have fallen upon "Kenilworth,"
and Charlotte writes as follows about it:


"I am glad you like 'Kenilworth'; it is certainly more resembling a
romance than a novel; in my opinion, one of the most interesting works
that ever emanated from the great Sir Walter's pen.  Varney is
certainly the personification of consummate villainy; and in the
delineation of his dark and profoundly and artful mind, Scott exhibits
a wonderful knowledge of human nature, as well as surprising skill in
embodying his perceptions, so as to enable others to become
participators in that knowledge. . . ."


Meanwhile, "The Professor" had met with many refusals from different
publishers; some, I have reason to believe, not over-courteously worded
in writing to an unknown author, and none alleging any distinct reasons
for its rejection.  Courtesy is always due; but it is, perhaps, hardly
to be expected that, in the press of business in a great publishing
house, they should find time to explain why they decline particular
works.  Yet, though one course of action is not to be wondered at, the
opposite may fall upon a grieved and disappointed mind with all the
graciousness of dew; and I can well sympathize with the published
account which "Currer Bell" gives, of the feelings experienced on
reading Messrs. Smith and Elder's letter containing the rejection of
"The Professor."


"As a forlorn hope, we tried one publishing house more.  Ere long, in a
much shorter space than that on which experience had taught him to
calculate, there came a letter, which he opened in the dreary
anticipation of finding two hard, hopeless lines, intimating that
'Messrs. Smith and Elder were not disposed to publish the MS.,' and,
instead, he took out the envelope a letter of two pages.  He read it,
trembling.  It declined, indeed, to publish that tale, for business
reasons, but it discussed its merits and demerits so courteously, so
considerately, in a spirit so rational, with a discrimination so
enlightened, that this very refusal cheered the author better than a
vulgarly expressed acceptance would have done.  It was added, that a
work in three volumes would meet with careful attention."

Mr. Smith has told me a little circumstance connected with the
reception of this manuscript which seems to me indicative of no
ordinary character.  It came (accompanied by the note given below) in a
brown paper parcel, to 65 Cornhill.  Besides the address to Messrs.
Smith & Co., there were on it those of other publishers to whom the
tale had been sent, not obliterated, but simply scored through, so that
Messrs.  Smith at once perceived the names of some of the houses in the
trade to which the unlucky parcel had gone, without success.


[_To Messrs. Smith and Elder_]

"JULY 15th, 1847.

"Gentlemen--I beg to submit to your consideration the accompanying
manuscript.  I should be glad to learn whether it be such as you
approve, and would undertake to publish at as early a period as
possible.  Address, Mr. Currer Bell, under cover to Miss Brontë,
Haworth, Bradford, Yorkshire."


Some time elapsed before an answer was returned. . . .


[_To Messrs. Smith and Elder_]

"AUGUST 2nd, 1847.

"Gentlemen--About three weeks since I sent for your consideration a MS.
entitled 'The Professor, a Tale by Currer Bell.'  I should be glad to
know whether it reached your hands safely, and likewise to learn, at
your earliest convenience, whether it be such as you can undertake to
publish.  I am, gentlemen, yours respectfully,

"CURRER BELL.

"I enclose a directed cover for your reply."


This time her note met with a prompt answer; for, four days later, she
writes (in reply to the letter she afterward characterized in the
Preface to the second edition of "Wuthering Heights," as containing a
refusal so delicate, reasonable, and courteous as to be more cheering
than some acceptances):


"Your objection to the want of varied interest in the tale is, I am
aware, not without grounds; yet it appears to me that it might be
published without serious risk, if its appearance were speedily
followed up by another work from the same pen, of a more striking and
exciting character.  The first work might serve as an introduction, and
accustom the public to the author's name: the success of the second
might thereby be rendered more probable.  I have a second narrative in
three volumes, now in progress, and nearly completed, to which I have
endeavoured to impart a more vivid interest than belongs to 'The
Professor.'  In about a month I hope to finish it, so that if a
publisher were found for 'The Professor' the second narrative might
follow as soon as was deemed advisable; and thus the interest of the
public (if any interest was aroused) might not be suffered to cool.
Will you be kind enough to favour me with your judgment on this
plan?". . .

Mr. Brontë, too, had his suspicions of something going on; but, never
being spoken to, he did not speak on the subject, and consequently his
ideas were vague and uncertain, only just prophetic enough to keep him
from being actually stunned when, later on, he heard of the success of
"Jane Eyre"; to the progress of which we must now return.


[_To Messrs. Smith and Elder_]

"AUGUST 24th.

"I now send you per rail a MS. entitled 'Jane Eyre,' a novel in three
volumes, by Currer Bell.  I find I cannot prepay the carriage of the
parcel, as money for that purpose is not received at the small
station-house where it is left.  If, when you acknowledge the receipt
of the MS., you would have the goodness to mention the amount charged
on delivery, I will immediately transmit it in postage stamps.  It is
better in future to address Mr. Currer Bell, under cover to Miss
Brontë, Haworth, Bradford, Yorkshire, as there is a risk of letters
otherwise directed not reaching me at present.  To save trouble, I
enclose an envelope."


"Jane Eyre" was accepted, and printed and published by October
16th. . . .

When the manuscript of "Jane Eyre" had been received by the future
publishers of that remarkable novel, it fell to the share of a
gentleman connected with the firm to read it first.  He was so
powerfully struck by the character of the tale that he reported his
impression in very strong terms to Mr. Smith, who appears to have been
much amused by the admiration excited.  "You seem to have been so
enchanted that I do not know how to believe you," he laughingly said.
But when a second reader, in the person of a clear-headed Scotchman,
not given to enthusiasm, had taken the MS. home in the evening, and
became so deeply interested in it as to sit up half the night to finish
it, Mr. Smith's curiosity was sufficiently excited to prompt him to
read it for himself; and great as were the praises which had been
bestowed upon it, he found that they had not exceeded the truth.




LOUISA MAY ALCOTT

(1832-1888)

He is a hard-hearted churl who can read with unmoistened eyes this
journal of a brave and talented girl.

With what genuine, _personal_ pleasure one remembers that a full
measure of success and recognition was finally won by her efforts.


From "Louisa Mary Alcott: Her Life, Letters, and Journals."  Little,
Brown & Co., 1889.

1852.--_High Street, Boston_.--After the smallpox summer, we went to a
house in High Street.  Mother opened an intelligence office, which grew
out of her city missionary work and a desire to find places for good
girls.  It was not fit work for her, but it paid; and she always did
what came to her in the work of duty or charity, and let pride, taste,
and comfort suffer for love's sake.

Anna and I taught; Lizzie was our little housekeeper--our angel in a
cellar kitchen; May went to school; father wrote and talked when he
could get classes or conversations.  Our poor little home had much love
and happiness in it, and it was a shelter for lost girls, abused wives,
friendless children, and weak or wicked men.  Father and mother had no
money to give, but gave them time, sympathy, help; and if blessings
would make them rich, they would be millionaires.  This is practical
Christianity.

My first story was printed, and $5 paid for it.  It was written in
Concord when I was sixteen.  Great rubbish!  Read it aloud to sisters,
and when they praised it, not knowing the author, I proudly announced
her name.

Made a resolution to read fewer novels, and those only of the best.
List of books I like:

  Carlyle's French Revolution and Miscellanies.
  Hero and Hero-Worship.
  Goethe's poems, plays, and novels.
  Plutarch's Lives.
  Madame Guion.
  Paradise Lost and Comus.
  Schiller's Plays.
  Madame de Staël.
  Bettine.
  Louis XIV.
  Jane Eyre.
  Hypatia.
  Philothea.
  Uncle Tom's Cabin.
  Emerson's Poems. . . .

1853.--In January I started a little school--E. W., W. A., two L's, two
H's--about a dozen in our parlor.  In May, when my school closed, I
went to L. as second girl.  I needed the change, could do the wash, and
was glad to earn my $2 a week.  Home in October with $34 for my wages.
After two days' rest, began school again with ten children.  Anna went
to Syracuse to teach; father to the West to try his luck--so poor, so
hopeful, so serene.  God be with him!  Mother had several boarders, and
May got on well at school.  Betty was still the home bird, and had a
little romance with C.

Pleasant letters from father and Anna.  A hard year.  Summer
distasteful and lonely; winter tiresome with school and people I didn't
like; I miss Anna, my one bosom friend and comforter.

1854.--_Pinckney Street_.--I have neglected my journal for months, so
must write it up.  School for me month after month.  Mother busy with
boarders and sewing.  Father doing as well as a philosopher can in a
money-loving world.  Anna at S.

I earned a good deal by sewing in the evening when my day's work was
done.

In February father came home.  Paid his way, but no more.  A dramatic
scene when he arrived in the night.  We were waked by hearing the bell.
Mother flew down, crying "My husband!"  We rushed after, and five white
figures embraced the half-frozen wanderer who came in hungry, tired,
cold, and disappointed, but smiling bravely and as serene as ever.  We
fed and warmed and brooded over him, longing to ask if he had made any
money; but no one did till little May said, after he had told all the
pleasant things, "Well, did people pay you?"  Then, with a queer look,
he opened his pocketbook and showed one dollar, saying with a smile
that made our eyes fill, "Only that!  My overcoat was stolen, and I had
to buy a shawl.  Many promises were not kept, and travelling is costly;
but I have opened the way, and another year shall do better."

I shall never forget how beautifully mother answered him, though the
dear, hopeful soul had built much on his success; but with a beaming
face she kissed him, saying, "I call that doing _very well_.  Since you
are safely home, dear, we don't ask anything more."

Anna and I choked down our tears, and took a little lesson in real
love, which we never forgot, nor the look that the tired man and the
tender woman gave one another.  It was half tragic and comic, for
father was very dirty and sleepy, and mother in a big nightcap and
funny old jacket.

[I began to see the strong contrasts and the fun and follies in
every-day life about this time--L. M. A.]

Anna came home in March.  Kept our school all summer.  I got "Flower
Fables" ready to print.

Louisa also tried service with a relative in the country for a short
time, but teaching, sewing, and writing were her principal occupations
during this residence in Boston.

These seven years, from Louisa's sixteenth to her twenty-third year,
might be called an apprenticeship to life.  She tried various paths,
and learned to know herself and the world about her, although she was
not even yet certain of success in the way which finally opened before
her and led her so successfully to the accomplishment of her
life-purpose.  She tried teaching, without satisfaction to herself or
perhaps to others.  The kind of education she had herself received
fitted her admirably to understand and influence children, but not to
carry on the routine of a school.  Sewing was her resource when nothing
else offered, but it is almost pitiful to think of her as confined to
such work when great powers were lying dormant in her mind.  Still
Margaret Fuller said that a year of enforced quiet in the country
devoted mainly to sewing was very useful to her, since she reviewed and
examined the treasures laid up in her memory; and doubtless Louisa
Alcott thought out many a story which afterward delighted the world
while her fingers busily plied the needle.  Yet it was a great
deliverance when she first found that the products of her brain would
bring in the needed money for family support.


[_L. in Boston to A. in Syracuse_]

THURSDAY, 27th.

DEAREST NAN: I was so glad to hear from you, and hear that all are well.

I am grubbing away as usual, trying to get money enough to buy mother a
nice warm shawl.  I have eleven dollars, all my own earnings--five for
a story, and four for the pile of sewing I did for the ladies of Dr.
Gray's society, to give him as a present.

. . . I got a crimson ribbon for a bonnet for May, and I took my straw
and fixed it nicely with some little duds I had.  Her old one has
haunted me all winter, and I want her to look neat.  She is so graceful
and pretty and loves beauty so much it is hard for her to be poor and
wear other people's ugly things.  You and I have learned not to mind
_much_; but when I think of her I long to dash out and buy the finest
hat the limited sum often dollars can procure.  She says so sweetly in
one of her letters: "It is hard sometimes to see other people have so
many nice things and I so few; but I try not to be envious, but
contented with my poor clothes, and cheerful about it."  I hope the
little dear will like the bonnet and the frills I made her and some
bows I fixed over from bright ribbons L. W. threw away.  I get half my
rarities from her rag-bag, and she doesn't know her own rags when fixed
over.  I hope I shall live to see the dear child in silk and lace, with
plenty of pictures and "bottles of cream," Europe, and all she longs
for.

For our good little Betty, who is wearing all the old gowns we left, I
shall soon be able to buy a new one, and send it with my blessing to
the cheerful saint.  She writes me the funniest notes, and tries to
keep the old folks warm and make the lonely house in the snowbanks
cosey and bright.

To father I shall send new neckties and some paper; then he will be
happy, and can keep on with the beloved diaries though the heavens fall.

Don't laugh at my plans; I'll carry them out, if I go to service to do
it.  Seeing so much money flying about, I long to honestly get a little
and make my dear family more comfortable.  I feel weak-minded when I
think of all they need and the little I can do.

Now about you: Keep the money you have earned by so many tears and
sacrifices, and clothe yourself; for it makes me mad to know that my
good little lass is going round in shabby things, and being looked down
upon by people who are not worthy to touch her patched shoes or the hem
of her ragged old gowns.  Make yourself tidy, and if any is left over
send it to mother; for there are always many things needed at home,
though they won't tell us.  I only wish I, too, by any amount of
weeping and homesickness could earn as much.  But my mite won't come
amiss; and if tears can add to its value, I've shed my quart--first,
over the book not coming out; for that was a sad blow, and I waited so
long it was dreadful when my castle in the air came tumbling about my
ears.  Pride made me laugh in public; but I wailed in private, and no
one knew it.  The folks at home think I rather enjoyed it, for I wrote
a jolly letter.  But my visit was spoiled; and now I'm digging away for
dear life, that I may not have come entirely in vain.  I didn't mean to
groan about it; but my lass and I must tell some one our trials, and so
it becomes easy to confide in one another.  I never let mother know how
unhappy you were in S. till Uncle wrote.

My doings are not much this week.  I sent a little tale to the Gazette,
and Clapp asked H. W. if five dollars would be enough.  Cousin H. said
yes, and gave it to me, with kind words and a nice parcel of paper,
saying in his funny way, "Now, Lu, the door is open, go in and win."
So I shall try to do it.  Then cousin L. W. said Mr. B. had got my
play, and told her that if Mrs. B. liked it as well, it must be clever,
and if it didn't cost too much, he would bring it out by and by.  Say
nothing about it yet.  Dr. W. tells me Mr. F. is very sick; so the
farce cannot be acted yet.  But the Doctor is set on its coming out,
and we have fun about it.  H. W. takes me often to the theatre when L.
is done with me.  I read to her all the P. M. often, as she is poorly,
and in that way I pay my debt to them.

I'm writing another story for Clapp.  I want more fives, and mean to
have them, too.

Uncle wrote that you were Dr. W.'s pet teacher, and every one loved you
dearly.  But if you are not well, don't stay.  Come home, and be
cuddled by your old

Lu.


_Pinckney Street, Boston_, January 1, 1855.--The principal event of the
winter is the appearance of my book "Flower Fables."  An edition of
sixteen hundred.  It has sold very well, and people seem to like it.  I
feel quite proud that the little tales that I wrote for Ellen E. when I
was sixteen should now bring money and fame.

I will put in some of the notices as "varieties," mothers are always
foolish over their first-born.

Miss Wealthy Stevens paid for the book, and I received $32.

[A pleasing contrast to the receipts of six months only, in 1886, being
$8,000 for the sale of books, and no new one; but I was prouder over
the $32 than the $8,000.--L. M. A., 1886.]

_April_, 1855.--I am in the garret with my papers round me, and a pile
of apples to eat while I write my journal, plan stories, and enjoy the
patter of rain on the roof, in peace and quiet.

[Jo in the garret.--L. M. A.]

Being behindhand, as usual, I'll make note of the main events up to
date, for I don't waste ink in poetry and pages of rubbish now.  I've
begun to live, and have no time for sentimental musing.

In October I began my school; father talked, mother looked after her
boarders, and tried to help everybody.  Anna was in Syracuse teaching
Mrs. S------'s children.

My book came out; and people began to think that topsy-turvy Louisa
would amount to something after all, since she could do so well as
housemaid, teacher, seamstress, and story-teller.  Perhaps she may.

In February I wrote a story for which C. paid $5 and asked for more.

In March I wrote a farce for W. Warren, and Dr. W. offered it to him;
but W. W. was too busy.

Also began another tale, but found little time to work on it, with
school, sewing, and housework.  My winter's earnings are:

  School, one quarter  . . . . . $50
  Sewing . . . . . . . . . . . .  50
  Stories  . . . . . . . . . . .  20

if I am ever paid.

A busy and a pleasant winter, because, though hard at times, I do seem
to be getting on a little; and that encourages me.

Have heard Lowell and Hedge lecture, acted in plays, and thanks to our
rag-money and good cousin H., have been to the theatre several
times--always my great joy.

Summer plans are yet unsettled.  Father wants to go to England: not a
wise idea, I think.  We shall probably stay here, and A. and I go into
the country as governesses.  It's a queer way to live, but dramatic,
and I rather like it; for we never know what is to come next.  We are
real "Micawbers," and always "ready for a spring."

I have planned another Christmas book, and hope to be able to write it.

1855.--Cousin L. W. asks me to pass the summer at Walpole with her.  If
I can get no teaching, I shall go; for I long for the hills, and can
write my fairy tales there.

I delivered my burlesque lecture on "Woman, and Her Position; by
Oronthy Bluggage," last evening at Deacon G's.  Had a merry time, and
was asked by Mr. R. to do it at H. for money.  Read "Hamlet" at our
club--my favorite play.  Saw Mrs. W. H. Smith about the farce; says she
will do it at her benefit.

_May_.--Father went to C. to talk with Mr. Emerson about the England
trip.  I am to go to Walpole.  I have made my own gowns, and had money
enough to fit up the girls.  So glad to be independent.

[I wonder if $40 fitted up the whole family.  Perhaps so, as my
wardrobe was made up of old clothes from cousins and friends.--L. M. A.]

_Walpole, N. H., June, 1855_.--Pleasant journey and a kind welcome.
Lovely place, high among the hills.  So glad to run and skip in the
woods and up the splendid ravine.  Shall write here, I know.

Helped cousin L. in her garden; and the smell of the fresh earth and
the touch of green leaves did me good.

Mr. T. came and praised my first book, so I felt much inspired to go
and do another.  I remember him at Scituate years ago, when he was a
young shipbuilder and I a curly-haired hoyden of five or six.

Up at five, and had a lovely run in the ravine, seeing the woods wake.
Planned a little tale which ought to be fresh and true, as it came at
that hour and place--"King Goldenrod."  Have lively days--writing in A.
M., driving in P. M., and fun in the eve.  My visit is doing me much
good.

_July_, 1855.--Read "Hyperion."  On the 16th the family came to live in
Mr. W.'s house, rent free.  No better plan offered, and we were all
tired of the city.  Here father can have a garden, mother can rest and
be near her good niece; the children have freedom and fine air; and A.
and I can go from here to our teaching, wherever it may be.

Busy and happy times as we settle in the little house in the lane near
by my dear ravine--plays, picnics, pleasant people, and good neighbors.
Fanny Kemble came up, Mrs. Kirkland, and others, and Dr. Bellows is the
gayest of the gay.  We acted the "Jacobite," "Rivals," and
"Bonnycastles," to an audience of a hundred, and were noticed in the
Boston papers.  H. T. was our manager, and Dr. B., D. D., our dramatic
director.  Anna was the star, her acting being really very fine.  I did
"Mrs. Malaprop," "Widow Pottle," and the old ladies.

Finished fairy book in September.  Ann had an offer from Dr. Wilbur of
Syracuse to teach at the great idiot asylum.  She disliked it, but
decided to go.  Poor dear! so beauty-loving, timid, and tender.  It is
a hard trial; but she is so self-sacrificing she tries to like it
because it is duty.

_October_.--A. to Syracuse.  May illustrated my book and tales called
"Christmas Elves." Better than "Flower Fables."  Now I must try to sell
it.

[Innocent Louisa, to think that a Christmas book could be sold in
October.--L. M. A.]

_November_.--Decided to seek my fortune; so with my little trunk of
home-made clothes, $20 earned by stories sent to the _Gazette_, and my
MSS., I set forth with mother's blessing one rainy day in the dullest
month in the year.

[My birth-month; always to be a memorable one.--L. M. A.]

Found it too late to do anything with the book, so put it away and
tried for teaching, sewing, or any honest work.  Won't go home to sit
idle while I have a head and pair of hands.

_December_.--H. and L. W. very kind, and my dear cousins the Sewalls
take me in.  I sew for Mollie and others, and write stories.  C. gave
me books to notice.  Heard Thackeray.  Anxious times; Anna very
homesick.  Walpole very cold and dull now the summer butterflies have
gone.  Got $5 for a tale and $12 for sewing; sent home a Christmas box
to cheer the dear souls in the snow-banks.

_January, 1856_.--C. paid $6 for "A Sister's Trial."  Gave me more
books to notice, and wants more tales.

[Should think he would at that price.--L. M. A.]

Sewed for L. W. Sewall and others.  Mr. J. M. Field took my farce to
Mobile to bring out; Mr. Barry of the Boston Theatre has the play.

Heard Curtis lecture.  Began a book for summer--"Beach Bubbles."  Mr.
F. of the _Courier_ printed a poem of mine on "Little Nell."  Got $10
for "Bertha," and saw great yellow placards stuck up announcing it.
Acted at the W.'s.

_March_.--Got $10 for "Genevieve."  Prices go up, as people like the
tales and ask who wrote them.  Finished "Twelve Bubbles."  Sewed a
great deal, and got very tired; one job for Mr. G. of a dozen pillow
cases, one dozen sheets, six fine cambric neckties, and two dozen
handkerchiefs, at which I had to work all one night to get them done,
as they were a gift to him.  I got only $4.

Sewing won't make my fortune; but I can plan my stories while I work,
and then scribble 'em down on Sundays.

Poem on "Little Paul"; Curtis's lecture on "Dickens" made it go well.
Hear Emerson on "England."

_May_.--Anna came on her way home, sick and worn out; the work was too
much for her.  We had some happy days visiting about.  Could not
dispose of B. B. in book form, but C. took them for his paper.  Mr.
Field died, so the farce fell through there.  Altered the play for Mrs.
Barrow to bring out next winter.

_June, 1856_.--Home, to find dear Betty very ill with scarlet-fever
caught from some poor children mother nursed when they fell sick,
living over a cellar where pigs had been kept.  The landlord (a deacon)
would not clean the place till mother threatened to sue him for
allowing a nuisance.  Too late to save two of the poor babies or Lizzie
and May from the fever.

[L. never recovered, but died of it two years later.--L. M. A.]

An anxious time, I nursed, did housework, and wrote a story a month
through the summer.

Dr. Bellows and Father had Sunday eve conversations.

_October_.--Pleasant letters from father, who went on a tour to New
York, Philadelphia, and Boston.

Made plans to go to Boston for the winter, as there is nothing to do
here, and there I can support myself and help the family.  C. offers
$10 a month, and perhaps more.  L. W., M. S., and others, have plenty
of sewing; the play may come out, and Mrs. R. will give me a sky-parlor
for $3 a week, with fire and board.  I sew for her also.

If I can get A. L. to governess I shall be all right.

I was born with a boy's spirit under my bib and tucker.  I _can't wait_
when I _can work_, so I took my little talent in my hand and forced the
world again, braver than before and wiser for my failures.

[Jo in N. Y.--L. M. A.]

I don't often pray in words; but when I set out that day with all my
worldly goods in the little old trunk, my own earnings ($25) in my
pocket, and much hope and resolution in my soul, my heart was very
full, and I said to the Lord, "Help us all, and keep us for one
another," as I never said it before, while I looked back at the dear
faces watching me, so full of love and hope and faith.

[_Journal_]