[Illustration: FIGURE OF FRONTENAC.  From the Hébert Statue at Quebec]

The splendid services of Du Lhut, covering a period of thirty years,
are the best vindication of Frontenac's policy towards him and his
associates.  Had Duchesneau succeeded in his efforts, Du Lhut would
have been {81} severely punished, and probably excluded from the West
for the remainder of his life.  Thanks to Frontenac's support, he
became the mainstay of French interests from Lake Ontario to the
Mississippi.  Setting out as an adventurer with a strong taste for
exploration, he ended as commandant of the most important
posts--Lachine, Cataraqui, and Michilimackinac.  He served the colony
nobly in the war against the Iroquois.  He has left reports of his
discoveries which disclose marked literary talent.  From the early
years of Frontenac's régime he made himself useful, not only to
Frontenac but to each succeeding governor, until, crippled by gout and
age, he died, still in harness.  The letter in which the governor
Vaudreuil announces Du Lhut's death (1710) to the Colonial Office at
Paris is a useful comment upon the accusations of Duchesneau.  'He
was,' says Vaudreuil, 'a very honest man.'  In these words will be
found an indirect commendation of Frontenac, who discovered Du Lhut,
supported him through bitter opposition, and placed him where his
talents and energy could be used for the good of his country.

It will be remembered that Frontenac received orders from Colbert
(April 7, 1672) to {82} prevent the Jesuits from becoming too powerful.
In carrying out these instructions he soon found himself embroiled at
Quebec, and the same discord made itself felt throughout the wilderness.

Frontenac favoured the establishment of trading-posts and government
forts along the great waterways, from Cataraqui to Crèvecoeur.[1]  He
sincerely believed that these were the best guarantees of the king's
power on the Great Lakes and in the valley of the Mississippi.  The
Jesuits saw in each post a centre of debauchery and feared that their
religious work would be undone by the scandalous example of the
coureurs de bois.  What for Frontenac was a question of political
expediency loomed large to the Jesuits as a vital issue of morals.  It
was a delicate question at best, though probably a peaceable solution
could have been arranged, but for the mutual agreement of Frontenac and
the Jesuits that they must be antagonists.  War having once been
declared, Frontenac proved a poor controversialist.  He could have
defended his forest policy without alleging that the Jesuits maintained
their missions as a source of {83} profit, which was a slander upon
heroes and upon martyrs.  Moreover, he exposed himself to a flank
attack, for it could be pointed out with much force that he had private
motives in advocating the erection of forts.  Frontenac was intelligent
and would have recommended the establishment of posts whether he
expected profit from them or not, but he weakened his case by attacking
the Jesuits on wrong grounds.

During Frontenac's first term the settled part of Canada was limited to
the shores of the St Lawrence from Lachine downward, with a cluster of
seigneuries along the lower Richelieu.  In this region the governor was
hampered by the rights of the intendant and the influence of the
bishop.  Westward of Lachine stretched the wilderness, against whose
dusky denizens the governor must guard the colony.  The problems of the
forest embraced both trade and war; and where trade was concerned the
intendant held sway.  But the safety of the flock came first, and as
Frontenac had the power of the sword he could execute his plans most
freely in the region which lay beyond the fringe of settlement.  It was
here that he achieved his greatest success and by his acts won a strong
place in the confidence {84} of the settlers.  This was much, and to
this extent his first term of office was not a failure.

As Canada was then so sparsely settled, the growth of population filled
a large place in the shaping of public policy.  With this matter,
however, Duchesneau had more to do than Frontenac, for it was the
intendant's duty to create prosperity.  During the decade 1673-83 the
population of Canada increased from 6705 to 10,251.  In percentage the
advance shows to better advantage than in totals, but the king had
hardened his heart to the demand for colonists.  Thenceforth the
population of Canada was to be recruited almost altogether from births.

On the whole, the growth of the population during this period compares
favourably with the growth of trade.  In 1664 a general monopoly of
Canadian trade had been conceded to the West India Company, on terms
which gave every promise of success.  But the trading companies of
France proved a series of melancholy failures, and at this point
Colbert fared no better than Richelieu.  When Frontenac reached Canada
the West India Company was hopelessly bankrupt, and in 1674 the king
acquired its rights.  This change produced little or no improvement.
Like France, {85} Canada suffered greatly through the war with Holland,
and not till after the Peace of Nimwegen (1678) did the commercial
horizon begin to clear.  Even then it was impossible to note any real
progress in Canadian trade, except in a slight enlargement of relations
with the West Indies.  During his last year at Quebec Duchesneau gives
a very gloomy report on commercial conditions.

For this want of prosperity Frontenac was in no way responsible, unless
his troubles with Laval and Duchesneau may be thought to have damped
the colonizing ardour of Louis XIV.  It is much more probable that the
king withheld his bounty from Canada because his attention was
concentrated on the costly war against Holland.  Campaigns at home
meant economy in Canada, and the colony was far from having reached the
stage where it could flourish without constant financial support from
the motherland.

In general, Frontenac's policy was as vigorous as he could make it.
Over commerce, taxes, and religion he had no control.  By training and
temper he was a war governor, who during his first administration fell
upon a time of peace.  So long as peace prevailed he lacked the powers
and the opportunity to {86} enable him to reveal his true strength; and
his energy, without sufficient vent, broke forth in quarrels at the
council board.

With wider authority, Frontenac might have proved a successful governor
even in time of peace, for he was very intelligent and had at heart the
welfare of the colony.  As it was, his restrictions chafed and goaded
him until wrathfulness took the place of reason.  But we shall err if
we conclude that when he left Canada in discomfiture he had not earned
her thanks.  Through pride and faults of temper he had impaired his
usefulness and marred his record.  Even so there was that which rescued
his work from the stigma of failure.  He had guarded his people from
the tomahawk and the scalping-knife.  With prescient eye he had
foreseen the imperial greatness of the West.  Whatever his
shortcomings, they had not been those of meanness or timidity.



[1] Fort Crèvecoeur was La Salle's post in the heart of the Illinois
country.




{87}

CHAPTER VI

THE LURID INTERVAL

We have seen that during Frontenac's first term of office no urgent
danger menaced the colony on the frontier.  The missionary and the
explorer were steadily pressing forward to the head of the Great Lakes
and into the valley of the Mississippi, enlarging the sphere of French
influence and rendering the interior tributary to the commerce of
Quebec.  But this peaceful and silent expansion had not passed
unnoticed by those in whose minds it aroused both rivalry and dread.
Untroubled from without as New France had been under Frontenac, there
were always two lurking perils--the Iroquois and the English.

The Five Nations owed their leadership among the Indian tribes not only
to superior discipline and method but also to their geographical
situation.  The valley of the St Lawrence lay within easy reach, either
through Lake Champlain or Lake Ontario.  On the {88} east at their very
door lay the valley of the Mohawk and the Hudson.  From the western
fringe of their territory they could advance quickly to Lake Erie, or
descend the Ohio into the valley of the Mississippi.  It was doubtless
due to their prowess rather than to accident that they originally came
into possession of this central and favoured position; however, they
could now make their force felt throughout the whole north-eastern
portion of the continent.

Over seventy years had now passed since Champlain's attack upon the
Iroquois in 1609; but lapse of time had not altered the nature of the
savage, nor were the causes of mutual hostility less real than at
first.  A ferocious lust for war remained the deepest passion of the
Iroquois, to be satisfied at convenient intervals.  It was unfortunate,
in their view, that they could not always be at war; but they
recognized that there must be breathing times and that it was important
to choose the right moment for massacre and pillage.  Daring but
sagacious, they followed an opportunist policy.  At times their
warriors delighted to lurk in the outskirts of Montreal with tomahawk
and scalping-knife and to organize great war-parties, such as that {89}
which was arrested by Dollard and his heroic companions at the Long
Sault in 1660.  At other times they held fair speech with the governor
and permitted the Jesuits to live in their villages, for the French had
weapons and means of fighting which inspired respect.

The appearance of the Dutch on the Hudson in 1614 was an event of great
importance to the Five Nations.  The Dutch were quite as ready as the
French to trade in furs, and it was thus that the Iroquois first
procured the firearms which they used in their raids on the French
settlements.  That the Iroquois rejoiced at having a European colony on
the Hudson may be doubted, but as they were unable to prevent it, they
drew what profit they could by putting the French and Dutch in
competition, both for their alliance and their neutrality.

But, though the Dutch were heretics and rivals, it was a bad day for
New France when the English seized New Amsterdam (1664) and began to
establish themselves from Manhattan to Albany.  The inevitable conflict
was first foreshadowed in the activities of Sir Edmund Andros, which
followed his appointment as governor of New York in 1674.  He visited
the Mohawks in their own villages, {90} organized a board of Indian
commissioners at Albany, and sought to cement an alliance with the
whole confederacy of the Five Nations.  In opposition to this France
made the formal claim (1677) that by actual residence in the Iroquois
country the Jesuits had brought the Iroquois under French sovereignty.

Iroquois, French, and English thus formed the points of a political
triangle.  Home politics, however--the friendship of Stuart and
Bourbon--tended to postpone the day of reckoning between the English
and French in America.  England and France were not only at peace but
in alliance.  The Treaty of Dover had been signed in 1670, and two
years later, just as Frontenac had set out for Quebec, Charles II had
sent a force of six thousand English to aid Louis XIV against the
Dutch.  It was in this war that John Churchill, afterwards Duke of
Marlborough, won his spurs--fighting on the French side!

None the less, there were premonitions of trouble in America,
especially after Thomas Dongan became governor of New York in 1683.
Andros had shown good judgment in his dealings with the Iroquois, and
his successor, inheriting a sound policy, went even further on the same
course.  Dongan, an {91} Irishman of high birth and a Catholic,
strenuously opposed the pretensions of the French to sovereignty over
the Iroquois.  When it was urged that religion required the presence of
the Jesuits among them, he denied the allegation, stating that he would
provide English priests to take their place.  A New England Calvinist
could not have shown more firmness in upholding the English position.
Indeed, no governor of Puritan New England had ever equalled Dongan in
hostility to Catholic New France.

Frontenac's successor, Lefebvre de la Barre, who had served with
distinction in the West Indies, arrived at Quebec in September 1682.
By the same ship came the new intendant, Meulles.  They found the Lower
Town of Quebec in ruins, for a devastating fire had just swept through
it.  Hardly anything remained standing save the buildings on the cliff.

La Barre and Meulles were soon at loggerheads.  It appears that,
instead of striving to repair the effects of the fire, the new governor
busied himself to accumulate a fortune.  He had indeed promised the
king that, unlike his predecessors, he would seek no profit from
private trading, and had on this ground requested an increase of
salary.  {92} Meulles presently reported that, far from keeping this
promise, La Barre and his agents had shared ten or twelve thousand
crowns of profit, and that unless checked the governor's revenues would
soon exceed those of the king.  Meulles also accuses La Barre of
sending home deceitful reports regarding the success of his Indian
policy.  We need not dwell longer on these reports.  They disclose with
great clearness the opinion of the intendant as to the governor's
fitness for his office.

La Barre stands condemned not by the innuendoes of Meulles, but by his
own failure to cope with the Iroquois.

The presence of the Dutch and English had stimulated the Five Nations
to enlarge their operations in the fur trade and multiply their
profits.  The French, from being earliest in the field, had established
friendly relations with all the tribes to the north of the Great Lakes,
including those who dwelt in the valley of the Ottawa; and La Salle and
Tonty had recently penetrated to the Mississippi and extended French
trade to the country of the Illinois Indians.  The furs from this
region were being carried up the Mississippi and forwarded to Quebec by
the Lakes and the St Lawrence.  This brought the Illinois within {93}
the circle of tribes commercially dependent on Quebec.  At the same
time the Iroquois, through the English on the Hudson, now possessed
facilities greater than ever for disposing of all the furs they could
acquire; and they wanted this trade for themselves.

The wholesome respect which the Iroquois entertained for Frontenac kept
them from attacking the tribes under the protection of the French on
the Great Lakes; but the remote Illinois were thought to be a safe
prey.  During the autumn of 1680 a war-party of more than six hundred
Iroquois invaded the country of the Illinois.  La Salle was then in
Montreal, but Tonty met the invaders and did all he could to save the
Illinois from their clutches.  His efforts were in vain.  The Illinois
suffered all that had befallen the Hurons in 1649.[1]  The Iroquois,
however, were careful not to harm the French, and to demand from Tonty
a letter to show Frontenac as proof that he and his companions had been
respected.

Obviously this raid was a symptom of danger, and in 1681 Frontenac
asked the king to send him five or six hundred troops.  A further
disturbing incident occurred at the {94} Jesuit mission of Sault Ste
Marie, where an Illinois Indian murdered a Seneca chieftain.  That
Frontenac intended to act with firmness towards the Iroquois, while
giving them satisfaction for the murder of their chief, is clear from
his acts in 1681 no less than from his general record.  But his forces
were small and he had received particular instructions to reduce
expenditure.  And, with Duchesneau at hand to place a sinister
interpretation upon his every act, the conditions were not favourable
for immediate action.  Then in 1682 he was recalled.

Such, in general, were the conditions which confronted La Barre, and in
fairness it must be admitted that they were the most serious thus far
in the history of Canada.  From the first the Iroquois had been a pest
and a menace, but now, with the English to flatter and encourage them,
they became a grave peril.  The total population of the colony was now
about ten thousand, of whom many were women and children.  The regular
troops were very few; and, though the disbanded Carignan soldiers
furnished the groundwork of a valiant militia, the habitants and their
seigneurs alone could not be expected to defend such a territory
against such a foe.

{95}

Above all else the situation demanded strong leadership; and this was
precisely what La Barre failed to supply.  He was preoccupied with the
profits of the fur trade, ignorant of Indian character, and past his
physical prime; and his policy towards the Iroquois was a continuous
series of blunders.  Through the great personal influence of Charles Le
Moyne the Five Nations were induced, in 1683, to send representatives
to Montreal, where La Barre met them and gave them lavish presents.
The Iroquois, always good judges of character, did not take long to
discover in the new governor a very different Onontio from the imposing
personage who had held conference with them at Fort Frontenac ten years
earlier.

The feebleness of La Barre's effort to maintain French sovereignty over
the Iroquois is reflected in his request that they should ask his
permission before attacking tribes friendly to the French.  When he
asked them why they had attacked the Illinois, they gave this ominous
answer: 'Because they deserved to die.'  La Barre could effect nothing
by a display of authority, and even with the help of gifts he could
only postpone war against the tribes of the Great Lakes.  The Iroquois
intimated that for the present they would be {96} content to finish the
destruction of the Illinois--a work which would involve the destruction
of the French posts in the valley of the Mississippi.  La Barre's chief
purpose was to protect his own interests as a trader, and, so far from
wishing to strengthen La Salle's position on the Mississippi, he looked
upon that illustrious explorer as a competitor whom it was legitimate
to destroy by craft.  By an act of poetic justice the Iroquois a few
months later plundered a convoy of canoes which La Barre himself had
sent out to the Mississippi for trading purposes.

The season of 1684 proved even less prosperous for the French.  Not
only Dongan was doing his best to make the Iroquois allies of the
English; Lord Howard of Effingham, the governor of Virginia, was busy
to the same end.  For some time past certain tribes of the Five
Nations, though not the confederacy as a whole, had been making forays
upon the English settlers in Maryland and even in Virginia.  To adjust
this matter Lord Howard came to Albany in person, held a council which
was attended by representatives of all the tribes, and succeeded in
effecting a peace.  Amid the customary ceremonies the Five Nations
buried the hatchet with the English, {97} and stood ready to
concentrate their war-parties upon the French.

It must not be inferred that by an act of reconciliation these subtle
savages threw themselves into the arms of the English, exchanging a new
suzerainty for an old.  They always did the best they could for their
own hand, seeking to play one white man against the other for their own
advantage.  It was a situation where, on the part of French and
English, individual skill and knowledge of Indian character counted for
much.  On the one hand, Dongan showed great intelligence and activity
in making the most of the fact that Albany was nearer to the land of
the Five Nations than Quebec, or even Montreal.  On the other, the
French had envoys who stood high in the esteem of the Iroquois--notably
Charles Le Moyne, of Longueuil, and Lamberville, the Jesuit missionary.

But for the moment the French were heavily burdened by the venality of
La Barre, who subordinated public policy to his own gains.  We have now
to record his most egregious blunder--an attempt to overawe the
Iroquois with an insufficient force--an attempt which Meulles declared
was a mere piece of acting--not designed for real war on behalf of the
colony, {98} but to assist the governor's private interests as a
trader.  From whatever side the incident is viewed it illustrates a
complete incapacity.

On July 10, 1684, La Barre left Quebec with a body of two hundred
troops.  In ascending the river they were reinforced by recruits from
the Canadian militia and several hundred Indian allies.  After much
hardship in the rapids the little army reached Fort Frontenac.  Here
the sanitary conditions proved bad and many died from malarial fever.
All thought of attack soon vanished, and La Barre altered his plans and
decided to invite the Iroquois to a council.  The degree of his
weakness may be seen from the fact that he began with a concession
regarding the place of meeting.  An embassy from the Onondagas finally
condescended to meet him, but not at Fort Frontenac.  La Barre, with a
force such as he could muster, crossed to the south side of Lake
Ontario and met the delegates from the Iroquois at La Famine, at the
mouth of the Salmon River, not far from the point where Champlain and
the Hurons had left their canoes when they had invaded the Onondaga
country in 1615.

The council which ensued was a ghastly joke.  La Barre began his speech
by {99} enumerating the wrongs which the French and their dependent
tribes had recently suffered from the Iroquois.  Among these he
included the raid upon the Illinois, the machinations with the English,
and the spoliation of French traders.  For offences so heinous
satisfaction must be given.  Otherwise Onontio would declare a war in
which the English would join him.  These were brave words, but
unfortunately the Iroquois had excellent reason to believe that the
statement regarding the English was untrue, and could see for
themselves the weakness of La Barre's forces.

This conference has been picturesquely described by Baron La Hontan,
who was present and records the speeches.  The chief orator of the
Onondagas was a remarkable person, who either for his eloquence or
aspect is called by La Hontan, Grangula, or Big Mouth.  Having listened
to La Barre's bellicose words and their interpretation, 'he rose, took
five or six turns in the ring that the French and the savages formed,
and returned to his place.  Then standing upright he spoke after the
following manner to the General La Barre, who sat in his chair of state:


Onontio, I honour you, and all the warriors that accompany me do the
same.  Your interpreter has {100} made an end of his discourse, and now
I come to begin mine.  My voice glides to your ear.  Pray listen to my
words.

Onontio, in setting out from Quebec, you must have fancied that the
scorching beams of the sun had burnt down the forests which render our
country inaccessible to the French; or else that the inundations of the
lake had surrounded our cottages and confined us as prisoners.  This
certainly was your thought; and it could be nothing else but the
curiosity of seeing a burnt or drowned country that moved you to
undertake a journey hither.  But now you have an opportunity of being
undeceived, for I and my warriors come to assure you that the Senecas,
Cayugas, Onondagas, Oneidas, and Mohawks are not yet destroyed.  I
return you thanks in their name for bringing into their country the
calumet of peace, which your predecessor received from their hands.  At
the same time I congratulate you on having left under ground the
tomahawk which has so often been dyed with the blood of the French.  I
must tell you, Onontio, that I am not asleep.  My eyes are open, and
the sun which vouchsafes the light gives me a clear view of a great
captain at the head of a troop of soldiers, who speaks as if he were
asleep.  He pretends that he does not approach this lake with any other
view than to smoke the calumet with the Onondagas.  But Grangula knows
better.  He sees plainly that Onontio meant to knock them on the head
if the French arms had not been so much weakened....

You must know, Onontio, that we have robbed no {101} Frenchman, save
those who supplied the Illinois and the Miamis (our enemies) with
muskets, powder, and ball....  We have conducted the English to our
lakes in order to trade with the Ottawas and the Hurons; just as the
Algonquins conducted the French to our five cantons, in order to carry
on a commerce that the English lay claim to as their right.  We are
born freemen and have no dependence either upon the Onontio or the
Corlaer [the English governor].  We have power to go where we please,
to conduct whom we will to the places we resort to, and to buy and sell
where we think fit....  We fell upon the Illinois and the Miamis
because they cut down the trees of peace that served for boundaries and
came to hunt beavers upon our lands....  We have done less than the
English and French, who without any right have usurped the lands they
are now possessed of.

I give you to know, Onontio, that my voice is the voice of the five
Iroquois cantons.  This is their answer.  Pray incline your ear and
listen to what they represent.

The Senecas, Cayugas, Onondagas, Oneidas, and Mohawks declare that they
buried the tomahawk in the presence of your predecessor, in the very
centre of the fort, and planted the Tree of Peace in the same place.
It was then stipulated that the fort should be used as a place of
retreat for merchants and not a refuge for soldiers.  Be it known to
you, Onontio, that so great a number of soldiers, being shut up in so
small a fort, do not stifle and choke the Tree of Peace.  Since it took
root so easily it would be evil {102} to stop its growth and hinder it
from shading both your country and ours with its leaves.  I assure you,
in the name of the five nations, that our warriors will dance the
calumet dance under its branches and will never dig up the axe to cut
it down--till such time as the Onontio and the Corlaer do separately or
together invade the country which the Great Spirit gave to our
ancestors.'[2]


When Le Moyne and the Jesuits had interpreted this speech La Barre
'retired to his tent and stormed and blustered.'  But Grangula favoured
the spectators with an Iroquois dance, after which he entertained
several of the Frenchmen at a banquet.  'Two days later,' writes La
Hontan, 'he and his warriors returned to their own country, and our
army set out for Montreal.  As soon as the General was on board,
together with the few healthy men that remained, the canoes were
dispersed, for the militia straggled here and there, and every one made
the best of his way home.'

With this ignominious adventure the career of La Barre ends.  The
reports which Meulles sent to France produced a speedy effect in {103}
securing his dismissal from office.  'I have been informed,' politely
writes the king, 'that your years do not permit you to support the
fatigues inseparable from your office of governor and
lieutenant-general in Canada.'

La Barre's successor, the Marquis de Denonville, arrived at Quebec in
August 1685.  Like La Barre, he was a soldier; like Frontenac, he was
an aristocrat as well.  From both these predecessors, however, he
differed in being free from the reproach of using his office to secure
personal profits through the fur trade.  No governor in all the annals
of New France was on better terms with the bishop and the Jesuits.  He
possessed great bravery.  There is much to show that he was energetic.
None the less he failed, and his failure was more glaring than that of
La Barre.  He could not hold his ground against the Iroquois and the
English.

It has been pointed out already that when La Barre assumed office the
problems arising from these two sources were more difficult than at any
previous date; but the situation which was serious in 1682 and had
become critical by 1685 grew desperate in the four years of
Denonville's sway.  The one {104} over-shadowing question of this
period was the Iroquois peril, rendered more and more acute by the
policy of the English.

The greatest mistake which Denonville made in his dealings with the
Iroquois was to act deceitfully.  The savages could be perfidious
themselves, but they were not without a conception of honour and felt
genuine respect for a white man whose word they could trust.
Denonville, who in his private life displayed many virtues, seemed to
consider that he was justified in acting towards the savages as the
exigency of the moment prompted.  Apart from all considerations of
morality this was bad judgment.

In his dealings with the English Denonville had little more success
than in his dealings with the Indians.  Dongan was a thorn in his side
from the first, although their correspondence opened, on both sides,
with the language of compliment.  A few months later its tone changed,
particularly after Dongan heard that Denonville intended to build a
fort at Niagara.  Against a project so unfriendly Dongan protested with
emphasis.  In reply Denonville disclaimed the intention, at the same
time alleging that Dongan was giving shelter at Albany to French
deserters.  A {105} little later they reach the point of sarcasm.
Denonville taxes Dongan with selling rum to the Indians.  Dongan
retorts that at least English rum is less unwholesome than French
brandy.  Beneath these epistolary compliments there lies the broad fact
that Dongan stood firm by his principle that the extension of French
rule to the south of Lake Ontario should not be tolerated.  He
ridicules the basis of French pretensions, saying that Denonville might
as well claim China because there are Jesuits at the Chinese court.
The French, he adds, have no more right to the country because its
streams flow into Lake Ontario than they have to the lands of those who
drink claret or brandy.  It is clear that Dongan fretted under the
restrictions which were imposed upon him by the friendship between
England and France.  He would have welcomed an order to support his
arguments by force.  Denonville, on his side, with like feelings, could
not give up the claim to suzerainty over the land of the Iroquois.

The domain of the Five Nations was not the only part of America where
French and English clashed.  The presence of the English in Hudson Bay
excited deep resentment at {106} Quebec and Montreal.  Here Denonville
ventured to break the peace as Dongan had not dared to do.  With
Denonville's consent and approval, a band of Canadians left Montreal in
the spring of 1686, fell upon three of the English posts--Fort Hayes,
Fort Rupert, Fort Albany--and with some bloodshed dispossessed their
garrisons.  Well satisfied with this exploit, Denonville in 1687 turned
his attention to the chastisement of the Iroquois.

The forces which he brought together for this task were greatly
superior to any that had been mustered in Canada before.  Not only were
they adequate in numbers, but they comprised an important band of
coureurs de bois, headed by La Durantaye, Tonty, Du Lhut, and Nicolas
Perrot--men who equalled the Indians in woodcraft and surpassed them in
character.  The epitaph of Denonville as a governor is written in the
failure of this great expedition to accomplish its purpose.

The first blunder occurred at Fort Frontenac before mobilization had
been completed.  There were on the north shore of Lake Ontario two
Iroquois villages, whose inhabitants had been in part baptized by the
Sulpicians and {107} were on excellent terms with the garrison of the
fort.  In a moment of insane stupidity Denonville decided that the men
of these settlements should be captured and sent to France as galley
slaves.  Through the ruse of a banquet they were brought together and
easily seized.  By dint of a little further effort two hundred Iroquois
of all ages and both sexes were collected at Fort Frontenac as
prisoners--and some at least perished by torture.  But, when executing
this dastardly plot, Denonville did not succeed in catching all the
friendly Iroquois who lived in the neighbourhood of his fort.  Enough
escaped to carry the authentic tale to the Five Nations, and after that
there could be no peace till there had been revenge.  Worst of all, the
French stood convicted of treachery and falseness.

Having thus blighted his cause at the outset, Denonville proceeded with
his more serious task of smiting the Iroquois in their own country.
Considering the extent and expense of his preparations, he should have
planned a complete destruction of their power.  Instead of this he
attempted no more than an attack upon the Senecas, whose operations
against the Illinois and in other quarters had made {108} them
especially objectionable.  The composite army of French and Indians
assembled at Irondequoit Bay on July 12--a force brought together at
infinite pains and under circumstances which might never occur again.
Marching southwards they fought a trivial battle with the Senecas, in
which half a dozen on the French side were killed, while the Senecas
are said to have lost about a hundred in killed and wounded.  The rest
of the tribe took to the woods.  As a result of this easy victory the
triumphant allies destroyed an Iroquois village and all the corn which
it contained, but the political results of the expedition were worse
than nothing.  Denonville made no attempt to destroy the other nations
of the confederacy.  Returning to Lake Ontario he built a fort at
Niagara, which he had promised Dongan he would not do, and then
returned to Montreal.  The net results of this portentous effort were a
broken promise to the English, an act of perfidy towards the Iroquois,
and an insignificant success in battle.

In 1688 Denonville's decision to abandon Fort Niagara slightly changed
the situation.  The garrison had suffered severe losses through illness
and the post proved too remote for {109} successful defence.  So this
matter settled itself.  The same season saw the recall of Dongan
through the consolidation of New England, New York, and New Jersey
under Sir Edmund Andros.  But in essentials there was no change.
Andros continued Dongan's policy, of which, in fact, he himself had
been the author.  And, even though no longer threatened by the French
from Niagara, the savages had reason enough to hate and distrust
Denonville.

Yet despite these untoward circumstances all hope of peace between the
French and the Five Nations had not been destroyed.  The Iroquois loved
their revenge and were willing to wait for it, but caution warned them
that it would not be advantageous to destroy the French for the benefit
of the English.  Moreover, in the long course of their relations with
the French they had, as already mentioned, formed a high opinion of men
like Le Moyne and Lamberville, while they viewed with respect the
exploits of Tonty, La Durantaye, and Du Lhut.

Moved by these considerations and a love of presents, Grangula, of the
Onondagas, was in the midst of negotiations for peace with the French,
which might have ended happily but {110} for the stratagem of the Huron
chief Kondiaronk, called 'The Rat.'  The remnant of Hurons and the
other tribes centring at Michilimackinac did not desire a peace of the
French and Iroquois which would not include themselves, for this would
mean their own certain destruction.  The Iroquois, freed of the French,
would surely fall on the Hurons.  All the Indians distrusted
Denonville, and Kondiaronk suspected, with good reason, that the Hurons
were about to be sacrificed.  Denonville, however, had assured
Kondiaronk that there was to be war to the death against the Iroquois,
and on this understanding he went with a band of warriors to Fort
Frontenac.  There he learned that peace would be concluded between
Onontio and the Onondagas--in other words, that the Iroquois would soon
be free to attack the Hurons and their allies.  To avert this
threatened destruction of his own people, he set out with his warriors
and lay in ambush for a party of Onondaga chiefs who were on their way
to Montreal.  Having killed one and captured almost all the rest, he
announced to his Iroquois prisoners that he had received orders from
Denonville to destroy them.  When they explained that they were
ambassadors, he {111} feigned surprise and said he could no longer be
an accomplice to the wickedness of the French.  Then he released them
all save one, in order that they might carry home this tale of
Denonville's second treachery.  The one Iroquois Kondiaronk retained on
the plea that he wished to adopt him.  Arrived at Michilimackinac, he
handed over the captive to the French there, who, having heard nothing
of the peace, promptly shot him.  An Iroquois prisoner, whom Kondiaronk
secretly released for the purpose, conveyed to the Five Nations word of
this further atrocity.

The Iroquois prepared to deliver a hard blow.  On August 5, 1689, they
fell in overwhelming force upon the French settlement at Lachine.
Those who died by the tomahawk were the most fortunate.  Charlevoix
gives the number of victims at two hundred killed and one hundred and
twenty taken prisoner.  Girouard's examination of parish registers
results in a lower estimate--namely, twenty-four killed at Lachine and
forty-two at La Chesnaye, a short time afterwards.  Whatever the
number, it was the most dreadful catastrophe which the colony had yet
suffered.

{112}

Such were the events which, in seven years, had brought New France to
the brink of ruin.  But she was not to perish from the Iroquois.  In
October 1689 Frontenac returned to take Denonville's place.



[1] See _The Jesuit Missions_ in this Series, chap. vi.

[2] Grangula's speech is an example in part of Indian eloquence, and in
part of the eloquence of Baron La Hontan, who contributes many striking
passages to our knowledge of Frontenac's period.




{113}

CHAPTER VII

THE GREAT STRUGGLE

During the period which separates his two terms of office Frontenac's
life is almost a blank.  His relations with his wife seem to have been
amicable, but they did not live together.  His great friend was the
Maréchal de Bellefonds, from whom he received many favours of
hospitality.  In 1685 the king gave him a pension of thirty-five
hundred livres, though without assigning him any post of dignity.
Already a veteran, his record could hardly be called successful.  His
merits were known to the people of Canada; they believed him to be a
tower of strength against the Iroquois.  At Versailles the fact stood
out most plainly that through infirmities of temper he had lost his
post.  His pension might save him from penury.  It was far too small to
give him real independence.

Had either La Barre or Denonville proved equal to the government of
Canada, it is almost {114} certain that Frontenac would have ended his
days ingloriously at Versailles, ascending the stairs of others with
all the grief which is the portion of disappointed old age.  Their
failure was his opportunity, and from the dreary antechambers of a
court he mounts to sudden glory as the saviour of New France.

There is some doubt, as we have seen, concerning the causes which gave
Frontenac his appointment in 1672.  At that time court favour may have
operated on his behalf, or it may have seemed desirable that he should
reside for a season out of France.  But in 1689 graver considerations
came into play.  At the moment when the Iroquois were preparing to
ravage Canada, the expulsion of James II from his throne had broken the
peace between France and England.  The government of New France was now
no post for a court favourite.  Louis XIV had expended much money and
effort on the colony.  Through the mismanagement of La Barre and
Denonville everything appeared to be on the verge of ruin.  It is
inconceivable that Frontenac, then in his seventieth year, should have
been renominated for any other cause than merit.  Times and conditions
had changed.  The task now was not to work peaceably with bishop {115}
and intendant, but to destroy the foe.  Father Goyer, the Récollet who
delivered Frontenac's funeral oration, states that the king said when
renewing his commission: 'I send you back to Canada, where I expect you
will serve me as well as you did before; I ask for nothing more.'  This
is a bit of too gorgeous rhetoric, which none the less conveys the
truth.  The king was not reappointing Frontenac because he was, on the
whole, satisfied with what he had done before; he was reappointing him
because during his former term of office and throughout his career he
had displayed the qualities which were called for at the present crisis.

Thus Frontenac returned to Quebec in the autumn of 1689, just after the
Iroquois massacred the people of Lachine and just before they descended
upon those of La Chesnaye.  The universal mood was one of terror and
despair.  If ever Canada needed a Moses this was the hour.

It will be seen from the dates that Denonville's recall was not due to
the Lachine massacre and the other raids of the Iroquois in 1689, for
these only occurred after Frontenac had been appointed.  Denonville's
dismissal was justified by the general results of {116} his
administration down to the close of 1688.  Before Frontenac left France
a plan of campaign had been agreed upon which it was now his duty to
execute.  The outlines of this plan were suggested by Callières, the
governor of Montreal,[1] who had been sent home by Denonville to
expound the needs of the colony in person and to ask for fresh aid.
The idea was to wage vigorous offensive warfare against the English
from Albany to New York.  Success would depend upon swiftness and
audacity, both of which Frontenac possessed in full measure, despite
his years.  Two French warships were to be sent direct to New York in
the autumn of 1689, while a raiding party from Canada should set out
for the Hudson as soon as Frontenac could organize it.

In its original form this plan of campaign was never carried out, for
on account of head winds Frontenac reached Quebec too late in the
autumn.  However, the central idea remained in full view and suggested
the three war-parties which were sent out during the winter of 1690 to
attack the English colonies.

{117}

Louis XIV had given Denonville important reinforcements, and with war
clouds gathering in Europe he was unwilling or unable to detach more
troops for the defence of Canada.  Hence, in warring against the
Iroquois and the English Frontenac had no greater resources than those
at the disposal of Denonville when he attacked the Senecas.  In fact,
since 1687 there had been some wastage in the number of the regulars
from disease.  The result was that Frontenac could not hope for any
solid success unless he received support from the Canadian militia.

In this crisis the habitants and their seigneurs accepted with courage
the duties laid upon them.  In the narrower sense they were fighting
for their homes, but the spirit which they displayed under Frontenac's
leadership is not merely that which one associates with a war of
defence.  The French soldier, in all ages, loved to strike the quick,
sharp blow, and it was now necessary for the salvation of Canada that
it should be struck.  The Iroquois had come to believe that Onontio was
losing his power.  The English colonies were far more populous than New
France.  In short, the only hope lay in a swift, spectacular campaign
which would disorganize {118} the English and regain the respect of the
Iroquois.

The issue depended on the courage and capacity of the Canadians.  It is
to their honour and to the credit of Frontenac that they rose to the
demand of the hour.  The Canadians were a robust, prolific race,
trained from infancy to woodcraft and all the hardships of the
wilderness.  Many families contained from eight to fourteen sons who
had used the musket and paddle from early boyhood, and could endure the
long tramps of winter like the Indians themselves.  The frontiersman
is, and must be, a fighter, but nowhere in the past can one find a
braver breed of warriors than mustered to the call of Frontenac.
François Hertel and Hertel de Rouville, Le Moyne d'Iberville with his
brothers Bienville and Sainte-Hélène, D'Aillebout de Mantet and
Repentigny de Montesson, are but a few representatives of the
militiamen who sped forth at the call of Frontenac to destroy the
settlements of the English.

[Illustration: PIERRE LE MOYNE, SIEUR D'IBERVILLE.  From an engraving
in the John Ross Robertson Collection, Toronto Public Library]

What followed was war in its worst form, including the massacre of
women and children.  The three bands organized by Frontenac at the
beginning of 1690 set out on snowshoes from Montreal, Three Rivers, and
Quebec.  {119} The largest party contained a hundred and fourteen
French and ninety-six Indians.  It marched from Montreal against
Schenectady, commanded by D'Aillebout de Mantet and Le Moyne de
Sainte-Hélène.  The second party, proceeding from Three Rivers and
numbering twenty-six French and twenty-nine Indians under the command
of François Hertel, aimed at Dover, Pemaquid, and other settlements of
Maine and New Hampshire.  The Quebec party, under Portneuf, comprised
fifty French and sixty Indians.  Its objective was the English colony
on Casco Bay, where the city of Portland now stands.  All three were
successful in accomplishing what they aimed at, namely the destruction
of English settlements amid fire and carnage.  All three employed
Indians, who were suffered, either willingly or unwillingly, to commit
barbarities.

It is much more the business of history to explain than to condemn or
to extenuate.  How could a man like François Hertel lead one of these
raids without sinking to the moral level of his Indian followers?  Some
such question may, not unnaturally, rise to the lips of a modern reader
who for the first time comes upon the story of Dover and Salmon {120}
Falls.  But fuller knowledge breeds respect for François Hertel.  When
eighteen years old he was captured by the Mohawks and put to the
torture.  One of his fingers they burned off in the bowl of a pipe.
The thumb of the other hand they cut off.  In the letter which he wrote
on birch-bark to his mother after this dreadful experience there is not
a word of his sufferings.  He simply sends her his love and asks for
her prayers, signing himself by his childish nickname, 'Your poor
Fanchon.'  As he grew up he won from an admiring community the name of
'The Hero.'  He was not only brave but religious.  In his view it was
all legitimate warfare.  If he slew others, he ran a thousand risks and
endured terrible privations for his king and the home he was defending.
His stand at the bridge over the Wooster river, sword in hand, when
pressed on his retreat by an overwhelming force of English, holding the
pass till all his men are over, is worthy of an epic.  He was
forty-seven years old at the time.  The three eldest of his nine sons
were with him in that little band of twenty-six Frenchmen, and two of
his nephews.  'To the New England of old,' says Parkman, 'François
Hertel was the abhorred chief of Popish {121} malignants and murdering
savages.  The New England of to-day will be more just to the brave
defender of his country and his faith.'

The atrocities committed by the French and Indians are enough to make
one shudder even at this distance of time.  As Frontenac adopted the
plan and sent forth the war-parties, the moral responsibility in large
part rests with him.  There are, however, some facts to consider before
judgment is passed as to the degree of his culpability.  The modern
distinction between combatants and non-combatants had little meaning in
the wilds of America at this period.  When France and England were at
open war, every settler was a soldier, and as such each man's duty was
to keep on his guard.  If caught napping he must take the consequences.
Thus, to fall upon an unsuspecting hamlet and slay its men-folk with
the tomahawk, while brutal, was hardly more brutal than under such
circumstances we could fairly expect war to be.

The massacre of women and children is another matter, not to be excused
on any grounds, even though Schenectady and Salmon Falls are paralleled
by recent acts of the Germans in Belgium.  Still, we should not forget
that European warfare in the age of {122} Frontenac abounded with just
such atrocities as were committed at Schenectady, Dover, Pemaquid,
Salmon Falls, and Casco Bay.  The sack of Magdeburg, the wasting of the
Palatinate, and, perhaps, the storming of Drogheda will match whatever
was done by the Indian allies of Frontenac.  These were unspeakable,
but the savage was little worse than his European contemporary.  Those
killed were in almost all cases killed outright, and the slaughter was
not indiscriminate.  At Schenectady John Sander Glen, with his whole
family and all his relations, were spared because he and his wife had
shown kindness to French prisoners taken by the Mohawks.  Altogether
sixty people were killed at Schenectady (February 9, 1690),
thirty-eight men, ten women, and twelve children.  Nearly ninety were
carried captive to Canada.  Sixty old men, women, and children were
left unharmed.  It is not worth while to take up the details of the
other raids.  They were of much the same sort--no better and no worse.
Where a garrison surrendered under promise that it would be spared, the
promise was observed so far as the Indians could be controlled; but
English and French alike when they used Indian allies knew well that
their {123} excesses could not be prevented, though they might be
moderated.  The captives as a rule were treated with kindness and
clemency when once the northward march was at an end.

Meanwhile, Frontenac had little time to reflect upon the probable
attitude of posterity towards his political morals.  The three
war-parties had accomplished their purpose and in the spring of 1690
the colony was aglow with fresh hope.  But the English were not slow to
retaliate.  That summer New York and Massachusetts decided on an
invasion of Canada.  It was planned that a fleet from Boston under Sir
William Phips should attack Quebec, while a force of militia from New
York in command of John Schuyler should advance through Lake Champlain
against Montreal.  Thus by sea and land Canada soon found herself on
the defensive.

Of Schuyler's raid nothing need be said except that he reached
Laprairie, opposite Montreal, where he killed a few men and destroyed
the crops (August 23, 1690).  It was a small achievement and produced
no result save the disappointment of New York that an undertaking upon
which much money and effort had been expended should terminate so
ingloriously.  But the siege of Quebec by {124} Phips, though it
likewise ended in failure, is a much more famous event, and deserves to
be described in some detail.

The colony of Massachusetts mustered its forces for a great and unusual
exploit.  Earlier in the same year a raid upon the coasts of Acadia had
yielded gratifying results.  The surrender of Port Royal without
resistance (May 11, 1690) kindled the Puritan hope that a single summer
might see the pestiferous Romanists of New France driven from all their
strongholds.  Thus encouraged, Boston put forth its best energies and
did not shrink from incurring a debt of £50,000, which in the
circumstances of Massachusetts was an enormous sum.  Help was expected
from England, but none came, and the fleet sailed without it, in full
confidence that Quebec would fall before the assault of the colonists
alone.

The fleet, which sailed in August, numbered thirty-four ships, carrying
twenty-three hundred men and a considerable equipment.  Sir William
Phips, the leader of the expedition, was not an Englishman by birth,
but a New Englander of very humble origin who owed his advancement to a
robust physique and unlimited assurance.  He was unfitted for his
command, both because he lacked experience {125} in fighting such foes
as he was about to encounter, and because he was completely ignorant of
the technical difficulties involved in conducting a large,
miscellaneous fleet through the tortuous channels of the lower St
Lawrence.  This ignorance resulted in such loss of time that he arrived
before Quebec amid the tokens of approaching winter.  It was the 16th
of October when he rounded the island of Orleans and brought his ships
to anchor under the citadel.  Victory could only be secured by sudden
success.  The state of the season forbade siege operations which
contemplated starvation of the garrison.

Hopeful that the mere sight of his armada would compel surrender, Phips
first sent an envoy to Frontenac under protection of the white flag.
This messenger after being blindfolded was led to the Château and
brought before the governor, who had staged for his reception one of
the impressive spectacles he loved to prepare.  Surrounding Frontenac,
as Louis XIV might have been surrounded by the grandees of France, were
grouped the aristocracy of New France--the officers of the French
regulars and the Canadian militia.  Nothing had been omitted which
could create an impression of dignity and strength.  {126} Costume,
demeanour, and display were all employed to overwhelm the envoy with
the insulted majesty of the king of France.  Led into this high
presence the messenger delivered his letter, which, when duly
interpreted, was found to convey a summary ultimatum.  Phips began by
stating that the war between France and England would have amply
warranted this expedition even 'without the destruction made by the
French and Indians, under your command and encouragement, upon the
persons and estates of their Majesties' subjects of New England,
without provocation on their part.'  Indeed, 'the cruelties and
barbarities used against them by the French and Indians might, upon the
present opportunity, prompt unto a severe revenge.'  But seeking to
avoid all inhumane and unchristian-like actions, Phips announces that
he will be content with 'a present surrender of your forts and castles,
undemolished, and the King's and other stores, unimbezzled, with a
seasonable delivery of all captives; together with a surrender of all
your persons and estates to my dispose; upon the doing whereof, you may
expect mercy from me, as a Christian, according to what shall be found
for their Majesties' service and the subjects' security.  Which, {127}
if you refuse forthwith to do, I am come provided and am resolved, by
the help of God in whom I trust, by force of arms to revenge all wrongs
and injuries offered, and bring you under subjection to the Crown of
England, and, when too late, make you wish you had accepted of the
favour tendered.  Your answer positive in an hour, returned by your own
trumpet, with the return of mine, is required upon the peril that will
ensue.'

To this challenge Frontenac at once returned the answer which comported
with his character.  When Phips's envoy took out his watch to register
the hour permitted by the ultimatum, Frontenac rejoined that he
required no time for deliberation, but would return his answer by the
mouth of the cannon.  The ground which he assigned for the invasion of
New England was that its people had rebelled against their lawful
prince, the ally of France.  Other more personal observations were
directed towards the manner in which Phips had behaved at Port Royal.
No word in writing would Frontenac send.  The envoy (who was only a
subaltern) received his congé, was blindfolded and led back to his boat.

Compliments having been thus exchanged, it remained for Phips to make
good his {128} challenge.  If we compare the four English and American
sieges of Quebec, the attack by Phips will be seen to have little in
common with those of Kirke and Montgomery, but to resemble rather
strikingly the attack by Wolfe.  Without fighting, Kirke swooped down
upon a garrison which was exhausted by starvation.  Arnold and
Montgomery operated without a fleet.  But while Phips's attempt is
unlike Wolfe's in that it ended in failure, the presence of the fleet
and the attempt to effect a landing below the mouth of the St Charles
present features of real similarity.  It is clear that Phips received
intelligence from prisoners of a possible landing above the town, at
the spot where Wolfe carried out his daring and desperate _coup de
main_.  But, anticipating Wolfe in another quarter, he chose to make
his first attack on the flats rather than on the heights.

The troops ordinarily stationed at Quebec were increased just after
Phips's arrival by a force of seven hundred regulars and militiamen
under Callières, who had come down from Montreal with all possible
haste.  So agile were the French and so proficient in irregular warfare
that Phips found it difficult to land any considerable detachment in
good order.  Thirteen hundred of the English did succeed {129} in
forming on the Beauport Flats, after wading through a long stretch of
mud.  There followed a preliminary skirmish in which three hundred
French were driven back with no great loss, after inflicting
considerable damage on the invaders.  But though the English reached
the east bank of the St Charles they could do no more.  Phips wasted
his ammunition on a fruitless and ill-timed bombardment, which was
answered with much spirit from the cliffs.  Meanwhile the musketeers on
the bank of the St Charles were unable to advance alone and received no
proper supply of stores from the ships.  Harassed by the Canadians,
wet, cold, and starving, they took to the boats, leaving behind them
five cannon.  After this nothing happened, save deliberations on the
part of Phips and his officers as to whether there remained anything
that could be done other than to sail for home, beaten and humiliated,
with a heavy burden of debt to hang round the neck of a too ambitious
Massachusetts.  Thus ended the second siege of Quebec (October 23,
1690).

Frontenac had lost two of his best soldiers--Sainte-Hélène, of the
fighting Le Moynes, and the Chevalier de Clermont; but, this
notwithstanding, the victory was felt to be complete.  {130} The most
precious trophy was the flag of Phips's ship, which a shot from the
ramparts had knocked into the river, whence it was rescued and brought
ashore in triumph.  Best of all, the siege had been too short to bring
famine in its train.  The loss of life was inconsiderable, and in
prestige the soldiery of New France now stood on a pinnacle which they
had never before attained.  When we consider the paucity of the forces
engaged, this repulse of the English from Quebec may not seem an
imposing military achievement.  But Canada had put forth her whole
strength and had succeeded where failure would have been fatal.  In the
shouts of rejoicing which followed Phips's withdrawal we hear the cry
of a people reborn.


The siege of Quebec and Schuyler's raid on Laprairie open up a subject
of large and vital moment--the historical antagonism of New France and
New England.  Whoever wishes to understand the deeper problems of
Canada in the age of Frontenac should read John Fiske's volumes on the
English colonies.  In the rise of Virginia, Maryland, Pennsylvania, New
York, Connecticut, and Massachusetts one sees the certain doom which
was {131} impending over New France.  It may be too much to say that
Richelieu by conquering Alsace threw away America.  Even had the
population of Canada been increased to the extent called for by the
obligations of Richelieu's company in 1627, the English might have
nevertheless prevailed.  But the preoccupation of France with the war
against Austria prevented her from giving due attention to the colonial
question at the critical moment when colonists should have been sent
out in large numbers.  And it is certain that by nothing short of a
great emigration could France have saved Canada.  As it was, the
English were bound to prevail by weight of population.  When the
conflict reached its climax in the days of Montcalm and Wolfe, two and
a half million English Americans confronted sixty-five thousand French
Canadians.  On such terms the result of the contest could not be
doubtful.  Even in Frontenac's time the French were protected chiefly
by the intervening wilderness and the need of the English colonists to
develop their own immediate resources.  The English were not yet ready
for a serious offensive war.  In fact they, too, had their own Indian
question.

It is a matter of some interest to observe {132} how the conquest of
Canada was postponed by the lack of cohesion among the English
colonies.  Selfishness and mutual jealousy prevented them from
combining against the common foe.  Save for this disunion and fancied
conflict of interest, New France must have succumbed long before the
time of Montcalm.  But the vital significance of the conflict between
New England and New France lies in the contrast of their spirit and
institutions.  The English race has extended itself through the world
because it possessed the genius of emigration.  The French colonist did
his work magnificently in the new home.  But the conditions in the old
home were unfavourable to emigration.  The Huguenots, the one class of
the population with a strong motive for emigrating, were excluded from
Canada in the interest of orthodoxy.  The dangers of the Atlantic and
the hardships of life in a wintry wilderness might well deter the
ordinary French peasant; moreover, it by no means rested with him to
say whether he would go or stay.  But, whatever their nature, the
French race lost a wonderful opportunity through the causes which
prevented a healthy, steady exodus to America.

England profited by having classes of people {133} sufficiently well
educated to form independent opinions and strong enough to carry out
the programme dictated by these opinions.  While each of the English
colonies sprang from a different motive, all had in common the purpose
to form an effective settlement.  The fur trade did France more harm
than good.  It deflected her attention from the middle to the northern
latitudes and lured her colonists from the land in search of quick
profits.  It was the enemy to the home.  On the other hand, the English
came to America primarily in search of a home.  Profits they sought,
like other people, but they sought them chiefly from the soil.

Thus English ideas took root in America, gained new vitality, and
assumed an importance they had not possessed in England for many
centuries.  And, while for the moment the organization of the English
colonies was not well suited to offensive war, as we may judge from the
abortive efforts of Phips and Schuyler, this defect could be corrected.
Arising, as it did arise, from a lack of unity among the colonies, it
was even indicative of latent strength.  From one angle, localism seems
selfishness and weakness; from another, it shows the vigorous life of
separate {134} communities, each self-centred and jealous of its
authority because the local instinct is so vitally active.  It only
needed time to broaden the outlook and give the English colonies a
sense of their common interest.  Virginia, New York, and Massachusetts,
by striking their roots each year more deeply into the soil of America,
became more and more self-supporting states in everything save name and
political allegiance; while New France, which with its austere climate
would have developed more slowly in any case, remained dependent on the
king's court.

Thus Frontenac's task was quite hopeless, if we define it as the effort
to overthrow English power in America.  But neither he nor any one of
that age defined his duties so widely.  In 1689 Canada was in extremes,
with the Iroquois at Lachine and Dongan threatening an attack from New
York.  Frontenac's policy was defensive.  If he struck first, it was
because he considered audacity to be his best safeguard.  No one knew
better than Frontenac that a successful raid does not mean conquest.



[1] Louis Hector de Callières-Bonnevue was a captain of the French army
who became governor of Montreal in 1684, and succeeded Frontenac as
governor of Canada in 1698.  He received the Cross of St Louis for
distinguished service against the Iroquois.  Frontenac could not have
had a better lieutenant.




{135}

CHAPTER VIII

FRONTENAC'S LAST DAYS

Though the English might withdraw from Quebec, New France always had
the Iroquois with her.  We must now pursue the thread of Frontenac's
dealings with the savages from the moment when he replaced Denonville.

It requires no flight of the imagination to appreciate the rage
Frontenac must have felt when, on returning to Canada, he saw before
his eyes the effects of La Barre's rapacity and Denonville's perfidy,
of which the massacres of Lachine and La Chesnaye furnished the most
ghastly proofs.  But in these two cases the element of tragedy was so
strong as to efface the mood of exasperation.  There remained a third
incident which must have provoked pure rage.  This was the destruction
of Fort Frontenac, blown up, at Denonville's order, by the French
themselves (October 1689).  The erection and maintenance of this post
had been a cardinal point in Frontenac's {136} Indian policy; and, more
particularly to aggravate the offence, there was the humiliating fact
that Denonville had ordered it demolished to comply with a demand from
the Iroquois.  This shameful concession had been made shortly before
Frontenac reached Canada.  It was Denonville's last important act in
the colony.  On the chance that something might have occurred to delay
execution of the order, Frontenac at once countermanded it and sent
forward an expedition of three hundred men.  But they were too late.
His beloved fortress was gone.  The only comfort which Frontenac could
derive from the incident was that the work of destruction had been
carried out imperfectly.  There remained a portion of the works which
could still be used.

Thus with regard to the Iroquois the situation was far worse in 1689
than it had been when Frontenac came to Canada in 1672.  Everything
which he had done to conciliate the Five Nations had been undone; and
Dongan's intelligent activities, coinciding with this long series of
French mistakes, had helped to make matters worse.  Nor was it now
merely a question of the Iroquois.  The whole Indian world had been
convulsed by the {137} renewal of strife between Onontio and the Five
Nations.  Tribes long friendly to the French and in constant trade with
them were being alienated.  The Indian problem as Frontenac saw it in
1690 resolved itself to this: either peace with the Iroquois on terms
which would prove impressive to the Hurons, the Ottawas, and even to
the savages of the Mississippi; or else uncompromising war.  For under
no circumstances could the French afford to lose their hold upon the
tribes from whom they derived their furs.

Obviously an honourable peace would be preferable to the horrors of a
forest war, and Frontenac did his best to secure it.  To undo, as far
as possible, Denonville's treachery at Fort Frontenac and elsewhere, he
had brought back with him to Quebec the Iroquois who had been sent to
France--or such of them as were still alive.  First among these was a
Cayuga chief of great influence named Ourehaoué, whose friendship
Frontenac assiduously cultivated and completely won.  Towards the close
of January 1690 an embassy of three released Iroquois carried to
Onondaga a message from Ourehaoué that the real Onontio had returned
and peace must be made with him if the Five Nations wished to live.  A
great {138} council was then held at which the English, by invitation,
were represented, while the French interest found its spokesman in a
Christian Iroquois named Cut Nose.  Any chance of success was destroyed
by the implacable enmity of the Senecas, who remembered the attempt of
the French to check their raids upon the Illinois and the invasion of
their own country by Denonville.  Cannehoot, a Seneca chieftain, rose
and stated that the tribes of Michilimackinac were ready to join the
English and the Iroquois for the destruction of New France; and the
assembly decided to enter this triple alliance.  Frontenac's envoys
returned to Quebec alive, but with nothing to show for their pains.  A
later effort by Frontenac was even less successful.  The Iroquois, it
was clear, could not be brought back to friendship by fair words.

War to the knife being inevitable, Frontenac promptly took steps to
confirm his position with the hitherto friendly savages of the Ottawa
and the Great Lakes.  When Cannehoot had said that the tribes of
Michilimackinac were ready to turn against the French, he was not
drawing wholly upon his imagination.  This statement was confirmed by
the report of Nicolas Perrot, who knew the {139} Indians of the West as
no one else knew them--save perhaps Du Lhut and Carheil.[1]  The French
were now playing a desperate game in the vast region beyond Lake Erie,
which they had been the first of Europeans to explore.  The Ottawas and
the Hurons, while alike the hereditary foes of the Iroquois, were
filled with mutual jealousy which must be composed.  The successes of
the Iroquois in their raids on the French settlements must be explained
and minimized.  'The Rat' Kondiaronk, the cleverest of the western
chieftains, must be conciliated.  And to compass all these ends, Perrot
found his reliance in the word that Frontenac had returned and would
lead his children against the common foe.  Meanwhile, the Iroquois had
their own advocates among the more timid and suspicious members of
these western tribes.  During the winter of 1689-90 the French and the
Iroquois had about an even chance of winning the {140} Indians who
centred at Michilimackinac.  But the odds were against the French to
this extent--they were working against a time limit.  Unless Frontenac
could quickly show evidence of strength, the tribes of the West would
range with the Iroquois.

In the spring of 1690 Frontenac dispatched a force of a hundred and
fifty men to reinforce the garrison at Michilimackinac.  On their way
westward these troops encountered a band of Iroquois and fortunately
killed a number of them.  The scalps were an ocular proof of success;
and Perrot, who was of the party, knew how to turn the victory to its
best use by encouraging the Ottawas to torture an Iroquois prisoner.
The breach thus made between the Ottawas and the Five Nations
distinctly widened as soon as word came that the French had destroyed
Schenectady.  Thus this dreadful raid against the English did not fail
of its psychological effect, as may be gathered from one of the
immediate consequences.  Early in August there appeared on Lake St
Louis a vast flotilla of canoes, which at first caused the afflicted
habitants to fear that the Iroquois were upon them again.  Instead of
this it was a great band of friendly savages from the West, drawn from
all the {141} trading tribes and bringing a cargo of furs of far more
than the usual value.  Frontenac himself chanced to be in Montreal at
this fortunate moment.  The market was held and concluded to mutual
satisfaction, but the crowning event of the meeting was a council, at
which, after an exchange of harangues, Frontenac entered into the
festivities of the savages as though he were one of themselves (August
1690).  The governor's example was followed by his leading officers.
Amid the chanting of the war-song and the swinging of the tomahawk the
French renewed their alliance with the Indians of the West.  All were
to fight until the Iroquois were destroyed.  Even the Ottawas, who had
been coquetting with the Senecas, now came out squarely and said that
they would stand by Onontio.

Here, at last, was a real answer to the Lachine massacre.  The
challenge had been fairly given, and now it was not a Denonville who
made the reply.  There followed three years of incessant warfare
between the Iroquois and the French, which furnished a fair test of the
strength that each side could muster when fighting at its best.  The
Five Nations had made up their minds.  The cares of diplomacy they
threw to the winds.  They {142} were on the war-path, united and
determined.  The French, on their side, had Frontenac for leader and
many outrages to avenge.  It was war of the wilderness in its most
unrelenting form, with no mercy expected or asked.  The general result
can be quickly stated.  The Iroquois got their fill of war, and
Frontenac destroyed their power as a central, dominating, terrorizing
confederacy.

The measure of this achievement is to be sought in the difficulties
which were overcome.  Despite the eighty years of its existence the
colony was still so poor that regularity in the arrival of supplies
from France was a matter of vital importance.  From the moment war
began English cruisers hovered about the mouth of the St Lawrence,
ready to pounce upon the supply-ships as they came up the river.
Sometimes the French boats escaped; sometimes they were captured; but
from this interruption of peaceful oversea traffic Canada suffered
grievously.  Another source of weakness was the interruption of
agriculture which followed in the train of war.  As a rule the Iroquois
spent the winter in hunting deer, but just as the ground was ready for
its crop they began to show themselves in the parishes near Montreal,
picking off the habitants in their {143} farms on the edge of the
forest, or driving them to the shelter of the stockade.  These forays
made it difficult and dangerous to till the soil, with a corresponding
shrinkage in the volume of the crop.  Almost every winter famine was
imminent in some part of the colony, and though spring was welcome for
its own sake, it invariably brought the Iroquois.  A third calamity was
the interruption of the fur trade.  Ordinarily the great cargoes
descended the Ottawa in fleets of from one hundred to two hundred
canoes.  But the savages of the West well knew that when they embarked
with their precious bales upon a route which was infested by the
Iroquois, they gave hostages to fortune.  In case of a battle the cargo
was a handicap, since they must protect it as well as themselves.  In
case they were forced to flee for their lives, they lost the goods
which it had cost so much effort to collect.  In these circumstances
the tribes of Michilimackinac would not bring down their furs unless
they felt certain that the whole course of the Ottawa was free from
danger.  In seasons when they failed to come, the colony had nothing to
export and penury became extreme.  At best the returns from the fur
trade were precarious.  In 1690 and 1693 {144} there were good markets;
in 1691 and 1692 there were none at all.

From time to time Frontenac received from France both money and troops,
but neither in sufficient quantity to place him where he could deal the
Iroquois one final blow.  Thus one year after another saw a war of
skirmishes and minor raids, sufficiently harassing and weakening to
both sides, but with results which were disappointing because
inconclusive.  The hero of this border warfare is the Canadian
habitant, whose farm becomes a fort and whose gun is never out of
reach.  Nor did the men of the colony display more courage than their
wives and daughters.  The heroine of New France is the woman who rears
from twelve to twenty children, works in the fields and cooks by day,
and makes garments and teaches the catechism in the evening.  It was a
community which approved of early marriage--a community where boys and
girls assumed their responsibilities very young.  Youths of sixteen
shouldered the musket.  Madeleine de Verchères was only fourteen when
she defended her father's fort against the Iroquois with a garrison of
five, which included two boys and a man of eighty (October 1692).

{145}

A detailed chronicle of these raids and counter-raids would be both
long and complicated, but in addition to the incidents which have been
mentioned there remain three which deserve separate comment--Peter
Schuyler's invasion of Canada in 1691, the activities of the Abnakis
against New England, and Frontenac's invasion of the Onondaga country
in 1696.

We have already seen that in 1690 an attempt was made by John Schuyler
to avenge the massacre at Schenectady.  The results of this effort were
insignificant, but its purpose was not forgotten; and in 1691 the
Anglo-Dutch of the Hudson attempted once more to make their strength
felt on the banks of the St Lawrence.  This time the leader was Peter
Schuyler, whose force included a hundred and twenty English and Dutch,
as against the forty who had attacked Canada in the previous summer.
The number of Indian allies was also larger than on the former
occasion, including both Mohawks and Mohegans.  Apart from its superior
numbers and much harder fighting, the second expedition of the English
was similar to the first.  Both followed Lake Champlain and the
Richelieu; both reached Laprairie, opposite Montreal; both were {146}
forced to retreat without doing any great damage to their enemies.
There is this notable difference, however, that the French were in a
much better state of preparation than they had been during the previous
summer.  The garrison at Laprairie now numbered above seven hundred,
while a flying squadron of more than three hundred stood ready to
attack the English on their retreat to the Richelieu.  On the whole,
Schuyler was fortunate to escape as lightly as he did.  Forty of his
party were killed in a hot battle, but he made his retreat in good
order after inflicting some losses on the French (August 1, 1691).
Although Schuyler's retreat was skilfully conducted, his original
object had been far more ambitious than to save his men from
extermination.  The French missed a chance to injure their foe more
seriously than they had done at Schenectady.  At the same time, this
second English invasion was so far from successful that the New France
of Frontenac suffered no further attack from the side of Albany.

While Callières and Valrennes were repulsing Peter Schuyler from
Laprairie, the French in another part of Frontenac's jurisdiction were
preparing for the offensive.  The centre {147} of this activity was the
western part of Acadia--that is, the large and rugged region which is
watered by the Penobscot and the Kennebec.  Here dwelt the Abnakis, a
tribe of Algonquin origin, among whom the Jesuits had established a
mission and made many converts.  Throughout Acadia the French had
established friendly relations with the Indians, and as the English
settlements began to creep from New Hampshire to the mouth of the
Kennebec, the interval between the rival zones of occupation became so
narrow as to admit of raiding.  Phips's capture of Port Royal had
alarmed some of the Abnakis, but most of them held fast to the French
connection and were amenable to presents.  It soon proved that all they
needed was leadership, which was amply furnished by the Baron de
Saint-Castin and Father Thury.

Saint-Castin was a very energetic French trader, of noble birth, who
had established himself at Pentegoet on Penobscot Bay--a point which,
after him, is now called Castine.  Father Thury was the chief of the
mission priests in the western part of Acadia, but though an
ecclesiastic he seems to have exalted patriotism above religion.  That
he did his best to incite his converts against the {148} English is
beyond question.  Urged on by him and Saint-Castin, the savages of the
Penobscot and the Kennebec proceeded with enthusiasm to destroy the
English settlements which lay within their reach.  In the course of
successive raids which extended from 1692 to 1694 they descended upon
York, Wells, and Oyster Bay, always with the stealth and swiftness
which marked joint operations of the French and Indians.  The
settlements of the English were sacked, the inhabitants were either
massacred or carried into captivity, and all those scenes were
re-enacted which had marked the success of Frontenac's three
war-parties in 1690.  Thus New England was exposed to attack from the
side of Acadia no less than from that of Canada.  Incidentally Canada
and Acadia were drawn into closer connection by the vigour which
Frontenac communicated to the war throughout all parts of his
government.

But the most vivid event of Frontenac's life after the defence of
Quebec against Phips was the great expedition which he led in person
against the Onondagas.  It was an exploit which resembles Denonville's
attack upon the Senecas, with the added interest that Frontenac was in
his seventy-seventh year when {149} he thus carried the war into the
heart of the enemy's country.  As a physical _tour de force_ this
campaign was splendid, and it enables us, better than any other event,
to appreciate the magnificent energy which Frontenac threw into the
fulfilment of his task.  With over two thousand men, and an equipment
that included cannon and mortars, he advanced from the south shore of
Lake Ontario against the chief stronghold of the Iroquois.  At the
portage the Indians would not permit their aged, indomitable Onontio to
walk, but insisted that he should remain seated in his canoe, while
they carried it from the pool below the fall to the dead water above.
All the French saw of the stronghold they had come to attack was the
flame which consumed it.  Following the example of the Senecas, the
Onondagas, when they saw that the invader was at hand, set fire to
their palisade and wigwams, gathered up what property was portable, and
took to the woods.  Pursuit was impossible.  All that could be done was
to destroy the corn and proceed against the settlement of the Oneidas.
After this, with its maize, had been consumed, Frontenac considered
whether he should attack the Cayugas, but he decided against this {150}
extension of the campaign.  Unlike Denonville, he was at war with the
English as well as with the Iroquois, and may have thought it imprudent
to risk surprise at a point so far from his base.  While it was
disappointing that the Onondagas did not wait to be destroyed by the
cannon which with so much effort had been brought against them, this
expedition was a useful proof of strength and produced a good moral
effect throughout the colony as well as among the western tribes.

The events of 'William and Mary's War,' as it was known in New England,
show how wide the French zone in North America had come to be.
Frontenac's province extended from Newfoundland to the Mississippi,
from Onondaga to Hudson Bay.  The rarest quality of a ruler is the
power to select good subordinates and fill them with his own high
spirit.  Judged by this standard Frontenac deserves great praise, for
he never lacked capable and loyal lieutenants.  With Callières at
Montreal, Tonty on the Mississippi, Perrot and Du Lhut at
Michilimackinac, Villebon and Saint-Castin in Acadia, Sainte-Hélène at
the siege of Quebec, and Iberville at Hudson Bay, he was well supported
by his staff.  At this critical moment the shortcomings of the {151}
French in America were certainly not due to lack of purpose or driving
power.  The system under which they worked was faulty, and in their
extremity they resorted to harsh expedients.  But there were heroes in
New France, if courage and self-sacrifice are the essence of heroism.

The Peace of Ryswick, which was signed in the year after Frontenac's
campaign against the Onondagas, came as a happy release to Canada
(1697).  For nine years the colony had been hard pressed, and a
breathing space was needed.  The Iroquois still remained a peril, but
proportionately their losses since 1689 had been far heavier than those
of the French and English.  Left to carry on the war by themselves,
they soon saw the hopelessness of their project to drive the French
from the St Lawrence.  The English were ready to give them defensive
assistance, even after word came from Europe that peace had been
signed.  In 1698 the Earl of Bellomont, then governor of New York,
wrote Frontenac that he would arm every man in his province to aid the
Iroquois if the French made good their threat to invade once more the
land of the Five Nations.  Frontenac, then almost on his death-bed,
sent back the characteristic reply {152} that this kind of language
would only encourage him to attack the Iroquois with the more vigour.
The sequel shows that the English at Albany overplayed their part.  The
reward of their protection was to be suzerainty, and at this price
protection proved unacceptable to the Iroquois, whose safety lay in the
equipoise of power between the rival whites.  Three years later the
Five Nations renewed peace with Onontio; and, though Frontenac did not
live to see the day, he it was who had brought it to pass.  His daring
and energy had broken the spirit of the red man.  In 1701 Callières,
then governor of New France, held a great council at Montreal, which
was attended by representatives from all the Indian tribes of the West
as well as from the Iroquois.  There, amid all the ceremonies of the
wilderness, the calumet was smoked and the hatchet was interred.

But the old warrior was then no more.  On returning to Quebec from his
war against the Onondagas he had thrown himself into an active quarrel
with Champigny, the intendant, as to the establishment and maintenance
of French posts throughout the West.  To the last Frontenac remained an
advocate of the policy which sought to place France in control {153} of
the Great Lakes and the Mississippi.  Champigny complained of the
expense and the Jesuits lamented the immorality which life in the
forest encouraged among young men.  It was an old quarrel renewed under
conditions which made the issue more important than ever, for with open
war between French and English it became of vital moment to control
points which were, or might be, strategic.

This dispute with Champigny was the last incident in Frontenac's stormy
life.  It remains to the credit of both governor and intendant that
their differences on matters of policy did not make them irreconcilable
enemies.  On the 28th of November 1698 Frontenac died at the Château St
Louis after an illness of less than a month.  He had long been a hero
of the people, and his friendship with the Récollets shows that he had
some true allies among the clergy.  No one in Canada could deny the
value of his services at the time of crisis--which was not a matter of
months but of years.  Father Goyer, of the Récollets, delivered a
eulogy which in fervour recalls Bossuet's funeral orations over members
of the royal family.  But the most touching valedictory was that from
Champigny, who after many differences had become {154} Frontenac's
friend.  In communicating to the Colonial Office tidings of the
governor's death, Champigny says: 'On the 28th of last month Monsieur
le Comte de Frontenac died, with the sentiments of a true Christian.
After all our disputes, you will hardly believe, Monseigneur, how truly
and deeply I am touched by his death.  He treated me during his illness
in a manner so obliging that I should be utterly devoid of gratitude if
I did not feel thankful to him.'


There is a well-known portrait of Madame de Frontenac, which may still
be seen at Versailles.  Of Frontenac himself no portrait whatever
exists.  Failing his likeness from brush or pencil, we must image to
ourselves as best we may the choleric old warrior who rescued New
France in her hour of need.  In seeking to portray his character the
historian has abundant materials for the period of his life in Canada,
though we must regret the dearth of information for the years which
separate his two terms of office.  There is also a bad gap in our
sources for the period which precedes his first appointment as
governor.  What we have from Madame de Montpensier and Saint-Simon is
useful, but their statements {155} are far from complete and provoke
many questions which must remain unanswered.  His letters and reports
as governor of Canada exist in considerable numbers, but it must remain
a source of lasting regret that his private correspondence has perished.

Some one has said that talent should be judged at its best and
character at its worst; but this is a phrase which does not help us to
form a true estimate of Frontenac.  He touched no heights of genius and
he sank to no depths of crime.  In essential respects his qualities lie
upon the surface, depicted by his acts and illustrated by his own words
or those of men who knew him well.  Were we seeking to set his good
traits against his bad, we should style him, in one column, brave,
steadfast, daring, ambitious of greatness, far-sighted in policy; and
in the other, prodigal, boastful, haughty, unfair in argument, ruthless
in war.  This method of portraiture, however, is not very helpful.  We
can form a much better idea of Frontenac's nature by discussing his
acts than by throwing adjectives at him.

As an administrator he appears to least advantage during his first term
of office, when, in the absence of war, his energies were directed
against adversaries within the colony.  {156} Had he not been sent to
Canada a second time, his feud with Laval, Duchesneau, and the Jesuits
would fill a much larger space in the canvas than it occupies at
present.  For in the absence of great deeds to his credit obstinacy and
truculence might have been thought the essentials rather than the
accidents of his character.  M. Lorin, who writes in great detail,
finds much to say on behalf of Frontenac's motives, if not of his
conduct, in these controversies.  But viewing his career broadly it
must be held that, at best, he lost a chance for useful co-operation by
hugging prejudices and prepossessions which sprang in part from his own
love of power and in part from antipathy towards the Jesuits in France.
He might not like the Jesuits, but they were a great force in Canada
and had done things which should have provoked his admiration.  In any
case, it was his duty to work with them on some basis and not dislocate
the whole administration by brawling.  As to Duchesneau, Frontenac was
the broader man of the two, and may be excused some of the petulance
which the intendant's pin-pricks called forth.

Frontenac's enemies were fond of saying that he used his position to
make illicit profits {157} from the fur trade.  Beyond question he
traded to some extent, but it would be harsh to accuse him of venality
or peculation on the strength of such evidence as exists.  There is a
strong probability that the king appointed him in the expectation that
he would augment his income from sources which lay outside his salary.
Public opinion varies from age to age regarding the latitude which may
be allowed a public servant in such matters.  Under a democratic régime
the standard is very different from that which has existed, for the
most part, under autocracies in past ages.  Frontenac was a man of
distinction who accepted an important post at a small salary.  We may
infer that the king was willing to allow him something from
perquisites.  If so, his profits from the fur trade become a matter of
degree.  So long as he kept within the bounds of reason and decency,
the government raised no objection.  Frontenac certainly was not a
governor who pillaged the colony to feather his own nest.  If he took
profits, they were not thought excessive by any one except Duchesneau.
The king recalled him not because he was venal, but because he was
quarrelsome.

Assuming the standards of his own age, a {158} reasonable plea can also
be made on Frontenac's behalf respecting the conduct of his wars.
'Man's inhumanity to man makes countless thousands mourn' in our own
day no less than in the seventeenth century; while certain facts of
recent memory are quite lurid enough to be placed in comparison with
the border raids which, under Frontenac, were made by the French and
their Indian allies.  It is dreadful to know that captured Iroquois
were burned alive by the French, but after the Lachine massacre and the
tortures which French captives endured, this was an almost inevitable
retaliation.  The concluding scenes of King Philip's War prove, at any
rate, that the men of New England exercised little more clemency
towards their Indian foes than was displayed by the French.  The
Puritans justified their acts of carnage by citations from the Old
Testament regarding the Canaanites and the Philistines.  The most
bitter chronicler of King Philip's War is William Hubbard, a Calvinist
pastor of Ipswich.  On December 19, 1675, the English of Massachusetts
and Connecticut stormed the great stronghold of the Narragansetts.  To
quote John Fiske: 'In the slaughter which filled the rest of that
Sunday afternoon till the sun went down behind a {159} dull gray cloud,
the grim and wrathful Puritan, as he swung his heavy cutlass, thought
of Saul and Agag, and spared not.  The Lord had delivered up to him the
heathen as stubble to his sword.  As usual the number of the slain is
variously estimated.  Of the Indians probably not less than a thousand
perished.'

For the slaughter of English women and children by French raiders there
was no precedent or just provocation.  Here Frontenac must be deemed
more culpable than the Puritans.  The only extenuating circumstance is
that those who survived the first moments of attack were in almost all
cases spared, taken to Canada, and there treated with kindness.

Writers of the lighter drama have long found a subject in the old man
whose irascibility is but a cloak for goodness of heart.  It would be
an exaggeration to describe Frontenac as a character of this type, for
his wrath could be vehement, and benevolence was not the essential
strain in his disposition.  At the same time, he had many warm impulses
to his credit.  His loyalty to friends stands above reproach, and there
are little incidents which show his sense of humour.  For instance, he
once fined a woman for lampooning him, but {160} caused the money to be
given to her children.  Though often unfair in argument, he was by
nature neither mean nor petty.  In ordinary circumstances he remembered
_noblesse oblige_, and though boastfulness may have been among his
failings, he had a love of greatness which preserved him from sordid
misdemeanours.  Even if we agree with Parkman that greatness must be
denied him, it yet remains to be pointed out that absolute greatness is
a high standard attained by few.  Frontenac was a greater man than most
by virtue of robustness, fire, and a sincere aspiration to discharge
his duty as a lieutenant of the king.

He doubtless thought himself ill-used in that he lacked the wealth
which was needed to accomplish his ambitions at court.  But if fortune
frowned upon him at Versailles, she made full compensation by granting
him the opportunity to govern Canada a second time.  As he advanced in
years his higher qualities became more conspicuous.  His vision
cleared.  His vanities fell away.  There remained traces of the old
petulance; but with graver duties his stature increased and the strong
fibre of his nature was disclosed.  For his foibles he had suffered
much throughout his whole life.  {161} But beneath the foibles lay
courage and resolve.  It was his reward that in the hour of trial, when
upon his shoulders rested the fate of France in America, he was not
found wanting.



[1] Étienne da Carheil was the most active of the Jesuit missionaries
in Canada during the period of Frontenac.  After fifteen years among
the Iroquois at Cayuga (1668-83) he returned for three years to Quebec.
He was then sent to Michilimackinac, where he remained another fifteen
years.  Shortly after the founding of Detroit (1701) he gave up life in
the forest.  Despite the great hardships which he endured, he lived to
be ninety-three.  None of the missionaries was more strongly opposed to
the brandy trade.




{162}

BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

Of the literature on Frontenac and his period the greater part is in
French.  The books in English to which attention may be specially
called are:

Parkman, Francis: _Count Frontenac and New France under Louis XIV_.

Le Sieur, William Dawson: _Count Frontenac_ in the 'Makers of Canada'
series.

Winsor, Justin: _Cartier to Frontenac_.

Stewart, George: 'Frontenac and his Times' in the _Narrative and
Critical History of America_, edited by Justin Winsor, vol. iv.


In French the most important works are:

Lorin, Henri: _Le Comte de Frontenac_.

Myrand, Ernest: _Frontenac et ses Amis; Phips devant Québec_.

Rochemonteix, Le Père Camille de: _Les Jésuites et la Nouvelle France_,
vol. iii.

Gosselin, L'Abbé: _La Vie de Mgr Laval_.

Sulte, B.: _Histoire des Canadiens-Français_.

Ferland, L'Abbé: _Cours d'Histoire du Canada_.

Faillon, L'Abbé: _Histoire de la Colonie Française en Canada_, vol. iii.

Gagnon, Ernest: _Le Fort et le Château Saint-Louis_.

{163}

Garneau, F.-X.: _Histoire du Canada_, edited by Hector Garneau.


Among the original sources for this period the following are likely to
be found in any large library:

_Jugements et Deliberations du Conseil Souverain_.

_Edits et Ordonnances_.

_Relations des Jésuites._  Ed. Thwaites.

_Memoires et Documents pour servir à l'histoire des origines françaises
des pays d'outre-mer_, ed. P. Margry.

_Les Lettres de La Hontan_.

_Histoire de l'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, par la mère Juchereau de
Saint-Denis_.




{164}

INDEX


Abnakis, the, raid New England settlements, 147-8.

Aillebout de Mantet, d', 118, 119.

Andros, Sir Edmund, his Indian policy, 89, 90, 109.


Bellomont, Earl of, and Frontenac, 151.

Bernières, Abbé de, 59.

Bienville, François Le Moyne de, 118.

Brucy, Perrot's chief agent, 49.


Callières-Bonnevue, Louis Hector de, 116, 150; at the defence of
Quebec, 128; repulses Schuyler's invasion, 146; makes peace with the
Iroquois, 152.

Canada.  See New France.

Cannehoot, a Seneca chief, 138.

Carheil, Étienne de, a Jesuit missionary, 139 n.

Cataraqui, Frontenac's conference with Iroquois at, 41-4.

Champigny, intendant, his relations with Frontenac, 152-4.

Champlain, Samuel de, 8.

Château St Louis, 9, 34.

Clermont, Chevalier de, killed at Quebec, 129.

Colbert, minister of Louis XIV, 30; and New France, 54, 58, 62, 65-8.

Courcelles, Sieur de, governor of New France, 34.

Coureurs de bois, the, 12-13, 46, 49.


Denonville, Marquis de, governor of New France, 103-4; his
correspondence with Dongan, 104-6, 108; fails to cope with the
Iroquois, 103-11, 135-136, 138; recalled, 115-16.

Dongan, Thomas, governor of New York, 90-1, 96, 97, 104-5, 109.

Duchesneau, Jacques, intendant, 51-2, 64; his relations with Frontenac,
52-3, 63-70, 80, 94; and the coureurs de bois, 79-80.

Du Lhut, Daniel Greysolon, explorer and pioneer, 77-81, 106, 109, 150.


Fénelon, Abbé, espouses Perrot's cause against Frontenac, 48-9, 50, 74.

Five Nations.  See Iroquois.

Fort Frontenac, 38, 43, 44, 45, 76, 98, 106-7; destroyed, 135-6.

France, under the Bourbons, 1-4, 11, 29 n., 31-2, 85, 90; her policy in
New France, 5, 10-11, 68; the Thirty Years' War, 19-21; the outbreak of
the Fronde, 21; the dispute between Gallicans and Ultramontanes, 55-7;
war with Holland, 85, 90; war with Britain, 114; her colonial system
compared with that of Britain, 131-4.  See New France.

Frontenac, Comte de, his birth and parentage, 17-18; his early career,
18-21, 26 n.; his marriage and domestic affairs, 21-6, 113; selected by
Turenne to assist Venice in the defence of Crete, 26-8; gossip
concerning his appointment as governor of New France, 28-30; his
arrival in Quebec, 33-4; summons the Three Estates, 35-7, 44-5; his
tour of inspection and conference with the Iroquois, 38-44, 95; his
quarrel with Perrot, 45-50; and Laval, 51-3, 55, 58-63; and Duchesneau,
52-3, 63-70, 80; and the Sulpicians, 54; his antagonism towards the
Jesuits, 54-5, 57-8, 69-70, 81-3; favours the Récollets, 55; upholds
the brandy traffic, 61-3; his influence with the Indians, 72-3, 93-4;
encourages exploration, 74-5, 79; supports the coureurs de bois, 80;
his recall, 70-2; an estimate of his work, 72-4, 83-86, 93-4; his
return to New France, 112-15, 116, 135-6; his campaign against New
England, 117-19, 121; his reply to Phips, 125-7; his Indian policy,
135-7, 138, 141; at war with the Iroquois, 137-42, 144, 148-50; his
expedition against the Onondagas and Oneidas, 148-50; his reply to
Bellomont's threat, 151-2; his dispute with Champigny, 152-3; his
death, 153-4; his character, 24, 25-26, 31, 32, 44, 57, 58, 150,
154-161.

Frontenac, Madame de, 22-5, 154.


Goyer, Father, 115; pronounces eulogy on Frontenac, 153.

Grangula, an Onondaga chief, 99-102, 109.

Great Britain, 29 n., 90; and war with France, 114, 142; her colonial
system, 131-4.  See New England States.


Hébert, Louis, a seigneur of New France, 14.

Hennepin, Father, his rescue, 78.

Hertel, François, his raid on English settlements, 118, 119-121.

Holland, and war with France, 29 n., 85, 90; and the fur trade, 89.

Howard of Effingham, Lord, governor of Virginia, 96.

Hubbard, William, and King Philip's War, 158-9.

Hudson Bay, the struggle between French and English on, 105-6.

Hurons, the, 139.


Iberville, Pierre Le Moyne d', 118, 150.

Illinois, the, 93, 95-6.

Iroquois, the, and Frontenac, 40, 41-4, 93, 95, 137-8; their power and
political sagacity, 87-9, 97, 109-10; and the fur trade, 92-3, 95-6; a
menace to New France, 94, 95-6, 111; their relations with the English,
96, 97; and La Barre, 95, 98-102; and Denonville, 106-7, 109, 110; at
war with New France, 137-42, 149; make peace, 152.


Jesuits, the, in New France, 8, 53-4; and Frontenac, 54-5, 57-8, 69-70,
82-3; and the brandy traffic, 61-3.


King Philip's War, 158-9.

Kondiaronk, a Huron chief, 110-111, 139.


La Barre, Lefebvre de, governor of New France, 91, 92, 135; fails to
cope with the Iroquois peril, 94, 95-6, 97, 98-102; recalled, 103.

La Chesnaye, massacre at, 111, 135.

Lachine, massacre by Iroquois at, 111, 135.

La Durantaye, and the Iroquois, 106, 109.

La Hontan, Baron, quoted, 99-102.

Lamberville, his influence with the Iroquois, 97, 109.

Laprairie, English raids on, 123, 146.

La Salle, and Frontenac, 40-1, 45, 74-7, 92, 93; and La Barre, 96.

Laval, François de, bishop of Quebec, 6-7, 8-9, 34, 51-3; and
Frontenac, 51-3, 55, 58-63; and the brandy traffic, 61-2.

Le Ber, Jacques, 47-8.

Le Moyne, Charles, interpreter, 43, 95, 97, 102.  See Bienville,
Iberville, and Sainte-Hélène.

Louis XIV, his interest in New France, 30, 50, 60, 62, 67, 85, 117; and
the Church, 56, 58.


Marlborough, Duke of, 90.

Mazarin, Cardinal, 21.

Meulles, intendant, and La Barre, 91, 92, 97, 102.

Michilimackinac, 13, 78.

Mohawks, the, 145.

Mohegans, the, 145.

Montpensier, Duchesse de, 22-23; and Frontenac, 24.

Montreal, its position in New France, 39-40, 141.


New Amsterdam, and the Iroquois, 89.

New England States, contrasted with New France, 15, 130-4; and the
Iroquois, 89-90, 104-5, 151-2; at war with New France, 123-30, 138,
151-152; and the Abnaki raids, 147-8.

New France, in 1672, 1, 8, 14-16, 83; status of the governor and
intendant, 5, 9-10, 11; the fur trade, 8; the seigneurial system,
11-12, 14-15; the coureurs de bois, 12-13; the creation of parishes,
58-61; the brandy traffic, 61-3; population and trade during 1673-83,
84-5; the Iroquois peril, 87, 89, 90, 91, 94, 97, 111, 137-40, 142-143,
149; in 1689, 114, 115; at war with New England, 119-123, 128-30,
145-6; her weakness, 130-4; from 1690 to 1693, 142-4, 150; and Acadia,
147-8.


Oneidas, the, 149.  See Iroquois.

Onondagas, the, 98-103, 149.  See Iroquois.

Ottawas, the, 139, 140, 141.

Ourehaoué, a Cayuga chief, 137.


Parkman, on Frontenac, 36, 160; on Hertel, 120-1.

Perrot, François, governor of Montreal, 39-40; his quarrel with
Frontenac, 45-50.

Perrot, Nicolas, interpreter, 13 n., 106, 138-9, 140, 150.

Phips, Sir William, his attack on Quebec, 123-30.

Portneuf, his raid, 119.

Port Royal, surrendered to Phips, 124, 127.


Quebec, 91; Phips's siege of, 123-30.


Récollets, the, and Frontenac, 53-4, 55.

Repentigny de Montesson, 118.

Richelieu, Cardinal, minister to Louis XIII, 18-19, 20, 21, 131.

Rouville, Hertel de, 118.

Ryswick, Peace of, 151.


Saint-Castin, Baron de, raids New England settlements, 147, 148, 150.

Sainte-Hélène,  Jacques Le Moyne de, 118, 119, 129, 150.

Schenectady, raided by the French, 119, 121, 122, 140.

Schuyler, John, his abortive raid into New France, 123, 145.

Schuyler, Peter, his invasion defeated at Laprairie, 145-6.

Seignelay, Marquis de, 70.

Senecas, the, 107-8.  See Iroquois.

Sovereign Council, composition and jurisdiction of, 9-10; and
Frontenac, 65-8.

Sulpicians, the, in New France, 39, 53-4.

Superior Council, 9.  See Sovereign Council.


Talon, Jean, 6, 34; supports Perrot against Frontenac, 50.

Thury, Father, encourages Abnaki raids on English settlements, 147-8.

Tonty, Henri de, explorer, 76-7, 92, 93, 106, 109, 150.

Turgot, Anne Robert Jacques, 6 and note.


Urfé, Abbé d', supports Perrot against Frontenac, 50.


Valrennes, at Laprairie, 146.

Vaudreuil, governor of New France, 81.

Verchères, Madeleine de, 144.


West India Company, its trading monopoly, 84.

'William and Mary's War,' 150.  See under New France and New England
States.




  Printed by T. and A. Constable, Printers to His Majesty
  at the Edinburgh University Press




THE CHRONICLES OF CANADA

THIRTY-TWO VOLUMES ILLUSTRATED

Edited by GEORGE M. WRONG and H. H. LANGTON



THE CHRONICLES OF CANADA

PART I

THE FIRST EUROPEAN VISITORS

1.  THE DAWN OF CANADIAN HISTORY
   By Stephen Leacock.

2.  THE MARINER OF ST MALO
   By Stephen Leacock.


PART II

THE RISE OF NEW FRANCE

3.  THE FOUNDER OF NEW FRANCE
   By Charles W. Colby.

4.  THE JESUIT MISSIONS
   By Thomas Guthrie Marquis.

5.  THE SEIGNEURS OF OLD CANADA
   By William Bennett Munro.

6.  THE GREAT INTENDANT
   By Thomas Chapais.

7.  THE FIGHTING GOVERNOR
   By Charles W. Colby.


PART III

THE ENGLISH INVASION

8.  THE GREAT FORTRESS
   By William Wood.

9.  THE ACADIAN EXILES
   By Arthur G. Doughty.

10.  THE PASSING OF NEW FRANCE
    By William Wood.

11.  THE WINNING OF CANADA
    By William Wood.


PART IV

THE BEGINNINGS OF BRITISH CANADA

12.  THE FATHER OF BRITISH CANADA
    By William Wood.

13.  THE UNITED EMPIRE LOYALISTS
    By W. Stewart Wallace.

14.  THE WAR WITH THE UNITED STATES
    By William Wood.


PART V

THE RED MAN IN CANADA

15.  THE WAR CHIEF OF THE OTTAWAS
    By Thomas Guthrie Marquis.

16.  THE WAR CHIEF OF THE SIX NATIONS
    By Louis Aubrey Wood.

17.  TECUMSEH: THE LAST GREAT LEADER OF HIS PEOPLE
    By Ethel T. Raymond.


PART VI

PIONEERS OF THE NORTH AND WEST

18.  THE 'ADVENTURERS OF ENGLAND' ON HUDSON BAY
    By Agnes C. Laut.

19.  PATHFINDERS OF THE GREAT PLAINS
    By Lawrence J. Burpee.

20.  ADVENTURERS OF THE FAR NORTH
    By Stephen Leacock.

21.  THE RED RIVER COLONY
    By Louis Aubrey Wood.

22.  PIONEERS OF THE PACIFIC COAST
    By Agnes C. Laut.

23.  THE CARIBOO TRAIL
    By Agnes C. Laut.


PART VII

THE STRUGGLE FOR POLITICAL FREEDOM

24.  THE FAMILY COMPACT
    By W. Stewart Wallace.

25.  THE 'PATRIOTES' OF '37
    By Alfred D. DeCelles.

26.  THE TRIBUNE OF NOVA SCOTIA
    By William Lawson Grant.

27.  THE WINNING OF POPULAR GOVERNMENT
    By Archibald MacMechan.


PART VIII

THE GROWTH OF NATIONALITY

28.  THE FATHERS OF CONFEDERATION
    By A. H. U. Colquhoun.

29.  THE DAY OF SIR JOHN MACDONALD
    By Sir Joseph Pope.

30.  THE DAY OF SIR WILFRID LAURIER
    By Oscar D. Skelton.


PART IX

NATIONAL HIGHWAYS

31.  ALL AFLOAT
    By William Wood.

32.  THE RAILWAY BUILDERS
    By Oscar D. Skelton.



TORONTO: GLASGOW, BROOK & COMPANY