The song was called "George Bush Doesn't Care About Black
People" (also referred to as "George Bush Doesn't Like Black
People"). Appropriately, given that Mr. West was the one to come
up with the phrase, the song was built around Mr. West's "Gold
Digger." Much of the melody was sampled directly from the
recording of that song. Yet the words were very different. Where
"Gold Digger" is about a predatory, sensual, and materialist
woman who "take[s] my money when I'm in need" and is a "triflin'
friend indeed," The Legendary K.O.'s song is a lyrical and
profane condemnation of the response to Katrina by both the
government and the media. Here is a sample:
17

    Five days in this motherf__ attic
    Can't use the cellphone I keep getting static
    Dying 'cause they lying instead of telling us the truth
    Other day the helicopters got my neighbors off the roof
    Screwed 'cause they say they coming back for us too
    That was three days ago, I don't see no rescue
    See a man's gotta do what a man's gotta do
    Since God made the path that I'm trying to walk through
    Swam to the store, tryin' to look for food
    Corner store's kinda flooded so I broke my way through
    I got what I could but before I got through
    News say the police shot a black man trying to loot
    (Who!?) Don't like black people
    George Bush don't like black people
    George Bush don't like black people

18

This chapter is the story of that song. "George Bush Doesn't
Care About Black People" is the end (for the moment) of a line
of musical borrowing. That borrowing extends far beyond Kanye
West's song "Gold Digger." "Gold Digger" is memorable largely
because it in turn borrows from an even older song, a very
famous one written half a century before and hailed by many as
the birth of soul music. It is in the origins of that song that
we will start the trail.
19

I GOT A WOMAN
20

In 1955, Ray Charles Robinson, better known as Ray Charles,
released a song called "I Got a Woman." It was a defining moment
in Charles's musical development. Early in his career he had
unashamedly modeled himself on Nat King Cole.
21

    I knew back then that Nat Cole was bigger than ever. Whites
could relate to him because he dealt with material they
understood, and he did so with great feeling. Funny thing, but
during all these years I was imitating Nat Cole, I never thought
twice about it, never felt bad about copying the cat's licks. To
me it was practically a science. I worked at it, I enjoyed it, I
was proud of it, and I loved doing it. He was a guy everyone
admired, and it just made sense to me, musical and commercial
sense, to study his technique. It was something like when a
young lawyer--just out of school--respects an older lawyer. He
tries to get inside his mind, he studies to see how he writes up
all his cases, and he's going to sound a whole lot like the
older man--at least till he figures out how to get his own shit
together. Today I hear some singers who I think sound like me.
Joe Cocker, for instance. Man, I know that cat must sleep with
my records. But I don't mind. I'm flattered; I understand. After
all, I did the same thing.3
22

In the early 50s Charles decided that he needed to move away
from Cole's style and find his own sound, "sink, swim or die."
But as with any musician, "his own sound" was the product of a
number of musical traditions--blues and gospel particularly. It
is out of those traditions that "I Got a Woman" emerged; indeed
it is that combination that causes it to be identified as one of
the birthplaces of soul music.
23

According to the overwhelming majority of sources, "I Got a
Woman" stems from a fairly overt piece of musical
borrowing--Charles reworded the hymn "Jesus Is All the World to
Me"--sometimes referred to as "My Jesus Is All the World to Me."
24

    Musically, soul denotes styles performed by and for black
audiences according to past musical practices reinterpreted and
redefined. During its development, three performers played
significant roles in shaping its sound, messages, and
performance practice: Ray Charles, James Brown, and Aretha
Franklin. If one can pinpoint a moment when gospel and blues
began to merge into a secular version of gospel song, it was in
1954 when Ray Charles recorded "My Jesus Is All the World to
Me," changing its text to "I Got A Woman."4
25

That story is repeated in the biography on Charles's Web site.
"Charles reworded the gospel tune 'Jesus Is All the World to Me'
adding deep church inflections to the secular rhythms of the
nightclubs, and the world was never the same."5 Michael Lydon,
Charles's most impressive biographer, simply reports that "Jesus
Is All the World to Me" is described as the song's origin in
another published source,6 and this origin is cited repeatedly
elsewhere in books, newspaper articles, and online,7 though the
most detailed accounts also mention Renald Richard, Charles's
trumpeter, who is credited with co-writing the song.8
26

To secular ears, "Jesus Is All the World to Me" is a plodding
piece of music with a mechanical, up-and-down melodic structure.
It conjures up a bored (and white) church audience, trudging
through the verses, a semitone flat, while thinking about Sunday
lunch rather than salvation. It is about as far removed as one
could be from the syncopated beat and amorous subject matter of
"I Got a Woman." The hymn was the product of Will Lamartine
Thompson--a severe-looking fellow with a faint resemblance to an
elderly Doc Holliday--who died in 1909 and is buried in the same
place he was born, East Liverpool, Ohio. But the words have an
earnestness to them that gives life to the otherwise uninspired
verse.
27

    Jesus is all the world to me, my life, my joy, my all;
    He is my strength from day to day, without Him I would fall.
    When I am sad, to Him I go, no other one can cheer me so;
    When I am sad, He makes me glad, He's my Friend.
28

Reading those words, one can understand the sincerity that made
Mr. Thompson spurn commercial publishers for his devotional
music, instead founding his own publishing house (also in East
Liverpool) to make sure that his hymns reached the people. I can
quote as much of the song as I want without worrying about legal
consequences because the copyright on Mr. Thompson's lyrics has
expired. So has the copyright over the music. The song was
published in 1904. Copyright had only been extended to musical
compositions in 1881. Like all copyrights back then, copyright
over music lasted for only twenty-eight years, with a possible
extension for another fourteen. If Ray Charles did indeed reword
it fifty years later, he was doing nothing illegal. It had been
in the public domain for at least eight years, and probably for
twenty. Now maybe Charles's genius was to hear in this hymn, or
in a syncopated gospel version of this hymn, the possibility of
a fusion of traditions which would itself become a new
tradition--soul. Or perhaps his genius was in knowing a good
idea--Richard's--when he heard it, and turning that idea into the
beginnings of its own musical genre.
29

Soul is a fusion of gospel on the one hand and rhythm and blues
on the other. From gospel, soul takes the call-and-response
pattern of preacher and congregation and the wailing vocals of
someone "testifying" to their faith. From rhythm and blues it
takes the choice of instruments, some of the upbeat tempo, and
the distinctly worldly and secular attitude to the (inevitable)
troubles of life. Musicologists delight in parsing the patterns
of influence further; R&B itself had roots in "jump music" and
the vocal style of the "blues shouters" who performed with the
big bands. It also has links to jazz. Gospel reaches back to
spirituals and so on.
30

As with all music, those musical traditions can be traced back
or forward in time, the net of influence and borrowing widening
as one goes in either direction. In each, one can point to
distinctive musical motifs--the chords of the twelve-bar blues,
or the flattened fifth in bebop. But musical traditions are also
defined by performance styles and characteristic sounds: the
warm guitar that came out of the valve amplifiers of early funk,
the thrashing (and poorly miked) drums of '80s punk, or the
tinny piano of honky-tonk. Finally, styles are often built
around "standards"--classic songs of the genre to which an almost
obligatory reference is made. My colleague, the talented
composer Anthony Kelley, uses Henry Louis Gates's term
"signifyin' " to describe the process of showing you are
embedded in your musical tradition by referring back to its
classics in your playing. In jazz, for example, one demonstrates
one's rootedness in the tradition by quoting a standard, but
also one's virtuosity in being able to trim it into a particular
eight-bar solo, beginning and ending on the right note for the
current moment in the chord progression. "I Got Rhythm" and
"Round Midnight" are such songs for jazz. (The chord changes of
"I Got Rhythm" are so standard, they are referred to as "the
rhythm changes"--a standard basis for improvisation.) And to
stretch the connections further, as Kelley points out, the
haunting introduction to "Round Midnight" is itself remarkably
similar to Sibelius's Fifth Symphony.
31

Through all these layers of musical borrowing and reference, at
least in the twentieth century in the United States, runs the
seam of race. When white musicians "borrowed" from soul to make
"blue-eyed soul," when Elvis took songs and styles from rhythm
and blues and turned them into rockabilly, a process of racial
cleansing went on. Styles were adapted but were cleansed of
those elements thought inappropriate for a larger white
audience. Generally, this involved cutting some of the rawer
sensuality, removing racially specific verbal and musical
references, and, for much of the century, cutting the African-
American artists out of the profits in the process.
32

There is another irony here. Styles formed by patterns of
gleeful borrowing, formed as part of a musical commons--the blues
of the Mississippi Delta, for example--were eventually
commercialized and "frozen" into a particular form by white
artists. Sometimes those styles were covered with intellectual
property rights which denied the ability of the original
community to "borrow back." In the last thirty or forty years of
the century, African-American artists got into the picture too,
understandably embracing with considerable zeal the commercial
opportunities and property rights that had previously been
denied to them. But aside from the issue of racial injustice,
one has to consider the question of sustainability.
33

In other work, I have tried to show how a vision of intellectual
property rights built around a notion of the romantic author can
sometimes operate as a one-way valve vis-à-vis traditional and
collective creative work.9 There is a danger that copyright will
treat collectively created musical traditions as unowned raw
material, but will then prevent the commercialized versions of
those traditions--now associated with an individual artist--from
continuing to act as the basis for the next cycle of musical
adaptation and development. One wonders whether jazz, blues,
R&B, gospel, and soul would even have been possible as musical
styles if, from their inception, they had been covered by the
strong property rights we apply today. That is a question I want
to return to at the end of this chapter.
34

Musical styles change over time and so do their techniques of
appropriation. Sometimes musical generations find their
successors are engaging in different types of borrowing than
they themselves engaged in. They do not always find it
congenial. It is striking how often musicians condemn a younger
generation's practice of musical appropriation as theft, while
viewing their own musical development and indebtedness as benign
and organic. James Brown attacked the use of his guitar licks or
the drum patterns from his songs by hip-hop samplers, for
example, but celebrated the process of borrowing from gospel
standards and from rhythm and blues that created the "Hardest
Working Man in Show Business"--both the song and the musical
persona. To be sure, there are differences between the two
practices. Samplers take a three-second segment off the actual
recording of "Funky Drummer," manipulate it, and turn it into a
repeating rhythm loop for a hip-hop song. This is a different
kind of borrowing than the adaptation of a chord pattern from a
gospel standard to make an R&B hit. But which way does the
difference cut as a matter of ethics, aesthetics, or law?
35

Charles himself came in for considerable criticism for his
fusion of gospel intonations and melodic structures with the
nightclub sound of rhythm and blues, but not because it was
viewed as piracy. It was viewed as sacrilegious.
36

    Charles totally removed himself from the polite music he had
made in the past. There was an unrestrained exuberance to the
new Ray Charles, a fierce earthiness that, while it would not
have been unfamiliar to any follower of gospel music, was almost
revolutionary in the world of pop. Big Bill Broonzy was
outraged: "He's crying, sanctified. He's mixing the blues with
the spirituals. He should be singing in a church."10
37

Charles disagreed. "You can't run away from yourself. . . . What
you are inside is what you are inside. I was raised in the
church and was around blues and would hear all these musicians
on the jukeboxes and then I would go to revival meetings on
Sunday morning. So I would get both sides of music. A lot of
people at the time thought it was sacrilegious but all I was
doing was singing the way I felt."11 Why the charge of
sacrilege? Because beyond the breach of stylistic barriers, the
relationships Charles described did not seem to belong in
church.
38

"I Got a Woman" tells of a woman, "way over town," who is good
to the singer--very good, in fact. She gives him money when he is
in need, is a "kind of friend indeed," even saves her "early
morning loving" just for him (and it is tender loving at that).
In the third verse we learn she does not grumble, fuss, or run
in the streets, "knows a woman's place is right there now in the
home," and in general is a paragon of femininity. Gender roles
aside, it is a fabulous song, from the elongated "We-e-ell . .
." in Charles's distinctive tones, to the momentary hesitation
that heightens the tension, all the way through the driving beat
of the main verses and the sense that a gospel choir would have
fit right in on the choruses, testifying ecstatically to the
virtues of Charles's lady friend. Charles liked women--a lot of
women, according to his biographers--and a lot of women liked him
right back. That feeling comes through very clearly from this
song.
39

I would like to quote the song lyrics for you, just as I did the
words of the hymn, but that requires a little more thought.
Charles's song was released in 1955. By that time, the copyright
term for a musical composition was twenty-eight years, renewable
for another twenty-eight if the author wished. (Later, the
twenty-eight-year second term would be increased to forty-seven
years. Still later, the copyright term would be extended to life
plus seventy years, or ninety-five years for a "work for hire."
Sound recordings themselves would not be protected by federal
law until the early 1970s.) Anyone who wrote or distributed a
song under the "28 ??28" system was, in effect, saying "this is
a long enough protection for me," enough incentive to create.
Thus, we could have assumed that "I Got a Woman" would enter the
public domain in either 1983 or, if renewed, 2011. Unfortunately
for us, and for a latter-day Ray Charles, the copyright term has
been extended several times since then, and each time it was
also extended retrospectively. Artists, musicians, novelists,
and filmmakers who had created their works on the understanding
that they had twenty-eight or fifty-six or seventy-five years of
protection now have considerably more. This was the point raised
in Chapter 1. Most of the culture of the twentieth century,
produced under a perfectly well-functioning system with much
shorter copyright terms, is still locked up and will be for many
years to come.
40

In the case of "I Got a Woman," it is now about fifty years
since the song's release--the same length of time as between
Thompson's hymn and Charles's alleged "rewording." If the words
and music were properly copyrighted at the time of its
publication, and renewed when appropriate, the copyright still
has forty-five years to run. No one will be able to "reword" "I
Got a Woman" and use it to found a new genre, or take
substantial portions of its melody, until the year 2050. The
freedoms Ray Charles says he used to create his song are denied
to his successors until nearly a century after the song's
release. (As we will see in a moment, this put certain
constraints on Kanye West.)
41

Would it truly be a violation of copyright for me to quote the
middle stanza in a nonfiction book on copyright policy? Not at
all. It is a classic "fair use." In a moment I will do so. But
it is something that the publisher may well fuss over, because
copyright holders are extremely aggressive in asking for
payments for the slightest little segment. Copyright holders in
music and song lyrics are among the most aggressive of the lot.
Year after year academics, critics, and historians pay fairly
substantial fees (by our standards) to license tiny fragments of
songs even though their incorporation is almost certainly fair
use. Many of them do not know the law. Others do, but want to
avoid the hassle, the threats, the nasty letters. It is simpler
just to pay.
42

Unfortunately, these individual actions have a collective
impact. One of the factors used to consider whether something is
a fair use is whether or not there is a market for this
particular use of a work. If there is, it is less likely to be a
fair use to quote or incorporate such a fragment. As several
courts have pointed out, there is a powerful element of
circularity here. You claim you have a right to stop me from
doing x--quoting two lines of your three-verse song in an
academic book, say. I say you have no such right and it is a
fair use. You say it is not a fair use because it interferes
with your market--the market for selling licenses for two-
sentence fragments. But when do you have such a market? When you
have a right to stop me quoting the two-sentence fragment unless
I pay you. Do you have such a right? But that is exactly what we
are trying to decide! Is it a fair use or not? The existence of
the market depends on it not being a fair use for me to quote it
without permission. To say "I would have a market if I could
stop you doing it, so it cannot be a fair use, so I can stop
you" is perfectly circular.
43

How do we get out of the circle? Often the court will look to
customs and patterns in the world outside. Do people accept this
as a market? Do they traditionally pay such fees? Thus, if a lot
of people choose to pay for quotes that actually should have
been fair use, the "market" for short quotes will begin to
emerge. That will, in turn, affect the boundaries of fair use
for the worse. Slowly, fair use will constrict, will atrophy.
The hypertrophied permissions culture starts as myth, but it can
become reality.
44

In any event, Ray Charles had no need of fair use to make "I Got
a Woman" because the hymn his biography claims it is based on
was in the public domain. But is that the real source? I can
hear little resemblance. As I researched the origins of "I Got a
Woman," I found claims that there was a different source, a
mysterious song by the Bailey Gospel Singers, or the Harold
Bailey Gospel Singers, called "I've Got a Savior."12 The
Columbia Records gospel catalogue even provided a catalogue
number.13 There was such a song, or so it seemed. But there the
research stalled. The exemplary librarians at Duke University
Music Library could find no trace. Catalogues of published
records showed nothing. Inquiries to various music librarian
listservs also produced no answer. There was a man called Harold
Bailey, who sang with a group of gospel singers, but though
several Internet postings suggested he was connected to the
song, his biography revealed he would have been only thirteen at
the time. The Library of Congress did not have it. Eventually,
Jordi Weinstock--a great research assistant who demonstrated
willingness to pester anyone in the world who might conceivably
have access to the recording--hit gold. The Rodgers and
Hammerstein Archives of Recorded Sound at the New York Public
Library for the Performing Arts had a copy--a 78 rpm vinyl record
by the Bailey Gospel Singers with "Jesus Is the Searchlight" on
the B-side. Our library was able to obtain a copy on
interlibrary loan from the helpful curator, Don McCormick.
45

It sounds like the same song. Not the same words, of course: the
introduction is different and the Bailey Gospel Singers lack the
boom-chicky-boom backing of Charles's version, but the central
melody is almost exactly the same. When the Bailey Gospel
Singers sing "Keeps me up / Keeps me strong / Teach me right /
When I doing wrong / Well, I've got a savior / Oh what a savior
/ yes I have," the melody, and even the intonation, parallel
Charles singing the equivalent lines: "She gimme money / when
I'm in need / Yeah she's a kind of / friend indeed / I've got a
woman / way over town / who's good to me."
46

True, some of the lyrical and rhythmic patterns of "I've Got a
Savior" are older still. They come from a spiritual called
"Ain't That Good News," dating from 1940, which rehearses all
the things the singer will have in the Kingdom of Heaven--a harp,
a robe, slippers (!), and, finally, a savior. The author of
"I've Got a Savior" was, like all the artists discussed here,
taking a great deal from a prior musical tradition.
Nevertheless, Charles's borrowing is particularly overt and
direct. The term "rewording" is appropriate. So far as I can
see, whether or not he also relied on a fifty-year-old hymn, Ray
Charles appears to have taken both the melody and lyrical
pattern of his most famous hit from a song that was made a mere
three or four years earlier.
47

Like many 78 rpm records, this one was sold without liner notes.
The center of the record provides the only details. It gives the
name of the track and the band and a single word under the song
title, "Ward"--presumably the composer. "Ward" might be Clara
Ward of the Ward Singers, a talented gospel singer and
songwriter who became Aretha Franklin's mentor and who had her
own music publishing company.
48

There is a particular reason to think that she might have
written the song: Ray Charles clearly liked to adapt her music
to secular ends. We know that he "reworked" Ward's gospel
classic "This Little Light of Mine" into "This Little Girl of
Mine." Ward reportedly was irritated by the practice. So far as
we know, the copying of the music did not annoy her because she
viewed it as theft, but because she viewed it as an offense
against gospel music.
49

    Charles is now starting to get criticism from some gospel
music performers for secularizing gospel music and presenting it
in usual R&B venues. Most adamant in her misgivings is Clara
Ward who complains about "This Little Girl Of Mine" being a
reworking of "This Little Light Of Mine" (which it is), as a
slap against the gospel field.14
50

This stage of Charles's career is described, rightly, as the
moment when his originality bursts forth, where he stops
imitating the smooth sounds of Nat King Cole and instead
produces the earthy and sensual style that becomes his
trademark--his own sound. That is true enough; there had been
nothing quite like this before. Yet it was hardly original
creation out of nothing. Both Charles himself and the
musicological literature point out that "his own sound," "his
style," is in reality a fusion of two prior genres--rhythm and
blues and gospel. But looking at the actual songs that created
soul as a genre shows us that the fusion goes far beyond merely
a stylistic one. Charles makes some of his most famous songs by
taking existing gospel classics and reworking or simply
rewording them. "I've Got a Savior" becomes "I Got a Woman."
"This Little Light of Mine" becomes "This Little Girl of Mine."
51

The connection is striking: two very recent gospel songs,
probably by the same author, from which Charles copies the
melody, structure, pattern of verses, even most of the title--in
each case substituting a beloved sensual woman for the beloved
deity. Many others have noticed just how closely Charles based
his songs on gospel tunes, although the prevalence of the story
that "I Got a Woman" is derived from an early-twentieth-century
hymn caused most to see only the second transposition, not the
first.15 Borrowing from a fifty-year-old hymn and changing it
substantially in the process seems a little different from the
repeated process of "search and replace" musical collage that
Charles performed on the contemporary works of Clara Ward.
52

If I am right, Charles's "merger" of gospel and blues relied on
a very direct process of transposition. The transposition was
not just of themes: passion for woman substituted for passion
for God. That is a familiar aspect of soul.16 It is what allows
it to draw so easily from gospel's fieriness and yet coat the
religion with a distinctly more worldly passion. Sex, sin, and
syncopation--what more could one ask? But Charles's genius was to
take particular songs that had already proved themselves in the
church and on the radio, and to grab large chunks of the melody
and structure. He was not just copying themes, or merging
genres, he was copying the melodies and words from recent songs.
53

Was this mere musical plagiarism, then? Should we think less of
Ray Charles's genius because we find just how closely two of the
canonical songs in the creation of soul were based on the work
of his contemporaries? Hardly. "I Got a Woman" and "This Little
Girl of Mine" are simply brilliant. Charles does in fact span
the worlds of the nightclub at 3 a.m. on Sunday morning and the
church later that day, of ecstatic testimony and good old-
fashioned sexual infatuation. But the way he does so is a lot
more like welding, or bricolage, than it is like designing out
of nothing or creating anew while distantly tugged by mysterious
musical forces called "themes" or "genres." Charles takes bits
that have been proven to work and combines them to make
something new. When I tell engineers or software engineers this
story, they nod. Of course that is how creation works. One does
not reinvent the wheel, or the method of debugging, so why
should one reinvent the hook, the riff, or the melody? And yet
Charles's creation does not have the degraded artistic quality
that is associated with "mere" cut-and-paste or collage
techniques. The combination is greater than the sum of its
parts. If Charles's songs do not fit our model of innovative
artistic creativity, perhaps we need to revise the model--at
least for music--rather than devaluing his work.
54

When I began this study, it seemed to me that the greatest
challenge to copyright law in dealing with music was preventing
rights from "creeping," expanding from coverage of a single song
or melody to cover essential elements of genre, style, and
theme. In effect, we needed to apply the Jefferson Warning to
music, to defeat the constant tendency to confuse intellectual
property with real property, and to reject the attempts to make
the right holder's control total. My assumption was that all we
needed to do was to keep open the "common space" of genre and
style, and let new artists create their new compositions out of
the material in that commons and gain protection over them. In
many ways, Charles's work lies at the very core of the stuff
copyright wishes to promote. It is not merely innovative and
expressive itself, it also helped form a whole new genre in
which other artists could express themselves. But to create this
work, Charles needed to make use of a lot more than just genres
and styles created by others. He needed their actual songs. If
the reactions of Clara Ward and Big Bill Broonzy are anything to
go by, they would not have given him permission. To them, soul
was a stylistic violation, a mingling of the sacred with the
profane. If given a copyright veto over his work, and a culture
that accepts its use, Ward might well have exercised it. Like
the disapproving heirs that Macaulay talked about, she could
have denied us a vital part of the cultural record. Control has
a price.
55

Did Ray Charles commit copyright infringement? Perhaps. We would
have to find if the songs are substantially similar, once we had
excluded standard forms, public domain elements, and so on. I
would say that they are substantially similar, but was the
material used copyright-protected expression?
56

The Copyright Office database shows no entry for "I've Got a
Savior." This is not conclusive, but it seems to indicate that
no copyright was ever registered in the work. In fact, it is
quite possible that the song was first written without a
copyright notice. Nowadays that omission would be irrelevant.
Works are copyrighted as soon as they are fixed in material
form, regardless of whether any copyright notice is attached. In
1951, however, a notice was required when the work was
published, and if one was not put on the work, it passed
immediately into the public domain. However, later legislation
decreed that the relevant publication was not of the record, but
of the notation. If the record were pressed and sold without a
copyright notice, the error could be corrected. If a lead sheet
or a sheet music version of "I've Got a Savior" had been
published without notice or registration, it would enter the
public domain. It is possible that this happened. Intellectual
property rights simply played a lesser role in the 1950s music
business than they do today, both for better and for worse.
Large areas of creativity operated as copyright-free zones. Even
where copyrights were properly registered, permission fees were
not demanded for tiny samples. While bootlegged recordings or
direct note-for-note copies might well draw legal action,
borrowing and transformation were apparently viewed as a normal
part of the creative process. In some cases, artists simply did
not use copyright. They made money from performances. Their
records might receive some kind of protection from state law.
These protections sufficed.
57

But the lack of protection also had a less attractive and more
racially skewed side. African-American artists were less likely
to have the resources and knowledge necessary to navigate the
system of copyright. For both black and white artists, whatever
rights there were moved quickly away from the actual creators
toward the agents, record companies, and distributors. They
still do. But African-American musicians got an even worse deal
than their white counterparts. True, the copyright system was
only an infinitesimal part of that process. A much larger part
was the economic consequences of segregation and racial
apartheid. But copyright was one of the many levers of power
that were more easily pulled by white hands. This is an
important point because the need to end that palpable racial
injustice is sometimes used to justify every aspect of our
current highly legalized musical culture. About that conclusion,
I am less convinced.
58

In any event, it is possible that the musical composition for
"I've Got a Savior" went immediately into the public domain. If
that were the case, Ray Charles could draw on it, could change
it, could refine it without permission or fee. Certainly there
is no mention of seeking permission or paying fees in any of the
histories of "I Got a Woman." Indeed, the only question of
rectitude Charles was focused on was the stylistic one. Was it
appropriate to mix gospel and R&B, devotional music and secular
desire? Charles and Richard seemed to see the process of
rewording and adapting as just a standard part of the musician's
creative process. The only question was whether these two styles
were aesthetically or morally suited, not whether the borrowing
itself was illegal or unethical. So, whether they drew on a hymn
that had fallen into the public domain after the expiration of
its copyright term, or a gospel song for which copyright had
never been sought, or whether they simply took a copyrighted
song and did to it something that no one at the time thought was
legally inappropriate, Renald Richard and Ray Charles were able
to create "I Got a Woman" and play a significant role in
founding a new musical genre--soul.
59

One thing is clear. Much of what Charles and Richard did in
creating their song would be illegal today. Copyright terms are
longer. Copyright protection itself is automatic. Copyright
policing is much more aggressive. The musical culture has
changed into one in which every fragment must be licensed and
paid for. The combination is fatal to the particular pattern of
borrowing that created these seminal songs of soul.
60

That should give us pause. I return to the ideas of the
Jefferson Warning from Chapter 2 and the Sony Axiom from Chapter
4. Copyright is not an end in itself. It has a goal: to promote
the progress of cultural and scientific creativity. That goal
requires rights that are less than absolute. As Jessica Litman
points out, building in the intellectual space is different from
building in the physical space. We do not normally dismantle old
houses to make new ones. This point is not confined to music.
Earlier I quoted Northrop Frye: "Poetry can only be made out of
other poems; novels out of other novels. All of this was much
clearer before the assimilation of literature to private
enterprise."17 The question is, how big are the holes we need to
leave in the private rights? How large a commons do we need to
offer to future creators?
61

Ray Charles's creation of "I Got a Woman" is only one case. By
itself, it proves nothing. Yet, if we find that the seminal,
genre-creating artworks of yesteryear would be illegal under the
law and culture of today, we have to ask ourselves "is this
really what we want?" What will the music of the future look
like if the Clara Wards and Will Lamartine Thompsons of today
can simply refuse to license on aesthetic grounds or demand
payment for every tiny fragment? Tracing the line further back,
it is fascinating to wonder whether gospel, blues, and jazz
would have developed if musical motifs had been jealously
guarded as private property rather than developed as a kind of
melodic and rhythmic commons. Like most counterfactuals, that
one has no clear answer, but there is substantial cause for
skepticism. If copyright is supposed to be promoting innovation
and development in culture, is it doing its job?
62

AN INDUSTRY OF GOLD DIGGERS?
63

Fifty years after "I Got a Woman" was written, Kanye West
released "Gold Digger" on the album Late Registration. Mr. West
is an interesting figure in rap. At first he was shunned because
his clean-cut looks and preppy clothing ran against the gangster
image that often dominates the music. It is just hard imagining
Mr. West delivering a line like Rakim's "I used to be a stick-up
kid, so I think of all the devious things I did" with a straight
face. (Still less "Stop smiling, ain't nothin' funny, nothing
moves but the money.") Perhaps partly as a result, his lyrics
are oddly bipolar in their views about exaggerated masculinity
and the misogyny that sometimes accompanies it.
64

For the song, Mr. West recruited Jamie Foxx, who had played Ray
Charles in the movie Ray. Showing an impressive expanse of oiled
chest, Mr. Foxx imitates Charles's style and the melody of "I
Got a Woman" to provide the lyrical chorus to "Gold Digger." "I
Got a Woman" anchors West's song. It provides its melodic hook.
It breaks up the rap with a burst of musical nostalgia. But Mr.
West's gold digger is very different from Ray Charles's woman
friend. This woman does not give money when the singer is in
need. She takes his money when he is in need and is a "triflin'
friend indeed." Mr. Charles had a friend who gave him tender
morning loving. Jamie Foxx sings of a mercenary gold digger who
digs on him. When Mr. West adds the rap verses to the song, we
get a perfect caricature of such a person, uninterested in any
man who is broke, dragging around four kids and an entourage,
insisting all of them be entertained at her boyfriend's expense,
and wielding unfounded paternity suits like a proprietary
business method. Mr. West's repeated disclaimer "I ain't sayin'
she's a gold digger" is unconvincing, because both the words of
the introduction and the implicit message of the rap tell us she
is. We even get the absurd image of a man who is playing on the
winning side in the Super Bowl but driving a Hyundai, so
financially demanding is his girlfriend. At several points the
song descends into ludicrous--and perhaps conscious--self-mockery,
as it explores the concerns of the rich African-American
celebrity male. My favorite line is "If you ain't no punk,
holler 'We want prenup!!' " The audience obliges. It sounds like
assertiveness training for show business millionaires.
65

It would be hard to get a feminist role model out of either "I
Got a Woman" or "Gold Digger." One offers the feminine virtues
of modesty and fidelity, but magically combines them with
wantonness where the singer is concerned and an open checkbook.
The other is a parody of the self-assertive economic actor, as
rapacious as any multinational, who uses her sexuality for
profit. Put them together and you have bookends--male fantasy and
male nightmare. Was that Mr. West's point? Perhaps. The song
itself takes several sly turns. The gold digger dogging Mr. West
is used as part of a homily to black women on how to treat their
(noncelebrity) black men. They should stick with their man
because his ambition is going to take him from mopping floors to
the fryers, from a Datsun to a Benz. It seems that Mr. West is
getting a little preachy, while slamming the actual social
mobility available to black men. Moving from floor cleaning to
frying chicken is not actually going to provide a Mercedes. But
he immediately undercuts that tone twice, once by acknowledging
the boyfriend's likely infidelity and again by saying that even
if the black woman follows his homily, "once you get on, he
leave yo' ass for a white girl."
66

Mr. West has a tendency to make sudden turns like this in his
lyrics--ironically upsetting the theme he has just set up. So it
is not hard to imagine that he deliberately used a fragment of
Charles's song, not just because it sounded good but to contrast
the image of the fantasy woman from Charles's 1950s soul, who is
faithful, sensual, and always willing to offer a loan, with an
image from today's rap--sexually predatory and emasculating women
who are uninterested in men except as a source of money. Even
the retro cover of the single, with its 1950s-style pinup
drawing of a white model, seems to draw the connection. Did he
use Charles's song precisely because of these clashing cultural
snapshots? Perhaps, or perhaps he just liked the tune. In any
event, the contrast is striking. When it was released, Charles's
song was seen as a sacrilegious depiction of sensuality and the
woman was decried as a harlot. Compared to the woman in Mr.
West's song, she sounds like a Girl Scout. It is also a little
depressing. Ray Charles was neither an egalitarian metrosexual
nor a Prince Charming where women were concerned--anything but.
But as I said before, you do get a sense that he liked
women--however unrealistic or two-dimensional their portrayal. It
is hard to get that sense from "Gold Digger."
67

Was Mr. West legally required to ask permission--and pay, if
necessary--to use a fragment of "I Got a Woman" for his chorus?
The longest single piece of borrowing occurs in the
introduction: twenty-six words and their accompanying music.
"She takes my money, when I'm in need, oh she's a triflin'
friend indeed. Oh she's a gold digger, way over town, who digs
on me." As I pointed out, the lyrics from Charles's song present
a very different story. "She gimme money / when I'm in need /
Yeah she's a kind of / friend indeed / I've got a woman / way
over town / who's good to me." But even if the message is the
opposite, the musical borrowing is direct. It is also extensive.
During Mr. West's rap, the entire background melody is a loop of
Jamie Foxx singing the Ray Charles-inspired melody in the
background. During the song, Mr. Foxx returns to words that are
closer to Charles's original: "She gimme money, when I'm in
need," a refrain that is conspicuously at odds with the woman
being described by Mr. West. That eight-bar loop of a Ray
Charles melody runs throughout Kanye West's song.
68

Mr. West is very successful, so the fragment of the song was
"cleared"--payment was made to Charles's estate. It is
fascinating to think of what might have happened if Charles's
heirs had refused. After all, one could see West's song as a
crude desecration of Charles's earlier work, rather than a good-
humored homage. Since this is not a "cover version" of the
song--one which does not change its nature and thus operates
under the statutory licensing scheme--Charles's heirs would have
the right to refuse a licensing request. Unlike Clara Ward, it
is clear that Charles's heirs have the legal power to say no, to
prevent reuse of which they disapprove.
69

Was West legally required to license? Would all this amount to a
copyright violation? It is worth running through the analysis
because it gives a beautiful snapshot of the rules with which
current law surrounds musical creation.
70

Today, a song is generally covered by at least two copyrights.
One covers the musical composition--the sheet music and the
lyrics--and the other the particular sound recording of that
composition. Just as there are two kinds of copyrights, so there
are at least two kinds of borrowings that copyright might be
concerned with. First, one musical composition might infringe
another. Thus, for example, a court found that George Harrison
"subconsciously" based his song "My Sweet Lord" on the melody of
"He's So Fine" by the Chiffons.
71

How much does it take to infringe? That is a difficult question.
The law's standard is "substantial similarity," but not every
kind of similarity counts. Minimal or de minimis copying of tiny
fragments is ignored. Certain styles or forms have become
standards; for example, the basic chord structure of the twelve-
bar blues or the habit of introducing instruments one at a time,
from quietest to loudest. There are only so many notes--and so
many ways to rearrange them; inevitably any song will be similar
to some other. Yet that cannot mean that all songs infringe
copyright. Finally, even where there is substantial similarity
of a kind that copyright is concerned with, the second artist
may claim "fair use"--for parody or criticism, say. Copyright
law, in other words, has tried to solve the problem with which I
began the chapter. Because much of musical creativity is organic
and collective and additive, because it does use prior musical
expression, some copyright decisions have tried to carve out a
realm of freedom for that creativity, using doctrines with names
such as scènes à faire, merger, and fair use. This is yet
another example of judges trying to achieve the balance that
this book is all about--between the realm of the protected and
the public domain--recognizing that it is the balance, not the
property side alone, that allows for new creativity.
72

The second type of potential infringement comes when someone
uses a fragment of the earlier recording as part of the later
one, actually copying a portion of the recording itself and
using it in a new song. One might imagine the same rules would
be applied--de minimis copying irrelevant, certain standard forms
unprotected, and so on. And one would be wrong. In a case called
Bridgeport Music, which I will discuss in a moment, the Court of
Appeals ruled that taking even two notes of a musical recording
counts as potentially actionable copying. Where recordings are
concerned, in other words, there is almost no class of copying
so minimal that the law would ignore it. This is a terrible
decision, at least in my opinion, likely to be rejected by other
Circuits and perhaps even eventually by the Supreme Court. But
for the moment, it is a case that samplers have to deal with.
73

How does Kanye West fare under these rules? He may sample from
the actual recording of Mr. Charles's song. It is hard to tell.
He certainly copies portions of the melody. That means we have
to look at the copyright in the musical composition--the words
and the music of "I Got a Woman." For a copyright infringement,
one needs a valid copyright and evidence of copying, the amount
copied needs to be more than an insignificant fragment,
substantial similarity is required, and the similarity has to be
between the new work and the elements of the original that are
actually protected by copyright. Elements taken from the public
domain, standard introductions, musical clichés, and so forth,
do not get included in the calculation of similarity. Finally,
the copier can claim "fair use"--that his borrowing is legally
privileged because it is commentary, criticism, parody, and so
on.
74

Does Charles, or his record company, have a valid copyright in
the musical composition? One huge problem in copyright law is
that it is remarkably hard to find this out. Even with the best
will in the world, it is hard for an artist, musician, or
teacher to know what is covered by copyright and what is not.
Nowadays, all works are copyrighted as soon as they are fixed,
but at the time "I Got a Woman" was written one had to include a
copyright notice or the song went immediately into the public
domain. The Copyright Office database shows no copyright over
the words and music of "I Got a Woman." There are copyrights
over a variety of recordings of the song. If Mr. West is using a
fragment of the recording, these would affect him. But the
melody? It is possible that the underlying musical composition
is in the public domain. Finding out whether it is or is not
would probably cost one a lot of money.
75

Suppose that Mr. Charles has complied with all the formalities.
The words and music were published with a copyright notice. A
copyright registration was filed and renewed. Does Mr. West
infringe this copyright? That is where the discovery of the
Bailey Gospel Singers recording is potentially so important.
Charles only gets a copyright in his original creation. Those
elements taken from the public domain (if "I've Got a Savior"
was indeed in the public domain) or from other copyrighted songs
do not count. The irony here is that the elements that Kanye
West borrows from Ray Charles are almost exactly the same ones
Ray Charles borrows from the Bailey Gospel Singers. "I've got a
savior, Oh what a savior" becomes "I got a woman, way over town"
becomes "There's a Gold Digger, way over town." And of course,
the music behind those words is even more similar. When The
Legendary K.O. reached for Kanye West's song in order to
criticize Mr. Bush, they found themselves sampling Jamie Foxx,
who was copying Ray Charles, who was copying the Bailey Gospel
Singers, who themselves may have borrowed their theme from an
older spiritual.
76

GEORGE BUSH DOESN'T CARE . . .
77

  Five damn days, five long days
  And at the end of the fifth he walking in like "Hey!"
  Chilling on his vacation, sitting patiently
  Them black folks gotta hope, gotta wait and see
  If FEMA really comes through in an emergency
  But nobody seem to have a sense of urgency
  Now the mayor's been reduced to crying
  I guess Bush said, "N------'s been used to dying!"
  He said, "I know it looks bad, just have to wait"
  Forgetting folks was too broke to evacuate
  N------'s starving and they dying of thirst
  I bet he had to go and check on them refineries first
  Making a killing off the price of gas
  He would have been up in Connecticut twice as fast . . .
  After all that we've been through nothing's changed
  You can call Red Cross but the fact remains that . . .
  George Bush ain't a gold digger,
  but he ain't f--ing with no broke n------s
  "George Bush Doesn't Care About Black People," The Legendary
  K.O.
78

The song "George Bush Doesn't Care About Black People" was an
immediate sensation. Hundreds of thousands of people downloaded
it. Within days two different video versions had been made, one
by Franklin Lopez and another by a filmmaker called "The Black
Lantern." Both synchronized the lyrics of the song with news
clips of the disaster and unsympathetic footage of President
Bush apparently ignoring what was going on. The effect was both
hilarious and tragic. The videos were even more popular than the
song alone. The blogosphere was fascinated--entries were posted,
e-mails circulated to friends with the usual "you have to see
this!" taglines. In fact, the song was so popular that it
received the ultimate recognition of an Internet fad: the New
York Times wrote a story on it, setting the practice in
historical context.
79

    In the 18th century, songwriters responded to current events
by writing new lyrics to existing melodies. "Benjamin Franklin
used to write broadside ballads every time a disaster struck,"
said Elijah Wald, a music historian, and sell the printed lyrics
in the street that afternoon. This tradition of responding
culturally to terrible events had almost been forgotten, Mr.
Wald said, but in the wake of Hurricane Katrina, it may be
making a comeback, with the obvious difference that, where
Franklin would have sold a few song sheets to his fellow
Philadelphians, the Internet allows artists today to reach the
whole world.18
80

Mr. Nickerson's and Mr. Randle's song started with Kanye West's
words--taken from the fundraiser with Mike Myers. "George Bush
doesn't care about black people." From there it launched into
the song. The background melody comes almost entirely from a
looped, or infinitely repeated, version of the hook that Kanye
West and Jamie Foxx had in turn taken from Ray Charles: "She
gimme money, when I'm in need. I gotta leave." Against that
background, The Legendary K.O. provide their profane and angry
commentary, part of which is excerpted above, with a chorus of
"George Bush don't like black people," in case anyone had missed
the point.
81

The videos differ in the issues they stress. Franklin Lopez's
movie is, rather pointedly given its theme, just black and
white. He uses ornate captions pages, reminiscent of silent film
from the 1920s, to make political points against the background
of the song and the news footage. As the captions read "Katrina
Rapidly Approaches," we cut to a shot of the hurricane. "The
President Ponders on What to Do." We have a shot of Mr. Bush
playing golf. "I Think I'll Ride This One Out." Mr. Bush is
shown relaxing on a golf cart, juxtaposed against pictures of
African-Americans wading through the floods. The captions add,
as an afterthought, "And Keep Dealing with the Brown People."
(Pictures of soldiers shooting.) When FEMA's Michael Brown is
shown--at the moment when Bush said "Brownie, you are doing a
hell of a job"--the captions comment mockingly, "The Horse Judge
to the Rescue."
82

Mr. Lopez's video obviously tries to use The Legendary K.O.'s
song to make larger political arguments about the country. For
example, it asserts that "in 2004 Bush diverted most of the
funds for the levees to the war in Iraq." Scenes reminiscent of
a Michael Moore documentary are shown. There are pictures of the
Iraq war, Halliburton signs, and shots of the president with a
member of the Saudi royal family. The captions accuse the
president of showing insensitivity and disdain to racial
minorities. One summarizes the general theme: "Since he was
elected president, George Bush's policies have been less than
kind toward Africans and Hispanics." Issues ranging from the
response to the Darfur massacres, No Child Left Behind, and the
attempted privatization of Social Security also make their
appearance. The video concludes by giving the donation
information for the Red Cross and saying that we are "onto"
Bush. A picture of a Klansman removing his hood is shown, with
the image manipulated so that the face revealed is Mr. Bush's.
83

The Black Lantern's video is just as angry, and it uses some of
the same footage, but the themes it picks up are different. It
starts with a logo that parodies the FBI copyright warning shown
at the beginning of movies: "WARNING: Artist supports
filesharing. Please distribute freely." That dissolves into a
picture of Kanye West and Mike Myers. West is speaking, somewhat
awkwardly as he goes "off script," and at first Mr. Myers is
nodding, though he starts to look increasingly worried. West
says, "I hate the way they portray us in the media. You see a
black family it says they are looting. You see a white family,
it says they are looking for food." Finally, West says "George
Bush doesn't care about black people" and the camera catches
Myers's mute, appalled reaction. Then the song begins. The film
cuts repeatedly between a music video of Mr. Foxx as he sang the
lines for "Gold Digger" and the news coverage of the debacle in
New Orleans. At one point the music pauses and a news anchor
says, "You simply get chills when you look at these people. They
are so poor. And so black." The song resumes. Here the message
is simpler. The media coverage is biased and governmental
attention slowed because of negative racial stereotypes and lack
of concern about black people.
84

Some readers will find that this song and these videos capture
their own political perspectives perfectly. They will love the
bitterly ironic and obscene outrage at the government's failure,
the double standards of the press, and the disproportionate and
callously disregarded impact on the poor and black. Others will
find both song and films to be stupid, insulting, and
reductionist--an attempt to find racial prejudice in a situation
that, at worst, was an example of good old-fashioned
governmental incompetence. Still others will find the language
just too off-putting to even think about the message. Whatever
your feelings about the content, I urge you to set them aside
for a moment. For better or worse, Mr. Bush just happened to be
president at the moment when the Internet was coming into its
own as a method of distributing digitally remixed political
commentary, which itself has recently become something that
amateurs can do for pennies rather than an expensive activity
reserved to professionals. The point is that whatever rules we
apply to deal with "George Bush Doesn't Care About Black People"
will also apply to the next video that alleges corruption in a
Democratic administration or that attacks the sacred cows of the
left rather than the right. How should we think about this kind
of activity, this taking the songs and films and photos of
others and remixing them to express political, satirical,
parodic, or simply funny points of view?
85

SAMPLING
86

Let us begin with the music. Unlike the other songs I have
discussed here, with the possible exception of Mr. West's,
"George Bush Doesn't Care About Black People" makes use of
digital samples of the work of others. In other words, this is
not merely about copying the tune or the lyrics. The reason that
Mr. Nickerson and Mr. Randle could make and distribute this song
so fast (and so cheaply) is that they took fragments from the
recording of "Gold Digger" and looped them to form the
background to their own rap. That was also part of the reason
for the positive public reaction. Kanye West (and Ray Charles
and Clara Ward) are very talented musicians. West's song was
already all over the airwaves. The Legendary K.O. capitalized on
that, just as Benjamin Franklin capitalized on the familiarity
of the songs he reworded. But where Franklin could only take the
tune, The Legendary K.O. could take the actual ones and zeros of
the digital sound file.
87

As I mentioned earlier, there are two types of copyright
protection over music. There is the copyright over the musical
composition and, a much more recent phenomenon, the copyright
over the actual recording. This song potentially infringes both
of them.
88

Readers who came of age in the 1980s might remember the music of
Public Enemy and N.W.A.--a dense wall of sound on which rap
lyrics were overlaid. That wall of sound was in fact made up of
samples, sometimes hundreds of tiny samples in a single track.
Rap and hip-hop musicians proceeded under the assumption that
taking a fragment of someone else's recording was as acceptable
legally (and aesthetically) as a jazz musician quoting a
fragment of another tune during a solo. In both cases, the use
of "quotation" is a defining part of the genre, a harmless or
even complimentary homage. Or so they thought.
89

In a 1991 case called Grand Upright, that idea was squashed.19
The rap artist Biz Markie had extensively sampled Gilbert
O'Sullivan's song "Alone Again (Naturally)" for his own song
"Alone Again." The court could have applied the rules described
earlier in this chapter, decided whether or not this was a large
enough usage to make the second song substantially similar to
the original, discussed whether or not it counted as a fair use,
whether Markie's use was transformative or parodic, whether it
was going to have a negative impact on the market for the
original, weighed the issues, and ruled either way. In doing so,
there would have been some nice points to discuss about whether
or not the breadth of fair use depends in part on the practice
in the relevant artistic community, how to understand parodic
reference, or the relevant markets for the work. (Biz Markie's
lawyers had asked for permission to use the sample, but the
Supreme Court has made clear that seeking permission does not
weigh against a defense of fair use.) There were also some
tricky issues about the breadth of legal rights over
recordings--the right was of relatively recent creation and had
some interesting limitations. Underlying it all was a more
fundamental question: how do we interpret the rules of copyright
so as to encourage musical creativity? After all, as this
chapter has shown, borrowing and reference are a fundamental
part of musical practice. We ought to think twice before
concluding they are illegal. Are we to criminalize jazz? Condemn
Charles Ives? And if not, what is the carefully crafted line we
draw that allows some of those uses but condemns this one?
90

Judge Duffy, however, was uninterested in any of these
subtleties.
91

    "Thou shalt not steal" has been an admonition followed since
the dawn of civilization. Unfortunately, in the modern world of
business this admonition is not always followed. Indeed, the
defendants in this action for copyright infringement would have
this court believe that stealing is rampant in the music
business and, for that reason, their conduct here should be
excused. The conduct of the defendants herein, however, violates
not only the Seventh Commandment, but also the copyright laws of
this country.20
92

If this were a law school exam, it would get a "D." (Maybe a C
given grade inflation.) Duffy makes all of the errors Jefferson
warned us against. Tangible property is the same as intellectual
property. Songs are the same as sheep and the same rules can
apply to both. Theft is theft. The prior injunctions of the
framers and the courts notwithstanding, we do not need to think
carefully about the precise boundaries of intellectual property
rights or worry that interpreting them too broadly is as bad as
making them too narrow. So far as Judge Duffy is concerned, the
tablets on Mount Sinai were inscribed with an absolute
injunction against digital sampling. (The font must have been
small.) But to say all this is merely to scratch the surface of
how regrettable a decision it is. In the narrowest and most
formalistic legal terms it is also very poor.
93

Judge Duffy gives not a single citation to the provisions of the
Copyright Act. He ignores issues of de minimis copying,
substantial similarity, fair use, and the differences between
the right over the recording and that over the composition. In
fact, he quotes the Bible more, and more accurately, than he
does Title 17 of the U.S. Code--the Copyright Act. The one
mention he makes of actual copyright law is at the end of the
opinion, when he refers the case for criminal prosecution! When
I first read this case, I seriously wondered for a moment if it
were a crude parody of a legal opinion written by someone who
had never been to law school.
94

Is the result in this case wrong? Personally, I do not think so.
It is possible, even probable, that a conscientious judge who
bothered to read the law could go through a careful analysis and
find that Markie's use went beyond de minimis copying, that it
was neither creative, parodic, nor short enough to count as a
fair use. The judge might have presumed a negative effect on the
market for Mr. O'Sullivan's song and thus could have ruled that
it was a copyright infringement. In doing so, the judge would
have to give some guidance to future courts about digital
sampling. The most likely guidance would be "the sample here is
so extensive and so unchanged, that this case says little about
the wider musical practice of sampling." Judge Duffy's opinion
was poor not because of the result he reached, but because he
reached it in an overly broad and judicially inappropriate way
that became a guideline for future cultural creation. Worse
still, the industry listened to him.
95

In excellent books on this issue, Kembrew McLeod and Siva
Vaidhyanathan each argue that Grand Upright was a disaster for
rap music.21 The industry's practice turned full circle almost
overnight. Now every sample, no matter how tiny, had to be
"cleared"--licensed from the owners of the recording. As they
tell the story, this "legal" change caused an aesthetic change.
The number of samples in an average song dropped precipitously.
The engaging complexity of the Public Enemy "wall of sound" gave
way to the simplistic thumping beat and unimaginative
synthesizer lines of modern rap. I must admit to sharing
McLeod's and Vaidhyanathan's musical prejudices. The causal
claim is harder to substantiate, but industry lawyers and
musicians both agree that changes in the industry's
understanding of the law had a major role in transforming the
practice of sampling.
96

If we disregard the Jefferson Warning and assume the recording
artist has absolute property rights over his work, then we could
ignore the idea that forcing people to pay for stuff they take
might have a negative effect on future art and culture. Theft is
theft. I might be able to make art much more easily if I did not
have to pay for the paint and canvas, but that is not commonly
held to excuse shoplifting from art stores. But if we take the
Jefferson Warning seriously, then intellectual property's job is
to balance the need to provide incentives for production and
distribution with the need to leave future creators free to
build upon the past. Reasonable minds will differ on where this
line is to be drawn, but the process of drawing it is very
different from the process Judge Duffy had in mind.
97

For fifteen years, critics of the decision waited for an appeals
court to fix the law in this area. When the case of Bridgeport
Music, Inc. v. Dimension Films came up, they thought they had
what they wanted. The band NWA had used a tiny fragment (less
than two seconds) consisting of three notes of a guitar solo
from the George Clinton song "Get Off Your Ass and Jam." The
fragment was an arpeggiated chord, which simply means that you
strike the notes of the chord individually and in sequence. It
was, in fact, a pretty standard "deedly" sound, familiar from
many guitar solos. NWA then heavily distorted this fragment and
looped it so that it played in the background of one part of the
song--so faintly that it is almost impossible to hear and
completely impossible to recognize. (With the distortion it
sounds like a very faint and distant police siren.) A company
called Bridgeport Music owned the sound recording copyright over
the Clinton song. They sued. NWA's response was predictable--this
was classic de minimis copying, which the law did not touch. One
did not even have to get to the issue of fair use (though this
surely would be one).
98

The appeals court did not waste any time attempting to dignify
Judge Duffy's decision in Grand Upright.
99

    Although Grand Upright applied a bright-line test in a
sampling case, we have not cited it as precedent for several
reasons. First, it is a district court opinion and as such has
no binding precedential value. Second, although it appears to
have involved claims for both sound recording and musical
composition copyright infringement, the trial judge does not
distinguish which he is talking about in his ruling, and appears
to be addressing primarily the musical composition copyright.
Third, and perhaps most important, there is no analysis set
forth to indicate how the judge arrived at his ruling, which has
resulted in the case being criticized by commentators.22
100

They did like one thing about the decision, however: its bright-
line rule, "Thou Shalt Not Steal." (Lawyers use the term
"bright-line rule" to refer to a rule that is very easy to apply
to the facts. A 55 mph speed limit is a bright-line rule.) The
Bridgeport court rejected the idea that sound recording
copyrights and music composition copyrights should be analyzed
in the same way. They wanted to set a clear rule defining how
much of a sound recording one could use without permission. How
much? Nothing. To be precise, the court suggests in a footnote
that taking a single note might be acceptable since the
copyright protection only covers a "series." Anything more,
however, is clearly off limits.
101

Though they come to a conclusion that, if anything, is more
stringent than Judge Duffy's, they do so very differently. In
their words, "Get a license or do not sample." Effectively, the
court concludes that the sound recording copyright is different
enough from the composition copyright that a court could
reasonably conclude that a different analysis is required. The
judges are fully aware that copyright must balance encouraging
current creators and leaving raw material to future creators--the
Jefferson Warning holds no novelty for them. But they conclude
that a clear "one-note rule" will do, because if the costs of
licenses are too high, samplers can simply recreate the riff
themselves, and this will tend to keep prices reasonable.
102

This is an interesting idea. Why does this not happen more
often? Why do samplers not simply recreate James Brown's
drumbeat from "Funky Drummer," or George Clinton's solo from
"Get Off Your Ass and Jam"? Musicians offer lots of different
answers. They do not understand the distinction the court is
drawing, so the market never develops. The samples themselves
cannot be replicated, because the music has all kinds of
overtones from the historical equipment used and even the
methods of recording. Fundamentally, though, the answer seems to
be one of authenticity, ironically enough. The original beats
have a totemic significance--like the great standard chord
sequences in jazz. One cannot substitute replicas for James
Brown's funkiness. It just would not be the same. As Walter
Benjamin pointed out long ago in "The Work of Art in the Age of
Mechanical Reproduction," cheap copying actually increases the
demand for authenticity.23 The court's economic analysis--which
imagines a world of fungible beats produced for music as a
consumer good--deals poorly with such motivations.
103

When the court first released its decision, it was greeted with
concern even by recording industry representatives who might
have been expected to favor it, because it appeared to do away
with not only the de minimis limitation on copyright (some
portions are just too small to count as "copying") but the fair
use provisions as well. The court took the very unusual step of
rehearing the case and amending the opinion, changing it in a
number of places and adding a paragraph that stated that when
the case went back to the district court, the judge there was
free to consider the fair use defense. Of course, if one takes
this seriously--and, for the constitutional reasons given in
Chapter 5, I agree that the court has no power to write fair use
out of the statute--it undermines the supposedly clear rule. If
the factors of fair use are seriously applied, how can a three-
note excerpt ever fail to be fair use? And if we always have to
do a conventional fair use analysis, then the apparent clarity
of the one-note rule is an illusion.
104

The Bridgeport decision is a bad one, I believe. Among other
things, it fails to take seriously the constitutional
limitations on copyright--including the originality requirement
and the First Amendment. (A three-note sample is not original
enough to be protected under copyright law, in my view. There
are also more speech-related issues in sampling than the court
seems to realize.) The competitive licensing market the court
imagines seems more like economic fantasy than reality. I think
the ruling sets unnecessary barriers on musical creation and
ends up with a rule that is just as blurry as the one it
criticizes. I think the court's reading of the statute and
legislative history is wrong--though I have not bored you with
the full details of that argument. But I want to be clear that
it is a very different kind of bad decision from Judge Duffy's.
105

The court in Bridgeport does see copyright as a balance. It does
understand the need for future creators to build on the past,
but it also shows that a simple willingness to look upon
intellectual property protections in a utilitarian way does not
solve all problems. It certainly does not proceed from
Jefferson's presumption that intellectual property protections
should be interpreted narrowly. Though it claims to have a
"literal" reading of the statute, the real driving force in the
analysis is an unconsummated desire for bright-line rules and a
belief that the market will solve these problems by itself. The
court also suggests that "[i]f this is not what Congress
intended or is not what they would intend now, it is easy enough
for the record industry, as they have done in the past, to go
back to Congress for a clarification or change in the law." Note
the assumption that "the record industry" is the most reliable
guide to Congress's intentions or that it is the only entity
affected by such a rule. This is truly the image of copyright
law as a contract among affected industries. Of course, digital
artists such as The Legendary K.O. hardly fit within such a
model.
106

Under the rule in Bridgeport--"Get a license or do not
sample"--Mr. Randle and Mr. Nickerson appear to be breaking the
law. They did not get a license and they most definitely did
sample. What about fair use?
107

Under fair use, copyright allows a very specific (and possibly
lengthy) use of another's material when the purpose is parody of
that prior work itself. The Supreme Court gave parody a unique
status in the Acuff-Rose case. The (extremely profane) rap group
2 Live Crew had asked for permission to produce a version of Roy
Orbison's "Pretty Woman." But where Orbison sang about the
pretty woman walking down the street whom he would like to meet,
2 Live Crew wrote about a "big hairy woman" ("with hair that
ain't legit, 'cause you look like Cousin It"). They sang about a
"bald headed" woman with a "teeny weeny afro." They sang about
group sex with both women. Finally, they told a "two timin'
woman," "now I know the baby ain't mine." Justice Souter showed
the characteristic sangfroid of a Supreme Court justice faced
with raunchy rap music.
108

    While we might not assign a high rank to the parodic element
here, we think it fair to say that 2 Live Crew's song reasonably
could be perceived as commenting on the original or criticizing
it, to some degree. 2 Live Crew juxtaposes the romantic musings
of a man whose fantasy comes true, with degrading taunts, a
bawdy demand for sex, and a sigh of relief from paternal
responsibility. The later words can be taken as a comment on the
naiveté of the original of an earlier day, as a rejection of its
sentiment that ignores the ugliness of street life and the
debasement that it signifies. It is this joinder of reference
and ridicule that marks off the author's choice of parody from
the other types of comment and criticism that traditionally have
had a claim to fair use protection as transformative works.24
[emphasis added]
109

Truly, the law can confront and master all cultural forms. The
heart of parody as the Supreme Court described it is that one is
taking aim at the original. Because 2 Live Crew could be seen as
directing their song at Orbison's original, rather than using
Orbison's song to make some other political or social point, the
court was willing to give it the favorable consideration that
parody receives as a fair use.
110

Does "George Bush Doesn't Care About Black People" fit that
model? The Legendary K.O. were not "taking aim" at "Gold
Digger." True, they quoted West's actual words from the
television broadcast (also copyrighted). They even used them as
their title. But they were not taking aim at his song.
(Ironically, Kanye West has a better claim that he was taking
aim at Ray Charles's picture of womanhood, in just the way
described in the 2 Live Crew case.) Rather, The Legendary K.O.
were using the sample of the song as the backing to an entirely
different rap that expressed, in familiar and popular musical
form, a more expansive version of his condemnation of both press
and president. That does not end the inquiry. Parody is not the
only form of protected criticism or commentary. But it makes it
much harder for them to succeed, particularly in light of the
hostility toward sampling betrayed by both Grand Upright and
Bridgeport.
111

The videos made by The Black Lantern and Franklin Lopez present
an even more complex set of questions. On top of the music
copyright issues, we also have fair use claims for the extensive
news footage and footage of Mr. Foxx. The Black Lantern also
used some fragments of a popular video by Jib-Jab, which had a
cartoon Bush and Kerry singing dueling parodied versions of
Woody Guthrie's "This Land." When JibJab's video first came out,
the Guthrie estate claimed copyright infringement over the song.
Assisted by a number of public interest legal groups, JibJab
claimed fair use. (It eventually came out that the copyright
over the song was no longer valid.) What did Jib-Jab do when The
Black Lantern sampled them in their turn? In a move that both
wins the prize for hypocrisy and serves to sum up the
intersection of law and culture I have been describing, they
sent him a cease and desist letter. The video was taken down for
a week and he was eventually forced to remove the segment of
their video from his work. Fair use for me, but not for thee.
112

CONCLUSION
113

The Legendary K.O. samples Kanye West, who uses a fragment from
Ray Charles, who may have taken material from Will Lamartine
Thompson or, more likely, from Clara Ward (who herself borrowed
from a gospel standard). The chain of borrowing I describe here
has one end in the hymns and spirituals of the early 1900s and
the other in the twenty-first century's chaotic stew of digital
sampling, remix, and mashup. Along the way, we have the
synthesis of old and the invention of new musical genres--often
against the wishes of those whose work is serving as the raw
material. One way of viewing this story is that each of these
musicians (except for some imaginary original artist, the
musical source of the Nile) is a plagiarist and a pirate. If
they are licensing their material or getting it from the public
domain, then they may not be lawbreakers but they are still
unoriginal slavish imitators. If one's image of creativity is
that of the romantic, iconoclastic creator who invents the world
anew with each creation, those conclusions seem entirely
appropriate. The borrowing here is rampant. Far from building
everything anew, these musicians seem quite deliberately to base
their work on fragments taken from others.
114

It is important to remember that copyright does not subscribe
completely to the idea of romantic creation where music is
concerned. As I pointed out earlier, musical genres develop out
of other genres: soul from gospel and rhythm and blues; gospel
from spirituals; rhythm and blues from jazz, jump music, and
Delta blues; and so on. When it comes to genres, we can play the
game of musicological "six degrees of separation" all day long.
Copyright is supposed to leave "holes" in its coverage so that
the genre is not covered, only the specific form of creativity
within the genre. I mentioned before the need to keep the lines
of genre and form open, to keep them free from private property
rights in order to allow musicians to develop the form by using
them as common property, the "highways" of musical progress. So,
for example, the twelve-bar blues uses the first, fourth, and
fifth chords in a scale. That sequence cannot be owned, unless
blues is to become impossible or illegal. Bebop is characterized
by copious use of the flattened fifth--a sound which was jarring
to audiences when it was first introduced and which marked the
break with the more accessible jazz of swing and the big bands.
The flattened fifth is not owned. These characteristic genre-
creating sequences or sounds are supposed to be left in the
public domain, though increasingly some scholars--including
me--are coming to believe that we have managed to make the
copyright holder's control so complete and so granular as to
close those common areas and impede the development of future
musical forms. The Bridgeport court might extend its logic and
imagine that the entire musical commons could be licensed, of
course. The presence of other chord sequences would keep the
price down! But up to now, we have not gone that far. In theory
at least, copyright is not supposed to stop the next Ray
Charles, the person who wants to fuse two older forms of music
to create a third.
115

Yet the chain of borrowing that links The Legendary K.O., Kanye
West, Ray Charles, and the Bailey Gospel Singers is of a
different kind. This borrowing involves taking chunks of prior
musicians' melodies, their words, their lyrical patterns. This
is not just copying the genre. It is copying the lines of the
song within the genre. This is the kind of stuff copyright is
supposed to regulate even when it is working well. And yet,
listening to the sequence, it is hard to deny that at each stage
something artistic and innovative, something remarkable, has
been created. In fact, the story of this song is the striking
ability of each set of artists to impose their own sound,
temperament, spirituality, humor, vision of women, or, in the
case of The Legendary K.O., their intense and profane political
anger, onto the musical phrases they have in common.
116

The postmodern conclusion here is "there is nothing new under
the sun"--that all creation is re-creation, that there is no such
thing as originality, merely endless imitation. If this is meant
to be a comment about how things get created, at least in music,
I think there is some truth to it. But if it is a claim about
aesthetic worth, a denial that there are more and less creative
individuals in the arts, I find it as facile and unconvincing as
its romantic authorial opposite.
117

What is fascinating about the artists I describe here is that,
while they do not fit neatly into either the aesthetic ideal of
independent creation or the legal model for how creative
expression gets made, they each have a remarkable, palpable
creativity. Each leaves us with something new, even if formed
partly from the fragments of the past. One could describe Ray
Charles as the merest plagiarist--making "search and replace"
songs by substituting a woman for the deity in already-
established hits. But if that is our conclusion, it merely
proves that our theories of aesthetics are poorer than the
creativity they seek to describe. So much the worse for the
theories.
118

As Jefferson pointed out, the lines surrounding intellectual
property are hard to draw--something the Bridgeport court got
right. When we draw them, whether legally or as a matter of
aesthetic morality, we do so partly with standard instances in
mind. "Well, that can't be wrong," we think to ourselves, and
reason by analogy accordingly. Yet the process of analogy fails
us sometimes, because the types of borrowing change over time.
119

Ray Charles was frank about the way he copied the style and
licks of Nat King Cole like an apprentice learning from a
lawyer. But he and his estate assiduously guarded his copyrights
against more modern borrowing they found to be inappropriate.
Judge Duffy thunderously denounces Biz Markie. It is harder to
imagine him leveling the same condemnation at Dizzy Gillespie,
Charles Ives, Oscar Peterson, or, for that matter, Beethoven,
though all of them made copious use of the works of others in
their own. It is bizarre to imagine a Bridgeport-like rule being
extended to composition copyrights and applied to music such as
jazz. "Get a license or do not solo"? I think not. Does it make
any more sense for sampling?
120

If there is a single reason I told the story of these songs it
is this: to most of us, certainly to me, the idea that copyright
encourages creativity and discourages the reuse of material
created by others seems reasonable. Of course, I would want to
apply the correctives implied by the Jefferson Warning--to make
sure the rights were as short and as narrow as possible. But at
least when it comes to copying chunks of expression still
covered by copyright, our intuitions are to encourage people to
create "their own work," rather than to rely on remix. What does
that mean in the world of music? As the story I have told here
seems to illustrate, even musicians of unquestioned
"originality," even those who can make a claim to having created
a new musical genre, sometimes did so by a process rather more
like collage than creation out of nothing, taking chunks of
existing work that were proven to work well and setting them in
a new context or frame.
121

Imagine Ray Charles trying to create "I Got a Woman" today. Both
of his possible sources would be strongly and automatically
protected by copyright. The industries in which those works were
produced would be much more legalistic and infinitely more
litigious. The owners of those copyrights could use them to stop
him from "desecrating their work"--which is literally what he is
doing. We know Clara Ward objected to Charles's other borrowings
from gospel. I cannot imagine Will Lamartine Thompson or his
worthy neighbors in East Liverpool looking kindly on the sweet
"early morning loving" outside of wedlock described in "I Got a
Woman," still less the use of sacred music to glorify it. And
copyright gives them the power to say no. Remember Macaulay's
description of how Richardson's novels might have been censored
by a moralistic heir? Even if the objections were not vetoes,
but simple demands for payment, would we get "I Got a Woman" and
"This Little Girl of Mine"? Given the extent of the borrowing
that jump-started this particular genre-bridging effort, would
we be likely to see the birth of soul music?
122

Congress assures us that the many increases in copyright
protection have been in the name of encouraging creativity. The
music industry says the same thing when its pettifogging
clearance procedures and permission culture are criticized. But
do we really think we are more likely to get a twenty-first-
century Ray Charles, or a fusion of styles to create a new
genre, in the world we have made? Do we really think that the
formalist ignorance of Judge Duffy or the market optimism of the
Bridgeport court, in which thick markets offer fungible sets of
samples to be traded like commodities, are good guides for the
future of music? Are we in fact killing musical creativity with
the rules that are supposed to defend it?
123

An Internet optimist would tell us that is precisely the point.
True, because of the errors described in the chapter on the
Jefferson Warning, and the mistakes catalogued in the chapters
on the Internet Threat and the Farmers' Tale, we have
dramatically expanded the scope, length, and power of the rights
that are supposed to shape our creative culture. But technology
cures all. Look at The Legendary K.O., The Black Lantern, or
Franklin Lopez. They are all probably breaking the law as it is
currently interpreted by the courts. But their work can be
created for pennies and distributed to millions. The technology
allows people to circumvent the law. Admittedly, some of the
copyright holders will police their rights assiduously--think of
JibJab's newfound dislike of fair use and their power to alter
The Black Lantern's video. But others either cannot or will not.
Kanye West's representatives in particular are unlikely to be
stupid enough to sue The Legendary K.O. in the first place.
Internet distribution becomes a demimonde in which the rules of
the rest of the society either cannot or will not be enforced.
Art gets its breathing room, not from legal exceptions, but from
technological enforcement difficulties. Finally, as more and
more people can create and distribute digital culture, they are
less likely to understand, believe in, or accept rules that are
strongly at variance with their aesthetic and moral assumptions.
124

There is a lot to these points. The technology does transform
the conditions of creativity, and sometimes it runs right over
the law in the process. Thousands, even millions, can be reached
outside of conventional distribution channels with work that is
technically illegal. And attitudes toward creative propriety do
not track legal rules. When I wrote to Mr. Randle and Mr.
Nickerson, I found that they realized Mr. West probably had a
legal right to get their work taken down, but they felt he would
not use it, and they had a very commonsensical conception of
what they ought to be allowed to do. They were not making any
money from this. They were making a political point, drawing
attention to a political and human problem. That made it okay.
They would have liked more formal permission so that they could
actually distribute CDs through conventional for-profit
channels, perhaps with some portion of the proceeds going to
disaster relief, but they understood they were unlikely to get
it.
125

Despite all this, I am uncomfortable with the argument "do not
worry, technology will allow us to evade the rules where they
are stupid." A system that can only function well through
repeated lawbreaking is an unstable and dangerous one. It breeds
a lack of respect for the law in those who should be its
greatest supporters and beneficiaries. It blurs civil
disobedience and plain old lawbreaking. Sitting in on the
segregated lunch counter and being willing to face the
consequences is very different from parking in the disabled
space and hoping you can get away with it. It also blurs our
judgment of conduct. Whatever one thinks of them, The Legendary
K.O. are doing something very different than a college student
who just does not want to pay for music and downloads thousands
of tracks for free from file sharing networks.
126

The problem is not simply one of blurring. Technology-based
"freedoms" are not reliable (though legal ones, too, may fail).
In a pinch, the technology may not save you, as thousands of
those same downloaders have found out when sued by the RIAA and
forced to pay thousands of dollars for an activity they thought
to be private and anonymous. The Internet "solution" also leaves
certain types of artistic creation dependent on the vagaries of
the current technology, which may well change, eliminating some
of the zone of freedom we currently rely on. But more worrisome
is the fact that this "solution" actually confines certain types
of art to the world of the Internet.
127

The video of "George Bush Doesn't Care About Black People" could
be seen by many, but only if they were wired to the right
technological and social network. (After all, someone has to
tell you to watch.) It was a searing intervention in the
national debate on Katrina. But it appeared on no television
station. Like most of the mashups created online, the fact that
the rights could never be cleared keeps it off mass media.
Copyright acts as the barbed wire around mass media outlets.
That is a shame, I think. Not because that video is so good--you
may love it or hate it. But because this kind of artwork has
something important to contribute to our national culture.
Imagine a world in which Ray Charles could create "I Got a
Woman," but could only circulate it to a narrow group of the
file-trading digerati because of a flagrant violation of Clara
Ward's copyright. Do we still get soul? The blues? Jazz? Or do
we just get a precious and insular digital subculture, whose
cultural experiments never reach the mainstream?
128

Throughout his life, Charles described an intimate relationship
with his audience, with the public. He described their tastes as
a check, as a corrective; he thought they would actually be
"ahead" of the artists. He wanted to make songs that would be
listened to by tens of millions of people. And he wanted to make
art and lots of money. I am all for the person who wants to
create as an "amateur-professional" and distribute outside the
chains of commerce. I have worked with organizations that make
it easier to do this. But I also believe in the power and
creativity of commercial culture and political speech carried on
mass media. Ironically, our current copyright system serves it
poorly.
129

What is the solution to all of this? The music business runs on
compulsory licenses, a legally granted ability to use music in
certain ways without permission, though with a fee. The system
seems to function pretty well. One solution is to extend that
system to the world of mashups and derivative works. If you
merely copy the whole of my work and circulate it on file
sharing networks or on CDs, we apply the current rules and
penalties. If, on the other hand, you make a "derivative" work,
mixing your work with mine, then there are two alternatives. If
you stay in the world of nonprofit exchange, you get a
heightened presumption in favor of fair use (perhaps
administered through a quicker and cheaper system of
arbitration). If you move into the for-profit world, then you
must pay a flat licensing fee or percentage of profits to the
copyright holder.
130

A second solution would be to curtail the hypertrophy of
protectionism that made all this happen in the first place. The
copyright term could be shortened or we could require renewal
every twenty-eight years. (There are international treaties that
currently forbid the latter alternative.) We could cut back on
excesses like the Bridgeport decision, create incentives to make
the music industry less legalistically insistent on policing the
most atomic level of creation. We could exempt samples shorter
than five seconds from copyright liability, clarify the
boundaries of fair use, and extend it beyond parody to other
genre-smashing forms such as satire and collage.
131

There are enormous obstacles to all these proposals. In
particular, while artists fare very poorly under the current
clearance culture--paying but not receiving the benefits of
payments--the middlemen who profit from transaction costs are not
keen on abolishing them. Certainly if, as the Bridgeport court
assumed, the recording industry is the party responsible for
fine-tuning copyright law, we are hardly likely to see any
reforms that threaten current modes of doing business. Yet there
is a ray of hope. It is getting harder and harder to pretend
that the rules ostensibly designed to encourage creativity are
actually working. At the same time, more and more people are
creating and distributing cultural objects--becoming "subjects"
of intellectual property law in the process, often to their
dismay and irritation. It is in that conjunction--a far cry from
the industry contract envisioned by the Bridgeport court--that
hope for the future of copyright law's treatment of culture
might lie.


Chapter 7: The Enclosure of Science and Technology: Two Case
Studies
1

Over the last forty years, much has changed in the way that
scientific research and technological development are organized,
funded, and institutionally arranged. Much has also changed in
the type of scientific and technical material that is covered by
intellectual property rights, the ways that material is covered,
the parties who hold the rights, and the state of research and
development at which rights claims are made. Many academics who
study both science's organizational structure and the
intellectual property claims that surround it are concerned
about the results. To say this is not to conjure up a tragically
lost world of pure research science, untainted by property
claims or profit motives. That world never existed and it is
probably a good thing too. Intellectual property rights, and the
profit motive more generally, have a vital and beneficial role
in moving innovations from lab bench to bedside, from computer
simulation to actual flight. The question is not whether
intellectual property rights are useful as part of scientific
and technological development. The question is what type of
rights they should be, where in the research process those
rights are best deployed, how they should coexist with state
funded basic scientific and technological research, how broad
they should be, how they should deal with new technologies, how
long they should last, how they should treat follow-on
innovations.
2

I cannot hope here to answer all those questions, though some
fascinating research has begun the process. Instead, as with the
music chapter, I will offer a case study--actually two case
studies--that try to illuminate the process I am describing, to
illustrate its pitfalls and its strange and unintended
consequences.
3

The two defining technologies of the last thirty years are
biotechnology and the networked computer. Each is both product
and platform. Innovations themselves, they are also constitutive
technologies that enable still more innovations. But at several
historical moments in the development of each we came perilously
close to breaking technology with law.1 Some would say that it
was not just a close shave: we actually have hampered or limited
the full potential of technology, slowing down its dynamism with
a host of overbroad software patents, gene patents, and
materials transfer agreements. Others are more optimistic. They
think that a series of rapid improvisations by courts,
scientists, programmers, and businesspeople has largely
mitigated any problems caused by the process of legal
expansion.2 But if mistakes were made, it is important to know
what they were lest we continue or repeat them. If there were
"fixes," it is important to know if they can be replicated.
4

So were there mistakes? If so, have they been fixed, and how?
Drawing on an article I co-wrote with my brilliant colleague
Arti Rai,3 this chapter suggests some answers to those questions
by sketching out some details of the legal history of those
technologies, concluding with a discussion of a single promising
new technology that shares aspects of both--synthetic biology.
The answers are important. Behind the abstract words
"innovation" or "technological development" there are lives
saved or lost, communicative freedoms expanded or contracted,
communities enabled or stunted, wealth generated or not. The
subject would benefit from informed, sophisticated, democratic
attention. It is not something you want to leave a host of
lawyers and lobbyists to decide among themselves.
5

A MACHINE THAT CONTAINS
ALL OTHER MACHINES
6

Imagine a person staring at an infinite roll of paper tape. On
the paper are symbols in some alphabet or number system. The
reader carries out simple, operable instructions on the basis of
that data. "Add together the next two digits you are presented
with and write down the answer. If the answer is odd, go to step
2. If the answer is even, go to step 3." Now replace the person
with a mechanical head that can "read" the instructions, carry
out the desired operations, and write the answer down. The
British mathematician Alan Turing imagined something like this--a
little more complicated, perhaps, but fairly similar. What is
it? We have the reading head, the set of instructions, the data
on which the instructions are to be performed, the record of the
result, and some kind of "state table" that tells the machine
where it is in the process. These are the component parts of
Turing machines--or as we know them better, computers. More
accurately, Turing machines are a method of simulating the
operation of computers, a metaphor that enables us to imitate
their logical processes. In the words of Wikipedia, "despite
their simplicity--[they] can be adapted to simulate the logic of
any computer that could possibly be constructed." And to give
lawyers fits. But that is getting ahead of ourselves.
7

In Greek mythology, Procrustes had a bed to which he fitted its
prospective occupants, whether they liked it or not. The tall
were trimmed down. The short stretched on the rack. Intellectual
property lawyers have many similarities to Procrustes. The
technologies that are brought before them are made to fit the
conceptual boxes the law provides, boxes with names such as
"copyright" and "patent." Occasionally, new conceptual boxes are
made, but--for very good reasons--most of the time we stick with
the boxes we have. As with Procrustes, things do not always fit
and the process can be distressing for its subjects.
8

It is important to realize that the process of trimming and
stretching can be done well or badly. If it is done really
badly, the technology is stunted, deformed, even destroyed. If
it is done well, the law aids the development of the technology
in exactly the happy way described in Chapter 1. What did our
Procrustean legal system do with computers and computer science?
9

I will focus on software--the set of instructions the machine is
to perform. How should we think of it? Software is written down
by programmers. It is recorded first in a form readable to
humans, or at least geeks. Then, through a series of
transformations, it is turned into the machine code, the ones
and zeros that will operate the computer. But at its root it can
be understood through the metaphor of the simple list of
instructions to be carried out in order, just as with the Turing
machine and its infinite tape.
10

How should we fit software into the categories of intellectual
property? We have "writing," fixation in some medium of symbols
that can be read by others--both machine and human. Writing is
normally the domain of copyright. Are computer programs
copyrightable? All kinds of problems present themselves. At
least in the United States, copyright covers expression. As I
pointed out in a previous book, at its base is the conception of
the romantic author impressing her uniqueness of spirit on the
work at the moment of writing. It is that expressive choice, not
the facts or ideas on which the work is based, that copyright
covers. And it is only original expression that copyright
covers. It does not cover purely functional objects, systems,
processes, or methods of operation. One cannot copyright the
coat hanger, the mousetrap, or long division. One cannot even
copyright a "sculpture" if the main function of its design is to
serve as a bicycle rack. Admittedly, one can copyright some
expressive works that serve a practical purpose. A book about
how to do double-entry bookkeeping is copyrightable. Yet
copyright covers only the expressive choices used in selecting
the words to explain the method, and the images to represent it,
not the methods it describes or the facts or ideas it contains.
Can copyright cover computer programs? Should we see them as
copyrightable how-to books or as uncopyrightable machines made
of words?
11

Machines and other functional innovations are normally the
domain of patent rights. One can patent the mousetrap, and then
one gets an exclusive right to the actual mechanically enabled
method of catching mice, not just the artistic flourishes on the
blueprint. Patents have more demanding criteria than copyrights.
The invention needs to be novel and have utility, or usefulness;
I cannot get a patent over something that would have been an
obvious idea to an insider in the relevant field of technology,
a "person having ordinary skill in the art," or PHOSITA, in the
jargon of patent lawyers. But once I get my patent, it gives me
a very strong power to exclude others from the invention--even if
they came up with it independently. The right lasts for twenty
years. Follow-on innovators who improve on my idea can get a
patent on that improvement. They can block me from using the
improvement. I can block them from using the original invention.
Thus we have an incentive to negotiate if either of us wants to
bring the improved innovation to market.
12

So where did software fit? Was it copyrightable writing or
patentable invention? There are two issues here. The first is
whether there should be any intellectual property rights over
software at all. The basic case for that proposition is simple,
a classic example of the public goods problem described in the
first chapter. Software costs money to create, but is cheap to
copy. When a youthful Bill Gates wrote his 1976 letter to the
wonderfully named Dr. Dobb's Journal of Computer Calisthenics &
Orthodontia, he put the point clearly.
13

    Who can afford to do professional work for nothing? What
hobbyist can put 3-man years into programming, finding all the
bugs, documenting his product and distribute it for free? The
fact is, no one besides us has invested a lot of money into
hobby software. We have written 6800 BASIC, and are writing 8080
APL and 6800 APL, but there is very little incentive to make
this software available to hobbyists. Most directly, the thing
you do is theft.4
14

He signed the letter "Bill Gates, General Partner, Micro-Soft."
The hyphen would disappear in time. The philosophy stuck around.
15

Though there are quibbles about the facts in Gates's
letter--critics claim he himself did a lot of free riding on
public domain code and government-funded computer time--his basic
point is that software needs to be protected by (enforceable)
property rights if we expect it to be effectively and
sustainably produced. Some software developers disagree. But
assuming one concedes the point for the sake of argument, there
is a second question: should software be covered by copyright or
patent, or some unidentified third option?
16

In practice, software ended up being covered by both schemes,
partly because of actions by Congress, which included several
references to software in the Copyright Act, and partly as a
result of decisions by the Copyright Office, the Patent and
Trademark Office, and judges. One could copyright one's code and
also gain a patent over the "nonobvious," novel, and useful
innovations inside the software.
17

At first, it was the use of copyright that stirred the most
concern. As I explained in the last chapter, copyright seems to
be built around an assumption of diverging innovation--the
fountain or explosion of expressive activity. Different people
in different situations who sit down to write a sonnet or a love
story, it is presumed, will produce very different creations
rather than being drawn to a single result. Thus strong rights
over the resulting work are not supposed to inhibit future
progress. I can find my own muse, my own path to immortality.
Creative expression is presumed to be largely independent of the
work of prior authors. Raw material is not needed. "Copyright is
about sustaining the conditions of creativity that enable an
individual to craft out of thin air an Appalachian Spring, a Sun
Also Rises, a Citizen Kane."5
18

There are lots of reasons to doubt that this vision of "creation
out of nothing" works very well even in the arts, the
traditional domain of copyright law. The story of Ray Charles's
"I Got a Woman" bears ample witness to those doubts. But
whatever its merits or defects in the realm of the arts, the
vision seems completely wrongheaded when it comes to software.
Software solutions to practical problems do converge, and
programmers definitely draw upon prior lines of code. Worse
still, as I pointed out earlier, software tends to exhibit
"network effects." Unlike my choice of novel, my choice of word
processing program is very strongly influenced, perhaps
dominated, by the question of what program other people have
chosen to buy. That means that even if a programmer could find a
completely different way to write a word processing program, he
has to be able to make it read the dominant program's files, and
mimic its features, if he is to attract any customers at all.
That hardly sounds like completely divergent creation.
19

Seeing that software failed to fit the Procrustean bed of
copyright, many scholars presumed the process of forcing it into
place would be catastrophic. They believed that, lacking
patent's high standards, copyright's monopolies would
proliferate widely. Copyright's treatment of follow-on or
"derivative" works would impede innovation, it was thought. The
force of network effects would allow the copyright holder of
whatever software became "the standard" to extract huge monopoly
rents and prevent competing innovation for many years longer
than the patent term. Users of programs would be locked in,
unable to shift their documents, data, or acquired skills to a
competing program. Doom and gloom abounded among copyright
scholars, including many who shared Mr. Gates's basic
premise--that software should be covered by property rights. They
simply believed that these were the wrong property rights to
use.
20

Copyright did indeed cause problems for software developers,
though it is hard to judge whether those problems outweighed the
economic benefits of encouraging software innovation,
production, and distribution. But the negative effects of
copyright were minimized by a remarkably prescient set of
actions by courts and, to a much lesser extent, Congress, so
that the worst scenarios did not come to pass. Courts
interpreted the copyright over software very narrowly, so that
it covered little beyond literal infringement. (Remember
Jefferson's point about the importance of being careful about
the scope of a right.) They developed a complicated test to work
out whether one program infringed the details of another. The
details give law students headaches every year, but the effects
were simple. If your software was similar to mine merely because
it was performing the same function, or because I had picked the
most efficient way to perform some task, or even because there
was market demand for doing it that way, then none of those
similarities counted for the purposes of infringement. Nor did
material that was taken from the public domain. The result was
that while someone who made literal copies of Windows Vista was
clearly infringing copyright, the person who made a competing
program generally would not be.
21

In addition, courts interpreted the fair use doctrine to cover
"decompilation"--which is basically taking apart someone else's
program so that you can understand it and compete with it. As
part of the process, the decompiler had to make a copy of the
program. If the law were read literally, decompilation would
hardly seem to be a fair use. The decompiler makes a whole copy,
for a commercial purpose, of a copyrighted work, precisely in
order to cause harm to its market by offering a substitute good.
But the courts took a broader view. The copy was a necessary
part of the process of producing a competing product, rather
than a piratical attempt to sell a copy of the same product.
This limitation on copyright provided by fair use was needed in
order to foster the innovation that copyright is supposed to
encourage. This is a nice variation of the Sony Axiom from
Chapter 4.
22

These rulings and others like them meant that software was
protected by copyright, as Mr. Gates wanted, but that the
copyright did not give its owner the right to prevent functional
imitation and competition. Is that enough? Clearly the network
effects are real. Most of us use Windows and most of us use
Microsoft Word, and one very big reason is because everyone else
does. Optimists believe the lure of capturing this huge market
will keep potential competitors hungry and monopolists scared.
The lumbering dominant players will not become complacent about
innovation or try to grab every morsel of monopoly rent, goes
the argument. They still have to fear their raptor-like
competitors lurking in the shadows. Perhaps. Or perhaps it also
takes the consistent threat of antitrust enforcement. In any
event, whether or not we hit the optimal point in protecting
software with intellectual property rights, those rights
certainly did not destroy the industry. It appeared that, even
with convergent creativity and network effects, software could
be crammed into the Procrustean bed of copyright without killing
it off in the process. Indeed, to some, it seemed to fare very
well. They would claim that the easy legal protection provided
by copyright gave a nascent industry just enough protection to
encourage the investment of time, talent, and dollars, while not
prohibiting the next generation of companies from building on
the innovations of the past.
23

In addition, the interaction between copyright and software has
produced some surprising results. There is a strong argument
that it is the fact that software is copyrightable that has
enabled the "commons-based creativity" of free and open source
software. What does commons-based creativity mean? Basically, it
is creativity that builds on an open resource available to all.
An additional component of some definitions is that the results
of the creativity must be fed back into the commons for all to
use. Think of English. You can use English without license or
fee, and you can innovate by producing new words, slang, or
phrases without clearance from some Academie Anglaise. After you
coin your term, it is in turn available to me to build upon or
to use in my own sentences, novels, or jokes. And so the cycle
continues. As the last chapter showed, for the entire history of
musical creativity until the last forty years or so, the same
had been true of at least a low level of musical borrowing. At
the basic level of musical phrases, themes, snatches of melody,
even chord structures, music was commons-based creativity.
Property rights did not reach down into the atomic structure of
music. They stayed at a higher level--prohibiting reproduction of
complete works or copying of substantial and important chunks.
So in some areas of both music and language, we had commons-
based creativity because there were no property rights over the
relevant level. The software commons is different.
24

The creators of free and open source software were able to use
the fact that software is copyrighted, and that the right
attaches automatically upon creation and fixation, to set up
new, distributed methods of innovation. For example, free and
open source software under the General Public License--such as
Linux--is a "commons" to which all are granted access. Anyone may
use the software without any restrictions. They are guaranteed
access to the human-readable "source code," rather than just the
inscrutable "machine code," so that they can understand, tinker,
and modify. Modifications can be distributed so long as the new
creation is licensed under the open terms of the original. This
creates a virtuous cycle: each addition builds on the commons
and is returned to it. The copyright over the software was the
"hook" that allowed software engineers to create a license that
gave free access and the right to modify and required future
programmers to keep offering those freedoms. Without the
copyright, those features of the license would not have been
enforceable. For example, someone could have modified the open
program and released it without the source code--denying future
users the right to understand and modify easily. To use an
analogy beloved of free software enthusiasts, the hood of the
car would be welded shut. Home repair, tinkering, customization,
and redesign become practically impossible.
25

Of course, if there were no copyright over software at all,
software engineers would have other freedoms--even if not legally
guaranteed open access to source code. Still, it was hard to
deny that the extension of the property regime had--bizarrely, at
first sight--actually enabled the creation of a continuing open
commons. The tempting real estate analogy would be
environmentalists using strong property rights over land to
guarantee conservation and open access to a green space, where,
without property rights, the space could be despoiled by all.
But as I have pointed out earlier, while such analogies may help
us, the differences between land and intellectual property
demand that they be scrutinized very carefully. It is hard to
overgraze an idea.
26

So much for copyright. What about patents? U.S. patent law had
drawn a firm line between patentable invention and unpatentable
idea, formula, or algorithm. The mousetrap could be patented,
but not the formula used to calculate the speed at which it
would snap shut. Ideas, algorithms, and formulae were in the
public domain--as were "business methods." Or so we thought.
27

The line between idea or algorithm on the one hand and
patentable machine on the other looks nice and easy. But put
that algorithm--that series of steps capable of being specified
in the way described by the Turing machine--onto a computer, and
things begin to look more complex. Say, for example, that
algorithm was the process for converting miles into kilometers
and vice versa. "Take the first number. If it is followed by the
word miles, then multiply by 8/5. If it is followed by the word
kilometers, multiply by 5/8 . . ." and so on. In the abstract,
this is classic public domain stuff--no more patentable than
E=mc2 or F=ma. What about when those steps are put onto the tape
of the Turing machine, onto a program running on the hard drive
of a computer?
28

The Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (the United
States's leading patent court) seems to believe that computers
can turn unpatentable ideas into patentable machines. In fact,
in this conception, the computer sitting on your desk becomes
multiple patentable machines--a word processing machine, an e-
mail machine, a machine running the program to calculate the
tensile strength of steel. I want to stress that the other bars
to patentability remain. My example of mile-to-kilometer
conversion would be patentable subject matter but, we hope, no
patent would be granted because the algorithm is not novel and
is obvious. (Sadly, the Patent and Trademark Office seems
determined to undermine this hope by granting patents on the
most mundane and obvious applications.) But the concern here is
not limited to the idea that without a subject matter bar, too
many obvious patents will be granted by an overworked and badly
incentivized patent office. It is that the patent was supposed
to be granted at the very end of a process of investigation and
scientific and engineering innovation. The formulae, algorithms,
and scientific discoveries on which the patented invention was
based remained in the public domain for all to use. It was only
when we got to the very end of the process, with a concrete
innovation ready to go to market, that the patent was to be
given. Yet the ability to couple the abstract algorithm with the
concept of a Turing machine undermines this conception. Suddenly
the patents are available at the very beginning of the process,
even to people who are merely specifying--in the abstract--the
idea of a computer running a particular series of algorithmic
activities.
29

The words "by means of a computer" are--in the eyes of the
Federal Circuit--an incantation of magical power, able to
transubstantiate the ideas and formulae of the public domain
into private property. And, like the breaking of a minor taboo
that presages a Victorian literary character's slide into
debauchery, once that first wall protecting the public domain
was breached, the court found it easier and easier to breach
still others. If one could turn an algorithm into a patentable
machine simply by adding "by means of a computer," then one
could turn a business method into something patentable by
specifying the organizational or information technology
structure through which the business method is to be
implemented.
30

If you still remember the first chapters of this book, you might
wonder why we would want to patent business methods.
Intellectual property rights are supposed to be handed out only
when necessary to produce incentives to supply some public good,
incentives that otherwise would be lacking. Yet there are
already plenty of incentives to come up with new business
methods. (Greed and fear are the most obvious.) There is no
evidence to suggest that we need a state-backed monopoly to
encourage the development of new business methods. In fact, we
want people to copy the businesses of others, lowering prices as
a result. The process of copying business methods is called
"competition" and it is the basis of a free-market economy. Yet
patent law would prohibit it for twenty years. So why introduce
patents? Brushing aside such minor objections with ease, the
Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit declared business
methods to be patentable. Was this what Jefferson had in mind
when he said "I know well the difficulty of drawing a line
between the things which are worth to the public the
embarrassment of an exclusive patent, and those which are not"?
I doubt it.
31

It is commonplace for courts to look at the purpose of the law
they are enforcing when seeking to understand what it means. In
areas of regulation which are obviously instrumental--aimed at
producing some particular result in the world--that approach is
ubiquitous. In applying the antitrust laws, for example, courts
have given meaning to the relatively vague words of the law by
turning to economic analysis of the likely effects of different
rules on different market structures.
32

Patent law is as instrumental a structure as one could imagine.
In the United States, for example, the constitutional
authorization to Congress to pass patent and copyright
legislation is very explicit that these rights are to be made
with a purpose in view. Congress has the power "to promote the
progress of science and useful arts, by securing for limited
times to authors and inventors the exclusive right to their
respective writings and discoveries." One might imagine that
courts would try to interpret the patent and copyright laws with
that purpose, and the Jefferson Warning about its constraints,
firmly in mind. Yet utilitarian caution about extending
monopolies is seldom to be found in the reasoning of our chief
patent court.
33

The difference is striking. Jefferson said that the job of those
who administered the patent system was to see if a patent was
"worth the embarrassment to the public" before granting it. The
Constitution tells Congress to make only those patent laws that
"promote the progress of science and useful arts." One might
imagine that this constitutional goal would guide courts in
construing those same laws. Yet neither Jeffersonian ideals nor
the constitutional text seem relevant to our chief patent court
when interpreting statutory subject matter. Anything under the
sun made by man is patentable subject matter, and there's an end
to it. The case that announced the rule on business methods
involved a patent on the process of keeping accounts in a "hub-
and-spoke" mutual fund--which included multiplying all of the
stock holdings of each fund in a family of funds by the
respective current share price to get total fund value and then
dividing by the number of mutual fund shares that each customer
actually holds to find the balance in their accounts. As my son
observed, "I couldn't do that until nearly the end of third
grade!"6
34

In theory of course, if the patent is not novel or is obvious,
it will still be refused. The Supreme Court recently held that
the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit has made
"nonobvious" too easy a standard to meet.7 It is unclear,
however, whether that judgment will produce concrete effects on
actual practices of patent grants and litigation. The Patent and
Trademark Office puts pressure on examiners to issue patents,
and it is very expensive to challenge those that are granted.
Better, where possible, to rule out certain subject matter in
the first place. Tempted in part by its flirtation with the
"idea made machine" in the context of a computer, the Court of
Appeals for the Federal Circuit could not bring itself to do so.
Where copyright law evolved to wall off and minimize the dangers
of extending protection over software, patent law actually
extended the idea behind software patents to make patentable any
thought process that might produce a useful result. Once
breached, the walls protecting the public domain in patent law
show a disturbing tendency to erode at an increasing rate.
35

To sum up, the conceptual possibilities presented to copyright
and patent law by the idea of a Turing machine were fascinating.
Should we extend copyright or patent to cover the new
technology? The answer was "we will extend both!" Yet the
results of the extension were complex and unexpected in ways
that we will have to understand if we want to go beyond the
simple but important injunctions of Jefferson and Macaulay. Who
would have predicted that software copyrights could be used to
create a self-perpetuating commons as well as a monopoly over
operating systems, or that judges would talk knowingly of
network effects in curtailing the scope of coverage? Who would
have predicted that patents would be extended not only to basic
algorithms implemented by a computer, but to methods of business
themselves (truly a strange return to legalized business
monopolies for a country whose founders viewed them as one of
the greatest evils that could be borne)?
36

SYNTHETIC BIOLOGY
37

If you are a reader of Science, PLoS Biology, or Nature, you
will have noticed some attractive and bizarre photographs
recently. A field of bacteria that form themselves into bull's-
eyes and polka dots. A dim photograph of a woman's face "taken"
by bacteria that have been programmed to be sensitive to light.
You may also have read about more inspiring, if less photogenic,
accomplishments--for example, the group of scientists who managed
to program bacteria to produce artemesinin, a scarce natural
remedy for malaria derived from wormwood. Poking deeper into
these stories, you would have found the phrase "synthetic
biology" repeated again and again, though a precise definition
would have eluded you.
38

What is "synthetic biology"? For some it is simply that the
product or process involves biological materials not found in
nature. Good old-fashioned biotechnology would qualify. One of
the first biotechnology patent cases, Diamond v. Chakrabarty,
involved some bacteria which Dr. Chakrabarty had engineered to
eat oil slicks--not their natural foodstuff.8 The Supreme Court
noted that the bacteria were not found in nature and found them
to be patentable, though alive. According to the simplest
definition, Dr. Chakrabarty's process would count as synthetic
biology, though this example antedates the common use of the
term by two decades. For other scientists, it is the completely
synthetic quality of the biology involved that marks the edge of
the discipline. The DNA we are familiar with, for example, has
four "base pairs"-- A, C, G, and T. Scientists have developed
genetic alphabets that involve twelve base pairs. Not only is
the result not found in nature, but the very language in which
it is expressed is entirely new and artificial.
39

I want to focus on a third conception of synthetic biology: the
idea of turning biotechnology from an artisanal process of one-
off creations, developed with customized techniques, to a true
engineering discipline, using processes and parts that are as
standardized and as well understood as valves, screws,
capacitors, or resistors. The electrical engineer told to build
a circuit does not go out and invent her own switches or
capacitors. She can build a circuit using off-the-shelf
components whose performance is expressed using standard
measurements. This is the dream of one group of synthetic
biologists: that biological engineering truly become
engineering, with biological black boxes that perform all of the
standard functions of electrical or mechanical
engineering--measuring flow, reacting to a high signal by giving
out a low signal, or vice versa, starting or terminating a
sequence, connecting the energy of one process to another, and
so on.
40

Of course an engineer understands the principle behind a
ratchet, or a valve, but he does not have to go through the
process of thinking "as part of this design, I will have to
create a thing that lets stuff flow through one way and not the
other." The valve is the mechanical unit that stands for that
thought, a concept reified in standardized material form which
does not need to be taken apart and parsed each time it is used.
By contrast, the synthetic biologists claim, much of current
biotechnological experimentation operates the way a seventeenth-
century artisan did. Think of the gunsmith making beautiful one-
off classics for his aristocratic patrons, without standardized
calibers, parts, or even standard-gauge springs or screws. The
process produces the gun, but it does not use, or produce,
standard parts that can also be used by the next gunsmith.
41

Is this portrayal of biology correct? Does it involve some
hyping of the new hot field, some denigration of the older
techniques? I would be shocked, shocked, to find there was hype
involved in the scientific or academic enterprise. But whatever
the degree to which the novelty of this process is being subtly
inflated, it is hard to avoid being impressed by the projects
that this group of synthetic biologists has undertaken. The MIT
Registry of Standard Biological Parts, for example, has exactly
the goal I have just described.
42

    The development of well-specified, standard, and
interchangeable biological parts is a critical step towards the
design and construction of integrated biological systems. The
MIT Registry of Standard Biological Parts supports this goal by
recording and indexing biological parts that are currently being
built and offering synthesis and assembly services to construct
new parts, devices, and systems. . . . In the summer of 2004,
the Registry contained about 100 basic parts such as operators,
protein coding regions, and transcriptional terminators, and
devices such as logic gates built from these basic parts. Today
the number of parts has increased to about 700 available parts
and 2000 defined parts. The Registry believes in the idea that a
standard biological part should be well specified and able to be
paired with other parts into subassemblies and whole systems.
Once the parameters of these parts are determined and
standardized, simulation and design of genetic systems will
become easier and more reliable. The parts in the Registry are
not simply segments of DNA, they are functional units.9
43

Using the Registry, a group of MIT scientists organizes an
annual contest called iGEM, the International Genetically
Engineered Machine competition. Students can draw from the
standard parts that the Registry contains, and perhaps
contribute their own creations back to it. What kinds of
"genetically engineered machines" do they build?
44

    A team of eight undergraduates from the University of
Ljubljana in Slovenia-- cheering and leaping onto MIT's Kresge
Auditorium stage in green team T-shirts-- won the grand prize
earlier this month at the International Genetically Engineered
Machine (iGEM) competition at MIT. The group--which received an
engraved award in the shape of a large aluminum Lego
piece--explored a way to use engineered cells to intercept the
body's excessive response to infection, which can lead to a
fatal condition called sepsis. The goal of the 380 students on
35 university teams from around the world was to build
biological systems the way a contractor would build a house--with
a toolkit of standard parts. iGEM participants spent the summer
immersed in the growing field of synthetic biology, creating
simple systems from interchangeable parts that operate in living
cells. Biology, once thought too complicated to be engineered
like a clock, computer or microwave oven, has proven to be open
to manipulation at the genetic level. The new creations are
engineered from snippets of DNA, the molecules that run living
cells.10
45

Other iGEM entries have included E. coli bacteria that had been
engineered to smell like wintergreen while they were growing and
dividing and like bananas when they were finished, a
biologically engineered detector that would change color when
exposed to unhealthy levels of arsenic in drinking water, a
method of programming mouse stem cells to "differentiate" into
more specialized cells on command, and the mat of picture-taking
bacteria I mentioned earlier.
46

No matter how laudable the arsenic detector or the experimental
technique dealing with sepsis, or how cool the idea of banana-
scented, picture-taking bacteria, this kind of enterprise will
cause some of you to shudder. Professor Drew Endy, one of the
pioneers in this field, believes that part of that reaction
stems from simple novelty. "A lot of people who were scaring
folks in 1975 now have Nobel prizes."11 But even if inchoate,
the concerns that synthetic biology arouses stem from more than
novelty. There is a deep-seated fear that if we see the natural
world of biology as merely another system that we can routinely
engineer, we will have extended our technocratic methods into a
realm that was only intermittently subject to them in a way that
threatens both our structure of self-understanding and our
ecosystem.
47

To this, the synthetic biologists respond that we are already
engineering nature. In their view, planned, structured, and
rationalized genetic engineering poses fewer dangers than poorly
understood interventions to produce some specific result in
comparative ignorance of the processes we are employing to do
so. If the "code" is transparent, subject to review by a peer
community, and based on known parts and structures, each
identified by a standard genetic "barcode," then the chance of
detecting problems and solving them is higher. And while the
dangers are real and not to be minimized, the potential
benefits--the lives saved because the scarce antimalarial drug
can now be manufactured by energetic E. coli or because a cheap
test can demonstrate arsenic contamination in a village well--are
not to be minimized either.
48

I first became aware of synthetic biology when a number of the
scientists working on the Registry of Standard Biological Parts
contacted me and my colleague Arti Rai. They did not use these
exact words, but their question boiled down to "how does
synthetic biology fare in intellectual property's categories,
and how can we keep the basics of the science open for all to
use?" As you can tell from this book, I find intellectual
property fascinating--lamentably so perhaps. Nevertheless, I was
depressed by the idea that scientists would have to spend their
valuable time trying to work out how to save their discipline
from being messed up by the law. Surely it would be better to
have them doing, well, science?
49

They have cause for concern. As I mentioned at the beginning of
this chapter, synthetic biology shares characteristics of both
software and biotechnology. Remember the focus on reducing
functions to black boxes. Synthetic biologists are looking for
the biological equivalents of switches, valves, and inverters.
The more abstractly these are described, the more they come to
resemble simple algebraic expressions, replete with "if, then"
statements and instructions that resolve to "if x, then y, if
not x, then z."
50

If this sounds reminiscent of the discussion of the Turing
machine, it should. When the broad rules for software and
business methods were enunciated by the federal courts, software
was already a developed industry. Even though the rules would
have allowed the equivalent of patenting the alphabet, the very
maturity of the field minimized the disruption such patents
could cause. Of course "prior art" was not always written down.
Even when it was recorded, it was sometimes badly handled by the
examiners and the courts, partly because they set a very
undemanding standard for "ordinary expertise" in the art.
Nevertheless, there was still a lot of prior experience and it
rendered some of the more basic claims incredible. That is not
true in the synthetic biology field.
51

Consider a recent article in Nature, "A universal RNAi-based
logic evaluator that operates in mammalian cells."12 The
scientists describe their task in terms that should be familiar.
"A molecular automaton is an engineered molecular system coupled
to a (bio)molecular environment by 'flow of incoming messages
and the actions of outgoing messages,' where the incoming
messages are processed by an 'intermediate set of elements,'
that is, a computer." The article goes on to describe some of
the key elements of so-called "Boolean algebra"-- "or," "and,"
"not," and so on--implemented in living mammalian cells.
52

These inscriptions of Boolean algebra in cells and DNA sequences
can be patented. The U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services, for example, owns patent number 6,774,222:
53

    This invention relates to novel molecular constructs that
act as various logic elements, i.e., gates and flip-flops. . . .
The basic functional unit of the construct comprises a nucleic
acid having at least two protein binding sites that cannot be
simultaneously occupied by their cognate binding protein. This
basic unit can be assembled in any number of formats providing
molecular constructs that act like traditional digital logic
elements (flips-flops, gates, inverters, etc.).
54

My colleagues Arti Rai and Sapna Kumar have performed a patent
search and found many more patents of similar breadth.13
55

What is the concern? After all, this is cutting-edge science.
These seem like novel, nonobvious inventions with considerable
utility. The concern is that the change in the rules over
patentable subject matter, coupled with the Patent and Trademark
Office's handling of both software and biotechnology, will come
together so that the patent is not over some particular
biological circuit, but, rather, over Boolean algebra itself as
implemented by any biotechnological means. It would be as if,
right at the beginning of the computer age, we had issued
patents over formal logic in software--not over a particular
computer design, but over the idea of a computer or a binary
circuit itself.
56

"By means of a computer" was the magic phrase that caused the
walls around the public domain of algorithms and ideas to
crumble. Will "by means of a biological circuit" do the same?
And--to repeat the key point--unlike computer science,
biotechnology is developing after the hypertrophy of our
intellectual property system. We do not have the immune system
provided by the established practices and norms, the "prior
art," even the community expectations that protected software
from the worst effects of patents over the building blocks of
science.
57

Following the example of software, the founders of the MIT
Registry of Standard Biological Parts had the idea of protecting
their discipline from overly expansive intellectual property
claims by turning those rights against themselves. Free and open
source software developers have created a "commons" using the
copyright over the code to impose a license on their software,
one that requires subsequent developers to keep the source open
and to give improvements back to the software commons--a virtuous
cycle. Could the Registry of Standard Biological Parts do the
same thing? The software commons rests on a license. But, as I
pointed out in the last section, the license depends on an
underlying property right. It is because I have automatic
copyright over my code that I can tell you "use it according to
these terms or you will be violating my copyright." Is there a
copyright over the products of synthetic biology? To create one
we would have to take the extension of copyright that was
required to reach software and stretch it even further. Bill
Gates might argue for intellectual property rights over software
using the logic of his article in Dr. Dobb's Journal. Will the
argument for copyrights over synthetic biological coding be "I
need the property right so I can create a commons"?
58

In practice, I think the answer is, and should be, no. Of
course, one could think of this as just another type of coding,
making expressive choices in a code of A's, C's, G's, and T's,
just as a programmer does in Java or C??. Yet, software was
already a stretch for copyright law. Synthetic biology strikes
me as a subject matter that the courts, Congress, and the
Copyright Office are unlikely to want to cram into copyright's
already distorted outlines-- particularly given the obvious
availability of patent rights. As a matter of conceptual
intuition, I think they will see biological subject matter as
harder to fit into the categories of original expressive
writing. On one level, yes, it is all information, but, on
another level, the idea of programming with gene sequences will
probably raise hackles that the idea of coding inside a
programming language never would. As a normative matter, I think
it would be a poor choice to apply copyright to the products of
synthetic biology. Attempting to produce a particular open
commons, one might enable the kind of hundred-year monopolies
over functional objects that the critics of software copyright
initially feared.
59

If one wishes to keep the basic ideas and techniques of
synthetic biology open for subsequent innovators, there are
alternatives to the idea of a synthetic biology open source
license. The Registry of Standard Biological Parts or the
BioBricks Foundation can simply put all their work into the
public domain immediately. (This, indeed, is what they are
currently doing.) Such a scheme lacks one key feature of open
source software: the right to force subsequent innovators to
release their code back into the commons. Yet it would make
subsequent patents on the material impossible, because it had
already been published.
60

Regardless of the decisions made about the future of synthetic
biology, I think its story--coupled to that of software and
biotechnology more generally--presents us with an important
lesson. I started the chapter with the metaphor of Procrustes's
bed. But in the case of software and biotechnology, both the
bed--the categories of copyright and patent--and its
inhabitants--the new technologies--were stretched. Cracks formed
in the boundaries that were supposed to prevent copyright from
being applied to functional articles, to prevent patents
extending to cover ideas, algorithms, and business methods.
61

Until this point, though the science would have been strange to
Jefferson or his contemporaries, the underlying issue would have
been familiar. The free-trade, Scottish Enlightenment thinkers
of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries would have scoffed at
the idea that business methods or algorithms could be patented,
let alone that one could patent the "or," "if-then," and "not"
functions of Boolean algebra as implemented by a biological
mechanism. The response, presumably, is to fine tune our patent
standards--to patent the mousetrap and the corkscrew, not the
notion of catching mice or opening bottles by mechanical means.
Still less should we allow the patenting of algebra. These are
fine points. Later scholarship has added formulae, data, and
historical analysis to back up Jefferson's concerns, while never
surpassing his prose. As I said at the beginning of the book, if
we were to print out the Jefferson Warning and slip it into the
shirt pocket of every legislator and regulator, our policy would
be remarkably improved.
62

But it is here that the story takes a new turn, something that
neither Jefferson nor the philosophers of the Scottish
Enlightenment had thought of, something that goes beyond their
cautions not to confuse intellectual property with physical
property, to keep its boundaries, scope, and term as small as
possible while still encouraging the desired innovation.
63

Think of the reaction of the synthetic biologists at MIT. They
feared that the basic building blocks of their new discipline
could be locked up, slowing the progress of science and research
by inserting intellectual property rights at the wrong point in
the research cycle. To solve the problem they were led seriously
to consider claiming copyright over the products of synthetic
biology--to fight overly broad patent rights with a privately
constructed copyright commons, to ride the process of legal
expansion and turn it to their own ends. As I pointed out
earlier, I think the tactic would not fare well in this
particular case. But it is an example of a new move in the
debate over intellectual property, a new tactic: the attempt to
create a privately constructed commons where the public domain
created by the state does not give you the freedom that you
believe creativity needs in order to thrive. It is to that
tactic, and the distributed creativity that it enables, that I
will turn to now.


Chapter 8: A Creative Commons
1

If you go to the familiar Google search page and click the
intimidating link marked "advanced search," you come to a page
that gives you more fine-grained control over the framing of
your query. Nestled among the choices that allow you to pick
your desired language, or exclude raunchy content, is an option
that says "usage rights." Click "free to use or share" and then
search for "physics textbook" and you can download a 1,200-page
physics textbook, copy it, or even print it out and hand it to
your students. Search for "Down and Out in the Magic Kingdom"
and you will find Cory Doctorow's fabulous science fiction
novel, online, in full, for free. His other novels are there
too--with the willing connivance of his commercial publisher.
Search for "David Byrne, My Fair Lady" and you will be able to
download Byrne's song and make copies for your friends. You'll
find songs from Gilberto Gil and the Beastie Boys on the same
page. No need to pay iTunes or worry about breaking the law.
2

Go to the "advanced" page on Flickr, the popular photo sharing
site, and you will find a similar choice marked "Creative
Commons License." Check that box and then search for "Duke
Chapel" and you will get a selection of beautiful photos of the
lovely piece of faux Gothic architecture that sits about three
hundred yards from the office where I am writing these words.
You can copy those photos, and 66 million others on different
subjects, share them with your friends, print them for your
wall, and, in some cases, even use them commercially. The same
basic tools can be found on a range of specialized search
engines with names like OWL Music Search, BlipTV, SpinExpress,
and OERCommons. Searching those sites, or just sticking with the
advanced options on Google or Yahoo, will get you courses in
music theory, moral philosophy, and C++ programming from famous
universities; a full-length movie called Teach by Oscar-winning
director Davis Guggenheim; and free architectural drawings that
can be used to build low-cost housing. At the Wellcome Library,
you will find two thousand years of medical images that can be
shared freely. Searching for "skeleton" is particularly fun. You
can even go to your favorite search engine, type in the title of
this book, find a site that will allow you to download it, and
send the PDF to a hundred friends, warmly anticipating their
rapturous enjoyment. (Better ask them first.)
3

All this copying and sharing and printing sounds illegal, but it
is not (at least if you went through the steps I described). And
the things you can do with this content do not stop with simply
reproducing it, printing it on paper, or sending it by e-mail.
Much of it can be changed, customized, remixed--you could rewrite
the module of the class and insert your own illustrations,
animate the graphs showing calculus in action, morph the photo
into something new. If you search for a musician with the
unpromising name "Brad Sucks," you will find a Web site bearing
the modest subtitle "A one man band with no fans." Brad, it
turns out, does not suck and has many fans. What makes him
particularly interesting is that he allows those fans, or anyone
else for that matter, to remix his music and post their
creations online. I am particularly fond of the Matterovermind
remix of "Making Me Nervous," but it may not be to your taste.
Go to a site called ccMixter and you will find that musicians,
famous and obscure, are inviting you to sample and remix their
music. Or search Google for Colin Mutchler and listen to a
haunting song called "My Life Changed." Mr. Mutchler and a
violinist called Cora Beth Bridges whom he had never met created
that song together. He posted a song called "My Life" online,
giving anyone the freedom to add to it, and she did--"My Life."
Changed.
4

On December 15, 2002, in San Francisco, a charitable
organization called Creative Commons was launched. (Full
disclosure: I have been a proud board member of Creative Commons
since its creation.) Creative Commons was the brainchild of
Larry Lessig, Hal Abelson, and Eric Eldred. All the works I have
just described--and this book itself--are under Creative Commons
licenses. The authors and creators of those works have chosen to
share it with the world, with you, under generous terms, while
reserving certain rights for themselves. They may have allowed
you to copy it, but not to alter it--to make derivative works. Or
they may have allowed you to use it as you wish, so long as you
do so noncommercially. Or they may have given you complete
freedom, provided only that you attribute them as the owner of
the work. There are a few simple choices and a limited menu of
permutations.
5

What makes these licenses unusual is that they can be read by
two groups that normal licenses exclude--human beings (rather
than just lawyers) and computers. The textbooks, photos, films,
and songs have a tasteful little emblem on them marked with a
"cc" which, if you click on it, links to a "Commons Deed," a
simple one-page explanation of the freedoms you have. There are
even icons--a dollar with a slash through it, for example--that
make things even clearer. Better still, the reason the search
engines could find this material is that the licenses also
"tell" search engines exactly what freedoms have been given.
Simple "metadata" (a fancy word for tags that computers can
read) mark the material with its particular level of freedoms.
This is not digital rights management. The license will not try
to control your computer, install itself on your hard drive, or
break your TV. It is just an expression of the terms under which
the author has chosen to release the work. That means that if
you search Google or Flickr for "works I am free to share, even
commercially," you know you can go into business selling those
textbooks, or printing those photos on mugs and T-shirts, so
long as you give the author attribution. If you search for "show
me works I can build on," you know you are allowed to make what
copyright lawyers call "derivative works."
6

The idea behind Creative Commons was simple. As I pointed out in
the first chapter, copyright adheres automatically on
"fixation." As soon as you lift the pen from the paper, click
the shutter, or save the file, the work is copyrighted. No
formalities. No need even to use the little symbol (C). Once
copyrighted, the work is protected by the full might of the
legal system. And the legal system's default setting is that
"all rights are reserved" to the author, which means effectively
that anyone but the author is forbidden to copy, adapt, or
publicly perform the work. This might have been a fine rule for
a world in which there were high barriers to publication. The
material that was not published was theoretically under an "all
rights reserved" regime, but who cared? It was practically
inaccessible anyway. After the development of the World Wide
Web, all that had changed. Suddenly people and institutions,
millions upon millions of them, were putting content
online--blogs, photo sites, videologs, podcasts, course
materials. It was all just up there.
7

But what could you do with it? You could read it, or look at it,
or play it presumably--otherwise why had the author put it up?
But could you copy it? Put it on your own site? Include it in a
manual used by the whole school district? E-mail it to someone?
Translate it into your own language? Quote beyond the boundaries
of fair use? Adapt for your own purposes? Take the song and use
it for your video? Of course, if you really wanted the work a
lot, you could try to contact the author--not always easy. And
one by one, we could all contact each other and ask for
particular types of permissions for use. If the use was large
enough or widespread enough, perhaps we would even think that an
individual contract was necessary. Lawyers could be hired and
terms hashed out.
8

All this would be fine if the author wished to retain all the
rights that copyright gives and grant them only individually,
for pay, with lawyers in the room. But what about the authors,
the millions upon millions of writers, and photographers and
musicians, and filmmakers and bloggers and scholars, who very
much want to share their work? The Cora Beth Bridges of the
world are never going to write individual letters to the Colin
Mutchlers of the world asking for permission to make a
derivative work out of "My Life." The person who translated my
articles into Spanish or Mandarin, or the people who repost them
on their Web sites, or include them in their anthologies might
have asked permission if I had not granted it in advance. I
doubt though that I would have been contacted by the very
talented person who took images from a comic book about fair use
that I co-wrote and mashed them up with words from a book by
Larry Lessig, and some really nice music from someone none of us
had ever met. Without some easy way to give permission in
advance, and to do so in a way that human beings and computers,
as well as lawyers, can understand, those collaborations will
never happen, though all the parties would be delighted if they
did. These are losses from "failed sharing"--every bit as real as
losses from unauthorized copying, but much less in the public
eye.
9

Creative Commons was conceived as a private "hack" to produce a
more fine-tuned copyright structure, to replace "all rights
reserved" with "some rights reserved" for those who wished to do
so. It tried to do for culture what the General Public License
had done for software. It made use of the same technologies that
had created the issue: the technologies that made fixation of
expressive content and its distribution to the world something
that people, as well as large concentrations of capital, could
do. As a result, it was able to attract a surprising range of
support--Jack Valenti of the Motion Picture Association of
America and Hillary Rosen of the Recording Industry Association
of America, as well as John Perry Barlow of the Grateful Dead,
whose attitude toward intellectual property was distinctly less
favorable. Why could they all agree? These licenses were not a
choice forced on anyone. The author was choosing what to share
and under what terms. But that sharing created something
different, something new. It was more than a series of isolated
actions. The result was the creation of a global "commons" of
material that was open to all, provided they adhered to the
terms of the licenses. Suddenly it was possible to think of
creating a work entirely out of Creative Commons-licensed
content--text, photos, movies, music. Your coursebook on music
theory, or your documentary on the New York skyline, could
combine your own original material with high-quality text,
illustrations, photos, video, and music created by strangers.
One could imagine entire fields--of open educational content or
of open music--in which creators could work without keeping one
eye nervously on legal threats or permissions.
10

From one perspective, Creative Commons looks like a simple
device for enabling exercise of authorial control, remarkable
only for the extremely large number of authors making that
choice and the simplicity with which they can do so. From
another, it can be seen as re-creating, by private choice and
automated licenses, the world of creativity before law had
permeated to the finest, most atomic level of science and
culture--the world of folk music or 1950s jazz, of jokes and
slang and recipes, of Ray Charles's "rewording" of gospel songs,
or of Isaac Newton describing himself as "standing on the
shoulders of giants" (and not having to pay them royalties).
Remember, that is not a world without intellectual property. The
cookbook might be copyrighted even if the recipe was not. Folk
music makes it to the popular scene and is sold as a copyrighted
product. The jazz musician "freezes" a particular version of the
improvisation on a communally shared set of musical motifs,
records it, and sometimes even claims ownership of it. Newton
himself was famously touchy about precedence and attribution,
even if not about legal ownership of his ideas. But it is a
world in which creativity and innovation proceed on the basis of
an extremely large "commons" of material into which it was never
imagined that property rights could permeate.
11

For many of us, Creative Commons was conceived of as a second-
best solution created by private agreement because the best
solution could not be obtained through public law. The best
solution would be a return of the formality requirement--a
requirement that one at least write the words "James Boyle
copyright 2008," for example, in order to get more than 100
years of legal protection backed by "strict liability" and
federal criminal law. Those who did not wish to have the legal
monopoly could omit the phrase and the work would pass into the
public domain, with a period of time during which the author
could claim copyright retrospectively if the phrase was omitted
by accident. The default position would become freedom and the
dead weight losses caused by giving legal monopolies to those
who had not asked for them, and did not want them, would
disappear. To return to the words of Justice Brandeis that I
quoted at the beginning of the book:
12

    The general rule of law is, that the noblest of human
productions--knowledge, truths ascertained, conceptions, and
ideas--become, after voluntary communication to others, free as
the air to common use. Upon these incorporeal productions the
attribute of property is continued after such communication only
in certain classes of cases where public policy has seemed to
demand it.
13

Brandeis echoes the Jeffersonian preference for a norm of
freedom, with narrowly constrained exceptions only when
necessary. That preference means that the commons of which I
spoke is a relatively large one--property rights are the
exception, not the norm. Of course, many of those who use
Creative Commons licenses might disagree with that policy
preference and with every idea in this book. They may worship
the DMCA or just want a way to get their song or their article
out there while retaining some measure of control. That does not
matter. The licenses are agnostic. Like a land trust which has a
local pro-growth industrialist and a local environmentalist on
its board, they permit us to come to a restricted agreement on
goals ("make sure this space is available to the public") even
when underlying ideologies differ. They do this using those most
conservative of tools--property rights and licenses. And yet, if
our vision of property is "sole and despotic dominion," these
licenses have created something very different--a commons has
been made out of private and exclusive rights.
14

My point here is that Creative Commons licenses or the tools of
free and open source software--to which I will turn in a
moment--represent something more than merely a second-best
solution to a poorly chosen rule. They represent a visible
example of a type of creativity, of innovation, which has been
around for a very long time, but which has reached new salience
on the Internet--distributed creativity based around a shared
commons of material.
15

FREE AND OPEN SOURCE SOFTWARE
16

In 2007, Clay Shirky, an incisive commentator on networked
culture, gave a speech which anyone but a Net aficionado might
have found simultaneously romantic and impenetrable. He started
by telling the story of a Shinto shrine that has been
painstakingly rebuilt to exactly the same plan many times over
its 1,300-year life--and which was denied certification as a
historic building as a result. Shirky's point? What was
remarkable was not the building. It was a community that would
continue to build and rebuild the thing for more than a
millennium.
17

From there, Shirky shifted to a discussion of his attempt to get
AT&T to adopt the high-level programming language Perl--which is
released as free and open source software under the General
Public License. From its initial creation by Larry Wall in 1987,
Perl has been adapted, modified, and developed by an
extraordinary range of talented programmers, becoming more
powerful and flexible in the process. As Shirky recounts the
story, when the AT&T representatives asked "where do you get
your support?" Shirky responded, " 'we get our support from a
community'--which to them sounded a bit like 'we get our
Thursdays from a banana.' " Shirky concluded the speech thus:
18

    We have always loved one another. We're human. It's
something we're good at. But up until recently, the radius and
half-life of that affection has been quite limited. With love
alone, you can plan a birthday party. Add coordinating tools and
you can write an operating system. In the past, we would do
little things for love, but big things required money. Now we
can do big things for love.1

19

There are a few people out there for whom "operating systems"
and "love" could plausibly coexist in a sentence not constructed
by an infinite number of monkeys. For most though, the question
is, what could he possibly have meant?
20

The arguments in this book so far have taken as a given the
incentives and collective action problems to which intellectual
property is a response. Think of Chapter 1 and the economic
explanation of "public goods." The fact that it is expensive to
do the research to find the right drug, but cheap to manufacture
it once it is identified provides a reason to create a legal
right of exclusion. In those realms where the innovation would
not have happened anyway, the legal right of exclusion gives a
power to price above cost, which in turn gives incentives to
creators and distributors. So goes the theory. I have discussed
the extent to which the logic of enclosure works for the commons
of the mind as well as it did for the arable commons, taking
into account the effects of an information society and a global
Internet. What I have not done is asked whether a global network
actually transforms some of our assumptions about how creation
happens in a way that reshapes the debate about the need for
incentives, at least in certain areas. This, however, is exactly
the question that needs to be asked.
21

For anyone interested in the way that networks can enable new
collaborative methods of production, the free software movement,
and the broader but less political movement that goes under the
name of open source software, provide interesting case studies.2
Open source software is released under a series of licenses, the
most important being the General Public License (GPL). The GPL
specifies that anyone may copy the software, provided the
license remains attached and the source code for the software
always remains available.3 Users may add to or modify the code,
may build on it and incorporate it into their own work, but if
they do so, then the new program created is also covered by the
GPL. Some people refer to this as the "viral" nature of the
license; others find the term offensive.4 The point, however, is
that the open quality of the creative enterprise spreads. It is
not simply a donation of a program or a work to the public
domain, but a continual accretion in which all gain the benefits
of the program on pain of agreeing to give their additions and
innovations back to the communal project.
22

For the whole structure to work without large-scale centralized
coordination, the creation process has to be modular, with units
of different sizes and complexities, each requiring slightly
different expertise, all of which can be added together to make
a grand whole. I can work on the sendmail program, you on the
search algorithms. More likely, lots of people try, their
efforts are judged by the community, and the best ones are
adopted. Under these conditions, this curious mix of Kropotkin
and Adam Smith, Richard Dawkins and Richard Stallman, we get
distributed production without having to rely on the proprietary
exclusion model. The whole enterprise will be much, much, much
greater than the sum of the parts.
23

What's more, and this is a truly fascinating twist, when the
production process does need more centralized coordination, some
governance that guides how the sticky modular bits are put
together, it is at least theoretically possible that we can come
up with the control system in exactly the same way. In this
sense, distributed production is potentially recursive.
Governance processes, too, can be assembled through distributed
methods on a global network, by people with widely varying
motivations, skills, and reserve prices.5
24

The free and open source software movements have produced
software that rivals or, some claim, exceeds the capabilities of
conventional proprietary, binary-only software.6 Its adoption on
the "enterprise level" is impressive, as is the number and
enthusiasm of the various technical testaments to its strengths.
You have almost certainly used open source software or been its
beneficiary. Your favorite Web site or search engine may run on
it. If your browser is Firefox, you use it every day. It powers
surprising things around you--your ATM or your TiVo. The plane
you are flying in may be running it. It just works.
25

Governments have taken notice. The United Kingdom, for example,
concluded last year that open source software "will be
considered alongside proprietary software and contracts will be
awarded on a value-for-money basis." The Office of Government
Commerce said open source software is "a viable desktop
alternative for the majority of government users" and "can
generate significant savings. . . . These trials have proved
that open source software is now a real contender alongside
proprietary solutions. If commercial companies and other
governments are taking it seriously, then so must we."7 Sweden
found open source software to be in many cases "equivalent to--or
better than--commercial products" and concluded that software
procurement "shall evaluate open software as well as commercial
solutions, to provide better competition in the market."8
26

What is remarkable is not merely that the software works
technically, but that it is an example of widespread, continued,
high-quality innovation. The really remarkable thing is that it
works socially, as a continuing system, sustained by a network
consisting both of volunteers and of individuals employed by
companies such as IBM and Google whose software "output" is
nevertheless released into the commons.
27

Here, it seems, we have a classic public good: code that can be
copied freely and sold or redistributed without paying the
creator or creators. This sounds like a tragedy of the commons
of the kind that I described in the first three chapters of the
book. Obviously, with a nonrival, nonexcludable good like
software, this method of production cannot be sustained; there
are inadequate incentives to ensure continued production. E pur
si muove, as Galileo is apocryphally supposed to have said in
the face of Cardinal Bellarmine's certainties: "And yet it
moves."9 Or, as Clay Shirky put it, "we get our support from a
community."
28

For a fair amount of time, most economists looked at open source
software and threw up their hands. From their point of view, "we
get our support from a community" did indeed sound like "we get
our Thursdays from a banana." There is an old economics joke
about the impossibility of finding a twenty-dollar bill lying on
a sidewalk. In an efficient market, the money would already have
been picked up. (Do not wait for a punch line.) When economists
looked at open source software they saw not a single twenty-
dollar bill lying implausibly on the sidewalk, but whole bushels
of them. Why would anyone work on a project the fruits of which
could be appropriated by anyone? Since copyright adheres on
fixation--since the computer programmer already has the legal
power to exclude others--why would he or she choose to take the
extra step of adopting a license that undermined that exclusion?
Why would anyone choose to allow others to use and modify the
results of their hard work? Why would they care whether the
newcomers, in turn, released their contributions back into the
commons?
29

The puzzles went beyond the motivations of the people engaging
in this particular form of "distributed creativity." How could
these implausible contributions be organized? How should we
understand this strange form of organization? It is not a
company or a government bureaucracy. What could it be? To
Richard Epstein, the answer was obvious and pointed to a reason
the experiment must inevitably end in failure:
30

    The open source movement shares many features with a
workers' commune, and is likely to fail for the same reason: it
cannot scale up to meet its own successes. To see the long-term
difficulty, imagine a commune entirely owned by its original
workers who share pro rata in its increases in value. The system
might work well in the early days when the workforce remains
fixed. But what happens when a given worker wants to quit? Does
that worker receive in cash or kind his share of the gain in
value during the period of his employment? If not, then the run-
up in value during his period of employment will be gobbled up
by his successor--a recipe for immense resentment. Yet that
danger can be ducked only by creating a capital structure that
gives present employees separable interests in either debt or
equity in exchange for their contributions to the company. But
once that is done, then the worker commune is converted into a
traditional company whose shareholders and creditors contain a
large fraction of its present and former employers. The bottom
line is that idealistic communes cannot last for the long
haul.10
31

There are a number of ideas here. First, "idealistic communes
cannot last for the long haul." The skepticism about the staying
power of idealism sounds plausible today, though there are some
relatively prominent counterexamples. The Catholic Church is
also a purportedly idealistic institution. It is based on
canonical texts that are subject to even more heated arguments
about textual interpretation than those which surround the
General Public License. It seems to be surviving the long haul
quite well.
32

The second reason for doomsaying is provided by the word
"commune." The problems Epstein describes are real where
tangible property and excludable assets are involved. But is the
free and open source community a "commune," holding tangible
property in common and excluding the rest of us? Must it worry
about how to split up the proceeds if someone leaves because of
bad karma? Or is it a community creating and offering to the
world the ability to use, for free, nonrival goods that all of
us can have, use, and reinterpret as we wish? In that kind of
commune, each of us could take all the property the community
had created with us when we left and the commune would still be
none the poorer. Jefferson was not thinking of software when he
talked of the person who lights his taper from mine but does not
darken me, but the idea is the same one. Copying software is not
like fighting over who owns the scented candles or the VW bus.
Does the person who wrote the "kernel" of the operating system
resent the person who, much later, writes the code to manage
Internet Protocol addresses on a wireless network? Why should
he? Now the program does more cool stuff. Both of them can use
it. What's to resent?
33

How about idealism? There is indeed a broad debate on the
reasons that the system works: Are the motivations those of the
gift economy? Is it, as Shirky says, simply the flowering of an
innate love that human beings have always had for each other and
for sharing, now given new strength by the geographic reach and
cooperative techniques the Internet provides? "With love alone,
you can plan a birthday party. Add coordinating tools and you
can write an operating system." Is this actually a form of
potlatch, in which one gains prestige by the extravagance of the
resources one "wastes"? Is open source an implicit résumé-
builder that pays off in other ways? Is it driven by the
species-being, the innate human love of creation that
continually drives us to create new things even when homo
economicus would be at home in bed, mumbling about public goods
problems?11
34

Yochai Benkler and I would argue that these questions are fun to
debate but ultimately irrelevant.12 Assume a random distribution
of incentive structures in different people, a global
network--transmission, information sharing, and copying costs
that approach zero--and a modular creation process. With these
assumptions, it just does not matter why they do it. In lots of
cases, they will do it. One person works for love of the
species, another in the hope of a better job, a third for the
joy of solving puzzles, and a fourth because he has to solve a
particular problem anyway for his own job and loses nothing by
making his hack available for all. Each person has their own
reserve price, the point at which they say, "Now I will turn off
Survivor and go and create something." But on a global network,
there are a lot of people, and with numbers that big and
information overhead that small, even relatively hard projects
will attract motivated and skilled people whose particular
reserve price has been crossed.
35

More conventionally, many people write free software because
they are paid to do so. Amazingly, IBM now earns more from what
it calls "Linux-related revenues" than it does from traditional
patent licensing, and IBM is the largest patent holder in the
world.13 It has decided that the availability of an open
platform, to which many firms and individuals contribute, will
actually allow it to sell more of its services, and, for that
matter, its hardware. A large group of other companies seem to
agree. They like the idea of basing their services, hardware,
and added value on a widely adopted "commons." This does not
seem like a community in decline.
36

People used to say that collaborative creation could never
produce a quality product. That has been shown to be false. So
now they say that collaborative creation cannot be sustained
because the governance mechanisms will not survive the success
of the project. Professor Epstein conjures up a "central
committee" from which insiders will be unable to cash out--a nice
mixture of communist and capitalist metaphors. All governance
systems--including democracies and corporate boards--have
problems. But so far as we can tell, those who are influential
in the free software and open source governance communities
(there is, alas, no "central committee") feel that they are
doing very well indeed. In the last resort, when they disagree
with decisions that are taken, there is always the possibility
of "forking the code," introducing a change to the software that
not everyone agrees with, and then letting free choice and
market selection converge on the preferred iteration. The free
software ecosystem also exhibits diversity. Systems based on
GNU-Linux, for example, have distinct "flavors" with names like
Ubuntu, Debian, and Slackware, each with passionate adherents
and each optimized for a particular concern--beauty, ease of use,
technical manipulability. So far, the tradition of "rough
consensus and running code" seems to be proving itself
empirically as a robust governance system.
37

Why on earth should we care? People have come up with a
surprising way to create software. So what? There are at least
three reasons we might care. First, it teaches us something
about the limitations of conventional economics and the
counterintuitive business methods that thrive on networks.
Second, it might offer a new tool in our attempt to solve a
variety of social problems. Third, and most speculative, it
hints at the way that a global communications network can
sometimes help move the line between work and play, professional
and amateur, individual and community creation, rote production
and compensated "hobby."
38

We should pay attention to open source software because it shows
us something about business methods in the digital world--indeed
in the entire world of "information-based" products, which is
coming to include biotechnology. The scale of your network
matters. The larger the number of people who use your operating
system, make programs for your type of computer, create new
levels for your game, or use your device, the better off you
are. A single fax machine is a paperweight. Two make up a
communications link. Ten million and you have a ubiquitous
communications network into which your "paperweight" is now a
hugely valuable doorway.
39

This is the strange characteristic of networked goods. The
actions of strangers dramatically increase or decrease the
usefulness of your good. At each stage the decision of someone
else to buy a fax machine increases the value of mine. If I am
eating an apple, I am indifferent about whether you are too. But
if I have a fax machine then my welfare is actually improved by
the decisions of strangers to buy one. The same process works in
reverse. Buy a word processing program that becomes unpopular,
get "locked in" to using it, and find yourself unable to
exchange your work easily with others. Networks matter and
increasing the size of the networks continues to add benefits to
the individual members.
40

What's true for the users of networks is doubly so for the
producers of the goods that create them. From the perspective of
a producer of a good that shows strong network effects such as a
word processing program or an operating system, the optimal
position is to be the company that owns and controls the
dominant product on the market. The ownership and control is
probably by means of intellectual property rights, which are,
after all, the type of property rights one finds on networks.
The value of that property depends on those positive and
negative network effects. This is the reason Microsoft is worth
so much money. The immense investment in time, familiarity,
legacy documents, and training that Windows or Word users have
provides a strong incentive not to change products. The fact
that other users are similarly constrained makes it difficult to
manage any change. Even if I change word processor formats and
go through the trouble to convert all my documents, I still need
to exchange files with you, who are similarly constrained. From
a monopolist's point of view, the handcuffs of network effects
are indeed golden, though opinions differ about whether or not
this is a cause for antitrust action.
41

But if the position that yields the most revenue is that of a
monopolist exercising total control, the second-best position
may well be that of a company contributing to a large and widely
used network based on open standards and, perhaps, open
software. The companies that contribute to open source do not
have the ability to exercise monopoly control, the right to
extract every last cent of value from it. But they do have a
different advantage; they get the benefit of all the
contributions to the system without having to pay for them. The
person who improves an open source program may not work for IBM
or Red Hat, but those companies benefit from her addition, just
as she does from theirs. The system is designed to continue
growing, adding more contributions back into the commons. The
users get the benefit of an ever-enlarging network, while the
openness of the material diminishes the lock-in effects. Lacking
the ability to extract payment for the network good itself--the
operating system, say--the companies that participate typically
get paid for providing tied goods and services, the value of
which increases as the network does.
42

I write a column for the Financial Times, but I lack the fervor
of the true enthusiast in the "Great Game of Markets." By
themselves, counterintuitive business methods do not make my
antennae tingle. But as Larry Lessig and Yochai Benkler have
argued, this is something more than just another business
method. They point us to the dramatic role that openness--whether
in network architecture, software, or content--has had in the
success of the Internet. What is going on here is actually a
remarkable corrective to the simplistic notion of the tragedy of
the commons, a corrective to the Internet Threat storyline and
to the dynamics of the second enclosure movement. This commons
creates and sustains value, and allows firms and individuals to
benefit from it, without depleting the value already created. To
appropriate a phrase from Carol Rose, open source teaches us
about the comedy of the commons, a way of arranging markets and
production that we, with our experience rooted in physical
property and its typical characteristics, at first find
counterintuitive and bizarre. Which brings us to the next
question for open source. Can we use its techniques to solve
problems beyond the world of software production?
43

In the language of computer programmers, the issue here is "does
it scale?" Can we generalize anything from this limited example?
How many types of production, innovation, and research fit into
the model I have just described? After all, for many innovations
and inventions one needs hardware, capital investment, and
large-scale, real-world data collection--stuff, in its infinite
recalcitrance and facticity. Maybe the open source model
provides a workaround to the individual incentives problem, but
that is not the only problem. And how many types of innovation
or cultural production are as modular as software? Is open
source software a paradigm case of collective innovation that
helps us to understand open source software and not much else?
44

Again, I think this is a good question, but it may be the wrong
one. My own guess is that an open source method of production is
far more common than we realize. "Even before the Internet" (as
some of my students have taken to saying portentously), science,
law, education, and musical genres all developed in ways that
are markedly similar to the model I have described. The
marketplace of ideas, the continuous roiling development in
thought and norms that our political culture spawns, owes much
more to the distributed, nonproprietary model than it does to
the special case of commodified innovation that we think about
in copyright and patent. Not that copyright and patent are
unimportant in the process, but they may well be the exception
rather than the norm. Commons-based production of ideas is
hardly unfamiliar, after all.
45

In fact, all the mottos of free software development have their
counterparts in the theory of democracy and open society; "given
enough eyeballs, all bugs are shallow" is merely the most
obvious example. Karl Popper would have cheered.14 The
importance of open source software is not that it introduces us
to a wholly new idea. It is that it makes us see clearly a very
old idea. With open source the technology was novel, the
production process transparent, and the result of that process
was a "product" which outcompeted other products in the
marketplace. "How can this have happened? What about the tragedy
of the commons?" we asked in puzzlement, coming only slowly to
the realization that other examples of commons-based,
nonproprietary production were all around us.
46

Still, this does not answer the question of whether the model
can scale still further, whether it can be applied to solve
problems in other spheres. To answer that question we would need
to think more about the modularity of other types of inventions.
How much can they be broken down into chunks suitable for
distribution among a widespread community? Which forms of
innovation have some irreducible need for high capital
investment in distinctly nonvirtual components--a particle
accelerator or a Phase III drug trial? Again, my guess is that
the increasing migration of the sciences toward data- and
processing-rich models makes much more of innovation and
discovery a potential candidate for the distributed model.
Bioinformatics and computational biology, the open source
genomics project,15 the BioBricks Foundation I mentioned in the
last chapter, the possibility of distributed data scrutiny by
lay volunteers16--all of these offer intriguing glances into the
potential for the future. Finally, of course, the Internet is
one big experiment in, as Benkler puts it, peer-to-peer cultural
production.17
47

If these questions are good ones, why are they also the wrong
ones? I have given my guesses about the future of the
distributed model of innovation. My own utopia has it
flourishing alongside a scaled-down, but still powerful,
intellectual property regime. Equally plausible scenarios see it
as a dead end or as the inevitable victor in the war of
productive processes. These are all guesses, however. At the
very least, there is some possibility, even hope, that we could
have a world in which much more of intellectual and inventive
production is free. " 'Free' as in 'free speech,' " Richard
Stallman says, not "free as in 'free beer.' "18 But we could
hope that much of it would be both free of centralized control
and low- or no-cost. When the marginal cost of reproduction is
zero, the marginal cost of transmission and storage approaches
zero, the process of creation is additive, and much of the labor
doesn't charge, the world looks a little different.19 This is at
least a possible future, or part of a possible future, and one
that we should not foreclose without thinking twice. Yet that is
what we are doing. The Database Protection Bills and Directives,
which extend intellectual property rights to the layer of
facts;20 the efflorescence of software patents;21 the UCITA-led
validation of shrinkwrap licenses that bind third parties;22 the
Digital Millennium Copyright Act's anticircumvention
provisions23--the point of all of these developments is not
merely that they make the peer-to-peer model difficult, but that
in many cases they rule it out altogether. I will assert this
point here, rather than argue for it, but I think it can be (and
has been) demonstrated quite convincingly.24
48

The point is, then, that there is a chance that a new (or old,
but underrecognized) method of production could flourish in ways
that seem truly valuable--valuable to free speech, innovation,
scientific discovery, the wallets of consumers, to what William
Fisher calls "semiotic democracy,"25 and, perhaps, valuable to
the balance between joyful creation and drudgery for hire. True,
it is only a chance. True, this theory's scope of operation and
sustainability are uncertain. But why would we want to foreclose
it? That is what the recent expansions of intellectual property
threaten to do. And remember, these expansions were dubious even
in a world where we saw little or no possibility of the
distributed production model I have described, where discussion
of network effects had yet to reach the pages of The New
Yorker,26 and where our concerns about the excesses of
intellectual property were simply the ones that Jefferson,
Madison, and Macaulay gave us so long ago.
49

LEARNING FROM THE
SHARING ECONOMY
50

Accept for the sake of argument that the free software community
actually works, actually produces high-quality products capable
of competing in the market with proprietary alternatives.
Concede for a moment that the adoption of Creative Commons
licenses shows there are millions of creators out there who want
to share their works with others. Many of those creators even
want to allow the world to build on their material. Indeed, let
us concede that the whole history of the Web, from Wikipedia to
the obsessive and usefully detailed sites created on everything
from Vikings to shoe polishes, shows a desire to share one's
knowledge, to build on the work of others one has never met.
These efforts are remarkably varied. Some are ultimately aimed
at profit--even if their results are free. Think of IBM's open
source initiatives or musicians who release Creative Commons-
licensed work in order to get more club gigs. Some are provided
as a volunteer act of benevolence or civic duty, even if they
"compete" with expensive proprietary alternatives. Think of
Wikipedia or MIT's OpenCourseWare. When the infrastructure for
this collaboration does not exist, it gets assembled--and
quickly. Both the GPL and Creative Commons are examples. Accept
all of this. So what?
51

Lesson number one comes from the nonprofit activities--everything
from Wikipedia to Web sites created by enthusiasts. People like
to create and wish to share. In many cases they will do so
without financial reward. A surprising amount of useful,
creative, or expressive activity is generated without any
financial incentive at all.
52

Should this cause us to throw out the economic case for
copyrights? No. But it should lead us to reassess it. As I
explained in Chapter 1, copyright provides an incentive for two
distinct activities. First, it offers an incentive to create the
work in the first place. The author of Windows for Dummies or
Harry Potter gets a right to exclude others from copying the
work, a right that he or she can sell in the marketplace. The
goal is to offer a financial reason to devote time to this
particular creative activity. It is this incentive that is most
often cited when attempting to persuade policy makers to expand
protection. Second, it offers an incentive to distribute the
work--to typeset and print large quantities of the work and to
sell it to bookstores, or to broadcast it, or put it on movie
screens.
53

Each medium is economically different, of course. The economics
of the feature film are different from those of the book, the
magazine, or the operating system. Thus, we have never had very
good figures on the relative importance of these incentives. We
can only guess at how much of the incentive from copyright goes
to encouraging creation and how much to distribution. Until
recently, most types of distribution demanded higher levels of
capital. The industry structure that resulted often consisted of
creators who worked as wage or contract labor for
distributors--either never acquiring copyright in their work in
the first place or immediately transferring that copyright to
their employers. Because distribution was expensive, our
experience with material generated for fun or out of a love of
sharing was an essentially private and local one. You might have
a neighbor's photocopied sheet of baking recipes that worked
well at high altitudes, or of fishing techniques that worked
well on a particular lake, a song that a friend created for a
special occasion, or a short story you wrote for your kids--and
then typed up for them to tell to theirs. Financial incentives
were not needed to encourage the creation of the work, but the
cost of distribution dramatically limited its dissemination.
54

The single most dramatic thing that the Web has done by lowering
the cost of communication and distribution, at the same moment
that other electronic tools lowered the cost of production, is
to make this local and private activity a global and public one.
Someone, somewhere, will have written the guide to fishing on
that lake, baking at that altitude, washing windows, or treating
stings from Portuguese man-of-war jellyfish. Someone will have
taken a photo of the Duke Chapel or explained the history,
economics, and chemistry of shoe polish or distilling. Someone
might even have created a great class on music theory or
C???programming. Someone will have written a handy little
program to manage DNS requests on a local network. Bizarrely, at
least as far as the economists were concerned, these people all
wanted to share what they had made. Because of the genius of
search engines, and the implicit peer-review function that those
engines deduce from patterns of links to pages, I can find that
material when I need it.
55

True, much of the material on the Web is inane or insane,
confused, badly written, tendentious, and inaccurate. (It should
be noted that this is hardly a problem confined to the Web or
volunteer-generated material. Personally, I would not want
People magazine or Fox News in a time capsule to represent my
civilization. But some of the material on the Web is clearly
worse.) Yes, Wikipedia is occasionally inaccurate--though in one
test in Nature it stacked up well against the Encyclopedia
Britannica, and it is obviously much more encyclopedic in its
coverage. But all of this misses the point.
56

Consider how your expectations about information retrieval have
changed in the last fifteen years. We now simply assume that
questions about a piece of architecture, a bit of local history,
a recipe, or the true author of a song can all be answered
within seconds. We have forgotten what it is like to be
routinely in ignorance because of the unavailability of some
piece of information. One podcaster I talked to called it being
a member of "the right-click generation": "When I am walking
around and I see a building, I almost feel as though I ought to
be able to 'right click' it and have the architect's name pop
up." Consider that it now seems normal for a gay Iraqi man in
Baghdad to have a blog that offers hundreds of thousands of
readers around the world a literate and touching account of the
American occupation from a perspective entirely different from
that provided by the mainstream press.27 We think it normal for
a person of moderate resources to be able to speak to the world
from a war zone, whether or not he is affiliated with a
newspaper or credentialed by a corporation.
57

These examples are not the end of the process. Our methods of
sorting, ranking, and verifying the material generated are still
evolving. They may improve even beyond this point. We are only
fifteen years into this particular experiment, after all. And a
huge amount of this material is produced by our fellow citizens
without the profit motive.
58

Does this mean that we no longer need copyright or patent
protection to encourage the production and distribution of
creative work? No. The fishing tips are great, but I still might
buy a handsomely illustrated guide to take on the lake with me
or, even better, just stay at home and read A River Runs Through
It. The New Yorker, and not a sheaf of printouts from the Web,
still sits on my coffee table, though much of the high-quality
content I read comes to me online, for free, from strangers who
are generating it for pleasure, not profit, or who profit from
open sharing, not closed control. The online blogosphere
provides a vital counterpoint to mainstream media, but it exists
in a symbiotic--some would say parasitic--relationship with that
media and the network of professional news gatherers for which
it pays. Some of the most interesting open source production
methods actually rely on copyright. Even if they did not, open
source production would not suffice to run our pharmaceutical
industry (though it might help with certain stages of the drug
discovery process).
59

Still, just as it would be silly to dismiss the importance of
intellectual property based on our experience of blogs and
Wikipedia and open source software, it would be equally silly to
underestimate what the Web has taught us. The Web has enabled an
astonishing flowering of communication and expression, an
astounding democratization of creativity. We have learned just
how strong, and how useful, is the human urge to express,
communicate, invent, and create--provided the barriers to sharing
are lowered. These are the very things that copyright and patent
are supposed to encourage. For us to portray the Web--as the
Internet Threat story line does--as predominantly a threat to
creativity is simply perverse. For us to base our policies only
on that notion would be a tragedy. We might end up stultifying
one of the greatest explosions of human creativity the world has
ever seen by treating it as an unimportant marginal case and
instead designing our rules around the production processes of
commercial culture in the late twentieth century.
60

The shape of our copyright and to a lesser extent our patent
system comes from a world in which almost all large-scale
distribution was an expensive, capital-intensive enterprise. The
roles of gatekeeper and financier, producer and assembler,
distributor and advertiser, tended naturally to coalesce into
vertically integrated firms or symbiotic commercial
partnerships. Those firms were presumed to be the proxy for the
public interest when it came to intellectual property policy.
Who would know better than they what was needed? Occasionally,
device manufacturers would provide a counterweight--as in the
Sony case--where the defense of a particular "consumer freedom"
actually created a market for a complementary product. Artists
and authors might be trotted out as appealing spokespersons,
though the laws that were made only sporadically reflected their
economic and artistic interests. Librarians and educational
institutions had influence at the edges. Most of the time,
though, it was the assemblers and distributors of content whose
voices and assumptions about markets would be heard.
61

Out of this pattern of habit and influence, and out of much
deeper notions about authorship and invention that I have
explored elsewhere, developed an ideology, a worldview. Call it
maximalism. Its proponents sincerely believed in it and pursued
it even when it did not make economic sense. (Think how lucky
the movie industry is that it lost the Sony case.) It has been
the subject of this book. Its tenets are that intellectual
property is just like physical property, that rights need to
increase proportionately as copying costs decrease, and that, in
general, increasing levels of intellectual property protection
will yield increasing levels of innovation. Despite its defense
of ever-increasing government-granted monopolies, this ideology
cloaks itself in the rhetoric of free markets. The bumbling
state, whose interventions in the economy normally spell
disaster, turns into a scalpel-wielding genius when its
monopolies and subsidies are provided through intellectual
property rights rather than regulatory fiat. Above all, this way
of seeing the world minimizes the importance of creativity,
expression, and distribution that takes place outside its
framework and ignores or plays down the importance of the input
side of the equation--the need to focus on the material from
which culture and science are made, as well as the protected
expression and inventions made from that raw material.
62

This process was not--let me stress--was not a simple process of
economic determinism or industry conspiracy. Anyone who claims
that is the thesis of this book simply has not read it.
(Reviewers beware.) Let us start with economic determinism. It
was not a situation in which the law mechanistically recorded
the interests of the most economically important industries in
the area. This was the creation of a worldview, not the steely-
eyed calculation of profit and loss. Not only did many of the
rules we ended up with make no sense from the point of view of
some of the largest economic players in the area--think of the
device manufacturers, the search engines, and so on--they
frequently made no sense from the perspective of those proposing
them. Attempting to twist the law to make it illegal for
technology to interfere with your old business method is
frequently bad for the industry seeking the protection, as well
as for the technology, the market, and the wider society. Since
this worldview makes incumbents systematically blind to profit-
making opportunities that could be secured by greater openness,
rather than greater control, it actually disables them from
pursuing some of the most promising methods by which they could
have made money for their shareholders. Again, the chapter on
the Sony decision offers a salutary example.
63

Economic determinism does not explain the rules we have. Neither
are those rules simply a result of the manipulation of elected
officials by incumbent industries through crafty campaign
contributions and distorted evidence (though to be sure, there
was a lot of that as well). Many of the people who put forward
this worldview--both lobbyists and lobbied--sincerely believe that
more rights will always lead to more innovation, that all
property rights are the same, that we do not need to think about
both the input and output sides of the equation, that cheaper
copying techniques automatically require greater protections,
and so on.
64

What of the modest suggestions I put forward here? We could sum
them up thus: do not apply identical assumptions to physical and
intellectual property. Focus on both the inputs to and the
outputs of the creative process; protecting the latter may
increase the cost of the former. Look both at the role of the
public domain and the commons of cultural and scientific
material and at the need to provide incentives for creativity
and distribution through exclusive rights. More rights will not
automatically produce more innovation. Indeed, we should confine
rights as narrowly as possible while still providing the desired
result. Look at the empirical evidence before and after
increasing the level of protection. Pay attention to the
benefits as well as the costs of the new technologies and the
flowering of creativity they enable.
65

To me, these points seem bland, boring, obvious--verging on
tautology or pablum. To many believers in the worldview I have
described, they are either straightforward heresy or a
smokescreen for some real, underlying agenda--which is identified
as communism, anarchism, or, somewhat confusingly, both.
66

This account smacks of exaggeration, I know. How could things be
so one-sided? The best answer I can give came from a question I
was asked at a recent conference. The questioner pointed out
politely that it was unlikely that the policy-making process
would ignore such a fundamental and obvious set of points--points
that I myself observed had been well understood for hundreds of
years. I had used many examples of intellectual property rights
being extended--in length, breadth, scope. Why had I not spoken,
he asked, of all the times over the last fifty years when
intellectual property rights had been weakened, curtailed,
shortened? Since human beings were fallible, surely there were
occasions when the length of a copyright or patent term had
proved to be too long, or the scope of a right too large, and
the rights had been narrowed appropriately by legislation. Why
did I not cite any of these? The answer is simple. To the best
of my knowledge, there are none. Legislatively, intellectual
property rights have moved only in one direction--outward. (Court
decisions present a more complex picture, as the previous
chapter's discussion of software copyrights and business method
patents shows.)
67

What are the odds that the costs of new technologies are always
greater than their benefits as far as intellectual property
rights holders are concerned? This pattern is not a matter of
policies carefully crafted around the evidence. It is the fossil
record of fifty years of maximalism. If I lean toward the other
side of the story it is not because I am a foe of intellectual
property. It is because I believe our policies have become
fundamentally unbalanced--unbalanced in ways that actually blind
us to what is going on in the world of creativity.
68

We are living through an existence-proof that there are other
methods of generating innovation, expression, and creativity
than the proprietary, exclusionary model of sole control. True,
these methods existed before. Yet they tended to be local or
invisible or both. The Internet has shown conclusively and
visibly that--at least in certain sectors--we can have a global
flowering of creativity, innovation, and information sharing in
which intellectual property rights function in a very different
way than under the standard model of proprietary control. In
some cases, intellectual property rights were simply
irrelevant--much of the information sharing and indexing on the
Web falls within this category. In some cases they were used to
prevent exclusivity. Think of Creative Commons or the General
Public License. In some, they were actually impediments.
Software patents, for example, have a negative effect on open
source software development--one that policy makers are only now
slowly beginning to acknowledge.
69

It is important not to overstate how far the sharing economy can
get us. It might help to cut the costs of early-stage drug
development, as the Tropical Disease Initiative attempts to do
for neglected diseases. It will not generate a Phase III drug
trial or bring a drug to market. Sharing methods might be used
to generate cult movies such as Star Wreck: In the Pirkinning,
which was created using techniques borrowed from open source
software and is available under a Creative Commons license. They
will not produce a mammoth blockbuster like Ben Hur, or
Waterworld for that matter--results that will generate mixed
feelings. So there are real limitations to the processes I
describe.
70

But even acknowledging those limitations, it is fair to say that
one of the most striking events to occur during our lifetimes is
the transformation wrought by the Web, a transformation that is
partly driven by the extraordinary explosion of nonproprietary
creativity and sharing across digital networks. The cultural
expectation that a web of expression and information will just
be there--whatever subject we are discussing--is a fundamental
one, the one that in some sense separates us from our children.
With this as a background it is both bizarre and perverse that
we choose to concentrate our policy making only on maintaining
the business methods of the last century, only on the story line
of the Internet Threat, only on the dangers that the technology
poses to creativity (and it does pose some) and never on the
benefits.
71

What would it mean to pay attention to the changes I have
described? It would mean assessing the impact of rules on both
proprietary and nonproprietary production. For example, if the
introduction of a broad regime of software patents would render
open source software development more difficult (because
individual contributors cannot afford to do a patent search on
every piece of code they contribute), then this should be
reflected as a cost of software patents, to be balanced against
whatever benefits the system brought. A method for encouraging
innovation might, in fact, inhibit one form of it.
72

Paying attention to the last ten years means we need to realize
that nonproprietary, distributed production is not the poor
relation of traditional proprietary, hierarchically organized
production. This is no hippy lovefest. It is the business method
on which IBM has staked billions of dollars; the method of
cultural production that generates much of the information each
of us uses every day. It is just as deserving of respect and the
solicitude of policy makers as the more familiar methods pursued
by the film studios and proprietary software companies. Losses
due to sharing that failed because of artificially erected legal
barriers are every bit as real as losses that come about because
of illicit copying. Yet our attention goes entirely to the
latter.
73

The main thrust of the argument here is still firmly within the
Jeffersonian, Scottish Enlightenment tradition. Jefferson does
not wish to give the patent to Oliver Evans because he believes
the invention will be (and has been) generated anyway without
the granting of an intellectual property right and that there
are sufficient information retrieval methods to have practical
access to it. In this case, the information retrieval method is
not Google. It is a polymath genius combing his library in
Monticello for references to Persian irrigation methods. The
"embarrassment" caused by the unnecessary patent is added
expense and bureaucracy in agriculture and impediments to
further innovators, not the undermining of open source software.
But it is the same principle of cautious minimalism, the same
belief that much innovation goes on without proprietary control
and that intellectual property rights are the exception, not the
rule. When Benjamin Franklin, a man who surely deserved patents
under even the most stringent set of tests, chooses to forgo
them because he has secured so much benefit from the
contributions of others, he expresses Shirky's norm nicely.
74

Indeed, Jefferson's optimism depends partly on a view of
information sharing that captures beautifully the attitudes of
the generation that built the Web. The letter that I discussed
in Chapter 2 was widely cited for precisely this reason.
Remember these lines?
75

    That ideas should freely spread from one to another over the
globe, for the moral and mutual instruction of man, and
improvement of his condition, seems to have been peculiarly and
benevolently designed by nature, when she made them, like fire,
expansible over all space, without lessening their density in
any point, and like the air in which we breathe, move, and have
our physical being, incapable of confinement or exclusive
appropriation.
76

What could encapsulate better the process by which information
spreads on a global network? What could more elegantly state the
norms of the "information wants to be free" generation? (Though
those who quoted him conveniently omitted the portions of his
analysis where he concedes that there are cases where
intellectual property rights may be necessary and desirable.)
77

In some ways, then, the explosion of nonproprietary and, in many
cases, noncommercial creativity and information sharing is
simply the vindication of Jefferson's comparison of ideas with
"fire . . . expansible over all space." The Web makes the simile
a reality and puts an exclamation point at the end of the
Jefferson Warning. All the more reason to pay attention to it.
But the creative commons I described here goes further. It
forces us to reconceptualize a form of life, a method of
production, and a means of social organization that we used to
relegate to the private world of informal sharing and
collaboration. Denied a commons by bad intellectual property
rules, we can sometimes build our own--which may in some ways do
even more for us than the zone of free trade, free thought, and
free action that Jefferson wished to protect.
78

Does all this mean that the Jefferson Warning is no longer
necessary? Can we mitigate the negative effects of intellectual
property expansion through a series of privately constructed
commons? The answers to those questions are, respectively, "no"
and "sometimes." Think of the story of retrospectively extended
copyright and orphan works. In many cases the problem with our
intellectual property rights is that they create barriers to
sharing--without producing an incentive in return--in ways that
can never be solved through private agreement. Twentieth century
culture will largely remain off-limits for digitization,
reproduction, adaptation, and translation. No series of private
contracts or licenses can fix the problem because the relevant
parties are not in the room and might not agree if they were.
79

Even when the parties are available and agree to share, the
benefits may not flow to all equally. Beset by a multitude of
vague patents of questionable worth and uncertain scope, large
information technology firms routinely create patent pools. IBM
tosses in thousands of patents, so does Hewlett or Dell. Each
agrees not to sue the other. This is great for the established
companies; they can proceed without fear of legal action from
the landmine patents that litter the technological landscape. As
far as the participants are concerned, the patent pool is almost
like the public domain--but a privatized public domain, a park
that only residents may enter. But what about the start up
company that does not have the thousands of patents necessary
for entry? They are not in as happy a situation. The patent pool
fixes the problem of poor patent quality and unclear scope--one
that Jefferson was worrying about 200 years ago. But it fixes it
only for the dominant firms, hurting competition in the process.
80

Attempts to form a commons may also backfire. The coordination
problems are legion. There are difficulties of compatibility in
licenses and the process, no matter how easy, still imposes
transaction costs. Nevertheless, with all of these
qualifications, the idea of the privately created commons is an
important addition to the world view that Jefferson provided, a
new tool in our attempt to craft a working system of innovation
and culture. No one who looks at the Web can doubt the power of
distributed, and frequently uncompensated, creativity in
constructing remarkable reference works, operating systems,
cultural conversations, even libraries of images and music. Some
of that innovation happens largely outside of the world of
intellectual property. Some of it happens in privately created
areas of sharing that use property rights and open, sometimes
even machine-readable, licenses to create a commons on which
others can build. The world of creativity and its methods is
wider than we had thought. That is one of the vital and exciting
lessons the Internet teaches us; unfortunately, the only one our
policy makers seem to hear is "cheaper copying means more
piracy."


Chapter 9: An Evidence-Free Zone
1

Perhaps some of the arguments in this book have convinced you.
Perhaps it is a mistake to think of intellectual property in the
same way we think of physical property. Perhaps limitations and
exceptions to those rights are as important as the rights
themselves. Perhaps the public domain has a vital and tragically
neglected role to play in innovation and culture. Perhaps
relentlessly expanding property rights will not automatically
bring us increased innovation in science and culture. Perhaps
the second enclosure movement is more troubling than the first.
Perhaps it is unwise to extend copyright again and again, and to
do so retrospectively, locking up most of twentieth-century
culture in order to protect the tiny fragment of it that is
still commercially available. Perhaps technological improvements
bring both benefits and costs to existing rights holders--both of
which should be considered when setting policy. Perhaps we need
a vigorous set of internal limitations and exceptions within
copyright, or control over content will inevitably become
control over the medium of transmission. Perhaps the Internet
should make us think seriously about the power of nonproprietary
and distributed production.
2

Saying all this gives us some guidance in how we should think.
It points out certain patterns of error. But its prescriptions
are not simple. Precisely because it is not a rejection of
intellectual property rights, but rather a claim that they only
work well through a process of consciously balancing openness
and control, public domain and private right, it still leaves
open the question of where that point of balance is and how to
strike it.
3

In this chapter I want to offer a suggestion that in any other
field would be stunningly obvious, boring even, but in the
funhouse mirror of intellectual property appears revolutionary.
We should make our policy based on empirical evidence of its
likely effects and there should be a formal requirement of
empirical reconsideration of those policies after they have been
implemented to see if they are working. Why is this a good idea?
4

Imagine a process of reviewing prescription drugs that goes like
this: representatives from the drug company come to the
regulators and argue that their drug works well and should be
approved. They have no evidence of this beyond a few anecdotes
about people who want to take it and perhaps some very simple
models of how the drug might affect the human body. The drug is
approved. No trials, no empirical evidence of any kind, no
follow-up. Or imagine a process of making environmental
regulations in which there were no data, and no attempts to
gather data, about the effects of the particular pollutants
being studied. Even the harshest critics of regulation would
admit we generally do better than this. But this is often the
way we make intellectual property policy.
5

So how do we decide the ground rules of the information age?
Representatives of interested industries come to regulators and
ask for another heaping slice of monopoly rent in the form of an
intellectual property right. They have doom-laden predictions,
they have anecdotes, carefully selected to pluck the
heartstrings of legislators, they have celebrities who
testify--often incoherently, but with palpable charisma--and they
have very, very simple economic models. The basic economic model
here is "If you give me a larger right, I will have a larger
incentive to innovate. Thus the bigger the rights, the more
innovation we will get. Right?"
6

As I have tried to show here using the words of Jefferson and
Macaulay and examples such as term extension, software
copyrights, and garage door openers, this logic is fallacious.
Even without data, the "more is better" idea is obviously
flawed. Copyrighting the alphabet will not produce more books.
Patenting E=?mc2 will not yield more scientific innovation.
Intellectual property creates barriers to, as well as incentives
toward, innovation. Jefferson agonized over the issue of when
the benefits exceed the costs of a new right. "I know well the
difficulty of drawing a line between the things which are worth
to the public the embarrassment of an exclusive patent, and
those which are not." It is not clear that contemporary policy
makers approach issues with anything like the same
sophistication or humility. But it would be an equal mistake to
conclude, as some do, that expansions of intellectual property
are never justified. Extensions of rights can help or hurt, but
without economic evidence beforehand and review afterward, we
will never know. This point should be obvious, banal, even
deeply boring, but sadly it is not.
7

From Jefferson and Macaulay and Adam Smith, I derived a second
point. In the absence of evidence on either side, the
presumption should be against creating a new, legalized
monopoly. The burden of proof should lie on those who claim, in
any particular case, that the state should step in to stop
competition, outlaw copying, proscribe technology, or restrict
speech. They have to show us that the existing protection is not
enough. But this presumption is a second-best solution and the
empirical emptiness of the debates frustrating.
8

This makes an occasion where there is some evidence a time for
celebration. What we need is a test case in which one country
adopts the proposed new intellectual property right and another
similarly situated country does not, and we can assess how they
are both doing after a number of years.
9

There is such a case. It is the "database right."
10

OWNING FACTS?
11

Europe adopted a Database Directive in 1996 which gave a high
level of copyright protection to databases and conferred a new
"sui generis" database right even on unoriginal compilations of
facts. In the United States, by contrast, in a 1991 case called
Feist Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Co., 499
U.S. 340 (1991), the Supreme Court made it clear that unoriginal
compilations of facts are not copyrightable.
12

What does all this mean? Take the phone directory--that was the
product at issue in the Feist case. A white pages directory is a
database of names and numbers, compiled in alphabetical order by
name. Does anyone have an intellectual property right over it?
Not the particular dog-eared directory lying next to your phone.
Does the phone company that compiled it own the facts, the
numbers inside that directory? Could they forbid me from copying
them, adding others from surrounding areas, and issuing a
competing directory that I believed consumers would find more
valuable? This was an important issue for Feist because it went
to the heart of their business. They issued regional telephone
directories, combining records from multiple phone companies. In
this case, all the other companies in the region agreed to
license their data to Feist. Rural did not, so Feist copied the
information, checked as many entries as possible, adding
addresses to some of the listings, and published the combined
result. Rural sued and lost. The Supreme Court declared that
mere alphabetical listings and other unoriginal assemblies of
data cannot be copyrighted.
13

    It may seem unfair that much of the fruit of the compiler's
labor may be used by others without compensation. As Justice
Brennan has correctly observed, however, this is not "some
unforeseen byproduct of a statutory scheme." It is, rather, "the
essence of copyright," and a constitutional requirement. The
primary objective of copyright is not to reward the labor of
authors, but "to promote the Progress of Science and useful
Arts." To this end, copyright assures authors the right to their
original expression, but encourages others to build freely upon
the ideas and information conveyed by a work. This principle,
known as the idea/expression or fact/expression dichotomy,
applies to all works of authorship. As applied to a factual
compilation, assuming the absence of original written
expression, only the compiler's selection and arrangement may be
protected; the raw facts may be copied at will. This result is
neither unfair nor unfortunate. It is the means by which
copyright advances the progress of science and art.1
14

Feist was not as revolutionary as some critics claimed it to be.
Most of the appeals courts in the United States had long held
this to be the case. As the Court pointed out in the passage
above, it is a fundamental tenet of the U.S. intellectual
property system that neither facts nor ideas can be owned. Feist
merely reiterated that point clearly and stressed that it was
not just a policy choice, it was a constitutional requirement--a
limit imposed by the Constitution's grant of power to Congress
to make copyright and patent laws.
15

Daily politics cares little for the limitations imposed by
constitutions or for the structural principle the Court
describes--that we should leave facts free for others to build
upon. Since 1991, a few database companies have lobbied the
Congress strenuously and continuously to create a special
database right over facts. Interestingly, apart from academics,
scientists, and civil libertarians, many database companies, and
even those well-known property haters, the U.S. Chamber of
Commerce, oppose the creation of such a right. They believe that
database providers can adequately protect themselves with
contracts or technical means such as passwords, can rely on
providing tied services, and so on. Moreover, they argue that
strong database protection may make it harder to generate
databases in the first place; the facts you need may be locked
up. We need to focus on the inputs as well as the outputs of the
process--a point I have tried to make throughout this book. The
pressure to create a new right continues, however, aided by
cries that the United States must "harmonize" with Europe,
where, you will remember, compilations of facts are strongly
protected by intellectual property rights, even if their
arrangement is unoriginal.
16

So here we have our natural experiment. One major economy
rejects such protection and resists pressure to create a new
right. A different major economic region, at a comparable level
of development, institutes the right with the explicit claim
that it will help to produce new databases and make that segment
of the economy more competitive. Presumably government
economists in the United States and the European Union have been
hard at work ever since, seeing if the right actually worked?
Well, not exactly.
17

Despite the fact that the European Commission has a legal
obligation to review the Database Directive for its effects on
competition, it was more than three years late issuing its
report. At first, during the review process, no attention was
paid to the actual evidence of whether the Directive helps or
hurts the European Union, or whether the database industry in
the United States has collapsed or flourished. That is a shame,
because the evidence was there and it was fairly shocking. Yet
finally, at the end of the process, the Commission did turn to
the evidence, as I will recount, and came to a remarkable
conclusion--which was promptly stifled for political reasons. But
we are getting ahead of ourselves.
18

How do we frame the empirical inquiry? Intellectual property
rights allow the creation of state-backed monopolies, and "the
general tendency of monopolies," as Macaulay pointed out, is "to
make articles scarce, to make them dear, and to make them bad."
Monopolies are an evil, but they must sometimes be accepted when
they are necessary to the production of some good, some
particular social goal. In this case, the "evil" is obviously
going to be an increase in the price of databases and the legal
ability to exclude competitors from their use--that, after all,
is the point of granting the new right. This right of exclusion
may then have dynamic effects, hampering the ability of
subsequent innovators to build on what went before. The "good"
is that we are supposed to get lots of new databases, databases
that we would not have had but for the existence of the database
right.
19

If the database right were working, we would expect positive
answers to three crucial questions. First, has the European
database industry's rate of growth increased since 1996, while
the U.S. database industry has languished? (The drop-off in the
U.S. database industry ought to be particularly severe after
1991 if the proponents of database protection are correct; they
argued the Feist case was a change in current law and a great
surprise to the industry.)
20

Second, are the principal beneficiaries of the database right in
Europe producing databases they would not have produced
otherwise? Obviously, if a society is handing over a database
right for a database that would have been created anyway, it is
overpaying--needlessly increasing prices for consumers and
burdens for competitors. This goes to the design of the
right--has it been crafted too broadly, so that it is not being
targeted to those areas where it is needed to encourage
innovation?
21

Third, and this one is harder to judge, is the new right
promoting innovation and competition rather than stifling it?
For example, if the existence of the right allowed a one-time
surge of newcomers to the market who then use their rights to
discourage new entrants, or if we promoted some increase in
databases but made scientific aggregation of large amounts of
data harder overall, then the database right might actually be
stifling the innovation it is designed to foment.
22

Those are the three questions that any review of the Database
Directive must answer. But we have preliminary answers to those
three questions and they are either strongly negative or
extremely doubtful.
23

Are database rights necessary for a thriving database industry?
The answer appears to be no. In the United States, the database
industry has grown more than twenty-five-fold since 1979
and--contrary to those who paint the Feist case as a
revolution--for that entire period, in most of the United States,
it was clear that unoriginal databases were not covered by
copyright. The figures are even more interesting in the legal
database market. The two major proponents of database protection
in the United States are Reed Elsevier, the owner of Lexis, and
Thomson Publishing, the owner of Westlaw. Fascinatingly, both
companies made their key acquisitions in the U.S. legal database
market after the Feist decision, at which point no one could
have thought unoriginal databases were copyrightable. This seems
to be some evidence that they believed they could make money
even without a database right. How? In the old-fashioned way:
competing on features, accuracy, tied services, making users pay
for entry to the database, and so on.
24

If those companies believed there were profits to be made, they
were right. Jason Gelman, a former Duke student, pointed out in
a recent paper that Thomson's legal regulatory division had a
profit margin of over 26 percent for the first quarter of 2004.
Reed Elsevier's 2003 profit margin for LexisNexis was 22.8
percent. Both profit margins were significantly higher than the
company average and both were earned primarily in the $6 billion
U.S. legal database market, a market which is thriving without
strong intellectual property protection over databases. (First
rule of thumb for regulators: when someone with a profit margin
over 20 percent asks you for additional monopoly protection,
pause before agreeing.)
25

What about Europe? There is some good news for the proponents of
database protection. As Hugenholtz, Maurer, and Onsrud point out
in a nice article in Science magazine, there was a sharp, one-
time spike in the number of companies entering the European
database market immediately following the implementation of the
Directive in member states.2 Yet their work, and "Across Two
Worlds,"3 a fascinating study by Maurer, suggests that the rate
of entry then fell back to levels similar to those before the
directive. Maurer's analysis shows that the attrition rate was
also very high in some European markets in the period following
the passage of the directive--even with the new right, many
companies dropped out.
26

At the end of the day, the British database industry--the
strongest performer in Europe--added about two hundred databases
in the three years immediately after the implementation of the
directive. In France, there was little net change in the number
of databases and the number of providers fell sharply. In
Germany, the industry added nearly three hundred databases
immediately following the directive--a remarkable surge--about two
hundred of which rapidly disappeared. During the same period,
the U.S. industry added about nine hundred databases. Bottom
line? Europe's industry did get a one-time boost and some of
those firms have stayed in the market; that is a benefit, though
a costly one. But database growth rates have gone back to
predirective levels, while the anticompetitive costs of database
protection are now a permanent fixture of the European
landscape. The United States, by contrast, gets a nice steady
growth rate in databases without paying the monopoly cost.
(Second rule of thumb for regulators: Do no harm! Do not create
rights without strong evidence that the incentive effect is
worth the anticompetitive cost.)
27

Now the second question. Is the Database Directive encouraging
the production of databases we would not have gotten otherwise?
Here the evidence is clear and disturbing. Again, Hugenholtz et
al. point out that the majority of cases brought under the
directive have been about databases that would have been created
anyway--telephone numbers, television schedules, concert times. A
review of more recent cases reveals the same pattern. These
databases are inevitably generated by the operation of the
business in question and cannot be independently compiled by a
competitor. The database right simply serves to limit
competition in the provision of the information. Recently, the
European Court of Justice implicitly underscored this point in a
series of cases concerning football scores, horse racing
results, and so on. Rejecting a protectionist and one-sided
opinion from its Advocate General, the court ruled that the mere
running of a business which generates data does not count as
"substantial investment" sufficient to trigger the database
right. It would be nice to think that this is the beginning of
some skepticism about the reach of the directive. Yet the court
provides little discussion of the economic reasons behind its
interpretation; the analysis is merely semantic and
definitional, a sharp contrast to its competition decisions.
28

So what kinds of creations are being generated by this bold new
right? The answer is somewhere between bathos and pathos. Here
are some of the wonderful "databases" that people found it
worthwhile litigating over: a Web site consisting of a
collection of 259 hyperlinks to "parenting resources," a
collection of poems, an assortment of advertisements, headings
referring to local news, and charts of popular music. The sad
list goes on and on. The European Commission might ask itself
whether these are really the kind of "databases" that we need a
legal monopoly to encourage and that we want to tie up judicial
resources protecting. The point that many more such factual
resources can be found online in the United States without any
legalized database protection also seems worthy of note. At the
very least, the evidence indicates that the right is drawn much
too broadly and triggered too easily in ways that produce
litigation but little social benefit.
29

Now, in one sense, these lawsuits over trivial collections of
hyperlinks and headlines might be seen as irrelevant. They may
indicate we are handing out rights unnecessarily--did we really
need a legal monopoly, and court involvement, to get someone to
compile hyperlinks on a Web page? But it is hard to see social
harm. As with the patents over "sealed crustless" peanut butter
sandwiches or "methods of swinging on a swing," we may shake our
heads at the stupidity of the system, but if the problems
consist only of trivial creations, at least we are not likely to
grieve because some vital piece of information was locked up.
But we should not be so quick to declare such examples
irrelevant. They tend to show that the system for drawing the
boundaries of the right is broken--and that is of general
concern, even if the issue at hand is not.
30

Finally, is the database right encouraging scientific innovation
or hurting it? Here the evidence is merely suggestive.
Scientists have claimed that the European database right,
together with the perverse failure of European governments to
take advantage of the limited scientific research exceptions
allowed by the directive, have made it much harder to aggregate
data, to replicate studies, and to judge published articles. In
fact, academic scientific bodies have been among the strongest
critics of database protection. But negative evidence, by its
nature, is hard to produce; "show me the science that did not
get done!" Certainly, both U.S. science and commerce have
benefited extraordinarily from the openness of U.S. data policy.
I will deal with this issue in the next part of this chapter.
31

If the United States does not give intellectual property
protection to raw data, to facts, how is it that the database
industry has managed to thrive here and to do better than in
Europe, which has extremely strong protection? The economists
described in Chapter 1 would surely tell us that this is a
potential "public goods" problem. If it is hard to exclude
others from the resource--it is cheap and easy to copy--and if the
use of the resource is not "rival"--if I don't use up your facts
by consulting them--then we ought to see the kind of dystopia
economists predict. What would that consist of? First it might
result in underproduction. Databases with a social value higher
than their cost of creation would not get made because the
creator could not get an adequate return on investment. In some
cases it might even lead to the reverse--overproduction, where
each party creates the database for itself. We get a social
overinvestment to produce the resource because there is no legal
right to exclude others from it. If you gave the first creator
an intellectual property right over the data, they could sell to
subsequent users at a price lower than their own cost to create
the database. Everyone would win. But the United States did not
give the intellectual property right and yet its database
industry is flourishing. There are lots of commercial database
providers and many different kinds of databases. How can this
be? Is the economic model wrong?
32

The answer to that is no, the model is not wrong. It is,
however, incomplete and all too often applied in sweeping ways
without acknowledging that its basic assumptions may not hold in
a particular case. That sounds vague. Let me give a concrete
example. Westlaw is one of the two leading legal database
providers and, as I mentioned before, one of the key proponents
of creating intellectual property rights over unoriginal
databases. (There is considerable question whether such a law
would be constitutional in the United States, but I will pass
over that argument for the moment.) Westlaw's "problem" is that
much of the material that it provides to its subscribers is not