BALED HAY

By Bill Nye

A Drier Book than Walt Whitman's "Leaves o' Grass."

Author of "Bill Nye and Boomerang,"

"Forty Liars and Other Lies,"

"Goose-Neck Smith,"

"How Came Your Eye
Out, and Your Nose Not Skun?" Etc., Etc., Etc.

_Heap cold day when Melican man no lite em blook_.—AH SIN.

Illustrated by F. Opper, of "Puck"

Chicago. New York, San Francisco:

Belford, Clarke & Co

1884

[Illustration: cover]

[Illustration: 0007]

[Illustration: 0009]




DEDICATION.

TO MY WIFE:

Who has courteously and heroically laughed at my feeble and emaciated
jokes, even when she did not feel like it; who has again and again
started up and agitated successfully the flagging and reluctant
applause, who has courageously held my coat through this trying ordeal,
and who, even now, as I write this, is in the front yard warning people
to keep off the premises until I have another lucid interval,

This Volume is Affectionately Inscribed,

BY THE

AUTHOR.

PIAZZA TO THE THIRD VOLUME.

There can really be no excuse for this last book of trite and beautiful
sayings. I do not attempt, in any way, to palliate this great wrong. I
would not do so even if I had an idea what palliate meant.

It will, however, add one more to the series of books for which I am to
blame, and the pleasure of travel will be very much enhanced, for me, at
least.

There is one friend I always meet on the trains when I travel. He is the
news agent. He comes to me with my own books in his arms, and tells me
over and over again of their merits. He means it, too. What object could
he have in coming to me, not knowing who I am, and telling me of their
great worth? Why would he talk that way to me if he did not really feel
it?

That is one reason I travel so much. When 1 get gloomy and heartsick,
I like to get on a train and be assured once more, by a total stranger,
that my books have never been successfully imitated.

Some authors like to have a tall man, with a glazed grip-sack, and whose
breath is stronger than his intellect, selling their works; but I do not
prefer that way.

I like the candor and ingenuousness of the train-boy. He does not come
to the front door while you are at prayers, and ring the bell till the
hat-rack falls down, and then try to sell you a book containing 2,000
receipts for the blind staggers. He leans gently over you as you look
out the car window, and he puts some pecan meats in your hand, and
thus wins your trusting heart. Then he sells you a book, and takes an
interest in you.

This book will go to swell the newsboy's armful, and if there be any
excuse, under the sun, for its publication, aside from the royalty; that
is it.

I have taken great care to thoroughly eradicate anything that would have
the appearance of poetry in this work, and there is not a thought or
suggestion contained in it that would soil the most delicate fabric.

Do not read it all at once, however, in order to see whether he
married the girl or not. Take a little at a time, and it will cure
gloom on the "_similia simili-bus curanter_" principle. If you read
it all at once, and it gives you the heaves, I am glad of it, and you
deserve it. I will not bind myself to write the obituary of such people.

Hudson, Wis., Sept, 5,1883.




BALED HAY

A NOVEL NOVELETTE

|I NEVER wrote a novel, because I always thought it required more of
a mashed-rasp-berry imagination than I could muster, but I was the
business manager, once, for a year and a half, of a little two-bit
novelette that has never been published.

I now propose to publish it, because I cannot keep it to myself any
longer.

Allow me, therefore, to reminisce.

Harry Bevans was an old schoolmate of mine in the days of and although
Bevans was not his sure-enough name, it will answer for the purposes
herein set forth. At the time of which I now speak he was more bashful
than a book agent, and was trying to promote a cream-colored mustache
and buff "Donegals" on the side.

Suffice it to say that he was madly in love with Fanny Buttonhook, and
too bashful to say so by telephone.

Her name wasn't Buttonhook, but I will admit it for the sake of
argument. Harry lived over at Kalamazoo, we will say, and Fanny at
Oshkosh. These were not the exact names of the towns, but I desire to
bewilder the public a little in order to avoid any harassing disclosures
in the future. It is always well enough, I find, to deal gently will
those who are alive and moderately muscular.

Young Bevans was not specially afraid of old man Buttonhook, or his
wife. He didn't dread the enraged parent worth a cent. He wasn't afraid
of anybody under the cerulean dome, in fact, except Miss Buttonhook;
but when she sailed down the main street, Harry lowered his colors and
dodged into the first place he found open, whether it was a millinery
store or a livery stable.

Once, in an unguarded moment, he passed so near her that the gentle
south wind caught up the cherry ribbon that Miss Buttonhook wore at her
throat, and slapped Mr. Bevans across the cheek with it before he knew
what ailed him. There was a little vision of straw hat, brown hair,
and pink-and-white cuticle, as it were, a delicate odor of violets, the
"swish" of a summer silk, and my friend, Mr. Bevans, put his hand to his
head, like a man who has a sun-stroke, and fell into a drug store and a
state of wild mash, ruin and helpless chaos.

His bashfulness was not seated nor chronic. It was the varioloid, and
didn't hurt him only when Miss Buttonhook was present, or in sight. He
was polite and chatty with other girls, and even dared to be blithe and
gay sometimes, too, but when Frances loomed up in the distance, he would
climb a rail fence nine feet high to evade her.

He told me once that he wished I would erect the frame-work of a
letter to Fanny, in which he desired to ask that he might open up a
correspondence with her. He would copy and mail it, he said, and he was
sure that I, being a disinterested party, would be perfectly calm.

I wrote a letter for him, of which I was moderately proud. It would melt
the point on a lightning rod, it seemed to me, for it was just as full
of gentleness and poetic soothe as it could be, and Tupper, Webster's
Dictionary and my scrap-book had to give down first rate. Still it was
manly and square-toed. It was another man's confession, and I made it
bulge out with frankness and candor.

As luck would have it, I went over to Oshkosh about the time Harry's
prize epistle reached that metropolis, and having been a confidant
of Miss B's from early childhood, I had the pleasure of reading Bev's
letter, and advising the young lady about the correspondence.

Finally a bright thought struck her. She went over to an easy chair, and
sat down on her foot, coolly proposing that I should outline a letter
replying to Harry's, in a reserved and rather frigid manner, yet bidding
him dare to hope that if his orthography and punctuation continued
correct, he might write occasionally, though it must be considered
entirely _sub rosa_ and abnormally _entre nous_ on account of "Pa."

By the way, "Pa" was a druggist, and one of the salts of the
earth--Epsom salts, of course.

I agreed to write the letter, swore never to reveal the secret workings
of the order, the grips, explanations, passwords and signals, and then
wrote her a nice, demure, startled-fawn letter, as brief as the collar
to a party dress, and as solemn as the Declaration of Independence.

Then I said good-by, and returned to my own home, which was neither
in Kalamazoo nor Oshkosh. There I received a flat letter from 'William
Henry Bevans, inclosing one from Fanny, and asking for suggestions as
to a reply. Her letter was in Miss Buttonhook's best vein. I remember
having written it myself.

Well, to cut a long story short, every other week I wrote a letter for
Fanny, and on intervening weeks I wrote one for the lover at Kalamazoo.
By keeping copies of all letters written, I had a record showing where I
was, and avoided saying the same pleasant things twice.

Thus the short, sweet summer scooted past. The weeks were filled
with gladness, and their memory even now comes back to me, like a
wood-violet-scented vision. A wood-violet-scented vision comes high, but
it is necessary in this place.

Toward winter the correspondence grew a little tedious, owing to the
fact that I had a large, and tropical boil on the back of my neck, which
refused to declare its intentions or come to a focus for three weeks. In
looking over the letters of both lovers yesterday, I could tell by the
tone of each just where this boil began to grow up, as it were, between
two fond hearts.

This feeling grew till the middle of December, when there was a red-hot
quarrel. It was exciting and spirited, and after I had alternately
flattered myself first from Kalamazoo and then from Oshkosh, it was
a genuine luxury to have a row with myself through the medium of the
United States mails.

Then I made up and got reconciled. I thought it would be best to secure
harmony before the holidays so that Harry could go over to Oshkosh and
spend Christmas. I therefore wrote a letter for Harry in which he said
he had, no doubt, been hasty, and he was sorry. It should not occur
again. The days had been like weary ages since their quarrel, he
said--vicariously, of course--and the light had been shut out of his
erstwhile joyous life. Death would be a luxury unless she forgave him,
and Hades would be one long, sweet picnic and lawn festival unless she
blessed him with her smile.

You can judge how an old newspaper reporter, with a scarlet imagination,
would naturally dash the color into another man's picture of humility
and woe.

She replied--by proxy--that he was not to blame. It was her waspish
temper and cruel thoughtlessness. She wished he would come over and take
dinner with them on Christmas day and she would tell him how sorry she
was. When the man admits that he's a brute and the woman says she's
sorry, it behooves the eagle eye of the casual spectator to look up into
the blue sky for a quarter of an hour, till the reconciliation has had
a chance and the brute has been given time to wipe a damp sob from his
coat-collar.

I was invited to the Christmas dinner. As a successful reversible
amanuensis I thought I deserved it. I was proud and happy. I had passed
through a lover's quarrel and sailed in with whitewinged peace on time,
and now I reckoned that the second joint, with an irregular fragment
of cranberry jelly, and some of the dressing, and a little of the white
meat please, was nothing more than right.

Mr. Bevans forgot to be bashful twice during the day, and even smiled
once also. He began to get acquainted with Fanny after dinner, and
praised her beautiful letters. She blushed clear up under her "wave,"
and returned the compliment.

That was natural. When he praised her letters I did not wonder, and
when she praised his I admitted that she was eminently correct. I never
witnessed better taste on the part of two young and trusting hearts.

After Christmas I thought they would both feel like buying a manual and
doing their own writing, but they did not dare to do so evidently. They
seemed to be afraid the change would be detected, so I piloted them into
the middle of the succeeding fall, and then introduced the crisis into
both their lives.

It was a success.

I felt about as well as though I were to be cut down myself, and married
off in the very prime of life. Fanny wore the usual clothing adopted
by young ladies who are about to be sacrificed to a great horrid man. I
cannot give the exact description of her trousseau, but she looked like
a hazel-eyed angel, with a freckle on the bridge of her nose. The
groom looked a little scared, and moved his gloved hands as though they
weighed twenty-one pounds apiece.

However, it's all over now. I was up there recently to see them. They
are quite happy. Not too happy, but just happy enough. They call their
oldest son Birdie. I wanted them to call him William, but they were
headstrong and named him Birdie. That wounded my pride, and so I called
him Earlie Birdie.




GREELEY AID RUM.

|WHEN I visit Greeley I am asked over and over again as to the practical
workings of woman suffrage in Wyoming, and when I go back to Wyoming I
am asked how prohibition works practically in Greeley, Col. By telling
varied and pleasing lies about both I manage to have a good deal of fun,
and also keep the two elements on the anxious seat.

There are two sides to both questions, and some day when I get time
and have convalesced a little more, I am going to write a large book
relating to these two matters. At present I just want to say a word
about the colony which bears the name of the Tribune philosopher, and
nestles so lovingly at the chilly feet of the Rocky mountains. As I
write, Greeley is apparently an oasis in the desert. It looks like
a fertile island dropped down from heaven in a boundless stretch of
buffalo grass, sage hens and cunning little prairie dogs. And yet you
could not come here as a stranger, and within the colonial barbed wire
fence, procure a bite of cold rum if you were President of the United
States, with a rattlesnake bite as large as an Easter egg concealed
about your person. You can, however, become acquainted, if you are of a
social nature and keep your eyes open.

I do not say this because I have been thirsty these few past weeks and
just dropped on the game, as Aristotle would say, but just to prove that
men are like boys, and when you tell them they can't have any particular
thing, that is the thing they are apt to desire with a feverish yearn.
That is why the thirstful man in Maine drinks from the gas fixture; why
the Kansas drinkist gets his out of a rain-water barrel, and why other
miracles too numerous to mention are performed.

Whisky is more bulky and annoying to carry about in the coat-tail
pocket than a plug of tobacco, but there have been cases where it was
successfully done. I was shown yesterday a little corner that would hold
six or eight bushels. It was in the wash-room of a hotel, and was about
half full. So were the men who came there, for before night the entire
place was filled with empty whisky bottles of every size, shape and
smell. The little fat bottle with the odor of gin and livery stable was
there, and the large flat bottle that you get at Evans, four miles away,
generally filled with something that tastes like tincture of capsicum,
spirits of ammonia and lingering death, is also represented in this
great congress of cosmopolitan bottles sucked dry and the cork gnawed
half up.

When I came to Greeley, I was still following the course of treatment
prescribed by my Laramie City physician, and with the rest, I was
required to force down three adult doses of brandy per day. He used
to taste the prescription at times to see if it had been properly
compounded. Shortly after my arrival here I ran out of this remedy
and asked a friend to go and get the bottle refilled. He was a man not
familiar with Greeley in its moisture-producing capacity, and he was
unable to procure the vile demon in the town for love or wealth. The
druggist even did not keep it, and although he met crowds of men with
tears in their eyes and breath like a veteran bung-starter, he had to
go to Evans for the required opiate. This I use externally, now, on the
vagrant dog who comes to me to be fondled and who goes away with his
hair off. Central Colorado is full of partially bald dogs who have wiped
their wet, cold noses on me, not wisely but too well.




ABOUT SAW MILLS.

River Falls, Wis., May 80.

|I HAVE just returned from a trip up the North Wisconsin railway, where
I went to catch a string of codfish, and anything else that might be
contagious. The trip was a pleasant one and productive of great good in
many ways. I am hardening myself to railway traveling, like Timberline
Jones' man, so that I can stand the return journey to Laramie in July.

Northern Wisconsin is the place where the "foreign lumber" comes from
which we use in Laramie in the erection of our palatial residences. I
visited the mill last week that furnished the lumber used in the Oasis
hotel at Greeley. They yank a big wet log into that mill and turn it
into cash as quick as a railroad man can draw his salary out of the pay
car. The log is held on a carriage by means of iron dogs while it is
being worked into lumber. These iron dogs are not like those we see on
the front steps of a brown stone house occasionally. They are another
breed of dogs.

[Illustration: 0027]

The managing editor of the mill lays out the log in his mind, and works
it into dimension stuff, shingle holts, slabs, edgings, two by fours,
two by eights, two by sixes, etc., so as to use the goods to the best
advantage, just as a woman takes a dress pattern and cuts it so she
won't have to piece the front breadths, and will still have enough left
to make a polonaise for the last-summer gown.

I stood there for a long time watching the various saws and listening
to their monotonous growl, and wishing that I had been born a successful
timber thief instead of a poor boy without a rag to my back.

At one of these mills, not long ago, a man backed up to get away from
the carriage, and thoughtlessly backed against a large saw that was
revolving at the rate of about 200 times a minute. The saw took a large
chew of tobacco from the plug he had in his pistol pocket, and then
began on him.

But there's no use going into details. Such things are not cheerful.
They gathered him up out of the sawdust and put him in a nail keg and
carried him away, but he did not speak again. Life was quite extinct.
Whether it was the nervous shock that killed him, or the concussion of
the cold saw against his liver that killed him, no one ever knew.

The mill shut down a couple of hours so that the head sawyer could file
his saw, and then work was resumed once more.

We should learn from this never to lean on the buzz saw when it moveth
itself aright.




EXPERIMENTS WITH OLD CHEESE.

|A RECENT article in a dairy paper is entitled, "Experiments with Old
Cheese." We have experimented some on the venerable cheese, too. One
plan is to administer chloroform first, then perform the operation while
the cheese is under its influence. This renders the experiment entirely
painless, and at the same time it is more apt to keep quiet. After the
operation the cheese may be driven a few miles in the open air, which
will do away with the effects of the chloroform.




THE RAG-CARPET.

|WITH the threatened eruption of the rag carpet as a kind of venerable
successor to the genuine Boston-made Turkish rug, there comes a wail on
the part of the male portion of humanity, and a protest on the part of
all health-loving humanity.

I rise at this moment as the self-appointed representative of poor,
down-trodden and long-suffering man. Already lady friends are looking
with avaricious and covetous eyes on my spring suit, and, in fancy,
constructing a stripe of navy blue, while some other man's spring
clothes are already spotted for the "hit-or-miss" stripe of this
time-honored humbug.

It does seem to me that there is enough sorrowing toil going for nothing
already; enough of back ache and delirium, without tearing the shirts
off a man's back to sew into a big ball, and then weave into a
rag carpet made to breathe death and disease, with its prehistoric
perspiration and its modern drug store dyes.

The rug now commonly known as the Turkish prayer rug, has a sad, worn
look, but it does not come up to the rag carpet of the dear old home.

Around it there clusters, perhaps, a tradition of an Oriental falsehood,
but the rag carpet of the dear old home, rich in association, is an
heir-loom that passes down from generation to generation, like the horse
blanket of forgotten years or the ragbag of the dear, dead past. Here is
found the stripe of all-wool delaine that was worn by one who is now
in the golden hence, or, stricken with the Dakota fever, living in the
squatter's home; and there is the fragment of underclothes prematurely
jerked from the back of the husband and father before the silver of a
century had crept into his hair. There is no question but the dear old
rag carpet, with poisonous greens and sickly yellows and brindle
browns and doubtful blacks, is a big thing. It looks kind of modest and
unpretending, and yet speaks of the dead past, and smells of the antique
and the garret.

It represents the long months when aching fingers first sewed the
garments, then the first dash of gravy on the front breadth, the
maddening cry, the wild effort to efface it with benzine, the sorrowful
defeat, the dusty grease-spot standing like a pork-gravy plaque upon the
face of the past, the glad relinquishment of the garment, the attack
of the rag-carpet fiend upon it, the hurried crash as it was torn into
shreds and sewn together, then the mad plunge of the dust-powdered mass
into the reeking bath of Paris green or copperas, then the weaver's
gentle racket, and at last the pale, consumptive, freckled, sickly
panorama of outrageous coloring, offending the eye, the nose, the thorax
and the larynx, to be trodden under feet of men, and to yield up
its precious dose of destroying poisons from generation even unto
generation.

It is not a thing of beauty, for it looks like the colored engraving
of a mortified lung. It is not economical, for the same time devoted
to knocking out the brains of frogs and collecting their hams for the
metropolitan market would yield infinitely more; and it is not worth
much as an heirloom, for within the same time a mortgage may be placed
upon the old homestead which will pass down from father to son, even to
nations yet unborn, and attract more attention in the courts than all
the rag carpets that it would require to span the broad, spangled dome
of heaven.

I often wonder that Oscar Wilde, the pale patron of the good, the true
and the beautiful, did not rise in his might and knock the essential
warp and filling out of the rag carpet. Oscar did not do right, or he
would have stood up in his funny clothes and fought for reform at so
much per fight. While he made fun of the Chicago water works, a grateful
public would have buried him in cut flowers if, instead, he had warped
it to the rag carpet and the approaching dude.

A TRYING SITUATION.

|THERE are a great many things in life which go to atone for the
disappointments and sorrows which one meets," but when a young man's
rival takes the fair Matilda to see the baseball game, and sits under
an umbrella beside her, and is at the height of enjoyment, and gets the
benefit of a "hot ball" in the pit of his stomach, there is a nameless
joy settles down in the heart of the lonesome young man, such as the
world can neither give nor take away.




ONE KIND OF A BOY.

|I AM always sorry to see a youth get irritated and pack up his clothes,
in the heat of debate, and leave the home nest. His future is a little
doubtful, and it is hard to prognosticate whether he will fracture
limestone for the streets of a great city, or become President of the
United States; but there is a beautiful and luminous life ahead of him
in comparison with that of the boy who obstinately refuses to leave the
home nest.

The boy who cannot summon the moral courage some day to uncoil the
tendrils of his heart from the clustering idols of the household, to
grapple with outrageous fortune, ought to be taken by the ear and led
away out into the great untried realm of space.

While the great world throbs on, he sighs and refuses to throb. While
other young men put on their seal-brown overalls and wrench the laurel
wreath and other vegetables from cruel fate, the youth who dangles near
the old nest, and eats the hard-earned groceries of his father, shivers
on the brink of life's great current and sheds the scalding tear.

He is the young-man-afraid-of-the-sawbuck, the human being with the
unlaundried spinal column. The only vital question that may be said to
agitate his pseudo brain is, whether he shall marry and bring his wife
to the home nest, or marry and tear loose from his parents to live
with his father-in-law. Finally he settles it and compromises by living
alternately with each.

How the old folks yearn to see him. How their aged eyes light up when
he comes with his growing family to devour everything in sight and yawn
through the space between meals. This is the heyday of his life; the
high noon of the boy who never ventured to ride the yearling colt, or to
be yanked through the shimmering sunlight at the tail of a two-year-old.
He never dared to have any fun because he might bump his nose and make
it bleed on his clean clothes. He never surreptitiously cut the copper
wire off the lightning rod to snare suckers with, and he never went in
swimming because the great, rude boys might duck him or paint him with
mud. He shunned the green apple of boyhood, and did not slide down hill
because he would have to pull his sled back to the top again.

Now, he borrows other people's newspapers, eats the provisions of
others, and sits on the counter of the grocery till the proprietor calls
him a counter irritant.

There can be nothing more un-American than this flabby polyp, this
one-horse tadpole that never becomes a frog. The average American would
rather burst up in business six times in four years, and settle for nine
cents on the dollar, than to lead such a life. He would rather be an
active bankrupt than a weak and bilious barnacle on the clam-shell of
home.

The true American would rather work himself into luxury or the lunatic
asylum than to hang like a great wart upon the face of nature. This
young man is not in accordance with the Yankee schedule, and yet I do
not want to say that he belongs to any other nation. Foreign powers may
have been wrong; trans-Atlantic nations may have erred, and the system
of European government may have been erroneous, but I would not come out
and charge them with this horrible responsibility. They never harmed me,
and I will not tarnish their fair fame with this grave indictment.

He will breathe a certain amount of atmosphere, and absorb a given
amount of feed for a few years, and then the full-grown biped will leave
the home nest at last. The undertaker will come and get him and take
what there is left of him out to the cemetery. That will be all. There
can be no deep abiding sorrow for him here; public buildings will not be
draped in mourning, and you can get your mail at the usual hour when he
dies. The band will not play a sadder strain because the fag-end of
a human failure has tapered down to death, and the soft and shapeless
features are still. You will have no trouble getting a draft cashed on
that day, and the giddy throng will join the picnic as they had made
arrangements to do.




THE CHAMPION MEAN MAN.

|LARAMIE has the champion mean man. He has a Sunday handkerchief made
to order with scarlet spots on it, which he sticks up to his nose just
before the plate starts round, and leaves the church like a house on
fire. So after he has squeezed out the usual amount of gospel, he
slips around the corner and goes home ten cents ahead, and has his
self-adjusting nose-bleed handkerchief for another trip.




FRATERNAL SPARRING.

|I HAVE just returned from a little two-handed tournament with the
gloves. I have filled my nose with cotton waste so that I shall not soak
this sketch in gore as I write.

I needed a little healthful exercise and was looking for something that
would be full of vigorous enthusiasm, and at the same time promote the
healthful flow of blood to the muscles. This was rather difficult.
I tried most everything, but failed. Being a sociable being (joke) I
wanted other people to help me exercise, or go along with me when I
exercised. Some men can go away to a desert isle and have fun with
dumb-bells and a horizontal bar, but to me it would seem dull and
commonplace after a while, and I would yearn for more humanity.

Two of us finally concluded to play billiards; but we were only amateurs
and the owner intimated that he would want the table for Fourth of July,
so we broke off in the middle of the first game and I paid for it.

Then a younger brother said he had a set of boxing-gloves in his room,
and although I was the taller and had longer arms, he would hold up as
long its he could., and I might hammer him until I gained strength and
finally got well.

I accepted this offer because I had often regretted that I had not made
myself familiar with this art, and also because I knew it would create
a thrill of interest and fire me with ambition, and that's what a
hollow-eyed invalid needs to put him on the road to recovery.

The boxing-glove is a large fat mitten, with an abnormal thumb and a
string at the wrist by which you tie it on, so that when you feed it to
your adversary he cannot swallow it and choke himself. I had never
seen any boxing-gloves before, but my brother said they were soft and
wouldn't hurt anybody. So we took off some of our raiment and put them
on. Then we shook hands. I can remember distinctly yet that we shook
hands. That was to show that we were friendly and would not slay each
other.

My brother is a great deal younger than I am and so I warned him not to
get excited and come for me with anything that would look like wild and
ungovernable fury, because I might, in the heat of debate, pile his jaw
up on his forehead and fill his ear full of sore thumb. He said that was
all right and he would try to be cool and collected.

Then we put our right toes together and I told him to be on his guard.
At that moment I dealt him a terrific blow aimed at his nose, but
through a clerical error of mine it went over his shoulder and spent
itself in the wall of the room, shattering a small holly-wood bracket,
for which I paid him $3.75 afterward. I did not wish to buy the bracket
because I had two at home, but he was arbitrary about it and I bought
it.

We then took another athletic posture, and in two seconds the air was
full of poulticed thumb and buckskin mitten. I soon detected a chance
to put one in where my brother could smell of it, but I never knew just
where it struck, for at that moment I ran up against something with the
pit of my stomach that made me throw up the sponge along with some other
groceries, the names of which I cannot now recall.

My brother then proposed that we take off the gloves, but I thought I
had not sufficiently punished him, and that another round would complete
the conquest, which was then almost within my grasp. I took a bismuth
powder and squared myself, but in warding off a left-hander, I forgot
about my adversary's right and ran my nose into the middle of his
boxing-glove. Fearing that I had injured him, I retreated rapidly on my
elbows and shoulder-blades to the corner of the room, thus giving him
ample time to recover. By this means my younger brother's features were
saved, and are to-day as symmetrical as my own.

I can still cough up pieces of boxing-gloves, and when I close my eyes
I can see calcium lights and blue phosphorescent gleams across the
horizon; but I am thoroughly convinced that there is no physical
exercise which yields the same amount of health and elastic vigor to
the puncher that the manly art does. To the punchee, also, it affords a
large wad of glad surprises and nose bleed, which cannot be hurtful to
those who hanker for the pleasing nervous shock, the spinal jar and the
pyrotechnic concussion.

That is why I shall continue the exercises after I have practiced with
a mule or a cow-catcher two or three weeks, and feel a little more
confidence in myself.




CHIPETA'S ADDRESS TO THE UTES.

|PEOPLE of my tribe! the sorrowing widow of the dead Ouray speaks to
you. She comes to you, not as the squaw of the dead chieftain, to rouse
you to war and victory, but to weep with you over the loss of her people
and the greed of the pale face.

The fair Colorado, over whose Rocky mountains we have roamed and hunted
in the olden time, is now overrun by the silver-plated Senator and the
soft-eyed dude.

We are driven to a small corner of the earth to die, while the oppressor
digs gopher holes in the green grass and sells them to the speculator of
the great cities toward the rising sun.

Through the long, cold winter my people have passed, in want and cold,
while the conqueror of the peaceful Ute has worn $250 night-shirts and
filled his pale skin with pie.

Chipeta addresses you as the weeping squaw of a great man whose bones
will one day nourish the cucumber vine. Ouray now sleeps beneath the
brown grass of the canyon, where the soft spring winds may stir the dead
leaves, and the young coyote may come and monkey o'er his grave. Ouray
was ignorant in the ways of the pale face. He could not go to Congress,
for he was not a citizen of the United States. He had not taken out
his second papers. He was a simple child of the forest, but he stuck
to Chipeta. He loved Chipeta like a hired man. That is why the widowed
squaw weeps over him.

A few more years and I shall join Ouray--my chief, Ouray the big Injun
from away up the gulch. His heart is still open to me. Chipeta could
trust him, even among tire smiling maidens of her tribe. Ouray was true.
There was no funny business in his nature. He loved not the garb of the
pale face, but won my heart while he wore a saddle-blanket and a look of
woe.

Chipeta looks to the north and the south, and all about are the graves
of her people. The refinement of the oppressor has come, with its
divorce and schools and gin cocktails and flour bread and fall
elections, and we linger here like a boil on the neck of a fat man.

Even while I talk to you, the damp winds of April are sighing through my
vertebras, and I've got more pains in my back than a conservatory.

Weep with the widowed Chipeta. Bow your heads and howl, for our harps
are hung on the willows and our wild goose is cooked.

Who will be left to mourn at Chipeta's grave? None but the starving
pappooses of my nation. We stand in the gray mist of spring like dead
burdocks in the field of the honest farmer, and the chilly winds of
departing winter make us hump and gather like a burnt boot.

All we can do is to wail. We are the red-skinned wailers from Wailtown.

Colorado is no more the home of the Ute. It is the dwelling place of
the bonanza Senator, who doesn't know the difference between the plan of
salvation and the previous question.

Chipeta cannot vote. Chipeta cannot pay taxes to a great nation, but you
will be apt to hear her gentle voice, and her mellow racket will fill
the air till her tongue is cold, and they tuck the buffalo robe about
her and plant her by the side of her dead chieftain, where the south
wind and the sage hen are singing.

[Illustration: 0046]




BILL NYE'S CAT.

(BY PERMISSION.)

|I AM not fond of cats, as a general rule. I never yearned to have one
around the house. My idea always was, that I could have trouble enough
in a legitimate way without adding a cat to my woes. With a belligerent
cook and a communistic laundress, it seems to me most anybody ought to
be unhappy enough without a cat.

I never owned one until a tramp cat came to our house one day during the
present autumn, and tearfully asked to be loved. He didn't have anything
in his make-up that was calculated to win anybody's love, but he seemed
contented with a little affection,--one ear was gone and his tail was
bald for six inches at the end, and he was otherwise well calculated to
win confidence and sympathy. Though we could not be madly in love with
him, we decided to be friends, and give him a chance to win the general
respect.

Everything would have turned out all right if the bobtail waif had not
been a little given to investigation. He wanted to know more about the
great world in which he lived, so he began by inspecting my house. He
got into the store-room closet and found a place where the carpenter had
not completed his job. This is a feature of the Laramie artisan's style.
He leaves little places in unobserved corners generally, so that he can
come back some day and finish it at an additional cost of fifty dollars.
This cat observed that he could enter at this point and go all over the
imposing structure between the flooring and the ceiling. He proceeded to
do so.



We will now suppose that a period of two days has passed. The wide halls
and spacious façades of the Nye mansion are still. The lights in the
banquet-hall are extinguished, and the ice-cream freezer is hushed to
rest in the wood-sned. A soft and tearful yowl, deepened into a regular
ring-tail-peeler, splits the solemn night in twain. Nobody seemed to
know where it came from.

I rose softly and went to where the sound had seemed to well up from. It
was not there.

I stood on a piece of cracker in the diningroom a moment, waiting for it
to come again. This time it came from the boudoir of our French artist
in soup-bone symphonies and pie--Mademoiselle Bridget O'Dooley. I went
there and opened the door softly, so as to let the cat out without
disturbing the giant mind-that had worn itself out during the day in the
kitchen, bestowing a dry shampoo to the china.

Then I changed my mind and came out. Several articles of vertu, beside
Bridget, followed me with some degree of vigor.

The next time the tramp cat yowled he seemed to be in the recesses of
the bath-room. I went down stairs and investigated. In doing so I
drove my superior toe into my foot, out of sight, with a door that I
encountered. My wife joined me in the search. She could not do much, but
she aided me a thousand times by her counsel. If it had not been for
her mature advice I might have lost much of the invigorating exercise of
that memorable night.

Toward morning we discovered that the cat was between the floor of the
children's play-room and the ceiling of the dining-room. We tried till
daylight to persuade the cat to come out and get acquainted, but he
would not.

At last we decided that the quickest way to get the poor little thing
out was to let him die in there, and then we could tear up that portion
of the house and get him out. While he lived we couldn't keep him still
long enough to tear a hole in the house and get at him.

It was a little unpleasant for a day or two waiting for death to come
to his relief, for he seemed to die hard, but at last the unearthly
midnight yowl was still. The plaintive little voice ceased to vibrate on
the still and pulseless air. Later, we found, however, that he was not
dead. In a lucid interval he had discovered the hole in the store-room
where he entered, and, as we found afterward a gallon of coal-oil
spilled in a barrel of cut loaf-sugar, we concluded that he had escaped
by that route.

That was the only time that I ever kept a cat, and I didn't do it then
because I was suffering for something to fondle. I've got a good deal
of surplus affection, I know, but I don't have to spread it out over a
stump-tail orphan cat.




AUTUMN THOUGHTS.

|IN the Rocky mountains now the eternal whiteness is stealing down
toward the foot-hills and the brown mantle of October hangs softly on
the swelling divide, while along the winding streams, cottonwood and
willow are turned to gold, and the deep green of the solemn pines lies
farther back against the soft blue of the autumn sky. The sigh of the
approaching storm is heard at eventide, and the hostile Indian comes
into the reservation to get some arnica for his chilblain, and to heal
up the old feeling of intolerance on the part, of the pale face.

He leaves the glorious picture of mountain and glen; the wide sweep of
magnificent nature, where a thousand gorgeous dyes are spread over the
remains of the dead summer, and folding his tepee, he steals into the
home of the white man that he may be once more at peace with the world.

The hectic of the dying year saddens and depresses him, for is it not
an emblem to him of the death of his race? Is it not to him an assurance
that in the golden ultimately, the red man will be sought for on the
face of the earth and he will not be able to represent. He will not
be there either in person or by proxy. Here and there may be found the
little silent mounds with some glass beads and teeth in them, but the
silent warrior with the Roman nose will not be there.

[Illustration: 0051]

The Indian agent will have a large, conservative cemetery on his hands,
and the brave warrior will be marching single file through the corridors
of the hence.

At this moment he does not look romantic. Clothed in a coffee sack and a
little brief authority, he would not make a good vignette on a $5 bill.
His wife, too, looks careworn, and the old glad light is not in her
eye. Pier gunny-sack dolman is not what it once was, and her beautifully
arched foot has spread out over the reservation more than it used to.
Her step has lost its old elasticity, and so have her suspenders.

Autumn brings to her nothing but regret for the past and hopelessness
for the future. The cold and cruel winter will bring her nothing but
bitter memories and condemned government grub. The solemn hush of nature
and the gorgeous coloring of the forest do not awake a thrill in her
wild heart. She cares not for the dead summer or the mellow mist of the
grand old mountains.

She doesn't care two cents. She knows that no sealskin sacque will come
to her on the Christmas trees, and the glad welcome of the placid and
select oyster is not for her.

Is it surprising, then, that to this decaying belle of an old family
the sparkle of hope is unknown? Can we wonder, as we contemplate her
history, that to her the soldier pantaloons of last year, and the
bullwhacker's straw hat of '79, are obnoxious?

She is like her sex, and her joy is fractured by the knowledge that her
moccasins are down at the heel, and her stockings existing in the realms
of fancy. We should not look with scorn upon Mrs. Rise-up-William-Riley,
for hope is dead in her breast, and the wigwam is desolate in the
sage-brush.

Daughter of a great nation, we are not mad at you. You are not to be
blamed because the republican party has busted your crust. We do not
hate you because you eat your steak-rare and wear your own hair. It is
your own right to do so if you wish. Brace up, therefore, and take a
tumble, as it were, and try to be cheerful. We will not massacre you if
you will not massacre us. All we want is peace, and you can wear what
you like, only wear something, if you please, when you come into our
society. We do not ask you to conform strictly to our false and peculiar
costumes, but wear something to protect you from the chilling blasts of
winter and you will win our respect. You needn't mingle in our society
much if you do not choose to, but wrap yourself up in most any kind
of clothing that will silence the tongue of slander, and try to quit
drinking. You would get along first-rate if you would only let liquor
alone. Do not try to drown your sorrows in the flowing bowl. It's
expensive and unsatisfactory. Take our advice and swear off. We have
tried it, and we know what we are talking about.

You have a glorious future before you, if you will cease to drink
the vintage of the pale face, and monkey with petty larceny. Look at
Pocahontas and Mrs. Tecumseh. They didn't drink. They were women of
no more ability than you have, but they were high-toned, and they got
there, Eli. Now they are known to history along with Cornwallis and
Payne. You can do the same if you choose to. Do not be content to lead a
yellow dog around by a string and get inebriated, but rise up out of the
alkali dust, and resolve that you will shun the demon of drink.

You ought to be ashamed of yourself.




THE MAN WHO INTERRUPTS.

|I DO not, as a rule, thirst for the blood of my fellow-man. I am
willing that the law should in all ordinary cases take its course, but
when we begin to discuss the man who breaks into a conversation and
ruins it with his own irrelevant ideas, regardless of the feelings
of humanity, I am not a law and order man. The spirit of the "Red
Vigilanter" is roused in my breast and I hunger for the blood of that
man.

Interrupters are of two classes: First, the common plug who thinks
aloud, and whose conversation wanders with his so-called mind. He breaks
into the saddest and sweetest of sentiment, and the choicest and
most tearful of pathos, with the remorseless ignorance that marks a
stump-tail cow in a dahlia bed. He is the bull in my china shop,
the wormwood in my wine, and the kerosene in my maple syrup. I am shy in
conversation, and my unfettered flights of poesy and sentiment are rare,
but this man is always near to mar all with a remark, or a marginal
note, or a story or a bit of politics, ready to bust my beautiful dream
and make me wish that his name might be carved on a marble slab in some
quiet cemetery, far away.

Dear reader, did you ever meet this man--or his wife? Did you ever
strike some beautiful thought and begin to reel it off to your friends
only to be shut off in the middle of a sentence by this choice and
banner idiot of conversation? If so, come and sit by me, and you may
pour your woes into my ear, and I in turn will pour a few gallons into
your listening ear.

I do not care to talk more than my share of the time, but I would be
glad to arrive at a conclusion just to see how it would seem. I would be
so pleased and so joyous to follow up an anecdote till I had reached the
"nub," as it were, to chase argument home to conviction, and to clinch
assertion with authority and evidence.

The second class of interrupters is even worse. It consists of the
man--and, I am pained to state, his wife also--who see the general drift
of your remarks and finish out your story, your gem of thought or
your argument. It is very seldom that they do this as you would do it
yourself, but they are kind and thoughtful and their services are always
at hand. No matter how busy they may be, they will leave their own work
and fly to your aid. With the light of sympathy in their eyes, they
rush into the conversation, and, partaking of your own zeal, they take
the words from your mouth, and cheerfully suck the juice out of your
joke, handing back the rind and hoping for reward. That is where they
get left, so far as I am concerned. I am almost always ready to repay
rudeness with rudeness, and cold preserved gall with such acrid sarcasm
as I may be able to secure at the moment. No one will ever know how I
yearn for the blood of the interrupter. At night I camp on his trail,
and all the day I thirst for his warm life's current. In my dreams I am
cutting his scalp loose with a case-knife, while my fingers are twined
in his clustering hair. I walk over him and promenade across his abdomen
as I slumber. I hear his ribs crack, and I see his tongue hang over his
shoulder as he smiles death's mirthful smile.

I do not interrupt a man no more than I would tell him he lied. I give
him a chance to win applause or decomposed eggs from the audience,
according to what he has to say, and according to the profundity of
his profund. All I want is a similar chance and room according to my
strength. Common decency ought to govern conversation without its being
necessary to hire an umpire armed with a four-foot club, to announce who
is at the bat and who is on deck.

It is only once in a week or two that the angel troubles the waters and
stirs up the depths of my conversational powers, and then the chances
are that some leprous old nasty toad who has been hanging on the brink
of decent society for two weeks, slides in with a low kerplunk, and my
fair blossom of thought that has been trying for weeks to bloom,
withers and goes to seed, while the man with the chilled steel and
copper-riveted brow, and a wad of self-esteem on his intellectual
balcony as big as an inkstand, walks slowly away to think of some other
dazzling gem, and thus be ready to bust my beautiful phantom, and tear
out my high-priced bulbs of fancy the next time I open my mouth.




THE ROCKY MOUKTAIN COW.

|THE attention of the Rocky Mountain Detective Association is
respectfully called to a large bay cow, who is hanging around this place
under an assumed name. She has no visible means of support, and has
been seen trying to catch the combination to the safes of several of our
business men here. She has also stolen into our lot several times and
eaten two or three lengths of stovepipe that we neglected to lock up.




PRESERVING EGGS.

|THE Scientific American gives this as an excellent mode of preserving
eggs: "Take fresh, ones, put a dozen or more into a small willow basket,
and immerse this for five seconds in boiling water, containing about
five pounds of common brown sugar per gallon, then pack, when cool,
small ends down, in an intimate mixture of one part of finely powdered
charcoal and two of dry bran. In this way they will last six months or
more. The scalding water causes the formation of a thin skin of hard
albumen near the inner surface of the shell, and the sugar of syrup
closes all the pores."

The Scientific American neglects, however, to add that when you open
them six months after they were picked and preserved, the safest way is
to open them out in the alley with a revolver, at sixteen paces. When
you have succeeded in opening one, you can jump on a fleet horse and get
out of the country before the nut brown flavor catches up with you.




HUMAN' NATURE ON THE HALF-SHELL.

|I AM up here in River Falls, Wisconsin, and patiently waiting for the
snow-banks to wilt away and gentle spring to come again. Gentle spring,
as I go to press, hath not yet loomed up. Nothing in fact hath loomed
up, as yet, save the great Dakota boom. Everybody, from the servant
girl with the symphony in smut on her face and the boundless waste of
freckles athwart her nose, up to the normal school graduate, with enough
knowledge to start a grist mill for the gods, has "a claim" in the
promised land, the great wild goose orchard and tadpole aquarium of the
new Northwest.

The honest farmer deserts his farm, around which clusters a thousand
memories of the past, and buckling on his web feet, he flees to the frog
ponds of the great northern watershed, to make a "tree claim," and be
happy.

Such is life. We battle on bravely for years, cutting out white-oak
grubs, and squashing army worms on a shingle, in order that we may dwell
beneath our own vine and plum tree, and then we sell and take wings
toward a wild, unknown country, where land is dirt cheap, where the
wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at rest.

That is where we get left, if I may be allowed an Americanism, or
whatever it is. We are never at rest. The more we emigrate the more
worthless, unsatisfied and trifling we become. I have seen the same
family go through Laramie City six times because they knew not of
contentment. The first time they went west in a Pullman car "for their
health." The husband rashly told a sad-eyed man that he lied, and in a
little while the sun was obscured by loose teeth and hair. The ground
was torn up and vegetation was killed where the discussion was held.

Then the family went home to Toledo. They went in a day coach and said a
Pullman car was full of malaria and death. Their relatives made sport
of them and lifted up their yawp and yawped at them insomuch that the
yawpness thereof was as the town caucus for might. Then the tourists on
the following spring packed up two pillows, and a pink comforter, and
a change of raiment, and gat them onto the emigrant train and journeyed
into the land which is called Arizona, where the tarantula climbeth up
on the innerside of the pantaloon and tickleth the limb of the pilgrim
as he journeyeth, and behold he getteth in his work, and the leg of that
man is greater than it was aforetime, even like unto the leg of a piano.

A FRIGID ROUTE.

|THERE'S no doubt but that the Fort Collins route to the North Park, is
a good, practicable route, but the only man who has started out over it
this spring fetched up in the New Jerusalem.

The trouble with that line of travel is, that the temperature is too
short. The summer on the Fort Collins route is noted mainly for its
brevity. It lasts about as long as an ordinary eclipse of the sun.

The man who undertook to go over the road this spring on snow shoes,
with a load consisting of ten cents' worth of fine cut tobacco, has not
been heard from yet at either end of the line, and he is supposed to
have perished, or else he is still in search of an open polar sea.

It is hoped that dog days will bring him to the surface, but if the
winter comes on as early this fall as there are grave reasons to fear,
a man couldn't get over the divide in the short space of time which will
intervene between Decoration day and Christmas.

We hate to discourage people who have an idea of going over the Fort
Collins road to North Park, but would suggest that preparations be made
in advance for about five hundred St. Bernard dogs and a large supply
of arctic whisky, to be placed on file where it can be got at without a
moment's delay.




TOO CONTIGUOUS.

|THERE is a firm on Coyote creek, in New Jersey, that would like to
advertise in _The Boomerang_, and the members of the firm are evidently
good square men, although they are not large. They lack about four feet
in stature of being large enough to come within the range of our vision.

They have got more pure gall to the superficial foot than anybody we
ever heard of. It seems that the house has a lot of vermifuge to feed
plants, and a bedbug tonic that it wants to bring before the public, and
it wants us to devote a quarter of a column every day to the merits of
these bug and worm discouragers, and then take our pay out of tickets in
the drawing of a brindle dog next spring.

We might as well come right out end state that we are not publishing
this paper for our health, nor because we like to loll around in
luxury all day in the voluptuous office of the staff. We have mercenary
motives, and we can't work off wheezy parlor organs and patent corn
plasters and threshing machines very well. We desire the scads. We can
use them in our business, and we are gathering them in just as fast as
we can. At the present time we are pretty well supplied with rectangular
churns and stem-winding mouse traps. We do not need them, It takes too
much time to hypothecate them.

In closing, we will add, that New Jersey people will not be charged much
more for advertising space than Wyoming people. We have made special
rates so that we can give the patrons of the East almost as good terms
as our home advertisers.




THE AMENDE HONORABLE.

|IT is rather interesting to watch the manner by which old customs have
been slightly changed and handed down from age to age. Peculiarities of
old traditions still linger among us, and are forked over to posterity
like a wappy-jawed teapot or a long-time mortgage.. No one can explain
it, but the fact still remains patent that some of the oddities of our
ancestors continue to appear from time to time, clothed in the changing
costumes of the prevailing fashion.

Along with these choice antiquities, and carrying the nut-brown flavor
of the dead and relentless years, comes the amende honorable. From the
original amende in which the offender appeared in public clothed only in
a cotton-flannel shirt, and with a rope about his neck as an evidence a
formal recantation, down to this day when (sometimes) the pale editor,
in a stickful of type, admits that "his informant was in error," the
amende honorable has marched along with the easy tread of time. The
blue-eyed moulder of public opinion, with one suspender hanging down
at his side, and writing on a sheet of news-copy paper, has a more
extensive costume, perhaps, than the old-time offender who bowed in the
dust in the midst of the great populace, and with a halter under his ear
admitted his offense, but he does not feel any more cheerful over it.

I have been called upon several times to make the amende honorable, and
I admit that it is not an occasion of mirth and merriment. People who
come into the editorial office to invest in a retraction are generally
very healthy, and have a stiff, reserved manner that no cheerfulness of
hospitality can soften..

I remember of an accident of this kind which occurred last summer in my
office, while I was writing something scathing. A large map with an air
of profound perspiration about him, and a plaid flannel shirt, stepped
into the middle of the room, and breathed in the air that I was not
using. He said he would give me four minutes in which to retract, and
pulled out a watch by which to ascertain the exact time.

[Illustration: 0067]

I asked him if he would not allow me a moment or two to go over to the
telegraph office and to wire my parents of my awful death. He said I
could walk out of that door when I walked over his dead body. Then I
waited a long time, until he told me my time was up, and asked what
I was waiting for. I told him I was waiting for him to die, so that I
could walk over his dead body. How could I walk over a corpse until life
was extinct?

He stood and looked at me first in astonishment, afterward in pity.
Finally tears welled up in his eyes, and plowed their way down his brown
and grimy face. Then he said that I need not fear him. "You are safe,"
said he. "A youth who is so patient and so cheerful as you are--who
would wait for a healthy man to die so that you could meander over his
pulseless remnants, ought not to die a violent death. A soft-eyed seraph
like you, who is no more conversant with the ways of this world than
that, ought to be put in a glass vial of alcohol and preserved. I came
up here to kill you and throw you into the rain-water barrel, but now
that I know what a patient disposition you have, I shudder to think of
the crime I was about to commit."




JOAQUIN AND JUNIATA.

|JOAQUIN MILLER has just published a new book called "The Shadows of
Shasta." It is based on the Hiawatha, Blue Juniata romance, which the
average poet seems competent to yank loose from the history of the
sore-eyed savage at all times.

Whenever a dead-beat poet strikes bedrock and don't have shekels enough
to buy a bowl of soup, he writes an inspired ode to the unfettered
horse-thief of the west.

It is all right so far as we know. If the poet will wear out the
smoke-tanned child of the forest writing poetry about him, and then if
the child of the forest will rise up in his death struggle and mash the
never-dying soul out of the white-livered poet, everything will be O.K.,
and we will pay the funeral expenses.

If it could be so arranged that the poet and the bright Alfarita
bug-eater and the bilious wild-eyed bard of the backwoods could be shut
up in a corral for six weeks together, with nothing to eat but each
other, it would be a big thing for humanity. We said once that we
wouldn't dictate to this administration, but let it flicker along alone.
We just throw out the above as a suggestion, however, hoping that it
will not be ignored.




SOME VAGUE THOUGHTS.

|SPRING, gentle, touchful, tuneful, breezeful, soothful spring is here.
It has not been here more than twenty minutes, and my arctics stand
where I can reach them in case it should change its mind.

The bobolink sits on the basswood vines, and the thrush in the
gooseberry tree is as melodious as a hired man. The robin is building
his nest--or rather her nest, I should say, perhaps--in the boughs
of the old willow that was last year busted by thunder--I beg your
pardon--by lightning, I should say. The speckled calf dines teat-a-teat
with his mother, and strawberries are like a baldheaded man's brow--they
come high, but we can't get along without them.

I never was more tickled to meet gentle spring than I am now. It
stirs up my drug-soaked remains, and warms the genial current of life
considerably. I frolicked around in the grass this afternoon and filled
my pockets full of 1000-legged worms, and other little mementoes of
the season. The little hare-foot boy now comes forth and walks with
a cautious tread at first, like a blind horse; but toward the golden
autumn the backs of his feet will look like a warty toad, and there will
be big cracks in them, and one toe will be wrapped up in part of a bed
quilt, and he will show it with pride to crowded houses.

Last night I lay awake for several hours thinking about Mr. Sherrod and
how long we had been separated, and I was wondering how many weary days
would have to elapse before we would again look into each other's eyes
and hold each other by the hand, when the loud and violent concussion of
a revolver shot near West Main street and Cascade avenue rent the sable
robe of night. I rose and lit the gas to see if I had been hit. Then
I examined my pockets to see if I had been robbed of my led pencil and
season pass. I found that I had not.

This morning I learned that a young doctor, who had been watching his
own house from a distance during the evening, had discovered that,
taking advantage of the husband's absence, a blonde dry goods clerk had
called to see the crooked but lonely wife. The doctor waited until
the young man had been in the house long enough to get pretty well
acquainted, and then he went in himself to see that the youth was making
himself perfectly comfortable.

There was a wild dash toward the window, made by a blonde man with his
pantaloons in his hand, the spatter of a bullet in the wall over the
young man's head and then all was still for a moment save the low sob
of a woman with her head covered up by the bed clothes. Then the two men
clinched and the doctor injected the barrel of a thirty-two self-cocker
up the bridge of the young man's nose, knocked him under the wash stand,
yanked him out by the hem of his garment and jarred him into the coal
bucket, kicked him up on a corner bracket and then swept the quivering
ruins into the street with a stub-broom. He then lit the chandelier and
told his sobbing wife that she wasn't just the temperament for him and
he was afraid that their paths might diverge. He didn't care much
for company and society while she seemed to yearn for such things
constantly. He came right out and admitted that he was of a nervous
temperament and quick tempered. He loved her, but he had such an
irritable, fiery disposition that he guessed he would have to excuse
her; so he escorted her out to the gate and told her where the best
hotel was, came in, drove out the cat, blew out the light and retired.

Some men seem almost like brutes in their treatment of their wives. They
come home at some eccentric hour of the night, and because they have
to sleep on the lounge, they get mad and try to shoot holes in the
lambrequins, and look at their wives in a harsh, rude tone of voice. I
tell you it's tough.




THE YOUMORIST.

|You are an youmorist, are you not?" queried a long-billed pelican
addressing a thoughtful, mental athlete, on the Milwaukee & St. Paul
road the other day.

"Yes, sir," said the sorrowful man, brushing away a tear. "I am an
youmorist. I am not very much so, but still I can see that I am drifting
that way. And yet I was once joyous and happy as you are. Only a few
years ago, before I was exposed to this malady, I was as blithe as a
speckled yearling, and recked not of aught--nor anything else, either.
Now my whole life is blasted. I do not dare to eat pie or preserves,
and no one tells funny stories when I am near. They regard me as a
professional, and when I get in sight the 'scrub nine' close up and wait
for me to entertain the crowd and waddle around the ring."

"What do you mean by that?" murmured the purple-nosed interrogation
point.

"Mean? Why, I mean that whether I'm drawing a salary or not, I'm
expected to be the 'life of the party.' I don't want to be the life of
the party. I want to let some one else be the life of the party. I want
to get up the reputation of being as cross as a bear with a sore head.
I want people to watch their children for fear I'll swallow them. I want
to take my low-cut-evening-dress smile and put it in the bureau drawer,
and tell the world I've got a cancer in my stomach, and the heaves and
hypochondria, and a malignant case of leprosy."

"Do you mean to say that you do not feel facetious all the time, and
that you get weary of being an youmorist?"

"Yes, hungry interlocutor. Yes, low-browed student, yes. I am not always
tickled. Did you ever have a large, angry, and abnormally protuberent
boil somewhere on your person where it seemed to be in the way? Did you
ever have such a boil as a traveling companion, and then get introduced
to people as an youmorist? You have not? Well, then, you do not know all
there is of suffering in this sorrow-streaked world. When wealthy people
die why don't they endow a cast-iron castle with a draw-bridge to it and
call it the youmorists' retreat? Why don't they do some good with their
money instead of fooling it away on those who are comparatively happy?"

"But how did you come to git to be an youmorist?"

"Well, I don't know. I blame my parents some. They might have prevented
it if they'd taken it in time, but they didn't. They let it run on till
it got established, and now its no use to go to the Hot Springs or to
the mountains, or have an operation performed. You let a man get the
name of being an youmorist and he doesn't dare to register at the
hotels, and he has to travel anonymously, and mark his clothes with his
wife's name, or the public will lynch him if he doesn't say something
youmorous.

"Where is your boy to-night?" continued the gloomy humorist. "Do you
know where he is? Is he at home under your watchful eye, or is he away
somewhere nailing the handles on his first little joke? Parent, beware.
Teach your boy to beware. Watch him night and day, or all at once,
when he is beyond your jurisdiction, he will grow pale. He will have a
far-away look in his eye, and the bright, rosy lad will have become the
flatchested, joyless youmorist.

"It's hard to speak unkindly of our parents, but mingled with my own
remorse I shall always murmur to myself, and ask over and over, why did
not my parents rescue me while they could? Why did they allow my
chubby little feet to waddle down to the dangerous ground on which the
sad-eyed youmorist must forever stand?

"Partner, do not forget what I have said to-day. 'Whether your child
be a son or daughter, it matters not. Discourage the first sign of
approaching humor. It is easier to bust the backbone of the first
little, tender jokelet that sticks its head through the virgin soil,
than it is to allow the slimy folds of your son's youmorous lecture to
be wrapped about you, and to bring your gray hairs with sorrow to the
grave."




MY CABINET.

|I HAVE made a small collection of wild, western things during the past
seven years, and have put them together, hoping some day, when I get
feeble, to travel with the aggregation and erect a large monument of
kopecks for my executors, administrators and assigns forever.

Beginning with the skull of old Hi-lo-Jack-and-the-game, a Sioux
brave, the collection takes in my wonderful bird, known as the
Walk-up-the-creek, and another _vara avis_, with carnivorous bill and
web feet, which has astonished everyone except the taxidermist and
myself. An old grizzly bear hunter--who has plowed corn all his life and
don't know a coyote from a Maverick steer--looked at it last fall and
pronounced it a "kingfisher," said he had killed one like it a year ago.
Then I knew that he was a pilgrim and a stranger, and that he had bought
his buckskin coat and bead-trimmed moccasins at Niagara Falls, for the
bird is constructed of an eagle's head, a canvas back duck's bust and
feet, with the balance sage hen and baled hay.

Last fall I desired to add to my rare collection a large hornet's nest.
I had an embalmed tarantula and her porcelain-lined nest, and I desired
to add to these the gray and airy home of the hornet. I procured one of
the large size after cold weather and hung it in my cabinet by a string.
I forgot about it until this spring. When warm weather came, something
reminded me of it. I think it was a hornet. He jogged my memory in some
way and called my attention to it. Memory is not located where I
thought it was. It seemed as though whenever he touched me he awakened a
memory--a warm memory with a red place all around it.

Then some more hornets came and began to rake up old personalities.
I remember that one of them lit on my upper lip. He thought it was a
rosebud. When he went away it looked like a gladiola bulb. I wrapped a
wet sheet around it to take out the warmth and reduce the swelling so
that I could go through the folding doors and tell my wife about it.

Hornets lit ah over me and walked around on my person. I did not dare
to scrape them off because they are so sensitive. You have to be very
guarded in your conduct toward a hornet.

I remember once while I was watching the busy little hornet gathering
honey and June bugs from the bosom of a rose, years ago, I stirred him
up with a club, more as a practical joke than anything else, and he came
and lit in my sunny hair--that was when I wore my own hair and he walked
around through my gleaming tresses quite awhile, making tracks as large
as a watermelon all over my head. If he hadn't run out of tracks my head
would have looked like a load of summer squashes. I remember I had to
thump my head against the smoke-house in order to smash him, and I had
to comb him out with a fine comb, and wear a waste-paper basket two
weeks for a hat.

Much has been said of the hornet, but he has an odd, quaint way after
all, that is forever new.




HEALTH FOOD.

|WHILE trying to reconstruct a telescoped spine and put some new copper
rivets in the lumbar vertebrae, this spring, I have had occasion to
thoroughly investigate the subject of so-called health food, such as
gruels, beef tea inundations, toasts, oat meal mush, bran mash, soups,
condition powders, graham gem, ground feed, pepsin, laudable mush, and
other hen feed usually poked into the invalid who is too weak to defend
himself.

Of course it stands to reason that the reluctant and fluttering spirit
may not be won back to earth, and joy once more beam in the leaden eye
unless due care be taken relative to the food by means of which nature
may be made to assert herself.

I do not care to say to the world through the columns of the Free Press,
that we may woo from eternity the trembling life with pie. Welsh rabbit
and other wild game will not do at first. But I think I am speaking the
sentiments of a large and emaciated constituency when I say, that there
is getting to be a strong feeling against oat meal submerged in milk and
in favor of strawberry short cake.

I almost ate myself into an early grave in April by flying into the face
of Providence and demoralizing old Gastric with oat meal. I ate oat meal
two weeks, and at the end of that time my friends were telegraphed for,
but before it was too late, I threw off the shackles that bound me. With
a desperation born of a terrible apprehension, I rose and shook off
the fatal oat meal habit and began to eat beefsteak. At first life hung
trembling in the balance and there was no change in the quotations of
beef, but later on there was a slight, delicate bloom on the wan cheek,
and range cattle that had barely escaped a long, severe winter on the
plains, began to apprehend a new danger and to seek the secluded canyons
of the inaccessible mountains.

I often thought while I was eating health food and waiting for death,
how the doctor and other invited guests at the post mortem would start
back in amazement to find the remnants of an eminent man filled with
bran!

Through all the painful hours of the long, long night and the eventless
day, while the mad throng rushed onward like a great river toward
eternity's ocean, this thought was uppermost in my mind. I tried to get
the physician to promise that he would not expose me, and show the
world what a hollow mockery I had been, and how I had deceived my best
friends. I told him the whole truth, and asked him to spare my family
the humiliation of knowing that though I might have led a blameless
life, my sunny exterior was only a thin covering for bran and shorts and
middlings, cracked wheat and pearl barley.

I dreamed last night of being in a large city where the streets were
paved with dry toast, and the buildings were roofed with toast, and the
soil was bran and oat meal, and the water was beef tea and gruel. All at
once it came over me that I had solved the great mystery of death, and
had been consigned to a place of eternal punishment. The thought was
horrible! A million eternities in a city built of dry toast and oat
meal! A home for never-ending cycles of ages, where the principal hotel
and the post-office building and the opera house were all built of
toast, and the fire department squirted gruel at the devouring element
forever!

It was only a dream, but it has made me more thoughtful, and people
notice that I am not so giddy as I was.

A NEW POET.

|A NEW and dazzling literary star has risen above the horizon, and is
just about to shoot athwart the starry vault of poesy. How wisely are
all things ordered, and how promptly does the new star begin to beam,
upon the decline of the old.

Hardly had the sweet singer of Michigan commenced to wane and to
flicker, when, rising above the western hills, the glad light of the
rising star is seen, and adown the canyons and gulches of the Rocky
mountains comes the melodious cadences of the poet of the Greeley Eye.

Couched in the rough terms of the west; robed in the untutored language
of the Michael Angelo slang of the miner and the cowboy, the poet at
first twitters a little on a bough far up the canyon, gradually waking
the echoes, until the song is taken up and handed back by every rock and
crag along the rugged ramparts of the mighty mountain barrier.

Listen to the opening stanza of "The Dying Cowboy and the Preacher:"

``So, old gospel shark, they tell me I must die;

``That the wheels of life's wagon have rolled into their last rut,

``Well, I will "pass in my checks" without a whimper or a cry,

``And die as I have lived--"a hard nut."=

This is no time-worn simile, no hackneyed illustration or bald-headed
decrepit comparison, but a new, fresh illustration that appeals to the
western character, and lifts the very soul out of the kinks, as it were.

"Wheels of life's wagon have rolled into their last rut."

Ah! how true to nature and yet how grand. How broad and sweeping. How
melodious and yet how real. Hone but the true poet would have thought to
compare the close of life to the sudden and unfortunate chuck of the off
hind wheel of a lumber wagon into a rut.

In fancy we can see it all. We hear the low, sad kerplunk of the wheel,
the loud burst of earnest, logical profanity, and then all is still.

How and then the swish of a mule's tail through the air, or the sigh of
the rawhide as it shimmers and hurtles through the silent air, and then
a calm falls upon the scene. Anon, the driver bangs the mule that is
ostensibly pulling his daylights out, but who is, in fact, humping up
like an angle worm, without pulling a pound.

Then the poet comes to the close of the cowboy's career in this style:

```"Do I repent?" No--of nothing present or past;

```So skip, old preach, on gospel pap I won't be fed;

```My breath comes hard; I--am going--but--I--am game to

`````the--last.

```And reckless of the future, as the present, the cowboy was

`````dead.=

If we could write poetry like that, do you think we would plod along
the dreary pathway of the journalist? Do you suppose that if we had the
heaven-born gift of song to such a degree that we could take hold of the
hearts of millions and warble two or three little ditties like that,
or write an effigy before breakfast, or construct an ionic, anapestic
twitter like the foregoing, that we would carry in our own coal, and
trim our own lamps, and wear a shirt two weeks at a time?

No, sir, he would hie us away to Europe or Salt Lake, and let our hair
grow long, and we would write some obituary truck that would make people
disgusted with life, and they would sigh for death that they might leave
their insurance and their obituaries to their survivors.

A WORD IN SELF-DEFENSE.

|IT might be well in closing to say a word in defense of myself.

The varied and uniformly erroneous notions expressed recently as to my
plans for the future, naturally call for some kind of an expression on
this point over my own signature. In the first place, it devolves upon
me to regain my health in full if it takes fourteen years. I shall not,
therefore, "publish a book,"

"prepare an youmorous lecture,"

"visit
Florida,"

"probate the estate of Lydia E. Pinkham, deceased," nor
make any other grand break till I have once more the old vigor and
elasticity, and gurgling laugh of other days.

In the meantime, let it be remembered that my home is in Laramie City,
and that unless the common council pass an ordinance against it, I shall
return in July if I can make the trip between snow storms, and evade the
peculiarities of a tardy and reluctant spring. Bill Nye.




PINES FOE HIS OLD HOME

|TOM FAGAN, of this city, has a wild horse that don't seem to take
to the rush and hurry and turmoil of a metropolis. He has been so
accustomed to the glad, free air of the plains and mountains that the
hampered and false life of a throbbing city, with its myriad industries,
makes him nervous and unhappy. He sighs for the boundless prairie and
the pure breath of the lifegiving mountain atmosphere. So taciturn is
he in fact, and so cursed by homesickness and weariness of an artificial
and unnatural horse society here in Laramie, that he refuses to eat
anything and is gradually pining away. Sometimes he takes a light lunch
out of Mr. Fagan's arm, but for days and days he utterly loathes food.
He also loathes those who try to go into the stable and fondle him.
He isn't apparently very much on the fondle. He don't yearn for human
society, but seems to want to be by himself and think it over.

The wild horse in stories soon learns to love his master and stay by him
and carry him through flood or fire, and generally knows more than the
Cyclopedia Brittanica; but this horse is not the historical horse that
they put into wild Arabian falsehoods. He is just a plain, unassuming
wild horse of Wyoming descent, whose pedigree is slightly clouded, and
who is sensitive on the question of his ancestry. All he wants is just
to be let alone, and most everybody has decided that he is right. They
came do that conclusion after they had soaked their persons in arnica
and glued themselves together with poultices.

[Illustration: 0089]

Perhaps, after a while, he will conclude to eat hay and grow up with
the country, but now he sighs for his native bunch-grass and the buffalo
wallow wherein he has heretofore made his lair. We don't wonder much,
though, that a horse who has lived in the country should be a little
rattled here when he finds the electric light, and bicycles, and lawn
mowers, and Uncle Tom's Cabin troupes, and baled hay at $20 per ton. It
makes him as wild and skittish as it does an eighteen-year-old girl the
first time she comes into town, and for the first time is met by the
blare of trumpets, and the oriental wealth of the circus with its
deformed camels and uniformed tramps driving its miles of cages with
no animals in them. The great natural world and the giddy maelstrom
of seething, perspiring humanity, peculiar to the city world, are two
separate and distinct existences.




ONE TOUCH OF NATURE.

|UP in Polk county, Wisconsin, not long ago, a man who had lost eight
children by diphtheria, while the ninth hovered between life and death
with the same disease, went to the-health officer of the town and asked
aid to prevent the spread of the terrible scourge. The health officer
was cool and collected. He did not get excited over the anguish of the
father whose last child was at that moment hovering upon the outskirts
of immortality. He calmly investigated the matter, and never for a
moment lost sight of the fact that he was a town officer and a professed
Christian.

"You ask aid, I understand," said he, "to prevent the spread of the
disease, and also that the town shall assist you in procuring new and
necessary clothing to replace that which you have been compelled to burn
in order to stop the further inroads of diphtheria. Am I right?" The
poor man answered affirmatively.

"May I ask if your boys who died were Christian boys, and whether they
improved their gospel opportunities and attended the Sabbath school, or
whether they were profane and given over to Sabbath-breaking?"

The bereft father said that his boys had never made a profession of
Christianity; that they were hardly old enough to do so, and that they
might have missed some gospel opportunities owing to the fact that they
were poor, and hadn't clothes fit to wear to Sabbath school. Possibly,
too, they had met with wicked companions, and had been taught to swear;
he could not say but they might have sworn, although he thought they
would have turned out to be good boys had they lived.

"I am sorry that the case is so bad," said the health officer. "I am led
to believe that God has seen fit to visit you with affliction in order
to express His Divine disapproval of profanity, and I cannot help you.
It ill becomes us poor, weak worms of the dust to meddle with the just
judgments of God. Whether as an individual or as a _quasi corporation_,
it is well to allow the Almighty to work out His great plan of
salvation, and to avoid all carnal interference with the works of God."

The old man went back to his desolated home and to the bedside of his
only living child. I met him yesterday and he told me all about it.

"I am not a professor of religion," said he, "but I tell you, Mr. Nye,
I can't believe that this board of health has used me right. Somehow I
ain't worried about my little fellers that is gone.

"They was little fellers, anyway, and they wasn't posted on the plan of
salvation, but they was always kind and they always minded me and their
mother. If God is using diphtheria agin perfanity this season they
didn't know it. They was too young to know about it and I was too poor
to take the papers, so I didn't know it nuther. I just thought that
Christ was partial to kids like mine, just the same as He used to be
2,000 years ago when the country was new. I admit that my little shavers
never went to Sabbath school much, and I wasn't scholar enough to throw
much light onto God's system of retribution, but I told 'em to behave
themselves, and they did, and we had a good deal of fun together--me and
the boys--and they was so bright, and square, and cute that I didn't see
how they could fall under divine wrath, and I don't believe they did.

"I could tell you lots of smart little things that they used to do, Mr.
Nye, but they wa'n't mean and cussed. They was just frolicky and gay
sometimes because they felt good. I don't believe God had it in for 'em
bekuz they was like other boys, do you? Fer if I thought so it would
kind o' harden me and the old lady and make us sour on all creation.

"Mind you, I don't kick because I'm left alone here in the woods, and
the sun don't seem to shine, and the birds seems a little backward about
singin' this spring, and the house is so quiet, and she is still all
the time and cries in the night when she thinks I am asleep. All that
is tough, Mr. Nye--tough as old Harry, too--but its so, and I ain't
murmurin', but when the board of health says to me that the Ruler of
the Universe is makin' a tower of Northern Wisconsin, mowin' down little
boys with sore throat because they say 'gosh,' I can't believe it.

"I know that people who ain't familiar with the facts will shake their
heads and say that I am a child of wrath, but I can't help it, All I can
do is to go up there under the trees where them little graves is, and
think how all-fired pleasant to me them little, short lives was, and
how every one of them little fellers was welcome when he come, poor as
I was, and how I rastled with poor crops and pine stumps to buy cloze
for 'em, and didn't care a cent for style as long as they was well.
That's the kind of heretic I am, and if God is like a father that
settles it, He wouldn't wipe out my family just to establish discipline,
I don't believe. The plan of creation must be on a bigger scale than
that, it seems to me, or else it's more or less of a fizzle.

"That board of health is better read than I am. It takes the papers and
can add up figures, and do lots of things that I can't do; but when
them fellers tell me that they represent the town of Balsam Lake and the
Kingdom of Heaven, my morbid curiosity is aroused, and I want to see the
stiffykits of election."




HOW TO PUT UP A STOVE-PIPE.

|PUTTING up stove-pipe is easy enough, if you only go at it right. In
the morning, breakfast on some light, nutritious diet, and drink two
cups of hot coffee; after which put on a suit of old clothes--or new
ones, if you can get them on time--put on an old pair of buckskin
gloves, and, when everything is ripe for the fatal blow, go and get a
good hardware man who understands his business. If this rule be strictly
adhered to, the gorgeous eighteen-karat-stem-winding profanity of the
present day may be very largely diminished, and the world made better.




FUN OF BEING A PUBLISHER.

|BEING a publisher is not all sunshine, joy and johnny-jump-ups,
although the gentle and tractable reader may at times think so.

A letter was received two years ago by the publishers of this book, on
the outside of which was the request to the "P. Master of Chicago to
give to the most reliable man in Chicago and oblige."

The P. Master thereupon gave the letter to Messrs. Belford, Clarke &
Co., who have sent it to me as a literary curiosity. I want it to go
down to posterity, so I put it in this great work. I simply change the
names, and where words are too obscure, doctor them up a little:

Butler, Bates county, Mo., Jan. the 2, 1881.

I have a novle fresh and pure from the pen, wich I would like to be
examined by you. I wish to bring it before the public the ensuing
summer.

I have wrote a good deal for the press, and always with great success. I
wrote once an article on the growth of pie plant wich was copied fur and
wide. You may have heard of me through my poem on "The Cold, Damp Sea or
the Murmuring Wave and its Sad Kerplunk."

I dashed it off one summer day for the Scabtown _Herald_.

In it, I enter the fair field of fancy and with exquisite word-painting,
I lead the reader on and on till he forgets that breakfast is ready,
and follows the thrilling career of Algonquin and his own fair-haired
Sciataca through page after page of delirious joy and poetic rithum.

In this novle, I have wove a woof of possibilities, criss-crossed with
pictures of my own wild, unfettered fancy, which makes it a work at once
truthful and yet sufficiently unnatural to make it egorly sot for by the
great reading world.

The plot of the novle is this:

Algonquin is a poor artist, who paints lovely sunsets and things,
nights, and cuts cordwood during the day, struggling to win a competence
so that he can sue for the hand of Sciataca, the wealthy daughter of a
plumber.

She does not love him much, and treats him coldly; but he perseveres
till one of his exquisite pictures is egorly snapt up by a wealthy man
at $2. The man afterwards turns out to be Sciataca's pa.

He says unkind things of Algonquin, and intimates that he is a better
artist in four-foot wood than he is as a sunset man. He says that
Algonquin is more of a Michael Angelo in basswood than anywhere else,
and puts a wet blanket on Sciataca's love for Algonquin.

Then Sciataca grows colder than ever to Algonquin, and engages herself
to a wealthy journalist.

Just as the wedding is about to take place, Algonquin finds that he is
by birth an Ohio man. Sciataca repents and marries her first love.
He secures the appointment of governor of Wyoming, and they remove to
Cheyenne.

Then there are many little bursts of pictureskness and other things that
I would like to see in print.

I send also a picture of myself which I would like to have in the book.
Tell the artist to tone down the freckles so that the features may be
seen by the observer, and put on a diamond pin, so that it will have the
appearance of wealth, which the author of a book generally wears.

It is not wrote very good, but that won't make any difference when it is
in print.

When the reading public begins to devour it, and the scads come rolling
in, you can deduct enough for to pay your expenses of printing and
pressing, and send me the balance by post-office money order. Please get
it on the market as soon as possible, as I need a Swiss muzzlin and some
other togs suitable to my position in liturary circles. Yours truly,
Luella Blinker.




LINGERIE.

|A LADY'S underwear is politely spoken of as "lingerie," but the great
horrid man crawls into his decrepit last year's undershirt every Monday
morning, and swears because his new underclothes are so "lingerie" about
making their appearance.




FRUIT.

|A CLASS of croakers that one meets with everywhere, have steadily
maintained that fruit cannot be raised in this Territory. In
conversation with a small boy yesterday, we learned that this is not
true. It is very simple and easy to do, even in this rigorous climate.
He showed us how it is done. He has a small and delicately constructed
harpoon with a tail to it--the apparatus attached to a long string. He
goes into the nearest market, and while the clerk is cutting out some
choice steaks for the man with the store teeth, the boy throws his
harpoon and hauls in on the string. In this way he raises all kinds of
fruit, not only for his own use, but he has some to sell.

He showed us some that he raised. It was as good as any of the fruit
that we buy here, only that there was a little hole on one side, but
that don't hurt the fruit for immediate use. He "puts some down," but
don't can or dry any. He says that he applies his where he feels the
worst. When he feels as though a Greening or a Bellflower would help
him, he goes out and picks it. He showed us a string with a grappling
hook attached, on which he had raised a bushel of assorted fruit this
fall, and it wasn't a very good string, either.




THE BONE OF CONTENTION.

|TWO self-accused humorists of Ohio have had a fight over the authorship
of the facetious phenomenon and laugh-jerking success, "Who ever saw
a tree box?" The bone of contention between these two gigantic minds,
evidently, is not their funny-bone.




CONGRATULATORY.

|I CANNOT close this letter without writing my congratulations to Mr.
Raymond, of _Tribune_, upon the position of Notary Public, which he
has secured. True merit cannot long go unrewarded. I, too, am a Notary
Public. So is Patterson of the Georgetown _Miner_. And yet we were all
once poor boys, unknown and unrecognized. Patterson was the son of a
wealthy editor in Michigan, who wished "Sniktau" to be a minister of the
everlasting gospel, but "Snik." knew that he was destined to enter upon
a wider and more important field. He devoted himself to the study of
profanity in all its various branches, until now he can swear more
men, and do a bigger "so-help-me-God" business than any other
go-as-you-please affidavit man in Colorado.

I have held my office through a part of the administration of Grant, and
all of the Hayes administration, so far, and all through the countless
political changes of the territorial administration. I state this with a
pardonable pride. It shows it was not the result of political influence
or party, but was the natural outgrowth of official rectitude and just
dealing toward all. When a man comes before me to make affidavit or to
acknowledge a deed, I recognize no party, no friend. They are all served
alike and charged alike.

I was appointed to this high official position under the administration
of Governor Thayer. At that time C. O. D. French was secretary. I had to
lubricate the wheels of government before I could catch on, as it were.
C. O. D. French wanted $5. I sent it to him. I wrote him that when the
people seemed determined to foist upon me the high official honor of
Notary Public, the paltry sum of $5 should not stand in the way. I have
held the position ever since. Political enemies have endeavored to tear
to pieces my record, both officially and socially, but through evil and
good report, I have still held it.

The nation to-day looks to her notaries public for her crowning glory
and successful future. In their hands rest the might and the grandeur
and the glory which, like a halo, in the years to come, will encircle
the brow of Columbia. I feel the responsibility that rests upon me, and
I tremble with the mighty weight of weal or woe for a great nation which
hangs upon my every official act. I presume Mr. Raymond feels the same
way. He ought, certainly, for the eyes of a great republic watch us with
feverish anxiety. It is an awful position to be placed in. Let those who
tread the lower walks of life envy not the brain-and-nerve-destroying
position of the notary public, whose every movement is portentous, and
great with its burden of good or ill for nations unborn. That is what
is making an old man of me before my time, and sprinkling my strawberry
blonde hair with gray.




THE AGONY IS OVER.

|IT has occurred to us that the destruction of timber near the
Continental Divide, in Colorado, which is also called, "The Backbone of
the Continent," will naturally be a severe blow to the lumber region of
Colorado.

We began studying on this joke last summer, and have wrestled
prayerfully with it ever since, with the above result. Do not think,
O gay, lighthearted reader, that these jokes are spontaneous, and that
mirth is pumped out of the recesses of the editor's brain as a grocer
pumps coal oil out of a tin tank. They come with fasting and sadness,
and vexation of spirit, and groanings that cannot be uttered, and
weeping and gnashing of teeth. Now that we are over this joke safely, no
doubt that we shall begin to flesh up again.




OSTRICH CAVALRY.

|THE question of mounting the United States cavalry upon ostriches, as
a matter of economy, is being agitated on the strength of their easy
propagation in Arizona and New Mexico. There being now one hundred and
seventeen of these birds in that region, the result of the increase
from nine of them imported several years ago. However successful ostrich
farming may be in and of itself, we cannot speak too highly of the
feasibility of using the bird for cavalry purposes. It is an established
fact that the ostrich is very swift and will live for days without food,
and be verier viceable all the time.

A detachment of ostrich cavalry could light out across the enemy's
country like the wind, and easily distance an equal force mounted upon
horses, and after several days' march, instead of a weary, worn, and
jaded-out lot of horses, there would be a flock of ostriches, hungry but
in good spirits, and the quartermasters could issue some empty bottles,
and some sardine boxes, and some government socks, and an old blue
overcoat or two, and the irons from an old ambulance, to each bird; and
at evening, while the white tents were glimmering in the twilight,
the birds would lie in a little knot chewing their cud constantly, and
snoring in a subdued way that would shake the earth for miles around.

One great difficulty would be to keep a sufficient guard around the arms
and ammunition to prevent the cavalry from eating them up. Think of
a half dozen ostriches breaking into an inclosure while the guard
was asleep, or off duty, and devouring fifteen or twenty rounds of
ammunition in one night, or stealing into the place where the artillery
was encamped, and filling themselves up with shells and round shot, and
Greek fire and gatling guns.




AN ELECTRIC BELT.

|A CHEYENNE man who was once mildly struck by lightning, calls it an
"electric belt."




THE ANNUAL WAIL

|AS usual, the regular fall wail of the eastern press on the Indian
question, charging that the Indians never committed any depredations
unless grossly abused, has arrived. We are unpacking it this morning and
marking the price on it. Some of it is on manifold, and the remainder
on ordinary telegraph paper. It will be closed out very cheap. Parties
wishing to supply boarding schools with essays and compositions, cannot
do better than to apply at once. We are selling Boston lots, with large
brass-mounted words, at two and three cents per pound. Every package
draws a prize of a two-pound can of baked beans. If large orders are
received from any one person, we will set up the wail and start it to
running, free of cost. It may be attached to any newspaper in a few
minutes, and the merest child can readily understand it. It is very
simple. But it is not as simple as the tallowy poultice on the average
eastern paper, who grinds them out at $4 per week, and found.

We also have some old wails, two or three years old--and older--that
have never been used, which we will sell very low. Old Sioux wails,
Modoc wails, etc., etc. They do not seem to meet with a ready sale in
the west, and we rather suspect it's because we are too near the scene
of the Indian troubles. Parties who have been shot at, scalped, or had
their wives and children massacred by the Indians, do not buy eastern
wails.

Eastern wails are meant for the eastern market, and if we can get this
old stock off our hands, we will hereafter treat the Indian question in
our plain, matter of fact way.

The namby-pamby style of Indian editorial and molasses-candy-gush that
New Englanders are now taking in, makes us tired. Life is too short. It
is but a span. Only as a tale that has been told. Just like the coming
of a guest, who gets his meal ticket punched, grabs a tooth pick, and
skins out.

Then why do we fool away the golden years that the Creator has given us
for mental improvement and spiritual elevation, in trying to fill up the
enlightened masses with an inferior article of taffy?

Every man who knows enough to feed himself out of a maple trough, knows,
or ought to know, that the Indian is treacherous, dishonest, diabolical
and devilish in the extreme, and that he is only waiting the opportunity
to spread out a little juvenile hell over the fair face of nature if
you give him one-sixteenth of a chance. He will wear pants and comb his
hair, and pray and be a class leader at the agency for fifty-nine years,
if he knows that in the summer of the sixtieth year he can murder a few
Colorado settlers and beat out the brains of the industrious farmers.

Industry is the foe of the red man. He is a warrior. He has royal blood
in his veins, and the vermin of the Montezumas dance the German over
his filthy carcass. That's the kind of a hair pin he is. He never works.
Nobody but Chinamen and plebians ever work.




HE WAS NOT A BURGLAR.

|THE young man who was seen climbing in a window on Center street
yesterday, was not a burglar as some might suppose, but on the contrary
he was a man whose wife had left the keys to the house lying on the
mantel, and locked them in by means of a spring lock on the front
door. He did not climb in the window because he preferred that way, but
because the door unlocked better from the inside.




BEST ON, BLESSED MEMORY.

|ONE of the attractions of life at the Cheyenne Indian agency, is the
reserved seat ticket to the regular slaughter-house matinee. The agency
butchers kill at the rate of ten bullocks per hour while at work, and so
great was the rush to the slaughter-pens for the internal economy of
the slaughtered animals, that Major Love found it necessary to erect a
box-office and gate, where none but those holding tickets could enter
and provide themselves with these delicacies.

This is not a sensation, it is the plain truth, and we desire to call
the attention of those who love and admire the Indian at a distance of
2,000 miles, and to the aesthetic love for the beautiful which prompts
the crooked-fanged and dusky bride of old Fly-up-the-Creek to rob the
soap-grease man and the glue factory, that she may make a Cheyenne
holiday. As a matter of fact, common decency will not permit us to enter
into a discussion of this matter. Firstly, it would not be fit for the
high order of readers who are now paying their money for _The Boomerang_;
and secondly, the Indian maiden at the present moment stands on a lofty
crag of the Rocky mountains, beautiful in her wild simplicity, wearing
the fringed garments of her tribe. To the sentimentalist she appears
outlined against the glorious sky of the new west, wearing a coronet of
eagle's feathers, and a health-corset trimmed with fantastic bead-work
and wonderful and impossible designs in savage art.

Shall we then rush in and with ruthless hand shatter this beautiful
picture? Shall we portray her as she appears on her return from the
great slaughter-house benefit and moral aggregation of digestive
mementoes? Shall we draw a picture of her clothed in a horse-blanket,
with a necklace of the false teeth of the pale face, and her coarse
unkempt hair hanging over her smoky features and clinging to her warty,
bony neck? No, no. Far be it from us to destroy the lovely vision of
copper-colored grace and smoke-tanned beauty, which the freckled student
of the effete east has erected in the rose-hued chambers of fancy. Let
her dwell there as the plump-limbed princess of a brave people. Let her
adorn the hat-rack of his imagination--proud, beautiful, grand, gloomy
and peculiar--while as a matter of fact she is at that moment
leaving the vestibule of the slaughter-house, conveying in the soiled
lap-robe--which is her sole adornment--the mangled lungs of a Texas
steer.

No man shall ever say that we have busted the beautiful Cigar Sign
Vision that he has erected in his memory. Let the graceful Indian queen
that has lived on in his heart ever since he studied history and saw the
graphic picture of the landing of Columbus, in which Columbus is just
unsheathing his bread knife, and the stage Indians are fleeing to the
tall brush; let her, we say, still live on. The ruthless hand that
writes nothing but everlasting truth, and the stub pencil that yanks
the cloak of the false and artificial from cold and perhaps unpalatable
fact, null spare this little imaginary Indian maiden with a back-comb
and gold garters. Let her withstand the onward march of centuries while
the true Indian maiden eats the fricasseed locust of the plains and
wears the cavalry pants of progress. We may be rough and thoughtless
many times, but we cannot come forward and ruthlessly shatter the red
goddess at whose shrine the far-away student of Black-hawk and other
fourth-reader warriors, worship.

As we said, we decline to pull the cloak from the true Indian maiden of
to-day and show her as she is. That cloak may be all she has on, and no
gentleman will be rude even to the daughter of Old Bob-Tail-Flush, the
Cheyenne brave.

A JUDICIAL WARBLER

|JACOB BEESON BLAIR, who has been recently renominated as associate
justice of the Supreme Court of Wyoming, and judge of the second
judicial district, with his headquarters at this place, is one of the
most able and consistent officials that Wyoming ever had. I might go
further and say that he stands at the head of them all. A year ago,
as an evidence of his popularity, I will say that he was unanimously
nominated to represent the Territory in Congress, which nomination he
gracefully declined. He has put his spare capital into mines, and
shown that he is a resident of Wyoming, and not of the classic halls of
Washington, or the sea-beat shores of "Maryland, my Maryland."

Two years ago I had the pleasure of making a trip to the mines on
Douglas creek, or, as it was then called, Last Chance, in company with
Judge Blair and Delegate Downey, owners of the Keystone gold mine in
that district. The party also included Governor Hoyt, Assayer Murphy,
Postmaster Hayford, and several other prominent men. Judge Brown and
Sheriff Boswell were also in the party at the mine. Judge Blair is,
by natural choice, a Methodist, and renewed our spiritual strength
throughout the trip in a way that was indeed pleasant and profitable.
The Judge sings in a soft, subdued kind of a way that makes the walls of
the firmament crack, and the heavens roll together like a scroll. When
he sings--=

```How tedious and tasteless the hours

````When Jesus no longer I see,=

the coyotes and jack-rabbits within a radius of seventy-five miles, hunt
their respective holes, and remain there till the danger has passed.

Looking at the Judge as he sits on the bench singeing the road agent for
ten years in solitary confinement, one would not think he could warble
so when he gets into the mountains. But he can. He is a regular prima
donna, so to speak.

When he starts to sing, the sound is like an Æolian harp, sighing
through the pine forests and dying away upon the silent air. Gradually
it swells into the wild melody of the hotel gong.

A FIRE AT A BALL.

|DOWN at Gunnison last week a large, select ball was given in a hall,
one end of which was partitioned off for sleeping rooms. A young man
who slept in one of these rooms, and who felt grieved because he had not
been invited, and had to roll around and suffer while the glad throng
tripped the light bombastic toe, at last discovered a knot-hole in
the partition through which he could watch the giddy multitude. While
peeping through the knot-hole, he discovered that one of the dancers,
who had an aperture in the heel of his shoe and another in his sock to
correspond, was standing by the wall with the ventilated foot near the
knot-hole. It was but the work of a moment to hold a candle against this
exposed heel until the thick epidermis had been heated red hot. Then
there was a wail that rent the battlements above and drowned the blasts
of the music. There was a wild scared cry of "fire": a frightened
throng rushing hither and thither, and then, where mirth and music and
rum had gladdened the eye and reddened the cheek a moment ago, all was
still save the low convulsive titter of a scantily clad man, as he lay
on the floor of his donjon tower and dug his nails in the floor.

A LITTLE PUFF.

|SOME time ago the Cheyenne _Sun_ noticed that Judge Crosby, known to
Colorado and Wyoming people quite well, was making strenuous efforts,
with some show of success, to obtain the appointment of Associate
Justice of the Supreme Court of Wyoming. Since that, I have noticed with
great sorrow that the President, in his youthful thoughtlessness and
juvenile independence, has appointed another man for the position.

I speak of this because so many Colorado and Wyoming people knew Mr.
Crosby and had an interest in him, as I might say. Some of us only knew
him fifty cents worth, while others knew him for various amounts up to
$5 and $10. He was an earnest, unflagging and industrious borrower. When
times were dull he used to borrow of me. Then I would throw up my hands
and let him go through me. It was not a hazardous act at all on my part.

The Judge knew everybody, and everybody knew him, and seemed nervous
when they saw him, for fear that the regular assessment was about to be
made. Every few days he wanted "to buy a pair of socks," but he never
bought them. Forty or fifty of us got together and compared notes the
other day. We ascertained that not less than $100 had been contributed
to the Crosby Sock Fund during his stay here, and yet the old man wore
the same socks to Washington that he had worn in the San Juan country.
A like amount was also contributed to the Wash Bill Fund, and still
he never had any washing done. We often wondered why so much money was
squandered on laundry expenses, and yet, that he should have the general
perspective and spicy fragrance of a Mormon emigrant train. He used to
come into my office and be sociable with me because he was a journalist.
It surprised me at first to meet a journalist who never changed his
shirt. I thought that journalists, as a rule, wore diamond studs and
had to be looked at through smoked glass.

He liked me. He told me so one day when we were alone, and after I had
promised to tell no one. Then he asked me for a quarter. I told him I
had nothing less than a fifty-cent piece. He said he would go and get it
changed. I said it would be a shame for an old man, and lame at that, to
go out and get it changed; so I said I would go. I went out and played
thirteen of my eternal revolving games of billiards, and about dusk
went back to the office whistling a merry roundelay, knowing that he had
starved out and gone away. I found him at my desk, where he had written
to every Senator and Representative in Congress, and every man who had
ever been a Senator or Representative in Congress; likewise every man,
woman and child who ever expected to be a Senator or a Representative
in Congress; also, to every superintendent and passenger agent of every
known line of railway, for a pass to every known point of the civilized
world, and this correspondence he had used my letter heads, and
envelopes and stamps, and he wasn't done either. He was just getting
animated and warming up to his work, and perspiring so that I had
to open the hall door and burn some old gum overshoes and other
disinfectants before I could breathe.

A large society is being formed here and in Cheyenne, called the "Crosby
Sufferer Aid Association." It is for the purpose of furnishing speedy
relief to the sufferers from the Crosby outbreak. We desire the
cooperation and assistance of Colorado philanthropists, and will, so
far as possible, furnish relief to Colorado sufferers from the great
scourge.

Later.--Henry Rothschild Crosby, Esq., passed through here a few
evenings since, on his way to Evanston, Wyoming, where he takes charge
of his office as receiver of public moneys for the western land office.

Henry seems to feel as though I had not stood by him through his
political struggle at Washington. At least I learn from other parties
that he does not seem to hunger and thirst after my genial society, and
thinks that what little influence I may have had, has not been used in
his interest.

That is where Henry hit the nail on the head, with that far-sighted
statesmanship and clear, unerring logic for which he is so remarkable.

I do not blame those who were instrumental in securing his appointment,
remember. Not at all. No doubt I would have done the same thing if I
had been in Washington all winter, and Henry had hovered around me
for breakfast, and for lunch, and for dinner, and for supper, and
for between meals, and for picnics, and had borrowed my money, and my
overcoat, and my meal ticket, and my bath ticket, and my pool checks,
and my socks, and my _robs de nuit_, and my tooth brush, and my gas and
writing materials and stationery; but it should be born in mind that I
am a resident of Wyoming. I have property here and it behooves me to do
and say what I can for the interests of our people. I may have to borrow
some things myself some day and I don't want to find, then, that they
have all been borrowed.

Let Hank stand back a little while and give the other boys a chance.

[Note.--In order to give the gentle reader an idea of Mr. Crosby's
personal appearance, I have consented to draw a picture of him myself.
It isn't very pretty, but it is horribly accurate. It is so life-like,
that it seems as though I could almost detect his maroon-colored
breath.--B. N]

[Illustration: 0122]




GENIUS AND WHISKY.

|I SEE in a recent issue of the _Sun_ a short article clipped from a
Sidney paper, relative to William Henry Harrison, which brings to my
mind fresh recollections of the long ago. I knew William too. I knew him
for a small amount which I wish I had now, to give to suffering Ireland.
He came upon me in the prime of summer time and said he was a newspaper
man. That always gets me. When a man says to me that he is a newspaper
man, and proves it by showing the usual discouraging state of resources
and liabilities, I always come forward with the collateral.

William wanted to go into the mountains and recover his exhausted
nerve-force, and build up his brain-power with our dry, bracing air. He
knew Mr. Foley, who was then working a claim in Last Chance, so he went
out there to tone up his exhausted energies. He went out there, and
after a few weeks a note came in from the man with the historical
cognomen, asking me to send him a gallon of best Old Crow. I went to
my guide book and encyclopoedia and ascertained that this was a kind of
drink. I then purchased the amount and sent it on.

Mr. Foley said that William stayed by the jug till it was dry, and
then he came into town. I met him on the street and asked him how his
intellect seemed after his picnic in the mountains. He said she was all
right now, and he felt just as though he could do the entire staff work
on the New York _Herald_ for two weeks and not sweat a hair. But he
didn't pay for the Old Crow. It slipped his mind. When time hung heavy
on my hands, I used to write William a note and cheerfully dun him for
the amount. I would also ask him how his intellect seemed by this time,
and also make other little jocular remarks. But he has never forwarded
the amount. If the bill had been for pantaloons, or grub, or other
luxuries, I might have excused him, but when I loan a man money for a
staple like whisky. I don't think it's asking too much to hope that in
the flight of time it would be paid back. However, I can't help it now.
It's about time that another bogus journalist should put in an
appearance. I have a few dollars ahead, and I am yearning to lay out the
sum on struggling genius.




THE TWO-HEADED GIRL

|THE cultivated two-headed girl has visited the west. It is very rare
that a town the size of Laramie experiences the rare treat of witnessing
anything so enjoyable. In addition to the mental feast which such a
thing affords, one goes away feeling better--feeling that life has more
in it to live for, and is not after all such a vale of tears as he had
at times believed it.

Through the trials and disappointments of this earthly pilgrimage,
the soul is at times cast down and discouraged. Man struggles against
ill-fortune and unlooked-for woes, year after year, until he becomes
misanthropical and soured, but when a two-headed girl comes along and
he sees her it cheers him up. She speaks to his better nature in two
different languages at one and the same time, and at one price.

When I went to the show I felt gloomy and apprehensive. The eighteenth
ballot had been taken and the bulletins seemed to have a tiresome
sameness. The future of the republic was not encouraging. I felt as
though, if I could get first cost for the blasted thing, I would sell
it.

I had also been breaking in a pair of new boots that day, and spectators
had been betting wildly on the boots, while I had no backers at three
o'clock in the afternoon, and had nearly decided to withdraw on the last
ballot. I went to the entertainment feeling as though I should criticise
it severely.

The two-headed girl is not beautiful. Neither one of her, in fact, is
handsome. There is quite a similarity between the two, probably because
they have been in each other's society a great deal and have adopted the
same ways.

She is an Ethiopian by descent and natural choice, being about the same
complexion as Frank Miller's oil blacking, price ten cents.

She was at one time a poor slave, but by her winning ways and genuine
integrity and genius, she has won her way to the hearts of the American
people. She has thoroughly demonstrated the fact that two heads are
better than one.

A good sized audience welcomed this popular favorite. When she came
forward to the footlights and made her two-ply bow she was greeted by
round after round of applause from the _elite_ of the city.

I felt pleased and gratified. The fact that a recent course of
scientific lectures here was attended by from fifteen to thirty people,
and the present brilliant success of the two-headed girl proved to me,
beyond a doubt, that we live in an age of thought and philosophical
progress.

Science may be all right in its place, but does it make the world
better? Does it make a permanent improvement on the minds and thoughts
of the listener? Do we go away from such a lecture feeling that we have
made a grand stride toward a glad emancipation from the mental thraldom
of ignorance and superstition? Do people want to be assailed, year after
year, with a nebular theory, and the Professor Huxley theory of natural
selections and things of that nature?

No! 1,000 times no!

They need to be led on quietly by an appeal to their better natures.
They need to witness a first-class bureau of monstrosities, such as men
with heads as big as a band wagon, women with two heads, Cardiff giants,
men with limbs bristling out all over them like the velvety bloom on a
prickly pear.

When I get a little leisure, and can attend to it,

I am going to organize a grand constellation of living wonders of this
kind, and make thirteen or fourteen hundred farewell tours with it, not
so much to make money, but to meet a long-felt, want of the American
people for something which will give a higher mental tone to the tastes
of those who never lag in their tireless march toward perfection.




THE CULTIVATION OF GUM.

|AN idea has occurred to us, that, situated as we are at a considerable
elevation, and being comparatively out of the line of tropical growth,
we should try to propagate plants that will withstand the severe winter
and the sudden and sometimes fatal surprise of spring. Plants in
this locality worry along very well through the winter in a kind of
semi-unconscious state, but when spring drops down on them about the
Fourth of July they are not prepared for it, and they yield to the
severe nervous shock and pass with a gentle gliding motion up the flume.

This has suggested to our mind the practicability of cultivating the
chewing-gum plant. We advance this thought with some timidity, knowing
that our enemies will use all these novel and untried ideas against us
in a presidential campaign; but the good of the country is what we are
after and we do not want to be misunderstood.

Chewing-gum is rapidly advancing in price, and the demand is far beyond
the supply. The call for gum is co-extensive with the onward move of
education. They may be said to go hand in hand. Wherever institutions
of learning are found, there you will see the tall, graceful form of the
chewing-gum tree rising toward heaven with its branches extending toward
all humanity.

Here, in Wyoming, we could easily propagate this plant. It is hardy and
don't seem to care whether winter lingers in the lap of spring or not.
We have the figures, also, to substantiate this article. We will figure
on the basis of twenty boxes of gum to the plant--and this is a very low
estimate, indeed--then the plants may easily be three feet apart. This
would be 3,097,600 plants to the acre, or 61,952,000 boxes, containing
100 chews in each box, or 6,195,200,000 chews to the acre. We have a
million acres that could be used in this way, which would yield in a
good year 6,195,200,000,000,000 chews at one cent each.

The reader will see at a glance that this is no wild romantic notion
on our part, but a terrible reality. Wyoming could easily supply the
present demand and wag the jaws of nations yet unborn. It makes us tired
to think of it.

Of course, anything like this will meet with strong opposition on the
part of those who have no faith in enterprises, but let a joint stock
company be formed with sufficient capital to purchase the tools and
gum seed, and we will be responsible for the result. Very likely
the ordinary spruce gum (made of lard and resin) would be best as an
experiment, after which the prize-package gum plant could be tried.

These experiments could be followed up with a trial of the gum drop, gum
overshoe, gum arabic and other varieties of gum. Doctor Hayford would be
a good man to take hold of this. Col. Donnellan says, however, that he
don't think it is practical. No use of enlarging on this subject--it
will never be tried. Probably the town is full of people who are
willing to chew the gum, but wouldn't raise a hand toward starting a
gum orchard. We are sick and tired of pointing out different avenues to
wealth only to be laughed at and ridiculed.




WE HAVE REASONED IT OUT.

|A HOME magazine comes to us this week, in which we find the following,
connected with a society article. After alluding to the young men of
the nineteenth century, and their peculiarities, it continues: "In
fact, many of the more fashionable strains are all black, except the
distinctive white feet and snout, so noticeable at this epoch in our
history."

This, it would seem, will make a radical change in the prevailing young
man. With white feet and white snout, the masher must also be black
aside from those features. This will add the charm of extreme novelty to
our social gatherings, and furnish sufficient excuse for a man like us,
with blonde rind and strawberry blonde feet, staying at home, with the
ban of society and a loose smoking jacket on him.

Farther on, this peculiar essay says: "He is noted for his wonderfully
fine blood, the bone is fine, the hair thin, the carcass long but broad,
straight and deep-sided, with smooth skin, susceptible to no mange or
other skin diseases."

We almost busted our capacity trying to figure out this startler in the
fashion line, and wore ourself down to a mere geometrical line in our
endeavor to fathom this thing when, yesterday, in reading an article
in the same paper entitled, "The Berkshire Hog," we discovered that the
sentences above referred to had evidently been omitted by the foreman,
and put in the society article. It is unnecessary to state that a
blessed calm has settled down in the heart of this end of _The Boomerang_.
Time, at last, makes all things size up in proper shape. Blessed be the
time which matures the human mind and the promissory note.




CARVING SCHOOLS.

|THEY are agitating the matter of instituting carving schools in the
east, so that the rising generation will be able to pass down through
the corridors of time without its lap full of dressing and its bosom
laden with gravy and remorse. The students at this school will wear
barbed-wire masks while practicing. These masks will be similar to those
worn by German students, who slice each other up while obtaining an
education.




DIGNITY.

|COLONEL INGERSOLL said, at Omaha the other day, that he hated a
dignified man and that he never knew one who had a particle of sense;
that such men never learned, and were constantly forgetting something.

Josh Billings says that gravity is no more the sign of mental strength
than a paper collar is the evidence of a shirt.

This leads us to say that the man who ranks as a dignified snoozer, and
banks on winning wealth and a deathless name through this one source of
strength, is in the most unenviable position of any one we know. Dignity
does not draw. It answers in place of intellectual tone for twenty
minutes, but after awhile it fails to get there. Dignity works all right
in a wooden Indian or a drum major, but the man who desires to draw a
salary through life and to be sure of a visible means of support, will
do well to make some other provision than a haughty look and the air
of patronage. Colonel Ingersoll may be wrong in the matter of future
punishment, but his head is pretty level on the dignity question.
Dignity works all right with a man who is worth a million dollars and
has some doubts about his suspenders; but the man who is to get a large
sum of money before he dies, and get married and accomplish some good,
must place himself before his fellow men in the attitude of one who has
ideas that are not too lonely and isolated.

Let us therefore aim higher than simply to appear cold and austere. Let
us study to aid in the advancement of humanity and the increase of baled
information. Let us struggle to advance and improve the world, even
though in doing so we may get into ungraceful positions and at times
look otherwise than pretty. Thus shall we get over the ground, and
though we may do it in the eccentric style of the camel, we will get
there, as we said before, and we will have camped and eaten our supper
while the graceful and dignified pedestrian lingers along the trail.

Works, not good clothes and dignity, are the grand hailing sign, and he
who halts and refuses to jump over an obstacle because he may not do
it so as to appear as graceful as a gazelle, will not arrive until the
festivities are over.

A SNORT OF AGONY.

|OUR attention has been called to a remark made by the New York
_Tribune_, which would intimate that the journal referred to didn't
like Acting-Postmaster F. Hatton, and characterizing the editor of The
Boomerang as a "journalistic pal" of General Hatton's. We certainly
regret that circumstances have made it necessary for us to rebuke the
_Tribune_ and speak, harshly to it. Frank Hatton may be a journalistic
pal of ours. Perhaps so. We would be glad to class him as a journalistic
pal of ours, even though he may not have married rich. We think just as
much of General Hatton as though he had married wealthy. We can't all
marry rich and travel over the country, and edit our papers vicariously.
That is something that can only happen to the blessed few.

It would be nice for us to go to Europe and have our _pro tem._ editor
at home working for $20 per week, and telegraphing us every few minutes
to know whether he should support Cornell or Folger. The pleasure of
being an editor is greatly enhanced by such privileges, and we often
feel that if we could get away from the hot, close office of The
Boomerang, and roam around over Scandahoovia and the Bosphorus, and
mould the policy of _The Boomerang_ by telegraph, and wear a cork helmet
and tight pants, we would be far happier. Still it may be that Whitelaw
Reid is no happier with his high priced wife and his own record of
crime, than we are in our simplicity here in the wild and rugged west,
as we write little epics for our one-horse paper, and borrow tobacco of
the foreman.

It is not all of life to live, nor all of death to die. We should live
for a purpose, Mr. Reid, not aimlessly like a blind Indian, 200 miles
from the reservation at Christmas-tide.

Now, Mr. Reid, if you will just tell Mr. Nicholson, when you get back
home, that in referring to us as a journalistic pal of Frank Hatton he
has exceeded his authority, we will feel grateful to you--and so will
Mr. Hatton. If you don't do it, we shall be called upon to stop the
_Tribune_, and subscribe for _Harper's Weekly_. This we should dislike
to do very much, because we have taken the _Tribune_ for years. We used
to take it when the editor stayed at home and wrote for it. Our
father used to take the _Tribune_, too. He is the editor of the Omaha
_Republican_, and needs a good New York paper, but he has quit taking
the _Tribune_. He said he must withdraw his patronage from a paper that
is edited by a tourist. All the Nyes will now stop taking the _Tribune_,
and all subscribe for some other dreary paper. We don't know just
whether it will be _Harper's Weekly_, or the _Shroud_.

Later.--Mr. Reid went through here on Tuesday, and told us that he
might have been wrong in referring to us as a journalistic pal of Frank
Hatton, and in fact did not know that the _Tribune_ had said so. He
simply told Nicholson to kind of generally go for the administration,
and turn over a great man every morning with his scathing pen, and
probably Nicholson had kind of run out of great men, and tackled the
North American Indian fighter of _The Boomerang_. Mr. Reid also said, as
he rubbed some camphor ice on his nose, and borrowed a dollar from his
wife to buy his supper here, that when he got back to New York, he was
going to write some pieces for the _Tribune_ himself. He was afraid he
couldn't trust Nicholson, and the paper had now got where it needed an
editor right by it all the time. He said also that he couldn't afford
to be wakened up forty times a night to write telegrams to New York,
telling the _Tribune_ who to indorse for governor. It was a nuisance, he
said, to stand at the center of a way station telegraph office, in his
sun-flower night shirt, and write telegrams to Nicholson, telling him
who to sass the next morning. Once, he said, he telegraphed him to
dismember a journalistic pal of Frank Hatton's, and the operator made a
mistake. So the next morning the _Tribune_ had a regular old ring-tail
peeler of an editorial, which planted one of Mr. Reid's special friends
in an early grave. So we may know from this that moulding the course of
a great paper by means of red messages, is fraught with some unpleasant
features.

[Illustration: 0137]




ALWAYS BOOM AT THE TOP.

|YOUNG man, do not stand lounging on the threshold of the glorious
future, while the coming years are big with possibilities, but take off
your coat and spit on your hands and win the wealth which the world will
yield you. You may not be able to write a beautiful poem, and die of
starvation; but you can go to work humbly as a porter and buy a whisk
broom, and wear people's clothes out with it, and in five years you can
go to Europe in your own special car. As the strawberry said to the box,
"there is always room at the top."




INACCURATE.

|ONCE more has Laramie been, slandered and traduced. Once more our free
and peculiar style has been spoken lightly of and our pride trailed in
the dust.

Last week the _Police Gazette_, an illustrated family journal of great
merit, appeared with a half page steel engraving, executed by one of the
old masters, representing two Laramie girls on horseback yanking a fly
drummer along the street at a gallop, because he tried to make a mash on
them and they did not yearn for his love.

There are two or three little errors in the illustration, to which we
desire to call the attention of the eastern reader of Michael Angelo
masterpieces that appear in the Police Gazette. First, the saloon or
hurdy-gurdy shown in the left foreground is not the exact representation
of any building in Laramie, and the dobe pig pens and A tents of which
the town seems to be composed, are not true to nature.

Again, the streets do not look like the streets of Laramie. They look
more like the public thoroughfares of Tie City or Jerusalem. Then the
girls do not look like Laramie girls, and we are acquainted with all the
girls in town, and consider ourself a judge of those matters. The girls
in this illustration look too much as though they had mingled a great
deal with the people of the world. They do not have that shy, frightened
and pure look that they ought to have. They appear to be that kind of
girls that one finds in the crowded metropolis under the gas light,
yearning to get acquainted with some one.

There are several features of the illustration which we detect as
erroneous, and among the rest we might mention, casually, that the
incident illustrated never occurred here at all. Aside from these little
irregularities above named, the picture is no doubt a correct one. We
realize fully that times get dull even in New York sometimes, and it is
necessary, occasionally, to draw on the imagination, but the _Gazette_
artist ought to pick up some hard town like Cheyenne, and let us alone
awhile.




THE WESTERN "CHAP."

|FEW know how voraciously we go for anything in the fashion line. Many
of our exchanges are fashion magazines, and nothing is read with such
avidity as these highly pictorial aggregations of literature. If
there are going to be any changes in the male wardrobe this winter, it
behooves us to know what they are. We intend to do so. It is our high
prerogative and glorious privilege to live in a land of information.
If we do not provide ourself with a few, it is our own fault. Man has
spanned the ocean with an electric cable, and runs his street cars
with another cable that puts people out of their misery as quick as
a giant-powder caramel in a man's chest-protector, under certain
circumstances. Science has done almost everything for us, except to
pay our debts without leaning toward repudiation. We are making rapid
strides in the line of progression. That is, the scientists are. Every
little while you can hear a scientist burst a basting thread off his
overalls, while making a stride.

It is equally true that we are marching rapidly along in the line of
fashion. Change, unceasing change, is the war cry, and he who undertakes
to go through the winter with the stage costumes of the previous winter,
will find, as Voltaire once said, that it is a cold day.

We look with great concern upon the rapid changes which a few weeks have
made. The full voluptuous swell and broad cincha of the chaparajo have
given place to the tight pantaletts with feathers on them, conveying
the idea that they cannot be removed until death, or an earthquake shall
occur..

"Chaps," as they are vulgarly called, deserve more than a passing
notice. They are made of leather with fronts of dog-skin with the hair
on. The inside breadths are of calf or sheep-skin, made plain,
but trimmed down the side seam with buckskin bugles and oil-tanned
bric-a-brac of the time of Michael Angelo Kelley. On the front are plain
pockets used for holding the ball programme and the "pop." The pop is a
little design in nickel and steel, which is often used as an inhaler.
It clears out the head, and leaves the nasal passages and phrenological
chart out on the sidewalk, where pure air is abundant. "Chaps" are
rather attractive while the wearer is on horseback, or walking toward
you, but when he chasses and "all waltz to places," you discern that
the seat of the garment has been postponed _sine die_. This, at first,
induces a pang in the breast of the beholder. Later, however, you become
accustomed to the barren and perhaps even stern demeanor of the wearer.
You gradually gain control of yourself and master your raging desire
to rush up and pin the garment together. The dance goes on. The _elite_
take an adult's dose of ice-cream and other refreshments; the leader of
the mad waltz glides down the hall with his mediæval "chaps," swishing
along as he sails; the violin gives a last shriek; the superior fiddle
rips the robe of night wide open, with a parting bzzzzt; the mad frolic
is over, and $5 have gone into the dim and unfrequented freight depot of
the frog-pond-environed past.




AN INCIDENT OF THE CAMPAIGN.

|COLONEL THOMAS JUNIUS DAYTON entered the democratic headquarters
on Second street, a few nights ago, having been largely engaged,
previously, in talking over the political situation, with sugar in it.
The first person he saw on entering, was an individual in the back part
of the room, writing.

Colonel Dayton ordered him out.

The man would not go, maintaining that he had a right to meet together
in democratic headquarters as often as he desired. The Colonel still
insisted that he was an outsider and could have nothing in common
with the patriotic band of bourbons whose stamping ground he had thus
entered.

Finally the excitement became so great that a man was called in to
umpire the game and sponge off the hostiles, but before blood was shed a
peacemaker asked Colonel Dayton what the matter was with him.

"This man is a Democrat. I've known him for years. What's the reason you
don't want him in here?"

"That's all right," said the Colonel, with his eyes starting from their
sockets with indignation, "you people can be easily fooled. I cannot. I
know him to be a spy in our camp. I have smelled his breath and find he
is not up in the Ohio degree. I have also discovered him to be able to
read and write. He cannot answer a single democratic test. He is a
bogus bourbon, and my sentiments are that he should be gently but firmly
fired. If the band will play something in D that is kind of tremulous, I
will take off my coat and throw the gentleman over into a vacant lot.
I think I know a Democrat when I see him. Perhaps you do not. He cannot
respond to a single grand hailing sign. He hasn't the cancelled internal
revenue stamp on his nose, and his breath lacks that spicy election odor
which we know so well. Away with him! Fling his palpitating remains over
the drawbridge and walk on him. Spread him out on the ramparts and jam
him into the culverin. Those are my sentiments. We want no electroplate
Democrats here. This is the stronghold of the highly aesthetic and
excessively _bon-ton_, Andrew Jackson peeler, and if justice cannot be
done to this usurper by the party, I shall have to go out and get an
infirm hoe handle and administer about $9 worth of rebuke myself."

He went out after the hoe handle, and while absent, the stranger said he
didn't want to be the cause of any ill feeling, or to stand in the way
of the prosperity of his party, so he would not remain. He put on his
hat and stole out into the night, a quiet martyr to the blind rage of
Colonel Dayton, and has not since been seen.




WHY DO THEY DO IT?

|BEN HILL, died, after suffering intolerable anguish from a tobacco
cancer, caused by excessive smoking. The consumers of the western-made
cigar are now and then getting a nice little dose of leprosy from the
Chinese constructed cigars of San Francisco, and yet people go right on
inviting the most horrible diseases known to science, by smoking, and
smoking to excess. Why do they do it? It is one of those deep, dark
mysteries that nothing but death can unravel. We cannot fathom it,
that's certain. (Give us a light, please.)




TWO STYLES.

|ONE of the peculiarities of correspondence is witnessed at this office
every day, to which we desire to call the attention of our growing girls
and boys, who ought to know that there is a long way and a short way of
saying things on paper; a right way and a wrong way to express thoughts
on a postal card, just as there is in conversation. We all admire the
business man who is terse and to the point, and we dislike the man
who hangs on to the door knob as though life was a never-ending summer
dream, and refuses to say good-bye. It's so with correspondence. In
touching upon the letters received at this office, we refer to a car
load received at this office during the past year, relating to sample
copies. Still they are a good specimen of the different styles of doing
the same thing.

For instance, here is a line which tells the story in brief, without
wearing out your eyes and days by ponderous phrases and useless
verbiage. "Useless verbiage and frothy surplusage" is a synonym which
we discovered in '75, while excavating for the purpose of laying the
foundations of our imposing residence up the gulch. Persons using the
same will please fork over ten per cent of the gross receipts:

_"Bangor, Maine, 11-10-82._

_"Find 10c for which send sample copy Boomerang to above address. Yours,
etc.,_

_"Thomas Billings."_

Some would have said "please" find inclosed ten cents. That is not
absolutely necessary. If you put ten cents in the letter that covers all
seeming lack of politeness and it's all right. If, however, you are out
of a job, and have nothing else to do but to write for sample copies
of papers, and wait for the department at Washington to allow you a
pension, you might say, "Please find inclosed," etc., otherwise the ten
cents will make it all right.

Here's another style, which evinces a peculiarity we do not admire. It
bespeaks the man who thinks that life and its associations are given us
in order to wear out the time, waiting patiently meanwhile for Gabriel
to render his little overture.

It occurs to us that life is real, life is earnest, and so forth. We
cannot sit here in the gathering gloom and read four pages of a letter,
which only expresses what ought to have been expressed in four lines.
We feel that we are here to do the greatest good to the greatest-number,
and we dislike the correspondent who hangs on to the literary door knob,
so to speak, and absorbs our time, which is worth $5.35 per hour.

Here we go--

"New Centreville, Wis., Nov. 8, 1882.

"Mr. William Nye, esq., Laramie City, Wyoming:

"Dear Sir:--I have often saw in our home papers little pieces cut out of
your paper The Larmy Boomerang, yet I have never saw the paper itself.
I hardly pick up a paper, from the Fireside. Friend to the Christian at
Work, that I do not see something or a nother from your faseshus pen and
credited to _The Boomerang_. I have asked our bookstore for a copy of the
paper, and he said go to grass, there wasn't no such perioddickle in
existence. He is a liar; but I did not tell him so because I am just
recovering from a case of that kind now, which swelled both eyes shet
and placed me under the doctor's care.

"It was the result of a campaign lie, and at this moment I do not
remember whether it was the other man or me which told it. Things got
confused and I am not clear on the matter now.

"I send ten cents in postage stamps, hoping you will favor me with
a speciment copy of _The Boomerang_ and I may suscribe. I send postage
stamps because they are more convenient to me, and I suppose that you
can use them all right as you must have a good deal of writing to do. I
intend to read the paper thorrow and give my folks the benefit also. I
love to read humerrus pieces to my children and my wife and hear their
gurgly laugh well up like a bobollink's. I now take an estern paper
which is gloomy in its tendencies, and I call it the Morg. It looks at
the dark side of life and costs $3 a year and postage.

"So send the speciment if you please and I will probbly suscribe for The
Boomerang, as I have saw a good many extrax from it in our papers here
and I have not as yet saw your paper."




GOSHALLHEMLOCK SALVE.

|THE bullwacking, mule-skinning proprieter of a life-giving salve wants
us to advertise for him, and to state that, with his Goshallhemlock
salve he "can cure all chronicle diseases whatever."

"We would do it if we could, sweet being; but owing to the fullness of
the paper and the foreman, we must turn you cruelly away.

"Yours truly,

"James Letson."




THE STAGE BALD-HEAD.

|MOST everyone, who was not born blind, knows that the stage bald-head
is a delusion and a snare. The only all-wool, yard-wide bald-head we
remember on the American stage, is that of Dunstan Kirke as worn by the
veteran Couldock.

Effie Ellsler wears her own hair and so does Couldock, but Couldock
wears his the most. It is the most worn anyhow.

What we started out to say, is, that the stage bald-head and the average
stage whiskers make us weary with life. The stage bald-head is generally
made of the internal economy of a cow, dried so that it shines, and
cut to fit the head as tightly as a potatoe sack would naturally fit a
billiard cue. It is generally about four shades whiter than the red
face of the wearer, or _vice versa_. We do not know which is the worst
violation of eternal fitness, the red-faced man who wears a deathly
white bald-head, or the pale young actor who wears a florid roof on his
intellect. Sometimes in starring through the country and playing ten
or fifteen hundred engagements, a bald-head gets soiled. We notice that
when a show gets to Laramie the chances are that the bald-head of the
leading old man is so soiled that he really needs a sheep-dip shampoo.
Another feature of this accessory of the stage is its singular failure
to fit. It is either a little short at both ends, or it hangs over the
skull in large festoons, and wens and warts, in such a way as to make
the audience believe that the wearer has dropsy of the brain.

You can never get a stage bald-head near enough like nature to fool the
average house-fly. A fly knows in two moments whether it is the genuine,
or only a base imitation, and the bald-head of the theatre fills him
with nausea and disgust. Nature, at all times hard to imitate, preserves
her bald head as she does her sunny skies and deep blue seas, far beyond
the reach of the weak, fallible, human imitator. Baldness is like fame,
it cannot be purchased. It must be acquired. Some men may be born bald,
some may acquire baldness, and others may have baldness thrust upon
them, but they generally acquire it.

"The stage beard is also rather dizzy, as a rule. It looks as much like
a beard that grew there, as a cow's tail would if tied to the bronze dog
on the front porch. When you tie a heavy black beard on a young actor,
whose whole soul would be churned up if he smoked a full-fledged cigar,
he looks about as savage as a bowl of mush and milk struck with a club."




FATHERLY WORDS.

|N. W. P., writes:--"I am a young man twenty-five years old. I am in
love with a young lady of seventeen. Her mind being very different
from mine, I have not told her of my love, nor asked to call on her. I
thought her so giddy that she did not want any steady company. She is
a great lover of amusement. She is a perfect lady in her deportment,
although she is more like a child of fourteen than a young lady of
seventeen. I think she is very pretty, but she seems to enjoy flirting
to the greatest extent. One evening at a party I asked her to promenade
with me, and she would not do it. I then asked her to allow me to bring
her refreshments, which she would not do. I then asked her to let me
take her home when she was ready to go, and the answer was, 'No, I will
not do any such thing,' and turning round she left me. I have met her
several times since. She always bows to me. Everywhere she meets me
she recognizes me pleasantly. How, did I do wrong in asking her those
privileges at the party, I having no introduction to her? I am still in
love with her."

After she had refused to promenade with you, and had declined to permit
you to bring her refreshments, it was pressing matters rather too far
for you to ask her to allow you to accompany her home "whenever she was
ready to go." Still, as she treats you kindly whenever you meet, it is
evident that you did not offend her very deeply. Perhaps she sees that
you love her, and does not wish to discourage you.

You were, no doubt, a little previous in trying to get acquainted with
the young lady. She may be giddy, but she has just about sized you up
in shape, and no doubt, if you keep on trying to love her without her
knowledge or consent, she will hit you with something, and put a Swiss
sunset over your eye. Do not yearn to win her affections all at once.
Give her twenty or thirty years in which to see your merits. You will
have more to entitle you to her respect by that time, no doubt. During
that time you may rise to be president and win a deathless name.

The main thing you have to look out for now, however, is to restrain
yourself from marrying people who do not want to marry you. That style
of freshness will, in thirty or forty years, wear away. If it does not,
probably the vigorous big brother of some young lady of seventeen, will
consign you to the silent tomb. Do not try to promenade with a young
lady unless she gives her consent. Do not marry anyone against her
wishes. Give the girl a chance. She will appreciate it, and even though
she may not marry you, she will permit you to sit on the fence and
watch her when she goes to marry some one else. Do not be despondent.
Be courageous, and some day, perhaps, you will get there. At present the
horizon is a little bit foggy.

As you say, she may be so giddy that she doesn't want steady company.
There is a glimmer of hope in that. She may be waiting till she gets
over the agony and annoyance of teething before she looks seriously into
the matters of matrimony. If that should turn out to be the case we are
not surprised. Give her a chance to grow up, and in the meantime, go and
learn the organ grinder's profession and fix yourself so that you can
provide for a family. Sometimes a girl only seventeen years old is able
to discern that a young intellectual giant like you is not going to make
a dazzling success of life as a husband. Brace up and try to forget your
sorrow, N. W. P., and you may be happy yet.




THE GOOD TIME COMING.

|ANGORA cloth is a Parisian novelty. Shaggy woolen goods are all the
rage, and this Angora cloth is a perfect type of shaggy materials. It is
a soft, downy article, like the fur of an Angora cat. Very showy
toilets are of Angora cloth, trimmed with velvet applique work to form
passementerie.

Angora cloth may be fashionable, but the odor of the Angora goat is
losing favor. A herd of these goats crossed the Sierra Nevadas during
the autumn, and as soon as they got over the range, we knew it at
Laramie just as well as we knew of the earthquake shock on the 7th
instant.

The Angora goat is very quiet in other respects; but as a fragrant
shrub, he certainly demands attention. A little band of Angora goats has
been quartered in Laramie City lately, and though they have been well
behaved, they have made them have opened the casement to let in the
glorious air of heaven. In letting in the glorious air of heaven, we
have in several instances let in a good deal of the mohair industry and
some seductive fragrance.

There is a glowing prospect that within the next year a bone fertilizer
mill, a soap emporium and a glue factory will have been started here;
and now, with the Angora goat looming up in the distance with his
molasses-candy horns, his erect, but tremulous and undecided tail
piercing the atmosphere, and the seductive odor peculiar to this fowl,
we feel that life in Wyoming will not, after all, be a hollow mockery.
Heretofore we have been compelled to worry along with polygamy and the
odor of the alkali flat; but times are changing now, and we will one day
have all the wonderful and complicated smells of Chicago at our door.
Then will the desert indeed blossom as the rose, and the mountain lion
and "Billy the Kid" will lie down together.




MANIA FOR MARKING CLOTHES.

|THE most quiet, unobtrusive man I ever knew," said Buck Bramel to a
Boomekang man, "was a young fellow who went into North Park in an early
day from the Salmon river. He was also reserved and taciturn among the
miners, and never made any suggestions if he could avoid it. He was also
the most thoughtful man about other people's comfort I ever knew.

"I went into the cabin one day where he was lying on the bed, and told
him I had decided to go into Laramie for a couple of weeks to do some
trading. I put my valise down on the floor and was going out, when he
asked me if my clothes were marked. I told him that I never marked my
clothes. If the washerwoman wanted to mix up my wardrobe with that of a
female seminary, I would have to stand it, I supposed.

"He thought I ought to mark my clothes before I went away, and said he
would attend to it for me. So he took down his revolver and put three
shots through the valise.

[Illustration: 0161]

"After that a coolness sprang up between us, and the warm friendship
that had existed so long was more or less busted. After that he marked
a man's clothes over in Leadville in the same way, only the man had them
on at the time. He seemed to have a mania on that subject, and as they
had no insanity experts at Leadville in those days, they thought the
most economical way to examine his brain would be to hang him, and then
send the brain to New York in a baking powder can.

"So they hung him one night to the bough of a sighing mountain pine.

"The autopsy was, of course, crude; but they sawed open his head and
scooped out the brain with a long handled spoon and sent it on to
New York. By some mistake or other it got mixed up with some sample
specimens of ore from 'The Brindle Tom Cat' discovery, and was sent to
the assayer in New York instead of the insanity smelter and refiner, as
was intended.

"The result was that the assayer wrote a very touching and grieved
letter to the boys, saying that he was an old man anyway, and he wished
they would consider his gray hairs and not try to palm off their old
groceries on him. He might have made errors in his assays, perhaps--all
men were more or less liable to mistakes--but he flattered himself that
he could still distinguish between a piece of blossom rock and a can
of decomposed lobster salad, even if it was in a baking-powder can. He
hoped they would not try to be facetious at his expense any more, but
use him as they would like to be treated themselves when they got old
and began to totter down toward the silent tomb.

"This is why we never knew to a dead moral certainty, whether he was O.
K. in the upper story, or not."




REGARDING THE NOSE.

|THE annals of surgery contain many cases where the nose has been cut
or torn off, and being replaced has grown fast again, recovering its
jeopardized functions. One of the earliest, 1680, is related by the
surgeon (Fioraventi) who happened to be near by when a man's nose,
having been cut off, had fallen in the sand. He remarks that he took it
up, washed it, replaced it, and that it grew together.

Still, this is a little bit hazardous, and in warm weather the nose
might refuse to catch on. It would be mortifying in the extreme to have
the nose drop off in a dish of ice-cream at a large banquet. Not only
would it be disagreeable to the owner of the nose, but to those who sat
near him.

He adds the address of the owner of the repaired nose, and requests
any doubter to go and examine for himself. Régnault, in the _Gazette
Salutaire_, 1714, tells of a patient whose nose was bitten off by a
smuggler. The owner of the nose wrapped it in a bit of cloth and sought
Régnault, who, "although the part was cold, reset it, and it became
attached."

This is another instance where, by being sufficiently previous, the
nose was secured and handed down to future generations. Yet, as we said
before, it is a little bit risky, and a nose of that character cannot
be relied upon at all times. After a nose has once seceded it cannot be
expected to still adhere to the old constitution with such loyalty as
prior to that change.

Although these cases call for more credulity than most of us have to
spare, yet later cases, published in trustworthy journals, would seem
to corroborate this. In the _Clinical Annals_ and _Medical Gazette_, of
Heidelberg, 1830, there are sixteen similar cases cited by the surgeon
(Dr. Hofacker) who was appointed by the senate to attend the duels of
the students.

It seems that during these duels it is not uncommon for a student to
slice off the nose of his adversary, and lay it on the table until the
duel is over. After that the surgeon puts it on with mucilage and it
never misses a meal, but keeps right on growing.

The wax nose is attractive, but in a warm room it is apt to get excited
and wander down into the mustache, or it may stray away under the
collar, and when the proprietor goes to wipe this feature he does not
wipe anything but space. A gold nose that opens on one side and is
engraved, with hunter case and key wind, is attractive, especially on
a bright day. The coin-silver nose is very well in its way, but rather
commonplace unless designed to match the tea service and the knives and
forks. In that case, good taste is repaid by admiration and pleasure on
the part of the guest.

The _papier-maché_ nose is durable and less liable to become cold and
disagreeable. It is also lighter and not liable to season crack.

False noses are made of _papier-maché_, leather, gold, silver and wax.
These last are fitted to spectacles or springs, and are difficult to
distinguish from a true nose.

Tycho Brahe lost his nose in a duel and wore a golden one, which he
attached to his face with cement, which he always carried about.

This was a good scheme, as it found him always prepared for accidents.
He could, at any moment, repair to a dressing room, or even slide into
an alley where he could avoid the prying gaze of the vulgar world, and
glue his nose on. Of course he ran the risk of getting it on crooked and
a little out of line with his other features, but this would naturally
only attract attention and fix the minds of those with whom he might
be called upon to converse. A man with his nose glued on wrong side up,
could hold the attention of an audience for hours, when any other man
would seem tedious and uninteresting.




SOMETHING TOO MUCH OF THIS.

|THE Pawnee Republican, of the 13th, innocently and impertinently,
remarks: "Fred Nye, father of Bill Aye, the humorist, is the editor
of the Omaha _Republican, vice_Datus Brooks, gone to Europe."--_Omaha
Herald._

Will the press of the country please provide us with a few more parents?
Old Jim Nye and several other valuable fathers of ours having already
clomb the golden elevator, we now feel like a comparative orphan. The
time was when we could hold a reunion of our parents and have a pretty
big time, but it's a mighty lonely thing to stand on the shores of time
and see your parents whittled down to three or four young men no bigger
than Fred Aye, of the _Republican_.




COLOR BLINDNESS.

|THE _Paper World_ says there's no use talking, the newspaper men of the
press are to-day becoming more and more "color blind." In other words,
they have lost that subtle flavor of description for which the public
yearns. They have missed that wonderful spice and aroma of narration
which is the life of all newspaper work.

We do not take this to ourself at all, but we desire before we say one
word, to make a few remarks. _The Boomerang_ has been charged with erring
on the other side and coloring things a little too high. Sir Garnet
Wolseley, in a private letter to us during the late Egyptian assault
and battery, stated that if we erred at all it was on the highly colored
side.

There is an excuse for lack of spice and all that sort of thing in the
newspaper world. The men who write for our dailies, as a rule, have to
write about two miles per day, and they ought not to be kicked if it is
not as interesting as "Uncle Tom's Cabin," or "Leaves o' Grass."

We have done some 900 miles of writing ourself during our short, sharp
and decisive career, and we know what we are talking about. Those things
we wrote at a time when we were spreading our graceful characters over
ten acres of paper per day, were not thrilling. They did not catch the
public eye, but were just naturally consigned to oblivion's bottomless
maw.

Read that last sentence twice; it will do you no harm.

The public, it seems to us, has created a false standard of merit for
the newspaper. People take a big daily and pay $10 per year for it
because it is the biggest paper in the world, and then don't read a
quarter of it. They are doing a smart thing, no doubt, but it is killing
the feverish young men with throbbing brains, who are doing the work.
Would you consider that a large pair of shoes or a large wife should be
sought for just because you can get more material for the same price?
Not much, Mary Ann!

Excellence is what we seek, not bulk. Write better things and less of
them, and you will do better, and the public will be pleased to see the
change.

Should anyone who reads these words be suffering from an insatiable
hunger for a paper that aims at elegance of diction, high-toned logic
and pink cambric sentiment, at a moderate price, he will do well to
call at this office and look over our goods. Samples sent free on
application, to any part of the United States or Europe. We refer to
Herbert Spencer, the Laramie National Bank, and the postmaster of this
city, as to our reputation for truth and veracity.

A LITTLE PREVIOUS.

|SPEAKING of elections and returns, brings back to our memory the
time when it was pretty close in a certain congressional district in
Wisconsin, where W. T. Price is now putting up a job on the Democrats.

In those days returns didn't come in by telegraph, but on horseback and
on foot, and it was annoying to wait for figures by which to determine
the result. At Hudson the politicians had made a pretty close estimate,
but were waiting, one evening after election, at a saloon on Buckeye
street, for something definite from Eau Claire county. The session was
very dull, and to cheer up the little Spartan hand some one suggested
that old Judge Wetherby ought to "set 'em up." Judge Wetherby was a
staunch old Democrat and had rigidly treated himself for twenty years,
and just as rigidly refused to treat anybody else. The result was that
he had secured a vigorous bloom on his own nose, but had never put the
glass to his neighbor's lips. He intimated on this occasion, however,
that if he could get encouraging news from Eau Claire for the Democrats,
he would turn loose. The party waited until midnight, and had just
decided to go home, when a travel-worn horseman rode up to the door. He
was very reticent, and as he was a stranger, no one seemed to want
to open up a conversation with him, till at last Judge Wetherby, who
couldn't keep the great question of politics out of his mind, asked him
what part of the country he had come from. "Just got in from Eau Claire
county," was the reply.

"How did Eau Claire county go?" was the Judge's next question. "O,
I don't pay no attention to politics, but they told me it went 453
majority for the Democrats."

Thereupon the judge threw his hat in the air and for the first and last
time in his life, treated the entire crowd of Republicans and Democrats
alike. It was very late when he went home, also very late when he got
down town the next day.

When he did come down he was surprised to find a Republican brass band
out, and the news all over the city that the Republican candidate had
been elected by several hundred majority. In the afternoon he learned
that Hod Taylor, now clergyman to Marseilles, had hired a tramp to ride
into the Buckeye saloon the previous evening and report as stated, in
order to bring about a good state of feeling on the Judge's part. Judge
Wetherby, since that time, is regarded as the most skeptical Democrat in
that congressional district, and even if he were to be assured over and
over again that his party was victorious, he would still doubt. It is
such things as these that go a long way toward encouraging a feeling of
distrust between the parties, and causes politicians to be looked upon
with great mistrust..

Although Mr. Taylor is now in France attending to the affairs of his
government, and trying to become familiar with the French language, he
often pauses in his work as the memory of this little incident comes
over his mind, and a hot tear falls on the report he is making out to
send on to the Secretary of State at Washington. Can it be that his hard
heart is at last touched with remorse?




IS DUELING MURDER?

|SOMEBODY wants to know whether dueling is murder, and we reply in
clarion tones that it depends largely on how fatal it is. Dueling with
monogram note paper, at a distance of 1,200 yards, is not murder.




HEAP GONE.

|ANOTHER land-mark of Laramie has gone. Another wreck has been strewn
upon the sands of time. Another gay bark has gone to pieces upon the
cruel rocks, and above the broken spars and jib-boom, and foretop
gallant royal mainbrace, and spanker-boom euchre deck, the cold, damp
tide is moaning.

We refer to L. W. Shroeder, who recently left this place incog., also in
debt, largely, to various people of this gay and festive metropolis.

Laramie has been the home, at various times, of some of the most
classical dead-beats of modern times; but Shroeder was the noblest, the
most grand and colossal of dead-beats that has ever visited our shores.
Born with unusual abilities in this direction, he early learned how to
enlarge and improve upon the talents thus bestowed upon him, and here
in Laramie, he soon won a place at the front as a man who purchased
everything and paid for nothing. He had a way of approaching the grocer
and the merchant that was well calculated to deceive, and he did, in
several instances, make representations, which we now learn, were false.

He was, by profession, a carpenter and joiner, having learned the art
while cutting cordwood on the Missouri bottoms, near Omaha, for the
Collins Brothers. Here he rapidly won his way to the front rank, by
erecting some of the most commanding architectural ruins of which modern
wood assassination can boast. He would take a hatchet and a buck-saw and
carve out his fortune anywhere in the world, and it wouldn't cost him a
cent. He filled this whole trans-Missouri country with his fame, and his
promissory notes, and then skinned out and left us here to mourn.

Good-bye, Shroeder. Wherever you go, we will remember you and hope that
you may succeed in piling up a monument of indebtedness as you did here.
You were industrious and untiring in your efforts to become a great
financial wreck, and success has crowned your efforts. We will not
grudge you the glory that coagulates about your massive brow.




THE EDITORIAL LAMP.

|THERE is something unique about an editor's lamp that, enables most
anyone to select it from a large number of other lamps. It is _sui
generis_ and extremely original. The large metropolitan papers use gas
in the editorial rooms, and make up for the loss of the kerosene lamp
by furnishing their offices with some other article of furniture that is
equally attractive.

_The Boomerang_ lamp, especially during the election, has had its
intensity wonderfully softened and toned down through various causes.
You can take most any other lamp and trim the wick so that it will
burn squarely and not smoke; but the editorial lamp is peculiar in this
respect. The wick gets so it will burn straight when you find that it
does not burn the oil. Then you get it filled and put in a new wick.
Experimenting with this you get your fingers perfumed with coal oil, and
spill some in your lap. Then you turn it up so you can see, and as you
get a flow of thought you look up to find that you have smutted up your
chimney, and you murmur something that you are glad no one is near to
hear. When our life-record is made up and handed down to posterity, if
a generous people will kindly overlook the remarks we have made over our
lamp, and also the little extemporaneous statements made at picnics,
we will do as much for the public and make this thing as near even as
possible.




DIFFICULT TO IDENTIFY.

|A DEAD fisherman was taken to the San Francisco morgue the other day,
with nothing by which to identify him but his fish fine. There may be
features of difference between fish lines, but as a rule there is a
long, tame sweep of monotony about them which confuses the authorities
in tracing a man's antecedents.




THE MAROON SAUSAGE.

|THE maroon sausage will be in favor this winter, as was the case last
season in our best circles. It will be caught up at the end and tied in
a plain knot with strings of the same.




TESTIMONIALS OF REGARD.

|FRIDAY was a large day in the office of this paper. A delegation,
consisting of Ed. Walsh and J. J. Clarke, train dispatchers of this
division of the Union Pacific road, waited on the editor hereof with
two tokens of their esteem. One, consisting of a bird that had been
taxidermed at Wyoming station by the agent, Mr. Gulliher, the great
corn-canner of the west, aided by another man who has, up to this date,
evaded the authorities. As soon as he is captured, his name will be
given to the public. The bird is mainly constructed on the duck plan,
with web feet and spike tail. The material gave out, however, and the
artist was obliged to complete the bird by putting an eagle's head on
him. This gives the winged king of birds a low, squatty and plebian cast
of countenance, and bothers the naturalist in determining its class and
in diagnosing the case. With the piercing, keen eye of the eagle, and
the huge Roman nose peculiar to that bird, coupled with the pose of the
duck, we have a magnificent combination in the way of an ornithological
specimen. Science would be tickled to death to wrestle with this
feathered anomaly.

The eagle looks as though he would like to soar first-rate if it were
not for circumstances over which he has no control, while the other
portions of his person would suggest that he would be glad to paddle
around an hour or two in the yielding-mud. We have placed this singular
circumstance where he can look down upon us in a reproachful way, while
we write abstruse articles upon the contiguity of the hence.

The same committee also presented a bottle of what purported to be
ginger ale. It was wrapped up in a newspaper, and the cork was held in
place by a piece of copper wire. As we do not drink anything whatever
now, we presented it to the composing room, and told the boys to sail in
and have a grand debauch.

Generosity is always rewarded, sooner or later. The office boy took it
into the composing room and partially opened it. Then it opened itself,
with a loud report that shook the dome of _The Boomerang_ office, and pied
a long article on yellow fever in Texas. Almost immediately after it
opened itself, it escaped into space. At least it filled the space box
of one of the cases full.

There was only about a spoonful left in the bottle, and no one felt
as though he wanted to rob the rest, so it stands there yet. If Mr.
Gulliher could put up his goods in such shape as to avoid this high
degree of effervescence, he would succeed; but in canning corn and
bottling beer, he has so far put too much vigor into the goods, and when
you open them, they escape almost immediately.

While we are grateful for the kind and thoughtful spirit shown, we
regret that we were unable to test the merits of the beverage without
collecting it from the sky, where it now is.

It looks to us as though some day Mr. Gulliher, while engaged in canning
and bottling some of his gaseous goods, would be lifted over into the
middle of the holidays, and we warn him against being too reckless, or
he will certainly meander through the atmosphere sometime, and the place
that knew him once will know him no more forever.

About two o'clock the following special was received:

[Special to the Boomerang.]

"[D. H. acct. charity.]

"Wyoming, October 27.

"Dear Bill Nye:

"We made the run from Laramie to Wyoming in one hour. Gulliher says, do
not open that bottle; it might go off. He sent you the wrong bottle
by mistake. It is a preparation for annihilating tramps, and produces
instant dissolution. We, after careful inquiry and rigid investigation,
find that the bird is filled with dynamite, nitroglycerine, etc.--in
fact is an 'infernal machine,' and is set to go off at 3:30 this P.M."




THE CHINESE COMPOSITOR

|THE Chinese compositor cannot sit at his case as our printers do, but
must walk from one case to another constantly, as the characters needed
cover such a large number, that they cannot be put into anything
like the space used in the English newspaper office. In setting up an
ordinary piece of manuscript, the Chinese printer will waltz up and down
the room for a few moments, and then go down stairs for a line of lower
case. Then he takes the elevator and goes up into the third story
after some caps, and then goes out into the woodshed for a handful of
astonishers.

The successful Chinese compositor doesn't need to be so very
intelligent, but he must be a good pedestrian. He may work and walk
around over the building all day to set up a stick full, and then half
the people in this county couldn't read it, after all.

"Clarke, Potter and Walsh."




SNOWED UNDER

|WE have met the enemy, and we are his'n.

We have made our remarks, and we are now ready to listen to the
gentleman from New York. We could have dug out, perhaps, and explained
about New York, but when almost every state in the Union rose up and
made certain statements yesterday, we found that the job of explaining
this matter thoroughly, would be wearisome and require a great deal of
time.

We do not blame the Democracy for this. We are a little surprised,
however, and grieved. It will interfere with our wardrobe this winter.
With an overcoat on Wyoming, a plug hat on Iowa, a pair of pantaloons on
Pennsylvania, and boots on the general result, it looks now as though
we would probably go through the winter wrapped in a bed-quilt, and
profound meditation.

We intended to publish an extra this morning, but the news was of such
a character, that we thought we would get along without it. What was
the use of publishing an extra with a Republican majority only in Red
Buttes.

The cause of this great Democratic freshet in New York yesterday--but
why go into details, we all have an idea why it was so. The number of
votes would seem to indicate that there was a tendency toward Democracy
throughout the State.

Now, in Pennsylvania, if you will look over the returns carefully--but
why should we take up your valuable time offering an explanation of a
political matter of the past.

Under the circumstances some would go and yield to the soothing
influences of the maddening bowl, but we do not advise that. It would
only furnish temporary relief, and the recoil would be unpleasant.

We resume our arduous duties with a feeling of extreme _ennui_, and with
that sense of surprise and astonishment that a man does who has had a
large brick block fall on him when he was not expecting it. Although
we feel a little lonely to-day--having met but a few Republicans on the
street, who were obliged to come out and do their marketing--we still
hope for the future.

The grand old Republican party--

But that's what we said last week. It sounds hollow now and meaningless,
somehow, because our voice is a little hoarse, and we are snowed under
so deep that it is difficult for us to enunciate.

Now about those bets. If the parties to whom we owe bets--and we owe
most everybody--will just agree to take the stakes, and not go into
details; not stop to ask us about the state of our mind, and talk
about how it was done, we don't care. We don't wish to have this thing
explained at all. We are not of an inquiring turn of mind. Just plain
facts are good enough for us, without any harrowing details. In the
meantime we are going to work to earn some more money to bet on the next
election. Judge Folger, and others, come over and see us when you have
time, and we will talk this matter over. Mr. B. Butler, we wish we had
your longevity. With a robust constitution, we find that most any man
can wear out cruel fate and get there at last. We do not feel so angry
as we do grieved and surprised. We are pained to see the American people
thus betray our confidence, and throw a large wardrobe into the hands of
the relentless foe.




ROUGH ON OSCAR.

|SOMEBODY shook a log-cabin bed-quilt at Oscar Wilde, when he was in
this country, and it knocked him so crazy for two days, that a man had
to lead him around town by a bed-cord to prevent him from butting his
head against a lump of oat-meal mush, and scattering his brains all over
the Union.




THE POSTAL CARD.

|NO one denies that the postal card is a great thing, and yet it makes
most people mad to get one This is because we naturally feel sensitive
about having our correspondence open to the eye of the postmaster and
postal clerk. Yet they do not read them. Postal employés hate a postal
card as cordially as anyone else. If they were banished and had nothing
to read but a package of postal cards, or a foreign book of statistics,
they would read the statistics. This wild hunger for postal cards on the
part of postmasters is all a myth. When the writer don't care who sees
his message, that knocks the curiosity out of those who handle those
messages. A man who would read a postal card without being compelled to
by some stringent statute, must be a little deranged. When you receive
one, you say, "Here's a message of so little importance that the writer
didn't care who saw it. I don't care much for it, myself." Then
you look it over and lay it away and forget it. Do you think that the
postmaster is going to wear out his young life in devouring literature
that the sendee don't feel proud of when he receives it? Hay, nay.

During our official experience we have been placed where we could have
read postal cards time and again, and no one but the All-seeing Eye
would have detected it; but we have controlled ourself and closed
our eyes to the written message, refusing to take advantage of the
confidence reposed in us by our government, and those who thus trusted
us with their secrets. All over our great land every moment of the day
or night these little cards are being silently scattered, breathing
loving words inscribed with a hard lead pencil, and shedding information
upon sundered hearts, and they are as safe as though they had never been
breathed.

They are safer, in most instances, because they cannot be read by
anybody in the whole world.

That is why it irritates us to have some one open up a conversation by
saying, "You remember what that fellow wrote me from Cheyenne on that
postal card of the 25th, and how he rounded me up for not sending
him those goods?" Now we can't keep all those things in our head. It
requires too much of a strain to do it on the salary we receive. A man
with a very large salary and a tenacious memory might keep run of the
postal correspondence in a small office, but we cannot do it. We are not
accustomed to it, and it rattles and excites us.

A CARD.

|I HAVE just received a letter from my friend, Bill Nye, of The
Laramie City Boomerang, wherein he informs me that he is engaged to the
beautiful and accomplished Lydia E. Pinkham, of "Vegetable Compounds"
fame, and that the wedding will take place on next Christmas. To be
sure, I am expected at the wedding, and I'll be on hand, if I can
secure a clean shirt by that time, and the roads ain't too bad. But I'm
somewhat at a loss what to get as a suitable present, as Bill informs
me in a postscript to his letter, that gifts of bibles, albums,
nickel-plated pickle dishes, chromos with frames, and the like, will not
be in order, as it is utterly impossible to pawn articles of this kind
in Laramie City.--_The Bohemian_.

We are sorry that the above letter, which we dashed off in a careless
moment, has been placed before the public, as later developments have
entirely changed the aspect of the matter; the engagement between
ourself and Lydia having been rudely broken by the young lady herself.
She has returned the solitaire filled ring, and henceforth we can be
nothing more to each other than friends. The promise which bade fair to
yield so much joy in the future has been ruthlessly yanked asunder, and
two young hearts must bleed through the coming years. Far be it from us
to say aught that would reflect upon the record of Miss Pinkham.

It would only imperil her chances in the future, and deny her the sweet
satisfaction of gathering in another guileless sucker like us. The
truth, however, cannot be evaded, that Lydia is no longer young. She is
now in the sere and yellow leaf. The gurgle of girlhood, and the romping
careless grace of her childhood, are matters of ancient history alone.

We might go on and tell how one thing brought on another, till the
quarrel occurred, and hot words and an assault and battery led to this
estrangement, but we will not do it. It would be wrong for a great,
strong man to take advantage of his strength and the public press,
to speak disparagingly of a young thing like Lyd. No matter how
unreasonably she may have treated us, we are dumb and silent on this
point. Journalists who have been invited, and have purchased costly
wedding presents, may ship the presents _by_ express, prepaid, and we
will accept them, and struggle along with our first great heart trouble,
while Lydia goes on in her mad career.




WHY WE ARE NOT GAY.

|IT was the policy of this paper, from its inception, whatever that is,
to frown upon and discourage fraud wherever the latter has shown its
hideous front. In doing so, we have simply done our duty, and our reward
has been great, partially in the shape of money, and partially in the
shape of conscious rectitude and new subscribers.

We shall continue this course until we are able to take a trip to
Europe, or until some large man comes into the office with a masked
battery and blows us out through the window into the mellow haze of an
eternal summer time.

We have been waiting until the present time for about 100,000 shade
trees in this town to grow, and as they seem to be a little reluctant
about doing so, and the season being now far advanced, we feel safe in
saying that they are dead. They were purchased a year ago of a nursery
that purported to be O. K., and up to that time no one had ever breathed
a word against it. Now, however, unless those trees are replaced, we
shall be compelled to publish the name of that nursery in large, glaring
type, to the world. The trees looked a little under the weather when
they arrived, but we thought we could bring them out by nursing them.
They stood up in the spring breeze like a seed wart, however, and
refused to leave. They are still obstinate. The agent concluded to
leave, but the trees did not. We feel hurt about it, because people
come here from a distance and laugh at our hoe-handle forest. They speak
jeeringly of our wilderness of deceased elms, and sneer at our defunct
magnolias. We hate to cast a reflection on the house, but we also
dislike to be played for Chinamen when we are no such thing.

We prefer to sit in the shade of the luxuriant telegraph pole, and
stroll at set of sun amid the umbrageous shadows of the barbed wire
fence, through which the sunlight glints and glitters to and fro.

Nothing saddens us like death in any form, and 100,000 dead trees
scattered through the city, sticking their limbs up into the atmosphere
like a variety actress, bears down upon us with the leaden weight of an
ever-present gloom.




SCIENTIFIC.

|THE Boomerang reporter, sent ont to find the North Pole, eighteen
months ago, has just been heard from. An exploring party recently found
portions of his remains in latitude 4-11-44, longitude sou'est by sou'
from the pole, and near the remains the following fragment of a diary:

July 1,1881.--Have just been out searching for a sunstroke and signs of
a thaw. Saw nothing but ice floe and snow as far as the eye could reach.
Think we will have snow this evening unless the wind changes.

July 2.--Spent the forenoon exploring to the northwest for right of way
for a new equatorial and North Pole railroad that I think would be of
immense value to commerce. The grade is easy, and the expense would be
slight. Ate my last dog to-day. Had intended him for the 4th, but got
too hungry, and ate him raw with vinegar; I wish I was at home eating
Boomerang paste.

July 3.--We had quite a frost last night, and it looks this morning as
though the corn and small fruits must have suffered. It is now two weeks
since the last of the crew died and left me alone. Ate the leather
ends of my suspenders to-day for dinner. I did not need the suspenders,
anyway, for by tightening up my pants I find they will stay on all
right, and I don't look for any ladies to call, so that even if my pants
came off by some oversight or other, nobody would be shocked.

July 4.--Saved up some tar roofing and a bottle of mucilage for my
Fourth of July dinner, and gorged myself to-day. The exercises were very
poorly attended and the celebration rather a failure. It is clouding up
in the west, and I'm afraid we're going to have snow. Seems to me we're
having an all-fired late spring here this year.

July 5.--Didn't drink a drop yesterday. It was the quietest Fourth I
ever put in. I never felt so little remorse over the way I celebrated as
I do to-day. I didn't do a thing yesterday that I was ashamed of except
to eat the remainder of a box of shoe blacking for supper. To-day I ate
my last boot-heel, stewed. Looks as though we might have a hard winter.

July 6.--Feel a little apprehension about something to eat. My credit
is all right here, but there is no competition, and prices are therefore
very high. Ice, however, is still firm. This would be a good ice-cream
country if there were any demand, but the country is so sparsely settled
that a man feels as lonesome here as a green-backer at a presidential
election. Ate a pound of cotton waste soaked in machine oil, to-day.
There is nothing left for to-morrow but ice-water and an old pocket-book
for dinner. Looks as though we might have snow.

July 7.--This is a good, cool place to spend the summer if provisions
were more plenty. I am wearing a seal-skin undershirt with three woolen
overshirts and two bear-skin vests, to-day, and when the dew begins to
fall, I have to put on my buffalo ulster to keep off the night air.
I wish I was home. It seems pretty lonesome here since the other boys
died. I do not know what I will get for dinner to-morrow, unless the
neighbors bring in something. A big bear is coming down the hatchway, as
I write. I wish I could eat him. It would be the first square meal for
two months. It is, however, a little mixed whether I will eat him or he
eat me. It will be a cold day for me if he----------

Here the diary breaks off abruptly, and from the chewed up appearance of
the book, we are led to entertain a horrible fear as to his safety.

[Illustration: 0191]




THE REVELATION RACKET IN UTAH.

|OUR esteemed and extremely connubial contemporary, the _Deseret News_,
says in a recent editorial:

"The Latter day Saints will rejoice to learn that the' vacancies which
have existed in the quorums of the twelve apostles and the first seven
presidents of seventies are now filled. During the conference recently
held, Elder Abram H. Cannon was unanimously chosen to be one of the
first seven presidents of seventies, and he was ordained to that office
on Monday, October 9th. Subsequently, the Lord, by revelation through
His servant, Prest. John Taylor, designated by name, Brothers George
Teasdale and Heber J. Grant, to be ordained to the apostleship, and
Brother Seymour B. Young to fill the remaining vacancy in the presidency
of the seventies. These brethren were ordained on Monday, October 16th,
the two apostles, under the hands of the first presidency and twelve,
and the other under the hands of the twelve and the presidency of the
seventies."

Now, that's a convenient system of politics and civil service. When
there is a vacancy, the president, John Taylor, goes into his closet
and has a revelation which settles it all right. If the man appointed
vicariously by the Lord is not in every way satisfactory, he may be
discharged by the same process. Instead, therefore, of being required to
rally a large force of his friends to aid him in getting an appointment,
the aspirant arranges solely with the party who runs the revelation
business. It will be seen at a glance, therefore, that the man who can
get the job of revelating in Zion, has it pretty much his own way. We
would not care who made the laws of Utah if we could do its revelating
at so much per revelate.

Think of the power it gives a man in a community of blind believers.
Imagine, if you please, the glorious possibilities in store for the
man who can successfully reveal the word of the Lord in an easy,
extemporaneous manner on five minutes notice.

This prerogative does not confine itself to politics alone. The
impromptu revelator of the Jordan has revelations when he wants to evade
the payment of a bill. He gets a divine order also if he desires to
marry a beautiful maid or seal the new school ma'am to himself. He has
a leverage which he can bring to bear upon the people of his diocese at
all times, even more potent than the press, and it does not possess the
drawbacks that a newspaper does. You can run an aggressive paper if you
want to in this country, and up to the time of the funeral you have a
pretty active and enjoyable time, but after the grave has been filled up
with the clods of the valley and your widow has drawn her insurance,
you naturally ask, "What is the advantage to be gained by this fearless
style of journalism?"

Still, even the inspired racket has its drawbacks. Last year, a little
incident occurred in a Mormon family down in southern Utah, which
weighed about nine pounds, and when the _ex officio_ husband, who had
been absent two years, returned, he acted kind of wild and surprised,
somehow, and as he went through the daily round of his work he could be
seen counting his fingers back and forth and looking at the almanac,
and adding up little amounts on the side of the barn with a piece of red
chalk.

Finally, one of the inspired mob of that part of the vineyard thought it
was about time to get a revelation and go down there, so he did so.
He sailed up to the _de facto_ husband and _quasi_ parent and solemnly
straightened up some little irregularities as to dates, but the
revelation was received with disdain, and the revelator was sent home in
an old ore sack and buried in a peach basket.

Sometimes there is, even in Utah, a manifestation of such irreverence
and open hostility to the church that it makes us shudder.




SAGE BRUSH TONIC.

|WE have a scheme on hand which we believe will be even more
remunerative than the newspaper business, if successfully carried
out. It is to construct a national remedy and joy-to-the-world tonic,
composed of the carefully expressed juice of our Rocky mountain tropical
herb, known as the sage brush. Sage brush is known to possess wonderful
medicinal properties. It is bitter enough to act as a tonic and to
convey the idea of great strength. Our idea would be to have our
portrait on each bottle, to attract attention and aid in effecting a
cure. We have noticed that the homeliest men succeed best as patent
medicine inventors, and this would be right in our hand.

The tonic could be erected at a cost of three cents per bottle,
delivered on the cars here, and after we got fairly to going we might
probably reduce even that price. At one dollar per bottle, we could
realize a living profit, and still do mankind a favor and turn loose
a boon to suffering humanity. It will make the hair grow, as everyone
knows, and it will stir up a torpid liver equally well. It just loves
to get after anything that is dormant. It might even help the Democratic
party, if it had a chance.

Our plan would be to advertise liberally, for we know the advantages of
judicious advertising. Only last week a man on South C street had three
cows to sell, which fact he set forth in this paper at the usual rates.
Before he went to bed that evening the cows were sold and people were
filing in the front gate like a row of men at the general delivery of
the postoffice. The next morning a large mob of people was found camped
out in front of the house, and the railroad was giving excursion rates
to those who wanted to come in from the country to buy these cows that
had been sold the day before.

We just quote this to show how advertising stirs the mighty deep and
wakes people up. We would make propositions to our brethren of the
press by which they could make some money out of the ad, too, instead of
telling them to put it in the middle of the telegraph page, surrounded
by pure reading matter, daily and weekly till forbid and pay when we get
ready.

Publishers will find that we are not that kind of people. We shall aim
to do the square thing, and will throw in an electrotype, showing us
just discovering the sage brush, and exclaiming "Eureka," while we
prance around like a Zulu on the war path. Underneath this we will
write, "Yours for Health," or words to that effect, and everything will
be pleasant and nice.

The Sage Brush Tonic will be made of two grades, one will be for
prohibition states and the other for states where prohibition is not in
general use. The prohibition tonic will contain, in addition to the sage
brush, a small amount of tansy and Jamaica ginger, to give it a bead and
prevent it from fermenting. A trial bottle will be sent to subscribers
of this paper, also a fitting little poem to be read at the funeral.
We will also publish death notice of those using the tonic, at one-half
rates.




LAME FROM HIS BERTH.

|A SAD-EYED man, the other night, fell out of his bed into the aisle of
a Pullman car and skinned his knee. He now claims that he was lame from
his berth. When he passes Carbon he will be hung by request.




THE PUBLIC PRINTER.




VERY few of the great mass of humanity know who makes the beautiful
public document, with its plain, black binding and wealth of statistics.
Few stop to think that hidden away from the great work-a-day world,
with eyelids heavy and red, and with finger-nails black with antimony,
toiling on at his case hour after hour, the public printer, during
the sessions of Congress, is setting up the thrilling chapters of the
Congressional Record, and between times yanking the Washington press
backward and forward, with his suspenders hanging down, as he prints
this beautiful sea-side library of song.

We are too prone to read that which gives us pleasure without thought
of the labor necessary to its creation. We glide gaily through the
Congressional Record, pleased with its more attractive features, viz:
its ayes and noes--little recking that Sterling P. Rounds, the public
printer, stands in the subdued gaslight with his stick half full, trying
to decipher the manuscript of some reticent representative, whose speech
was yesterday delivered to the janitor as he polished the porcelain
cuspidor of Congress.

This is a day and age of the world when men take that which comes to
them, and do not stop to investigate the pain and toil it costs. They
never inquire into the mystery of manufacture, or try to learn the
details of its construction. Most of our libraries are replete with
books which we have received at the hands of a generous government,
and yet we treat those volumes with scorn and contumely. We jeer at the
footsore bugologist who has chased the large, green worm from tree to
tree, in order that we may be wise. We speak sneeringly of the man who
stuffs the woodtick, and paints the gaudy wings of the squash-bug that
we may know how often she orates.

Year after year the entomologist treads the same weary road with his
bait-box tied to his waist, wooing to his laboratory the army-worm and
the sheep-scab larvæ in order that we, poor particles on the surface of
the great earth, may know how these minute creatures rise, flourish and
decay.

Then the public printer throws in his case, rubs his finger and thumb
over a lump of alum, takes a chew of tobacco, and puts in type these
words of wisdom from the lips of gray-bearded savants, that knowledge
may be scattered over the broad republic. Patiently he goes on with
the click of type, anon in an absorbed way, while we, gay, thoughtless
mortals, wear out the long summer day at a basket picnic, with deft
fingers selecting the large red ant from our cold ham.

Thus these books are made which come to us wrapped in manilla and
franked by the man we voted for last fall. Beautiful lithographs,
illustrating the different stages of hog cholera, deck their pages. Rich