[Illustration: THAT BORE THE MAJOR!]



HYDE PARK AND KENSINGTON GARDENS. ONCE AGAIN!--M. ZOLA said "he would
give forty Hyde Parks for one Bois de Boulogne." Bravo! So would all
Londoners, especially equestrians, who year after year quietly put up
with that one Rotten Row ride, and do not unite in their hundreds to
petition "the authorities" (mysterious power!) for the opening of a ride
through Kensington Gardens from south to north, and for a few "alleys"
under the broad spreading trees, where now sometimes a few sheep, and
sometimes a nursery maid and her charge, do stray. A "proposition"
logically precedes a "rider;" in this case the proposition should come
from the riders.



[Illustration: A LARGE ORDER.

"WHAT CAN WE GET FOR YOU, MADAM?" "WINGS!"]



                         "MASTERLY INACTIVITY."

    ["The terms of the Treaty give complete satisfaction to the
    claims of France."--_M. le Myre de Vilers on the Franco-Siamese
    Draft Treaty_.]

                        _John Bull, loquitur:_--

  Settling it! Humph! And my Jingoes, no doubt,
    Would like me to shout "British Interests!" and "Robbery!!!"
  Well, of course, 'tis quite clear what those two are about,
    But _I_ do not feel called on to kick up a bobbery.
  Poor little Siam! It's rather a shame;
  But--at present--I shan't take a hand in the game.

  Complete satisfaction? Well, _that's_ something gained!
    "The claims" I had fancied a trifle elastic;
  "The terms" looked ambiguous, made to be strained,
    To politic pressure prepared to be plastic.
  _Micawber_ craved time, and a chance of "turn-up;"
  And craft has its uses as well as a Krupp.

  Sturdy assertion on one side that table,
    While scared acquiescence is seen on the other!
  Further development of the old fable.
    Wolf and the Lamb next, as brother with brother,
  Or new Franco-Siamese twins may appear;
  Well, I pity the Lamb, but I feel little fear.

  It isn't smart Treaties alone secure Trade,
    And if I keep the Trade they may keep all their Treaties.
  'Tis not by mere craft your true Trader is made.
    The Frank as a diplomat neat and complete is,
  As Colonist-Trader, at settlement--shipment--
  Well, there's something seems wanting about his equipment.

  Trade gravitates somehow, by natural law,
    To stickers and stayers, the firmest and fittest.
  A fig for mere parchment and diplomat jaw!
    Dear France, thou thy insular neighbour oft twittest
  As "Shopkeeper"! Well ma'am, _j'y suis_, and shall stop;
  For a Shopkeeper's one who--of course--_keeps the Shop_!

  I've had some experience. Far Hindostan,
    And Canada, Africa, Egypt--ah! pardon!
  That's just a sore point, and I am not the man
    A rival of me and my ways to be hard on.
  No; at a neat "counter" a cur only blubbers;
  And they who play bowls must expect to have rubbers.

  I may have a word to put in by and by;
    Young ROSEBERY, doubtless, will know how to put it.
  At present on matters I'll just keep an eye.
    The World's gate is Trade, and nobody can shut it
  So tight--by mere Treaties--skill can't turn the handle.
  One might as well bolt the back door with a candle.

  'Tis all Swag and Swagger! I very much fear
    That's true of us cock-a-whoop "Civilised Races,"
  Who hold that our "Influence" must find its "Sphere,"--
    At the cost of the poor yellow-skins or black faces.
  We are so much alike, 'twere sheer cant to upbraid,
  So I mean to stand-by--and look after my Trade!



                         NAMES FOR OTHER NAMES.

The London County Council having considered the propriety of changing
the name of Great George Street, Westminster, we append a list of
localities that possibly may, later on, attract their attention. In each
case we have appended a suggested new name, chosen in the customary
arbitrary and (except in the last specimen) meaningless fashion:--

  Trafalgar Square--Water-squirt Place.
  Piccadilly--Snooks' Avenue.
  Mayfair--Mews' Gardens.
  Eaton Square--Pimlico Enclosure.
  Haymarket--Picture-dealers' Row.
  Charing Cross--Araminta Place East.
  Covent Garden--Cabbage Buildings.
  The Strand--Western Central High Street.
  Buckingham Palace--Guelph House.
  Pall Mall--Pavement Promenade.
  Westminster Abbey--Members' Meeting House.
  St. Paul's Cathedral--Lord Mayor's Church.
  Temple Bar--Law Courts' Corner.
  Chancery Lane--Smith Street East.
  Fleet Street--Pedlington Place.
  Whitehall--Rosebery Row.
                  and
  Spring Gardens--County Council Folly.



SERIOUS NEWS FROM ETON COLLEGE.--Strike of the _Minors_. The Dii Majores
and the Maximi have come to terms, and the Minors have resumed fagging.



QUERY FOR AUTHOR AND MANAGER AT COMEDY THEATRE.--When you've been
_Sowing the Wind_ is the result _A Stitch in the Side_?



[Illustration: "MASTERLY INACTIVITY."

JOHN BULL. "TREATY OR NO TREATY--I SHALL DO THE TRADE ALL THE SAME!"]



                         THE RULES OF THE RUDE.

1. The one object which all cyclists should keep steadily in view is to
become "scorchers." There are three essentials before you can earn this
proud title. First, you must totally disregard the convenience or safety
of the public. Second, you must ride at a minimum rate of 15 miles an
hour. Third, you must develop pronounced curvature of the spine as
quickly as is compatible with your other engagements.

2. Races should always be held on the high roads, at a time of the day
when traffic is busiest.

3. Should you be unfortunate enough to knock down a pedestrian, do not
trouble to stop and apologise, or inquire if he's hurt. It is his
business to get out of your way, and you should remind him of this
obligation in the most forcible language at your disposal. This will
tend to make the pastime exceedingly popular among non-cyclists.

4. If you notice an old gentleman; crossing the road, wait till you get
quite close to him, then emit a wild war-whoop, blow your trumpet, and
enjoy the roaring fun of seeing what a shock you have given him.

5. A still better plan, if a wayfarer happens to be walking in the
middle of the road, and going in your own direction, is _not_ to signal
your approach at all, but to startle him into fits by suddenly and
silently gliding by him when he believes himself to be quite alone. The
nearer you can shave his person the better the sport.

6. Of course the last plan is much improved if the wayfarer should be a
market woman carrying milk or eggs, and if in her fright she drops her
can or basket. Unfortunately few cyclists have the good fortune to
witness this exquisite bit of rural comedy.

    [_These Rules will now probably be thoroughly revised, as the
    "National Cyclists' Union" has issued a well-timed manifesto
    warning all wheelmen against "furious riding."_



"Well," observed the amiable Mrs. SHARPTON SNAPPIE, "there's only one
person whom I rate very highly--and that's my husband." [So she did--and
rated him--soundly.]



[Illustration: A NEW TARIFF.

"THIRD-CLASS SINGLE TO RUSWARP, PLEASE, AND A DOG-TICKET. HOW MUCH?"

"FOURPENCE-HALFPENNY--THREEPENCE FOR THE DOG, AND THREE-HALFPENCE FOR
YOURSELF."

"AH! YOU RECKON BY _LEGS_ ON THIS LINE."]



                          NOT A FAIR EXCHANGE.

                  (_An Exercise to be Translated from
                  English into any Foreign Language_.)

This is a thoroughly British home. I find chairs, sofas, curtains, and
carpets. They all seem to be of British manufacture.

No, they are not of British manufacture. On the contrary, they are all
made in Germany.

But surely this window is English? No, it is not English; it is put
together in Sweden, and erected by Swiss workmen.

But are not these pictures, these fire-irons, these card-tables, of home
growth? No, for the pictures come from France, the fire-irons from
Belgium, and the card-tables from Austria.

The sofa, however, was surely bought in London? It may have been bought
in London, but it was certainly made in Denmark.

But the brass nails mast have arrived from Sheffield? No, they are now
received from parts of Portugal, Spain, and Northern Russia.

And the coal-scuttles, surely they are made in Lambeth, Manchester, and
Liverpool? They were manufactured in those places for a while, when
other branches of trade were lost to the country, but for a long time
they have been imported from Constantinople.

It may be assumed that the coals come from Newcastle? Certainly not,
considering that they have only just been received from New York.

Are the bread and butter, and the other ingredients of the tea-table,
English? Oh dear no; the toast comes from Australia, the tea from
Ceylon, the sugar from the South Pole, and the butter from Gibraltar.

It really would appear that there is nothing English about the house;
nothing save the rent and taxes, which of course are of home growth? You
are correct in your supposition; however, in exchange for these
conveniences from abroad, we have made a present to the foreigner of
something once held very dear in this country.

And what was that?

Our trade. English trade has left England, probably permanently, for the
Continent.



                        "PICTURES PROM 'PUNCH.'"

    ["Let me draw the People's pictures, and whosoever will may
    preach their sermons."--_Maxims of Punchius_.]

  "Pictures from _Punch_!" Good lack! How one's memories backward it
        carries.
  This artful collection of BRIGGSES, and TOMPKINSES, ROBERTS, and
        'ARRIES!
  Forage of fifty years from Art--granaries fuller than Coptic!
  What first pleased our grandfather's eye may now brighten our
        grandchild's blue optic!
  Art that's humane never ages, and humour that's human's perennial.
  Turn to these pages and try! You'll perceive that impeccable TENNIEL
  Moved men to mirth in the Fifties that folks in the Nineties continue;
  Your midriff indeed must be numb if his Yeomanry Major won't win you;
  And such "Illustrations to Shakspeare," so finely drawn and so
        funnily,
  Might tickle Miss DELIA BACON, and knock sawdust out of "crank"
        DONNELLY.
  Why praise those plump, "pretty girls," with their cheeks round and
        rosy as peaches,
  And as full of fun as of beauty, well known to the world as JOHN
        LEECH'S?
  All the fan of the _Fair_! Still their arch eyes attractively flash on
  The British male creature, although he _may_ growl at the follies of
        Fashion.
  But e'en fashion cannot kill fun. If you'd enter the evergreen
        Smile-Lands,
  Turn over to page twenty-one and accompany BRIGGS to the Highlands!
  _Br-r-r-r_! There's a happy explosion in each individual picture!
  "Sport" such as BRIGGS'S escapes the most "humanitarian" stricture.
  KEANE--gentle CARLO! again! His braw feeshermen--even o' Sundays!--
  Might soften a Scotch Sabbatarian. Even the grimmest of GRUNDIES
  _Must_ smile at his topers and tubthumpers, while, as for true English
        scenery,
  Where _is_ the magical touch that could so render gay breadths of
        greenery?
  Drawing-room humours, and dainty _technique_, do you favour? Fame's
        _laurier_,
  Everyone knows--as here proved--for all that falls on subtle DU
        MAURIER.
  "DICKY DOYLE'S" opulent fancy, quaint SAMBOURNE'S exhaustless
        invention--
  But there, 'tis a "Humorous Art Gallery" by "Great Hands" too many to
        mention.
  When you have feasted on TENNIEL and KEANE, then of PARTRIDGE the turn
        is,
  And fed full on JOHN LEECH'S "fire," you will find lots of ditto in
        FURNISS.
  "Pictures from _Punch_!" That means pictures from full half a
        century's story;
  Humours, and fashions, and fads, English Mirth--English Girls--English
        Glory!
  VICTORIA'S reign set to laughter; a gay panorama of Beauty!
  Buy Britons, study, enjoy! 'Tis your interest, aye, and your duty!
  Here are "England--Home--Beauty" in one, and at sixpence a month.
        That's not much, man!
  If 'tis not your duty to "see that you get it," then _Punch_ is a
        Dutchman!



[Illustration: HIS OPPORTUNITY.

_Young Hawkins (finding young Mr. Merton, the model of his office, in an
unexpected haunt)_. "HULLO, MERTON, WHAT ARE YOU DOING HERE? HAVE A
SHERRY AND BITTERS?"

_Young Merton_. "NO, THANK YOU, HAWKINS; I'M AFRAID IT WOULD GO TO MY
HEAD."

_Hawkins_. "SO MUCH THE BETTER, OLD MAN. NATURE ABHORS A VACUUM. YOU
KNOW."]



                                 BOBO.

                  (_The kind of Novel Society likes_.)

"Sling me over a two-eyed steak, BILL," said BOBO.

BILL complied instantly, for he knew the lady's style of conversation;
but Lord COKALEEK required to be told that his Marchioness
was asking for one of the bloaters in the silver dish in front of his
cousin, BILL SPLINTER.

Now, dear reader, I 'm not going to describe Cokaleek House, in the
black country, or COKALEEK, or BOBO, or BILL. If you are in smart
society you know all about them beforehand; and if you ain't you must
puzzle them out the best way you can. The more I don't describe them
the more vivid and alive they ought to seem to you. As for BOBO, I
shall let her talk. That's enough. In the course of my two
volumes--one thick and one thin--which is a new departure, and looks
as if my publisher thought that BOBO would stretch to three volumes,
and then found she wouldn't--you will be told, 1, that BOBO had brown
eyes; 2, that she was five foot eight; and that is all you 'll ever
know about the outside of BOBO. But you'll hear her talk, and you'll
see her smoke; and if you can't evolve a fascinating personality out
of cigarettes, and swears, and skittish conversation, you are not
worthy to have known BOBO.

I am told that some people have taken "BOBO" for a vulgar caricature
of a real personage. If they have, I can only say I feel flattered by
the notion, as it may serve to differentiate me from the vulgar herd
of novelists who draw on their imagination for their characters.



                       CHAPTER I. (_and others_).

BOBO began her bloater.

"Why the beast has a hard roe!" she cried. "COKALEEK, you shall have the
roe;" and she dropped it into his tea before he could object. "You're
not eating any breakfast. Put the mustard-spoon in his mouth, BILL, if
he insists upon keeping it wide open while he stares at me. Ain't I
fascinating this morning? Why the devil don't you notice the new feather
in my hat? I always wear feathers when I'm going out clubbing, because I
plume myself upon being smart. Here, somebody see if my spur's screwed
on all right."

"I wish your head was screwed on half as well," said BILL, as BOBO
planted her handsome Pinet boot, No. 31z, on the breakfast-table.

COKALEEK looked on and smiled, with his mouth still open. It was all he
had to do in life. He had married her because she was BOBO; and the more
she out-Bobo'd BOBO, the better she pleased him. He was a marquis, and a
millionaire, but he had only one drawing-room at his country-seat; and
the smoking-room was upstairs--obviously because there was no room for
it on the ground-floor. And there was only one piano in the house, at
which BOBO'S gifted young friend, SALLIE RENGAW, was engaged in the
early morning, picking out an original funeral march with one finger,
and throwing breakfast-eggs about in the fury of inspiration.

An _oeuf a la coque_ came flying across the passage at this moment,
through the open door of the dining-room, and hit BILL SPLINTER on the
nose. BILL was COKALEEK'S first-cousin, and heir-presumptive; in love,
_pour le bon motif_, with BOBO.

"You should always give SALLIE poached eggs," he remonstrated, holding
his nose; "they make a worse mess when she pitches them about, but they
only hurt the furniture."

"Does she always chuck eggs?" asked COKALEEK, mildly.

It was BOBO'S first autumn at Cokaleek House, and the Marquis wasn't
used to the ways of her gifted friends. She had another friend, besides
the musical lady, a Miss MIRANDA SKEGGS, whose conversation was like a
bad dream; and these two, with BILL SPLINTER, were the house-party.
COKALEEK, waking suddenly from an after-dinner nap, used to think he was
in Hanwell.

"She chucks anything," answered BOBO; "kidneys, chops, devilled bones.
How can she help it? That's the divine afflatus."

"It _sounds_ like ta-ra-ra-boomdeay," said COKALEEK, who thought his
wife meant the melody that SALLIE'S muscular forefinger was thumping out
on the concert-grand.

"Come, come along, every manjack of you!" shrieked SALLIE, from the
other side of the passage. "Ain't this glorious? Ain't it majestic?
Don't it bang BEETHOVEN, and knock SULLIVAN into a cocked-hat? Hark at
this! Ta-ra-ra! _largo_, for the hautboys and first fiddles. Boom!
cornets and ophicleides. De----ay! bassoons, double-basses, and
minute-guns on the big drum. There's a funeral march for you! With my
learned orchestration it will be as good as SEBASTIAN BACH."

"Back? Why he's never been here in my time," faltered COKALEEK. "I don't
know any feller called SEBASTIAN."

"Rippin'!" cried BOBO; "and now we'll have the funeral. Get all the
cloaks and umbrellas off the stand, MIRANDA. BILL, bring me the
coal-scuttle--that's for the coffin, doncherknow. COKALEEK, you and BILL
are to be a pair of black horses; and me and MIRANDA 'll be the
mourners. Play away, SALLIE, with all your might. We're doing the
funeral."

Out flew BOBO into the garden, driving BILL and COKALEEK before her,
scattering coals all over the gravel walk, and slashing at the two men
with her pocket-handkerchief. She rushed all round the house, past the
windows of the back parlour, kitchen, and scullery; and then she
suddenly remembered the cub-hunting, and tore off to the stables,
tally-ho-ing to COKALEEK and BILL to follow her. The next thing they all
saw was a shower of baking-pears tumbling off the garden-wall, as BOBO
took it on her favourite hunter. She had been essentially BOBO all that
morning.

                             CHAPTER XIII.

"BILL," said BOBO, one winter twilight, by the smoking-room fire, after
her fourteenth cigarette, "I want you to run away with me."

"Rot," answered BILL.

"Yes, I do. I've ordered the carriage for half-past ten this evening. We
shall catch the mail to Euston."

"You won't catch this male," said BILL. "No, BOBO, you're very good
fun--in your own house, but I don't want you in mine. You are distinctly
BOBO, but that's all. It isn't enough to live upon. It won't pay rent
and taxes."

"You're a cur."

"No, I'm trying to be a gentleman. Besides, what's the matter with
COKALEEK? Hasn't he millions, and a charming house in the heart of the
collieries?"

"He's all that's delightful, only I happen to hate him. Directly I leave
off chaffing him I begin to think of arsenic, and, brilliant as I am, I
can't coruscate all day. It's very mean of you not to want to elope."

"I daresay; but I'm the only rational being in the book, and I want to
sustain my character."

                           CHAPTER THE LAST.

BOBO stayed, and BILL went in the carriage that had been ordered for the
elopement; and then there happened an incident so rare in the realms of
fiction that it has stamped my novel at once and for ever as the work of
an original mind.

COKALEEK, the noble, unappreciated husband, got himself killed in the
hunting-field. He went out with BOBO one morning, and she came home, a
little earlier than usual, without him, and smoked cigarettes by the
fire, while he stayed out in the dusk and just meekly rolled over a
hedge, with his horse uppermost. He wasn't like GUY LIVINGSTONE; he
wasn't a bit like dozens of heroes of French novels, who have died the
same kind of death. He was just as absolutely COKALEEK as his wife was
BOBO.

And did BILL marry BOBO, or BOBO BILL?

Not she! Another woman might have done it--but not BOBO. She knew too
well what the intelligent reader expected of her; so she jilted BILL, in
a thoroughly cold-blooded and BOBO-ish manner, and got herself married
to an Austrian Prince at half-an-hour's notice, by special licence from
the A. of C.



[Illustration: FOLLOWING THE EXAMPLE OF MR. GLADSTONE AND MR. GOSCHEN,
MR. PUNCH VISITS EDINBURGH.]



LE PREUX CHEVALIER ENCORE!--After a little dinner at FRASCATI'S, which
is still "going strong," we paid a visit to the Renovated and Enlarged
Royal Music Hall, Holborn, and were soon convinced that the best things
Mr. ALBERT CHEVALIER has yet done are the coster songs, not to be
surpassed, including the "_Little Nipper_," in which is just the one
touch of Nature that makes the whole audience sympathetically
costermongerish. "_My Old Dutch_" was good, but lacking in dramatic
power, and the latest one "_The Lullaby_," sung by a coster to his
"biby" in the cradle, wouldn't be worth much if it weren't for Mr.
CHEVALIER'S reputation as a genuine comedian. It is good, but not equal
to the "_Little Nipper_." "Full to-night," I observed to Lord ARTHUR
SWANBOROUGH, who is Generalissimo of the forces "in front" of the house.
"Yes," replies his Lordship, casually, "it's like this every night.
Highly respectable everywhere. Only got to have in a preacher, we'd
supply the choristers, and you'd think it was a service--or something
like it."



BY OUR OWN PHILOSOPHER.--Woe to him of whom all men speak well! And woe
to that seaside or inland country place for which no one has anything
but praise. It soon becomes the fashion; its natural beauties vanish;
the artificial comes in. Nature abhors a vacuum; so does the builder.
Yet Nature creates vacuums and refills them; so does the builder. Nature
is all things to all men; but the builder has his price. Man, being a
landed proprietor and a sportsman, preserves; but he also destroys, and
the more he preserves so much the more does he destroy. Nature gives
birth and destroys. Self-preservation is Nature's first law, and game
preservation is the sporting landlord's first law.



PAIN IN PROSPECT.--Says AUGUSTUS DRURIOLANUS (_Advertiscus_), "_A Life
of Pleasure_ will last until it is crowded out by the Christmas
pantomime." Epigramatically, our DRURIOLANUS might have said, "_A Life
of Pleasure_ will last till the first appearance of PAYNE."



"TAKE MY BEN'SON!"--"_Don't! Don't!_" a moral antidotal story as a
sequel to "_Dodo_."



A VERY BAD "SCUTTLE POLICY."--The Coal Strike.



[Illustration: Allan a Daly, Robin Hood's Chief Forester.]

                             A DALY DREAM.

If it be true that "a thing of beauty is a joy for ever," then _The
Foresters_ at Daly's Theatre ought to have a good run, instead of being
limited to a certain number of representations. Rarely has a scene of
more fairy-like beauty been placed on the stage than _Maid Marian's_
dream in Sherwood Forest. The peculiar light in which the fairies appear
gives a marvellous elfinesque effect to the woodland surroundings. Sir
ARTHUR SULLIVAN'S music, too, may be reckoned as among some of his
happiest efforts, and the gay Savoyard (who has only one rival, and he
is at the Savoy) is fortunate in such principals as the _First Fairy_,
Miss GASTON MURRAY, and Miss HASWELL as _Titania_. The Fairy Chorus and
the Forester Chorus are remarkably efficient. Mr. LLOYD DAUBIGNY as
_Young Scarlet_ the Outlaw, is bright both as tenor and actor. Mr.
BOURCHIER is an easy-going representative of the EARL OF HUNTINGDON,
with just enough suggestion of "divilment" in his face to account for
his so readily and naturally taking to robbery as a profession.

As _Maid Marian_, Miss ADA REHAN is at once dignified yet playful, and
as Tennysonianly captivating in her boy's clothes (there were ready-made
tailors to hand in the days of ISAAC of York), which is of course "_a
suit of male_," as she is when, as _Rosalind_, she delights us in her
doublet and hose. Fortunate is Tailor-_Maid Marian_ to obtain a
situation in the country where so many "followers are allowed"! _Little
John_, _Will Scarlet_, _Old Much_ who does little, but that little well,
with many others, make up the aforesaid "followers," who are of course
very fond of chasing every little dear they see among the greenwood
trees. Miss CATHERINE LEWIS as _Kate_, with a song, one of Sir ARTHUR'S
extra good ones, about a Bee (is it in the key of "B," for Sir ARTHUR
dearly loves a merrie jest?), obtained a hearty encore on the first
night. Not only her singing of the bee song is good, but her
stage-buzzyness is excellent.

Mr. HANN'S ('ARRY thinks there's a "lady scene-painter 'ere, and her
name is HANN") and Mr. RYAN'S scenery is first-rate; and if the business
of the fighting were more realistic, if the three Friars were a trifle
less pantomimic, and the three grotesquely-got-up beggars (worthy of
CALLOT'S pencil) would aim at being less actively funny, with one or two
other "ifs," including _Friar Tuck's_ general make-up which might be
vastly improved, and if the last Act were shortened, and the Abbot and
the Sheriff and the Justiciary were compressed into one, or
abolished,--any of which alterations may have been effected by now,
seeing the piece was produced just a week ago,--then the attractions of
_Maid Marian_ and the fairy scene and the music are of themselves
sufficient to draw all lovers of the poetic musical drama to Daly's for
some weeks to come, unless Mr. DALY clips the run with the scissors of
managerial fate,

                          "For be it understood
  It would have lived much longer if it could,"

and so banishes his own outlaws from the elegant and commodious theatre
in Leicester Square.

[Illustration: The Villain of the Piece.]



NEW NOVEL.--"_The Mackerel of the Dean_," by the author of
"_The Soul of the Bishop_."



                           Transcriber Notes:

Passages in italics were indicated by _underscores_.

Small caps were replaced with ALL CAPS.

Throughout the document, the oe ligature was replaced with "oe".

Throughout the dialogues, there were words used to mimic accents of
the speakers. Those words were retained as-is.

Errors in punctuations and inconsistent hyphenation were not corrected
unless otherwise noted.

On page 178, "cubbing" was replaced with "clubbing".