_Scripture._

But after that the kindness and love of God towards man appeared, not by
works of righteousness which we have done, but according to his mercy he
saved us.--Titus iii. 4, 5.

He who spared not his own Son, but gave him up for us all, how shall he
not with him also freely give us all things?--Rom. viii. 32.

The blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all sin.--1 John i. 7.

One Mediator.--1 Tim. ii. 5.

Who also maketh intercession for us.--Rom. viii. 34.

He ever liveth to make intercession for them.--Heb. vii. 25.

_Service of Thomas Becket._

O Christ Jesus, by the wounds of Thomas loosen the sins which bind us.

O blessed Jesus, BY THE MERITS OF THOMAS, forgive us our debts, raise us
from the threefold death, and restore what has been lost with thy
accustomed pity.

Do thou, O Christ, by the blood of Thomas, which he shed for thee, make
us ascend whither Thomas has ascended.

Holy Thomas, pray for us.

And if this service thus seems to mingle the merits of Christ, the
merits of his blood and of his death, with {222} the merits of a mortal
man, the immediate address to that mortal as the giver of good things
temporal and spiritual, very awfully trespasses on that high, exclusive,
and incommunicable prerogative of the one Lord God Omnipotent, which his
Spirit hath proclaimed solemnly and repeatedly, and which he has fenced
around against all invasion with so many warnings and denunciations.

_Scripture._                         _Service of Becket_

1. O thou that hearest prayer,       1. For they sake, O Thomas,
unto thee shall all flesh come.--    let the right hand of God embrace
Ps. lxv. [vulg. lxiv.] 2.            us.

By prayer and supplication,
with thanksgiving, let your requests
be made known unto God.--Phil.
iv. 6.

2. Lord, be thou my helper.--        2. Send help to us, O Thomas;
Ps. xxx. [xxix.] 10.

3. Thou shalt guide me by thy        3. Guide thou those who stand;
counsel.--Ps. lxxiii. [lxxii.] 24.

He, The Holy Spirit, shall guide
you into all truth.--John xvi. 13.

4. The Lord upholdeth all that       4. Raise up those who fall;
fall, and raiseth up all those that
be bowed down.--Psalm cxlv.
[cxliv.] 14.

5. Create in me a clean heart,       5. Correct our morals, actions
O God.--Ps. li. [l.] 10.             and life;

6. The steps of a good man are       6. And guide us into the way
ordered by the Lord. Though          of peace.
he fall, he shall not be utterly
cast down, for the Lord upholdeth
him.--Ps. xxxvii. [xxxvi.]
23.

The day-spring from on high
hath visited us, to guide our feet
into the way of peace.--Luke i.
78, 79.

And then again, in celebrating the praises of a mortal {223} man,
recourse is had to language which can fitly be used only in our hymns
and praises to the supreme Lord of our destinies, the eternal Creator,
Redeemer, and Comforter, the only wise God our Saviour.

_Address to Thomas._                 _Language of Scripture._

1. Hail, Thomas, Rod of Justice!     1. There shall come a rod out
                                     of the stem of Jesse. Ye denied
                                     the Holy One, and the Just--Isaiah
                                     xi. 1. Acts iii. 14.

2. The brightness of the world.      2. The brightness of his glory.
                                     I am the light of the world--Heb.
                                     i. 3. John viii. 12.

3. The strength of the Church.       3. I can do all things through
                                     Christ, that strengthened me.
                                     Christ loved the Church, and
                                     gave himself for it.--Phil. iv. 13.
                                     Eph. v. 25.

4. The love of the people: the       4. Grace be with all them that
delight of the Clergy.               love our Lord Jesus Christ in
                                     sincerity. Delight thyself in the
                                     Lord.--Eph. vi. 24. Ps. xxxvii. 4.

5. Hail, glorious Guardian of        5. Our Lord Jesus, that great
the Flock. Save those who rejoice    Shepherd of the sheep. Give ear,
in thy glory.                        O Shepherd of Israel; come and
                                     save us. He that glorieth, let  him
                                     glory in the Lord.--Heb. xiii.  20.
                                     Psalm lxxx. [lxxix.] 1. 1 Cor.
                                     i. 31.

Can that worship become the disciples of the Gospel and the Cross, which
addresses such prayers and such praises to the spirit of a mortal man?
Every prayer, and every form of praise here used in honour of Thomas
Becket, it would well become Christians to offer to the Giver of all
good, trusting solely and exclusively to the mediation of Christ Jesus
our Lord for acceptance; and pleading-only the merits of his most
precious blood. {224} And yet I am bound to confess, that in principle,
in spirit, and in fact, I can find no substantial difference between
this service of Thomas of Canterbury, and the service which all in
communion with the Church of Rome are under an obligation to use even at
the present hour.

This point remains next for our inquiry, and we will draw from the
well-head. I would, however, first suggest the application of a general
test for ascertaining the real _bona-fide_ nature of these prayers and
praises. The test I would apply is, to try with the change only of the
name, substituting the holiest name ever named in heaven or in earth for
the name of Thomas of Canterbury--whether these prayers and praises
should not be offered to the Supreme Being alone through the atoning
merits of his Blessed Son; whether they are not exclusively appropriate
to HIM.

To (Thomas/God Almighty) all things bow and are obedient.

Plagues, diseases, death, and devils,
Fire, air, land, and sea.
(Thomas/The Almighty) fills the world with glory.

The world offers obeisance to (Thomas/Almighty God).

(The Martyr Thomas/Our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ) began to shine
forth with miracles [John ii. 11]; restoring sight to the blind [Luke
vii. 21]; walking to the lame; hearing to the deaf; speech to the dumb;
cleansing to the lepers [Matt. xi. 5]; making the paralytic sound [Matt.
iv. 24]; healing the dropsy [Luke xiv. 4]; and all kinds of incurable
diseases [Luke iv. 40]; restoring the dead to {225} life [Luke viii. 43.
55]; in a wonderful manner commanding the devils [Matt. viii. 16], and
all the elements [Luke viii. 25]. He put forth his hand to unwonted and
unheard-of signs of his own power [Mark ii. 12. John ix. 30].

Do thou, O Lord, by the blood of (Thomas/Christ) cause us to ascend
whither (Thomas/Christ) has ascended. (O Thomas/O God), send help to us.
Guide those who stand; raise up those who fall; correct our morals,
actions, and life; and guide us into the way of peace.

Hail, (Thomas!/Jesus!) Rod of Justice, the Brightness of the world, the
Strength of the Church, the Love of the people, the Delight of the
Clergy. Hail, Glorious Guardian of the flock! Save Thou those who
delight in Thy glory.



We shall apply this same test to many of the collects and prayers used,
and of necessity to be used, because they are authorized and appointed,
even at the present day, in the ministrations of the Church of Rome. The
impiety in many of those instances is not couched in such startling
language; but it is not the less real. God forbid that we should charge
our fellow-creatures with idolatry, who declare that they offer divine
worship to the Supreme Being only; or that we should pronounce any
professed Christian to have cast off his {226} dependence on the merits
of Christ alone, who assures us that he looks for mercy only through
those merits. But I know and feel, that according to the standard of
Christian truth, and of the pure worship of Almighty God, which the
Scriptures and primitive antiquity compel me to adopt, I should stain my
own soul with the guilt of idolatry, and with the sin of relying on
other merits than Christ's, were I myself to offer those prayers.

That this service excited much disgust among the early reformers, we
learn from various writers[85]. On the merits of the struggle between
Becket and his king; on the question of Becket's moral and religious
worth, (a question long and often discussed among the exercises of the
masters of Paris in the full assembly of the Sorbonne[86],) or on the
motives which influenced Henry the Eighth, I intend not to say one word:
those points belong not to our present inquiry. It may not, however, be
thought irrelevant here to quote a passage {227} from the ordinance of
this latter monarch for erasing Becket's service out of the books, and
his name from the calendar of the saints.

    [Footnote 85: See Mornay "De la Messe," Saumur, 1604. p. 826.
    Becon, in his "New Year's Gift," London, 1564, p. 183, thus
    speaks: "What saint at any time thought himself so pure,
    immaculate, and without all spot of sin, that he durst presume
    to die for us, and to avouch his death to be an oblation and
    sacrifice for our lives to God the Father, except peradventure
    we will admit for good payment these and such like blasphemies,
    which were wont full solemnly to be sung in the temples unto the
    great ignominy of the glorious name of God, and the dishonour of
    Christ's most precious blood." Then quoting the lines from the
    service of Thomas Becket, on which we have above commented, he
    adds, "I will let pass many more which are easy to be searched
    and found out." Becon preached and wrote in the reign of Henry
    VIII. and was then persecuted for his religion, as he was
    afterwards in the reign of Mary.]

    [Footnote 86: We are told that forty-eight years after his
    death, the masters of Paris disputed whether Thomas was a
    condemned sinner, or admitted into heaven.]

In Henry the Eighth's proclamation, dated Westminster, 16th November, in
the thirtieth year of his reign, printed by Bertholet, is the following
very curious passage:--

    "ITEM, for as moche as it appereth now clerely, that Thomas
    Becket, sometyme Archbyshop of Canterburie, stubburnly to
    withstand the holsome lawes establyshed agaynste the enormities
    of the clergie, by the kynges highness mooste noble progenitour,
    kynge HENRY the Seconde, for the common welthe, reste, and
    tranquillitie of this realme, of his frowarde mynde fledde the
    realme into Fraunce, and to the bishop of Rome, mayntenour of
    those enormities, to procure the abrogation of the sayd lawes,
    whereby arose moch trouble in this said realme, and that his
    dethe, which they untruely called martyrdome, happened upon a
    reskewe by him made, and that, as it is written, he gave
    opprobrious wordes to the gentyllmen, whiche than counsayled hym
    to leave his stubbernesse, and to avoyde the commocion of the
    people, rysen up for that rescue. And he not only callyd the one
    of them bawde, but also toke Tracy by the bosome, and violently
    shoke and plucked hym in suche maner, that he had almoste
    overthrowen hym to the pavement of the Churche; so that upon
    this fray one of their company, perceivynge the same, strake
    hym, and so in the thronge Becket was slayne. And further that
    his canonization was made onely by the bysshop of Rome, bycause
    he had ben a champion of maynteyne his usurped auctoritie, and a
    bearer of the iniquitie of the clergie, for these and for other
    great and urgent causes, longe to recyte, the Kynge's {228}
    Maiestie, by the advyse of his counsayle, hath thought expedient
    to declare to his lovynge subjectes, that notwithstandynge the
    sayde canonization, there appereth nothynge in his lyfe and
    exteriour conversation, wherby he shuld be callyd a sainct, but
    rather estemed to have ben a rebell and traytour to his prynce.
    Therefore his Grace strayghtly chargeth and commandeth that from
    henseforth the sayde Thomas Becket shall not be estemed, named,
    reputed, nor called a sayncte, but bysshop Becket; and that his
    ymages and pictures, through the hole realme, shall be putte
    downe, and avoyded out of all churches, chapelles, and other
    places; and that from henseforthe, the dayes used to be
    festivall in his name shall not be observed, nor the service,
    office, antiphoners, colletes, and prayers, in his name redde,
    but rased and put out of all the bokes[87]."

    [Footnote 87: In the Roman Breviary, adapted to England, several
    biographical lessons are appointed for the Anniversary of "St.
    Thomas, bishop and martyr," interspersed with canticles. In one
    of these we read, "This is truly a martyr, who, for the name of
    Christ, shed blood; who feared not the threats of judges, nor
    sought the glory of earthly dignity. But he reached the heavenly
    kingdom."--Norwich, 1830. Hiem. p. 251.] {229}






CHAPTER II.

COUNCIL OF TRENT.


In the process of ascertaining the real state of doctrine and practice
in the worship of the Church of Rome at the present day, we must first
gain as clear and accurate a knowledge of the decree of the Council of
Trent, as its words will enable us to form. Into the character of that
Council, and of those who constituted it, our present investigation does
not lead us to inquire. It is now, I believe, generally understood, that
its decrees are binding on all who profess allegiance to the Sovereign
Roman Pontiff; and that the man would be considered to have renounced
the Roman Catholic Communion, who should professedly withhold his assent
from the doctrines there promulgated as vital, or against the oppugners
of which the Council itself pronounced an anathema.

Ecclesiastical writers[88] assure us, that the wording of the decrees of
that Council was in many cases on purpose framed ambiguously and
vaguely. The latitude, however, of the expressions employed, does not in
itself {230} of necessity imply any of those sinister and unworthy
motives to which it has been usual with many writers to attribute it. In
charity, and without any improbable assumption, it may be referred to an
honest and laudable desire of making the terms of communion as wide as
might be, with a view of comprehending within what was regarded the pale
of the Catholic Church, the greatest number of those who professed and
called themselves Christians. Be this as it may, the vagueness and
uncertainty of the terms employed, compel us in many instances to have
recourse to the actual practice of the Church of Rome, as the best
interpreter of doubtful expressions in the articles of that Council. The
decree which bears on the subject of this volume is drawn up in the
following words:--

    [Footnote 88: See Mosheim, xvi. Cent. c. i. vol. iv. p. 196.
    London, 1811.]

    "SESSION XXV.[89]

    "On the invocation, veneration, and reliques of saints, and of
    sacred images.

    "The Holy Council commands all bishops and others bearing the
    office and care of instruction, that according to the usage of
    the Catholic and Apostolic Church, received from the primitive
    times of the Christian religion, and the consent of holy
    fathers, and decrees of sacred councils, they in the first place
    should instruct the faithful concerning the intercession and
    invocation of saints, the honour of reliques, and the lawful use
    of images, teaching them, that the SAINTS REIGNING TOGETHER WITH
    CHRIST, offer their own {231} prayers for men to God: that it is
    good and profitable SUPPLIANTLY TO INVOKE THEM: and to fly to
    their PRAYERS, HELP, and ASSISTANCE, for obtaining benefits from
    God, by his Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who is our only Redeemer
    and Saviour. But that those who deny that the saints, enjoying
    everlasting happiness in heaven, are to be invoked; or who
    assert either that they do not pray for us; or that the
    invocation of them to pray for us even as individuals is
    idolatry, or is repugnant to the word of God, and is opposed to
    the honour of the one Mediator of God and man, Jesus Christ; or
    that it is folly, by voice or mentally, to supplicate those who
    reign in heaven, hold impious sentiments.

    "That the bodies also of the holy martyrs and others living with
    Christ, which were living members of Christ, and a temple of the
    Holy Ghost to be raised by Him to eternal life, and to be
    glorified, are to be worshipped by the faithful; by means of
    which many benefits are conferred on men by God; so that those
    who affirm that worship and honour are not due to the reliques
    of the saints, or that they and other sacred monuments are
    unprofitably honoured by the faithful; and that the shrines of
    the saints are frequented in vain for the purpose of obtaining
    their succour, are altogether to be condemned, as the Church has
    long ago condemned them, and now also condemns them."

    [Footnote 89: The Latin, which will be found in the Appendix, is
    a transcript from a printed copy of the Acts of the Council of
    Trent, preserved in the British Museum, to which are annexed the
    autograph signatures of the secretaries (notarii), and their
    seals.]

An examination of this decree, in comparison with the form and language
of other decrees of the same Council, forces the remark upon us, That
the Council does not assert that the practice of invoking saints has any
foundation in Holy Scripture. The absence of all such declaration is the
more striking and important, because in the very decree immediately
preceding this, {232} which establishes Purgatory as a doctrine of the
Church of Rome, the Council declares that doctrine to be drawn from the
Holy Scriptures. In the present instance the Council proceeds no further
than to charge with impiety those who maintain the invocation of saints
to be contrary to the word of God. Many a doctrine or practice, not
found in Scripture, may nevertheless be not contrary to the word of God;
but here the Council abstains from affirming any thing whatever as to
the scriptural origin of the doctrine and practice which it
authoritatively enforces. In this respect the framers of the decree
acted with far more caution and wisdom than they had shown in wording
the decree on Purgatory; and with far more caution and wisdom too than
they exercised in this decree, when they affirmed that the doctrine of
the invocation of saints was to be taught the people according to the
usage of the Catholic and Apostolic Church, received from the primitive
times of the Christian religion, and the consent of the holy fathers. I
have good hope that these pages have already proved beyond gainsaying,
that the invocation of saints is a manifest departure from the usage of
the Primitive Church, and contrary to the testimony of "the holy
fathers." However, the fact of the Council not having professed to trace
the doctrine, or its promulgation, to any authority of Holy Scripture,
is of very serious import, and deserves to be well weighed in all its
bearings.

With regard to the condemnatory clauses of this decree, I would for
myself observe, that I should never have engaged in preparing this
volume, had I not believed, "that it was neither good nor profitable to
invoke the saints, or to fly to their prayers, their assistance, and
succour." I am bound, with this decree {233} before me, to pronounce,
that it is a vain thing to offer supplications, either by the voice or
in the mind, to the saints, even if they be reigning in heaven; and that
it is also in vain for Christians to frequent the shrines of the saints
for the purpose of obtaining their succour.

I am, moreover, under a deep conviction, that the invocation of them is
both at variance with the word of God, and contrary to the honour of the
one Mediator between God and man, Jesus Christ.

On this last point, indeed, I am aware of an anxious desire prevailing
on the part of many Roman Catholics, to establish a distinction between
a mediation of Redemption, and a mediation of Intercession: and thus by
limiting the mediation of the saints and angels to intercession, and
reserving the mediation of redemption to Christ only, to avoid the
setting up of another to share the office of Mediator with Him, who is
so solemnly declared in Scripture to be the one Mediator between God and
man. But this distinction has no foundation in the revealed will of God;
on the contrary, it is directly at variance with the words and with the
spirit of many portions of the sacred volume. There we find the two
offices of redemption and mediation joined together in Christ. "If any
man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
Righteous, and He is the propitiation for our sins." [1 John ii. 1, 2.
Heb. ix. 12. vii. 25.] In the Epistle to the Hebrews, the same Saviour
who is declared "by his own blood to have obtained eternal redemption,"
is announced also as the Mediator of Intercession. "Wherefore he is able
to save them to the uttermost who come unto God through him, seeing he
ever liveth to make intercession for them." The {234} redemption wrought
by Christ, and the intercession still made in our behalf by Christ, are
both equally declared to us by the most sure warrant of Holy Scripture;
of any other intercession by saints in glory, by angels, or Virgin, to
be sought by our suppliant invocations to them, the covenant of God
speaks not.

It may be observed, that the enactment of this decree by the Council of
Trent, has been chiefly lamented by some persons on the ground of its
presenting the most formidable barrier against any reconciliation
between the Church of Rome, and those who hold the unlawfulness of the
invocation of saints. Indeed persons of erudition, judgment, piety, and
charity, in communion with Rome, have not been wanting to express openly
their regret, that decrees so positive, peremptory, and exclusive,
should have been adopted. They would have been better satisfied with the
terms of communion in the Church to which they still adhered, had
individuals been left to their own responsibility on questions of
disputable origin and doubtful antiquity, involving rather the subtilty
of metaphysical disquisitions, than agreeable to the simplicity of
Gospel truth, and essential Christian doctrine. On this point I would
content myself with quoting the sentiments of a Roman Catholic author.
Many of the facts alleged in his interesting comments deserve the
patient consideration of every Christian. Here (observes the commentator
on Paoli Sarpi's History of the Council of Trent[90]) the Council makes
it a duty to pray to saints, though the ancient Church never regarded it
as necessary. The practice cannot be proved to be introduced into public
worship {235} before the sixth century; and it is certain, that in the
ancient liturgies and sacramentaries no direct invocation is found. Even
in our modern missals, being those of our ecclesiastical books in which
the ancient form has been longest retained, scarcely is there a collect
[those he means in which mention is made of the saints] where the
address is not offered directly to God, imploring Him to hear the
prayers of the saints for us; and this is the ancient form of
invocation. It is true, that in the Breviaries and other ecclesiastical
books, direct prayers to the saints have been subsequently introduced,
as in litanies, hymns, and even some collects. But the usage is more
modern, and cannot be evidence for ancient tradition. For this [ancient
tradition] only some invocations addressed to saints in public harangues
are alleged, but which ought to be regarded as figures of rhetoric,
_apostrophes_, rather than real invocations; though at the same time
some fathers laid the foundation for such a practice by asserting that
one could address himself to the saints, and hope for succour from them.

    [Footnote 90: Histoire du Conc. de Trent, par Fra. Paoli Sarpi,
    traduit par Pierre François de Courayer. Amsterdam, note 31.
    1751. vol. iii. p. 182.]

We have already alluded to the very great latitude of interpretation
which the words of this Council admit. The expressions indeed are most
remarkably elastic; capable of being expanded widely enough to justify
those of the Church of Rome who allow themselves in the practice of
asking for aid and assistance, temporal and spiritual, to be expected
from the saints themselves; and at the same time, the words of the
decree admit of being so far contracted as not in appearance palpably to
contradict those who allege, that the Church of Rome never addresses a
saint with any other petition, than purely and simply that the saint
would by prayer intercede for the worshippers. The words "suppliantly
{236} to invoke them," and "to fly to their prayers, HELP, and SUCCOUR,"
are sufficiently comprehensive to cover all kinds of prayer for all
kinds of benefits, whilst "the invocation of them to pray for us even
individually," will countenance those who would restrict the faithful to
an entreaty for their prayers only.

Whatever may be the advantage of this latitude of interpretation, in one
point of view it must be a subject of regret. Complaints had long been
made in Christendom, that other prayers were offered to the saints,
besides those which petitioned only for their intercession; and if the
Council of Trent had intended it to be a rule of universal application,
that in whatever words the invocations of the saints might be couched,
they should be taken to mean only requests for their prayers, it may be
lamented, that no declaration to that effect was given.

The manner in which writers of the Church of Rome have attempted to
reconcile the prayers actually offered in her ritual, with the principle
of invoking the saints only for their prayers, is indeed most
unsatisfactory. Whilst to some minds the expedient to which those
writers have had recourse carries with it the stamp of mental
reservation, and spiritual subterfuge, and moral obliquity; others under
the influence of the purest charity will regret in it the absence of
that simplicity, and direct openness in word and deed, which we regard
as characteristic of the religion of the Gospel; and will deprecate its
adoption as tending, in many cases inevitably, to become a most
dangerous snare to the conscience. I will here refer only to the
profession of that principle as made by Bellarmin. Subsequent writers
seem to have adopted his sentiments, and to have expressed themselves
very much in his words. {237}

Bellarmin unreservedly asserts that Christians are to invoke the saints
solely and exclusively for their prayers, and not for any benefits as
from the saints themselves. But then he seems to paralyse that
declaration by this refinement: "It must nevertheless be observed that
we have not to do with words, but with the meaning of words; for as far
as concerns the words, it is lawful to say, 'Saint Peter, have mercy on
me! Save me! Open to me the entrance of heaven!' So also, 'Give to me
health of body, Give me patience, Give me fortitude!' Whilst only we
understand 'Save me, and have mercy upon me BY PRAYING for me: Give me
this and that, BY THY PRAYERS AND MERITS.' For thus Gregory of
Nazianzen, in his Oratio in Cyprianum; and the Universal Church, when in
the hymn to the Virgin she says,

  Mary, Mother of Grace,
  Mother of Mercy,
  Do thou protect us from the enemy,
  And take us in the hour of death.

"And in that of the Apostles,

  'To whose command is subject'
  The health and weakness of all:
  Heal us who are morally diseased;
  Restore us to virtue.

"And as the Apostle says of himself 'that I might save some,' [Rom. xi.]
and 'that he might save all,' [I Cor. ix.] not as God, but Thy prayer
and counsel."

I wish not to enter upon the question how far this distinction is
consistent with that openness and straightforward undisguised dealing
which is alone allowable when we are contending for the truth; nor how
far the {238} charge of moral obliquity and double dealing, often
brought against it, can be satisfactorily met. But suppose for a moment
that we grant (what is not the case) that in the metaphysical
disquisitions of the experienced casuist such a distinction might be
maintained, how can we expect it to be recognized, and felt, and acted
upon by the large body of Christians? Abstractedly considered, such an
interpretation in a religious act of daily recurrence by the mass of
unlearned believers would, I conceive, appear to reflecting minds most
improbable, if not utterly impossible. And as to its actual _bona-fide_
result in practice, a very brief sojourn in countries where the religion
of Rome is dominant, will suffice to convince us, that such subtilties
of the casuist are neither received nor understood by the great body of
worshippers; and that the large majority of them, when they pray to an
individual saint to deliver them from any evil, or to put them in
possession of some good, do in very deed look to the saint himself for
the fulfilment of their wishes. It is a snare to the conscience only too
evidently successful.

And I regret to add, that in the errors into which such language of
their prayers may unhappily betray them, they cannot be otherwise than
confirmed as well by the recorded sentiments of men in past years, whom
they have been taught to reverence, as by the sentiments which are
circulated through the world now, even by what they are accustomed to
regard as the highest authority on earth[91].

    [Footnote 91: See in subsequent parts of this work the
    references to Bonaventura, Bernardin Sen., Bernardin de Bust.,
    &c.; and also the encyclical letter of the present (A.D. 1840)
    reigning pontiff.]

To this point, however, we must repeatedly revert {239} hereafter; at
present, I will only add one further consideration. If, as we are now
repeatedly told, the utmost sought by the invocation of saints is that
they would intercede for the supplicants; that no more is meant than we
of the Anglican Church mean when we earnestly entreat our
fellow-Christians on earth to pray for us,--why should not the prayers
to the saints be confined exclusively to that form of words which would
convey the meaning intended? why should other forms of supplicating them
be adopted, whose obvious and direct meaning implies a different thing?
If we request a Christian friend to pray for us, that we may be
strengthened and supported under a trial and struggle in our spiritual
warfare, we do not say, "Friend, strengthen me; Friend, support me."
That entreaty would imply our desire to be, that he would visit us
himself, and comfort and strengthen us by his own kind words and
cheering offices of consolation and encouragement. To convey our
meaning, our words would be, "Pray for me; remember me in your
supplications to the throne of grace. Implore God, of his mercy, to give
me the strength and comfort of his Holy Spirit." If nothing more is ever
intended to be conveyed, than a similar request for their prayers, when
the saints are "suppliantly invoked," in a case of such delicacy, and
where there is so much danger of words misleading, why have other
expressions of every variety been employed in the Roman Liturgies, as
well as in the devotions of individuals, which in words appeal to the
saints, not for their prayers, but for their own immediate exertion in
our behalf, their assistance, succour, defence, and comfort,--"Protect
us from our enemies--Heal the diseases of our minds--Release us from our
sin--Receive us at the hour of death?" {240}

In the present work, however, were it not for the example and warning
set us by this still greater departure from Scripture and the primitive
Church, we need not have dwelt on this immediate point; because we
maintain that any invocation of saint or angel, even if it were confined
to a petitioning for their prayers and intercessions, is contrary both
to God's word and to the faith and practice of the primitive, Catholic,
and Apostolic Church. We now proceed to the next portion of our proposed
inquiry,--the present state of Roman Catholic worship, with respect to
the invocation of saints and angels. {241}






CHAPTER III.

SECTION I.--PRESENT SERVICE IN THE CHURCH OF ROME.


In submitting to the reader's consideration the actual state of Roman
Catholic worship at the present hour, I disclaim all desire to fasten
upon the Church of Rome any of the follies and extravagancies of
individual superstition. Probably many English Roman Catholics have been
themselves shocked and scandalized by the scenes which their own eyes
have witnessed in various parts of continental Europe. It would be no
less unfair in us to represent the excesses of superstition there forced
on our notice as the genuine legitimate fruits of the religion of Rome,
than it would be in Roman Catholics to affiliate on the Catholics of the
Anglican Church the wild theories and revolting tenets of all who assume
the name of opponents to Rome. Well indeed does it become us of both
Churches to watch jealously and adversely as against ourselves the
errors into which our doctrines, if not preserved and guarded in their
purity and simplicity, might have a tendency to seduce the unwary. And
whilst I am fully alive to the necessity of us Anglican Catholics
prescribing to ourselves a {242} practical application of the same rule
in various points of faith and discipline, I would with all delicacy and
respect invite Roman Catholics to do likewise. Especially would I
entreat them to reflect with more than ordinary scrutiny and solicitude
on the vast evils into which the practice of praying to saints and
angels, and of pleading their merits at the throne of grace, has a
tendency to betray those who are unenlightened and off their guard; and
unless my eyes and my ears and my powers of discernment have altogether
often deceived and failed me, I must add, actually betrays thousands.
Often when I have witnessed abroad multitudes of pilgrims prostrate
before an image of the Virgin, their arms extended, their eyes fixed on
her countenance, their words in their native language pouring forth her
praises and imploring her aid, I have asked myself, If this be not
religious worship, what is? If I could transport myself into the midst
of pagans in some distant part of the world at the present day; or could
I have mingled with the crowd of worshippers surrounding the image of
Minerva in Athens, or of Diana in Ephesus, when the servants of the only
God called their fellow-creatures from such vanities, should I have seen
or heard more unequivocal proofs that the worshippers were addressing
their prayers to the idols as representations of their deities? Would
any difference have appeared in their external worship? When the
Ephesians worshipped their "great goddess Diana and the image which fell
down from Jupiter," could their attitude, their eyes, or their words
more clearly have indicated an assurance in the worshipper, that the
Spirit of the Deity was especially present in that image, than the
attitude, the eyes, the words of the pilgrims at Einsiedlin for example,
are indications of the same {243} belief and assurance with regard to
the statue of the Virgin Mary? These thoughts would force themselves
again and again on my mind; and though since I first witnessed such
things many years have intervened, chequered with various events of
life, yet whilst I am writing, the scenes are brought again fresh to my
remembrance; the same train of thought is awakened; and the lapse of
time has not in the least diminished the estimate then formed of the
danger, the awful peril, to which the practice of addressing saints and
angels in prayer, even in its most modified and mitigated form, exposes
those who are in communion with Rome. I am unwilling to dwell on this
point longer, or to paint in deeper or more vivid colours the scenes
which I have witnessed, than the necessity of the case requires. But it
would have been the fruit of a morbid delicacy rather than of brotherly
love, had I disguised, in this part of my address, the full extent of
the awful dread with which I contemplate any approximation to prayers,
of whatever kind, uttered by the lips or mentally conceived, to any
spiritual existence in heaven above, save only to the one God
exclusively. It is indeed a dread suggested by the highest and purest
feelings of which I believe my frame of mind to be susceptible; it is
sanctioned and enforced by my reason; and it is confirmed and
strengthened more and more by every year's additional reflection and
experience. Ardently as I long and pray for Christian unity, I could not
join in communion with a Church, one of whose fundamental articles
accuses of impiety those who deny the lawfulness of the invocations of
saints.

But I return from this digression on the peril of idolatry, to which as
well the theory as the practice of {244} the Roman Catholic Church
exposes her members; and willingly repeat my disclaimer of any wish or
intention whatever to fasten and filiate upon the Church of Rome the
doctrines or the practice of individuals, or even of different sections
of her communion. Still, in the same manner as I have referred to the
extravagancies which offend us in many parts of Christendom now, I would
recall some of the excesses into which renowned and approved authors of
her communion have been betrayed. I seek not to fix on those members of
the Roman Church who disclaim any participation in such excesses, the
folly or guilt of others; but when we find many of the most celebrated
among her sons tempted into such lamentable departures from primitive
Christian worship, we are naturally led to ascertain whether the
doctrine be not itself the genuine cause and source of the
mischief;--whether the malady be not the immediate and natural effect of
the tenet and practice operating generally, and not to be referred to
the idiosyncrasy of the patient. A voice seems to address us from every
side, when such excesses are witnessed, Firmly resist the beginnings of
the evil; oppose its very commencement; it is not a question of degree,
exclude the principle itself from your worship; give utterance to no
invocation; mentally conceive no prayer to any being, save God alone;
plead no other merits with Him than the merits of his only Son. Then,
and then only, are you safe. Then, and then only, is your prayer
catholic, primitive, apostolic, and scriptural.

The[92] most satisfactory method of conducting this {245} branch of our
inquiry seems to be, that we should examine the Roman Ritual with
reference to those several and progressive stages to which I have before
generally referred; from the mere rhetorical apostrophe to the direct
prayer for spiritual blessings petitioned for immediately from the
person addressed. I am neither anxious to establish the progress
historically, nor do I wish to tie myself down in all cases to the exact
order of those successive stages, in my present citation of testimonies
from the Roman Ritual. My anxiety is to give a fair view of what is now
the real character of Roman Catholic worship, rather than to draw fine
distinctions. I shall therefore survey within the same field of view the
two fatal errors by which, as we believe, the worship of the Church of
Rome is rendered unfit for the family of Christ to acknowledge it
generally as their own: I mean the adoration of saints, and the pleading
of their merits at the throne of grace, instead of trusting to the alone
exclusive merits of the one only Mediator Jesus Christ our Lord, and
addressing God Almighty alone.

    [Footnote 92: I believe the method best calculated to supply us
    with the very truth is, as I have before observed, to trace the
    conduct of Christians at the shrines of the martyrs, and follow
    them in their successive departures further and further from
    primitive purity and simplicity, on the anniversaries of those
    servants of God. What was hailed there first in the full warmth
    of admiration and zeal for the honour and glory of a national or
    favourite martyr, crept stealthily, and step by step, into the
    regular and stated services of the Church.]

I. In the original form of those prayers in which mention was made of
the saints departed, Christians addressed the Supreme Being alone,
either in praise for the mercies shown to the saints themselves, and to
the Church through their means; or else in supplication, that the
worshippers might have grace to follow their example, and profit by
their instruction. Such, for instance, is the prayer in the Roman
ritual[93] on St. {246} John's day[94] which is evidently the foundation
of the beautiful Collect now used in the Anglican Church,--"Merciful
Lord, we beseech thee to cast thy bright beams of light upon thy Church,
that it being enlightened by the doctrine of thy Apostle and Evangelist
St. John, may so walk in the light of thy truth, that it may at length
attain to the light of everlasting life, through Jesus our Lord. Amen."
Such too is the close of the Prayer for the whole state of Christ's
Church militant here on earth, offered in our Anglican service,--"We
bless thy holy name for all thy servants departed this life in thy faith
and fear, beseeching thee to give us grace so to follow their good
examples, that with them we may be partakers of thy heavenly kingdom.
Grant this, O Father, for the sake of Jesus Christ our only Mediator and
Advocate. Amen."

    [Footnote 93: The references will generally be given to the
    Roman Breviary as edited by F.C. Husenbeth, Norwich, 1830. That
    work consists of four volumes, corresponding with the four
    quarters of the ecclesiastical year--Winter, Hiem.; Spring,
    Vern.; Summer, _Æstiv_.; Autumn, Aut.; and the volumes will be
    designated by the corresponding initials, H. V. Æ. A.]

    [Footnote 94: "Ecclesiam, tuam, Domine, benignus illustra, ut
    beati Johannis Apostoli tui et evangelistæ illuminata doctrinis,
    ad dona perveniat sempiterna. Per Dominum."--Husen. H. p. 243.]

II. The second stage supplies examples of a kind of rhetorical
apostrophe; the speaker addressing one who was departed as though he had
ears to hear. Were not this the foundation stone on which the rest of
the edifice seems to have been built, we might have passed it by
unnoticed. Of this we have an instance in the address to the Shepherds
on Christmas-day. "Whom have ye seen, ye shepherds? Say ye, tell ye, who
hath appeared on the earth? Say ye, what saw ye? Announce to us the
nativity of Christ[95]."

    [Footnote 95: Quem vidistis, Pastores? Dicite, Annunciate nobis.
    In terris quis apparuit? Dicite quidnam vidistis? Et annunciate
    Christi nativitatem.--H. 219.] {247}

Another instance is seen in that beautiful song ascribed to Prudentius
and used on the day of Holy Innocents:

  "Hail! ye flowers of Martyrs." [Salvete flores martyrum. H. 249.]

It is of the same character with other songs, said to be from the same
pen, in which the town of Bethlehem is addressed, and even the Cross.

  "O Thou of mighty cities." [O sola magnarum urbium. H. 306.]
  "Bend thy boughs, thou lofty tree...."
      [Flecte ramos arbor alta, &c. Aut. 344.]
  "Worthy wast thou alone
  To bear the victim of the world."

Thus, on the feast of the exaltation of the Cross, this anthem is
sung,--"O blessed Cross, who wast alone worthy to bear the King of the
heavens and the Lord." [O crux benedicta, quæ sola fuisti digna portare
Regem coelorum et Dominum. Alleluia. A. 345.] Though unhappily, in an
anthem on St. Andrew's day, this apostrophe becomes painful and
distressing, in which not only is the cross thus apostrophised, but it
is prayed to, as though it had ears to hear, and a mind to understand,
and power to act,--"Hail, precious Cross! do thou receive the disciple
of Him who hung upon thee, my master, Christ." [Salve, crux pretiosa
suscipe discipulum ejus, qui pependit in te, magister meus Christus. A.
547.] The Church of Rome, in this instance, gives us a vivid example of
the ease with which exclamations and apostrophes are made the
ground-work of invocations. In the legend of the day similar, though not
the same, words form a part of the salutation, which St. Andrew is there
said to have addressed {248} to the cross of wood prepared for his own
martyrdom, and then bodily before his eyes. There are many such
addresses to the Cross, in various parts of the Roman ritual. (See A.
344.)

In such apostrophes the whole of the Song of the Three Children abounds;
and we meet with many such in the early writers.

III. The third stage supplies instances of prayer to God, imploring him
to allow the supplication of his saints to be offered for us. Of this we
find examples in the Collects for St. Andrew's Eve and Anniversary, for
the feast of St. Anthony, and various others.

"We beseech thee, Almighty God, that he whose feast we are about to
celebrate may implore thy aid for us," &c. [Quæsumus omnipotens Deus, ut
beatus Andreas Apostolus cujus prævenimus festivitatem, tuum pro nobis
imploret auxilium. A. 545.]

"That he may be for us a perpetual intercessor." [Ut apud te sit pro
nobis perpetuus intercessor. A. 551.]

"We beseech thee, O Lord, let the intercession of the blessed Anthony
the Abbot commend us, that what we cannot effect by our own merits, we
may obtain by his patronage [Ejus patrocinio assequamur. H. 490.]:
through the Lord."

These prayers I could not offer in faith. I am taught in the written
word to look for no other intercessor in heaven, than one who is eternal
and divine, therefore I can need no other. Had God, by his revealed
word, told me that the intercessions of his servants departed should
prevail with Him, provided I sought that benefit by prayer, I should,
without any misgiving, have implored Him to receive their {249} prayers
in my behalf; but I can find no such an intimation in the covenant. In
that covenant the word of the God of truth and mercy is pledged to
receive those, and to grant the prayers of those who come to him through
his blessed Son. In that covenant, I am strictly commanded and most
lovingly invited to approach boldly the Supreme Giver of all good things
myself, and to ask in faith nothing wavering, with an assurance that He
who spared not his own Son, but delivered Him up for us all, will, with
Him, also freely give us all things. In this assurance I place implicit
trust; and as long as I have my being in this earthly tabernacle, I
will, by his gracious permission and help, pray for whatever is needful
for the soul and the body; I will pray not for myself only, but for all,
individually and collectively, who are near and dear to me, and all who
are far from me; for my friends, and for those who wish me ill; for my
fellow Christians, and for those who are walking still in darkness and
sin;--I will pray for mercy on all mankind. And I will, as occasion
offers, desire others among the faithful on earth to pray for me; and
will take comfort and encouragement and holy hope from the reflection
that their prayers are presented to God in my behalf, and that they will
continue to pray for me when my own strength shall fail and the hour of
my departure shall draw nigh. But for the acceptance of my own prayers
and of theirs I can depend on no other Mediator in the world of spirits,
than on HIM, whom his own Word declares to be the one Mediator between
God and men, who prayed for me when He was on earth, who is ever making
intercession for me in heaven. I know of no other in the unseen world,
by whom I can have access to the Father; I find no other offered to me,
I seek no {250} other, I want no other. I trust my cause,--the cause of
my present life, the cause of my soul's eternal happiness,--to HIM and
to his intercession. I thank God for the blessing. I am satisfied; and
in the assurance of the omnipotence of his intercession, and the perfect
fulness of his mediation, I am happy.

On this point it were well to compare two prayers both offered to God;
the one pleading with Him the intercession of the passion of his only
Son, the other pleading the prayers of a mortal man. The first prayer is
a collect in Holy Week, the second is a collect on St. Gregory's Day.

    We beseech thee, Almighty God, that we who among so many
    adversities from our own infirmity fail, the passion of thy only
    begotten Son interceding for us, may revive. V. 243.

    O God, who hast granted the rewards of eternal blessedness[96]
    to the soul of thy servant Gregory, mercifully grant that we who
    are pressed down by the weight of our sins, may, by his prayers
   with Thee, be raised up. V. 480.

    [Footnote 96: I can never read this, and such passages as this,
    without asking myself, can such an assertion be in accordance
    with the inspired teaching?--"Judge nothing before the time,
    until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden
    things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the
    hearts: and then shall every man have praise of God." I Cor. iv.
    5.]

IV. The next form of prayer to which I would invite your serious
attention, is one from which my judgment and my feelings revolt far more
decidedly even than from the last-mentioned; and I have the most clear
denouncement of my conscience, that by offering it I should do a wrong
to my Saviour, and ungratefully disparage his inestimable merits, and
the full, perfect, and sufficient sacrifice and satisfaction of his
omnipotent {251} atonement: I mean those prayers, still addressed to
God, which supplicate that our present and future good may be advanced
by the merits of departed mortals, that by their merits our sins may be
forgiven, and our salvation secured; that by their merits our souls may
be made fit for celestial joys, and be finally admitted into heaven.

Of these prayers the Roman Breviary contains a great variety of
examples, some exceeding others very much in their apparent
forgetfulness and disregard of the merits of the only Saviour, and
consequently far more shocking to the reason and affections of us who
hold it a point of conscience to make the merits of Christ alone, all in
all, exclusive of any other to be joined with them, the only ground of
our acceptance with God.

We find an example of this prayer in the collect on the day of St.
Saturnine. "O God, who grantest us to enjoy the birth-day of the blessed
Saturnine, thy martyr, grant that we may be aided by his merits, through
the Lord." [Ejus nos tribue meritis adjuvari per Dominum. A. 544.]

Another example, in which the supplicants plead for deliverance from
hell, to be obtained by the merits and prayers of the saint together, is
the Collect for December 6th, the day of St. Nicolas.

"O God, who didst adorn the blessed Pontiff Nicolas with unnumbered
miracles, grant, we beseech Thee, that by his merits and prayers we may
be set free from the fires of hell, through," &c. [Ut ejus meritis et
precibus à gehennæ incendiis liberemur. H. 436.]

Another example, in like manner specifying both the merits and
intercession of the departed saint, contains {252} expressions very
unacceptable to many of those who are accustomed to make the Bible their
study. It is a prayer to Joseph, the espoused husband of the Virgin
Mary. Of him mention is made by name in the Gospel just before and just
after the birth of Christ, as an upright, merciful man, to whom God on
three several occasions made a direct revelation of his will, by the
medium of a dream, with reference to the incarnate Saviour. Again, on
the holy family visiting Jerusalem, when our Lord was twelve years of
age, Mary, his mother, in her remonstrance with her Son, speaks to Him
of Joseph thus: "Why hast Thou thus dealt with us? Behold thy father and
I have sought Thee sorrowing." Upon which not one word was uttered by
our Saviour that would enable us to form an opinion as to his own will
with regard to Joseph. Our Lord seems purposely to have drawn their
thoughts from his earthly connexion with them, and to have raised their
minds to a contemplation of his unearthly, his heavenly, and eternal
origin. "How is it that ye sought me? Wist ye not that I must be about
my Father's business?" After this time, though the writings of the Holy
Book, either historical, doctrinal, or prophetic, at the lowest
calculation embrace a period of fourscore years, no allusion is made to
Joseph as a man still living, or to his memory as one already dead. And
yet he is one of those for the benefit of whose intercession the Church
of Rome teaches her members to pray to God, and from whose merits they
are taught to hope for succour.

On the 19th of March the following Collect is offered to the Saviour of
the world:--

"We beseech thee, O Lord, that we may be succoured by the merits of the
husband of thy most holy mother, {253} so that what we cannot obtain by
our own power, may be granted to us by his intercession. Who livest,"
&c. [V. 486.]

It is anticipating our instances of the different stages observable in
the invocation of saints, to quote here direct addresses to Joseph
himself; still it may be well to bring at once to a close our remarks
with regard to the worship paid to him. We find that in the Litany of
the Saints, "St. Joseph, pray for us," is one of the supplications; but
on his day (March 19) there are three hymns addressed to Joseph, which
appear to be full of lamentable superstition, assigning, as they do, to
him a share at least in the work of our salvation, and solemnly stating,
as a truth, what, whether true or not, depends upon a groundless
tradition, namely, that our blessed Lord and Mary watched by him at his
death; ascribing to Joseph also that honour and praise, which the Church
was wont to offer to God alone. The following are extracts from those
hymns:

First hymn. "Thee, Joseph, let the companies of heaven celebrate; thee
let all the choirs of Christian people resound; who, bright in merits,
wast joined in chaste covenant with the renowned Virgin. Others their
pious death consecrates after death; and glory awaits those who deserve
the palm. Thou alive, equal to those above, enjoyest God, more blessed
by wondrous lot. O Trinity, most High, spare us who pray; grant us to
reach heaven [to scale the stars] BY THE MERITS OF JOSEPH, that at
length we may perpetually offer to thee a grateful song." [Te Joseph
celebrent agmina coelitum. V. 485.]

Second hymn. "O, Joseph, the glory of those in heaven, and the sure hope
of our life, and the safeguard {254} of the world, benignly ACCEPT THE
PRAISES WHICH WE joyfully sing TO THEE.... Perpetual praise to the most
High Trinity, who granting to thee honours on high, give to us, BY THY
MERITS, the joys of a blessed life." [Coelitum, Joseph, Decus. V. 486.]

Third hymn. "He whom we, the faithful, worship with joy, whose exalted
triumphs we celebrate, Joseph, on this day obtained by merit the joys of
eternal life. O too happy! O too blessed! at whose last hour Christ and
the Virgin together, with serene countenance, stood watching. Hence,
conqueror of hell, freed from the bands of the flesh, he removes in
placid sleep to the everlasting seats, and binds his temples with bright
chaplets. Him, therefore, reigning, let us all importune, that he would
be present with us, and that he obtaining pardon for our transgressions,
would assign to us the rewards of peace on high. Be praises to thee, be
honours to thee, O Trine God, who reignest, and assignest golden crowns
to thy faithful servant for ever. Amen." [Iste, quem læti colimus
fideles. V. 490.]

It is painful to remark, that in these last clauses the very same word
is employed when the Church of Rome applies to Joseph to assign to the
faithful the rewards of peace, and when she ascribes glory to God for
assigning to his faithful servants crowns of gold. Indeed these hymns
contain many expressions which ought to be addressed to the Saviour
alone, whose "glory is in the heavens," who is "the hope of us on
earth," and "the safeguard of the world."



Under this fourth head I will add only one more specimen. Would it were
not to be found in the Roman {255} Liturgies since the Council of Trent:
God grant it may ere long be wiped out of the book of Christian worship!
It is a collect in which the Church of Rome offers this prayer to God
the Son:--

"O God, whose right hand raised the blessed Peter when walking on the
waves, that he sank not; and rescued his fellow-apostle Paul, for the
third time suffering shipwreck, from the depth of the sea; mercifully
hear us, and grant that by the merits of both we may obtain the glory of
eternity." [H. 149.]

Now suppose for a moment it had been intended in any one prayer
negatively to exclude the merits of Christ from the great work of our
eternal salvation, and to limit our hopes of everlasting glory to the
merits of St. Peter and St. Paul, could that object have been more
effectually and fully secured than by this prayer? Not one word alluding
to the redemption which is in Christ can be found in this prayer. The
sentiment in the first member of the prayer refers us to the power
exercised by the Son of God, and Son of man, when he was intabernacled
in our flesh; and the second expression teaches us to contemplate the
providence of our Almighty Saviour in his deeds of beneficence. But no
reference, even by allusion, is here made to the merits of Christ's
death--none to his merits as our great Redeemer; none to his merits as
our never-ceasing and never-failing Intercessor. We are led to approach
the throne of grace only with the merits of the two Apostles on our
tongue. If those who offer it hope for acceptance through THE MEDIATION
of Jesus Christ, and for the sake of his merits, that hope is neither
suggested nor fostered by this prayer. The truth, as it is in Jesus,
would compel us in addressing {256} Him, the Saviour of the world, to
think of the merits of neither Peter nor Paul, of neither angel nor
spirit. Instead of praying to him that we may obtain the glories of
eternity for their merits, true faith in Christ would bid us throw
ourselves implicitly on his omnipotent merits alone, and implore so
great a blessing for his own mercy's sake. If we receive the whole
truth, can it appear otherwise than a disparagement of his perfect and
omnipotent merits, to plead with Him the merits of one, whom the Saviour
himself rebuked with as severe a sentence as ever fell from his lips,
"Get thee behind me, Satan, thou art an offence to me; for thou
savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of men;"
[Matt. xvi. 23.] and of another who after his conversion, when speaking
of the salvation wrought by Christ, in profound humility confesses
himself to be a chief of those sinners for whom the Saviour died, "This
is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief?" [1 Tim. i.
15.] We feel, indeed, a sure and certain hope that these two
fellow-creatures, once sinners, but by God's grace afterwards saints,
have found mercy with God, and will live with Christ for ever; but to
pray for the same mercy at his gracious hands for the sake of their
merits is repugnant to our first principles of Christian faith. When we
think of merits, for which to plead for mercy, we can think of Christ's,
and of Christ's alone.

V. Our thoughts are next invited to that class of prayers which the
Church of Rome authorizes and directs to be addressed immediately to the
Saints themselves. {257} Of these there are different kinds, some far
more objectionable than others, though all are directly at variance with
that one single and simple principle, to which, as we believe, a
disciple of the cross can alone safely adhere--prayer to God, and only
to God. The words of the Council of Trent are, as we have already
observed, very comprehensive on this subject. They not only declare it
to be a good and useful thing supplicantly to invoke the saints reigning
with Christ: but also for the obtaining of benefits from God, through
Jesus Christ our Lord, who is our only Redeemer and Saviour, to fly to
their prayers, HELP, and ASSISTANCE. Whether these last words can be
interpreted as merely words of surplusage, or whether they must be
understood to mean that the faithful must have recourse to some help and
assistance of the saints beyond their intercession, is a question to
which we need not again revert. If it had been intended to embrace other
kinds of beneficial succour, and other help and assistance, perhaps it
would be difficult to find words more expressive of such general aid and
support as a human being might hope to derive, in answer to prayer from
the Giver of all good. And certainly they are words employed by the
Church, when addressing prayers directly to God. Be this as it may, the
public service-books of the Church of Rome unquestionably, by no means
adhere exclusively to such addresses to the saints, as supplicate them
to pray for the faithful on earth. Many a prayer is couched in language
which can be interpreted only as conveying a petition to them
immediately for their assistance, temporal and spiritual.

But let us calmly review some of the prayers, supplications,
invocations, or by whatever name religious addresses now offered to the
saints may be called; and {258} first, we will examine that class in
which the petitioners ask merely for the intercession of the saints.

We have an example of this class in an invocation addressed to St.
Ambrose on his day, December 7; the very servant of Christ in whose
hymns and prayers no address of prayer or invocation to any saint or
martyr can be found.

"O thou most excellent teacher, the light of the Holy Church, O blessed
Ambrose, thou lover of the divine law, deprecate for us [or intercede
for us with] the Son of God[97]."

    [Footnote 97: H. 438. "Deprecare pro nobis Filium Dei." This
    invocation to Ambrose is instantly followed by this prayer to
    God: "O God, who didst assign to thy people the blessed Ambrose
    as a minister of eternal salvation, grant, we beseech Thee, that
    we may deserve to have him as our intercessor in heaven, whom we
    had as a teacher of life on earth."]

The Church of Rome has wisely availed herself of the pious labours of
Ambrose, Bishop of Milan; and has introduced into her public worship
many of the hymns usually ascribed to him. Would she had followed his
example, and addressed her invocations to no one but our Creator, our
Redeemer, and our Sanctifier! Could that holy man hear the supplications
now offered to him, and could be make his voice heard in return among
those who now invoke him, that voice, we believe, would only convey a
prohibitory monition like that of the Angel to St. John when he fell
down before him, See thou do it not; I am thy fellow-servant; worship
God.

It is needless to multiply instances of this fifth kind of invocation.
In the "Litany of the Saints" more than fifty different saints are
enumerated by name, and are invoked to pray and intercede for those who
join in {259} it. Among the persons invoked are Raphael [Æ. cxcii.],
Gervasius, Protasius, and Mary Magdalene; whilst in the Litany [Æ.
cxcvi.] for the recommendation of the soul of the sick and dying, the
names of Abel, and Abraham, are specified.

Under this head I will call your attention only to one more example.
Indeed I scarcely know whether this hymn would more properly be classed
under this head, or reserved for the next; since it appears to partake
of the nature of each. It supplicates the martyr to obtain by his
prayers spiritual blessings, and yet addresses him as the person who is
to grant those blessings. It implores him to liberate us by the love of
Christ; but so should we implore the Father of mercies himself. Still,
as the more safe course, I would regard it as a prayer to St. Stephen
only to intercede for us. But it may be well to derive from it a lesson
on this point; how easily the transition glides from one false step to a
worse; how infinitely wiser and safer it is to avoid evil in its very
lowest and least noxious appearance:

"Martyr of God [or Unconquered Martyr], who, by following the only Son
of the Father, triumphest over thy conquered enemies, and, as conqueror,
enjoyest heavenly things; by the office of thy prayer wash out our
guilt; driving away the contagion of evil; removing the weariness of
life. The bands of thy hallowed body are already loosed; loose thou us
from the bands of the world, by the love of the Son of God [or by the
gift of God Most High]." [H. 237.]

In the above hymn the words included within brackets are the readings
adopted in the last English edition of the Roman Breviary; and in this
place, when we are about to refer to many hymns now in use, it may be
well to observe, that in the present day we find {260} various readings
in the hymns as they are still printed for the use of Roman Catholics in
different countries. In some instances the changes are curious and
striking. Grancolas, in his historical commentary on the Roman Breviary
(Venice, 1734, p. 84), furnishes us with interesting information as to
the chief cause of this diversity. He tells us that Pope Urban VIII.,
who filled the papal throne from 1623 to 1644, a man well versed in
literature, especially in Latin poetry, and himself one of the
distinguished poets of his time, took measures for the emendation of the
hymns in the Roman Breviary. He was offended by the many defects in
their metrical composition, and it is said that upwards of nine hundred
and fifty faults in metre were corrected, which gave to Urban occasion
to say that the Fathers had begun rather than completed the hymns.
These, as corrected, he caused to be inserted in the Breviary. Grancolas
proceeds to tell us that many complained of these changes, alleging that
the primitive simplicity and piety which breathed in the hymns had been
sacrificed to the niceties of poetry. "Accessit Latinitas, et recessit
pietas." The verse was neater, but the thought was chilled.

VI. But the Roman Church by no means limits herself to this kind of
invocation; prayers are addressed to saints, imploring them to hear,
and, as of themselves, to grant the prayers of the faithful on earth,
and to release them from the bands of sin, without any allusion to
prayers to be made by those saints. It grieves me to copy out the
invocation made to St. Peter on the 18th of January, called the
anniversary of the Chair of St. Peter at Rome; the words of our Blessed
Lord himself, and of his beloved and inspired Apostle, seem to rise up
in judgment against that prayer, and condemn it. It {261} will be well
to place that hymn addressed to St. Peter, side by side with the very
word of God, and then ask, Can this prayer be safe?

1. Now, O good Shepherd,             1. Jesus saith, I am the good
merciful Peter,                      Shepherd. John x. 11.

2. Accept the prayers of us          2. Whatsoever ye shall ask in
who supplicate,                      my name, that will I do. That
                                     whatsoever ye shall ask the
                                     Father in my name, he may give
                                     it you. John xiv. 13; xv. 16.

3. And loose the bands of our        3. The blood of Jesus Christ
sins, by the power committed to      his Son cleanseth us from all sin.
thee,                                1 John i. 7.

4. By which thou shuttest            4. These things saith he that
heaven against all by a word,        is holy, he that is true, he that
and openest it[98].                  openeth and no man shutteth, and
                                     shutteth and no man openeth.
                                     Rev. iii. 7.

                                     I am he that liveth and was
                                     dead, and am alive for evermore,
                                     and have the keys of hell and of
                                     death. Rev. i. 18.

    [Footnote 98: This hymn is variously read. In the edition of Mr.
    Husenbeth (H. 497.) it is: "O Peter, blessed shepherd, of thy
    mercy receive the prayers of us who supplicate, and loose by thy
    word the bands of our sins, thou to whom is given the power of
    opening heaven to the earth, and of shutting it when
    open."--"Beate pastor, Petre, clemens accipe voces precantum,
    criminumque vincula verbo resolve, cui potestas tradita aperire
    terris coelum, apertum claudere." H. 497.]

Let it not be answered that many a Christian minister is now called a
good shepherd. Let it not be said that the very words of our ordination
imply the conveyance of the power of loosing and binding, of opening and
shutting the gates of heaven. When prayer is contemplated, we can think
only of One, HIM, who has appropriated the title of Good Shepherd to
{262} himself. And we must see that Peter cannot, by any latitude of
interpretation, be reckoned now among those to whom the awful duty is
assigned of binding and loosing upon earth.

The same unsatisfactory associations must be excited in the mind of
every one who takes a similar view of Christian worship with myself, by
the following supplication to various saints on St. John's day:

  "Let the heaven exult with praises[99],
  Let the earth resound with joy; {263}
  The sacred solemnities sing
  The glory of the Apostles.
  O ye Just Judges of the age,
  And true lights of the world,
  We pray you with the vows of our hearts,
  Hear the prayers of your suppliants.
  Ye who shut the heaven by a word,
  And loose its bars,
  Loose us by command, we beseech you,
  From all our sins.
  Ye to whose word is subject
  The health and weakness of all,
  Cure us who are diseased in morals,
  Restore us to virtues.
  So that when Christ shall come,
  The Judge at the end of the world,
  He may make us partakers
  Of eternal joy.
  To God the Father be Glory,
  And to his only Son,
  With the Spirit the Comforter,
  Now and for ever. Amen[100]."

    [Footnote 99: Having inserted in the text a translation of this
    hymn from a copy with which I had been long familiar, I think it
    right to insert here the two forms side by side. They supply an
    example of the changes to which we have already alluded.

    _Lille_, 1823.                         _Norwich_, 1830.

    OLD VERSION.                           POPE URBAN'S VERSION.

    Exultet coelum laudibus,               Exultet orbis gaudiis,
    Resultet terra gaudiis,                Coelum resultet laudibus,
    Apostolorum gloriam                    Apostolorum gloriam
    Sacra canunt solemnia.                 Tellus et astra concinunt.
    Vos sæcli justi judices                Vos sæculorum judices
    Et vera mundi lamina,                  Et vera mundi lumina,
    Votis precamur cordium                 Votis precamur cordium
    Audite preces supplicum.               Audite voces supplicum.
    Qui coelum verbo clauditis             Qui templa coeli clauditis
    Serasque ejus solvitis,                Serasque verbo solvitis,
    Nos a peccatis omnibus                 Nos a reatu noxios
    Solvite jussu, quæsumus.               Solvi jubete quæsumus.
    Quorum præcepto subditur               Præcepta quorum protinus
    Salus et languor omnium,               Languor salusque sentiunt,
    Sanate ægros moribus,                  Sanate mentes languidas,
    Nos reddentes virtutibus.              Augete nos virtutibus.
    Ut cum judex advenerit                 Ut cum redibit arbiter
    Christus in fine sæculi,               In fine Christus sæculi,
    Nos sempiterni gaudii                  Nos sempiterni gaudii
    Faciat esse compotes.                  Concedat esse compotes.
    Deo Patri sit gloria,                  Jesu, tibi sit gloria
    Ejusque soli Filio,                    Qui natus es de virgine,
    Cum Spiritu paracleto,                 Cum Patre et Almo Spiritu,
    Et nunc et in perpetuum.               In sempiterna sæcula.

    Amen.                                  Amen.
                                           (H. 243.)
    ]

    [Footnote 100: Or as in the present Roman Breviary:--

      Let the world exult with joy,
      Let the heaven resound with praise;
      The earth and stars sing together
      The glory of the Apostles.
      Ye judges of the ages
      And true lights of the world,
      With the prayers of our hearts we implore,
      Hear the voices of your suppliants.
      Ye who shut the temples of heaven,
      And loose its bars by a word,
      Command ye us, who are guilty,
      To be released from our sins; we pray.
      Ye whose commands forthwith
      Sickness and health feel,
      Heal our languid minds,
      Increase us in virtues,
      That when Christ, the Judge, shall return,
      In the end of the world,
      He may grant us to be partakers
      Of eternal joy.
      Jesus, to thee be glory,
      Who wast born of a virgin,
      With the Father and the Benign Spirit,
      Through eternal ages. Amen. {264}
    ]

Many a pious and humble Catholic of the Roman Communion, I have no
doubt, would regard these prayers as little more than an application to
Peter and the rest of the Apostles for absolution, and would interpret
its several clauses as an acknowledgment only of that power, which
Christ himself delegated to them of binding and loosing sins on earth.
But the gulf fixed between these prayers, and the lawful use of the
power given to Christ's ordained ministers on earth, is great indeed. To
satisfy the mind of this, it is not necessary to enter upon even the
confines of the wide field of controversy, as to what was really
conveyed by Christ to his Apostles. I would ask only two questions.
Could any of us address these same words to one of Christ's ministers on
earth? And could we address our blessed Saviour himself in stronger or
more appropriate language, as the Lord of our destinies--the God who
heareth prayer--the Physician of our souls?

Suppose for example we were celebrating the anniversary of Christ's
Nativity, of his Resurrection, or his Ascension, what word in this hymn,
expressive of {265} power, and honour, and justice, and mercy, would not
be appropriate? What word would not apply to Him, in most perfect
accordance with Scripture language? And can we without offence, without
doing wrong to his great Name, address the same to our fellow-servants,
even though we may believe them to be with Him in glory?

  Let the heaven exult with praises--
  Let the earth resound with joy;
  The sacred solemnities sing
  The glory of the Lord.
  O Thou just Judge of the age,
  And true light of the world,
  We pray Thee with the supplications of our hearts
  Hear the prayers of Thy suppliants,
  Thou who shuttest the heavens by a word,
  And loosest its bars.
  Loose us by command, we beseech Thee,
  From all our sins.
  Thou to whose word is subject
  The health and weakness of all,
  Cure us who are diseased in morals,
  Restoring us to virtue.
  So that when Thou shalt come,
  The Judge at the end of the world,
  Thou mayest make us partakers
  Of eternal joy.
  Glory to Thee, O Lord,
  Who wast born of a virgin,
  With the Father and the Holy Spirit,
  For ever and ever. Amen.

Only for a moment let us see how peculiarly all these expressions are
fitting in a hymn of prayer and praise {266} to our God and Saviour,
recalling to our minds the words of inspiration; and then again let us
put the question to our conscience, Is this language fit for us to use
to a fellow-creature?

Let the heaven exult with praises,    Let the heavens rejoice, and
Let the earth resound with joy:       let the earth be glad ... (exultet
                                      is the very word used in the Vulgate
                                      translation of the Psalm)--before
                                      the Lord, for He cometh
                                      to judge the earth.--Ps. xcvi
                                      (xcv). 11.

The holy solemnities sing             Ye shall have a song, as in the
The glory of the Lord.                night when a holy solemnity is
                                      kept ... And the Lord shall cause
                                      His glorious voice to be heard.
                                      Isa. xxx. 29. Let the heaven
                                      and earth praise Him. Ps. lxix
                                      (lxviii). 34.

Thou just Judge of mankind,           All judgment is committed
And true light of the world,          unto the Son. John v. 22. That
                                      was the true Light, which lighteth
                                      every man that cometh into
                                      the world. John i. 9.

With the prayers of our hearts we     With my whole heart have I
  pray Thee,                          sought Thee. Ps. cxix (cxviii).
Hear the prayers of Thy suppliants.   10. Hear my prayer, O God.
                                      Ps. lxi (lx). 1. Whom have I in
                                      heaven but Thee? Ps. lxxiii
                                      (lxxii). 25. And this is the
                                      confidence that we have in Him,
                                      that if we ask any thing according to
                                      His will, He heareth us. 1 John
                                      v. 14.

Thou who shuttest heaven by           I have the keys of death and of
  Thy word,                           hell. These things saith He that
And loosest its bars,                 is holy, He that is true: He
                                      that hath the key of David. He
                                      that openeth and no man shutteth,
                                      and shutteth and no man {267}
                                      openeth. I have set before thee
                                      an open door, and no man can
                                      shut it. Rev. i. 18; iii. 7,8

Release us by command, we pray        Thy sins be forgiven thee.
Thee,                                 Matt. ix. 22. Bless the Lord, O
From all our sins.                    my soul ... who forgiveth all
                                      thine iniquities. Ps. ciii. 2. This
                                      is your blood of the New Testament,
                                      which is shed for many
                                      for the remission of sins. Matt.
                                      xxvi. 28. Have mercy upon me,
                                      O God ... according to the
                                      multitude of Thy tender mercies,
                                      blot out my transgressions. Wash
                                      me throughly from mine iniquity,
                                      and cleanse me from my
                                      sin. Ps. li (l).

Thou to whose word is subject         Bless the Lord, O my soul ...
The health and weakness of all,       who healeth all thy diseases. Ps.
                                      ciii (cii). 2, 3.

Do Thou heal us who are morally       Create in me a clean heart, O
diseased,                             God, and renew a right spirit
Restoring us to virtue;               within me. Ps. li. 10 (4.)
That when Thou, the Judge, shalt
appear in the end of the world,
Thou mayest grant us to be
partakers of eternal joy.

This would be a Christian prayer, a primitive prayer, a scriptural
prayer, a prayer well fitting mortal man to utter by his tongue and from
his heart, to the God who heareth prayer; and him who shall in sincere
faith offer such a prayer, Christ will never send empty away. But if
this prayer, fitted as it seems only to be addressed to God, be offered
to the soul of a departed saint--I will not talk of blasphemy, and
deadly sin, and idolatry,--I will only ask members of the Church of Rome
to weigh all these things well, one by one. These are not subjects for
crimination and recrimination. {268}

We have had far too much of those unholy weapons on both sides. Speaking
the truth in love, I should be verily guilty of a sin in my own
conscience were I, with my views of Christian worship, to offer this
prayer to the soul of a man however holy, however blessed, however
exalted.

The next part of our work will be given exclusively to the worship of
the Blessed Virgin Mary. {269}






PART III.

CHAPTER I.

SECTION I.--THE VIRGIN MARY.


The worship of the blessed Virgin Mary is so highly exalted in the
Church of Rome, as to require the formation of a new name to express its
high character. Neither could the Latin language provide a word which
would give an adequate idea of its excellence, nor could any word
previously employed by the writers in Greek, meet the case
satisfactorily. The newly invented term Hyperdulia, meaning "a service
above others," seems to place the service of the Virgin on a footing
peculiarly its own, as raised above the worship of the saints departed,
and of the angels of God, cherubim and seraphim, with all the hosts of
principalities and powers in heavenly places. The service of the Virgin
Mary thus appears not only to justify, but even to require a separate
and distinct examination in this volume. The general principles,
however, which we have already endeavoured to establish and illustrate
with regard as well to the study of the Holy Scriptures as to the
evidence of primitive antiquity, are equally applicable here; and with
those principles present to our minds, {270} we will endeavour now to
ascertain the truth with regard to the worship of the Virgin as now
witnessed in the Roman Catholic Church.

Of the Virgin Mary, think not, brethren of the Church of Rome, that a
true member of the Anglican branch of the Catholic Church will speak
disparagingly or irreverently. Were such an one found among us, we
should say of him, he knows not what spirit he is of. Our church, in her
Liturgy, her homilies, her articles, in the works too of the best and
most approved among her divines and teachers, ever speaks of Saint Mary,
the blessed Virgin, in the language of reverence, affection, and
gratitude.

She was a holy virgin and a holy mother. She was highly favoured,
blessed among women. The Lord was with her, and she was the mother of
our only Saviour. She was herself blessed, and blessed was the fruit of
her womb. We delight in the language of our ancestors, in which they
were used to call her "Mary, the Blissful Maid." Should any one of those
who profess and call themselves Christians and Catholics, entertain a
wish to interrupt the testimony of every succeeding age, and to
interpose a check to the fulfilment of her own recorded prophecy, "All
generations shall call me blessed," certainly the Anglican Catholic
Church will never acknowledge that wish to be the genuine desire of one
of her own sons. The Lord hath blessed her; yea, and she shall be
blessed.

But when we are required either to address our supplications to her, or
else to sever ourselves from the communion of a large portion of our
fellow-Christians, we have no room for hesitation; the case offers us no
alternative. Our love of unity must yield to our love {271} of truth; we
cannot join in that worship which in our conscience we believe to be a
sin against God. Whether we are right or wrong in this matter, God will
himself judge: and, compared with his acquittal and approval, the
severity of man's judgment cannot turn us aside from our purpose. But
before any one pronounces a sentence of condemnation against us, or of
approval on himself, it well becomes him patiently and dispassionately
to weigh the evidence; lest his decision may not be consistent with
justice and truth.

In addition to what has been already said on the general subject of
addressing our invocation to any created being--to any one among the
principalities and thrones, dominions, powers, angels, archangels, and
all the hosts of heaven, to any one among the saints, martyrs,
confessors, and holy men departed hence in the Lord--I would submit to
my brethren of the Roman Catholic Church some considerations
specifically applicable to the case of the blessed Virgin, and to the
practice of the Church of Rome in the religious worship paid to her.

First, it will be well for us to possess ourselves afresh of whatever
light is thrown on this subject by the Scriptures themselves.





SECTION II.--EVIDENCE OF HOLY SCRIPTURE.


The first intimation given to us that a woman was in the providence of
God appointed to be the instrument, or channel by which the Saviour of
mankind should be brought into the world, was made immediately after the
Fall, and at the very first dawn of the day of salvation. {272} I am
fully aware how the various criticisms on the words in which that first
promise of a Saviour is couched, have been the well-spring of angry
controversy. I will not enter upon that field. The authorized English
version thus renders the passage: "I will put enmity between thee and
the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head,
and thou shalt bruise his heel." [Gen. iii. 15.] The Roman Vulgate,
instead of the word "it," reads "she." Surely such a point as this
should be made a subject of calm and enlightened criticism, without
warmth or heart-burnings on either side. But for our present purpose, it
matters little what turn that controversy may take. I believe our own to
be the true rendering: but whether the word dictated here by the Holy
Spirit to Moses should be so translated as to refer to the seed of the
woman generally, as in our authorized version, or to the male child, the
descendant of the woman, as the Septuagint renders it, or to the word
"woman" itself; and if the latter, whether it refer to Eve, the mother
of every child of a mortal parent, or to Mary, the immediate mother of
our Saviour: whatever view of that Hebrew word be taken, no Christian
can doubt, that before the foundations of the world were laid, it was
foreordained in the counsels of the Eternal Godhead, that the future
Messiah, the Redeemer of Mankind, should be of the seed of Eve, and in
the fulness of time be born of a Virgin of the name of Mary, and that in
the mystery of that incarnation should the serpent's head be bruised. I
wish not to dwell on this, because it bears but remotely and
incidentally on the question at issue. I will, therefore, pass on,
quoting {273} only the words of one of the most laborious among Roman
Catholic commentators, De Sacy. "The sense is the same in the one and in
the other, though the expression varies. The sense of the Hebrew is, The
Son of the Woman, Jesus Christ, Son of God, and Son of a Virgin, shall
bruise thy head, and by establishing the kingdom of God on earth,
destroy thine. The sense of the Vulgate is, The woman, by whom thou hast
conquered man, shall bruise thy head, not by herself, but by Jesus
Christ." [Vol. i. p. 132.]

The only other passage in which reference appears to be made in the Old
Testament to the Mother of our Lord, contains that celebrated prophecy
in the seventh chapter of Isaiah, about which I am not aware that any
difference exists between the Anglican and the Roman Churches. "A Virgin
shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his name Immanuel."
[Isaiah vii. 4.]

I find no passage in the Old Testament which can by any inferential
application be brought to bear on the question of Mary's being a proper
object of invocation.



In the New Testament, mention by name is made of the Virgin Mary by St.
Matthew, St. Mark, and St. Luke, and by St. John in his Gospel, as the
Mother of our Lord, but not by name; and by no other writer. Neither St.
Paul in any one of his many Epistles, though he mentions the names of
many of our Lord's disciples, nor St. James, nor St. Peter, who must
often have seen her during our Lord's ministry, nor St. Jude, nor St.
John in any of his three Epistles, or in the {274} Revelation (though,
as we learn from his own Gospel, she had of especial trust been
committed to his care)--no one of these either mentions her as living,
or alludes to her memory as dead.

The first occasion on which any reference is made in the New Testament
to the Virgin Mary is the salutation of the Angel, as recorded by St.
Luke in the opening chapter of his Gospel. The last occasion is when she
is mentioned by the same Evangelist, as "Mary the Mother of Jesus," in
conjunction with his brethren and with the Apostles and the women all
continuing in prayer and supplication, immediately after the ascension
of our blessed Lord. Between these two occasions the name of Mary occurs
under a variety of circumstances, on every one of which we shall do well
to reflect.

The first occasion, we have already said, is the salutation of Mary by
the angel, announcing to her that she should be the Mother of the Son of
God. Surely no daughter of Eve was ever so distinguished among women;
and well does it become us to cherish her memory with affectionate
reverence. The words addressed to her when on earth by the angel in that
announcement, with a little variation of expression, are daily addressed
to her by the Roman Catholic Church, now that she is no longer seen, but
is removed to the invisible world. "Hail, thou that art highly
favoured!" (or as the Vulgate reads it, "full of grace") "the Lord is
with thee. Blessed art thou among women." [Luke i. 28.] On the
substitution of the expression, "full of grace," for "highly favoured,"
or, as our margin suggests, "graciously accepted, or much graced," I am
not desirous {275} of troubling you with any lengthened remark. I could
have wished that since the Greek is different in this passage, and in
the first chapter of St. John, where the words "full of grace" are
applied to our Saviour, a similar distinction had been observed in the
Roman translation. But the variation is unessential. The other
expression, "Blessed art thou among women," is precisely and identically
the same with the ascription of blessedness made by an inspired tongue,
under the elder covenant, to another daughter of Eve. "Blessed above
women," or (as both the Septuagint and the Vulgate render the word)
"Blessed among women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be."
[Judges v. 24.] We can see no ground in such ascription of blessedness
for any posthumous adoration of the Virgin Mary.

The same observation applies with at least equal strictness to that
affecting interview between Mary and Elizabeth, when, enlightened
doubtless by an especial revelation, Elizabeth returned the salutation
of her cousin by addressing her as the Mother of her Lord, and hailing
her visit as an instance of most welcome and condescending kindness,
"Whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come unto me?"
[Luke i. 43.] Members of the Anglican Church are taught to refer to this
event in Mary's life with feelings of delight and gratitude. On this
occasion she uttered that beautiful hymn, "The Song of the blessed
Virgin Mary," which our Church has selected for daily use at Evening
Prayer. These incidents bring before our minds the image of a spotless
Virgin, humble, pious, obedient, holy: a chosen servant of God--an
exalted pattern for her fellow-creatures; but still a fellow-creature,
and a fellow-servant: {276} a virgin pronounced by an angel blessed on
earth. But further than this we cannot go. We read of no power, no
authority, neither the power and influence of intercession, nor the
authority or right of command being ever, even by implication, committed
to her; and we dare not of our own minds venture to take for granted a
statement of so vast magnitude, involving associations so awful. We
reverence her memory as a blessed woman, the virgin mother of our Lord.
We cannot supplicate any blessing at her hand; we cannot pray to her for
her intercession.

The angel's announcement to Joseph, whether before or after the birth of
Christ, the visit of the Magi, the flight into Egypt, and the return
thence, in the record of all of which events by St. Matthew the name of
Mary occurs, however interesting and important in themselves, seem to
require no especial attention with reference to the immediate subject of
our inquiry. To Joseph the angel speaks of the blessed Virgin as "Mary
thy wife." [Matt. i. 20.] In every other instance she is called "The
young child's mother," or "His mother."

In relating the circumstances of Christ's birth the Evangelist employs
no words which seem to invite any particular examination. Joseph went up
into the city of David to be taxed with Mary his espoused wife; and
there she brought forth her first-born son, and wrapped him in swaddling
clothes, and laid him in a manger. And the shepherds found Mary and
Joseph, and the babe lying in a manger. And Mary kept all these things,
and pondered them in her heart. [Luke ii. 19.]

Between the birth of Christ, and the flight into Egypt, St. Luke records
an event to have happened by no means unimportant--the presentation of
Christ in {277} the temple. "And when the days of her purification
according to the law of Moses were accomplished, they brought him to
Jerusalem to present him to the Lord. And he (Simeon) came by the Spirit
into the temple; and when the parents brought in the child Jesus to do
for him after the custom of the law, then took he him up in his arms,
and blessed God, and said, Lord, &c. And Joseph and his mother marvelled
at those things which were spoken of him. And Simeon blessed them, and
said unto Mary his mother, Behold, this child is set for the fall and
rising again of many in Israel; and for a sign that shall be spoken
against, (yea, a sword shall pierce through thine own soul also) that
the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed." [Luke ii. 28.] In this
incident it is worthy of remark, that Joseph and Mary are both mentioned
by name, that they are both called the parents of the young child; that
both are equally blessed by Simeon; and that the good old Israelite,
illumined by the spirit of prophecy, when he addresses himself
immediately to Mary, speaks only of her future sorrow, and does not even
most remotely or faintly allude to any exaltation of her above the other
daughters of Abraham. "A sword shall pass through thine own soul also,"
a prophecy, as St. Augustine interprets it, accomplished when she
witnessed the sufferings and death of her Son. (See De Sacy, vol. xxxii.
p. 138.)

The next occasion on which the name of the Virgin Mary is found in
Scripture, is the memorable visit of herself, her husband, and her Son,
to Jerusalem, when he was twelve years old. And the manner in which this
incident is related by the inspired Evangelist, so far from intimating
that Mary was destined to be an object of worship to the believers in
her Son, affords {278} evidence which exhibits strongly a bearing the
direct contrary. Here again Joseph and Mary are both called his parents:
Joseph is once mentioned by name, and so is Mary. If the language had
been so framed as on purpose to take away all distinction of preference
or superiority, it could not more successfully have effected its
purpose. But not only so, of the three addresses recorded as having been
made by our blessed Lord to his beloved mother (and only three are
recorded in the New Testament), the first occurs during this visit to
Jerusalem. It was in answer to the remonstrance made by Mary, "Son, why
hast thou thus dealt with us? Behold, thy father and I have sought thee
sorrowing." [Luke ii. 48.] "How is it that ye sought me? Knew ye not
that I must be about my Father's business?"--[or in my Father's house,
as some render it.] He lifts up their minds from earth to heaven, from
his human to his eternal origin. He makes no distinction here,--"Wist YE
not." Again, I would appeal to any dispassionate person to pronounce,
whether this reproof, couched in these words, countenances the idea that
our blessed Lord intended his human mother to receive such divine honour
from his followers to the end of time as the Church of Rome now pays?
and whether St. Luke, whose pen wrote this account, could have been made
cognizant of any such right invested in the Virgin?

The next passage calling for our consideration is that which records the
first miracle: "And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of
Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there, and both Jesus was called
and his disciples to the marriage. And when they wanted wine (when the
wine failed), the mother of {279} Jesus saith unto him, They have no
wine. Jesus saith unto her, Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine
hour is not yet come." [John ii. 1.]

I have carefully read the comments on this passage, which different
writers of the Roman Catholic communion have recommended for the
adoption of the faithful, and I desire not to make any remarks upon
them. Let the passage be interpreted in any way which enlightened
criticism and the analogy of Scripture will sanction, and I would ask,
after a careful weighing of this incident, the facts, and the words in
all their bearings, would any unprejudiced mind expect that the holy and
beloved person, towards whom the meek and tender and loving Jesus
employed this address, was destined by that omniscient and omnipotent
Saviour to be an object of those religious acts with which, as we shall
soon be reminded, the Church of Rome now daily approaches her?

It is pain and grief to me thus to extract and to comment upon these
passages of Holy Writ. The feelings of affection and of reverence
approaching awe, with which I hold the memory of that blessed Virgin
Mother of my Lord, raise in me a sincere repugnance against dwelling on
this branch of our subject, beyond what the cause of the truth as it is
in Jesus absolutely requires; and very little more of the same irksome
task awaits us. You will of course expect me to refer to an incident
recorded with little variety of expression, and with no essential
difference, by the first three Evangelists. St. Matthew's is the most
full account, and is this,--"While he yet talked to the people, behold
his mother and his brethren stood without desiring to speak with him.
Then one said unto him, {280} Behold, thy mother and thy brethren stand
without, desiring to speak with thee. But he answered and said unto him
that told him, Who is my mother, and who are my brethren? And he
stretched forth his hand toward his disciples and said, Behold my mother
and my brethren. For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is
in heaven, the same is my brother and sister and mother." [Matt. xii.
46.] Or, as St. Luke expresses it,--"And he answered and said unto them,
My mother and my brethren are these, who hear the word of God and do
it." [Luke viii. 21.]

Humanly speaking, could a more favourable opportunity have presented
itself to our blessed Lord of referring to his beloved mother, in such a
manner as to exalt her above her fellow daughters of Eve,--in such a
manner too, as that Christians in after days, when the Saviour's bodily
presence should have been taken away from them, and the extraordinary
communications of the Spirit of truth should have been withdrawn, might
have remembered that He had spoken these things, and have been
countenanced by his words in doing her homage? But so far is this from
the plain and natural tendency of the words of her blessed Son, that,
had He of acknowledged purpose (and He has condescended to announce to
us, in another place (John xiii. 19, &c.), the purpose of his words)
wished to guard his disciples, whilst the world should last, against
being seduced by any reverence and love which they might feel towards
Himself into a belief that they ought to exalt his mother above all
other created beings, and pay her holy worship, we know not what words
He could have adopted more fitted for that purpose. There was nothing in
the communication which seemed to call for {281} such a remark. A plain
message announces to Him as a matter of fact one of the most common
occurrences of daily life. And yet He fixes upon the circumstance as the
groundwork not only of declaring the close union which it was his good
pleasure should exist between obedient and true believers and Himself,
but of cautioning all against any superstitious feelings towards those
who were nearly allied to Him by the ties of his human nature. With
reverence I would say, it is as though He desired to record his
foreknowledge of the errors into which his disciples were likely to be
seduced, and warned them beforehand to shun and resist the temptation.
The evidence borne by this passage against our offering any religious
worship to the Virgin, on the ground of her having been the mother of
our Lord, seems clear, strong, direct, and inevitable. She was the
mother of the Redeemer of the world, and blessed is she among women; but
that very Redeemer Himself, with his own lips, assures us that every
faithful servant of his heavenly Father shall be equally honoured with
her, and possess all the privileges which so near and dear a
relationship with Himself might be supposed to convey.--Who is my
mother? Or, who are my brethren? Behold my mother and my brethren!
Whosoever shall do the will of my Father in heaven, the same is my
brother, and my sister, and my mother.

No less should we be expected in this place to take notice of that most
remarkable passage of Holy Scripture, [Luke xi. 27.] in which our
blessed Lord is recorded under different circumstances to have expressed
the same sentiments, but in words which will appear to many even more
strongly indicative of his desire to prevent any {282} undue exaltation
of his mother. "As he spake these things, a certain woman of the company
lifted up her voice and said unto him, Blessed is the womb that bare
thee, and the paps which thou hast sucked." On the truth or wisdom of
that exclamation our Lord makes no remark; He refers not to his mother
at all, not even to assure them (as St. Augustine in after-ages taught,
see De Sacy, vol. xxxii. p. 35.), that however blessed Mary was in her
corporeal conception of the Saviour, yet far more blessed was she
because she had fully borne Him spiritually in her heart. He alludes not
to his mother except for the purpose of instantly drawing the minds of
his hearers from contemplating any supposed blessedness in her, and of
fixing them on the sure and greater blessedness of his true, humble,
faithful, and obedient disciples, to the end of time. "But he said, Yea,
rather [or, as some prefer, yea, verily, and] blessed are they that hear
the word of God, and keep it." Again, it must be asked, could such an
exclamation have been met by such a reply, had our Lord's will been to
exalt his mother, as she is now exalted by the Church of Rome? Rather,
we would reverently ask, would He have given this turn to such an
address, had He not desired to check any such feeling towards her?

That most truly affecting and edifying incident recorded by St. John as
having taken place whilst Jesus was hanging in his agony on the cross,
an incident which speaks to every one who has a mind to understand and a
heart to feel, presents to us the last occasion on which the name of the
Virgin Mother of our Lord occurs in the Gospels. No paraphrase could add
force, or clearness, or beauty to the simple narrative of the
Evangelist; no exposition could bring out its parts more prominently or
{283} affectingly. The calmness and authority of our blessed Lord, his
tenderness and affection, his filial love in the very midst of his
agony, it is impossible to describe with more heart-stirring and
heart-soothing pathos than is conveyed in the simple language of him
whom the Saviour at that awful hour addressed, as He committed his
mother to him of especial trust. But not one syllable falls from the
lips of Christ, or from the pen of the beloved disciple, who records
this act of his blessed Master's filial piety, which can by possibility
be construed to imply, that our blessed Lord intended Mary to be held in
such honour by his disciples, as would be shown in the offering of
prayer and praise to her after her dissolution. He who could by a word,
rather by the mere motion of his will, have bidden the whole course of
nature and of providence, so to proceed as that all its operations
should provide for the health and safety, the support and comfort of his
mother--He, when He was on the cross, and when He was on the point of
committing his soul into the hands of his Father, leaves her to the care
of one whom He loved, and whose sincerity and devotedness to Him He had,
humanly speaking, long experienced. He bids him treat Mary as his own
mother, He bids Mary look to John as to her own son for support and
solace: "Now there stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his
mother's sister, Mary the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. When
Jesus, therefore, saw his mother and the disciple standing by whom he
loved, he saith unto his mother, Woman, behold thy son; then saith he to
the disciple, Behold thy mother." [John xix. 25.] And He added no more.
If Christ willed that his beloved mother should end her days in peace,
removed equally {284} from want and the desolation of widowhood on the
one hand, and from splendour and notoriety on the other, nothing could
be more natural than such conduct in such a Being at such a time. But if
his purpose was to exalt her into an object of religious adoration, that
nations should kneel before her, and all people do her homage, then the
words and the conduct of our Lord at this hour seem altogether
unaccountable: and so would the words of the Evangelist also be, "And
from that hour that disciple took her unto his own home."

After this not another word falls from the pen of St. John which can be
made to bear on the station, the character, the person, or circumstances
of Mary. After his resurrection our Saviour remained on earth forty days
before He finally ascended into heaven. Many of his interviews and
conversations with his disciples during that interval are recorded in
the Gospel. Every one of the four Evangelists relates some act or some
saying of our Lord on one or more of those occasions. Mention is made by
name of Mary Magdalene, of Mary [the mother] of Joses, of Mary [the
mother] of James, of Salome, of Joanna, of Peter, of Cleophas, of the
disciple whom Jesus loved, at whose house the mother of our Lord then
was; of Thomas, of Nathanael. The eleven also are mentioned generally.
But by no one of the Evangelists is reference made at all to Mary the
mother of our Lord, as having been present at any one of those
interviews; her name is not alluded to throughout.

On one solitary occasion subsequently to the ascension of Christ,
mention is made of Mary his mother, in company with many others, and
without any further distinction to separate her from the rest: "And when
{285} they were come in (from having witnessed the ascension of our
Saviour), they went up into an upper room, where abode both Peter, and
James, and John, and Andrew, Philip, and Thomas, Bartholomew and
Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas the
brother of James. These all continued with one accord in prayer and
supplication with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his
brethren." [Acts i. 13.] Not one word is said of Mary having been
present to witness even the ascension of her blessed Son; we read no
command of our Lord, no wish expressed, no distant intimation to his
disciples that they should even show to her marks of respect and honour;
not an allusion is there made to any superiority or distinction and
preeminence. Sixty years at the least are generally considered to be
comprehended within the subsequent history of the New Testament before
the Apocalypse was written; but neither in the narrative, nor in the
Epistles, nor yet in the prophetic part of the Holy Book, is there the
most distant allusion to Mary. Of him to whose loving care our dying
Lord committed his beloved mother of especial trust, we hear much. John,
we find, putting forth the miraculous power of Christ at the Beautiful
Gate of the Temple; we find him imprisoned and arraigned before the
Jewish authorities; but not one word is mentioned as to what meanwhile
became of Mary. We find John confirming the Church in Samaria; we find
him an exile in the island of Patmos; but no mention is made of Mary.
Nay, though we have three of his epistles, and the second of them
addressed to one "whom he loved in the truth," we find neither from the
tongue nor from the pen of St. John, one single allusion to the mother
of our Lord alive or dead. And then, whatever may have been the matter
{286} of fact as to St. Paul, neither the many letters of that Apostle,
nor the numerous biographical incidents recorded of him, intimate in the
most remote degree that he knew any thing whatever concerning her
individually. St. Paul does indeed refer to the human nature of Christ
derived from his human mother, and had he been taught by his Lord to
entertain towards her such sentiments as the Roman Church now professes
to entertain, he could not have had a more inviting occasion to give
utterance to them. But instead of thus speaking of the Virgin Mary, he
does not even mention her name or state at all, but refers only in the
most general way to her nature and her sex as a daughter of Adam: "But
when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, MADE OF A
WOMAN, made under the law; to redeem them that were under the Law, that
we might receive the adoption of sons." [Gal. iv. 4.] From a time
certainly within a few days of our Saviour's ascension the Scriptures
are totally silent throughout as to Mary, whether in life or in death.

Here we might well proceed to contrast this view which the Scriptures of
eternal truth give of the blessed Virgin Mary with the authorized and
appointed worship of that branch of the Christian Church which is in
communion with Rome. We must first, however, here also examine the
treasures of Christian antiquity, and ascertain what witness the
earliest uninspired records bear on this immediate point. {287}






CHAPTER II.--EVIDENCE OF PRIMITIVE WRITERS.


Closing the inspired volume, and seeking at the fountain-head for the
evidence of Christian antiquity, what do we find? For upwards of three
centuries and a half (the limit put to our present inquiry) we discover
in no author, Christian or heathen, any trace whatever of the invocation
of the Virgin Mary by Catholic Christians. I have examined every passage
which I have found adduced by writers of the Church of Rome, and have
searched for any other passages which might appear to deserve
consideration as bearing favourably on their view of the subject; and
the worship of the Virgin, such as is now insisted upon by the Council
of Trent, prescribed by the Roman ritual, and practised in the Church of
Rome, is proved by such an examination to have had neither name, nor
place, nor existence among the early Christians. Forgive my importunity
if I again and again urge you to join us in weighing these facts well;
and to take your view of them from no advocate on the one side or the
other. Search the Scriptures for yourselves, search the earliest writers
for yourselves, and for yourselves search with all diligence into the
authentic and authorized liturgies of your own Church, your missals, and
breviaries, and formularies. Hearsay evidence, testimony {288} taken at
second or third hand, vague rumours and surmises will probably expose
us, on either side, to error. Let well-sifted genuine evidence be
brought by an upright and an enlightened mind to bear on the point at
issue, and let the issue joined be this, Is the practice of praying to
the Virgin, and praising her, in the language of the prayers and praises
now used in the prescribed formularies of the Roman Church, primitive.
Catholic, Apostolical?

I am aware that among those who adhere to the Tridentine Confession of
faith, there are many on whom this investigation will not be allowed to
exercise any influence.

The sentiments of Huet, wherever they are adopted, would operate to the
total rejection of such inquiries as we are instituting in this work.
His words on the immaculate conception of the Virgin are of far wider
application than the immediate occasion on which he used them, "That the
blessed Mary never conceived any sin in herself is in the present day an
established principle of the Church, and confirmed by the Council of
Trent. In which it is our duty to acquiesce, rather than in the dicta of
the ancients, if any seem to think otherwise, among whom must be
numbered Origen." [Origen's Works, vol. iv. part 2, p. 156.]

In this address, however, we take for granted that the reader is open to
conviction, desirous of arriving at the truth, and, with that view,
ready to examine and sift the evidence of primitive antiquity.

In that investigation our attention is very soon called to the
remarkable fact, that, whereas in the case of the invocation of saints
and angels, the defenders of that doctrine and practice bring forward a
great variety of passages, in which mention is supposed to be made of
{289} those beings as objects of honour and reverential and grateful
remembrance, the passages quoted with a similar view, as regards the
Virgin Mary, are very few indeed: whilst the passages which intimate
that the early Christians paid her no extraordinary honour (certainly
not more than we of the Anglican Church do now) are innumerable.

I have thought that it might be satisfactory here to refer to each
separately of those earliest writers, whose testimony we have already
examined on the general question of the invocation of saints and angels,
and, as nearly as may be, in the same order.

In the former department of our investigation we first endeavoured to
ascertain the evidence of those five primitive writers, who are called
the Apostolical Fathers; and, with regard to the subject now before us,
the result of our inquiry into the same works is this:

1. In the Epistle ascribed to BARNABAS we find no allusion to Mary.

2. The same must be affirmed of the book called The Shepherd of HERMAS.

3. In CLEMENT of Rome, who speaks of the Lord Jesus having descended
from Abraham according to the flesh, no mention is made of that daughter
of Abraham of whom he was born.

4. IGNATIUS in a passage already quoted (Ad Eph. vii. p. 13 and 16)
speaks of Christ both in his divine and human nature as Son of God and
man, and he mentions the name of Mary, but it is without any adjunct or
observation whatever, "both of Mary and of God." In another place he
speaks of her virgin state, and the fruit of her womb; and of her having
borne our God Jesus the Christ; but he adds no {290} more; not even
calling her "The blessed," or "The Virgin." In the interpolated Epistle
to the Ephesians, the former passage adds "the Virgin" after "Mary," but
nothing more.

5. In the Epistle of POLYCARP we find an admonition to virgins (Page
186), how they ought to walk with a spotless and chaste conscience, but
there is no allusion to the Virgin Mary.

JUSTIN MARTYR. In this writer I do not find any passage so much in point
as the following, in which we discover no epithet expressive of honour,
or dignity, or exaltation, though it refers to Mary in her capacity of
the Virgin mother of our Lord:--"He therefore calls Himself the Son of
Man, either from his birth of a virgin, who was of the race of David,
and Jacob, and Isaac, and Abraham, or because Abraham himself was the
father of those persons enumerated, from whom Mary drew her origin."
[Trypho, § 100. p. 195.] And a little below he adds, "For Eve being a
virgin and incorrupt, having received the word from the serpent, brought
forth transgression and death; but Mary the Virgin having received faith
and joy (on the angel Gabriel announcing to her the glad tidings, that
the Spirit of the Lord should come upon her, and the power of the
Highest overshadow her) answered, Be it unto me according to thy word.
And of her was born He of whom we have shown that so many Scriptures
have been spoken; He by whom God destroys the serpent, and angels and
men resembling [the serpent]; but works a rescue from death for such as
repent of evil and believe in Him." One more passage will suffice, "And
according to the command of God, Joseph, taking Him with Mary, went into
Egypt." [Trypho, § 102. p. 196.] {291}

Among those "Questions" to which we have referred under the head of
Justin Martyr's works, but which are confessedly of a much less remote
date, probably of the fifth century, an inquiry is made, How could
Christ be free from blame, who so often set at nought his parent? The
answer is, that He did not set her at nought; that He honoured her in
deed, and would not have hurt her by his words;--but then the respondent
adds, that Christ chiefly honoured Mary in that view of her maternal
character, under which all who heard the word of God and kept it, were
his brothers and sisters and mother; and that she surpassed all women in
virtue. [Qu. 136. p. 500.]

IRENÆUS. To the confused passage relied upon by Bellarmin, in which
Irenæus is supposed to represent Mary as the advocate of Eve, we have
already fully referred (page 120 of this work). In that passage there is
no allusion to any honour paid, or to be paid to her, nor to any
invocation of her. In every passage to which my attention has been
drawn, Irenæus speaks of the mother of our Lord as Mary, or the Virgin,
without any adjunct, or term of reverence.

CLEMENT of Alexandria speaks of the Virgin, and refers to an opinion
relative to her virgin-state, but without one word of honour. [Stromat.
vii. 16. p. 889.]

TERTULLIAN[101]. The passages in which this ancient writer refers to the
mother of our Lord are very far from countenancing the religious worship
now paid to her by Roman Catholics: "The brothers of the Lord had not
believed on him, as it is contained in the Gospel published {292} before
Marcion. His mother likewise is not shown to have adhered to him;
whereas others, Marys and Marthas, were frequently in his company." (See
Tert. De carne Christi, c. 7. (p. 364. De Sacy, 29. 439.)) And he tells
us that Christ was brought forth by a virgin, who was also about to be
married once after the birth, that the two titles of sanctity might be
united in Christ by a mother who was both a virgin and also once
married[102].

    [Footnote 101: Paris, 1675. De carne Christi, vii. p. 315. De
    Monogamia, vii. p. 529. N.B. Both these treatises were probably
    written after he became a Montanist.]

    [Footnote 102: On the works once ascribed to Methodius, but now
    pronounced to be spurious, see above, p. 131.]

ORIGEN thus speaks: "Announcing to Zacharias the birth of John, and to
Mary the advent of our Saviour among men." [Comment on John, § 24. vol.
iv. p. 82.] In his eighth homily on Leviticus, he refers to Mary as a
pure Virgin. [Vol. ii. p. 228.] In the forged work of later times, the
writer, speaking of our Saviour, says, "He had on earth an immaculate
and chaste mother, this much blessed Virgin Mary." [Hom. iii. in
Diversos.]

In CYPRIAN we do not find one word expressive of honour or reverence
towards the Virgin Mary. Nor is her name mentioned in the letter of his
correspondent Firmilian, Bishop of Cappadocia.

LACTANTIUS speaks of "a holy virgin" [Vol. i. p. 299.] chosen for the
work of Christ but not one other word of honour, or tending to
adoration; though whilst dwelling on the incarnation of the Son of God,
had he or his fellow-believers paid religious honour to her, he could
scarcely have avoided all allusion to it.

EUSEBIUS speaks of the Virgin Mary, but is altogether silent as to any
religious honour of any kind being due to her. In the Oration of the
Emperor Constantine (as it is recorded by Eusebius), direct mention is
made of the "chaste virginity," and of the maid who was mother {293} of
God, and yet remained a virgin. But the object present to the author's
mind was so exclusively God manifest in the flesh, that he does not
throughout even mention the name of Mary, or allude to any honour paid
or due to her. [Cantab. 1720. § 11. p. 689. and § 19. p. 703.]

ATHANASIUS, bent ever on establishing the perfect divinity and humanity
of Christ, thus speaks: "The general scope of Holy Scripture is to make
a twofold announcement concerning the Saviour, that He was always God,
and is a Son; being the Word and the brightness and wisdom of the
Father, and that He afterwards became man for us, taking flesh of the
Virgin Mary, who bare God ([Greek: taes theotokou])." [Athan. Orat. iii.
Cont. Arian. p. 579.]

The work which we have already examined, called The Apostolical
Constitutions, compiled probably about the commencement of the fourth
century, cannot be read without leaving an impression clear and powerful
on the mind, that no religious honour was paid to the Virgin Mary at the
time when they were written; certainly not more than is now cheerfully
paid to her memory by us of the Anglican Church. Take, for example, the
prayer prescribed to be used on the appointment of a Deaconess; the
inference from it must be, that others with whom the Lord's Spirit had
dwelt, were at least held in equal honour with Mary: "O Eternal God,
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Maker of male and female, who didst
fill with thy Spirit Miriam, and Hannah, and Holda, and didst not
disdain that thy Son should be born of a woman," &c. [Book viii. c. 20.]
Thus, {294} too, in another passage, Mary is spoken of just as other
women who had the gift of prophecy; and of her equally and in
conjunction with the others it is said, that they were not elated by the
gift, nor lifted themselves up against the men. "But even have women
prophesied; in ancient times Miriam, the sister of Aaron and Moses;
after her Deborah; and afterwards Huldah and Judith; one under Josiah,
the other under Darius; and the mother of the Lord also prophesied, and
Elizabeth her kinswoman; and Anna; and in our day the daughters of
Philip; yet they were not lifted up against the men, but observed their
own measure. Therefore among you also should any man or woman have such
a grace, let them be humble, that God may take pleasure in them." [Book
viii. c. 2.]

In the Apostolical Canons I find no reference to Mary; nor indeed any
passage bearing on our present inquiry, except the last clause of all,
containing the benediction. In this passage not only is the prayer for
spiritual blessings addressed to God alone, but it is offered
exclusively through the mediation of Christ alone, without alluding to
intercessions of angels saints, or the Virgin: "Now may God, the only
unproduced Being, the Creator of all things, unite you all by peace in
the Holy Ghost; make you perfect unto every good work, not to be turned
aside, unblameable, not deserving reproof; and may He deem you worthy of
eternal life with us, by the mediation of his beloved Son Jesus Christ
our God and Saviour: with whom be glory to Him the Sovereign God and
Father, in the Holy Ghost the Comforter, now and ever, world without
end. Amen." [Vol. i. p. 450.]

I have not intentionally omitted any ancient author {295} falling within
the limits of our present inquiry, nor have I neglected any one passage
which I could find bearing testimony to any honour paid to the Virgin.
The result of my research is, that I have not discovered one solitary
expression which implies that religious invocation and honour, such as
is now offered to Mary by the Church of Rome, was addressed to her by
the members of the primitive Catholic Church. {296}






CHAPTER III.--THE ASSUMPTION OF THE VIRGIN MARY.


By the Church of England, two festivals are observed in grateful
commemoration of two events relating to Mary as the mother of our
Lord:--the announcement of the Saviour's birth by the message of an
angel, called, "The Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary," and "The
Presentation of Christ in the Temple," called also, "The Purification of
Saint Mary the Virgin." In the service for the first of these
solemnities, we are taught to pray that, as we have known the
incarnation of the Son of God by the message of an angel, so by his
Cross and Passion we may be brought to the glory of his resurrection. In
the second, we humbly beseech the Divine Majesty that, as his
only-begotten Son was presented in the Temple in the substance of our
flesh, so we may be presented unto Him with pure and clean hearts by the
same, his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. These days are observed to
commemorate events declared to us on the most sure warrant of Holy
Scripture; and these prayers are primitive and evangelical. They pray
only to God for spiritual blessings through his Son. The second prayer
was used in the Church {297} from very early times, and is still
retained in the Roman Breviary (Hus. Brev. Rom. H. 536.); whereas,
instead of the first[103], we find there unhappily a prayer now
supplicating that those who offer it, "believing Mary to be truly the
Mother of God, might be aided by her intercessions with Him." [V. 496.]

    [Footnote 103: This collect also is found in the Roman Missal,
    as a Prayer at the Post Communion; though it does not appear in
    the Breviarium Romanum.]

In the Roman Catholic Church, on the other hand, feasts are observed to
the honour of the Virgin Mary, in which the Anglican Church cannot join;
such as the Nativity of the Virgin Mary, and the immaculate conception
of her by her mother. On the origin and nature of these feasts it is not
my intention to dwell. I can only express my regret, that by appointing
a service and a collect commemorative of the Conception of the
Virgin[104] in her mother's womb, and praying that the observance of
that solemnity may procure the votaries an increase of peace, the Church
of Rome has given countenance to a superstition, against which at its
commencement, so late as the 12th century, St. Bernard strongly
remonstrated, in an epistle to the monks of Lyons; a superstition which
has been supported and explained by discussions in no way profitable to
the head or the heart. [Epist. 174. Paris, 1632, p. 1538.]

    [Footnote 104: Ut quibus beatæ Virginis partus exstitit salutis
    exordium, conceptionis ejus votiva solemnitas pacis tribuat
    incrementum. H. 445.]

Of all these institutions however in honour of the Virgin, the Feast of
the ASSUMPTION appears to be as it were the crown and the
consummation[105]. This festival {298} is kept to celebrate the
miraculous taking up (assumptio) of the Virgin Mary into heaven. And its
celebration, in Roman Catholic countries, is observed in a manner worthy
a cause to which our judgment would give deliberately its sanction; in
which our feelings would safely and with satisfaction rest on the
firmness of our faith; from joining in which a truly pious mind would
have no ground for inward misgiving, nor for the aspiration, Would it
were founded in truth!

    [Footnote 105: "The Assumption of the Virgin Mary is the
    greatest of all the festivals which the Church celebrates in her
    honour. It is the consummation of all the other great mysteries
    by which her life was rendered most wonderful. It is the
    birthday of her true greatness and glory, and the crown of all
    the virtues of her whole life, which we admire single in her
    other festivals." Alban Butler, vol. viii. p. 175.]

Before such a solemn office of praise and worship were ever admitted
among the institutions of the religion of truth, its originators and
compilers should have built upon sure grounds; careful too should they
also be who now join in the service, and so lend it the countenance of
their example; more especially should those sift the evidence well, who,
by their doctrine and writings, uphold, and defend, and advance it; lest
they prove at the last to love Rome rather than the truth as it is in
Jesus. So solemn, so marked, a religious service in the temples and at
the altar of HIM who is the truth, a service so exalted above his
fellows, ought beyond question to be founded on the most sure warrant of
Holy Scripture, or at the least on undisputed historical evidence, as to
the alleged matter of fact on which it is built,--the certain,
acknowledged, uninterrupted, and universal testimony of the Church
Catholic from the very time. They incur a momentous responsibility who
aid in propagating for religious truths the inventions of men[106].

    [Footnote 106: Very different opinions are held by Roman
    Catholic writers as to the antiquity of this feast. All, indeed,
    maintain that it is of very ancient introduction; but whilst
    some, with Lambecius (lib. viii. p. 286), maintain the antiquity
    of the festival to be so remote, that its origin cannot be
    traced; and thence infer that it was instituted by a silent and
    unrecorded act of the Apostles themselves; others (among whom
    Kollarius, the learned annotator on the opinion of Lambecius)
    acknowledged, that it was introduced by an ordinance of the
    Church, though not at the same time in all countries of
    Christendom. That annotator assigns its introduction at Rome to
    the fourth century; at Constantinople to the sixth; in Germany
    and France to the ninth.] {299}

But what is the real state of the case with regard to the fact of the
Assumption of the Virgin Mary? It rests (as we shall soon see) on no
authentic history; it is supported by no primitive tradition. I profess
my surprise to have been great, when I found the most celebrated
defenders of the Roman Catholic cause, instead of citing such evidence
as would bear with it even the appearance of probability, appealing to
histories written more than a thousand years after the alleged event, to
forged documents and vague rumours. I was willing to doubt the
sufficiency of my research; till I found its defenders, instead of
alleging and establishing by evidence what God was by them said to have
done, contenting themselves with asserting his omnipotence, in proof
that the doctrine implied no impossibility; dwelling on the fitness and
reasonableness of his working such a miracle in the honour of her who
was chosen to be the mother of his eternal Son; and whilst they took the
fact as granted, substituting for argument glowing and fervent
descriptions of what might have been the joy in heaven, and what ought
to be the feelings of mortals on earth.

At every step of the inquiry into the merits of this case, the principle
recurs to the mind, that, as men really and in earnest looking onward to
a life after this, our duty is to ascertain to the utmost of our {300}
power, not what God could do, not what we or others might pronounce it
fit that God should do, but what He has done; not what would be
agreeable to our feelings, were it true, but what, whether agreeably or
adversely to our feelings or wishes, is proved to be true. The very
moment a Christian writer refers me from evidence to possibilities, I
feel that he knows not the nature of Christianity; he throws me back
from the sure and certain hope of the Gospel to the "beautiful fable" of
Socrates,--"It were better to be there than here, IF THESE THINGS ARE
TRUE."

But let us inquire into the facts of the case.

First, I would observe that it is by no means agreed among all who have
written upon the subject, what was the place, or what was the time of
the Virgin's death. Whilst some have maintained that she breathed her
last at Ephesus, the large majority assert that her departure from this
world took place at Jerusalem. And as to the time of her death, some
have assigned it to the year 48 of the Christian era, about the time at
which Paul and Barnabas (as we read in Holy Scripture) returned to
Antioch; whilst others refer it to a later date. I am not, however,
aware of any supposition which fixes it at a period subsequent to that
at which the canon of Scripture closes. Epiphanius indeed, towards the
close of the fourth century, reminding us that Scripture is totally and
purely silent on the subject as well of Mary's death and burial, as of
her having accompanied St. John in his travels or not, without alluding
to any tradition as to her assumption, thus sums up his sentiments: "I
dare to say nothing; but considering it, I observe silence." [Epiph.
vol. i. p. 1043.] {301}

Should any of my readers have deliberately adopted as the rule of their
faith the present practice of the Church of Rome, I cannot hope that
they will take any interest in the following inquiry; but I have been
assured, by most sensible and well-informed members of that Church, that
there is a very general desire entertained to have this and other
questions connected with our subject examined without prejudice, and
calmly placed before them. To such persons I trust this chapter may not
appear altogether unworthy of their consideration. Those who would turn
from it on the principle to which we have here alluded, will find
themselves very closely responding to the sentiments professed by St.
Bernard, "Exalt her who is exalted above the choirs of angels to the
heavenly kingdom. These things the Church sings to me of her, and has
taught me to sing the same to others. For my part, what I have received
from it, I am secure in holding and delivering; which also, I confess, I
am not OVER-SCRUPULOUS in admitting. (Quod non scrupulosius fateor
admiserim.) I have received in truth from the Church that that day is to
be observed with the highest veneration on which she was TAKEN up
(assumpta) from this wicked world, and carrying with her into heaven
feasts of the most celebrated joys[107]."

    [Footnote 107: See Lambecius, book viii. p. 286. The letter of
    St. Bernard is addressed to the Canons of Lyons on the
    Conception of the holy Mary. Paris, 1632, p. 1538. His
    observations in that letter, with a view of discountenancing the
    rising superstition, in juxtaposition with these sentiments, are
    well deserving the serious consideration of every one.]

Let us then, with the authorized and enjoined service of the Church of
Rome for the 15th of August before us, examine the evidence on which
that religious {302} service, the most solemn consummation of all the
rest, is founded.

In the service of the Assumption, more than twice seven times is it
reiterated in a very brief space, and with slight variations of
expression, that Mary was taken up into heaven; and that, not on any
general and indefinite idea of her beatific and glorified state, but
with reference to one specific single act of divine favour, performed at
a fixed time, effecting her assumption, as it is called, "to-day." [Æs.
595.] "To-day Mary the Virgin ascended the heavens. Rejoice, because she
is reigning with Christ for ever." "Mary the Virgin is taken up into
heaven, to the ethereal chamber in which the King of kings sits on his
starry throne." "The holy mother of God hath been exalted above the
choirs of angels to the heavenly realms." "Come, let us worship the King
of kings, to whose ethereal heaven the Virgin Mother was taken up
to-day." And that it is her bodily ascension, her corporeal assumption
into heaven, and not merely the transit of her soul[108] from mortal
life to eternal bliss, which the Roman Church maintains and propagates
by this service, is put beyond doubt by the service itself. In the
fourth and sixth reading[109], or lesson, for example, we find these
{303} sentences:--"She returned not into the earth but is seated in the
heavenly tabernacles." "How could death devour, how could those below
receive, how could corruption invade, THAT BODY, in which life was
received? For it a direct, plain, and easy path to heaven was prepared."

    [Footnote 108: Lambecius, indeed (book viii. p. 306), distinctly
    affirms, that one object which the Church had in view was to
    condemn the HERESY of those who maintain that the reception of
    the Virgin into heaven, was the reception of her soul only, and
    not also of her body. "Ut damnet eorum hæresin qui sanctissimæ
    Dei genetricis rcceptionem in coelum ad animam ipsius tantum,
    non vero simul etiam ad corpus pertinere existimant."]

    [Footnote 109: Non reversa est in terram, sed ... in coelestibus
    tabernaculis collocatum. Quomodo mois devoraret, quomodo inferi
    susciperent, quomodo corruptio invaderit CORPUS ILLUD in quo
    vita suscepta est? Huic recta plana et facilis ad coelum parata
    est via. Æs. 603, 604.]

Now, on what authority does this doctrine rest? On what foundation stone
is this religious worship built? The holy Scriptures are totally and
profoundly silent, as to the time, the place, the manner of Mary's
death. Once after the ascension of our Lord, and that within eight days,
we find mentioned the name of Mary promiscuously with others; after
that, no allusion is made to her in life or in death; and no account, as
far as I can find, places her death too late for mention to have been
made of it in the Acts of the Apostles. The historian, Nicephorus
Callistus, refers it to the 5th year of Claudius, that is about A.D. 47:
after which period, events through more than fifteen years are recorded
in that book of sacred Scripture.

But closing the holy volume, what light does primitive antiquity enable
us to throw on this subject?

The earliest testimony quoted by the defenders of the doctrine, that
Mary was at her death taken up bodily into heaven, is a supposed entry
in the Chronicon of Eusebius, opposite the year of our Lord 48. This is
cited by Coccius without any remark; and even Baronius rests the date of
Mary's assumption upon this testimony. [Vol. i. 403.] The words referred
to are these,--"Mary the Virgin, the mother of Jesus, was taken up into
heaven; as some write that it had been revealed to them." {304}

Now, suppose for one moment that this came from the pen of Eusebius
himself, to what does it amount? A chronologist in the fourth century
records that some persons, whom he does not name, not even stating when
they lived, had written down, not what they had heard as matter of fact,
or received by tradition, but that a revelation had been made to them of
a fact alleged to have taken place nearly three centuries before the
time of that writer. But instead of this passage deserving the name of
Eusebius as its author, it is now on all sides acknowledged to be
altogether a palpable interpolation. Suspicions, one would suppose, must
have been at a very remote date suggested as to the genuineness of this
sentence. Many manuscripts, especially the seven in the Vatican, were
known to contain nothing of the kind; and the Roman Catholic editor of
the Chronicon at Bordeaux, A.D. 1604, tells us that he was restrained
from expunging it, only because nothing certain as to the assumption of
the Virgin could be substituted in its stead. [P. 566.] Its spuriousness
however can no longer be a question of dispute or doubt; it is excluded
from the Milan edition of 1818, by Angelo Maio and John Zohrab; and no
trace of it is to be found in the Armenian[110] version, published by
the monks of the Armenian convent at Venice, in 1818.

    [Footnote 110: The author visited that convent whilst this
    edition of the Chronicon of Eusebius was going through the
    press, and can testify to the apparent anxiety of the monks to
    make it worthy of the patronage of Christians.]

The next authority, to which we are referred, is a letter[111] said to
have been written by Sophronius the {305} presbyter, about the
commencement of the fifth century. The letter used to be ascribed to
Jerome; Erasmus referred it to Sophronius; but Baronius says it was
written "by an egregious forger of lies," ("egregius mendaciorum
concinnator,") who lived after the heresies of Nestorius and Eutyches
had been condemned. I am not at all anxious to enter upon that point of
criticism; that the letter is of very ancient origin cannot be doubted.
This document would lead us to conclude, that so far from the tradition
regarding the Virgin's assumption being general in the Church, it was a
point of grave doubt and discussion among the faithful, many of whom
thought it an act of pious forbearance to abstain altogether from
pronouncing any opinion on the subject. Whoever penned the letter, and
whether we look to the sensible and pious sentiments contained in it, or
to its undisputed antiquity, the following extract cannot fail to be
interesting[112].

    [Footnote 111: The letter is entitled "Ad Paulam et Eustochium
    de Assumptione B.M. Virginis." It is found in the fifth volume
    of Jerome's works, p. 82. Edit. Jo. Martian.]

    [Footnote 112: Baronius shows great anxiety (Cologne, 1609, vol.
    i. p. 408) to detract from the value of this author's testimony,
    whoever he was; sharply criticising him because he asserts, that
    the faithful in his time still expressed doubts as to the matter
    of fact of Mary's assumption. By assigning, however, to the
    letter a still later date than the works of Sophronius, Baronius
    adds strength to the arguments for the comparatively recent
    origin of the tradition of her assumption. See Fabricius
    (Hamburgh, 1804), vol. ix. p. 160.]

"Many of our people doubt whether Mary was taken up together with her
body, or went away, leaving the body. But how, or at what time, or by
what persons her most holy body was taken hence, or whither removed, or
whether it rose again, is not known; although some will maintain that
she is already revived, and is clothed with a blessed immortality with
Christ in heavenly places, which very many affirm also of the blessed
{306} John, the Evangelist, his servant, to whom being a virgin, the
virgin was intrusted by Christ, because in his sepulchre, as it is
reported, nothing is found but manna, which also is seen to flow forth.
Nevertheless which of these opinions should be thought the more true we
doubt. Yet it is better to commit all to God, to whom nothing is
impossible, than to wish to define rashly[113] by our own authority any
thing, which we do not approve of.... Because nothing is impossible with
God, we do not deny that something of the kind was done with regard to
the blessed Virgin Mary; although for caution's sake (salva fide)
preserving our faith, we ought rather with pious desire to think, than
inconsiderately to define, what without danger may remain unknown." This
letter, at the earliest, was not written until the beginning of the
fifth century.

    [Footnote 113: These last words, stamping the author's own
    opinion, "Which we do not approve of," are left out in the
    quotation of Coccius.]

Subsequent writers were not wanting to fill up what this letter declares
to have been at its own date unknown, as to the manner and time of
Mary's assumption, and the persons employed in effecting it. The first
authority appealed to in defence of the tradition relating to the
assumption of the Virgin[114], is usually cited as a well-known work
written by Euthymius, who was contemporary with Juvenal, Archbishop of
Jerusalem. And the testimony simply quoted as his, offers to us the
following account of the miraculous transaction[115]:--

    [Footnote 114: Coccius heads the extract merely with these
    words: "Euthumius Eremita Historiæ Ecclesiasticæ, lib. iii. c.
    40;" assigning the date A.D. 549.]

    [Footnote 115: This version by Coccius differs in some points
    from the original. Jo. Dam. vol. ii. p. 879.]

"It has been above said, that the holy Pulcheria {307} built many
churches to Christ at Constantinople. Of these, however, there is one
which was built in Blachernæ, in the beginning of Marcian I's _reign_ of
divine memory. These, therefore, namely, Marcian and Pulcheria, when
they had built a venerable temple to the greatly to be celebrated and
most holy mother of God and ever Virgin Mary, and had decked it with all
ornaments, sought her most holy body, which had conceived God. And
having sent for Juvenal, Archbishop of Jerusalem, and the bishops of
Palestine, who were living in the royal city on account of the synod
then held at Chalcedon, they say to them, 'We hear that there is in
Jerusalem the first and famous Church of Mary, mother of God and ever
Virgin, in the garden called Gethsemane, where her body which bore the
Life was deposited in a coffin. We wish, therefore, her relics to be
brought here for the protection of this royal city. But Juvenal
answered, 'In the holy and divinely inspired Scripture, indeed, nothing
is recorded of the departure of holy Mary, mother of God. But from an
ancient and most true tradition we have received, that at the time of
her glorious falling asleep, all the holy Apostles who were going
through the world for the salvation of the nations, in a moment of time
borne aloft, came together at Jerusalem. And when they were near her,
they had a vision of angels, and divine melody of the highest powers was
heard: and thus with divine and more than heavenly glory, she delivered
her holy soul into the hands of God in an unspeakable manner. But that
which had conceived God being borne with angelic and apostolic psalmody,
with funeral rites, was deposited in a coffin in Gethsemane. In this
place the chorus and singing of the angels continued for three whole
days. But {308} after three days, on the angelic music ceasing, since
one of the Apostles had been absent, and came after the third day, and
wished to adore the body which had conceived God, the Apostles, who were
present, opened the coffin; but the body, pure and every way to be
praised, they could not at all find. And when they found only those
things in which it had been laid out and placed there, and were filled
with an ineffable fragrancy proceeding from those things, they shut the
coffin. Being astounded at the miraculous mystery, they could form no
other thought, but that He, who in his own person had vouchsafed to be
clothed with flesh, and to be made man of the most holy Virgin, and to
be born in the flesh, God the Word, and Lord of Glory, and who after
birth had preserved her virginity immaculate, had seen it good after she
had departed from among the living, to honour her uncontaminated and
unpolluted body by a translation before the common and universal
resurrection."

Such is the passage offered to us in its insulated form, as an extract
from Euthymius. To be enabled, however, to estimate its worth, the
inquirer must submit to the labour of considerable research. He will not
have pursued his investigation far, before he will find, that a thick
cloud of uncertainty and doubt hangs over this page of ecclesiastical
history. Not that the evidence alleged in support of the reputed miracle
can leave us in doubt as to the credibility of the tradition; for that
tradition can scarcely be now countenanced by the most zealous and
uncompromising maintainers of the assumption of the Virgin. What I would
say is, that the question as to the genuineness and authenticity of the
works by which the tradition is said to have been preserved, is far more
difficult and complicated, than {309} those writers must have believed,
who appeal to such testimony without any doubt or qualification. The
result of my own inquiries I submit to your candid acceptance.

The earliest author in whose reputed writings I have found the
tradition, is John Damascenus, a monk of Jerusalem, who flourished
somewhat before the middle of the eighth century. The passage is found
in the second of three homilies on the "Sleep of the Virgin," a term
generally used by the Greeks as an equivalent for the Latin word
"Assumptio." The original publication of these homilies in Greek and
Latin is comparatively of a late date. Lambecius, whose work is dated
1665, says he was not aware that any one had so published them before
his time[116]. But not to raise the question of their genuineness, the
preacher's introduction of this passage into his homily is preceded by a
very remarkable section, affording a striking example of the manner in
which Christian orators used to indulge in addresses and appeals not
only to the spirits of departed men, but even to things which never had
life. The speaker here in his sermon addresses the tomb of Mary, as
though it had ears to hear, and an understanding to comprehend; and then
represents the tomb as having a tongue to answer, and as calling forth
from the preacher and his congregation an address of admiration and
reverence. Such apostrophes as these cannot be too steadily borne in
mind, or too carefully weighed, when any argument is sought to be drawn
from similar salutations offered by ancient Christian orators to saint,
or angel, or the Virgin.

    [Footnote 116: Vol. viii. p. 281. Le Quien, who published them
    in 1712, refers to earlier homilies on the Dormitio Virginis.
    Jo. Damas. Paris, 1712. vol. ii. p. 857.] {310}

The following are among the expressions in which the preacher, in the
passage under consideration, addresses the Virgin's tomb: "Thou, O Tomb,
of holy things most holy (for I will address thee as a living being),
where is the much desired and much beloved body of the mother of God?"
[Vol. ii. p. 875.] The answer of the tomb begins thus, "Why seek ye her
in a tomb, who has been taken up on high to the heavenly tabernacles?"
In reply to this, the preacher first deliberating with his hearers what
answer he should make, thus addresses the tomb: "Thy grace indeed is
never-failing and eternal," &c. [P. 881.] By the maintainers of the
invocation of saints, many a passage far less unequivocal and less
cogent than this has been adduced to show, that saints and martyrs were
invoked by primitive worshippers.

We find John Damascenus thus introducing the passage of Euthymius, "Ye
see, beloved fathers and brethren, what answer the all-glorious tomb
makes to us; and that these things are so, in the EUTHYMIAC HISTORY, the
third book and fortieth chapter, is thus written word for word." [P.
877.]

Lambecius maintains, that the history here quoted by John Damascenus was
not an ecclesiastical history, written by Euthymius, who died in A.D.
472, but a biographical history concerning Euthymius himself, written by
an ecclesiastic, whom he supposes to be Cyril, the monk, who died in
A.D. 531. This opinion of Lambecius is combated by Cotelerius; the
discussion only adding to the denseness of the cloud which involves the
whole tradition. But whether the work quoted had Euthymius for its
author or its subject, the work itself is lost; and an epitome only of
such a work has come down to {311} our time. In that abridgment the
passage quoted by Damascenus is not found.

The editor of John Damascenus, Le Quien, in his annotations on this
portion of his work, offers to us some very interesting remarks, which
bear immediately on the agitated question as to the first observance of
the feast of the Assumption, as well as on the tradition itself. Le
Quien infers, from the words of Modestus, patriarch of Jerusalem, that
scarcely any preachers before him had addressed their congregations on
the departure of the Virgin out of this life; he thinks, moreover, that
the Feast of the Assumption was at the commencement of the seventh
century only recently instituted. Though all later writers affirm that
the Virgin was buried in the valley of Jehoshaphat, in the garden of
Gethsemane, the same editor says, that this could not have been known to
Jerome, who passed a great part of his life in Bethlehem, and yet
observes a total silence on the subject; though in his "Epitaph on
Paula," [Jerome, Paris, 1706. Vol. iv. p. 670-688, ep. 86.] he
enumerates all the places in Palestine consecrated by any remarkable
event. Neither, he adds, could it have been known to Epiphanius, who,
though he lived long in Palestine, yet declares that nothing was known
as to the death or burial of the Virgin. [Vol. ii, p. 858.]

Again, in his remarks upon the writings falsely attributed to Melito,
the same editor says, that since this Pseudo-Melito speaks many jejune
things of the Virgin Mary, (such for example as at the approach of death
her exceeding fear of being exposed to the wiles of Satan,) he
concludes, from that circumstance, that the work was written before the
Council of Ephesus; alleging this very remarkable reason, that "after
that {312} time there BEGAN TO BE ENTERTAINED, as was right, not only in
the East, but also in the West, a far better estimate of the parent of
God." [P. 880.]

Many of the remarks of this editor would appear to savour of prejudice
had they come from the pen of one who denied the reality of the
assumption, or oppugned the honour and worship now paid by members of
the Church of Rome to the Virgin. Nor could the suspicion of such
prejudice be otherwise than increased by the insinuation which the same
editor throws out against the honesty of Archbishop Juvenal, and on the
possibility of his having invented the whole story, and so for sinister
purposes deceived Marcian and Pulcheria; just as he fabricated the
writings which he forged for the purpose of securing the primacy of
Palestine; a crime laid to the charge of Juvenal by Leo the Great, in
his letter to Maximus, Bishop of Antioch. [P. 879. See Leo. vol. i. p.
1215. Epist. cxix.]

It is moreover much to be regretted that in making the extract from John
Damascenus those who employ it as evidence of primitive belief, have not
presented it to their readers whole and entire. In the present case the
system of quoting garbled extracts is particularly to be lamented,
because the paragraphs omitted in the quotation carry in themselves
clear proof that Juvenal's answer, as it now appears in John Damascenus,
could not have been made by Juvenal to Marcian and Pulcheria. For in it
is quoted from Dionysius the Areopagite by name, a passage still found
in the works ascribed to him; whereas by the judgment of the most
learned Roman Catholic writers, those spurious works did not make their
appearance in Christendom till the beginning of the sixth century, fifty
years after the Council of Chalcedon, to assist at which {313} Juvenal
is said to have been present in Constantinople when the emperor and
empress held the alleged conversation with him.

The remainder of the passage from the history of Euthymius, rehearsed in
this oration of John Damascenus, is as follows: "There were present with
the Apostles at that time both the most honoured Timothy the Apostle,
and first bishop of the Ephesians, and Dionysius the Areopagite,
himself, as the great Dionysius testifies in the laboured words
concerning the blessed Hierotheus, himself also then being present, to
the above-named apostle Timothy, saying thus, Since with the inspired
hierarchs themselves, when we also as thou knowest, and yourself, and
many of our holy brethren had come together to the sight of the body
which gave the principle of life; and there was present too James the
brother of the Lord ([Greek: adelphotheos]), and Peter the chief and the
most revered head of the apostles ([Greek: theologon]); then it seemed
right, after the spectacle, that all the hierarchs (as each was able)
should sing of the boundless goodness of the divine power. After the
apostles, as you know, he surpassed all the other sacred persons, wholly
carried away, and altogether in an ecstasy, and feeling an entire
sympathy with what was sung; and by all by whom he was heard, and seen,
and known (and he[117] knew it not), he was considered to be an inspired
and divine hymnologist. And why should I speak to you about the things
there divinely said, for unless I have even forgotten myself, I know
that I have often heard from you some portions also of those inspired
canticles? And the royal personages having heard this, requested of
Juvenal the archbishop, that the holy coffin, with the {314} clothes of
the glorious and all-holy Mary, mother of God, sealed up, might be sent
to them. And this, when sent, they deposited in the venerable temple of
the Mother of God, built in Blachernae; and these things were so."

    [Footnote 117: This seems confused in the original ([Greek: kai
    eginosketo, kai ouk eginoske]). The whole passage is involved in
    great obscurity.]

It is a fact no less lamentable than remarkable, that out of the lessons
appointed by the Church of Rome for the feast of the Assumption, to be
read to believers assembled in God's house of prayer, three of those
lessons are selected and taken entirely from this very oration of John
Damascenus[118].

    [Footnote 118:

    The Fourth Lesson begins "Hodie sacra et animata arca."
    The Fifth    "      "    "Hodie virgo immaculata."
    The Sixth    "      "    "Eva quæ serpentis," &c.--Æ. 603.

    These contain the passages to which we have before referred as
    fixing the belief of the Church of Rome to be in the CORPOREAL
    assumption of Mary. "Quomodo corruptio invaderet CORPUS ILLUD in
    quo vita suscepta est? [Greek: pos diaphthora tou zoodochon
    katatolmaeseie somatos.]"]

This, then, is the account nearest to the time of the supposed event;
and yet can any thing be more vague, and by way of testimony, more
worthless? A writer near the middle of the sixth century refers to a
conversation, said to have taken place in the middle of the fifth
century; in this reported conversation at Constantinople, the Bishop of
Jerusalem is represented to have informed the Emperor and Empress of an
ancient tradition, which was believed, concerning a miraculous event,
said to have taken place nearly four hundred years before, that the body
was taken out of a coffin without the knowledge of those who had
deposited it there: Whilst the primitive and inspired account, recording
most minutely the journeys and proceedings of some of those very
persons, and the letters of others, makes no mention at all of any
transaction of the kind; and of {315} all the intermediate historians
and ecclesiastical writers not one gives the slightest intimation that
any rumour of it had reached them[119].

    [Footnote 119: Baronius appears not to have referred to this
    history of Euthymius, but he refers to Nicephorus, and also to a
    work ascribed to Melito, c. 4, 5. Nicephorus, Paris, 1630. vol.
    i. p. 168. lib. ii. c. 21. Baronius also refers to lib. 15. c.
    14. This Nicephorus was Patriarch of Constantinople. He lived
    during the reign of our Edward the First, or Edward the Second,
    and cannot, therefore, be cited in any sense of the word as an
    ancient author writing on the events of the primitive ages;
    though the manner in which his testimony is appealed to would
    imply, that he was a man to whose authority on early
    ecclesiastical affairs we were now expected to defer.]

Another authority to which the writers on the assumption of the Virgin
appeal, is that of Nicephorus Callistus, who, at the end of the
thirteenth or the beginning of the fourteenth century, dedicated his
work to Andronicus Palæologus. The account given by Nicephorus is this:

In the fifth year of Claudius, the Virgin at the age of fifty-nine, was
made acquainted with her approaching death. Christ himself then
descended from heaven with a countless multitude of angels, to take up
the soul of his mother; He summoned his disciples by thunder and storm
from all parts of the world. The Virgin then bade Peter first, and
afterwards the rest of the Apostles, to come with burning torches[120].
The Apostles surrounded her bed, and "an outpouring of miracles flowed
forth." The blind beheld the sun, the deaf heard, the lame walked, and
every disease fled away. The Apostles and others sang, as the coffin was
borne from Sion to Gethsemane, angels preceding, surrounding, and
following it. {316} A wonderful thing then took place. The Jews were
indignant and enraged, and one more desperately bold than the rest
rushed forward, intending to throw down the holy corpse to the ground.
Vengeance was not tardy; for his hands were cut off from his arms[121].
The procession stopped; and at the command of Peter, on the man shedding
tears of penitence, his hands were joined on again and restored whole.
At Gethsemane she was put into a tomb, but her Son transferred her to
the divine habitation.

    [Footnote 120: This author here quotes the forged work ascribed
    to Dionysius the Areopagite, to which we have before referred.]

    [Footnote 121: This tradition seems to have been much referred
    to at a time just preceding our Reformation. In a volume called
    "The Hours of the most blessed Mary, according to the legitimate
    rite of the Church of Salisbury," printed in Paris in 1526, from
    which we have made many extracts in the second part of this
    work, the frontispiece gives an exact representation of the
    story at the moment of the Jew's hands being cut off. They are
    severed at the wrist, and are lying on the coffin, on which his
    arms also are resting. In the sky the Virgin appears between the
    Father and the Son, the Holy Dove being seen above her. The same
    print occurs also in another part of the volume.]

Nicephorus then refers to Juvenal, Archbishop of Jerusalem, as the
authority on which the tradition was received, that the Apostles opened
the coffin to enable St. Thomas (the one stated to have been absent) to
embrace the body; and then he proceeds to describe the personal
appearance of the Virgin. [Vol. i. p. 171.]

I am unwilling to trespass upon the patience of my readers by any
comment upon such evidence as this. Is it within the verge of
credibility that had such an event as Mary's assumption taken place
under the extraordinary circumstances which now invest the tradition, or
under any circumstances whatever, there would have been a total silence
respecting it in the Holy Scriptures? {317} That the writers of the
first four centuries should never have referred to such a fact? That the
first writer who alludes to it, should have lived in the middle of the
fifth century, or later; and that he should have declared in a letter to
his contemporaries that the subject was one on which many doubted; and
that he himself would not deny it, not because it rested upon probable
evidence, but because nothing was impossible with God; and that nothing
was known as to the time, the manner, or the persons concerned, even had
the assumption taken place? Can we place any confidence in the relation
of a writer in the middle of the sixth century, as to a tradition of
what an archbishop of Jerusalem attending the council of Chalcedon, had
told the sovereigns at Constantinople of a tradition, as to what was
said to have happened nearly four hundred years before, whilst in the
"Acts" of that Council, not the faintest trace is found of any allusion
to the supposed fact or the alleged tradition, though the transactions
of that Council in many of its most minute circumstances are recorded,
and though the discussions of that Council brought the name and
circumstances of the Virgin Mary continually before the minds of all who
attended it?

This, however, is a point of too great importance to be dismissed
summarily; and seems to require us to examine, however briefly, into the
circumstances of that Council. {318}






CHAPTER IV.--COUNCILS OF CONSTANTINOPLE, EPHESUS, AND THE GENERAL
COUNCIL OF CHALCEDON


The legend on which the doctrine of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary is
founded professes to trace the tradition to Juvenal, Archbishop of
Jerusalem, when he was sojourning in Constantinople for the purpose of
attending the General Council of Chalcedon. To the Emperor and Empress,
who presided at that council, Juvenal is said to have communicated the
tradition, as received in Palestine, of the miraculous taking up of
Mary's body into heaven. This circumstance seems, as we have already
intimated, of itself, to require us to examine the records of that
Council, with the view of ascertaining whether any traces may be found
confirmatory of the tradition, or otherwise; and since that Council
cannot be regarded as an insulated assembly, but as a continuation
rather or resumption of the preceding minor Councils of Constantinople
and Ephesus, we must briefly refer to the occasion and nature generally
of that succession of Christian synods. I am not aware that in the
previous Councils any thing had transpired {319} which could be brought
as evidence on the subject of our inquiry. The questions which had
disturbed the peace of Christendom, and which were agitated in these
Councils, inseparable from a repeated mention of the Virgin Mary's name,
afforded an opportunity at every turn for an expression of the
sentiments of those who composed the Councils, and of all connected with
them, including the Bishop of Rome himself, towards her. It would be
altogether foreign from the purpose of this address to enter in any way
at large upon the character and history of those or the preceding
Councils, yet a few words seem necessary, to enable us to judge of the
nature and weight of the evidence borne by them on the question
immediately before us.

The source of all the disputes which then rent the Church of HIM who had
bequeathed peace as his last and best gift to his followers, was the
anxiety to define and explain the nature of the great Christian mystery,
the Incarnation of the Son of God; a point on which it were well for all
Christians to follow only so far as the Holy Scriptures lead them by the
hand. All parties appealed to the Nicene Council; though there seems to
have been, to say the least, much misunderstanding and unnecessary
violence and party spirit on all sides. The celebrated Eutyches of
Constantinople was charged with having espoused heterodox doctrine, by
maintaining that in Christ was only one nature, the incarnate Word. On
this charge he was accused before a Council held at Constantinople in
A.D. 448. His doctrine was considered to involve a denial of the human
nature of the Son of God. The Council condemned him of heresy, deposed,
and excommunicated him. From this proceeding Eutyches appealed to a
General Council. A council (the authority of which, however, {320} has
been solemnly, but with what adequate reason we need not stop to
examine, repudiated), was convened at Ephesus in the following year, by
the Emperor Theodosius. The proceedings of this assembly were
accompanied by lamentable unfairness and violence. Eutyches was
acquitted, and restored by this council[122]; and his accusers were
condemned and persecuted; Flavianus, Archbishop of Constantinople, who
had summoned the preceding council, being even scourged and exiled. In
his distress that patriarch sought the good offices of Leo, Bishop of
Rome, who espoused his cause, but who failed nevertheless of inducing
Theodosius to convene a General Council. His successor Marcian, however,
consented; and in the year 451 the Council of Chalcedon was convened,
first meeting at Nice, and by adjournment being removed to Chalcedon. In
this council all the proceedings as well of the Council of
Constantinople as of Ephesus, were rehearsed at length; and from a close
examination of the proceedings of those three councils, only one
inference seems deducible, namely, that the invocation and worship of
saints and of the Virgin Mary had not then obtained that place in the
Christian {321} Church, which the Church of Rome now assigns to it; a
place, however, which the Church of England, among other branches of the
Catholic Church, maintains that it has usurped, and cannot, without a
sacrifice of the only sound principle of religious worship, be suffered
to retain.

    [Footnote 122: The sentiments of Eutyches, even as they are
    recorded by the party who charged him with heresy, seem to imply
    so much of soundness in his principles, and of moderation in his
    maintenance of those principles, that one must feel sorrow on
    finding such a man maintaining error at any time. The following
    is among the records of transactions rehearsed at Chalcedon:
    "He, Eutyches, professed that he followed the expositions of the
    holy and blessed Fathers who formed the Councils of Nicæa and
    Ephesus, and was ready to subscribe to them. But if any where it
    might chance, as he said, that our fathers were deceived and led
    astray, that as for himself he neither accepted nor accused
    those things, but he only on such points investigated the divine
    Scriptures as more to be depended upon [Greek: os
    bebaioteras]."]

The grand question then agitated with too much asperity, and too little
charity, was, whether by the incarnation our blessed Saviour became
possessed of two natures, the divine and human. Subordinate to this, and
necessary for its decision, was involved the question, What part of his
nature, if any, Christ derived from the Virgin Mary? Again and again
does this question bring the name, the office, the circumstances, and
the nature of that holy and blessed mother of our Lord before these
Councils. The name of Mary is continually in the mouth of the accusers,
the accused, the judges, and the witnesses; and had Christian pastors
then entertained the same feelings of devotion towards her; had they
professed the same belief as to her assumption into heaven, and her
influence and authority in directing the destinies of man, and in
protecting the Church on earth; had they habitually appealed to her with
the same prayers for her intercession and good offices, and placed the
same confidence in her as we find now exhibited in the authorized
services of the Roman Ritual, it is impossible to conceive that no
signs, no intimation of such views and feelings, would, either directly
or incidentally, have shown themselves, somewhere or other, among the
manifold and protracted proceedings of these Councils. I have searched
diligently, but I can find no expression as to her nature and office, or
as to our feelings and conduct towards Mary, in which, as a {322}
Catholic of the Anglican Church, I should not heartily acquiesce. I can
find no sentiment implying invocation, or religious worship of any kind,
or in any degree; I find no allusion to her Assumption.

Pope Leo, who is frequently in these documents [Vol. v. p. 1418.] called
Archbishop of Rome, in a letter to Julianus, Bishop of Cos, speaks of
Christ as born of "A Virgin," "The blessed Virgin," "The pure, undefiled
Virgin;" and in a letter to the empress Pulcheria, he calls Mary simply
"The Virgin Mary." In his celebrated letter to Flavianus, not one iota
of which (according to the decree of the Roman council under Pope
Gelasius) was to be questioned by any man on pain of incurring an
anathema, Pope Leo says that Christ was conceived by the Holy Ghost in
the womb of the Virgin Mary his mother, who brought him forth with the
same virgin purity as she had conceived him. Flavianus, Archbishop of
Constantinople, in his Declaration of faith to the Emperor Theodosius,
affirms, that Christ was born "of Mary, the Virgin--of the same
substance with the Father according to his Godhead--of the same
substance with his mother according to his manhood." [Vol. vi. p. 539.]
He speaks of her afterwards as "The holy Virgin."

There is, indeed, one word used in a quotation from Cyril of Alexandria,
and adopted in these transactions, which requires a few words of
especial observation. The word is _theotocos_[123], which the Latins
were accustomed {323} to transfer into their works, substituting only
Roman instead of Greek characters, but which afterwards the authors of
the Church of Rome translated by Deipara, and in more recent ages by Dei
Mater, Dei Genetrix, Creatoris Genetrix, &c. employing those terms not
in explanation of the twofold nature of Christ's person, as was the case
in these Councils, but in exaltation of Mary, his Virgin mother. This
word was adopted by Christians in much earlier times than the Council of
Chalcedon; but it was employed only to express more strongly the
Catholic belief in the union of the divine and human nature in Him who
was Son both of God and man; and by no means for the purpose of raising
Mary into an object of religious adoration. The sense in which it was
used was explained in the seventh Act of the Council of Constantinople,
(repeated at Chalcedon) as given by Cyril of Alexandria. "According to
this sense of an unconfused union, we confess the holy Virgin to be
theotocos, because that God the Word was made flesh, and became man, and
from that very conception united with himself the temple received from
her."

    [Footnote 123: [Greek: Theotokos]. To those who would depend
    upon this word _theotocos_ as a proof of the exalted honour in
    which the early Christians held the Virgin, and not as
    indicative of an anxiety to preserve whole and entire the
    doctrine of the union of perfect God and perfect man in Christ,
    deriving his manhood through her, I would suggest the necessity
    of weighing well that argument with this fact before them; that
    to the Apostle James, called in Scripture the Lord's brother,
    was assigned the name of Adelphotheos, or God's brother. This
    name was given to James, not to exalt him above his
    fellow-apostles, but to declare the faith of those who gave it
    him in the union of the divine and human nature of Christ.--See
    Joan. Damascenus, Hom. ii. c. 18. In Dormit. Virg. vol. ii. p.
    881. Le Quien, Paris, 1712. The Latin translation renders it
    Domini frater.]

Nothing in our present inquiry turns upon the real {324} meaning of that
word _theotocos_. Some who have been among the brightest ornaments of
the Anglican Church have adopted the translation "mother of God," whilst
many others among us believe that the original sense would be more
correctly conveyed by the expression "mother of Him who was God."

I am induced here to lay side by side, with the second Article of our
Anglican Church, the Confession of Faith from Cyril, first recited at
Constantinople, then repeated at Ephesus, and afterwards again rehearsed
at Chalcedon; in its last clause the expression occurs which gave rise
to these remarks.

    _Ancient Confession._

    We confess that our Lord Jesus, the Christ, the only begotten
    Son of God, perfect God and perfect man, from a reasonable soul
    and body, begotten from everlasting of the Father according to
    his Godhead, and in these last days, He the same for us and for
    our salvation [was born] of Mary, the Virgin, according to his
    manhood--of the same substance with the Father according to his
    Godhead, of the same substance with us according to his manhood.
    For of two natures there became an union. Wherefore we confess
    one Christ, one Lord. According to this sense of the unconfused
    union, we confess the holy Virgin to be theotocos, because that
    God the Word was made flesh, and became man, and from that very
    conception united with himself the temple received from her.

    [Vol. vi. p. 736.]

    _Second Article of Anglican Church._

    The Son, which is the Word of the Father, begotten from
    everlasting of the Father, the very and eternal God, and of one
    substance with the Father, took man's nature in the womb of the
    blessed Virgin, of her substance: so that two whole and perfect
    natures, that is to say, the Godhead and Manhood, were joined
    together in one Person, never to be divided, whereof is one
    Christ, very God, and very man; who truly suffered, was
    crucified, dead and buried, to reconcile his Father to us, and
    to be a sacrifice, not only for original guilt, but also for
    actual sins of men. {325}

But there are other points in the course of these important proceedings
to which I would solicit your especial attention, with the view of
comparing the sentiments of the Bishop of Rome at that day, and also the
expressions employed by other Chief Pastors of Christ's flock, with the
language of the appointed authorized services of the Roman Church now,
and the sentiments of her reigning Pontiff, and of his accredited
ministers.

The circumstances of the Church Catholic, as represented in Leo's letter
in the fifth century, and the circumstances of the Church of Rome, as
lamented by the present Pope in 1832[124], are in many respects very
similar. The end desired by Leo and Flavianus, his brother pastor and
contemporary, Bishop of Constantinople, and by Gregory, now Bishop of
Rome, is one and the same, namely, the suppression of heresy, the
prevalence of the truth, and the unity of the Christian Church. But how
widely and how strikingly different are the foundations on which they
respectively build their hopes for the attainment of that end!

    [Footnote 124: "The encyclical letter of our most holy Father,
    Pope Gregory, by divine providence, the sixteenth of that name,
    to all patriarchs, primates, archbishops, and bishops."]

The present Roman Pontiff's hopes, and desires, and exhortations are
thus expressed[125]:--

    [Footnote 125: This is the translation circulated in the Roman
    Catholic Annual, p. 15, called, The Laity's Directory for the
    year 1833; on the title page of which is this notice: "The
    Directory for the Church Service, printed by Messrs. Keating and
    Brown, is the only one which is published with the authority of
    the Vicars Apostolic in England.--London, Nov. 12, 1829." Signed
    "James, Bishop of Usula, Vic. Ap. Lond."]

"That all may have a successful and happy issue, let us raise our eyes
to the most blessed Virgin Mary, {326} WHO ALONE DESTROYS HERESIES, who
is our GREATEST HOPE, yea, the ENTIRE GROUND OF OUR HOPE[126]. May she
exert her patronage to draw down an efficacious blessing on our desires,
our plans, and proceedings in the present straitened condition of the
Lord's flock. We will also implore, in humble prayer, from Peter, the
prince of the Apostles, and from his fellow-Apostle Paul, that you may
all stand as a wall to prevent any other foundation than what hath been
laid; and supported by this cheering hope, we have confidence that the
author and finisher of faith, Jesus Christ, will at last console us all
in the tribulations which have found us exceedingly."

    [Footnote 126: On this word there is a note of reference to S.
    Bern. Serm. de Nat. B.M.V. 7.]

"To you, venerable brethren, and the flocks committed to your care, we
most lovingly impart, as auspicious of celestial help, the Apostolic
Benediction. Given at Rome from St. Mary Major's, August 15th, the
Festival of the Assumption of the same blessed Virgin Mary, the year of
our Lord 1832, of our Pontificate the Second."

How deplorable a change, how melancholy a degeneracy is here evinced
from the faith, and hopes, and sentiments of Christian bishops in days
of old! In the expressed hopes of Leo and Flavianus, you will seek in
vain for any reference or allusion "to the blessed Virgin Mary, as the
destroyer of heresies, the greatest hope, the entire ground of a
Christian's hope;" you will in vain seek for any exhortation for the
faithful "to raise their eyes to her in order to obtain a merciful and
happy issue." Equally vain would be your search for any "imploring in
humble prayer," of Peter and Paul, or any even distant allusion to help
from them. {327} To God and God alone are the faithful exhorted to pray;
on God and God alone do those Christians express that their hopes rely;
God alone they regard as the destroyer of heresy, the restorer of peace,
and the protector of the Church's unity. "Their greatest hope, yea, the
entire ground of their hope," the Being to be "implored in humble
prayer," is not Mary, nor Peter, nor Paul, but God alone, the Creator,
the Redeemer, the Sanctifier of Mary, and of Peter, and of Paul.

Thus Flavian writing to Leo says, "Wherefore (in consequence of those
errors, and heresies, and distractions, which he had deplored) we must
be sober and watch unto prayer, and draw nigh to God." [Vol. v. 1330.]
And again, "Thus will the heresy which has arisen, and the consequent
commotion, be easily destroyed by your holy letters with the assistance
of God." [Vol. v. 1355.] Thus Leo in his turn writing to Julian, Bishop
of Cos, utters this truly Christian sentiment. "May the mercy of God, as
we trust, grant that without the loss of any soul, against the darts of
the devil the sound parts may be entirely preserved, and the wounded
parts may be healed. May God preserve you safe and sound, most honoured
brother!" [Vol. v. 1423.] Thus the same Bishop of Rome writing to
Flavian, expresses his hopes in these words: "Confidently trusting that
the help of God will be present, so that one who has been misled,
condemning the vanity of his own thoughts, may be saved. May God
preserve you in health and strength, most beloved brother!" [Vol. v.
1390.]

I will detain you by only one more reference to these most interesting
documents. The whole Council of Chalcedon, at the conclusion of all, and
when the {328} triumph was considered to have been secured over
Eutyches, and their gratitude was expressed that the heresies had been
destroyed--instead of referring to Mary as the "sole destroyer of
heresies," shout, as if with the voice of one man, from every side, "It
is God alone who hath done this!" [Vol. vii. p. 174.] Neither
antecedently did their chief pastors exhort them to raise their eyes to
Mary, and promise to "implore" the blessing they needed, "in humble
prayer from Peter and Paul." Neither "in the straitened condition of the
Lord's flock" did they invoke any other than God. And when truth
prevailed, and the victory was won, whilst they were lavish of their
grateful thanks to the emperor and his queen, who were present and had
succoured them; of help from the invisible world they make no mention,
save only of the Lord's; they had implored neither angel, nor saints,
nor Virgin to be their protector and patron; no angel, nor saint, nor
virgin, shared their praises;--God alone was exalted in that day.

And, let not the answer, ever at hand when reference is thus made to the
prayers or professions of individuals, whether popes or canonized
saints, seduce any now from a pursuit of the very truth. These, it is
said, "are the prayers and professions of individuals, it is unfair then
to make the Church responsible for them; we appeal from them to the
Church." But in this case the words of the Sovereign Pontiff are in good
faith the words of the Church of Rome; not because I at all would
identify the words of a Pope with the Church, but because the prayers of
the Church of Rome in her authorized solemn services and acts of worship
justify {329} Pope Gregory in every sentiment he utters, and every
expression he employs. Does Gregory bid the faithful lift up their eyes
to Mary the sole destroyer of heresies? The Roman ritual in the Lesser
Office of the holy Virgin thus addresses her, "Rejoice, O Mary Virgin;
thou alone hast destroyed all heresies in the whole world:" And again:
"Under thy protection we take refuge, holy parent of God; despise not
thou our prayers in our necessities, but from all dangers ever deliver
us, O glorious and blessed Virgin." Does Gregory assure the faithful
that he will implore in humble prayer of Peter and Paul? in doing so he
is only treading in the very footsteps of the Roman Church itself. In an
address, which we have already quoted (see p. 262), Peter is thus
invoked. "Now O good shepherd, merciful Peter, accept the prayers of us
who supplicate, and loose the bands of our sins, by the power committed
to thee, by which thou shuttest heaven against all by a word, and
openest it."

These things are now; but from the beginning it was not so. {330}






CHAPTER V.

SECTION I.--PRESENT WORSHIP OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN IN THE AUTHORIZED AND
ENJOINED SERVICES OF THE CHURCH OF ROME.


When from examining the evidence of antiquity we turn to the present
enjoined services of the Church of Rome, it is impossible not to be
struck by the fact repeatedly forced upon our notice, that whereas the
invocation of the Virgin seems to have been introduced at a period much
later than those addresses to the martyrs which have already invited our
attention, her worship now assumes so much higher a place, and claims so
large a share in the public worship of the Roman Catholic portions of
Christendom above martyrs, saints, and angels. The offices of the Virgin
present instances of all those various and progressive stages of divine
worship, which we have already exemplified in the case of the martyrs,
from the first primitive and Christian practice of making the
anniversary of the Saint a day either of especial praise and prayer to
God for the mercies of redemption generally, or of returning thanks to
God for the graces manifested in his holy servants now in peace, with
prayers for light and strength to enable the worshippers to follow them,
as they followed Christ--down to the last and worst stage, the
consummation {331} of all, namely, prayer directly to saints and angels
for protection, succour, and spiritual benefits at their hands.

I. Of the first class is the following collect, retained almost word for
word in our Anglican service.

_On the day of the Purification._

"Almighty and everlasting God, we humbly beseech thy majesty, that as
thy only begotten Son was this day presented in the temple in substance
of our flesh, so Thou wouldest cause us to be presented unto Thee with
purified minds. Through the same."

(Omnipotens sempiterne Deus, majestatem tuam supplices exoramus, ut
sicut unigenitus Filius tuus hodierna die cum nostræ carnis substantia
est præsentatus, ita nos facias purificatis tibi mentibus præsentari.
Per eundem Dominum.--H. 536.)

Such a prayer is founded on the facts of revelation, and is primitive,
catholic, apostolic, and evangelical.

II. Of the second progressive stage towards the adoration of the saints,
the offices of the Virgin supply us with various instances; the case,
namely, of the Christian orator being led by the flow of his eloquence
to apostrophize the spirit of the Saint, and address him as though he
were present, witnessing the celebration of his day, hearing the
panegyrics uttered for his honour, and partaking with the congregation
in their religious acts of worship.

"O holy and spotless virginhood; with what praises to extol thee I know
not: because Him, whom the heavens could not contain, thou didst bear in
thy bosom. {332} Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit
of thy womb. Thou art blessed, O Virgin Mary, who didst carry the Lord,
the Creator of the world. Thou didst give birth to Him who made thee,
and remainest a virgin for ever. [Beata es Virgo Maria, quæ Dominum
portasti Creatorem mundi: genuisti qui te fecit, et in æternum permanes
virgo.--Vern. clxii.] Hail, holy parent, who didst in child-birth bring
forth the King who ruleth heaven and earth for ever and ever. Amen."
[Salve sacra parens enixa puerpera regem, qui coelum terramque regit in
sæcula sæculorum. Amen.--Introit. at the mass on the Nativity of the
Virgin.]

In apostrophes like these, the members of the Anglican Church see
nothing in itself harmful, so long as they are kept within due bounds.
Many of the passages cited from the ancient writers in proof of their
having espoused the doctrine, and exemplified in themselves the practice
of invoking saints, are nothing more than these glowing addresses. They
have been responded to by one of the brightest ornaments, and sweetest
minstrels of the Anglican Church, whose apostrophe at the same time by
its own words would guard us against the abuses and excesses in which in
the Roman Catholic Church this practice, followed without restraint and
indulged in with less and less of caution and soberness, unhappily
ended; abuses against which also we cannot ourselves now be too
constantly and carefully on our guard.

  "Ave Maria! Blessed maid,
  Lily of Eden's fragrant shade,
      Who can express the love,
  That nurtured thee so pure and sweet;
  Making thy heart a shelter meet
      For Jesus' holy Dove? {333}
  Ave Maria! mother blest,
  To whom, caressing and caress'd,
      Clings the Eternal Child!
  Favour'd beyond archangel's dream,
  When first on thee with tenderest gleam
      The newborn Saviour smiled.
  Ave Maria! thou whose name,
  ALL BUT ADORING love may claim,
      Yet may we reach thy shrine;
  For HE, thy Son and Saviour, vows,
  To crown all lowly lofty brows
      With love and joy like thine.
  Bless'd is the womb that bare Him,--bless'd
  The bosom where his lips were press'd;
      But rather bless'd are they
  Who hear his word and keep it well,
  The living homes where Christ shall dwell,
      And never pass away."

  J. Keble's Christian Year. "The Annunciation."

Would that no branch of the Church Catholic had ever passed the boundary
line drawn here so exquisitely by this Anglican Catholic, from whose
lips or pen no syllable could ever fall in disparagement of the holy
Virgin, as blessed among women, and the holy mother of our Lord. To
bring about the re-union of Christians would in that case have been a
far more hopeful task than it is now.

III. In the third stage, a prayer was offered to God, that He would
permit the intercessions of the saints to help us; or the prayer
contained the expression of a wish,--a desire not addressed either to
God or to the saint, merely words expressive of the hope of the
individual. The following are some of the many instances now contained
in the Roman Breviary: {334}

"May the Virgin of virgins herself intercede for us to the Lord. Amen."
[Ipsa Virgo virginum intercedat pro nobis ad Dominum. Amen.--Vern.
cxlviii.]

In the Post-communion, on the day of the Assumption, this prayer is
offered:--"Partakers of the heavenly table, we implore thy clemency, O
Lord our God, that we who celebrate the Assumption of the mother of God,
may, by her intercession, be freed from all impending evils. Through,"
&c. [Mensæ coelestis participes effecti imploramus clementiam tuam,
Domine Deus noster, ut qui Assumptionem Dei Genetricis colimus, a
cunctis malis imminentibus ejus intercessione liberemur. Per.--Miss.
Rom.]

"We beseech Thee, O Lord, let the glorious intercession of the blessed
and glorious ever Virgin Mary protect us and bring us to life eternal."
[Beatæ et gloriosæ semper Virginia Mariæ, quæsumus, Domine, intercessio
gloriosa nos protegat, et ad vitam producat æternam.--Vern. clv.]

"Pardon, we beseech Thee, O Lord, the offences of thy servants, that we,
who cannot please Thee of our own act, may be saved by the intercession
of the mother of thy Son, our Lord, who liveth with Thee." [Famulorum
tuorum quæsumus, Domine, delictis ignosce, ut qui tibi placere de
nostris actibus non valemus, Genetricis Filii tui, Domini nostri,
intercessione salvemur, qui tecum vivit.--Vern. clxix.]

On the vigil of the Epiphany, this prayer is offered in the
Post-communion at the mass,--"Let this communion, O Lord, purge us from
guilt, and by the intercession of the blessed Virgin, mother of God, let
it make us partakers of the heavenly cure. Through the same." [Hæc nos
communio, Domine, purget a crimine, et intercedente beata Virgine Dei
genetrice coelestis remedii faciat esse consortes. Per eundem.--Miss.
Rom.]

"Grant, we beseech Thee, O Lord God, that we thy {335} servants may
enjoy perpetual health of body and mind, and be freed from present
sorrow, and enjoy eternal gladness, by the glorious intercession of the
blessed Mary, ever Virgin. Through." [Concede nos famulos tuos,
quæsumus, Domine Deus, perpetua mentis et corporis sanitate gaudere, et
gloriosa beatæ Mariæ semper Virginis intercessione a præsenti liberari
tristitia, et æterna perfrui lætitia. Per Dominum.--Vern. cxlvi.]

On the second Sunday after Easter, we find a further and more sad
departure from the simplicity of Christian worship, in which the Church
of Rome declares that the offerings made to God at the Lord's Supper
were made for the honour of the Virgin.--"Having received, O Lord, the
helps of our salvation, grant, we beseech Thee, that by the patronage of
Mary, ever Virgin, we may be every where protected; in veneration of
whom we make these offerings to thy Majesty." [Sumptis, Domine, salutis
nostræ subsidiis, da, quæsumus, beatæ Mariæ semper Virginis patrociniis
ubique protegi, _in cujus veneratione_ hæc tuæ obtulimus
Majestati.--Post Commun. Mis. Rom.]

On the octave of Easter, at the celebration of mass, in the Secret, the
intercession of the Virgin is made to appear as essential a cause of our
peace and blessedness as the propitiation of Christ; or rather, the two
are represented as joint concurrent causes; as though the office of the
Saviour was confined to propitiation, exclusive altogether of
intercession, whilst the office of intercession was assigned to the
Virgin.--"By thy propitiation, O Lord, and by the intercession of the
blessed Mary, ever Virgin, may this offering be profitable to us for
perpetual and present prosperity and peace." [Tua, Domine, propitiatione
et beatæ Marisæ semper Virginis intercessione ad perpetuam atque
prsesentem hæc oblatio nobis profecerit prosperitatem et pacem.] {336}

IV. A fourth station in this lamentable progress was evidenced when
Christians at the tombs of martyrs implored, yet still in prayer to God,
that He would, for the sake of the martyrs, and by their merits and good
offices, grant to the petitioner some benefit temporal or spiritual. Of
that practice, we have an example in this prayer: "O God, who didst
deign to choose the blessed Virgin's womb in which to dwell, vouchsafe,
we beseech thee, to make us, defended by her protection, to take
pleasure in her commemoration." [Deus qui virginalem aulam beatæ Mariæ
in qua habitares eligerere dignatus es, da, quæsumus, ut sua nos
defensione munitos jucundos facias suæ interesse commemorationi.--Æst.
clvi.]

"By the Virgin mother, may the Lord grant us health and peace. Amen."
[Per Virginem Matrem concedat nobis Dominus salutem et pacem.
Amen.--Vern. cxliii.]

"By the prayers and merits of the blessed Mary, ever Virgin, and of all
saints, may the Lord bring us to the kingdom of heaven." [Precibus et
meritis beatæ Mariæ Virginis et omnium sanctorum perducat nos Dominus ad
regna coelorum.--Vern. cxlvii.]

"May the Virgin Mary bless us, together with a pious offspring." [Nos
cum prole pia benedicat Virgo Maria.--Vern. cxlvii.]

V. The fifth grade involves a still more melancholy departure from
Christian truth and primitive simplicity, when the prayer is no longer
addressed to God, but is offered to the Virgin, imploring her to
intercede with God for the supplicants, yet still asking nothing but her
prayers.

"Blessed mother, Virgin undefiled, glorious Queen of the world,
intercede for us with the Lord." [Beata Mater, et intacta Virgo,
gloriosa regina mundi, intercede pro nobis ad Dominum.--Aut. cxliv.]
{337}

"Blessed mother of God, Mary, perpetual Virgin, the temple of the Lord,
the holy place of the holy Spirit, thou alone without example hast
pleased our Lord Jesus Christ: Pray for the people, mediate for the
clergy, intercede for the female sex who are under a vow." [Beata Dei
Genitrix, Maria Virgo perpetua, templum Domini, sacrarium Spiritus
Sancti, sola sine exemplo placuisti Domino nostro Jesu Christo; ora pro
populo, interveni pro clero, intercede pro devoto femineo sexu.--Vern.
clxiii.]

  "Holy Mary, pray for us!
  Holy mother of God, pray for us!
  Holy Virgin of virgins, pray for us!"

In the form of prayer called Litaniæ Lauretanæ, between the most solemn
addresses to the ever blessed Trinity, and to the Lamb of God that
taketh away the sins of the world, are inserted more than forty
addresses to the Virgin, invoking her under as many varieties of title.
She is appealed to as--The Mirror of Justice, The Cause of our Joy, The
mystical Rose, The Tower of David, The Tower of Ivory, The House of
Gold, The Arc of the Covenant, The Gate of Heaven, The Refuge of
Sinners, The Queen of Angels, the Queen of all Saints. [Vern. ccxxxix.]

In examining the case of the invocation of saints, we placed under this
head, as the safer course, a kind of invocation which seemed to
vacillate between this appeal to them merely for intercession, and the
last consummation of all, direct prayer to them for blessings. We
exemplified it by the hymn to St. Stephen. The following seems very much
of the same character, addressed to the Virgin:--

    "Hail, O Queen, Mother of mercy, our life, sweetness, and hope,
    Hail! To thee we cry, banished sons {338} of Eve. To thee we
    sigh, groaning and weeping in this valley of tears. Come then,
    our Advocate, turn those compassionate eyes of thine on us, and
    after this exile show to us Jesus, the blessed fruit of thy
    womb. O merciful! O pious! O sweet Virgin Mary! [Salve, Regina,
    Mater Misericordiæ, vita, dulcedo, et spes nostra, salve. Ad te
    clamamus exules filii Evæ. Ad te suspiramus gementes et flentes
    in hac lachrymarum valle. Eja ergo Advocata nostra, illos tuos
    misericordes oculos ad nos converte, et Jesum benedictum fructum
    ventris tui nobis post hoc exilium ostende. O clemens! O pia! O
    dulcis Virgo Maria!]

    "Pray for us, O holy Mother of God, that we may be made worthy
    of the promises of Christ." [Ora pro nobis, Sancta Dei Genetrix,
    ut digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi.--Æst. 151.]

VI. Unhappily, in the appointed religious services of the Roman ritual,
we have too many examples of prayer for benefits spiritual and temporal,
addressed directly to the Virgin. It is in vain to say that all that is
meant is to ask her intercession; the people will not, cannot, do not,
regard it in that light. It is affirmed that when the Church of Rome
guides and directs her sons and daughters to pray for specific benefits
at the hands of the Virgin mother, without any mention of her prayers,
without specifying that her petitions are all that they ask; yet they
are taught only to ask for her intercession, and are not encouraged to
look for the blessings as her gift and at her hands. But, can this be
right and safe? In an act of all human acts the most solemn and holy,
can recourse be had to such refinements without great danger?

Among many others of a similar kind this invocation frequently recurs,
"Deem me worthy to praise thee, {339} O sacred Virgin; give to me
strength against thy enemies." [Dignare me laudare te, Virgo sacrata. Da
mihi virtutem contra hostes tuos.--Æst. clvi.]

The following seems to be among the most favourite addresses to the
Virgin:--"Hail, Star of the Sea, kind Mother of God, and ever Virgin!
Happy Gate of Heaven, taking that 'Hail!' from the mouth of Gabriel,
establish us in peace,--changing the name of Eve. For the guilty, loose
their bonds; bring forth light for the blind; drive away our evils;
demand for us all good things. SHOW THAT THOU ART A MOTHER. Let Him who
endured for us to be thy Son, through thee receive our prayers. O
excellent Virgin, meek among all, us, FREED FROM FAULT, MAKE MEEK AND
CHASTE; make our life pure; prepare a safe journey; that, beholding
Jesus, we may always rejoice. Praise be to God the Father, glory to
Christ most high, and to the Holy Spirit; one honour to the three.
Amen."

  [Ave Man's Stella,
  Dei Mater alma,
  Atque semper Virgo!
  Felix coeli porta,
  Sumens illud Ave
  Gabrielis ore,
  Funda nos in pace,
  Mutans Evæ nomen.
  Solve vincla reis,
  Profer lumen cæcis,
  Mala nostra pelle,
  Bona cuncta posce.
  MONSTRA TE ESSE MATREM;
  Sumat per te preces,
  Qui pro nobis natus
  Tulit esse tuus.
  Virgo singularis,
  Inter omnes mitis,
  Nos culpa solutos,
  Mites fac et castos,
  Vitam præsta puram,
  Iter para tutum,
  Ut videntes Jesum
  Semper collætemur.

  Sit laus Deo Patri, summo Christo decus,
  Spiritui Sancto, tribus honor unus. Amen.--Æst. 597.
  ]

In the body of this hymn, there is undoubtedly reference to an
application to be made to the Son, &c.; but can it be fitting that such
language as is here suggested to the Virgin, for her to use, should be
addressed by a {340} mortal to God? can such a call upon her to show her
power and influence over the eternal Son of the eternal Father be
fitting--"Show that thou art a mother?" I confess that against what is
here implied, my understanding and my heart entirely revolt.[127]

    [Footnote 127: At the present day some versions, contrary to the
    whole drift and plain sense and meaning of the passage, have
    translated it, as though the prayer was, that Mary would, by her
    maternal good offices in our behalf, prove to us that she was
    our mother. An instance of what I mean occurs in a work called
    "Nouveau Recueil de Cantiques," p. 353.

    "Monstra te esse Matrem: Faites voir que vous êtes véritablement
    notre mère." In an English manual, first printed in 1688, and
    then called "The Prince of Wales's Manual," the lines are thus
    rendered--

      Shew us a Mother's care,
      To Him convey our prayer,
      Who for our sake put on
      The title of thy Son.

    I rejoice to see an indication of a feeling of impropriety in
    the sentiment in its plain, obvious meaning; still the change is
    inadmissible. She is addressed above, in the second line, as the
    mother of God; Jesus is immediately mentioned, in the very next
    line, and through the entire stanza, as her Son; and the prayer
    is, that through her that Being who endured to be her Son would
    hear the prayers of the worshippers.

    Since I first prepared this note for the press, I have found a
    proof, that the obvious grammatical and logical meaning, "show
    thyself to be His mother," is the sense in which it was received
    and interpreted before the Reformation. In a work dedicated to
    the "Youth of England studious of good morals," and entitled
    "Expositio Sequentiarum," the only interpretation given to this
    passage is thus expressed: "Show thyself to be a MOTHER, namely
    BY APPEASING THY SON, and let thy Son take our prayers through
    thee, who (namely, the Son born of the Virgin Mary,) for us
    miserable sinners endured to be thy Son." "Monstra te esse
    MATREM (sc.) placando TILIUM TUUM, et filius tuus sumat precem,
    id est, deprecationes nostras per te qui (sc.) filius natus ex
    Virgine Maria pro nobis (sc.) miseris peccatoribus tulit, id
    est, sustinuit esse tuus filius." It must be observed, that this
    work was expressly written for the purpose of explaining these
    parts of the ritual according to the use of Sarum. It was
    printed by the famous W. de Worde, at the sign of the Sun in
    Fleet-street, 1508. The passage occurs in p. 33. b. This is by
    no means the only book of the kind. I have before me one printed
    at Basil, in 1504, and another at Cologne the same year. They
    are evidently all drawn from some common source, but are not
    reprints all of the same work, for there are in each some
    variations. The Cologne edition tells us, that it was the
    reprint of a familiar commentary long ago (jamdudum) published
    on the hymns. All these join in construing the passage so as to
    represent the prayer to the Virgin to be, that she would show
    and prove that she was mother by appeasing her Son, and causing
    him to hear our prayers. Nor can any other meaning be attached
    to the translation of the words as given by Cardinal Du Perron
    (Replique à la Rep. du Roy de la G. Bretagne. Paris, 1620, p.
    970). "Et pourtant quand l'Eglise dit à la saincte Vierge,
    'Defends nous de l'ennemy, et nous reçoy à l'heure delamort,'
    elle n'entend pas prier la Vierge qu'elle nous reçoive par sa
    propre virtu, mais par impetration de la grace de son Fils,
    comme l'Eglise le temoigne en ces mots: 'Monstre que tu es mère,
    reçoive par toy nos prieres celuy, qui né pour nous a eu
    agreeable d'être tien!'" This novel interpretation I have not
    found in any one book of former days.] {341}

Another prayer runs thus: "Under thy protection we take refuge, Holy
Mother of God. Despise not our supplications in our necessities; but
from all dangers ever deliver us, O glorious and Blessed Virgin." [Sub
tuum præsidium confugimus, sancta Dei Genetrix; nostras deprecationes ne
despicias in necessitatibus, sed a periculis cunctis libera nos semper,
Virgo gloriosa et benedicta.--Æst. cxlvi.]

Let us suppose the object of these addresses to be changed; and instead
of the Virgin let us substitute the name of the ever-blessed God and
Father of us all. The very words here addressed to the Virgin are
offered to Him, and spoken of Him in some of the most affecting prayers
and praises recorded in the Bible[128].

    [Footnote 128: The identity of the prayers offered to the Virgin
    with those offered in the Book of inspiration, or in the Roman
    Ritual to the Almighty, becomes very striking, if we lay side by
    side the authorized language of the Roman Liturgy, and the only
    translation of the Scriptures authorized by the Roman Church.

    _Roman Ritual in addressing the          _Roman Ritual, or Translation
    Virgin_                                  of the Bible, in addressing
                                             the Almighty_.

    Sub tuum præsidium confugimus.           Dominus, firmamentum meum et
                                             refugium meum. Ad te
                                             confugi.--Ps. xvii. 1; cxlii.
                                             11.

    Nostras deprecationes ne despicias       Ne despexeris deprecationem
    in necessitatibus.                       meam.--Ps. liv. 1.

    Sed a periculis cunctis libera nos.      Libera, Domine, animam servi
                                             tui ab omnibus periculis
                                             inferni. Hiem. ccvi.

                                             Libera nos a malo. Orat. Dom.

                                             A periculo mortis libera nos,
                                             Domine.--Hiem. cciv.

    Tu nos ab hoste protege.                 Eripe me de inimicis meis,
                                             Domine.--Ps. cxlii. 11.

    Et hora mortis SUSPICE.                  _Suscipe_, Domine, servum
                                             tuum.--Hiem. ccvi. {342}
    ]

But another hymn in the office of the Virgin, addressed in part to the
blessed Saviour himself, and partly to the Virgin Mary, is still more
revolting to all my feelings with regard to religious worship. The
Redeemer is only asked to remember his mortal birth; no blessing is here
supplicated for at his hands; his protection is not sought; no
deliverance of our souls at the hour of death is implored from Him;
these blessings, and these heavenly benefits, and these divine mercies,
are sought for exclusively at the hands of the Virgin alone. Can such a
mingled prayer, can such a contrast in prayer, be the genuine fruit of
that Gospel which bids us ask for all we need in prayer to God in the
name and for the sake of his blessed Son?

    "Author of our salvation, remember that once, by {343} being
    born of a spotless virgin, thou didst take the form of our body!
    Mary, mother of grace, mother of mercy, do thou protect us from
    the enemy, and receive us at the hour of death. Glory to thee, O
    Lord, who wast born of a Virgin, with the Father and the Holy
    Spirit, through eternal ages. Amen[129]."

    [Footnote 129:

    Memento, Salutis Auctor,         Tu nos ab hoste protege,
    Quod nostri quondam corporis,    Et hora mortis suscipe.
    Ex illibata Virgine,             Gloria tibi, Domine,
    Nascendo formam sumpseris.       Qui natus es de Virgine,
    Maria mater gratiæ,             Cum Patre et Sancto Spiritu,
    Mater misericordiæ,             In sempiterna sæcula. Amen.

    In the new version, (referred to in page 260 of the present
    work,) this hymn stands thus:--

    Memento, rerum Conctitor,        Maria mater gratiæ,
    Nostri quod olim corporis,       Dulcis parens clementiæ,
    Sacrata ab alvo Virginis,        Tu nos ab hoste protege,
    Nascendo forrnam sumpseris.      In mortis hora suscipe, &c.

    Æst. clv.]

Could the beloved John, to whose kind and tender care our blessed Lord
gave his mother of especial trust, have offered to her such a prayer as
this? To God alone surely would he have prayed for deliverance from all
evil and mischief. To God alone would he have prayed:--"In the hour of
death, good Lord, deliver us, and all for Jesus Christ's sake, our only
Saviour and Mediator."

To one other example of the practice of the Church of Rome I must refer.
The rubric in our Book of Common Prayer directs that "at the end of
every Psalm throughout the year, shall be repeated, Glory be to the
Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost: As it was in the
beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen." In the
Roman Breviary also we find this rubric: "This verse, _Gloria_, is
always said in the end of all psalms, EXCEPT IT BE OTHERWISE {344}
NOTED." [Æst. 3.] Such notifications occur at the end of various psalms.
On the Feast of the Assumption [Æst. 595.], fourteen psalms are
appointed to be used. At the close of every one of these psalms, without
however any note that the Gloria is not to be said, there is appended an
anthem to the Virgin. In some cases, so intimately is the anthem
interwoven with the closing words of the psalm, as that under other
circumstances it would induce us to infer that the Gloria was intended
to be left out, especially as in the Parvum Officium of the Virgin [Æst.
clv.], though to the various psalms anthems in the same manner have been
annexed, yet the words "Gloria Patri et Filio" are inserted in each case
between the psalm and the anthem. Be this as it may, the annexation of
the anthem has a lamentable tendency to withdraw the thoughts of the
worshippers from the truths contained in the inspired psalm, and to fix
them upon Mary and her Assumption; changing the Church's address from
the Eternal Being, alone invoked by the Psalmist, to one, who though a
virgin blessed among women, is a creature of God's hand. Thus, at the
conclusion of the 8th psalm; "O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is thy
name in all the world," we find immediately annexed these two anthems,
"The holy mother of God is exalted above the choirs of angels to the
heavenly realms. The gates of paradise are opened to us by thee, [by
thee, O Virgin [Quæ gloriosa]] who glorious triumphest with the angels."
Thus again, an anthem is attached to the last verse of the 95th (in the
Hebrew and English versions the 96th). "He shall judge the earth in
equity, and the people with his truth. Rejoice, {345} O Virgin Mary;
thou alone hast destroyed all heresies in the whole world. Deem me
worthy to praise thee, hallowed Virgin: Give me strength against thy
enemies." To the 96th (97th), the latter clause of that address is
repeated, with the addition of the following: "After the birth thou
didst remain a virgin inviolate. Mother of God, intercede for us."

An instance of the anthem being so intimately interwoven with the psalm,
as to render the insertion of the "Gloria," between the two, to say the
least, forced and unnatural, occurs at the close of the 86th (87th)
psalm. The vulgate translation of the last verse, differing entirely
from the English, is this: "As the habitation of all who rejoice is in
thee." This sentence of the Psalmist is thus taken up in the Roman
Ritual: "As the habitation of all us who rejoice is in THEE, Holy Mother
of God."

The object proposed by the Church from of old in concluding each psalm
by an ascription of glory to the eternal Trinity, was to lead the
worshipper to apply the sentiments of the psalm to the work of our
salvation accomplished by the three Persons of the Godhead. The
analogous end of these anthems in the present service of the Church of
Rome is to fix the thoughts of the worshipper upon Mary. This practice
unhappily sanctions the excesses into which Bonaventura and others have
run in their departures from the purity and integrity of primitive
worship.

Cardinal du Perron informs us, that at the altar in the office of the
mass, prayer is not made directly to any saint, but only obliquely, the
address being always made to God. But if prayers are offered in other
parts of the service directly to them, it is difficult to see what is
gained by that announcement. Surely it is trifling {346} to make such
immaterial distinctions. If as a priest I could address the following
prayer to the Virgin in preparing for offering mass, why should I not
offer a prayer to the same being during its celebration?

"O mother of pity and mercy, blessed Virgin Mary, I a miserable and
unworthy sinner, flee to thee with my whole heart and affection, and I
pray thy most sweet pity, that as thou didst stand by thy most sweet Son
hanging upon the cross, so thou wouldest vouchsafe mercifully to stand
by me a miserable priest, and by all priests who here and in all the
holy Church offer Him this day, that, aided by thy grace, we may be
enabled to offer a worthy and acceptable victim in the sight of the most
high and undivided Trinity. Amen." [O Mater pietatis et misericordiæ,
beatissima Virgo Maria, ego miser et indignus peccator ad te confugio
toto corde et affectu. Et precor dulcissimam pietatem tuam, ut sicut
dulcissimo Filio tuo in cruce pendenti astitisti, ita et mihi misero
sacerdoti et sacerdotibus omnibus hic et in tota sancta ecclesia ipsum
hodie offerentibus, clementer assistere digneris, ut tua gratia adjuti
dignam et acceptabilem hostiam in conspectu summæ et individuæ
Trinitatis offerre valeamus. Amen.--Rom. Brev. Hus. Hiem. p. ccxxxiii.]

This is called, in the Roman Breviary, "A PRAYER to the blessed Virgin
before the celebration of the mass," and is immediately followed by
another prayer directed to be offered to any saint, male or female,
whose feast is on that day celebrated. "O Holy N. behold I, a miserable
sinner, DERIVING CONFIDENCE FROM THY MERITS, now offer the most holy
sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, FOR THY HONOUR
AND GLORY. I humbly and devotedly pray thee that thou wouldest deign to
intercede for me to-day, that I may be enabled to offer so great a
sacrifice {347} worthily and acceptably, and to praise Him eternally
with thee and with all his elect, and that I may live with Him for
ever." [O sancte N. ecce ego miser peccator de tuis mentis confisus,
offero nunc sacratissimura sacramentum corporis et sanguinis Domini
nostri Jesu Christ! PRO TUO HONORE ET GLORIA; precor te humiliter et
devote ut pro me hodie intercedere digneris, ut tantum sacrificium digne
et acceptabiliter offerre valeam, ut Eum tecum et cum omnibus electis
ejus æternaliter laudare et cum eo semper regnare valeam.--Hiem.
ccxxxiii.]



Such, Christian brethren, is the result of our inquiries into the real
practice of the Church of Rome with regard to the worship of the Virgin
Mary at the present day, in every part of the world where allegiance to
that Church is acknowledged. Can we wonder that individuals, high in
honour with that Church, have carried out the same worship to far
greater lengths? I have ever present to my mind the principle of fixing
upon the Church of Rome herself that only which is to be found in her
canons, acknowledged decrees, and formularies. And unhappily of that
which directly contravenes the Gospel-rule and primitive practice, far
more than enough is found in her authorized rituals to compel all who
hold to the Gospel and the integrity of primitive times, to withdraw
their assent and consent from her worship. But with this principle
before us, surely common justice and common prudence require that we
should see for ourselves the practical workings of the system. "By their
fruits ye shall know them," is a principle no less sanctioned by the
Gospel than suggested by common sense and experience And, indeed, the
shocking lengths to which priests, bishops, cardinals, and canonized
persons have gone in this particular of the worship of the Virgin, might
well {348} cause every upright and enlightened Roman Catholic to look
anxiously to the foundation; to determine honestly, though with tender
caution and pious care, for himself, whether the corruption be not in
the well-head, whether the stream do not flow impregnated with the
poison from the very fountain itself; whether the prayers authorized and
directed by the Church of Rome to be offered to the Virgin be not in
themselves at variance with the first principles of the Gospel--Faith in
one God, the giver of every good, and in one Mediator and Intercessor
between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, whose blood cleanseth from
all sin: in a word, to see whether all the aberrations of her children
in this department of religious duty have not their prototype in the
laws and ordinances, the rules and injunctions, the example and practice
of their mother herself.

Indeed I am compelled here to say, that, however revolting to us as
believers in Jesus, and as worshippers of the one true God, are those
extravagant excesses into which the votaries of the Virgin Mary have
run, I have found few of their most unequivocal ascriptions of divine
worship to her, for a justification of which they cannot with reason
appeal to the authorized ritual of the Church of Rome.

In leaving this point of our inquiry, I would suggest two
considerations: 1st, If it was intended that the invocation of the
Virgin should be exclusively confined to requests, praying her to pray
and intercede by prayer for the petitioners, why should language be
addressed to her which in its plain, obvious, grammatical, and common
sense interpretation conveys the form of direct prayers to her for
benefits believed to be at her disposal? And, 2ndly, If the Church had
{349} intended that her members, when they suppliantly invoked the
Virgin Mary, and had recourse to her aid, should have offered to her
direct and immediate prayers that she would grant temporal and spiritual
benefits, to be dispensed at her own will, and by her own authority and
power, in that case, what words could the Church have put into the mouth
of the petitioners which would more explicitly and unequivocally have
conveyed that idea?





SECTION II.--WORSHIP OF THE VIRGIN, CONTINUED.


I have no intention of dwelling at any length on the extraordinary
excesses to which the adoration of the Virgin Mary has been carried in
the Church of Rome, I do not mean by obscure and illiterate or fanatical
individuals, but by her celebrated prelates, doctors, and saints. My
researches have brought to my knowledge such a mass of error and
corruption in the worship of Christians as I never before had any
conception of; and rather than bring it all forward, and exhibit it to
others, I would turn my own eyes from it altogether. Still many reasons
render it absolutely necessary that we should not pass over the subject
entirely in silence. Few in England, I believe, are aware of the real
facts of the case; and it well becomes us to guard ourselves and others
against such melancholy results as would appear to be inseparable from
the invocation and worship of the Virgin. If indeed we could be
justified in regarding such palpable instances of her worship in its
most objectionable form as the {350} marks of former and less
enlightened times, most gladly would I draw a veil over them, and hide
them from our sight for ever. But when I find the solemn addresses of
the present chief authorities in the Church, nay, the epistles of the
present sovereign Pontiff himself, cherishing, countenancing, and
encouraging the selfsame evil departures from primitive truth and
worship, it becomes a matter not of choice, but of necessity, to give
examples at least of the deplorable excesses into which the highest and
most honoured in that communion have been betrayed. On the present
Pope's encyclical letter [A.D. 1840] we have already observed; and in
this place I propose to examine only one more of those many excesses
meeting us on every side, which characterize the public worship of the
Virgin. The instance to which I refer seems to take a sort of middle
station between the authorized enjoined services of the Church of Rome,
and the devotions of individuals and family worship. It partakes on the
one hand far too much of a public character to be considered in the
light of private religious exercises; and on the other it wants that
authority which would rank it among the appointed services of the
Church. The devotional parts of the services are found neither in the
Missals nor the Breviaries, and the adoption and celebration of the
service seems to be left to the option and care of individuals. But the
service is performed in the Churches,--a Priest presides,--the Host is
presented to the adorations of the people,--and a sermon is preached by
an appointed minister. The service to which I am referring is performed
every evening through the entire month of May, and is celebrated
expressly in honour of the Virgin Mary. {351}

The month of May is dedicated to her, and is called Mary's month.
Temporary altars are raised to her honour, surrounded by flowers and
adorned with garlands and drapery; her image usually standing before the
altar. Societies are formed chiefly for the celebration of the Virgin's
praises, and in some Churches the effect, both to the eye and to the
ear, corresponds with the preparation. One thing only is wanting--the
proper object of worship. I have now before me a book of hymns published
professedly for the religious fraternities in Paris, and used in the
Churches there. [Nouveau Recueil de Cantiques à l'usage des confréries
des Paroisses de Paris. Paris, 1839.] Many of these hymns are addressed
to the Virgin alone; some without any reference to the Son of God and
Man, the only Saviour, and without any allusion to the God of
Christians; indeed, an address to a heathen Goddess more entirely
destitute of Christianity can scarcely be conceived. I copy one hymn
entire.

  "Around the altars of Mary
  Let us, her children, press;
  To that mother so endeared
  Let us address the sweetest prayers.
  Let a lively and holy mirth
  Animate us in this holy day:
  There exists no sadness
  For a heart full of her love.
  Let us adorn this sanctuary with flowers;
  Let us deck her revered altar;
  Let us redouble our efforts to please her.
  Be this month consecrated to her;
  Let the perfume of these crowns
  Form a delicious incense, {352}
  Which ascending even to her throne
  May carry to her both our hearts and our prayers.
  Let the holy name of Mary
  Be for us a name of salvation!
  Let our softened soul
  Ever pay to her a sweet tribute of love.
  Let us join the choirs of angels
  The more to celebrate her beauty;
  And may our songs of praise
  Resound in eternity.
  O holy Virgin! O our mother!
  Watch over us from fhe height of heaven;
  And when from this sojourning of misery,
  We present our prayers to you;
  O sweet, O divine Mary!
  Lend an ear to our sighs,
  And after this life
  Make us to taste of immortal pleasures."

  [Autour des autels de Marie
    Nous ses enfants, empressons-nous;
  A cette Mère si chérie,
    Adressons les voeux les plus doux.
  Qu'une vive et sainte allégresse
    Nous anime dans ce saint jour;
  Il n'existe point de tristesse
    Pour un coeur plein de son amour.
  Ornons des fleurs ce sanctuaire,
    Parons son autel révéré,
  Redoublons d'efforts pour lui plaire.
    Que ce mois lui soi, consacré;
  Que le parfume de ces couronnes
    Forme un encens délicieux,
  Qui s'élevant jusqu'à son trône,
    Lui porte et nos coeurs et nos voeux.
  Que le nom sacré de Marie
    Soit pour nous un nom de salut;
  Que toujours notre âme attendrie,
    D'amour lui paie un doux tribut.
  Unissons-nous aux choeurs des anges,
    Pour mieux célébrer sa beauté.
  Et puissent nos chants de louanges
    Retentir dans l'éternité.
  O Vierge sainte! ô notre Mère!
    Veillez sur nous du haut des cieux;
  Et de ce séjour de misère,
    Quand nous vous présentons nos voeux,
  O douce, ô divine Marie!
    Prêtez l'oreille à nos soupirs;--
  Et faites qu'après cette vie,
    Nous goûtions d'immortels plaisirs.

  --"Cantiques à l'usage des Confréries." Paris, 1839, p. 175.]

In the course of the present work I have already suggested the propriety
of trying the real import, {353} the true intent, and meaning and force
of an address to a Saint, by substituting the holiest name ever uttered
on earth, for the name of the Saint to whom such address is offered; and
if the same words, without any change, form a prayer fit to be offered
by us sinners to the Saviour of the world, then to ask ourselves, Can
this be right? I would earnestly recommend the application of the same
test here; and in many other of the prayers now offered (for many such
there are now offered) by Roman Catholics to the Virgin. Suppose,
instead of offering these songs of praise and prayer, and self-devotion
to Mary in the month of May, we were to offer them, on the day of his
nativity, to our blessed Lord, would they not form an act of faith in
Him as our Saviour and our God?

  "Around the altar of Jesus,
  Let us, his children, press;
  To that Saviour so endeared
  Let us address the sweetest prayers. {354}
  Let a lively and holy mirth
  Animate us in this holy day:
  There exists no sadness
  For a heart full of his love.
  Let the holy name of Jesus
  Be for us a name of salvation!
  Let our softened soul
  Ever pay to HIM a sweet tribute of love.
  O holy Jesus! O our Saviour!
  Watch over us from the height of heaven;
  And when from this sojourning of misery,
  We present our prayers to Thee;
  O sweet, O divine Redeemer,
  Lend an ear to our sighs; and after this life,
  Make Thou us to taste of immortal pleasures."





SECTION III.--BONAVENTURA.


I will now briefly call your attention to the devotional works of the
celebrated Bonaventura. He is no ordinary man; and the circumstances
under which his works were commended to the world are indeed remarkable.
I know not how a Church can give the impress of its own name and
approval in a more full or unequivocal manner to the works of any human
being, than the Church of Rome has stamped her authority on the works of
this her saint.

In the "Acta Sanctorum", [Antwerp, 1723, July 14, p. 811-823.] it is
stated, that this celebrated man was born in 1221, and died in 1274. He
passed through all degrees of ecclesiastical dignities, {355} short only
of the pontifical throne itself. He was of the order of St. Francis, and
refused the archbishopric of York, when it was offered to him by Pope
Clement the Fourth, in 1265; whose successor, Gregory the Tenth,
elevated him to the dignity of cardinal bishop. His biographer expresses
his astonishment, that such a man's memory should have been so long
buried with his body; but adds, that the tardiness of his honours was
compensated by their splendour.

More than two centuries after his death, his claims to canonization were
urged upon Sixtus the Fourth; and that Pope raised him to the dignity of
saint; the diploma of his canonization bearing date 18 kalends of May,
1482, the eleventh year of that pope's reign.

Before a saint is canonized by the Pope, it is usually required, that
miracles wrought by him, or upon him, or at his tomb, be proved to the
satisfaction of the Roman court[130]. We need not dwell on the nature of
an inquiry into a matter-of-fact, alleged to have been done by an
individual two hundred years before; and whose memory is said to have
lain buried with his corpse. Among the miracles specified, it is
recorded, that on one occasion, when he was filled with solemn awe and
fear at the celebration of the Lord's Supper, God, by an angel, took a
particle of the consecrated host from the hands of the priest, and
gently placed it in the holy man's mouth. But, with these transactions,
I am not anxious to interfere, except so far as to ascertain the degree
of authority with which any pious Roman Catholic must be induced to
invest Bonaventura as a teacher and instructor in the doctrines of
Christianity, authorized and appointed by his Church. The case stands
thus:--Pope Sixtus IV. states in his {356} diploma, that the proctor of
the order of Minors, proved by a dissertation on the passage of St.
John, "There are three that bear record in heaven," that the blessed
Trinity had borne testimony to the fact of Bonaventura being a saint in
heaven: the Father proving it by the attested miracles; the Son, in the
WISDOM OF HIS DOCTRINE; the Holy Spirit, by the goodness of his life.
The pontiff then adds, in his own words, "He so wrote on divine
subjects, THAT THE HOLY SPIRIT SEEMS TO HAVE SPOKEN IN HIM." [Page 831.
"Ea de divinis rebus scripsit, ut in eo Spiritus Sanctus locutus
videatur."] A testimony referred to by Pope Sixtus the Fifth.

    [Footnote 130: See the canonization of St. Bonaventura in the
    Acta Sanctorum.]

This latter pontiff was crowned May 1, 1585, more than a century after
the canonization of Bonaventura, and more than three centuries after his
death. By his order, the works of Bonaventura were "most carefully
emendated." The decretal letters, A.D. 1588, pronounced him to be an
acknowledged doctor of Holy Church, directing his authority to be cited
and employed in all places of education, and in all ecclesiastical
discussions and studies. The same act offers plenary indulgence to all
who assist at the mass on his feast, in certain specified places, with
other minor immunities on the conditions annexed. [Page 837.]

In these documents Bonaventura[131] is called the Seraphic Doctor; and I
repeat my doubt, whether it is possible for any human authority to give
a more full, entire, and unreserved sanction to the works of any human
being than the Church of Rome has given to {357} the writings of
Bonaventura. And what do those works present to us, on the subject of
the Invocation and worship of the Virgin Mary?

    [Footnote 131: The edition of his works which I have used was
    published at Mentz in 1609; and the passages referred to are in
    vol. vi. between pp. 400 and 500.]

Taking every one of the one hundred and fifty psalms[132], Bonaventura
so changes the commencement of each, as to address them not as the
inspired Psalmist did, to the Lord Jehovah, the One only Lord God
Almighty, but to the Virgin Mary; inserting much of his own composition,
and then adding the Gloria Patri to each. It is very painful to refer to
these prostitutions of any part of the Holy Book of revealed truth; but
we must not be deterred from looking this evil in the face. A few
examples, however, will suffice.

    [Footnote 132: It is curious to find the Cardinal Du Perron, in
    his answer to our King James, declaring that he had never seen
    nor met with this Psalter in his life, and he was sure it was
    never written by Bonaventura; alleging that it was not mentioned
    by Trithemius or Gesner. The Vatican editors, however, have set
    that question at rest. They assure us that they have thrown into
    the appendix all the works about the genuineness of which there
    was any doubt, and that Bonaventura wrote many works not
    mentioned by Trithemius, which they have published from the
    Vatican press. Of this Psalter there is no doubt. See Cardinal
    Du Perron, Replique à la Rep. du Roi de Grand Bretagne. Paris,
    1620, p. 974.]

In the 30th psalm. "In thee, O Lord, have I trusted; let me not be
confounded for ever," &c., the Psalter of the Virgin substitutes these
words: [In te, Domina, speravi; non confundar in æternum, &c. &c. In
manus tuas, Domina, commendo spiritum meum, totam vitam meam, et diem
ultimum meum.--P. 480.]

"In thee, O Lady, have I trusted; let me not be confounded for ever: in
thy grace take me.

"Thou art my fortitude and my refuge; my consolation and my protection.
{358}

"To thee, O Lady, have I cried, while my heart was in heaviness; and
thou didst hear me from the top of the eternal hills.

"Bring thou me out of the snare which they have hid for me; for thou art
my succour.

"Into thy hands, O Lady, I commend my spirit, my whole life, and my last
day.--Gloria Patri," &c.

In the 31st psalm we read, "Blessed are they whose hearts love thee, O
Virgin Mary; their sins shall be mercifully blotted out BY THEE...."
[Beati quorum corda te diligunt, Virgo Maria; peccata ipsorum A TE
misericorditer diluentur.--P. 481.]

In the 35th, v. 2. "Incline thou the countenance of God upon us; COMPEL
HIM to have mercy upon sinners. O Lady, thy mercy is in the heaven, and
thy grace is spread over the whole earth." [Inclina vultum Dei super
nos. COGE illum peccatoribus misereri; Domina, in coelo misericordia
tua, et gratia diffusa est super terram.]

In the 67th, instead of, "Let God arise, and let his enemies be
scattered," the Psalter of the Virgin has,

"Let Mary arise, and let her enemies be scattered." [Exurgat Maria, et
dissipentur inimici ejus.--P. 483.]

In the opening of the 93rd psalm there is a most extraordinary, rather,
as it sounds to me, a most impious and blasphemous comparison of the
Supreme God with the Virgin Mary, in reference to the very Attribute,
which shines first, last, and brightest in HIM,--His eternal mercy. Nay,
it draws the contrast in favour of the Virgin, and against God. Most
glad should I be, to find that I had misunderstood this passage; and
that it admits of another acceptation[133]. But I fear its real meaning
is beyond controversy.

    [Footnote 133: A similar idea indeed pervades some addresses to
    the Virgin of the present day, representing the great and only
    potentate as her heavenly husband, in himself full of rage, but
    softened into tenderness towards her votaries by her influence.
    See a hymn, in the Paris collection already referred to, p. 353,
    &c. of this work (Nouveau Recueil de Cantiques, p. 183).

    Daignez, Marie, en ce jour             Vouchsafe, Mary, on this day
      Ecouter nos soupirs,                 To hear our sighs,
      Et seconder nos désirs.              And to second our desires.
    Daignez, Marie, en ce jour             Vouchsafe, Mary, on this day
    Recevoir notre encens, notre amour.    To receive our incense, our
                                             love.
    Du céleste époux                       Calm the rage
    Calmez le courroux,                    Of thy heavenly husband,
    Qu'il se montre doux                   Let HIM show himself kind
    A tous qui sont à vous.                To all those who are thine.
    Du céleste époux                       Of thy heavenly husband
    Calmez le courroux,                    Calm the rage,
    Que son coeur s'attendrisse sur nous.  Let his heart be softened
                                             towards us. {359}
    ]

"The Lord is a God of vengeance; but thou, O Mother of Mercy, bendest to
be merciful." [Deus ultionum Dominus; sed tu, Mater Misericordiæ, ad
miserandum inflectis.--P. 485.]

The well known and dearly valued penitentiary psalm (129th) "De
profundis," is thus addressed to Mary:--

"Out of the depths have I called to thee, O Lady:

"O Lady, hear my voice. Let thine ears be attent to the voice of thy
praise and glorifying: deliver me from the hand of my enemies: confound
their imaginations and attempts against me. Rescue me in the evil day;
and, in the day of death, forget not my soul. Carry me into the haven of
safety: let my name be enrolled among the just." [De profundis clamavi
ad te, Domina: Domina, exaudi vocem meam. Fiant aures tuæ intendentes in
vocem laudis et glorificationis tuæ. Libera me de manu adversariorum
meorum: confunde ingenia et conatus eorum contra me. Erue me in die
mala: et in die mortis ne obliviscaris animæ meæ. Deduc me ad portum
salutis: inter justos scribatur nomen meum.--P. 489.] {360}

But, as the penitential psalms are thus turned, from Him to whom the
Psalmist addressed them, so his hymns of praise to Jehovah, are made to
flow through the same channel to the Virgin. And all nature in the sea,
on the earth, in the heavens, and heaven of heavens, is called upon to
praise and glorify Mary. Thus, in the 148th psalm, we read,--

"Praise our Lady of heaven, glorify her in the highest. Praise her, all
ye men and cattle, ye birds of the heaven, and fishes of the sea. Praise
her, sun and moon; ye stars and circles of the planets. Praise her,
cherubim and seraphim, thrones and dominions, and powers. Praise her,
all ye legions of angels. Praise her, all ye orders of spirits above."
[Laudate Dominam nostram de coelis: glorificate eam in excelsis. Laudate
eam omnes homines et jumenta: volucres coeli et pisces maris. Laudate
eam sol et luna: stellæ, et circuli planetarum. Laudate eam cherubim et
seraphim: throni et dominationes, et potestates. Laudate eam omnes
legiones angelorum. Laudate eam omnes ordines spirituum supernorum.--P.
491.]

The last sentence of the psalms is thus rendered,--"Let every spirit
[_or_ every thing that hath breath] praise our Lady."

To this Psalter are added many hymns changed in the same manner. One,
entitled, "A Canticle, like that of Habakkuk iii." presents to us an
address to the Virgin Mary, of the very words which our blessed Saviour
most solemnly addressed to his heavenly Father.

O Lord, I have heard thy           O Lady, I have heard thy report,
speech, and was afraid, &c. &c.    and was astonished; I considered
                                   thy works, O Lady, and
                                   I was afraid at thy work. In the
                                   midst of the years thou hast revived
                                   it. {361}

                                     I will confess to thee, O Lady,
                                   because thou hast hid these things
                                   from the wise, and hast revealed
                                   them to babes.

                                     Thy glory hath covered the
                                   heavens, and the earth is full of
                                   thy mercy.

                                     Thou, O Virgin, wentest forth
                                   for the salvation of thy people,
                                   for salvation with thy Christ [thy
                                   anointed].

                                     O thou Blessed, our salvation
                                   rests in thy hands. Remember
                                   our poverty, O thou pious One.

                                     WHOM THOU WILLEST, HE
                                   SHALL BE SAVED; AND HE FROM
                                   WHOM THOU TURNEST AWAY THY
                                   COUNTENANCE, GOETH INTO DESTRUCTION.

[Domina, audivi auditionem tuam, et obstupui: consideravi opera tua, et
expavi, Domina, opus tuum: circa medium annorum vivificasti illud.

Confitebor tibi, Domina: quia abscondisti hæc a sapientibus: et
revelasti ea parvulis. Operuit coelos gloria tua, et misericordia tua
plena est terra.

Egressa es, Virgo, in salutem populi tui: in salutem cum Christo tuo. O
Benedicta, in manibus tuis est reposita nostra salus; recordare, pia,
paupertatis nostræ.

Quem vis, ipse salvus erit, et a quo avertis vultum tuum, vadit in
interitum.--G.P., &c.]

The song of the Three Children is altered in the same manner. In it as
well as in the Canticle of Zacharias, these prayers are introduced;

"O Mother of Mercy, have mercy upon us miserable sinners; who neglect to
repent of our past sins, and commit every day many to be repented of."
[Miserere, misericordiæ Mater, nobis miseris peccatoribus, qui retroacta
peccata poenitere negligimus, ac multa quotidie poenitenda committimus.]
{362}

The Te Deum is thus lamentably perverted:

"We praise thee, Mother of God; we acknowledge thee, Mary the Virgin.
[Te Matrem Dei laudamus; Te Mariam Virginem profitemur.]

"All the earth doth worship thee, spouse of the eternal Father.

"To thee all Angels and Archangels, Thrones and Principalities,
faithfully do service....

"To thee the whole angelic creation with incessant voice proclaim,

"Holy! Holy! Holy! Mary, parent, mother of God, and virgin!...

"... Thou with thy Son sittest at the right hand of the Father....

"O Lady, SAVE THY PEOPLE, that we may partake of the inheritance of thy
Son.

"And rule us and guard us for ever....

"Day by day we salute thee, O pious One; and we desire to praise thee in
mind and voice even for ever.

"Vouchsafe, O sweet Mary, now and for ever, to keep us without sin.

"Have mercy upon us, O pious One; have mercy upon us.

"Let thy great mercy be with us, because we put our trust in thee, O
Virgin Mary.

"In thee, sweet Mary, do we hope, defend thou us eternally. {363}

"Praise becomes thee, empire becomes thee; to thee be virtue and glory
for ever and ever. Amen."

[SALVUM FAC POPULUM tuum, Domina, ut simus participes hæreditatis Filii
tui,

Et rege nos et custodi nos in æternum.

Dignare, Dulcis Maria, mine et semper nos sine delicto conservare.
Miserere, Pia, nobis! miserere nobis! Fiat misericordia tua magna
nobiscum, quia in te, Virgo Maria, confidimus. In te, Dulcis Maria,
speramus, nos defendas in æternum. Te decet laus, te decet imperium,
tibi virtus et gloria in sæcula sæculorum, Amen.]

Can this by any the most subtle refinement be understood to be a mere
request to her to pray for us?

The Athanasian Creed is employed in the same manner; and it is very
remarkable that the Assumption itself of the Virgin into heaven is there
specified as one of the points to be believed on pain of losing all
hopes of salvation.

"Whosoever will be saved, before all things it is necessary that he hold
firm the faith concerning the Virgin Mary: which except a man keep whole
and undefiled, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly....
[Quicunque vult salvus esse, ante omnia opus est ut teneat de Maria
firmam fidem.]

"Whom at length He took up (assumpsit) unto heaven, and she sitteth at
the right hand of her Son, not ceasing to pray to her Son for us. [Quam
demum ipse in coelum assumpsit, et sedit ad dexteram Filii, non cessans
pro nobis Filium exorare.]

"This is the faith concerning Mary the Virgin, which except every one
believe faithfully and firmly he cannot be saved." [Hæc est fides de
Maria Virgine: quam nisi quisque fideliter firmiterque crediderit,
salvus esse non poterit.]

In the Litany addressed to her, these sentences are found.

"Holy Mary, whom all things praise and venerate, pray for us,--be
propitious,--spare us, O Lady.

"From all evil deliver us, O Lady.

"In the devastating hour of death, deliver us, O Lady.

"From the horrible torments of hell, deliver us, O Lady.

"We sinners do beseech thee to hear us.

"That thou wouldest vouchsafe to give eternal rest {364} to all the
faithful departed, we beseech thee to hear us. &c. &c."

  [Sancta Maria, quam omnia laudant
  Et venerantur, ora pro nobis.
  Propitia esto. Parce nobis, Domina.
  Ab omni malo libera nos, Domina.
  In hora mortis devastante libera nos, Domina.
  Ab inferni horribili cruciamine libera nos, Domina.
  Peccatores te rogamus, audi nos.
  Ut cunctis fidelibus defunctis requiem
  Æternam donare digneris, te rogamus, audi nos.]

I will add to this catalogue of prayers and praises to the Virgin, only
the translation of one prayer more from the same canonized Saint; it
contains a passage often referred to, but the existence of which has
been denied. It stands, however, in his works, vol. vi. page 466.

"Therefore, O Empress, and our most benign Lady, by THY RIGHT OF MOTHER
COMMAND thy most beloved Son [JURE MATRIS IMPERA tuo dilectissimo
Filio], our Lord, Jesus Christ, that He vouchsafe to raise our minds
from the love of earthly things to heavenly desires, who liveth and
reigneth."



Now let any man of common understanding and straightforward principles
say, whether any, the most ingenious refinement can interpret all this
to mean merely that Bonaventura invoked the Virgin Mary to pray for him,
or for his fellow-creatures. It looks as though he were resolved on set
purpose to exalt her to an equality with the Almighty, when we find him
not once, not casually, not in the fervent rapture of momentary
excitement, but deliberately, through one hundred and fifty Psalms,
applying to Mary the very words dictated by the Holy Spirit to the
Psalmist, and consecrated {365} to the worship of the one supreme God;
and then selecting the most solemn expressions by which the Christian
Church approaches the Lord of heaven and earth, our Father, our Saviour,
our Sanctifier: employing too the very words of her most solemn form of
belief in the ever-blessed Trinity, and substituting Mary's name for the
God of Christians. On the words, "By thy right of mother command thy
Son," beyond the assertion of the fact that there they are to this day,
I wish to add nothing, because the very denial of their existence often
repeated shows, that many Roman Catholics themselves regard them as
objectionable.

But, if such a man as Bonaventura, one of the most learned and
celebrated men of his age, could be tempted by the views cherished by
the Church of Rome, to indulge in such language, what can be fairly
expected of the large mass of persons who find that language published
to the world with the highest sanction which their religion can give, as
the work of a man whom the Almighty declared when on earth, by miracles,
to be a chosen vessel, and to be under the guidance of the Holy Spirit;
and of whom they are taught by the infallible testimony[134] of his
canonization, that he is now reigning with Christ in heaven, and is
himself the lawful and appointed object of religious invocation. I
profess to you that I see no way by which Christians can hold and
encourage this doctrine of the Invocation of Saints, without at the same
time countenancing and cherishing what, were I to join in such
invocation, would stain my soul with the guilt of idolatry. If the
doctrine were confessedly Scriptural, come what would come, our duty
would be to maintain it at all hazards, {366} and to brave every danger
rather than from fear of consequences to renounce what we believe to
have come from God; securing the doctrine at all events, and then
putting forth our very best to guard against its perversion and abuse.
But surely, it well becomes our brethren of the Church of Rome, to
examine with most rigid and unsparing scrutiny into the very foundation
of such a doctrine as this; a doctrine which in its mildest and most
guarded form is considered by a very large number of their fellow
Christians, as a dishonouring of God and of his Son, our Saviour; and
which in its excess, an excess witnessed in the books of learned and
sainted authors, and in the every day practice of worshippers, seems to
be in no wise distinguishable from the practices of acknowledged
polytheism, and pagan worship. If that foundation, after honest and
persevering examination, approves itself as based sure and deep on the
word of God, and the faith and practice of the apostles and the Church
founded by them from the first, I have not another word to say, beyond a
fervent prayer that the God in whom we trust would pour the bright beams
of his Gospel abundantly into the hearts of all who receive that Gospel
as the word of life. But were they my dying words to my dearest friend
who had espoused that doctrine, I would say to him, Look well yourself
to the foundation, because I am, after long examination, convinced,
beyond a shadow of doubt that the doctrine and practice of the
Invocation of Saints and Angels is as contrary to the doctrine and
practice of the primitive Church, as it is in direct opposition to the
express words of Scripture, and totally abhorrent from the spirit which
pervades the whole of the Old, and the whole of the New Testament of
God's eternal truth.

    [Footnote 134: Bellarmin, in his Church Triumphant, maintains
    that in the act of Canonization, the Church is infallible. Vol.
    ii. p. 871.] {367}





SECTION IV.--BIEL, DAMIANUS, BERNARDINUS DE BUSTIS, BERNARDINUS
SENENSIS, &c.


Unhappily these excesses in the worship of the Virgin Mary are not
confined to Bonaventura, or to his age. We have too many examples of the
same extravagant exaltation of her as an object of adoration and praise
in men, whose station and abilities seemed to hold them forth to the
world as burning and shining lights. Again, let me repeat, that in thus
soliciting your attention to the doctrines and expressed feelings of a
few from among the host of the Virgin's worshippers, I am far from
believing that the enlightened Roman Catholics in England now are ready
to respond to such sentiments. My desire is that all persons should be
made aware of the excesses into which even celebrated teachers have been
tempted to run, when they once admitted the least inroad to be made upon
the integrity of God's worship; and I am anxious also, without offence,
but with all openness, to caution my countrymen against encouraging that
revival of the worship of the Virgin in England, to promote which the
highest authorities in the Church of Rome have lately expressed their
solicitude, intimating, at the same time, their regret that the worship
of the Virgin at the present time has, in England, degenerated from its
exaltation in former ages, and that England is now far behind her
continental neighbours in her worship. Though these excessive departures
from Gospel truth and the primitive worship of one God by one Mediator
may not be the doctrines of all who belong to the Church of Rome, yet
they are the tenets of some of her most {368} celebrated doctors, of men
who were raised to her highest dignities in their lifetime, and solemnly
enrolled by her among the saints of glory after their death. Their words
and their actions are appealed to now in support of similar tenets and
doctrines, though few, in this country at least, are found to put them
forth in all their magnitude and fulness. But even in their mildest and
least startling form these doctrines are awfully dangerous.

The fact is, that the direct tendency of the worship of the Virgin, as
practically illustrated in the Church of Rome, is to make GOD himself an
object of FEAR, and the VIRGIN an object of LOVE; to invest Him, who is
the Father of mercy and God of all comfort, with awfulness, and majesty,
and with the terrors of eternal justice, and in direct and striking
contrast to array the Virgin mother with mercy and benignity, and
compassionate tenderness. Christians cannot be too constantly and too
carefully on their guard against doing this wrong to our heavenly
Father. His own inspired word invites us to regard Him not only as the
God of love, but as Love itself. "God is love;" [1 John iv. 8.] and so
far from terrifying us by representations of his tremendous majesty, and
by declarations that we cannot ourselves draw nigh to God; so far from
bidding us to approach Him with our suits and supplications through
mediators whom we should regard as having, more than our blessed
Redeemer, a fellow-feeling with us, and at the same time resistless
influence with Him; his own invitation and assurance is, "Come unto me,
and I will give you rest:" [Matt. xi. 28.] "No one cometh unto the
Father but by me:" [John xiv. 6.] "Him that cometh to me I will {369} in
no wise cast out:" [John vi. 37.] "Let us come boldly unto the throne of
grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of
need." [Heb. iv. 16.]

How entirely opposed to such passages as these, breathing the spirit
that pervades the whole Bible, are those doctrines which represent the
Virgin Mary as the Mediatrix by whom we must sue for the divine
clemency; as the dispenser of all God's mercies and graces; as the
sharer of God's kingdom, as the fountain of pity, as the moderator of
God's justice, and the appeaser of his wrath. "Show thyself a mother."
"Compel thy Son to have pity." "By thy right of mother command thy Son."
"God is a God of vengeance; but thou, Mary, dost incline to mercy;" such
expressions convey sentiments and associations shocking to our feelings,
and from which our reason turns away, when we think of God's
perfections, and the full atonement and omnipotent intercession of his
Son Christ our Redeemer. But it must not be disguised, that these are
the very sentiments in which the most celebrated defenders of the
worship of the Virgin, in the Church of Rome, teach their disciples to
acquiesce, and in which they must have themselves fully acquiesced, if
they practised what they taught. It is very painful to make such
extracts as leave us no alternative in forming our opinions on this
point; but it is necessary to do so, otherwise we may injure the cause
of truth by suppressing the reality; a reality over which there seems to
be a strong disposition, in the present day, in part at least, to draw a
veil; an expedient which can only increase the danger.

The first author, whose sentiments I would request you to weigh, is
Gabriel Biel, a schoolman of great celebrity[135]. {370} In his
thirty-second lecture, on the Canon of the Mass, he thus expresses
himself, referring to a sermon of St. Bernard, "The will of God was,
that we should have all through Mary.... You were afraid to approach the
Father, frightened by only hearing of Him.... He gave you Jesus for a
Mediator. What could not such a Son obtain with such a Father? He will
surely be heard for his own reverence-sake; for the Father loveth the
Son. But, are you afraid to approach even Him? He is your brother and
your flesh; tempted through all, that He might become merciful. THIS
BROTHER MARY GAVE TO YOU. But, perhaps, even in Him you fear the divine
Majesty, because, although He was made man, yet He remained God. You
wish to have an advocate even to Him. Betake yourself to Mary. For, in
Mary is pure humanity, not only pure from all contamination, but pure
also by the singleness of her nature[136]. Nor should I, with any doubt
say, she too will be heard for her own reverence-sake. The Son, surely,
will hear the Mother, and the Father will hear the Son."

    [Footnote 135: Tubingen, 1499. Gabriel Biel, born at Spires
    about A.D. 1425, was in A.D. 1484 appointed the first Professor
    of Theology in the then newly founded University of Tubingen. He
    afterwards retired to a monastery, and died A.D. 1495.]

    [Footnote 136: This is a very favourite argument in the present
    day, often heard in the pulpits on the Continent.]

In his 80th lecture, the same author comments on this prayer, which is
still offered in the service of the Mass:

"Deliver us, we beseech thee, O Lord, from all evils past, present, and
future; and by the intercession of the blessed and glorious ever-virgin
mother of God, Mary, with thy blessed apostles, Peter and Paul, and
Andrew, and all saints, mercifully grant peace in our days, that, aided
by the help of thy mercy, we may be both ever {371} free from sin, and
free from all disquietude. Through the same our Lord, &c."

On this prayer Biel observes, "Again we ask, in this prayer, the defence
of peace; and since we cannot, nor do we presume to obtain this by our
own merit, ... therefore, in order to obtain this, we have recourse, in
the second part of this prayer, to the suffrages of all his saints, whom
He hath constituted, in the court of his kingdom, as our mediators, most
acceptable to himself, whose prayers his love does not reject. But, of
them, we fly, in the first place, to the most blessed Virgin, the Queen
of Heaven, to whom the King of kings, the heavenly Father, has given the
half of his kingdom; which was signified in Hester, the queen, to whom,
when she approached to appease king Asuerus, the king said to her, Even
if thou shalt ask the half of my kingdom, it shall be given thee. So the
heavenly Father, inasmuch as He has justice and mercy as the more valued
possessions of his kingdom, RETAINING JUSTICE TO HIMSELF, GRANTED MERCY
to the Virgin Mother. We, therefore, ask for peace, by the intercession
of the blessed and glorious Virgin." [Cum habeat justitiam et
misericordiam tanquam potiora regni sui bona, justitia sibi retenta,
misericordiam Matri Virgini concessit.]

The very same partition of the kingdom of heaven, is declared to have
been made between God himself and the Virgin by one who was dignified by
the name of the "venerable and most Christian Doctor," John Gerson[137],
who died in 1429; excepting that, instead of justice and mercy, Gerson
mentions power and mercy as the two parts of which God's kingdom
consists, and that, whilst power remained with the Lord, the part of
mercy ceded "to the mother of Christ, and the reigning {372} spouse;
hence, by the whole Church, she is saluted as Queen of Mercy."

    [Footnote 137: Paris, 1606. Tract iv. Super "Magnificat," part
    iii. p. 754. See Fabricius, vol. iii. p. 49. Patav. 1754.]

I would next refer to a writer who lived four centuries before Biel, but
whose works received the papal sanction so late as the commencement of
the seventeenth century, Petrus Damianus, Cardinal and Bishop. His works
were published at the command of Pope Clement VIII., who died A.D. 1604,
and were dedicated to his successor, Paul V., who gave the copyright for
fifteen years to the Editor, Constantine Cajetan, A.D. 1606. I will
quote only one passage from this author. It is found in his sermon on
the nativity of the Virgin, whom he thus addresses: "Nothing is
impossible with thee, with whom it is possible to restore those in
despair to the hope of blessedness. For how could that authority, which
derived its flesh from thy flesh, oppose thy power? For thou approachest
before that golden altar of human reconciliation not only asking, but
commanding; a mistress, not a handmaid." [Accedis enim ante illud aureum
humanæ reconciliationis altare, non solum rogans, sed imperans; Domina,
non ancilla. Paris, 1743. vol. ii. p. 107. Serm. 44.]

I must now solicit your attention to the sentiments of two writers,
whose partial identity of name has naturally led, in some instances, to
the one being mistaken for the other, Bernardinus de Bustis, and
Bernardinus Senensis. Bernardinus de Bustis, [Fabricius, vol. i. 215.]
in the country of Milan, was the celebrated author of the "Office of the
Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin," which was confirmed by the
bull of Sixtus the Fourth, and has since been celebrated on the 8th of
December.

He composed different works in honour of the Virgin, {373} to one of
which he gave the title "Mariale." In this work, with a great variety of
sentiments of a similar tendency, he thus expresses himself:--

"Of so great authority in the heavenly palace is that empress, that,
omitting all other intermediate saints, we may appeal to her from every
grievance.... With confidence, then, let every one appeal to her,
whether he be aggrieved by the devil, or by any tyrant, or by his own
body, or by divine justice;" [Cologne, 1607. Part iii. Serm. ii. p.
176.] and then, having specified and illustrated the three other sources
of grievance, he thus proceeds: "In the fourth place, he may APPEAL TO
HER, if any one feels himself AGGRIEVED BY THE JUSTICE OF GOD [Licet ad
ipsam appellare, si quis a Dei justitia se gravari sentit.] ... That
empress, therefore, Hester, was a figure of this empress of the heavens,
with whom God divided his kingdom. For, whereas God has justice and
mercy, He retained justice to himself to be exercised in this world, and
granted mercy to his mother; and thus, if any one feels himself to be
aggrieved in the court of God's justice, let him appeal to the court of
mercy of his mother." [Ideo si quis sentit se gravari in foro justitiæ
Dei, appellet ad forum misericordiæ matris ejus.]

For one moment, let us calmly weigh the import of these words:--Is it
any thing short of robbing the Eternal Father of the brightest jewel in
his crown, and sharing his glory with another? Is it not encouraging us
to turn our eyes from the God of mercy as a stern and ruthless judge,
and habitually to fix them upon Mary as the dispenser of all we want for
the comfort and happiness of our souls?

In another place, this same author thus exalts Mary:

"Since the Virgin Mary is mother of God, and God is her Son; and every
son is naturally inferior to his {374} mother, and subject to her; and
the mother is preferred above, and is superior to her son, it follows
that the blessed Virgin is herself superior to God, and God himself is
her subject, by reason of the humanity derived from her;" [Part ix.
Serm. ii. p. 605.] and again. "O the unspeakable dignity of Mary, who
was worthy to command the Commander of all." [Part xii. Serm, ii. p.
816.]

I will detain you by only one more quotation from this famed Doctor. It
appears to rob God of his justice and power, as well as of his mercy;
and to turn our eyes to Mary for the enjoyment of all we can desire, and
for safety from all we can dread. Would that Bernardine stood alone in
the propagation of such doctrines. "We may say, that the blessed Virgin
is chancellor in the court of heaven. For we see, that in the chancery
of our lord the pope, three kinds of letters are granted: some are of
simple justice, others are of pure grace, and the third mixed,
containing justice and grace.... The third chancellor is he to whom it
appertains to give letters of pure grace and mercy. And this office hath
the blessed Virgin; and therefore she is called the mother of grace and
mercy: but those letters of mercy she gives only in the present life.
For, to some souls, as they are departing, she gives letters of pure
grace; to others, of simple justice; and to others, mixed, namely, of
justice and grace. For some were very much devoted to her, and to them
she gives letters of pure grace, by which she COMMANDS, that glory be
given to them without any pain of purgatory: others were miserable
sinners, and not devoted to her, and to them she gives letters of simple
justice, by which she COMMANDS that condign vengeance be done upon them;
others were lukewarm and remiss in devotion, and to them she gives
letters of justice and grace, by which {375} she COMMANDS that grace be
given to them, and yet, on account of their negligence and sloth, some
pain of purgatory be also inflicted on them." [Part xii. Serm. ii. On
the twenty-second excellence, p. 825.]

The only remaining author, to whom I will at present refer you, is a
canonized saint, Bernardinus Senensis. A full account of his life, his
miracles, and his enrolment among the saints in heaven, is found in the
Acta Sanctorum, vol. v. under the 20th of May, the day especially
dedicated to his honour. Eugenius IV. died before the canonization of
Bernardine could be completed: the next pope, Nicholas V. on Whitsunday
1450, in full conclave, enrolled him among the saints, to the joy, we
are told, of all Italy. In 1461, Pius the Second said that Bernardine
was taken for a saint even in his lifetime; and, in 1472, Sixtus IV.
issued a bull, in which he extols the saint, and authorizes the
translation of his body into a new church, dedicated, as others had
been, to his honour.

This Bernardine is equally explicit with others, in maintaining, that
all the blessings which Christians can receive on earth are dispensed by
Mary; that her princedom equals the princedom of the Eternal Father;
that all are her servants and subjects, who are the subjects and
servants of the Most High; that all who adore the Son of God should
adore his virgin-mother, and that the Virgin has repaid the Almighty for
all that He has done for the human race. Some of these doctrines were to
me quite startling; I was not prepared for them; but I have been assured
they find an echo in the pulpits in many parts of the continent. Very
few quotations will suffice. [Opera, per John de la Haye. Paris, 1636.
Five volumes bound in two.] {376}

"As many creatures do service to the glorious Mary, as do service to the
Trinity.... For he who is the Son of God, and of the blessed Virgin,
wishing (so to speak) to make, in a manner, the princedom of his mother
equal to the princedom of his father, he who was God, served his mother
on earth. Moreover, this is true, all things, even the Virgin, are
servants of the divine empire; and again, this is true, all things, even
God, are servants of the empire of the Virgin." [Vol. iv. Serm. v. c.
vi. p. 118.]

"Therefore, all the angelic spirits are the ministers and servants of
this glorious Virgin." [Serm. iii. c. iii. p. 104.]

"To comprise all in a brief sentence, I do not doubt that God made all
the liberations and pardons in the Old Testament on account of the
reverence and love of this blessed maid, by which God preordained from
eternity, that she should be, by predestination, honoured above all his
works. On account of the immense love of the Virgin, as well Christ
himself, as the whole most blessed Trinity, frequently grants pardon to
the most wicked sinners." [Serm. v. c. ii. p. 116.]

"By the law of succession, and the right of inheritance, the primacy and
kingdom of the whole universe is due to the blessed Virgin. Nay, when
her only Son died on the cross, since He had no one on earth to succeed
Him of right, his mother, by the laws of all, succeeded, and by this
acquired the principality of all. [Serm. v. c. vii. p. 118.] ... But, of
the monarchy of the universe, Christ never made any testamentary
bequest, because that could never be done without prejudice to his
mother. Moreover, HE KNEW THAT A MOTHER CAN ANNUL THE {377} WILL OF HER
SON, IF IT BE MADE TO THE PREJUDICE OF HERSELF." [Insuper noverat quod
potest mater irritare Filii testamentum si in sui præjudicium sit
confectum.--P. 118.]

"The Virgin Mother[138], from the time she conceived God, obtained a
certain jurisdiction and authority in every temporal procession of the
Holy Spirit, so that no creature could obtain any grace of virtue from
God except according to the dispensation of his Virgin mother[139]. As
through the neck the vital breathings descend from the head into the
body, so the vital graces are transfused from the head Christ into his
mystical body, through the Virgin. I fear not to say, that this Virgin
has a certain jurisdiction over the flowing of all graces. And, because
she is the mother of such a Son of God, who produces the Holy Spirit;
THEREFORE, ALL THE GIFTS, VIRTUES, AND GRACES OF THE HOLY SPIRIT ARE
ADMINISTERED BY THE HANDS OF HERSELF, TO WHOM SHE WILL, WHEN SHE WILL,
HOW SHE WILL, AND IN WHAT QUANTITY SHE WILL." [Serm. v. p. 119.]

    [Footnote 138: Serm. v. c. viii. and Serm. vi. c. ii. p. 120 and
    122. There is an omission (probably by an error of the press) in
    the first passage, which the second enables us to supply.]

    [Footnote 139: This writer is constantly referring to St.
    Bernard's doctrine, "No grace comes from heaven upon the earth,
    but what passes through the hands of Mary."]

"She is the queen of mercy, the temple of God, the habitation of the
Holy Spirit, always sitting at the right hand of Christ in eternal
glory. Therefore she is to be venerated, to be saluted, and to be adored
with the adoration of hyperdulia. And therefore she sits at the right
hand of the King, that as often as you adore Christ the king you may
adore also the mother of Christ." [Serm. vi. p. 121.]

"The blessed Virgin Mary alone has done more for {378} God; or as much
(so to speak) as God hath done for the whole human race. For I verily
believe that God will grant me indulgence if I now speak for the Virgin.
Let us gather together into one what things God hath done for man, and
let us consider what satisfaction the Virgin Mary hath rendered to the
Lord." Bernardine here enumerates many particulars, placing one against
the other, which for many reasons I cannot induce myself to transfer
into these pages, and then he sums up the whole thus: "Therefore,
setting each individual thing one against another, namely, what things
God had done for man, and what things the blessed Virgin has done for
God, you will see that Mary has done more for God, than God has for man;
so that thus, on account of the blessed Virgin, (whom, nevertheless, He
himself made,) God is in a certain manner under greater obligations to
us than we are to Him." [Serm. vi. p. 120.]

The whole treatise he finishes with this address to the Virgin:--

"Truly by mere babbling are we uttering these thy praises and
excellences; but we suppliantly pray thy immense sweetness. Do thou, by
thy benignity, supply our insufficiencies, that we may worthily praise
thee through the endless ages of ages. Amen."

In closing these brief extracts I would observe, that by almost every
writer in support of the worship of the Virgin, an appeal is made to St.
Bernard[140] as their chief authority. Especially is the following
passage quoted by many, either whole or in part, at almost every turn of
their argument:--

    [Footnote 140: The present Pope, in the same manner, refers to
   him in his Encyclical Letter.--A.D. 1840.]

"If thou art disturbed by the heinousness of thy crimes, and confounded
by the foulness of thy conscience, {379} if terrified by the horror of
judgment thou begin to be swallowed up in the gulf of despair, think of
Mary, invoke Mary; let her not depart from thy heart, let her not depart
from thy mouth. For whilst thinking of her, thou dost not err; imploring
her, thou dost not despair; following her, thou dost not lose thy way;
whilst she holds thee, thou dost not fall; whilst she protects thee,
thou dost not fear; whilst she is thy leader, thou art not wearied;
whilst she is favourable, thou reachest thy end[141]."

    [Footnote 141: See Bern. Sen. vol. iv. p. 124. The passage is
    found in Bernard, Paris, 1640. p. 25.]

If the Virgin Mary is thus regarded as the source and well-head of all
safety and blessing, we cannot wonder, that glory and praise are
ascribed in the selfsame terms to her as to the Almighty. Cardinal
Bellarmin closes the several portions of his writings with "Praise to
God and the blessed Virgin Mary[142]." It is painful to reflect, that
either the highest glory, due to that God who will not share his glory
with another, is here ascribed to one of the creatures of his hand
(however highly favoured and full of grace), or else that to the most
high God is ascribed an inferior glory and praise, such as it is lawful
for us to address to an exalted fellow-creature. Surely the only
ascription fitting the lips and the heart of those who have been
enlightened by the bright beams of Gospel truth, is Glory to God alone
through Christ his Son.

    [Footnote 142: Such ascriptions are very common. Joannes de
    Carthagena, a most voluminous writer of homilies, adopts this as
    the close of his sections: "Praise and glory to the Triune God,
    to the Humanity of Christ, to the Blessed Virgin Mary his
    mother, and to St. Joseph her dearest spouse."--Catholic
    Homilies on the Sacred Secrets of the Mother of God, and Joseph,
    p. 921. Paris, 1615.] {380}





SECTION V.--MODERN WORKS OF DEVOTION AMONG ROMAN CATHOLICS.


It may perhaps be surmised, that the authors referred to in the last
section lived many years ago, and that the sentiments of the faithful
members of the Church of Rome have undergone material changes on these
points. Assurances are given on every side, that the invocation of the
saints and of the Virgin is nothing more than a request, that they would
intercede with God, and implore his mercy for the suppliants. But
whatever implicit reliance we may place on the good faith with which
these declarations are made, we can discover no new key by which to
interpret the forms of prayer and praise satisfactorily. Confessedly
there are no changes in the authorized services. We discover no traces
of change in the worship of private devotion. The Breviary and Missal
contain the same offices of the Virgin Mary as in former days. The same
sentiments are expressed towards her in public; the same forms of
devotion[143], both in prayer and praise, are prepared for the use of
individuals in their daily exercises. Whatever meaning is to be attached
to the expressions employed, the prevailing expressions themselves
remain the same as we found them to have been in past ages.

    [Footnote 143: Works of this character abound in every place,
    where Catholic books may be purchased.]

Since I made these extracts from the learned and celebrated doctors and
canonized saints of former ages, my attention has been invited to the
language now {381} used in forms of devotion, the spirit of which
implies similar views of the power and love of the Virgin Mary, as the
fountain of mercies to mankind, and the dispenser of every heavenly
blessing.

At the head of these modern works, I was led to read over again the
encyclical letter of the present sovereign pontiff, from the closing
sentences of which I have already made extracts. And referring his words
to a test which we have more than once applied in a similar case--that
of changing the name of the person, and substituting the name of God, or
his blessed Son, I cannot see how the spirit of his sentiments falls in
the least below the highest degree of religious worship. His words, in
the third paragraph of his letter, as they appear in the Laity's
Directory for 1833, are these:--

"But having at length taken possession of our see in the Lateran Basilic
according to the custom and institution of our predecessors, we turn to
you without delay, venerable brethren, and in testimony of our feelings
towards you, we select for the date of our letter this most joyful day
on which we celebrate the solemn festival of the most blessed Virgin's
triumphant assumption into heaven, that she who has been through every
great calamity our patroness and protectress, may WATCH OVER US WRITING
TO YOU, AND LEAD OUR MIND BY HER HEAVENLY INFLUENCE to those counsels
which may prove most salutary to Christ's flock."

Let us substitute for the name of Mary, the holiest of all, The Eternal
Spirit of Jehovah Himself; and will not these words be a proper vehicle
of the sentiments of a Christian pastor? Let us fix upon Christmas-day,
or Easter, or Holy Thursday, and what word expressive {382} of gratitude
for past mercies to the supreme Giver of all good things, or of hope and
trust in the guidance of the Spirit of counsel, and wisdom, and
strength--of the most High God, who alone can order the wills and ways
of men--might not a bishop of Christ's flock take from this declaration
of the Sovereign Pontiff, and use in its first and natural sense, when
speaking of the Lord Jehovah Himself? "We select for the date of our
letter this most joyful day on which we celebrate the solemn festival of
the most blessed Redeemer's nativity, (or glorious resurrection, or
ascension,) that He who has been through every great calamity our patron
and protector, may watch over us writing to you, and lead our mind by
his heavenly influence to those counsels which may prove most salutary
to Christ's flock."

In these sentiments of the present Pope there is no allusion (as there
is in the other clause) to Mary's prayers and intercessions. Looking to
and weighing the words employed, and as far as words can be relied upon
as interpreters of the thoughts, looking to the spirit of his
profession, only one inference can be fairly drawn. However direct and
immediate the prayers of the suppliants may be to the Virgin for her
protection and defence from all dangers, spiritual and bodily, and for
the guidance of the inmost thoughts in the right way, (blessings which
we of the Anglican Catholic Church, following the footsteps of the
primitive flock of Christ, have always looked for at the hand of God
Almighty only, to be granted by Him for the sake of his blessed Son,)
such petitioners to Mary would be sanctioned to the utmost by the
principles and example of the present Roman Pontiff.

We have already, when examining the records of {383} the Council of
Chalcedon, compared the closing words of this encyclical letter with the
more holy and primitive aspirations of the Bishops of Rome and
Constantinople in those earlier days; and the comparison is striking
between the sentiments now expressed in the opening parts of the same
letter, and the spirit of the collects which were adopted for the use of
the faithful, before the invocation of saints and of the Virgin had
gained its present strong hold in the Church of Rome. For example, a
collect at Vespers teaches us to pray to God as the source from whom all
holy desires and all good counsels proceed [Hiem. 149.]; and on the
fifth Sunday after Easter this prayer is offered: "O God, from whom all
good things do come, grant, we pray Thee, that by thy inspiration we may
think those things that be good; and by thy guidance may perform the
same;" whilst on the fifth Sunday after the Epiphany, in a collect, the
spirit of which is strongly contrasted with the sentiments in both parts
of this encyclical letter, God is thus addressed: "We beseech thee, O
Lord, with thy continual pity, guard thy family, that, leaning on the
sole hope of heavenly grace, it may ever be defended by thy protection."
[Ut quæ in _sola_ spe gratiæ coelestis innititur, tua semper protectione
muniatur.--Hiem, 364. "Let us raise our eyes to the Blessed Virgin, who
is our greatest hope, yea, the entire ground of our hope."]

Similar materials are abundant. A whole volume, indeed, might readily be
composed consisting solely of rules and instructions, confessions and
forms of prayer, appertaining to the Virgin and the Saints, published by
authority at the present day, both in our country and on the Continent,
for the use of our Roman Catholic {384} brethren; but to which the word
of God, and the doctrine and practice of the primitive Church, are in
our estimation as much opposed as to the prayers of Bonaventura, or to
the doctrine of either of the Bernardins. It would, however, be
unprofitable to dwell on this subject at any great length. I will,
therefore, only briefly refer to two publications of this sort, to which
my own attention has been accidentally drawn: "The Imitation of the
Blessed Virgin,"[144] and "The Little Testament of the Holy
Virgin."[145]

    [Footnote 144: "The Imitation of the Blessed Virgin, composed on
    the plan of the Imitation of Christ. London, 1816. Approved by
    T.R. Asselini, Doctor of Sorbonne, last Bishop of Boulogne. From
    the French."]

    [Footnote 145: "The Little Testament of the Holy Virgin,
    translated from the French, and revised by a Catholic Priest.
    Third Edition. Dublin, 1836."]

The first professes to be "composed on the plan of the 'Imitation of
Christ.'" This is, in itself, highly objectionable; its tendency is to
exalt Mary, by association, to the same place in our hearts and minds,
which Thomas à Kempis had laboured, in his "Imitation of Christ," to
secure for the Saviour; and it reminds us of the proceedings of
Bonaventura, who wrote psalms to the honour of the Virgin after the
manner which David used in his hymns to the Lord of Glory. In this work
we read the following prayer to the Virgin, which seems to be stained
with the error, the existence of which elsewhere we have already
noticed, of contrasting the justice and the stern dealings even of the
Saviour, with the mercy, and loving-kindness, and fellow-feeling of
Mary; making God an object of fear, Mary an object of love.

"Mother of my Redeemer, O Mary, in the last moments {385} of my life, I
implore thy assistance with more earnestness than ever. I find myself,
as it were, placed between heaven and hell. Alas! what will become of
me, if thou do not exert, in my behalf, thy powerful influence with
Jesus?... I die with SUBMISSION since JESUS has ORDAINED it; but
notwithstanding the natural horror which I have of death, I die with
PLEASURE, because I die under THY protection." [Chap. xiii. p. 344.]

In the fourteenth chapter the following passage occurs: "It is giving to
the blessed Virgin a testimony of love particularly dear and precious to
her, to make her holy spouse Joseph the first object of our devotion,
next to that which consecrates us to her service.... The name of Joseph
is invoked with singular devotion by all the true faithful. They
frequently join it with the sacred names of Jesus and Mary. Whilst Jesus
and Mary lived at Nazareth, if we had wished to obtain some favour from
them, could we have employed a more powerful protector than St. Joseph?
Will he now have less power and credit? GO THEREFORE TO JOSEPH, (Gen.
xli. 55.) that he may intercede for you. Whatever favour you ask, God
will grant it you at his request.... Go to Joseph in all your
necessities; but especially to obtain the grace of a happy death. The
general opinion that he died in the arms of Jesus and Mary has inspired
the faithful with great confidence, that, through his intercession, they
will have an end as happy and consoling as his. In effect, it has been
remarked, that it is particularly at the hour of death that those who
have been during their life careful to honour this great saint, reap the
fruit of their devotion." [P. 347.]

In this passage the unworthy idea, itself formed on a groundless
tradition, is introduced of paying reverence {386} to one saint, in
order to gratify and conciliate another. Joseph must be especially
honoured in order to do what is most acceptable to Mary. Surely this
tends to withdraw the mind from that habitual reference of all our
actions immediately to God, which the primitive teachers were so anxious
to cultivate in all Christians.

In the "Little Testament of the Holy Virgin," the following (p. 46) is
called, "A Prayer to the blessed Virgin." Can any words place more on an
entire level with each other, the eternal Son of God and the Virgin?
"Jesus and Mary?!"

"O Mary! what would be our poverty and misery if the Father of Mercies
had not drawn you from his treasury to give you to earth! Oh! my Life
and Consolation, I trust and confide in your holy name. My heart wishes
to love you; my mouth to praise you; my mind to contemplate you; my soul
sighs to be yours. Receive me, defend me, preserve me; I cannot perish
in your hands. Let the demons tremble when I pronounce your holy name,
since you have ruined their empire; but we shall say with Saint Anselm,
that he does not know God, who has not an idea sufficiently high of your
greatness and glory. We shall esteem it the greatest honour to be of the
number of your servants. Let your glory, blessed Mother, be equal to the
extent of your name; reign, after God, over all that is beneath God;
but, above all, reign in my heart; you will be my consolation in
suffering, my strength in weakness, my counsel in doubt. At the name of
Mary my hope shall be enlightened, my love inflamed. Oh! that I could
deeply engrave the dear name on every heart, suggest it to every tongue,
and make all celebrate it with me. Mary! sacred name, under which no one
{387} should despair. Mary! sacred name, often assaulted, but always
victorious. Mary! it shall be my life, my strength, my comfort! Every
day shall I envoke IT AND THE DIVINE NAME OF JESUS. The Son will awake
the recollection of the mother, and the mother that of the Son. JESUS
AND MARY! this is what my heart shall say at the last hour, if my tongue
cannot; I shall hear them on my death bed,--they shall be wafted on my
expiring breath, and I with them, to see THEM, know THEM, bless and love
THEM for eternity. Amen."

There may, perhaps, be a reasonable ground for our hoping that these are
not the sentiments entertained by the enlightened Roman Catholics of our
country and age. Any one has a full right to say, "These are productions
of individuals for which we and the Church to which we belong are not
responsible, any more than the Church of England is responsible for all
doctrines and sentiments expressed by writers in her communion! Even the
sentiments above referred to of the present reigning pope, you have no
right to allege as the doctrines of the Church!" But I would again
venture to suggest to every one, who would thus speak, the duty of
ascertaining for himself, whether the sentiments of those who at present
fill the highest places, and which fully justify these devotional
exercises and prayers to the Virgin and the Saints, be not themselves
fully justified by the authorized ritual of the Roman Church. On this
point are supplied, even in this volume, materials sufficiently
diversified and abundant in quantity to enable any one to form a correct
judgment.

By two brief extracts I will now bring this branch of our inquiry to a
close. The first is from the concluding paragraphs of a discourse lately
delivered and {388} published. In principle, the sentiments here
professed apparently admit not only of being identified with those of
the authorized services of the Church of Rome, but also, though not so
naked and revolting in appearance as the doctrines of Bonaventura, Biel,
and the two Bernardins, yet in reality they equally depart from the
simplicity of the Gospel, and are equally at direct variance with that,
its first and its last principle, ONE GOD AND ONE MEDIATOR BETWEEN GOD
AND MEN, THE MAN CHRIST JESUS.

"Remember that this day you have put yourselves and your families under
the protection of the ever-blessed Mother of God, and Her chaste Spouse,
St. Joseph; of those who were chosen of God to protect the infancy of
Jesus from the danger by a persecuting world. ENTREAT THEM TO PROTECT
YOU AND YOURS FROM THE PERILS of a seducing and ensnaring world; to
plead your interests in heaven, and secure by their intercession your
everlasting crown. Loudly proclaim the praises of your heavenly Queen,
but at the same time turn Her power to your everlasting advantage by
your earnest supplications to HER." (See Appendix.)

The other extract, which sanctions to the full whatever offerings of
praise and ascriptions of glory we have found individuals making to the
Virgin and to Saints, is from an announcement in, I believe, the last
English edition of the Roman Breviary published, in its present form,
under the sanction of the Pope himself.

"To those who devoutly recite the following prayer after the office,
Pope Leo the Tenth hath granted pardon (indulsit) for the defects and
faults in celebrating it, contracted by human frailty.

"To the most holy and undivided Trinity; to the manhood {389} of our
crucified Lord Jesus Christ; to the fruitful spotlessness of the most
blessed and most glorious and ever-Virgin Mary; and to the entire body
of all the Saints, be eternal praise, honour, virtue, and glory, from
every creature, and to us remission of all sins, through endless ages of
ages. Amen." [Norwich, 1830. Æst.]

On the indulgence for pardon given by Pope Leo the Tenth, more than 300
years ago, for such defects and faults in celebrating a religious
service as may be contracted by human frailty; and on the fact of the
notification of that indulgence being retained, and set forth so
prominently in the service books at the present day, I will say nothing.
Whatever associations may be raised in our minds by these circumstances,
the subject does not fall within our present field of inquiry. But to
join the Holy Trinity with the Virgin Mother, and all the Saints in one
and the same ascription of ETERNAL PRAISE, HONOUR, and GLORY, is as
utterly subversive of the integrity of primitive Christian Worship, as
it is repugnant to the plainest sense of holy Scripture, and derogatory
to the dignity of that Supreme Being, who declares Himself to be a
jealous God.

It has, indeed, been maintained that such ascriptions of glory and
praise jointly to God and his Saints, is sanctioned by the language of
our blessed Saviour Himself when He speaks of his having given his glory
to his disciples [John xvii. 22.], and of his second advent, when He
shall come in his own glory, and in his Father's, and of the holy
angels. [Luke ix. 26.] But between the two cases there is no analogy
whatever; the inference is utterly fallacious. We know that the Lord of
Hosts is the King of glory, and that his eternal Son shared the glory of
his Father before the foundations {390} of the world were laid. We know,
too, that the Almighty has been pleased to create beings of various
degrees and orders, differing from each other in kind or in excellence
according to his supreme will. Among those creatures of his hand are the
angels whom we reverence and love, as his faithful servants and his
ministers to us for good. But when we speak and think of religious
adoration; of giving thanks; and ascribing eternal glory and honour, we
have only one object in our minds,--the supreme Sovereign Lord of all.

With regard to the gracious words of our Saviour in his prayer to the
Father, on the eve of his death, St. Peter's acts and words supply us
with a plain and conclusive comment. He was himself one of those to whom
Christ had declared that He had given the glory which his Father had
given to Him; and yet when Cornelius fell down at his feet to worship
him, he took him up, saying, "Stand up; I myself also am a man." [Acts
x. 26.] The Saviour was pleased to impart his glory to his Apostles,
dividing to them his heavenly gifts severally as He willed. We praise
Him for those graces which shone so brightly in them, and we pray to Him
to enable us by his grace to follow them, as they followed his blessed
steps. We reverence their memory, but we give God alone the praise.

As to the other instance, the words of our Lord (assuring us that the
angels should accompany Him at his second advent in their glory, the
glory which He assigned to them in the order of creation,) no more
authorize us to ascribe praise and glory by a religious act to them,
when we praise the God of angels and men, than would {391} the assurance
of an inspired apostle, that "there is one glory of the sun, another
glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars," sanction us in
joining those luminaries in the same ascription of glory with their
Almighty Creator and ours. Just as reasonably would a pagan justify his
worship of the sun, the moon, and the stars, by this passage of
Scripture, as our Roman Catholic brethren would justify themselves by
the former passage in their ascription of praise and glory to the holy
angels, and saints, and the blessed Virgin. We honour the holy angels,
we praise God for the glory which He has imparted to them, and for the
share which He has been pleased to assign to them in executing his
decrees of mercy in the heavenly work of our salvation; and we pray to
HIM to grant that they may by his appointment succour and defend us on
earth, through Jesus Christ our Lord. But we address no invocation to
them; we ascribe no glory to them as an act of religious worship. By
offering thanks and praise to God He declares that we honour HIM; by
offering thanks and praise, and by ascribing glory and honour to angel,
saint, or virgin, we make them gods. {392}






CONCLUSION.


We have now, my fellow Christians, arrived at the conclusion of the task
which I proposed to undertake. I have laid before you, to the utmost of
my abilities and means, the result of my inquiry into the evidence of
holy Scripture and primitive antiquity, on the invocation of saints and
angels, and the blessed Virgin Mary. In this inquiry, excepting so far
as was necessary to elucidate the origin and history of the Roman
Catholic tenet of the Assumption of the Virgin, we have limited our
researches to the writers who lived before the Nicene Council. That
Council has always been considered a cardinal point,--a sort of
climacteric in the history of the early Church. It was the first Council
to which all the bishops of Christendom were summoned; and the influence
of its decrees is felt beneficially in the Catholic Church to this very
day. In fixing upon this Council as our present boundary line, I was
influenced by a conviction, that the large body of Christians, whether
of the Roman, the Anglican, or any other branch of the Church Catholic,
would consent to this as an indisputable axiom,--that what the Church
Catholic did not believe or practise up to {393} that date of her
existence upon earth, cannot be regarded as either Catholic or
primitive, or apostolical. Ending with St. Athanasius, (who, though he
was present at that Council, yet brings his testimony down through
almost another half century, his death not having taken place till A.D.
873, on the verge of his eightieth year,) we have examined the remains
of Christian antiquity, reckoning forward to that Council from the times
of the Apostles. We have searched diligently into the writings, the
sentiments, and the conduct of those first disciples of our Lord. We
have contemplated the words of our blessed Saviour himself, and the
inspired narrative of his life and teaching. With the same object in
view we have studied the prophets of the Old Testament, and the works of
Moses; and we have endeavoured, at the fountainhead, to ascertain what
is the mind and will of God, as revealed to the world from the day when
He made man, on the question of our invoking the angels and saints to
intercede with Him in our behalf, or to assist and succour us on the
earth. And the result is this:--From first to last, the voice of God
Himself, and the voices of the inspired messengers of heaven, whether
under the patriarchal, the Mosaic, or the Christian dispensations, the
voices too of those maintainers of our common faith in Christ, who
prayed, and taught, in the Church, before the corruptions of a
degenerate world had mingled themselves with the purity of Christian
worship, combine all, in publishing, throughout the earth, one and the
self-same principle, "Pray only to God; draw nigh to Him alone; invoke
no other; seek no other in the world of spirits, neither angel, nor
beatified saint; seek Him, and He will favourably, with mercy, hear your
prayers." To this one {394} principle, when the Gospel announced the
whole counsel of God in the salvation of man, our Lord himself, his
Apostles, and his Church, unite in adding another principle of eternal
obligation,--There is one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ
Jesus; whatsoever the faithful shall ask the Father in the name of that
Mediator, He will grant it to them: He is ever living to make
intercession for those who believe in Him: Invoke we no other
intercessor, apply we neither to saint nor angel, plead we the merits of
no other. Let us lift up our hearts to God Almighty himself, and make
our requests known to Him in the name, and through the mediation of
Christ, and He will fulfil our desires and petitions as may be most
expedient for us; He will grant to us, in this world, a knowledge of his
truth, and in the world to come life everlasting!

Watching the tide of evidence through its whole progress, we find it to
flow all in this one direction. Here and there indeed attempts have been
made to raise some mounds and barriers of human structure, in order to
arrest its progress, and turn it from its straight course, but in vain;
unchecked by any such endeavours, it rolls on in one full, steady,
strong, and resistless current. Until we have long passed the Nicene
Council, we find no one writer of the Christian Church, whose remains
tell us, that he either himself invoked saints and angels, and the
Virgin Mary, or was at all aware of any such practice prevailing in
Christendom. Suppose, for one moment, that our doctrine is right; and
then we find the whole tenour of the Old and New Testaments, and the
ancient writers, in their plain meaning, agreeably to the interpretation
of the most learned and unbiassed critics, fully coinciding in every
respect with our view of God being the sole object of invocation, {395}
and of the exclusive character of Christ's intercession, mediation, and
advocacy. Suppose, for another moment, the Roman Catholic theory to be
correct, then the whole general tenour and drift of Scripture must be
evaded; the clearest statements and announcements must be explained away
by subtle distinctions, gratuitous definitions, and casuistical
refinements, altogether foreign from the broad and simple truths of
Revelation; then, too, in ascertaining the sentiments of an author, not
his general and pervading principles, evidenced throughout his writings,
must be appealed to; but casual and insulated expressions must be
contracted or expanded as may best seem to counteract the impression
made by the testimony of those principles. We may safely ask, Is there
such evidence, that the primitive Church offered invocations to saints
and angels, and the Virgin, as would satisfy us in the case of any
secular dispute with regard to ancient usage? On the contrary, is not
the evidence clear to a moral demonstration, that the offering of such
addresses is an innovation of later days, unknown to the primitive
Christians till after the middle of the fourth century, and never
pronounced to be an article of faith, until the Council of Trent, more
than a thousand years after its first appearance in Christendom, so
decreed it.

The tendency, indeed, of some Roman Catholic writings, especially of
late years, is to draw off our minds on these points from the written
word of God, and the testimony of the earliest Church, and to dwell upon
the possibility, the reasonableness of the doctrines of the Church of
Rome in this respect, their accordance with our natural feelings, and
their charitableness. But in points of such vast moment, in things
concerning the soul's salvation, we can depend with satisfaction and
{396} without misgiving, only on the sure word of promise; nothing short
of God's own pledge of his own eternal truth can assure us, that all is
safe. Such substitution of what may appear to us reasonable, and
agreeable to our natural sentiments, and desirable if true, in place of
the assurances of God's revealed Will, may correspond with the arguments
of a heathen philosopher unacquainted with the truth as it is in Jesus,
but cannot satisfy disciples of Him who brought life and immortality to
light by his Gospel. Such questions as these, "Is there any thing
unreasonable in this? Would not this be a welcome tenet, if true?" well
became the lips of Socrates in his defence before his judges, but are in
the strict sense of the word preposterous in a Christian. With the
Christian the first question is, What is the truth? What is revealed?
What has God promised? What has He taught man to hope for? What has He
commanded man to do? By his own words, by the words and by the example
of his inspired messengers, by the doctrine and practice of his Church,
the witness and interpreter of the truth, how has He directed us to sue
for his mercy and all its blessings? On what foundation, sure and
certain, can we build our hopes that "He will favourably with mercy hear
our prayers?" For in this matter, a matter of spiritual life and death,
we can anchor our hope on no other rock than his sure word of promise.

That sure word of promise, if I am a faithful believer, I have; but it
is exclusive of any invocation by me of saint, or angel, or virgin. The
pledge of heaven is most solemnly and repeatedly given; God, who cannot
lie, has, in language so plain, that he may run who readeth it, assured
me that if I come to HIMSELF by HIS SON, my prayer shall not be cast
out, my suit shall {397} not be denied, I shall not be sent empty away.
In every variety of form which language can assume, this assurance is
ratified and confirmed. His own revealed will directs me to pray for my
fellow-creatures, and to expect a beneficial effect from the prayers of
the faithful upon earth in my behalf. To pray for them, therefore, and
to seek their prayers, and to wait patiently for an answer to both, are
acts of faith and of duty. And were it also appointed by God's will to
be an act of faith and duty in a Christian to seek the prayers, and aid,
and assistance, of saints and angels by supplicatingly invoking them,
surely the same word of truth would have revealed that also. Whereas the
reverse shows itself under every diversified state of things, from the
opening of the sacred book to its very last page. The subtle distinction
of religious worship into latria, dulia, and hyperdulia, the refined
classification of prayer under the two heads of direct, absolute, final,
sovereign, on the one hand, and of oblique, relative, transitory,
subaltern, on the other, swell indeed many elaborate works of casuistry,
but are not discoverable in the remains of primitive Christians, nor in
the writings of God's word have they any place. I cannot find in the
inspired Apostles any reference to the necessity, the duty, the
lawfulness, the expediency of our seeking by prayer the good offices of
the holy dead, or of the angels of light. In their successors the
earliest inspired teachers and pastors of Christ's fold, I seek in vain
for any precept, or example, or suggestion, or incidental allusion
looking that way. Why then should a Christian wish to add to that which
God has been pleased to appoint and to reveal? Why should I attempt to
enter heaven through any other gate than {398} that gate which the Lord
of heaven has opened for me? or why should I seek to reach that gate by
any other way than the way which He has made for me; which He has
Himself plainly prescribed to me; in which He has promised that his word
shall be a lantern unto my feet; and along which those saints and
servants of his, who received the truth from his own lips, and sealed it
by their blood, have gone before?

Whenever a maintainer of the doctrine and practice of invoking the
Saints asks me, as we have lately been asked in these words, "May I not
reasonably hope that their prayers will be more efficacious than my own
and those of my friends? And, under this persuasion, I say to them, as I
just now said to you, holy Mary, holy Peter, holy Paul, pray for me.
What is there in reason or revelation to forbid me to do so?" To this
and similar questions and suggestions, I answer at once, God has
solemnly covenanted to grant the petitions of those who ask HIM for his
mercy, in the name and for the sake of his Son; and in his holy word
has, both by precept and example, taught us in this life to pray for
each other, and to ask each other's prayers [James v. 16; I Tim. ii.
1.]; but that He will favourably answer the prayers which we supplicate
angels to offer, or which we offer to Himself through the merits and by
the intercession of departed mortals, is no where in the covenant.
Moreover, when God invites me and commands me to approach Him myself, in
the name of his Son, and trusting to his merits, it is not Christian
humility, rather it savours of presumption, and intruding into those
things which we have not seen [Coloss. ii. 18.], to seek to prevail with
Him by {399} pleading other merits, and petitioning creatures, however
glorious, to interest themselves with Him in our behalf, angels and
saints, of whose power even to hear us we have no evidence. When Jesus
Himself, who knows both the deep counsels of the Eternal Spirit, and
man's wants and weaknesses and unworthiness, and who loveth his own to
the end, pledges his never-failing word, that whatsoever we ask the
Father in his name, He will give it us, can it be less than an unworthy
distrust of his truth and faithfulness to ask the Father for the merits
and by the intercession of another? and as though in fear lest God
should fail of his promise, or be unmindful of us Himself, to invoke
angels and the good departed to make our wants known unto HIM, and
prevail with HIM to relieve us?

Surely it were wiser and safer to adhere religiously to that one way
which cannot fail, than to adopt for ourselves methods and systems, for
the success of which we have no guarantee; which may be unacceptable in
his sight; and the tendency of which may be to bring down a curse and
not a blessing.

May the great Shepherd and Bishop of souls pour down upon his Church the
abundance of his mercy, preserving those in the truth who now possess
it, restoring it to those by whom it has been lost, and imparting it to
all who are yet in darkness. And, whilst we speak the truth in love, and
endeavour to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, may HE,
for his own glory, and for the safety and comfort of his people, shed
this truth abroad in our hearts, and enlighten us to receive it in all
its fulness and integrity, and in the very sense in which the Holy
Spirit, when He guided {400} the pen of St. Paul, willed the Church to
interpret it, "There is one God and one Mediator between God and men,
the man Christ Jesus."



O everlasting God, who hast ordained and constituted the services of
Angels and men in a wonderful order; Mercifully grant, that as thy holy
Angels alway do Thee service in heaven, so by thy appointment they may
succour and defend us on earth, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Almighty God, who hast built thy Church upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the head corner-stone;
Grant us so to be joined together in unity of spirit by their doctrine,
that we may be made an holy temple, acceptable unto Thee, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Almighty God, who hast knit together thine elect in one communion and
fellowship, in the mystical body of thy Son Christ our Lord; Grant us
grace, so to follow thy blessed Saints in all virtuous and godly living,
that we may come to those unspeakable joys, which Thou hast prepared for
them that unfeignedly love Thee; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
{401}




APPENDIX.




Note.--Pages 107 and 110.

The following is the original of the passages discussed in the text.
Justin Martyr, Apol. I. p. 47. § vi. Benedictine Edition by P. Maran.
Paris, A.D. 1742.

[Greek: Enthende kai atheoi keklaemetha; kai homologoumen ton toiouton
nomizomenon theon atheoi einai, all' ouchi tou alaethestatou, kai patros
dikaiosunaes kai sophrosunaes, kai ton allon areton, anepimiktou te
kakias Theou; all' ekeinon te, kai ton par' autou huion elthonta kai
didaxanta haemas tauta, kai ton ton allon hepomenon kai exomoioumenon
agathon angelon straton, pneuma te to prophaetikon sebometha, kai
proskunoumen, logoi kai alaetheiai timontes, kai panti boulomenoi
mathein, hos edidachthaemen, aphthonos paradidontes.]

Ibid. page 50, 51. sect. xiii.--[Greek: 'Atheoi men oun hos ouk esmen,
ton daemiourgon toude tou pantos sebomenoi, ... ton didaskalon te touton
genomenon haemin, kai eis touto genaethenta Iaesoun Christon ton
staurothenta epi Pontiou Pilatou, tou genomenou en Ioudaiai epi chronois
Tiberiou Kaisaros epitropou, huion autou tou ontos Theou mathontes, kai
en deuterai chorai echontes, pneuma te prophaetikon en tritaei taxei,
hoti meta logou timomen, apodeixomen....]

Note.--Page 134.

In the text it has been observed, that "Coccius in his elaborate work
quotes the two following passages as Origen's, without expressing {402}
any hesitation or doubt respecting their genuineness; in which he is
followed by writers of the present day."

The modern works, to which reference is here made, are chiefly the
Lectures delivered by Dr. Wiseman, in the Roman Catholic Chapel in
Moorfields in the year 1836, and the compilation of Messrs. Berington
and Kirk [Berington and Kirk. London, 1830, p. 403.], from which Dr.
Wiseman in his preface to his Lectures (p. ix.) informs us, that in
general he had drawn his quotations of the Fathers. In citing the
testimony of Origen in support of the invocation of saints, it is
evident that Dr. Wiseman has drawn from that source; for whereas the two
confessedly spurious passages, from the Lament, and from the Book on
Job, are in that compilation quoted in the same page, Dr. Wiseman cites
only the passage from the Lament, as from a work on the Lamentations,
but gives his reference to the Book on Job. His words are these:--"Again
he (Origen) thus writes on the Lamentations: 'I will fall down on my
knees, and not presuming, on account of my crimes, to present my prayer
to God, I will invoke all the saints to my assistance. O ye saints of
heaven, I beseech you with a sorrow full of sighs and tears; fall at the
feet of the Lord of mercies for me, a miserable sinner,'--Lib. ii. De
Job." [Lectures on the Principal Doctrines and Practices of the Catholic
Church, by Nicholas Wiseman, D.D. London, 1836. Vol. i. preface, p. ix.
and vol. ii. p. 107.]

When we find such passages as these, which have been so long ago and so
repeatedly pronounced to be utterly spurious, yet cited in evidence at
the present time, and represented as conveying the genuine testimony of
Origen, we shall be pardoned for repeating the sentiments expressed so
many years ago by the learned Bishop of Avranches with regard to the
very work here cited, "It is wonderful that, WITHOUT ANY MARK OF THEIR
BEING FORGERIES, they should be sometimes cited in evidence by some
theologians."

Note.--Page 151.

The whole passage cited as Origen's comment on the words of Ezekiel,
"The heavens are opened," is in the Latin version as follows. The Greek
original, if it ever existed, is lost. The portion between brackets is
the part suspected of being an interpolation.

6. _Et aperti sunt coeli_. Clausi erant coeli, et ad adventum Christi
aperti sunt, ut reseratis illis veniret super eum Spiritus Sanctus in
specie columbæ. Neque enirn poterat ad nos commeare nisi primum {403} ad
suæ naturæ consortem descendisset. _Ascendit Jesus in altum, captivam
duxit captivitatem, accepit dona in hominibus. Qui descendit, ipse est
qui ascendit super omnes coelos ut impleret omnia. Et ipse dedit alios
apostolos, alios prophetas, alios evangelistas, alios pastores et
magistros in perfectionem sanctorum_.

[7. _Aperti sunt coeli_. Non sufficit unum coelum aperiri: aperiuntur
plurimi, ut descendant non ab uno, sed ab omnibus coelis angeli ad eos
qui salvandi sunt. Angeli qui ascendebant et descendebant super Filium
hominis, et accesserunt as eum, et ministrabant ei. Descenderunt autem
angeli, quia prior descenderat Christus, metuentes descendere priusquam
Dominus virtutum omnium rerumque præciperet. Quando autem viderunt
principem militiæ coelestis in terrestribus locis commorari, tunc per
apertam viam ingressi sunt sequentes Dominum suum, et parentes voluntati
ejus qui distribuit eos custodes credentium nomini suo. Tu heri sub
dæmonio eras, hodie sub angelo. _Nolite_, inquit Dominus, _contemnere
unum de minimis istis_ qui sunt in ecclesia. _Amen enim dico vobis, quia
angeli eorum per omnia vident faciem Patris qui est in coelis_.
Obsequuntur saluti tuæ angeli, concessi sunt ad ministerium Filii Dei,
et dicuntinter se: si ille descendit, et descendit in corpus; si mortali
indutus est carne, et sustinuit crucem, et pro hominibus mortuus est,
quit nos quiescimus? quid parcimus nobis? Eja omnes angeli descendamus e
coelo. Ideo et multitudo militiæ coelestis erat laudantium et
glorificantium Deum, quando natus est Christus. Omnia angelis plena
sunt: veni, angeli, suscipe sermone conversum ab errore pristino, a
doctrina dæmoniorum, ab iniquitate in altum loquente: et suscipiens eum
quasi medicus bonus confove atque institue, parvulus est, hodie nascitur
senex repuerascens: et suscipe tribuens ei baptismum secundæ
regenerationis, et advoca tibi alios socios ministerii tui, ut concti
pariter eos qui aliquando decepti sunt, erudiatis ad fidem. _Gaudium
enim est majus in coelis super unum peccatorem poenitentiam agentem,
quam supra nonaginta novem justos quibus non opus est poenitentia_.
Exultat omnis creatura, collætatur et applaudit his qui salvandi sunt.
Nam _expectatio creaturæ revelationem filiorum Dei expectat_. Et licet
nolint ii qui scripturas apostolicas interpolaverunt istiusmodi sermones
inesse libris eorum quibus possit Creator Christus approbari, expectat
tamen omnis creatura filios Dei, quando liberentur a delicto, quando
auferentur de Zabuli manu, quando regenerentur a Christo. Verum jam
tempus est, ut de præsenti loco aliqua tangamus. Vidit Propheta non
visionem, sed visiones Dei. {404} Quare non vidat unam, sed plurimas
visiones? Audi Dominum pollicentem atque dicentem: _Ego visiones
multiplicavi_. 8. _Quinta mensis_. Hic annus quinta captivitatis regis
Joachim. Trigesimo anno ætatis Ezekielis, et quinto captivitatis
Joachim, Propheta mittiur ad Judæos. Non despexit clementissimus pater,
nec longo tempore incommonitum populum dereliquit. Quintus est annus.
Quantum temporis intercessit? Quinque anni interfluxerunt ex quo captivi
serviunt.]

Statim descendit Spiritus Sanctus,--aperuit coelos, ut hi qui
captivitatis jugo premebantur, viderent ea quæ videbantur a Propheta.
Dicente quippe eo, _Et aperti sunt coeli_, quodam modo et ipsi
intuebantur oculis cordis quæ ille etiam oculis carnis aspexerat.--Vol.
iii. p. 358.

Note.--Page 165.

In a note on the Epistle of St. Cyprian to his brother, reference was
made to the Appendix for a closer comparison of Cyprian's original
letter with the modern translation of the passage under consideration.
By placing the two versions in parallel columns side by side, we shall
immediately see, that the mode of citing the testimony of St. Cyprian
adopted in Dr. Wiseman's Lectures, from the compilation of Messrs.
Berington and Kirk, is rather to substitute his own comment and
inference, than to allow the witness to speak for himself in his own
words. The whole paragraph, as it appears in Dr. Wiseman's Lectures, is
this:--

"St. Cyprian in the same century: 'Let us be mindful of one another in
our prayers; with one mind and with one heart, in this world and in the
next, let us always pray with mutual charity relieving our sufferings
and afflictions. And may the charity of him, who, by the divine favour,
shall first depart hence, still persevere before the Lord; may his
prayer, for our brethren and sisters, not cease.' Therefore, after
having departed this life, the same offices of charity are to continue,
by praying for those who remain on earth." [Lect. xiii. vol. ii. p. 107,
and Berington and Kirk, p. 430.]

_St. Cyprian's words_. _Epist._ lvii. _p._ 96.

_Translation adopted by Dr. Wiseman from Berington and Kirk._


1. Memories nostri invicem simus,

1. Let us be mindful of one
another IN OUR PRAYERS; {405}

2.  Concordes atque unanimes,         2. With one mind and with
                                      one heart.

3.  Utrobique.                        3. In this world and in the next,

4.  PRO NOBIS semper oremus,          4. Let us always pray,

5.  Pressuras et angustias mutua      5. With mutual charity RELIEVING out
caritate relevemus,                   sufferings and afflictions.

6. Et si quis istinc nostrum          6. And may the CHARITY OF HIM,
prior divinæ dignationis celeritate   who, by the divine facour, shall
præcesserit, perseveret apud Dominum  first depart hence, still persevere
NOSTRA DILECTIO,                      before the Lord;

7. Pro fratribus et sororibus         7. May HIS prayer, for our brethren
nostris apud misericordiam patris     and sisters, not cease.
non cesset oratio.

In this translation, by inserting the words, _in our prayers_, which are
not in the original in the first clause; by rendering the adverb
_utrobique_, IN THIS WORLD AND IN THE NEXT, in the third clause; by
omitting the words _pro nobis, for each other_, which are in the
original, in the fourth clause; by changing in the fifth the verb
_relevemus, let us relieve_, implying another branch of their mutual
kindness, into the participle _relieving_, which may imply, that the
relief alluded to was also to be conveyed by the medium of their
prayers; by substituting _the charity of him_, in place of _nostra
dilectio, our charity_, in the sixth; and by inserting the word _his_,
which is not in the original, before _prayer_, where the grammar of the
sentence requires _our_, in the seventh clause;--by these means the
translator makes Cyprian express a sentiment far removed from what the
words of Cyprian, in their plain and natural sense, convey. It must,
however, be borne in mind, as we have shown in our examination of the
passage, that the sentiment of Cyprian, even as it is thus unduly
extracted from his words, would not in the remotest degree countenance
the invocation of saints. It would do no more than imply his belief,
that the faithful departed may take an interest in the welfare of their
surviving friends on earth, and promote that welfare by their prayers; a
point which, in the preface, is mentioned as one of those topics, the
discussion of which would be avoided in this inquiry, as quite distinct
from the invocation of saints. {406}

Note.--Page 176.

An extract from Eusebius, unnoticed in the text of this work, has
recently been cited as conveying his testimony in favour of the
invocation of saints. I have judged it better to defer the consideration
of it to the appendix. It has been cited in these terms: "In the fourth
century Eusebius of Cæsarea thus writes: 'May we be found worthy by the
prayers and intercessions of all the saints.'" [Dr. Wiseman's Lectures,
vol. ii. p. 107. Lect. xiii. Berington and Kirk, p. 431.] To form a just
estimate of this alleged testimony, it is requisite that we have before
us not only that incomplete clause, but the whole passage purporting to
contain, in these words, the closing sentences of a commentary on
Isaiah: [Tom. ii. p. 593, ed. Paris, 1707. Dr. Wiseman's reference is
"Com. in Isai. Tom. ii. p. 593, ed. Paris, 1706."]

"'And they shall be for a spectacle to all flesh.' To what flesh?
Altogether to that which shall be somewhere punished? Nay, to that which
shall of the heavenly vision be deemed worthy, concerning which it was
said before, All flesh shall come to worship before me, of which may we
also be deemed worthy by the prayers and intercessions of all the
saints. Amen."

In examining this passage I am willing for the present that all its
clauses should be accepted as the genuine words of Eusebius, and
accepted too in the meaning attached to them by those who have cited
them. And to what do they amount? If these are indeed his expressions,
Eusebius believed that the saints departed can forward our spiritual
welfare by their prayers and ministering offices; and he uttered his
desire that we might thus be benefited. Now whether we agree with him or
not in that belief; whether we consider the faithful departed as able to
take an interest in our welfare and to promote it, or regard such an
opinion as without foundation in the word of God and in primitive
doctrine; the belief implied and the wish expressed here by Eusebius,
are widely indeed removed from the act of suppliantly invoking the
saints departed, and resorting to them with entreaties for their prayers
and intercessions in our behalf. These two things, although often
confounded, are far from being equivalent; and by all who would
investigate with fairness the subject of our inquiry, they must be
carefully kept distinct. The invocation of saints being the single point
in question, our business is to ascertain, not what opinions Eusebius
may have {407} entertained as to the condition, and power, and offices
of the saints departed, but whether he invoked them; whether he had
recourse to them with supplications for their prayers, or aid and
succour. And keeping this closely in view, even if we admit this passage
to be genuine, and interpret it as those who have cited it wish it to be
interpreted, we find in it no authority for the invocation of saints. A
Christian would be no more countenanced by this language of Eusebius in
suppliantly invoking departed saints, than he would in praying to the
angels for their help and mediation be countenanced by the terms of the
prayer in regard to them, addressed by the Anglican Church to God, "O
everlasting God, who hast ordained and constituted the services of
angels and men in a wonderful order; Mercifully grant, that as thy holy
angels alway do Thee service in heaven, so by THY appointment they may
succour and defend us on earth; through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen."
Whoever petitions them, makes them Gods--Deos qui rogat ille facit.

But whilst, for the sake of the argument, I have admitted this passage
to be genuine, and correctly translated, and have shown that whether
genuine or not, and even if it be thus correctly translated, it affects
not in the least the issue of our inquiry, I do not feel at liberty to
withhold the acknowledgment of my persuasion that in this concession I
grant too much. For, in the first place, I am assured, that if the
passage came from the pen of Eusebius, no one is justified in confining
the desire and wish contained in it to the intercessions and prayers of
the saints in heaven; and, secondly, I see reasons for inferring that
the last clause was framed and attached to this work, not by Eusebius
himself, but by some editor or scribe.

In support of my first persuasion, I would observe that the very
language of the writer of these comments on Isaiah and the Psalms
precludes us from regarding the Saints departed as exclusively
constituting those "holy ones" by whose intercessions and prayers he
expresses his desire that our spiritual welfare may be promoted. In this
very comment on Isaiah (ch. vi. 2. p. 376), when he is speaking of the
heavenly inhabitants, and illustrates his views by God's dealings
towards the children of men in this world, he employs this expression:
"For as among men the Saints of God partake of more excellent graces."
On the 67th (68th) Ps. v. 34, having interpreted the words, "his
strength is in the clouds," as referring to the {408} prophets and
teachers of divine wisdom, under the guidance of the Spirit, pouring
heavenly truths upon the souls of men as the clouds drop rain on fertile
lands, he proceeds thus to comment on the expression, "God is wonderful
among his Saints." [Vol. i. p. 364. The English translation refers the
word "holy" to places, not persons.] "These Saints are different from
those before called Apostles and prophets. And who can they be, except
those who out of all nations are deemed worthy of purity and holiness,
among whom God is wonderful, giving to them power and strength?" Thus in
perfect accordance with the language of this writer, the Saints, from
whose prayers and intercessions he desires to derive spiritual benefits,
may be the Saints of God on earth--in the same state with those saints
still living in the flesh, whose prayers St. Paul desired to be offered
up for himself, that by them a door of utterance to speak the mystery of
Christ might be opened unto him [Coloss. i. 2; iv. 2, 3.]--and with
those saints to whom the same Apostle wrote at Philippi: "To all the
saints in Christ Jesus:" and to whom he sent the greetings of the saints
who then surrounded him: "ALL the SAINTS salute you." [Phil i. 1; iv.
22.]

But before the closing words of this paragraph, whatever be its meaning,
be acknowledged as the genuine and undoubted production of Eusebius, I
would suggest the careful weighing of some considerations, which appear
to me to involve serious difficulties.

1. First, through all the voluminous works of Eusebius, I have found in
no single passage any allusion to the prayers of saints departed, or to
their ministering offices in our behalf, though numberless openings show
themselves for the natural introduction of such a subject.

2. Secondly, among all the various works and treatises of Eusebius, I
have not found one which is closed by any termination of the kind; on
the contrary, they all end with remarkable suddenness and abruptness,
precisely as this comment would end, were the sentence under
consideration removed. Each, indeed, of the books of his Ecclesiastical
History, is followed by a notice of the close of the book, in some cases
too that notice involving a religious sentiment: for example, at the
close of the 10th book we read: "With the help of God, the end of the
tenth book." But that these are appendages made by an editor or scribe
is evident in itself, and moreover {409} in many instances is shown by
such sentences as these, "And this we have found in a certain copy in
the 8th volume:" "This is in some copies, as if omitted from the 8th
book." I find no one instance of Eusebius bringing a chapter or a
treatise to its close by any religious sentiment, or any termination of
the nature here contemplated.

It is also difficult to conceive that any author, having the flow and
connexion of the whole passage present to his mind, would himself have
appended this ejaculation as we now find it. We know that editors and
scribes often attached a sentiment of their own to the closing words of
an author. And it seems far more probable, that a scribe not having the
full drift of the argument mainly before him, but catching the
expression, "heavenly vision," appended such an ejaculation. That the
writer himself should introduce such a sentence by the connecting link
of a relative pronoun feminine, which must of necessity be referred, not
as the grammatical construction would suggest to the feminine noun
preceding it,--not to any word expressed or understood in the
intervening clause preceding it,--not to the last word in the sentence
even before that intervening clause, nor yet to the principal and
leading subject immediately under discussion and thrice repeated,--but
to a noun incidentally introduced, seems, to say the least, strange and
unnatural. "And they shall be for a spectacle to all flesh. To what
flesh? Altogether to that which shall be somewhere punished? Nay, to
that which shall of the heavenly vision be deemed worthy, concerning
WHICH it was said before, All FLESH shall come to worship before me, of
which may we also be deemed worthy by the prayers and intercessions of
all the saints. Amen." But the classical reader will appreciate these
remarks more satisfactorily by examining them with reference to the
passage in the original language.

[Greek: Kai esontai eis orasin pasaei sarki. poiai de sarki; ae pantos
pou taei kolasthaesomenaei; taes de epouraniou theas kataxiothaesomenaei
peri HAES anotero elegeto aexei pasa sarx tou proskunaesai enopion mou,
HAES kai haemeis axiotheiaemen euchais kai presbeiais panton ton hagion,
amaen.]

Note.--Page 181.

ATHANASIUS.

In the text I observed that some Roman Catholic writers of the present
day had cited the homily there shown to be utterly spurious, {410} as
the genuine work of St. Athanasius, and as recording his testimony in
defence of the invocation of Saints. The passage there referred to Dr.
Wiseman thus introduces, and comments upon.

"St. Athanasius, the most zealous and strenuous supporter that the
Church ever possessed of the divinity of Jesus Christ, and consequently
of his infinite superiority over all the saints, thus enthusiastically
addresses his ever-blessed Mother: 'Hear now, O daughter of David;
incline thine ear to our prayers. We raise our cry to thee. Remember us,
O most holy Virgin, and for the feeble eulogiums we give thee, grant us
great gifts from the treasures of thy graces, thou who art full of
grace. Hail, Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee. Queen and
mother of God, intercede for us.' Mark well," continues Dr. Wiseman,
"these words; 'grant us great gifts, from the treasures of thy graces;'
as if he hoped directly to receive them from her. Do Catholics use
stronger words than these? Or did St. Athanasius think or speak with us,
or with Protestants?"

In answer to these questions I reply with sure and certain confidence,
first, that the genuine words of St. Athanasius himself prove him to
have spoken and thought with the Anglican Church, and not with the Roman
Church on the invocation of saints and angels, and the blessed Virgin
Mary; and secondly, that whatever words Roman Catholics use, whether
stronger or not than these, these words on which the above questions are
put, never came forth from the pen of St. Athanasius. Their spuriousness
is not a question of doubt or difficulty. It has been shown in the text
that the whole homily has been for ages utterly repudiated, as a work
falsely attributed to St. Athanasius. It is indeed very disheartening to
those, whose object is the discovery and the establishment of the truth,
to find works cited in evidence as the genuine productions of primitive
Christian teachers, which have been so long ago, and so repeatedly, and
that not by members of another communion, but by the most learned men of
the Church of Rome, adjudged to be spurious. I do not mean that I think
it not fully competent for a writer of the present day to call in
question, and overrule and set aside the decisions of former editors, as
to the genuine or the spurious character of any work. On the contrary I
am persuaded that a field is open in that department of theology, which
would richly repay all the time and labour and expense, which persons
well qualified for the task could bestow upon its culture. What I lament
is this, that after a work has been deliberately condemned as
unquestionably {411} spurious, by competent and accredited judges for
two centuries and a half at the least, that very work should be now
cited as genuine and conclusive evidence, without any the most distant
allusion to the judgment which had condemned it, or even to any
suspicion of its being a forgery. In this instance, also, Dr. Wiseman
has implicitly followed the compilation of Messrs. Berington and Kirk.
This is evident, because the extract, as it stands word for word the
same in his Lectures and their compilation, is not found as one passage
in the spurious homily, but is made up of sentences selected from
different clauses, and put together so as to make one paragraph. It is
worthy of notice, that in quoting their authority, both Dr. Wiseman, and
those whom he follows, refer us to the very volume in which the
Benedictine editors declare that there was no learned man, who did not
pronounce the work to be spurious; and in which also they quote at
length the letter of Baronius which had proved it to be a forgery. [Dr.
Wiseman's Lectures, vol. ii. p. 108, from Berington and Kirk, p. 430,
431.]

Note.--Page 231. (Decree of the Council of Trent.) [Canones et Decreta
Sacros. OEcumen. et Genera. Concilii Tridentini, &c. Rom. fol. A.D.
1564.]

Mandat sancta Synodus omnibus Episcopis, et ceteris docendi munus
curamque sustinentibus, ut juxta Catholicæ, et Apostolicæ Ecclesiæ usum,
a primævis Christianæ religionis temporibus receptum, sanctorumque
Patrum consensionem, et sacrorum Conciliorum decreta, inprimis de
Sanctorum intercessione, invocatione, Reliquiarum honore, et legitimo
imaginum usu, fideles diligenter instruant, docentes eos, Sanctos, una
cum Christo regnantes, orationes suas pro hominibus Deo offerre; bonum
atque utile esse suppliciter eos invocare; et ob beneficia impetranda a
Deo per Filium ejus Jesum Christum, Dominum nostrum, qui solus noster
Redemptor et Salvator est, ad eorum orationes, opem, auxiliumque
confugere: illos vero, qui negant sanctos æternâ felicitate in coelo
fruentes, invocandos esse; aut qui asserunt, vel illos pro hominibus non
orare, vel eorum, ut pro nobis etiam singulis orent, invocationem esse
idololatriam, vel pugnare cum verbo Dei, adversarique honori unius
Mediatoris Dei et hominum, Jesu Christi, vel stultum esse, in coelo
regnantibus voce, vel mente supplicare, impie sentire. Sanctorum quoque
Martyrum, et aliorum cum Christo viventium Sancta corpora, {412} quæ
viva membra fuerunt Christi, et templum Spiritus Sancti, ab ipso ad
æternam vitam suscitanda et glorificanda, a fidelibus veneranda esse;
per quæ multa beneficia a Deo hominibus præstantur: ita ut affirmantes,
Sanctorum Reliquiis venerationem, atque honorem non deberi; vel eas,
aliaque sacra monumenta a fidelibus inutiliter honorari; atque eorum
opis impetrandæ causa sanctorum memorias frustra frequentari; omnino
damnandos esse, prout jampridem eos damnavit, et nunc etiam damnat
Ecclesia. [De Invocatione, Veneratione, et Reliquiis Sanctorum, et
Sacris Imaginibus, p. 202.]

Note.--Pages 369 and 390.

In a prefatory epistle, addressed to the "Chaplains, Wardens, and
Brethren of the Holy Catholic Gild," in Huddersfield, Dr. Wiseman (p. 4)
expresses himself thus: "Yesterday I laid the badge of your association
at the feet of the sovereign pontiff, and it was most condescendingly
and graciously received. But this is not all. As I had foretold, I found
His Holiness fully informed of your establishment and public
manifestation; and I had the satisfaction of hearing him express his
WISH THAT SIMILAR INSTITUTIONS SHOULD REVIVE ALL OVER THE COUNTRY."

Towards the close of the sermon, to which this preface is prefixed, and
which was preached at St. Patrick's Chapel, Huddersfield, Sept. 26th,
1839, and was printed at York in the present year [A.D. 1840], the
preacher draws the comparison, referred to in page 370 of this work,
between England and the continent, and between England as it is, and
England as it once was, and as, in his view, it ought to be again. After
describing the scenes which you may witness in Roman Catholic countries,
"where you might see the poor and the afflicted crowding round some
altar, where their pious confidence or experience of past favours leads
them to hope that their prayers will best be heard through the
intercession of our dear Lady," he thus proceeds: "Oh that the time had
come, when a similar expression of our devout feelings towards her
should publicly be made, and all should unite to show her that honour,
that reverence, and love which she deserves from all Christians, and
which has so long been denied her amongst us. There was a time when
England was second to {413} no other country upon earth in the discharge
of this holy duty; and it will be only PART OF THE RESTORATION OF OUR
GOOD AND GLORIOUS DAYS OF OLD to revive to the utmost this part of
ancient piety. Therefore do I feel sincere joy at witnessing the
establishment of this excellent brotherhood, and its public
manifestation in this town this day, both as a means of encouraging
devotion and virtue, and as a return to one of the venerable
institutions of our forefathers. Enter then fully into its spirit."

["A Sermon delivered at St. Patrick's, Huddersfield, Sept. 26th, 1839,
on occasion of the Holy Catholic Gild there established, by the Rev. N.
Wiseman, D.D., Professor in the University of Rome. York, 1840," p. 22,
23. The first quotation made in p. 390, is from this Sermon.]