regulate the amount, or proper proportions, of food
material for a well-balanced dietary, as amounts, and the same person
requires different ferent conditions. Professor W. O. Atwater, an
American, makes the following statement: 'As the habits and conditions
of individuals differ, so, too, their needs for nourishment differ, and
their food should be adapted to their particular requirements. It has
been estimated that an average man at moderately active labor, like a
carpenter, or mason, should have (daily) about 115 grams (1750 grains)
or 0.25 pound of available protein, and sufficient fuel ingredients in
addition to make the fuel value of the whole diet 3,400 calories; while
a man at sedentary employment would be well nourished with 92 grams
(1400 grains) or 0.20 pound of available protein, and enough fat and
carbohydrates in addition to yield 2,700 calories of energy. The demands
are, however, variable, increasing and decreasing with increase and
decrease of muscular work, or as other needs of the person change. Each
person, too, should learn by experience what kinds of food yield him
nourishment with the least discomfort, and should avoid those which do
not "agree" with him.'

It has been stated that unless the body is supplied with protein, hunger
will be felt, no matter if the stomach be over-loaded with
non-nitrogenous food. If a hungry man ate heartily of _only_ such foods
as fresh fruit and green vegetables he might soon experience a feeling
of fulness, but his hunger would not be appeased. Nature asks for
protein, and hunger will continue so long as this want remains
unsatisfied. Similarly as food is the first necessity of life, so is
protein the first necessity in food. If a person were deprived of
protein starvation must inevitably ensue.

Were we (by 'we' is meant the generality of people in this country), to
weigh out our food supply, for, say a week, we should soon realise what
a large reduction from the usual quantity of food consumed would have to
be made, and instead of eating, as is customary, without an appetite,
hunger might perhaps once a day make itself felt. There is little doubt
but that the health of most people would be vastly improved if food were
only eaten when genuine hunger was felt, and the dietary chosen were
well balanced, _i.e._, the proportions of protein, fat, carbohydrates
and salts being about 3, 2, 9, 2-3. As aforesaid, the mixed vegetarian
dietary is, in general, well-balanced.

While speaking about too much food, it may be pointed out that the
function of appetite is to inform us that the body is in need of
nutriment. The appetite was intended by Nature for this purpose, yet how
few people wait upon appetite! The generality of people eat by time,
custom, habit, and sensual desire; not by appetite at all. If we eat
when not hungry, and drink when not thirsty, we are doing the body no
good but positive harm. The organs of digestion are given work that is
unnecessary, thus detracting from the vital force of the body, for there
is only a limited amount of potential energy, and if some of this is
spent unnecessarily in working the internal organs, it follows that
there is less energy for working the muscles or the brain. So that an
individual who habitually overfeeds becomes, after a time, easily tired,
physically lazy, weak, perhaps if temperamentally predisposed, nervous
and hypochondriacal. Moreover, over-eating not only adds to the general
wear and tear, thus probably shortening life, but may even result in
positive disease, as well as many minor complaints such as constipation,
dyspepsia, flatulency, obesity, skin troubles, rheumatism, lethargy,
etc.

Just as there is danger in eating too much, so there is much harm done
by drinking too much. The evil of stimulating drinks will be spoken of
later; at present reference is made only to water and harmless
concoctions such as lime-juice, unfermented wines, etc. To drink when
thirsty is right and natural; it shows that the blood is concentrated
and is in want of fluid. But to drink merely for the pleasure of
drinking, or to carry out some insane theory like that of 'washing out'
the system is positively dangerous. The human body is not a dirty barrel
needing swilling out with a hose-pipe. It is a most delicate piece of
mechanism, so delicate that the abuse of any of its parts tends to throw
the entire system out of order. It is the function of the blood to
remove all the waste products from the tissues and to supply the fresh
material to take the place of that which has been removed. Swilling the
system out with liquid does not in any way accelerate or aid the
process, but, on the contrary, retards and impedes it. It dilutes the
blood, thus creating an abnormal condition in the circulatory system,
and may raise the pressure of blood and dilate the heart. Also it
dilutes the secretions which will therefore 'act slowly and
inefficiently, and more or less fermentation and putrefaction will
meanwhile be going on in the food masses, resulting in the formation of
gases, acids, and decomposition products.'

Eating and drinking too much are largely the outcome of sensuality. To
see a man eat sensually is to know how great a sensualist he is.
Sensualism is a vice which manifests itself in many forms. Poverty has
its blessings. It compels abstinence from rich and expensive foods and
provides no means for surfeit. Epicurus was not a glutton. Socrates
lived on bread and water, as did Sir Isaac Newton. Mental culture is not
fostered by gluttony, but gluttony is indulged in at the expense of
mental culture. The majority of the world's greatest men have led
comparatively simple lives, and have regarded the body as a temple to be
kept pure and holy.

We have now to consider (_a_) what to eat, (_b_) when to eat, (_c_) how
to eat. First, then, we will consider the nutritive properties of the
common food-stuffs.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 3: This is not an exaggeration. 'Genoa Cake,' for instance,
contains ten varieties of food: butter, sugar, eggs, flour, milk,
sultanas, orange and lemon peel, almonds, and baking powder.]




II

WHAT TO EAT


Among the foods rich in protein are the legumes, the cereals, and nuts.
Those low in protein are fresh fruits, green vegetables, and roots. Fat
is chiefly found in nuts, olives, and certain pulses, particularly the
peanut; and carbohydrates in cereals, pulses, and many roots. Fruit and
green vegetables consist mostly of water and organic mineral compounds,
and in the case of the most juicy varieties may be regarded more as
drink than food. We have, then, six distinct classes of food--the
pulses, cereals, nuts, fruits, green vegetables, and roots. Let us
briefly consider the nutritive value of each.

Pulse foods usually form an important item in a vegetarian dietary. They
are very rich in their nutritive properties, and even before matured are
equal or superior in value to any other green vegetable. 'The ripened
seed shows by analysis a very remarkable contrast to most of the matured
foods, as the potato and other tubers, and even to the best cereals, as
wheat. This superiority lies in the large amount of nitrogen in the
form of protein that they contain.' Peas, beans, and lentils should be
eaten very moderately, being highly concentrated foods. The removal of
the skins from peas and beans, also of the germs of beans, by
parboiling, is recommended, as they are then more easily digested and
less liable to 'disagree.' These foods, it is interesting to know are
used extensively by the vegetarian nations. The Mongol procures his
supply of protein chiefly from the Soya bean from which he makes
different preparations of bean cheese and sauce. It is said that the
poorer classes of Spaniards and the Bedouins rely on a porridge of
lentils for their mainstay. In India and China where rice is the staple
food, beans are eaten to provide the necessary nitrogenous matter, as
rice alone is considered deficient in protein.

With regard to the pulse foods, Dr. Haig, in his works on uric acid,
states that, containing as they do considerable xanthin, an exceedingly
harmful poison, they are not to be commended as healthful articles of
diet. He states that he has found the pulses to contain even more
xanthin than many kinds of flesh-meat, and as it is this poison in flesh
that causes him to so strongly condemn the eating of meat, he naturally
condemns the eating of any foods in which this poison exists in any
considerable quantity. He writes: 'So far as I know the "vegetarians" of
this country are decidedly superior in endurance to those feeding on
animal tissues, who might otherwise be expected to equal them; but
these "vegetarians" would be still better if they not only ruled out
animal flesh, but also eggs, the pulses (peas, beans, lentils and
peanuts), eschew nuts, asparagus, and mushrooms, as well as tea, coffee
and cocoa, all of which contain a large amount of uric acid, or
substances physiologically equivalent to it.'

Dr. Haig attributes many diseases and complaints to the presence of uric
acid in the blood and its deposits in the tissues: 'Uric acid diseases
fall chiefly in two groups: (a) The arthritic group, comprising gout,
rheumatism, and similar affections of many fibrous tissues throughout
the body; (b) the circulation group including headache, epilepsy, mental
depression, anæmia, Bright's disease, etc.' Speaking with regard to
rheumatism met with among the vegetarian natives of India, Dr. Haig
writes: 'I believe it will appear, on investigation, that in those parts
of India where rice and fresh vegetables form the staple foods, not only
rheumatism, but uric acid diseases generally are little known, whereas
in those parts where pulses are largely consumed, they are
common--almost universal.'

The cereals constitute the mainstay of vegetarians all the world over,
and although not superior to nuts, must be considered an exceedingly
valuable, and, in some cases, essential food material. They differ
considerably in their nutritive properties, so it is necessary to
examine the worth of each separately.

Wheat, though not universally the most extensively used of the cereals,
is the most popular and best known cereal in this country. It has been
cultivated for ages and has been used by nearly all peoples. It is
customary to grind the berries into a fine meal which is mixed with
water and baked. There are various opinions about the comparative value
of white and whole-wheat flour. There is no doubt but that the
whole-wheat flour containing, as it does, more woody fibre than the
white, has a tendency to increase the peristaltic action of the
intestines, and thus is valuable for persons troubled with
constipation.[4] From a large number of analyses it has been determined
that entire wheat flour contains about 2.4 per cent. more protein than
white flour (all grades), yet experiments have demonstrated that the
_available_ protein is less in entire wheat-flour than in white
flour.[5] This is probably due to the fact that the protein which is
enclosed in the bran cannot be easily assimilated, as the digestive
organs are unable to break up the outer walls of woody fibre and extract
the nitrogenous matter they contain. On the other hand whole-wheat flour
contains considerably more valuable and available mineral matter than
does white flour. The two outer layers contain compounds of phosphorus,
lime, iron, and soda. Analyses by Atwater show entire-wheat flour to
contain twice as much mineral matter as white flour. It is affirmed by
Broadbent and others, that this mineral matter is exceedingly valuable
both as a nutrient, and because of its neutralising effect upon proteid
wastes, and that it is because of this that flour made from the
entire-wheat berry has very superior food value to that made from the
berry minus the outer cuticles. Many dietetists look upon whole-wheat
bread as one of the most salutary of all foods and strongly advise its
use in place of white bread. A well-known doctor states that he has
known it a cure for many diseases, and thinks that many nervous
complaints due to 'saline starvation' can be cured by substituting
whole-meal for white bread.

But in opposition to these views Dr. Haig thinks that as the outer brown
husk of all cereals contains some xanthin, it should on this account be
removed. He therefore recommends white flour, (not superfine, but
cheap-grade), in place of the entire-wheat. Others, however, are of the
opinion that the amount of xanthin present in the bran is so small as
not to be considered, especially when, by the removal of the xanthin,
valuable mineral matter is also removed.

Of course, it is difficult for a layman to form an opinion when experts
differ. Perhaps the best thing to do is to use whole-wheat bread if
there is any tendency to constipation. If not, then choose that which is
the more palatable, or change from one to the other as inclination
dictates. This adds to variety, and as digestion is better when the food
is better relished, no doubt, in this case, that which pleases the taste
best is the best to eat. At least, we can hold this view tentatively for
the present.

Wheat flour (entire), ranks the highest of all the cereals in protein,
excepting oatmeal, averaging 13 per cent. In fat it exceeds rice and
rye, is equal with barley and maize, but considerably below oatmeal:
averaging about 1.9 per cent. In carbohydrates it averages about
seventy-two per cent., all the cereals being very much alike in quantity
of these nutrients. It is a well-balanced food, as indeed, all cereals
are, and is palatable prepared in a variety of ways, although, made into
unleavened, unsalted bread, the sweet, nutty flavour of the berry itself
is best preserved.

Oatmeal is not extensively used, comparatively speaking, although it has
an excellent reputation. It is decidedly the richest cereal in protein
and fat, especially fat, and this is probably why people living in cold
climates find it such a sustaining food. In protein it averages 16.1 per
cent.: in fat 7.2 per cent. It is very commonly used as porridge. When
well cooked, that is to say, for several hours, this is a good way to
prepare it, but a better is to eat it dry in the form of unsweetened
oatcakes, scones, etc., these being more easily digested because
necessitating thorough mastication. The above remarks regarding the
removal of the bran from wheat-flour are precisely as applicable to
oatmeal, as well as rye, so no more need be said on that point.

Rye flour is not unlike wheat, and is used more extensively than wheat
in many parts of Europe. It has 2 per cent. less protein than wheat and
its gluten is darker in colour and less elastic and so does not make as
light a loaf; but this does not detract from its nutritive value at all.
Being more easily cultivated than wheat, especially in cold countries,
it is cheaper and therefore more of a poor man's food.

Indian corn, or maize, or Turkish wheat, is one of the finest of
cereals. It is used extensively in America, North and South, in parts of
the Orient, in Italy, the Balkans, Servia, and elsewhere. It is used as
a green vegetable and when fully matured is ground into meal and made
into bread, porridge, biscuits, Johnny-cake, etc., etc. Corn compared to
wheat is rich in fat, but in protein wheat is the richer by about 3 per
cent. Sugar corn, cooked and canned, is sold in England by food-reform
dealers. It is perhaps the most tasty of all the cereals.

Rice is the staple of the Orientals. The practice of removing the dark
inner skin in order to give the uncooked grain a white and polished
appearance, is not only an expensive operation, but a very foolish one,
for it detracts largely from the nutritive value of the food, as
considerable protein and other valuable matter is removed along with the
bran. We are told that the Burmese and Japanese and other nations who
use rice as their principal food-stuff, use the entire grain. As
compared to undressed rice, the ordinary, or polished rice is deficient
3 per cent. of protein; 6 per cent. of fat; 5 per cent. of mineral
matter. 'Once milled' rice can be procured in this country, but has to
be specially asked for. Rice is not nearly so nitrogenous as wheat, but
is equal to it in fuel value, this being due to the large amount of
starch it contains. It is an excellent food, being easily digested and
easily prepared.

Millet, buckwheat, wild rice, sesame, and Kaffir corn, are cereals
little known in this country, although where they are raised they are
largely used by the natives. However, we need not trouble to consider
their food value as they are not easily procurable either in Europe or
America.

Nuts are perhaps the best of all foods. There is no doubt but that man
in his original wild state lived on nuts and berries and perhaps roots.
Nuts are rich in protein and fat. They are a concentrated food, very
palatable, gently laxative, require no preparation but shelling, keep
well, are easily portable, and are, in every sense, an ideal food. They
have a name for being indigestible, but this may be due to errors in
eating, not to the nuts. If we eat nuts, as is often done, after having
loaded the stomach with a large dinner, the work of digesting them is
rendered very difficult, for the digestive apparatus tires itself
disposing of the meal just previously eaten. Most things are
indigestible eaten under such conditions. Nuts should be looked upon as
the essential part of the meal and should be eaten first; bread, salad
stuffs and fruit help to supply bulk and can follow as dessert if
desired. Another cause of nuts not being easily digested is insufficient
mastication. They are hard, solid food, and should be thoroughly chewed
and insalivated before being swallowed. If the teeth are not good, nuts
may be grated in an ordinary nut-mill, and then, if eaten slowly and
sparingly, will generally be found to digest. Of course with a weak
digestion nuts may have to be avoided, or used in very small quantities
until the digestion is strengthened; but with a normal, healthy person,
nuts are a perfect food and can be eaten all the year round. Perhaps it
is best not to eat a large quantity at once, but to spread the day's
supply over four or five light meals. With some, however, two meals a
day seems to work well.

Pine kernels are very suitable for those who have any difficulty in
masticating or digesting the harder nuts, such as the brazil, filbert,
etc. They are quite soft and can easily be ground into a soft paste with
a pestil and mortar, making delicious butter. They vary considerably in
nitrogenous matter, averaging about 25 per cent. and are very rich in
fat, averaging about 50 per cent. Chestnuts are used largely by the
peasants of Italy. They are best cooked until quite soft when they are
easily digested. Chestnut meal is obtainable, and when combined with
wheatmeal is useful for making biscuits and breadstuffs. Protein in
chestnuts averages 10 per cent. Walnuts, Hazelnuts, Filberts, Brazils,
Pecans, Hickory nuts, Beechnuts, Butternuts, Pistachio nuts and Almonds
average 16 per cent. protein; 52 per cent. fat; 20 per cent.
carbohydrates; 2 per cent. mineral salts. As each possesses a distinct
flavour, one can live on nuts alone and still enjoy the pleasure of
variety. A man weighing 140 lbs. would, at moderately active labour,
require, to live on almonds alone--11 ozs. per day. 10 ozs. of nuts per
day together with some fresh fruit or green salad in summer, and in
winter, some roots, as potato, carrot, or beetroot, would furnish an
ideal diet for one whose taste was simple enough to relish it.

Fruits are best left alone in winter. They are generally acid, and the
system is better without very acid foods in the cold weather. But fruits
are health-giving foods in warm and hot weather, and living under
natural, primitive conditions, this is the only time of the year we
should have them, for Nature only provides fruit during the months of
summer. The fraction of protein fruit contains, 1 per cent. or less, is
too small to be of any account. The nutritive value of fruits consists
in their mineral salts, grape-sugar and water.

Much the same applies to green vegetables. In cooking vegetables care
should be taken that the water they are cooked in is not thrown away as
it contains nearly all the nutrient properties of the vegetable; that is
to say, the various salts in the vegetable become dissolved in the water
they are boiled in. This water can be used for soup if desired, or
evaporated, and with flour added to thicken, served as sauce to the
vegetable. Potatoes are a salutary food, especially in winter. They
contain alkalies which help to lessen the accumulation of uric acid.
They should be cooked with skins on: 16 grains per lb. more of valuable
potash salts are thus obtained than when peeled and boiled in the
ordinary way. The ideal method, however, of taking most vegetables is in
the form of uncooked salads, for in these the health-giving, vitalising
elements remain unaltered.

If man is to be regarded, as many scientists regard him, as a frugivore,
constitutionally adapted and suited to a nut-fruit diet, then to regain
our lost original taste and acquire a liking for such simple foods
should be our aim. It may be difficult, if not impossible, to make a
sudden change after having lived for many years upon the complex
concoctions of the chef's art, for the system resents sudden changes,
but with proper care, changing discreetly, one can generally attain a
desired end, especially when it involves the replacing of a bad habit by
a good one.

In the recipes that follow no mention is made of condiments, _i.e._,
pepper, salt, mustard, spice, _et hoc genus omni_. Condiments are not
foods in any sense whatever, and the effect upon the system of
'seasoning' foods with these artificial aids to appetite, is always
deleterious, none the less because it may at the time be imperceptible,
and may eventually result in disease. Dr. Kellogg writes: 'By contact,
they irritate the mucous membrane, causing congestion and diminished
secretion of gastric juice when taken in any but quite small quantities.
When taken in quantities so small as to occasion no considerable
irritation of the mucous membrane, condiments may still work injury by
their stimulating effects, when long continued.... Experimental evidence
shows that human beings, as well as animals of all classes, live and
thrive as well without salt as with it, other conditions being equally
favorable. This statement is made with a full knowledge of counter
arguments and experiments, but with abundant testimony to support the
position taken.... All condiments hinder natural digestion.'

Condiments, together with such things as pickles, vinegar, alcohol, tea,
coffee, cocoa, tobacco, opium, are all injurious, and undoubtedly are
the cause of an almost innumerable number of minor, and, in some cases,
serious, complaints. Theine, caffeine, and theobromine, all stimulant
drugs, are present in tea, coffee, and cocoa, respectively. Tea also
contains tannin, a substance which is said to seriously impair
digestion.

Alcohol, tea, coffee, etc., are stimulants. Stimulants do not produce
force and should never be mistaken for food. They are undoubtedly
injurious, as they are the cause, among other evils, of _loss_ of force.
They cause an abnormal metabolism which ultimately weakens and exhausts
the whole system. While these internal activities are taking place,
artificial feelings of well-being, or, at least, agreeable sensations,
are produced, which are unfortunately mistaken for signs of benefit.
Speaking of alcohol Dr. Haig writes: 'It introduces no albumen or force,
it merely affects circulation, nutrition, and the metabolism of the
albumens already in the body, and this call on the resources of the body
is invariably followed by a corresponding depression or economy in the
future.... It has been truly said that the man who relies upon
stimulants for strength is lost, for he is drawing upon a reserve fund,
which is not completely replaced, and physiological bankruptcy must
inevitably ensue. This is what the stimulants such as tea, coffee,
alcohol, tobacco, opium and cocaine do for those who trust in them.'

He who desires to enjoy life desires to possess good physical health,
for a healthy body is almost essential to a happy life; and he who
desires to live healthily does not abuse his body with poisonous drugs.
It may require courage to reform, but he who reforms in this direction
has the satisfaction of knowing that his good health will probably some
day excite the envy of his critics.

The chemical composition of all the common food materials can be seen
from tables of analyses. It would be to the advantage of everyone to
spend a little time examining these tables. It is not a difficult
matter, and the trouble to calculate the quantity of protein in a given
quantity of food, when once the _modus operandi_ is understood, is
trifling. As it has not unwisely been suggested, if people would give,
say, one-hundredth the time and attention to studying the needs of the
body and how to satisfy them as they give to dress and amusement, there
is little doubt that there would be more happiness in the world.

The amount of protein in any particular prepared food is arrived at in
the following manner: In the first place those ingredients containing a
noticeable amount of protein are carefully weighed. Food tables are then
consulted to discover the protein percentage. Suppose, for instance, the
only ingredient having a noticeable quantity of protein is rice, and 1
lb. is used. The table is consulted and shows rice to contain eight per
cent. protein. In 1 lb. avoirdupois there are 7,000 grains; eight per
cent. of 7,000 is 70.00 × 8 = 560 grains. Therefore, in the dish
prepared there are 560 grains of protein. It is as well after cooking to
weight the entree or pudding and divide the number of ounces it weighs
into 560, thus obtaining the number of grains per ounce. Weighing out
food at meals is only necessary at first, say for the first week or so.
Having decided about how many grains of protein to have daily, and
knowing how many grains per ounce the food contains, the eye will soon
get trained to estimate the quantity needed. It is not necessary to be
exact; a rough approximation is all that is needed, so as to be sure
that the system is getting somewhere near the required amount of
nutriment, and not suffering from either a large excess or deficiency of
protein.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 4: Entire-wheat flour averages .9 per cent. fibre; high-grade
white flour, .2 per cent. fibre.]

[Footnote 5: See United States Dept. of Agriculture, Farmer's Bulletin,
No. 249, page 19, obtainable from G. P. O., Washington, D. C.]




III

WHEN TO EAT


The question of when to eat is of some importance. The Orientals eat
fewer meals than we do, and in their abstemiousness they set us an
example we should do well to follow. Sufficient has already been said to
show that it is a mistake to imagine a great deal of food gives great
strength. When we eat frequently, and especially when we 'live well,'
that is, are accustomed to a large variety of food, we are tempted to
eat far more than is good for us. Little and often may work
satisfactorily so long as it does not develop into much and often,
which, needless to say, it is very likely to do. Most people on this
account would probably be much better in their health if they ate but
twice daily, at noon, and five or six hours before going to bed. Then
there is less chance of over-feeding. If, however, we experimentally
determine the quantity of food that our particular system requires in
order to be maintained in good health, and can trust our self-command in
controlling the indulgence of sense, probably the best method is to eat
anyway three times daily, and four, five, or even six times, or doing
away with set meals altogether, would be a procedure which, judging
from analogy of the anthropoids, ought to be a better method than eating
a whole day's supply at once, or at two or three meals.

It is not wise to sit down to a meal when the body is thoroughly
fatigued. A glass of hot or cold water will be found reviving, and then,
after a short rest, the system will be far better able to assimilate
food. When the body is 'tired out,' it stands to reason it cannot
perform digestion as easily and as well as when in fit condition.

Also it is unwise to eat immediately before undertaking vigorous
muscular work. Strenuous exercise after meals is often the cause of
digestive disorders. Starting on exercise after a hearty meal may
suspend the gastric digestion, and so prevent the assimilation of
protein as to produce a sensation of exhaustion. If, however, rest is
taken, the digestive organs proceed with their work, and after a short
time recuperation follows, and the exercise can be continued. It is
unwise to allow such a suspension of digestion because of the danger of
setting up fermentation, or putrefaction, in the food mass awaiting
digestion, for this may result in various disorders.

For the same reason it is a bad plan to eat late at night. It is unwise
to take a meal just before going to bed, for the digestive organs cannot
do their work properly, if at all, while the body is asleep, and the
food not being digested is liable to ferment and result in dyspepsia.
The 'sinking feeling' sometimes complained of if a meal is not eaten
late at night and described as a kind of hunger is probably due to an
abnormal secretion of acid in the stomach. A glass of hot water will
often relieve this discomfort. This feeling is seldom experienced by
vegetarians of long standing. The natives of India, it is said, do not
experience it at all, which fact leads us to surmise the cause to be in
some way connected with flesh-eating. Farinaceous foods, however,
prepared as soup, porridge, gruel, pultaceous puddings, etc., when
eaten, as is customary, without proper insalivation, are liable to be
improperly digested and to ferment, giving rise to the sensation
described as a 'sinking feeling' and erroneously thought to be hunger.

It is an excellent rule that prescribes fasting when without hunger.
When there is no appetite do not eat. It is an example of conventional
stupidity that we eat because it is 'meal time,' even though there be
not the slightest feeling of genuine hunger. Leaving out of
consideration the necessitous poor and those who for their living engage
themselves in hard physical toil, it is safe to say that hardly one
person in a thousand has ever felt real hunger. Yet no one was ever the
worse for waiting upon appetite. No one was ever starved by not eating
because of having no appetite. Loss of appetite is a sign that the
digestive organs require a rest. It is better to go without food for a
time than to force oneself to eat against inclination. The forcing of
oneself to eat to 'keep up one's strength,' is perhaps the quickest way
to bring down one's strength by overworking the system and burdening it
with material it does not need. Eat by appetite, not by time. Eat
frequently when the appetite demands frequent satisfaction, and seldom
when seldom hungry. These rules hold good at all times and for everyone.
Loss of appetite during sickness should not be looked upon as anything
serious in itself, but as a sign that the system does not require food.
A sick man like a well man will feel hunger as soon as food is needed,
and the practice of tempting the appetite with rich and costly foods is
not only a waste of money but is injurious physiologically. Possibly
there may be pathological conditions under which hunger cannot make
itself felt, but it would seem contrary to Nature as far as the writer,
a layman, understands the matter. At least, leaving abnormal conditions
of health out of consideration, we can say this much affirmatively: if a
man is hungry enough to relish dry bread, then, and then only, does he
really require nourishment.

Hunger is always experienced when nutriment is needed, and will be felt
a dozen times a day if the food eaten at each of a dozen meals has
supplied only sufficient nutriment to produce the force expended between
each meal. If the meal is large and supplies sufficient nutriment to
produce the force expended in a whole day, then the one meal is all that
is required. Never eat to be sociable, or conventional, or sensual; eat
when hungry.

Professor Pavlov says: 'Appetite is juice'; that is to say, the
physiological condition existing when the body has run short of
food-fuel, produces a psychological effect, the mind thinking of food,
thereby causing through reaction a profuse secretion of saliva, and we
say 'the mouth waters.' It is true the appetite is amenable to
suggestion. Thus, though feeling hunger, the smell of, or even thought
of, decayed food may completely take away appetite and all inclination
to eat. This phenomenon is a provision of Nature to protect us from
eating impure food. The appetite having thus been taken away will soon
return again when the cause of its loss has been removed. Therefore the
appetite should be an infallible guide when to eat.

There is one further point to be noted. Food should not be eaten when
under the influence of strong emotion. It is true that under such
conditions there probably would be no appetite, but when we are so
accustomed to consulting the clock that there is danger of cozening
ourselves into the belief that we have an appetite when we have not, and
so force ourselves to eat when it may be unwise to do so. Strong
emotions, as anger, fear, worry, grief, judging by analogy, doubtless
inhibit digestive activity. W. B. Cannon, M.D., speaking of experiments
on cats, says: 'The stomach movements are inhibited whenever the cat
shows signs of anxiety, rage, or distress.' To thoroughly enjoy one's
food, it is necessary to have hunger for it, and if we only eat when we
feel hungry, there is little likelihood of ever suffering from
dyspepsia.

In passing, it is appropriate to point out that as when food is better
enjoyed it is better digested, therefore art, environment, mental
disposition, indirectly affect the digestive processes. We should,
therefore, remembering that simplicity, not complexity, is the essence
of beauty, ornament our food and table, and be as cheerful, sociable,
and even as merry as possible.




IV

HOW TO EAT


The importance of thorough mastication and insalivation cannot be
overestimated. The mouth is a part of the digestive apparatus, and in it
food is not only broken down, but is chemically changed by the action of
the saliva. If buccal (mouth) digestion be neglected, the consequence is
that the food passes into the stomach in a condition that renders it
difficult for that organ to digest it and any of a great number of
disturbances may result.

Mastication means a thorough breaking up of the food into the smallest
particles, and insalivation means the mixing of the small particles with
the saliva. The mechanical work is done with the jaws and tongue, and
the chemical work is performed by the saliva. When the mechanical work
is done thoroughly the chemical work is also thorough, and the test for
thoroughness is loss of taste. Masticate the food until all taste has
disappeared, and then it will be found that the swallowing reflex
unconsciously absorbs the food, conscious swallowing, or at least, an
effort to swallow, not being called for.

It may take some while to get into the habit of thorough mastication
after having been accustomed to bolting food, but with a conscious
effort at the first, the habit is formed, and then the effort is no
longer a laborious exercise, but becomes perfectly natural and is
performed unconsciously.

This ought to be common knowledge. That such a subject is not considered
a necessary part of education is indeed lamentable, for the crass
ignorance that everywhere abounds upon the subject of nutrition and diet
is largely the cause of the frightful disease and debility so widespread
throughout the land, and, as a secondary evil of an enormous waste of
labour in the production and distribution of unneeded food. Were
everyone to live according to Nature, hygienically and modestly, health,
and all the happiness that comes with it, would become a national asset,
and as a result of the decreased consumption of food, more time would be
available for education, and the pursuit of all those arts which make
for the enlightenment and progress of humanity.

To become a convert to this new order, adopting non-animal food and
hygienic living, is not synonymous with monastical asceticism, as some
imagine. Meat eaters when first confronted with vegetarianism often
imagine their dietary is going to be restricted to a monotonous round of
carrots, turnips, cabbages, and the like; and if their ignorance
prevents them from arguing that it is impossible to maintain health and
strength on such foods, then it is very often objected that carrots and
cabbages are not liked, or would not be cared for _all_ the time. The
best way to answer this objection is to cite a few plain facts. From a
catalogue of a firm supplying vegetarian specialties, (and there are now
quite a number of such firms), most of the following information is
derived:

Of nuts there are twelve varieties, sold either shelled, ground, or in
shell. Many of these nuts are also mechanically prepared, and in some
cases combined, and made into butters, nut-meats, lard, suet, oil, etc.
The varieties of nut-butters are many, and the various combinations of
nuts and vegetables making potted savouries, add to a long list of
highly nutritious and palatable nut-foods. There are the pulses dried
and entire, or ground into flour, such as pea-, bean-, and lentil-flour.
There are the cereals, barley, corn, oats, rice, rye, wheat, etc., from
which the number of preparations made such as breakfast foods, bread,
biscuits, cakes, pastries, etc., is legion. (One firm advertises
twenty-three varieties of prepared breakfast foods made from cereals.)
Then there are the fruits, fresh, canned, and preserved, about
twenty-five varieties; green vegetables, fresh and canned, about
twenty-one varieties; and roots, about eleven varieties.

The difficulty is not that there is insufficient variety, but that the
variety is so large that there is danger of being tempted beyond the
limits dictated by the needs of the body. When, having had sufficient
to eat, there yet remain many highly palatable dishes untasted, one is
sometimes apt to gratify sense at the expense of health and
good-breeding, to say nothing of economy. Simplicity and purity in food
are essential to physical health as simplicity and purity in art are
essential to moral and intellectual progress. 'I may say,' says Dr.
Haig, 'that simple food of not more than two or three kinds at one meal
is another secret of health; and if this seems harsh to those whose day
is at present divided between anticipating their food and eating, I must
ask them to consider whether such a life is not the acme of selfish
shortsightedness. In case they should ever be at a loss what to do with
the time and money thus saved from feasting, I would point on the one
hand to the mass of unrelieved ignorance, sorrow, and suffering, and on
the other to the doors of literature and art, which stand open to those
fortunate enough to have time to enter them; and from none of these need
any turn aside for want of new Kingdoms to conquer.'

This question of feeding may, by superficial thinkers, be looked upon as
unimportant; yet it should not be forgotten that diet has much more to
do with health than is commonly realized, and health is intimately
connected with mental attitude, and oftentimes is at the foundation of
religious and moral development. 'Hypochondriacal crotchets' are often
the product of dyspepsia, and valetudinarianism and pessimism are not
unrarely found together. 'Alas,' says Carlyle, 'what is the loftiest
flight of genius, the finest frenzy that ever for moments united Heaven
with Earth, to the perennial never-failing joys of a digestive apparatus
thoroughly eupeptic?'

Our first duty is to learn to keep our body healthy. Naturally, we
sooner expect to see a noble character possess a beautiful form than one
disfigured by abuse and polluted by disease. We do not say that every
sick man is a villain, but we do say that men and women of high
character regard the body as an instrument for some high purpose, and
believe that it should be cared for and nourished according to its
natural requirements. In vegetarianism, _scientifically practised_, is a
cure, and better, a preventative, for many physical, mental, and moral
obliquities that trouble mankind, and if only a knowledge of this fact
were to grow and distil itself into the public mind and conscience,
there would be halcyon days in store for future generations, and much
that now envelops man in darkness and in sorrow, would be regarded as a
nightmare of the past.




FOOD TABLE


The following table exhibits the percentage chemical composition of the
principal vegetable food materials; also of dairy produce and common
flesh-foods for comparison.


 FOOD MATERIAL               Protein   Fat   Carbo-    Salts  Water   Fuel
                                             hydrates               Value cals.
 Vegetable Foods             p. ct.  p. ct.   p. ct.   p. ct. p. ct.   p. lb.

 Wheat Flour (entire)         18.8    1.9      71.9     1.0   11.4     1,675
 Oatmeal                      16.1    7.2      67.5     1.9    7.3     1,860
 Rice                         8.0      .3      79.0      .4   12.3     1,630
 Barley                       8.5     1.1      77.8     1.1   11.5     1,650
 Corn Meal                    9.2     1.9      75.4     1.0   12.5     1,655
 Rye                          0.8      .9      78.7      .7   12.9     1,630
 Lentils (dried)             25.7     1.0      59.2     5.7    8.4     1,620
 Beans (dried)               22.5     1.8      59.6     3.5   12.6     1,605
 Peas (dried)                24.6     1.0      62.0     2.9    9.5     1,655
 Nuts, various (_aver._)     16.0    52.0      20.0     2.0   10.0     2,640
 Dates                        2.1     2.8      78.4     1.3   15.4     1,615
 Figs                         4.3      .3      74.2     2.4   18.8     1,475
 Potatoes                     2.2      .1      18.4     1.0   78.3       385
 Apples                        .4      .5      14.2      .3   84.6       290
 Bananas                      1.3      .6      22.0      .8   75.3       460

 Dairy Foods

 Milk, whole (not skim)       3.3     4.0       5.0      .7   87.0       325
 Cheese, various (_aver._)    24.5    28.4      2.1     4.0   41.0     1,779
 Hens' Eggs (_boiled_)        14.0    12.0      0.0      .8   73.2       765

 Flesh Foods

 Beef                         18.6    19.1      0.0     1.0   61.3     1,155
 Mutton (_medium fat_)        18.2    18.0      0.0     1.0   62.8     1,105
 Ham (_fresh_)                15.6    33.4      0.0      .9   50.1     1,700
 Fowl                         19.0    16.3      0.0     1.0   63.7     1,045
 White Fish (_as purchased_)  22.1     6.5      0.0     1.6   69.8       700

[The amount of heat that will raise one kilogram of water 1 deg. C. is
termed a _calorie_. Fuel value, or food units, means the number of
calories of heat equivalent to the energy it is assumed the body obtains
from food when the nutrients thereof are completely digested.]




ONE HUNDRED RECIPES




RECIPES


The following recipes are given as they appear in the English edition of
this book and were prepared for English readers. While some of these
will be difficult for American readers to follow, we give them as in the
original edition, and many of the unusual ingredients called for can be
obtained from the large grocers and dealers, and if not in stock will be
obtained to order. 'Nutter' is a name given a nut butter used for
cooking. It is, so far as we know, the only collection of strictly
vegetarian recipes published.

Readers interested in the foreign products referred to, should write to
Pitman's Health Food Company, Aston Brook St., Birmingham, England, and
to Mapleton's Nut Food Company, Ltd., Garston, Liverpool, England, for
price list and literature.

                                                  THE PUBLISHERS.




SOUPS


=1.--Vegetable Soup=

1 large cupful red lentils, 1 turnip, 2 medium onions, 3 potatoes, 1
carrot, 1 leek, 1 small head celery, parsley, 1 lb. tomatoes, 3-1/2
quarts water.

Wash and cut up vegetables, but do not peel. Boil until tender, then
strain through coarse sieve and serve. This soup will keep for several
days and can be reheated when required.


=2.--Semolina Soup=

4 oz. semolina, 2 chopped onions, 1 tablespoonful gravy essence,[6] 2
quarts water or vegetable stock.[7]


=3.--Spinach Soup No. 1=

1 lb. Spinach, 1 tablespoonful gravy essence, 1 quart water.

Cook spinach in its own juices (preferably in double boiler). Strain
from it, through a hair sieve or colander, all the liquid. Add essence
and serve.


=4.--Spinach Soup No. 2=

1 lb. spinach, 1 lb. can tomatoes, 1 tablespoonful nut-milk
(Mapleton's), 1-1/2 pints water.

Dissolve nut-milk in little water, cook all ingredients together in
double-boiler for 1-1/2 hours, strain and serve.


=5.--Pea Soup=

4 ozs. pea-flour, 2 potatoes, 1 large onion, 1 tablespoonful gravy
essence, 2 quarts water.

Cook potatoes, (not peeled), and onion until soft. Skin and mash
potatoes and chop onion. Mix pea-flour into paste with little water.
Boil all ingredients together for 20 minutes, then serve.


=Lentil and Haricot Soups=

These are prepared in the same way as Recipe No. 5 substituting lentil,
or haricot flour for pea-flour.


=6.--Tomato-Pea Soup=

4 ozs. pea-flour, 1 lb. tin tomatoes, 1 chopped leek, 1 quart water.

Mix pea-flour into paste with little water. Boil ingredients together 30
minutes, then serve.


=Tomato-Lentil and Tomato-Bean Soups=

These are prepared in the same way as Recipe No. 6, substituting
lentil-, or bean-flour for pea-flour.


=7.--Rice-Vermicelli Soup=

2 ozs. rice-vermicelli, 1 tablespoonful nut-milk, 1 dessertspoonful
gravy essence, 1 quart water.

Boil vermicelli in water until soft. Dissolve nut-milk in little water.
Boil all ingredients together 5 minutes, then serve.


=8.--Pea-Vermicelli Soup=

2 ozs. pea-vermicelli, 1 tablespoonful nut-milk, 1 tablespoonful tomato
purée, 1 quart water.

Boil vermicelli in water until soft, dissolve nut-milk in little water.
Boil all ingredients together 5 minutes, then serve.


=9.--Pot-barley Soup No. 1=

4 ozs. pot-barley, 1 onion, 1 tablespoonful gravy essence, 2 quarts
water, corn flour to thicken.

Cook barley until quite soft; chop onion finely; mix a little corn flour
into paste with cold water. Stir into the boiling soup. Boil all
ingredients together for 20 minutes, then serve.


=Wheat and Rice Soups=

These are prepared in the same way as Recipe No. 9, substituting wheat
or rice grains for barley.


=10.--Pot-barley Soup No. 2=

4 ozs. pot-barley, 1 dessertspoonful nut-milk, 1 chopped onion, 1
dessertspoonful tomato purée, 1 quart water.

Cook barley until soft; dissolve nut-milk in little water; boil all
ingredients together for 20 minutes, then serve.


=11.--Corn Soup=

1 lb. tin sugar-corn, 1/2 lb. tin tomatoes, 2 chopped onions, 2 ozs.
corn flour, 1 quart water.

Boil onion until soft; mix corn flour into paste with cold water. Place
sugar-corn, tomatoes, onions, and water into stew pan; heat and add corn
flour. Boil ingredients together 10 minutes, and serve.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 6: There are several brands of wholly vegetable gravy essence
now on the market. The best known are 'Vegeton,' 'Marmite,' 'Carnos,'
and Pitman's 'Vigar Gravy Essence.']

[Footnote 7: Vegetable stock is the water that vegetables have been
boiled in; this water contains a certain quantity of valuable vegetable
salts, and should never be thrown away.]




SAVORY DISHES


=12.--Nut Rissoles=

3 ozs. mixed grated nuts, 3 ozs. breadcrumbs, 1 oz. nut butter, 1
chopped onion, 1 large cupful canned tomatoes.

Mix ingredients together; mould into rissoles, dust with flour and fry
in 'Nutter.' Serve with gravy.


=13.--Lentil Cakes=

8 ozs. red lentils, 3 ozs. 'Grape Nuts,' 1 small onion, 1 teaspoonful
gravy essence, breadcrumbs.

Cook lentils until soft in smallest quantity of water; chop onion
finely; mix all ingredients, using sufficient breadcrumbs to make into
stiff paste; form into cakes and fry in 'Nutter.' Serve with gravy.


=14.--Marrow Roast=

1 vegetable marrow, 3 ozs. grated nuts, 1 onion, 1 oz. 'Nutter,' 1 cup
breadcrumbs, 2 teaspoonfuls tomato purée.

Cook marrow, taking care not to allow it to break; when cold, peel, cut
off one end and remove seeds with spoon. Prepare stuffing:--chop onion
finely; melt nut fat and mix ingredients together. Then stuff marrow and
tie on decapitated end with tape; sprinkle with breadcrumbs and bake 30
minutes. Serve with gravy.


=15.--Stewed Celery=

1 head celery, 4 slices whole-meal bread, nut butter.

Slice celery into suitable lengths, which steam until soft. Toast and
butter bread, place celery on toast and cover with pea, bean, or lentil
sauce, (see Recipe No. 39).


=16.--Barley Entrée=

4 ozs. pot-barley, 1 lb. tin tomatoes, 1 chopped onion, 2 tablespoonfuls
olive oil.

Cook barley until quite soft in smallest quantity of water (in double
boiler). Then add tomatoes and oil, and cook for 10 minutes. To make
drier, cook barley in tomato juice adding only 2 or 3 tablespoonfuls of
water.


=Rice, Wheat, Macaroni, Lentil, Bean, Split-pea Entrées=

These are prepared in the same way as Recipe No. 16, substituting one of
these cereals or légumes for barley.


=17.--Savory Pie=

Paste (Recipe No. 59), marrow stuffing (Recipe No. 14).

Line sandwich tin with paste; fill interior with stuffing; cover with
paste or cooked sliced potatoes; bake in sharp oven.


=18.--Baked Bananas=

Prepare the desired number by washing and cutting off stalk, but do not
peel. Bake in oven 20 minutes, then serve.


=19.--Barley Stew=

4 ozs. pot-barley, 2 onions, parsley.

Chop onions and parsley finely; cook ingredients together in very small
quantity of water in double boiler until quite soft. Serve with hot
beetroot, or fried tomatoes or potatoes.


=Corn, Rice, Frumenty, Pea-Vermicelli Stews=

These are prepared in the same way as Recipe No. 19, substituting one of
the above cereals or pulses for barley.


=20.--Mexican Stew=

1 cupful brown beans, 2 onions, 2 potatoes, 4 tomatoes, 1 oz. sugar, 1
cupful red grape-juice, rind of 1 lemon, water.

Soak beans overnight; chop vegetables in chunks; boil all ingredients
together 1 hour.


=21.--Vegetable Pie=

5 ozs. tapioca, 4 potatoes, 3 small onions, paste, (see Recipe No. 59),
tomato purée to flavor.

Soak tapioca. Partly cook potatoes and onions, which then slice. Place
potatoes, onions, and tapioca in layers in pie-dish; mix purée with a
little hot water, which pour into dish; cover with paste and bake.


=22.--Rice Rissoles=

6 ozs. unpolished rice, 1 chopped onion, 1 dessertspoonful tomato purée,
breadcrumbs.

Boil rice and onion until soft; add purée and sufficient breadcrumbs to
make stiff; mould into rissoles; fry in 'Nutter,' and serve with parsley
sauce, (Recipe No. 38).


=23.--Scotch Stew=

3 ozs. pot-barley, 2 ozs. rolled oats, 1 carrot, 1 turnip, 2 potatoes, 1
onion, 4 tomatoes, water.

Wash, peel, and chop vegetables in chunks. Stew all ingredients together
for 2 hours. Dress with squares of toasted bread.


=24.--Plain Roasted Rice=

Steam some unpolished rice until soft; then distribute thinly on flat
tin and brown in hot oven.


=25.--Nut Roast No. 1=

1 lb. pine kernels (flaked), 4 tablespoonfuls pure olive oil, 2
breakfastcupfuls breadcrumbs, 1/2 lb. tomatoes (peeled and mashed).

Mix ingredients together, place in pie-dish, sprinkle with breadcrumbs,
and bake until well browned.


=26.--Nut Roast No. 2=

1 lb. pine kernels (flaked), 1 cooked onion (chopped), 1/2 cupful
chopped parsley, 8 ozs. cooked potatoes (mashed).

Mix ingredients together, place in pie-dish and cover with layer of
boiled rice. Cook until well browned.


=27.--Maize Roast=

8 ozs. corn meal, 1 large Spanish onion (chopped), 2 tablespoonfuls
nut-milk, 1 dessertspoonful gravy essence.

Cook onion; dissolve nut-milk thoroughly in about 1/2 pint water.

Boil onion, nut-milk, and essence together two minutes, then mix all
ingredients together, adding sufficient water to make into very soft
batter; bake 40 minutes.


=28.--Plain Savory Rice=

4 ozs. unpolished rice, 1 lb. tin tomatoes.

Boil together until rice is cooked. If double boiler be used no water
need be added, and thus the rice will be dry and not pultaceous.


=29.--Potato Balls=

4 medium sized potatoes, 1 large onion (chopped), 1 dessertspoonful pure
olive oil, breadcrumbs.

Cook onion and potatoes, then mash. Mix ingredients, using a few
breadcrumbs and making it into a very soft paste. Roll into balls and
fry in 'Nutter,' or nut butter.


=30.--Bean Balls=

4 ozs. brown haricot flour, 1 onion (chopped), 1 dessertspoonful pure
olive oil, 1 tablespoonful tomato purée, breadcrumbs.

Cook onion; mix flour into paste with purée and oil; add onion and few
breadcrumbs making into soft paste. Fry in 'Nutter.'


=31.--Lentil and Pea Balls=

These are made in the same way as Recipe No. 30, substituting lentil-or
pea-flour for bean-flour.


=31.--Lentil Patties=

4 ozs. lentils, 1 small onion (chopped), 1 oz. 'Nutter,' or nut butter,
1 teaspoonful gravy essence, paste (see Recipe No. 59).

Cook ingredients for filling all together until lentils are quite soft.
Line patty pans with paste; fill, cover with paste and bake in sharp
oven.


=Barley, Bean, Corn, Rice, and Wheat Patties=

These are prepared in the same way as in Recipe No. 31, substituting
one of the above cereals or beans for lentils.


=32.--Lentil Paste=

8 ozs. red lentils, 1 onion (chopped), 4 tablespoonfuls pure olive oil,
breadcrumbs.

Boil lentils and onions until quite soft; add oil and sufficient
breadcrumbs to make into paste; place in jars; when cool cover with
melted nut butter; serve when set.


=33.--Bean Paste=

8 ozs. small brown haricots, 2 tablespoonfuls tomato purée, 1
teaspoonful 'Vegeton,' 2 ozs. 'Nutter' or nut butter, 1 cup breadcrumbs.

Soak beans over night; flake in Dana Food Flaker; place back in fresh
water and add other ingredients; cook one hour; add breadcrumbs, making
into paste; place in jars, when cool cover with nut butter; serve when
set.


=34.--Spinach on Toast=

Cook 1 lb. spinach in its own juice in double boiler. Toast and butter
large round of bread. Spread spinach on toast and serve. Other
vegetables may be served in the same manner.




GRAVIES AND SAUCES


=35.--Clear Gravy=

1 teaspoonful 'Marmite,' 'Carnos,' 'Vegeton,' or 'Pitman's Vigar Gravy
Essence,' dissolved in 1/2 pint hot water.


=36.--Tomato Gravy=

1 teaspoonful gravy essence, 1 small tablespoonful tomato purée, 1/2
pint water. Thicken with flour if desired.


=37.--Spinach Gravy=

1 lb. spinach, 1 dessertspoonful nut-milk, 1/2 pint water.

Boil spinach in its own juices in double boiler; strain all liquid from
spinach and add it to the nut-milk which has been dissolved in the
water.


=38.--Parsley Sauce=

1 oz. chopped parsley, 1 tablespoonful olive oil, a little flour to
thicken, 1/2 pint water.


=39.--Pea, Bean, and Lentil Sauces=

1 teaspoonful pea-, or bean-, or lentil-flour; 1/2 teaspoonful gravy
essence, 1/2 pint water.

Mix flour into paste with water, dissolve essence, and bring to a boil.




PUDDINGS, ETC.


=40.--Fig Pudding=

1 lb. whole-meal flour, 6 ozs. sugar, 6 ozs. 'Nutter,' or nut butter,
1/2 chopped figs, 1 teaspoonful baking powder, water.

Melt 'Nutter,' mix ingredients together with water into stiff batter;
place in greased pudding basin and steam 2 hours.


=31.--Date Pudding=

1 lb. breadcrumbs, 6 ozs. sugar, 6 ozs. 'Nutter,' 1/2 lb. stoned and
chopped dates, 1 teaspoonful baking powder, water.

Melt 'Nutter'; mix ingredients together with water into stiff batter;
place in greased pudding basin and steam 2 hours.


=Prune, Ginger, and Cherry Puddings=

These are prepared the same way as in Recipe No. 40, or No. 41,
substituting prunes or preserved ginger, or cherries for figs or dates.


=42.--Rich Fruit Pudding=

1 lb. whole-meal flour, 6 ozs. almond cream, 6 ozs. sugar, 3 ozs.
preserved cherries, 3 ozs. stoned raisins, 3 ozs. chopped citron, 1
teaspoonful baking powder, water.

Mix ingredients together with water into stiff batter; place in greased
pudding basin and steam 2 hours.


=43.--Fruit-nut Pudding No. 1=

1/2 lb. white flour, 1/4 lb. whole meal flour, 1/4 lb. mixed grated
nuts, 6 ozs. 'Nutter' or nut butter, 6 ozs. sugar, 6 ozs. sultanas, 2
ozs. mixed peel (chopped), 1 teaspoonful baking powder, water.

Melt nut-fat, mix ingredients together with water into stiff batter;
place in greased pudding basin and steam 2 hours.


=44.--Fruit-nut Pudding No. 2=

1/2 lb. white flour, 1/4 lb. ground rice, 1/4 lb. corn meal, 4 ozs.
chopped dates or figs, 4 ozs. chopped almonds, 6 ozs. almond nut-butter,
6 ozs. sugar, 1 teaspoonful baking powder, water.

Melt butter, mix ingredients together with water into stiff batter;
place in greased pudding basin and steam 2 hours.


=45.--Maize Pudding No. 1=

1/2 lb. maize meal, 3 ozs. white flour, 3 ozs. 'Nutter,' 3 ozs. sugar,
1/2 tin pineapple chunks, 1 teaspoonful baking powder.

Melt fat, cut chunks into quarters; mix ingredients with very little
water into batter; place in greased pudding basin and steam 2 hours.


=46.--Maize Pudding No. 2=

6 ozs. corn meal, 3 ozs. white flour, 2 ozs. 'Nutter,' 2 ozs. sugar, 3
tablespoonfuls marmalade, 1 teaspoonful baking powder, water.

Melt 'Nutter,' mix ingredients together with little water into batter;
place in greased pudding basin and steam 2 hours.


=47.--Cocoanut Pudding=

6 ozs. whole wheat flour, 2 ozs. cocoanut meat, 2 ozs. 'Nutter,' 2 ozs.
sugar, 1 small teaspoonful baking powder, water.

Melt fat, mix ingredients together with water into batter; place in
greased pudding basin and steam 2 hours.


=48.--Tapioca Apple=

1 cup tapioca, 6 large apples, sugar to taste, water.

Soak tapioca, peel and slice apples; mix ingredients together, place in
pie-dish with sufficient water to cover and bake.


=49.--Oatmeal Moulds=

4 ozs. rolled oats, 2 ozs. sugar, 4 ozs. sultanas, water.

Cook oatmeal thoroughly in double boiler, then mix ingredients together;
place in small cups, when cold turn out and serve with apple sauce, or
stewed prunes.


=50.--Carrot Pudding=

4 ozs. breadcrumbs, 4 ozs. 'Nutter,' 4 ozs. flour, 4 ozs. mashed
carrots, 4 ozs. mashed potatoes, 6 ozs. chopped raisins, 2 ozs. brown
sugar, 1 dessertspoonful treacle, 1 teaspoonful baking powder.

Mix ingredients well, place in greased pudding basin and steam 2 hours.


=51.--Sultana Pudding=

1/2 lb. whole meal flour, 1 breakfastcupful breadcrumbs, 4 ozs. ground
pine kernels, pignolias or almonds, 1/2 lb. sultanas, 4 ozs. sugar,
water.

Mix ingredients together into a stiff batter; place in greased basin and
steam 2 hours.


=52.--Semolina Pudding=

4 ozs. semolina, 1 oz. corn flour, 3 ozs. sugar, rind of one lemon,
1-1/2 pints water.

Mix corn flour into paste in little water; place ingredients in double
boiler and cook for 1 hour, place in pie-dish and brown in sharp oven.


=53.--Rice Mould=

4 ozs. ground rice, 1 oz. sugar, 1/2 pint grape-juice.

Cook ingredients in double boiler, place in mould. When cold turn out
and serve with stewed fruit.


=54.--Maize Mould=

6 ozs. corn meal, 2 ozs. sugar, 1/2 pint grape-juice, 1-1/2 pints water.

Cook ingredients in double boiler for 1 hour; place in mould. When cold
turn out and serve with stewed fruit.


=55.--Lemon Sago=

4 ozs. sago, 7 ozs. golden syrup, juice and rind of two lemons, 1-1/2
pints water.

Boil sago in water until cooked, then mix in other ingredients. Place in
mould, turn out when cold.


=56.--Lemon Pudding=

4 ozs. breadcrumbs, 1 oz. corn flour, 2 ozs. sugar, rind one lemon, 1
pint water.

Mix corn flour into paste in little water; mix ingredients together,
place in pie-dish, bake in moderate oven.


=57.--Prune Mould=

1 lb. prunes, 4 ozs. sugar, juice 1 lemon, 1/4 oz. agar-agar, 1 quart
water.

Soak prunes for 12 hours in water, and then remove stones. Dissolve the
agar-agar in the water, gently warming. Boil all ingredients together
for 30 minutes, place in mould, when cold turn out and decorate with
blanched almonds.


=58.--Lemon Jelly=

1/4 oz. agar-agar, 3 ozs. sugar, juice 3 lemons, 1 quart water.

Soak agar-agar in the water for 30 minutes; add fruit-juice and sugar,
and heat gently until agar-agar is completely dissolved, pour into
moulds, turn out when cold.

This jelly can be flavoured with various fruit juices, (fresh and
canned). When the fruit itself is incorporated, it should be cut up into
small pieces and stirred in when the jelly commences to thicken. The
more fruit juice added, the less water must be used. Such fruits as
fresh strawberries, oranges, raspberries, and canned pine-apples,
peaches, apricots, etc., may be used this way.


=59.--Pastry=

1 lb. flour, 1/2 lb. nut-butter or nut fat, 2 teaspoonfuls baking
powder, water.

Mix with water into stiff paste. This is suitable for tarts, patties,
pie-covers, etc.




CAKES


=60.--Wheatmeal Fruit Cake=

6 ozs. entire wheat flour, 3 ozs. nut-butter, 3 ozs. sugar, 3 ozs.
almond meal, 10 ozs. sultanas, 2 ozs. lemon peel, 2 teaspoonsful baking
powder.

Rub butter into flour, mix all ingredients together with water into
stiff batter; bake in cake tins lined with buttered paper.


=61.--Rice Fruit Cake=

8 ozs. ground rice, 4 ozs. white flour, 4 ozs. 'Nutter,' 3 ozs. sugar, 6
ozs. stoned, chopped raisins, 1 large teaspoonful baking powder, water.

Rub 'Nutter' into flour, mix all ingredients together with water into
stiff batter; bake in cake tins lined with buttered paper.


=62.--Maize Fruit Cake=

8 ozs. corn meal, 6 ozs. white flour, 4 ozs. sugar, 4 ozs. nut-butter, 8
ozs. preserved cherries, 2 ozs. lemon peel, 2 teaspoonfuls baking
powder, water.

Rub butter into flour, mix all ingredients together with water into
stiff batter; bake in cake tins lined with buttered paper.


=63.--Apple Cake=

1 lb. apples, 1/4 lb. white flour, 1/2 lb. corn meal, 4 ozs. 'Nutter,' 4
ozs. sugar, 2 small teaspoonfuls baking powder, water.

Cook apples to a sauce and strain well through colander, rejecting
lumps. Melt fat and mix all ingredients together with water into stiff
batter; bake in cake tins lined with buttered paper.


=64.--Corn Cake (plain)=

1/2 lb. maize meal, 3 ozs. 'Nutter,' 3 ozs. sugar, 1 teaspoonful baking
powder.

Melt fat, mix all ingredients together into batter; bake in cake tins
lined with buttered paper.


=65.--Nut Cake=

12 ozs. white flour, 4 ozs. ground rice, 4 ozs. 'Nutter,' or nut butter,
5 ozs. sugar, 6 ozs. mixed grated nuts, 2 teaspoonfuls baking powder.

Melt fat, mix ingredients together into batter, and place in cake tins
lined with buttered paper.


=66.--Mixed Fruit Salads=

2 sliced bananas, 1 tin pineapple chunks, 2 sliced apples, 2 sliced
oranges, 1/2 lb. grapes, 1/4 lb. raisins, 1/4 lb. shelled walnuts, 1/2
pint grape-juice.


=67.--Fruit Nut Salad=

1 lb. picked strawberries, 1/4 lb. mixed shelled nuts, 1/2 pint
grape-juice. Sprinkle over with 'Granose' or 'Toasted Corn Flakes' just
before serving.


=68.--Winter Salad=

2 peeled, sliced tomatoes, 2 peeled, sliced apples, 1 small sliced
beetroot, 1 small sliced onion, olive oil whisked up with lemon juice
for a dressing.


=69.--Vegetable Salad=

1 sliced beetroot, 1 sliced potato (cooked), 1 sliced onion, 1 sliced
heart of cabbage, olive oil dressing; arrange on a bed of water-cress.




BISCUITS

The following biscuits are made thus:--Melt the 'Nutter,' mix all
ingredients with sufficient water to make into stiff paste; roll out and
cut into shapes. Bake in moderate oven.

These biscuits when cooked average 20 grains protein per ounce.


=70.--Plain Wheat Biscuits=

1/2 lb. entire wheat flour, 4 ozs. sugar, 4 ozs. 'Nutter,' little
chopped peel.


=71.--Plain Rice Biscuits=

3-4 lb. ground rice, 4 ozs. sugar, 3 ozs. 'Nutter,' vanilla essence.


=72.--Plain Maize Biscuits=

1/2 lb. maize meal, 4 ozs. sugar, 3 ozs. 'Nutter.'

(If made into soft batter these can be dropped like rock cakes).


=73.--Banana Biscuits=

1/2 lb. banana meal, 4 ozs. sugar, 4 ozs. 'Nutter.'


=74.--Cocoanut Biscuits=

1/2 lb. white flour, 3 ozs. sugar, 2 ozs. 'Nutter,' 4 ozs. cocoanut
meal.


=75.--Sultana Biscuits=

3-4 lb. white flour, 4 ozs. sugar, 4 ozs. 'Nutter,' 6 ozs. minced
sultanas and peel 2 ozs. almond meal.


=78.--Fig Biscuits=

1/2 lb. entire wheat flour, 3 ozs. sugar, 4 ozs. 'Nutter,' 3 ozs. minced
figs.

(If made into soft batter these can be dropped like rock cakes).


=Date, Prune, Raisin, and Ginger Biscuits=

These are prepared in the same way as Recipe No. 76, using one of these
fruits in place of figs. (Use dry preserved ginger).


=77.--Brazil-nut Biscuits=

8 ozs. white flour, 2 ozs. ground rice, 3 ozs. sugar, 4 ozs. grated
brazil kernels.

(If made into a soft batter these can be dropped like rock cakes).


=78.--Fruit-nut Biscuits=

3/4 lb. white flour, 4 ozs. ground rice, 4 ozs. sugar, 5 ozs. 'Nutter,'
6 ozs. mixed grated nuts, 6 ozs. mixed minced fruits, sultanas, peel,
raisins.


=79.--Rye Biscuits=

1 lb. rye flour, 8 ozs. sugar, 8 ozs. nut butter, 8 ozs. sultanas.


=80.--Xerxes Biscuits=

3/4 lb. whole wheat flour, 2 ozs. sugar, 1/2 breakfastcupful olive oil.




BREADS (unleavened)


These are prepared as follows: Mix ingredients with water into stiff
dough; knead well, mould, place in bread tins, and bake in slack oven
for from 1-1/2 to 2-1/2 hours (or weigh off dough into 1/2 lb. pieces,
mould into flat loaves, place on flat tin, cut across diagonally with
sharp knife and bake about 1-1/2 hours).


=81.--Apple Bread=

2 lbs. entire wheat meal doughed with 1 lb. apples, cooked in water to a
pulp.


=82.--Rye Bread=

2 lbs. rye flour, 3/4 lb. ground rice.


=83.--Plain Wheat Bread=

2 lbs. finely ground whole wheat flour.


=84.--Corn Wheat Bread=

1 lb. whole wheat flour, 1 lb. cornmeal.


=85.--Rice Wheat Bread=

1 lb. ground rice, 1 lb. whole wheat flour, 1 lb. white flour.


=86.--Date Bread=

2 lbs. whole wheat flour, 3/4 lb. chopped dates.


=87.--Ginger Bread=

3/4 lb. whole wheat flour, 3/4 lb. white flour, 1/4 lb. chopped
preserved ginger, a little cane sugar.


=88.--Cocoanut Bread=

1 lb. whole wheat flour, 1 lb. white flour, 1/2 lb. cocoanut meal, some
cane sugar.


=89.--Fig Bread=

1-1/2 lbs. whole wheat flour, 1/2 lb. white flour, 1/2 lb. chopped figs.


=90.--Sultana Bread=

1/2 lb. ground rice, 1/2 lb. maize meal, 1/2 lb. white flour, 1/2 lb.
sultanas.


=91.--Fancy Rye Bread=

1-1/2 lbs. rye flour, 1/2 lb. currants and chopped peel, a little cane
sugar.




PORRIDGES


=92.=--Maize, Meal, Rolled Oats, Ground Rice, etc., thoroughly cooked make
excellent porridge. Serve with sugar and unfermented fruit-juice.




FRUIT CAKES


The following uncooked fruit foods are prepared thus: Mix all
ingredients well together; roll out to 1/4 inch, or 1/2 inch, thick; cut
out with biscuit cutter and dust with ground rice.


=93.--Date Cakes=

1-1/2 lbs. stoned dates minced, 1/2 lb. mixed grated nuts.


=94.--Fig Cakes=

1-1/2 lbs. figs minced, 1/2 lb. ground almonds.


=95.--Raisin-Nut Cakes=

1/2 lb. stoned raisins minced, 6 ozs. mixed grated nuts.


=96.--Ginger-Nut Cakes=

1/2 lb. preserved ginger (minced), 1/2 lb. mixed grated nuts. 4 ozs.
'Grape Nuts.'


=97.--Prune-Nut Cakes=

1/2 lb. stoned prunes (minced), 1/2 lb. grated walnuts.


=98.--Banana-Date Cakes=

8 ozs. figs (minced); 4 bananas; sufficient 'Wheat or Corn Flakes' to
make into stiff paste.


=100.--Cherry-Nut Cakes=

8 ozs. preserved cherries (minced); 1/2 lb. mixed grated nuts;
sufficient 'Wheat or Corn Flakes' to make into stiff paste.





The Health Culture Co.


For more than a dozen years the business of the Health-Culture Co. was
conducted in New York City, moving from place to place as increased room
was needed or a new location seemed to be more desirable.

In 1907 the business was removed to Passaic, N. J., where it is
pleasantly and permanently located in a building belonging to the
proprietor of the company.

There has never been as much interest in the promotion and preservation
of personal health as exists to-day. Men and women everywhere are
seeking information as to the best means of increasing health and
strength with physical and mental vigor.

HEALTH-CULTURE, a monthly publication devoted to Practical Hygiene and
Bodily Culture, is unquestionably the best publication of its kind ever
issued. It has a large circulation and exerts a wide influence,
numbering among its contributors the best and foremost writers on the
subject.

THE BOOKS issued and for sale by this Company are practical and include
the very best works published relating to Health and Hygiene.

THE HEALTH APPLIANCES, manufactured and for sale, include Dr. Forest's
Massage Rollers and Developers, Dr. Wright's Colon Syringes, the Wilhide
Exhaler, etc. and we are prepared to furnish anything in this line,
Water-Stills, Exercisers, etc.

CIRCULARS and price lists giving full particulars will be sent on
application.

INQUIRIES as to what books to read or what appliances to procure for any
special conditions cheerfully and fully answered. If you have any doubts
state your case and we will tell you what will best meet it. If you want
books of any kind we can supply them at publisher's prices.




DR. FOREST'S Massage Rollers


Dr. Forest is the inventor and originator of MASSAGE ROLLERS, and these
are the original and only genuine MASSAGE ROLLERS made. The making of
others that are infringements on our patents have been stopped or they
are inferior and practically worthless. In these each wheel turns
separately, and around the centre of each is a band or buffer of elastic
rubber.

The rollers are made for various purposes, each in a style and size best
adapted for its use, and will be sent prepaid on receipt of price.

=No. 1. Six Wheels, Body Roller, $2.=

The best size for use over the body, and especially for indigestion,
constipation, rheumatism, etc. Can also be used for reduction.

=No. 2, Four Wheels, Body Roller, $1.50.=

Smaller and lighter than No. 1; for small women it is the best in size,
for use over the stomach and bowels, the limbs, and for cold feet.

=No. 3, Three Wheels, Scalp Roller, $1.50.=

Made in fine woods and for use over the scalp, for the preservation of
the hair. Can be used also over the neck to fill it out and for the
throat.

=No. 4, Five Wheels, Bust Developer, $2.50.=

The best developer made. By following the plain physiological directions
given, most satisfactory results can be obtained.

=No. 5, Twelve Wheels, Abdominal Roller, $4.=

For the use of men to reduce the size of the abdomen, and over the back.
The handles give a chance for a good, firm, steady, pressure.

=No. 6, Three Small Wheels, Facial Roller, $2.50.=

Made in ebony and ivory, for use over the face and neck, for preventing
and removing wrinkles, and restoring its contour and form.

=No. 7, Three Wheels, Facial Massage Roller, $1.50.=

Like No. 6, made in white maple. In other respects the same.

=No. 8, Eight Wheels, Abdominal Roller, $3.50.=

This is the same as No. 5, except with the less number of wheels. Is
made for the use of women, for reducing hip and abdominal measure.

With each roller is sent Dr. Forest's Manual of Massotherapy; containing
100 pages, giving full directions for use. Price separately 25c.




THE ATTAINMENT OF EFFICIENCY

Rational Methods of Developing Health and Personal Power

By W. R. C. Latson M. D., Author of "Common Disorders," "The Enlightened
Life," Etc.


This work by Dr. Latson indicates the avenues that lead to efficient and
successful living, and should be read by every man and woman who would
reach their best and attain to their highest ambitions in business,
professional, domestic or social life. Something of the scope of this
will be seen from the following


TABLE OF CONTENTS.

     =How to Live the Efficient Life.=--Man a Production of
     Law--Determining Factors in Health and Power--The Most Wholesome
     Diet--Practical Exercises for Efficiency--Influence of Thought
     Habits.

     =Mental Habits and Health.=--All is Mind--Seen in Animals--Formative
     Desire in the Jungle--Mind the Great Creator--Mind the One Cause of
     Disease--Faulty Mental Habits.

     =The Conquest of Worry.=--Effects Upon Digestion--Anarchy of the
     Mind--A Curable Disorder.

     =Secret of Mental Supremacy.=--Practical Methods--The Key
     Note--Mental Power a Habit.

     =The Nobler Conquest.=--Life a Struggle--Who Are the Survivors?--The
     Art of Conquest--The Struggle with the World--Effects of
     Opposition.

     =Firmness One Secret of Power.=--Without Firmness no Real Power--How
     it Grows with Exercise--Gaining the Habit of Firmness.

     =Self-Effacement and Personal Power.=--Growing Older in Wisdom--The
     Fallacy of Identity--Self-Preservation the First Law.

     =The Power of Calmness.=--The Nervous System--Effects of Control.

     =How to Be an Efficient Worker.=--How to Work--Making Drudgery a Work
     of Art.

     =The Attainment of Personal Power.=--An Achievement--Know
     Yourself--Learning from Others.

     =The Secret of Personal Magnetism.=--What is Personal
     Magnetism?--Effects of the Lack of It--How to Gain It.

     =The Prime Secret of Health.=--What is Essential?--What to Do--How to
     Do It.

     =How to Increase Vitality.=--The Mark of the Master--What Is
     Vitality?--Possibility of Increase--Spending Vitality.

     =The Attainment of Physical Endurance.=--Essential to Success--The
     Secret of Endurance--Working Easily--Economizing
     Strength--Exercises for Promoting Endurance.

     =The Attainment of Success.=--The Secret of Success--What to Do to
     Acquire It.

     =The Way to Happiness.=--A Royal Road to Happiness--The Secret of
     Happiness.

     =How to Live Long in the Land.=--Characteristics--Essentials--Bodily
     Peculiarities.

     =The Gospel of Rest.=--All Need It--Few get It--The Secret of
     Rest--Its Effects.

     =Sleeping as a Fine Art.=--Causes of Sleeplessness--The Mind. How to
     Control It.

     =Common Sense Feeding.=--What is Proper Feeding?--Many
     Theories--Mental Conditions--The Kind of Food.

     =Grace and How to Get It.=--What is Grace--Hindrances to
     Grace--Exercises for Grace.

     =Style and How to Have It.=--The Secret of Style--Carriage of the
     Body--Exercises for Stylishness.

     =How to Have a Fine Complexion.=--What Effects the Complexion?--The
     Secret of a Good Complexion--Effects of Food.

     =The Secret of a Beautiful Voice.=--What the Voice Is--Easily
     Acquired.

     =How to Cure Yourself When Sick.=--It is Easy--What is
     Disease?--Nature's Efforts--Best Remedies.

One of the most practical and helpful works published on personal
improvement and the acquiring of physical and mental vigor; a key to
efficient manhood and womanhood and a long, happy and helpful life. All
who are striving for success should read it.

Artistically bound in Ornithoid covers. Price 50c. An extra edition is
issued on heavy paper, bound in fine cloth. Price $1.00.




WOMANLY BEAUTY

_In Form and Features._

Containing specially written chapters from well-known authorities on the
cultivation of personal beauty in women, as based upon Health-Culture;
fully illustrated. Edited by Albert Turner. Bound in extra cloth, price;
$1.00.

This is the best and most comprehensive work ever published on Beauty
Culture, covering the entire subject by specialists in each department,
thus giving the work a greatly increased value. It is profusely and
beautifully illustrated; a handsome volume. Some idea of the scope of
this may be seen from the


TABLE OF CONTENTS.

=Introduction.= By ELLA VAN POOLE.

=Womanly Beauty: Its Requirements.= By Dr. JACQUES.

=Why It Lasts or Fades.= By Dr. C. H. STRATZ.

=Temperamental Types.= By SARAH C. TURNER.

=Breathing and Beauty.= By Dr. W. R. C. LATSON.

=Curative Breathing.= By MADAME DONNA MADIXXA.

=Sleep; Its Effect on Beauty.= By ELLA VAN POOLE.

=The Influence of Thought Upon Beauty.= By Dr. W. R. C. LATSON.

=Health and Beauty.= By Dr. CHAS. H. SHEPARD.

=The Home A Gymnasium.= By MRS. O. V. SESSIONS.

=Facial Massage.= By ELLA VAN POOLE.

=The Hair; Its Care and Culture.= By ALBERT TURNER.

=Care of the Hands and Feet.= By STELLA STUART.

=Exercising for Grace and Poise.= ILLUSTRATED.

=A Good Form, and How to Secure It.= From HEALTH-CULTURE.

=How to Have a Good Complexion.= By SUSANNA W. DODDS M. D.

=Bust Development; How to Secure It.=

=Exercise: Who Needs It; How to Take It.= EDWARD B. WARMAN.

=Perfumes and Health.= By FELIX L. OSWALD, M. D.

=The Voice as an Element of Beauty.= By Dr. LATSON.

=How to be Beautiful.= By RACHEL SWAIN, M. D.

=The Ugly Duckling.= A Story. By ELSIE CARMICHAEL.

=Dress and Beauty.= By ELLA VAN POOLE.

=Some Secrets About a Beautiful Neck.= By ELEANOR WAINWRIGHT.

=Hints in Beauty Culture.= COMPILED BY THE EDITOR.

It is an encyclopedia on the subject, covering every phase of the
question in a practical way, and should be in the hands of every woman
who would preserve her health and personal appearance and her influence.
Agents wanted for the introduction and sale of this great work. Sent
prepaid on receipt of price, $1.00. Address




Publications of the Health-Culture Co.,
45 Ascension St., Passaic, N.J.

=Health-Culture.=

     The largest and best illustrated monthly magazine published on the
     preservation and restoration of health, bodily development and
     physical culture for men, women and children. $1.00 a year; 10c. a
     number.

=The Enlightened Life.=

     And How to Live It. By Dr. Latson; 365 pages, with portrait of the
     author. Cloth, $1.00.

This contains the leading editorials from Health-Culture, many of them
revised and enlarged.

=Common Disorders.=

     With rational Methods of Treatment. Including Diet, Exercise,
     Baths, Massotherapy, etc. By Latson. 340 pages, 200 illustrations.
     $1.00.

=The Attainment of Efficiency.=

     Rational Methods of Developing Health and Personal Power. By Dr.
     Latson. Paper, 50c.; cloth, $1.00.

=The Food Value of Meat.=

     Flesh Food Not Essential to Physical or Mental Vigor. By Dr.
     Latson. Illustrated. Paper, 25c.

=Walking for Exercise and Recreation.=

     By Dr. Latson. 15c.

=Dr. Latson's Health Chart.=

     Presenting in an Attractive and Comprehensive Form a Complete
     System of Physical Culture Exercises, fully Illustrated with Poses
     From Life, with Special Directions for Securing Symmetrical
     Development, for Building up the Thin Body, for Reducing Obesity,
     and for the Increase of General Vitality. 18×25 inches, printed on
     fine paper, bound with metal, with rings to hang on the wall. 50c.

=Uncooked Food.=

     And How to Live on Them. With Recipes for Wholesome Preparation,
     Proper Combinations and Menus, with the Reason Uncooked Food Is
     Best for the Promotion of Health, Strength and Vitality. By Mr. and
     Mrs. Eugene Christian. Cloth, $1.00.

=The New Internal Bath.=

     An Improved Method of Flushing the Colon or Administering an Enema.
     For the relief of Acute and Chronic Diseases. By Laura M. Wright,
     M. D. Illustrated. 25c.

=Womanly Beauty.=

     Of Form and Feature. The Cultivation and Preservation of Personal
     Beauty Based upon Health and Hygiene. By Twenty Well-known
     Physicians and Specialists. With 80 half-tone and other
     Illustrations. Edited by Albert Turner. 300 pages, cloth and gold.
     Price, $1.00.

In this volume the Editor has brought together the teachings of those
who have made a study of special features of the subject, and the result
is a work that is unique and practical, not filled with a medley of
receipts and formulas, so often found in books on beauty.

=Manhood Wrecked and Rescued.=

     How Strength and Vigor Is Lost and How it may be Restored by
     Self-Treatment. A Series of Chapters to Men on Social Purity and
     Right Living. By Rev. W. J. Hunter, Ph. D., D. D. Cloth $1.00.

It contains the following chapters: The Wreck--An Ancient Wreck--A
Modern Wreck--A Youthful Wreck--A Wreck Escaped--The Rescue Begun--The
Rescue Continued--The Rescue Completed.

=Illustrated Hints upon Health and Strength for Busy People.=

     Text and Illustrations by Adrian Peter Schimdt, Professor of Higher
     Physical Culture. Price $1.00.

The best System of Physical Culture published.

=Courtship Under Contract.=

     The Science of Selection. A Tale of Woman's Emancipation. By J. H.
     L. Eager 440 pages, with portrait of the author. Price, $1.20 net.
     By mail, $1.30.

A novel with a purpose, higher than that of any other ever published,
not excepting even "Uncle Tom's Cabin," as it aims to secure more of
happiness in Marriage and the doing away with the divorce evil. The
author presents, in the form of a clean, wholesome love story, some new
ideas on the subject of Love, Courtship, Marriage and Eugenics.

=Human Nature Explained.=

     A new Illustrated Treatise on Human Science for the People. By
     Prof. N. N. Riddell. Illustrated. 400 pages. Extra cloth binding,
     $1.00.

Men and women differ in character as they do in looks and temperament;
no two are just alike. If you would know these "Signs of Character,"
read "Human Nature Explained," and you can read men as an open book. It
gives the most complete system of reading character ever published.

=Human Nature Indexed.=

     A Descriptive Chart for use of Phrenologists. By N. N. Riddle. 25c.

=What Shall We Eat?=

    The Food Question, from the Standpoint of Health, Strength and
    Economy. Containing Numerous Tables Showing the Constituent Elements
    of over Three Hundred Food Products and Their Relations, Cost and
    Nutritious Values, Time of Digestion, etc., Indicating Best Foods
    for all Classes and Conditions. By Alfred Andrews. Price,
    leatherette, 50c.; cloth binding. 75c.

=The New Method.=

    In Health and Disease. By W. E. Forest, B.S., M.D., Fellow of N. Y.
    Academy of Medicine. Sixteenth Edition. Revised and enlarged by
    Albert Turner, Publisher of Health-Culture. 350 pp., clo. binding,
    $1.

It makes the way from weakness to strength so plain that only those who
are past recovery (the very few) need to be sick, and the well who will
follow its teachings cannot be sick, saving the need of calling a
physician and all expenses for medicine.

=Massotherapy.=

    Or the Use of Massage Rollers and Muscle Beaters in Indigestion,
    Constipation, Liver Trouble, Paralysis, Neuralgia and Other
    Functional Diseases. By W. E. Forest, M. D. 25c.

=Constipation.=

    Its Causes and Proper Treatment Without the Use of Drugs. By W. E.
    Forest, M. D. The only rational method of cure. 10c.

=Hygienic Cookery.=

    Or Health in the Household. By Susanna W. Dodds, M. D. $2.00.

It is unquestionably the best work ever written on the healthful
preparation of food, and should be in the hands of every housekeeper who
wishes to prepare food healthfully and palatably.

=The Diet Question.=

    Giving Reasons Why--Rules of Diet. By Dr. Dodds. 25c.

=The Liver and Kidneys.=

    With a Chapter on Malaria. Part I. The Liver and Its Functions,
    Diseases and Treatment. Part II. The Kidneys, Their Healthy Action
    and How to Secure It. Part III. Malarial Fever, Rational Treatment
    by Hygienic Methods. By Dr. Dodds. 25c.

=Race Culture.=

    The Improvement of the Race through Mother and Child. By Susanna W.
    Dodds, M. D. Nearly 500 pages, $1.50.

Dr. Dodds' experience as a physician, teacher and lecturer has given her
the preparation needed for the writing of this book. It is certainly
safe to say that every woman, especially the mothers of young children
and prospective mothers, should read it. No other work covers so
completely the subject of health for women and children as in "Race
Culture."

=Scientific Living.=

    For Prolonging the Term of Human Life. The New Domestic Science,
    Cooking to Simplify Living and Retaining the Life Elements in Food.
    By Laura Nettleton Brown. $1.00.

This work presents new views on the health question, especially as
related to food. It treats of the life in food, showing that in the
preparation of food by the usual methods the life-giving vitality is
destroyed; that is, the organic elements become inorganic. The reason is
clearly stated and recipes and directions for cooking, with menus for a
balanced dietary, are given.

=Cooking for Health.=

    Or Plain Cookery, With Health Hints. By Rachel Swain, M. D. $1.00.

This book is the outcome of progress in the kitchen, and provides for
the preparation of food with direct reference to health. It is not an
invalids' Cook Book, but for all who believe in eating for strength, and
the use of the best foods at all times.

=The No-Breakfast Plan and Fasting Cure.=

    By Edward Hooker Dewey, M. D. Cloth, $1.00.

Presents his theories in a clear, concise, practical way, together with
specific and definite instructions for the carrying out of this method
of living and treatment.

=Experiences of the No-Breakfast Plan and Fasting Cure.=

    A letter in answer to the many questions asking for special details
    as to methods and result. By Dr. Dewey, 50c.

=Chronic Alcoholism:=

    Its Radical Cure. A new method of treatment for those afflicted with
    the alcohol habit, without the use of drugs. By Dr. Dewey. 50c.

=Health in the Home.=

    A Practical Work on the Promotion and Preservation of Health, with
    Illustrated Prescriptions of Swedish Gymnastic Exercises for Home
    and Club Practice. By E. Marguerite Lindley. $1.00.

Unquestionably the best and most important work ever published for the
promotion of the health of women and children.

=The Temperaments;=

    Or Varieties of Physical Constitution in Man in Their Relations to
    Mental Character and the Practical Affairs of Life, etc. By D. H.
    Jacques, M. D. Nearly 150 Illustrations. $1.50.

The only work published on this important and interesting subject. The
author made it the special subject of study and was thoroughly familiar
with all temperamental questions.

=The Avoidable Causes of Disease;=

    Insanity and Deformity, Together with Marriage and Its Violations.
    By John Ellis, M. D. New Edition, Revised and Enlarged by the
    Author, with the Collaboration of Dr. Sarah M. Ellis. $1.00.

This book should be in every library, and if read and its teachings
followed nearly all sickness and disease would be avoided with the
accompanying suffering and expense--one of the most valuable works ever
published.

=Facial Diagnosis.=

    Indications of Disease as shown in the Face. By Dr. Louis Kuhne.
    Illustrated. $1.00.




SCIENTIFIC LIVING

=For Prolonging term of Human Life=

The New Domestic Science, Cooking to Simplify Living and Retaining the
Life Elements in Food.

By LAURA NETTLETON BROWN.

A great truth is emphasized in this book, namely, that in the ordinary
processes of cooking the organic elements become inorganic and food
values are destroyed. This dietetic idea is most important, and it is
claimed by the author that when generally known and made practical it
will restore the racial vigor as nothing else can, free woman from the
slavery of the cook stove and become a large factor in the solution of
the servant problem.

The author does more than inform; she arouses and inspires; she also
enters into the practical demonstration of the new way; food tables,
recipes and menus are numerous and enlightening and will prove
exceedingly helpful not only to busy housekeepers, but also to all
persons who desire to get the greatest benefit and fullest enjoyment
from the daily meals.

She refrains from urging the exclusive use of uncooked foods, but shows
what kind of cooking can be made useful. A most interesting and
practical feature of this work is the clear and discriminating
instructions given for the application of heat in preparing food. From
the author's point of view it becomes evident that the present mode of
preparing food is not only unnecessarily laborious, but that it involves
great waste of the raw material and puts a severe tax upon the digestive
organs of the consumer.

The best thing about the new way to many minds, however, will be that it
greatly enhances the appetizing qualities of the viands. It treats of
the chemistry of food in a way that is easily understood and made
practical. The concluding chapter of the book deals with "Associate
Influences," and gives sound advice upon other factors than diet.

The volume is thoroughly sensible and enlightening; original without
being cranky; radical without being faddish;
withal, practical plain and entirely helpful. No one who is interested
in the all-important question of scientific living can afford to be
without this book. It will be found of interest to teachers and students
of domestic economy. It is very carefully and thoroughly indexed, adding
to its usefulness.

Printed on fine paper. Handsomely bound in extra cloth. $1.00 by mail on
receipt of price. If not entirely satisfactory, money will be returned.
Address




The New Internal Bath


The benefits and great importance of properly flushing the colon is now
fully recognized and it has led to a large and increasing demand for
syringes used for this purpose. The appliances in general use have one
very serious fault, the water is discharged into the lower part of the
rectum, which is distended, and thus produces an irritation which often
proves injurious, causing and aggravating piles and other rectal
troubles. It in frequently a cause of constipation and creates a
necessity for continuing the use of enemas indefinitely.

Dr. Wright's New Colon Syringe

Consists of a strong, well made, four quart rubber bag or reservoir with
two long SOFT RUBBER FLEXIBLE TUBES, by the use of which the water is
easily carried past the rectum and into the sigmoid flexure, and by the
use of the longest tube may be carried up to the transverse colon. The
water is then discharged where it needed and the cleansing is made much
more perfect than it can be in any other way. The tubing and the outlets
are extra large, securing a rapid discharge of the water, which reduces
the time required to less than one-half that usually taken, which is a
very great advantage over other syringes. This new syringe will prove a
most important help in the taking of "Internal Baths" in the "New
Method" treatment as recommended by Dr. Forest and others, and will
prove curative in many cases when all others fail.

Dr. Wright's manual on the taking of the "Internal Bath," containing
full directions for its use in Constipation, Diarrhoea, Dyspepsia,
Biliousness, Sick Headache, Kidney Troubles, Convulsions, Jaundice,
Rheumatism, Colds, Influenza, La Grippe, Diseases of Women, Worms and
Constipation in Children and other diseases, price 25c., is given free
with each syringe.

Carefully packed in a fine polished wooden case, will be sent prepaid to
any address on receipt of price, $5.00, with a copy of Dr. Forest's
great work, "The New Method," the very best work on Health and Disease
published. (Price, $1.00), both for $5.50.

An Infants' Flexible Rubber Tube will be sent for 75c. extra; New
improved Vaginal Irrigator, $1.00; two Hard Rubber Rectal Tubes if
desired, 25c extra. Agents wanted to introduce and sell this.




Health Culture Appliances


=DR. WRIGHT'S COLON SYRINGE=, for taking the New Internal Bath.

This consists of a one-gallon reservoir, one each, long and short
flexible rubber colon tube, one box of antiseptic powder, and Dr.
Wright's Manual of the New Internal Bath, all packed in a polished
wooden case. Price, prepaid, $5.00.

=THE PRIMO LADIES' SYRINGE=. Price, $2.00. The only properly constructed
Vaginal Syringe made.

Every woman should have a good syringe for use in emergencies and for
purposes of cleanliness, which is essential to health, comfort and
pleasure.

All women, married or single, should have a Primo. With each is sent
full directions for use in all emergencies.

=DR. FOREST'S MASSAGE ROLLERS.=

These rollers are coming into general use wherever massage is needed and
are a cure for many of the functional disorders as Dyspepsia,
Constipation, Biliousness, Neuralgia, Rheumatism, Sleeplessness,
Obesity, and wherever there is a lack of a good circulation of the
blood; and the developers and facial rollers are used successfully for
building up the form and the prevention of wrinkles and age in the face.
The rollers consist of wheels about 1-1/2 inches in diameter: around the
centre is a band or buffer of elastic rubber.

=No. 1, Body Roller, 6 Wheels, $2.=--The best size for use over body, and
especially for indigestion, constipation, rheumatism, etc.

=No. 2, Body Roller, 4 Wheels, $1.50.=--Smaller and lighter than No. 1,
for small women it is best in size for use over the stomach and bowels,
the limbs and for cold feet.

=No. 3, Scalp Roller, $1.50.=--Made in fine woods, and for use over the
scalp, for the preservation of the hair.

=No. 4, Bust Developer, $2.50.=--The best developer made. By following the
plain, physiological directions given, most satisfactory results can be
obtained.

=No. 5, Abdominal Roller, 12 Wheels, $4.=--For the use of men to reduce
the size of the abdomen and over the back.

=No. 6, Facial Roller, $2.50.=--Made in ebony; very fine for use over the
face and neck, for preventing and removing wrinkles and restoring its
contour and form.

=No. 7, Facial Roller, $1.50.=--Like No. 6. Made in white maple. In other
respects the same.

=No. 8, Abdominal Boiler, 8 Wheels, $3.50.=--This is the same as No. 5,
except with the less number of wheels. Is made for the use of women, for
reducing hip and abdominal measure.

=No. 1 Massage Vibrator, 24 Balls, price $2.00.

No. 2 Massage Vibrator, 12 Balls, price $1.25.=

Dr. Forest's Manual of Massotherapy, containing nearly 100 pages, giving
full directions for use, sent with each of the above.

=TURKISH BATH CABINETS.=

No. 1, a Double Walled Cabinet, the best made, with new and improved
heater and manual giving full instructions for using the Cabinet for the
Cure of Colds, Catarrh, Rheumatism, LaGrippe, Neuralgia, Kidney Trouble,
Lumbago, Malaria, and many other disorders. Price $12.50.

No. 2 Cabinet Single Walled, with heater and instructions as above.
Price $7.50.

=DR. FOREST'S HEALTH CULTURE VASELINE SPRAY= and Bottle of Catarrh Remedy.
Price, $2.00.

=THE WILHIDE EXHALER.= Price $1.00.

Special descriptive circulars of any of the above sent on application.




Uncooked Foods And How to Use Them.


With recipes for wholesome preparation, proper combinations and menus,
with the reason why it is better for the promotion of health, strength
and vitality to use uncooked than cooked foods, by Mr. and Mrs. Eugene
Christian, with an Introduction by W. R. C. Latson, M. D.

It will meet a widespread want filled by no other work that has ever
been published, and will do very much to solve the question of how to
live for health, strength, and happiness.

It will simplify methods of living--help to solve the servant question
and financial problems, as well as point the way for many to perfect
health. The following chapter headings show something of the scope and
value of this.

CONTENTS.

PART FIRST--

Why This Book Was Written,
Introduction,
The Emancipation of Women,
The Functions of Foods,
Food Products,
Selection of Foods,
Raw Foods,
Preparation of Foods,
Preparation of Uncooked Wood,
Effects of Cooking Food,
Tables Giving Nutritive Values, etc.
Food Combinations,
Condiments,
Bread--Fermentation,
Economy and Simplicity,
As a Remedy.

PART SECOND--

How to Begin the Use of Uncooked Foods.
   Recipes for--
Soups,
Salads (35 kinds),
Eggs, Meat and Vegetables,
Cereals,
Bread, Crackers and Cakes,
Nuts,
Fruits and Fruit Dishes,
Evaporated Fruits,
Desserts,
Jellies and Ices,
Drinks,
Menus,
Miscellaneous.

It is the most important work on the food question ever published. Bound
in cloth. Price, $1.00; with a year's subscription to Health-Culture,
$1.50.




COMMON DISORDERS

Including Diet, Exercise, Baths, Exercise, Massotherapy, Etc.

BY W. R. C. LATSON. M. D.


This is a practical handbook and guide for the home treatment of the
sick without the use of drugs, with suggestions for the avoidance of
disease and the retaining of health and strength. A book for those who
would get well and keep well.

CONTENTS.

Introduction.--What the Body Is. Cell
Life and Its Construction. Circulation
of the Blood and What
It Is. What Exercise Does.

Massage. Principles and Practice.
How It Acts as a Remedy.

Massotherapy. Showing How It Is
Applied.

Special Exercises. Including Those for
Development and Remedial
Work.

Tissue Building. Special Diet, with
Menus.

Obesity. Its Cause and Treatment
Instructions for General Reduction.

Indigestion. Causes of Dyspepsia.
What to Do to Secure Good
Digestion.

Constipation. Its Causes. Treatment
by Hygienic Measures.

Rheumatism. Muscular and Articular.
Treatment.

Gout. Causes. Symptoms. General
and Local Treatment.

Neuralgia. Causes and Symptoms.
The Only Rational Treatment.

Sprains and Synovitis. Symptoms.
Treatment.

Varicose Veins and Swollen Glands.
The Cause and Treatment.

Baldness. Treatment for Restoring
the Hair.

Lung Disorders. How to Improve
Breathing. The Prevention and
Treatment of Consumption.

Round Shoulders and Protruding Collar
Bones. How to Overcome Them,
with Special Exercises.

How to Strengthen the Back. The
Cause of Spinal Weakness.

How to Strengthen the Trunk. The
Importance of Strong Bodily
Muscles.

A Chair as a Gymnasium. How to
Use a Bedroom Chair as a
Complete Gymnasium Apparatus.

The Hygiene of the Skin. Nerves of
the Skin. Sun Baths.

Modern Nervousness. The Best Treatment.

Smallpox. Its Nature. Prevention.
Treatment of Smallpox.

Sunstroke. Causation and Treatment.
How to Avoid It. What to Do
When Prostrated.

In this work the author sets forth the methods he has pursued and found
be practical and successful. Over 300 pages and 200 Illustrations. Price
$1.00.




RACE CULTURE

THE IMPROVEMENT OF THE RACE THROUGH MOTHER AND CHILD. By Susanna W.
Dodds, M. D.

A large 12mo. volume bound in extra cloth, price, $1.50


The time has come when parents must consider the responsibilities that
rest upon them in relation to their children and make a study of
Eugenics. This cannot be avoided or shirked and especially should
prospective mothers study the subject in all its bearing, and know what
you should do and what you should not do to insure the best possible for
your unborn child. What conditions will promote the best for health, and
afford the highest degree of intellectual and moral development. What
limit you shall place upon the number of children. Race Suicide is not
so serious a question as Race Culture, which may be easily attained by
giving proper attention to the subject.

The author of "RACE CULTURE" has made a most careful study of the whole
subject, starting from the foundation, taking up pre-natal culture in
all its bearings, including the marriage relations and the father's
responsibilities. Considering the health and the well-being of the
prospective mother and her diseases. How childbearing may be made easy,
the first care of and the feeding of the babe, all the diseases of
infancy and childhood and their treatment without the use of drugs.

The avoidable causes of disease in children and adults are fully
considered and a voluminous appendix treats of the use of water,
massage, exercise, food and drinks, and how to prepare them as remedial
agencies.

It is safe to say that no greater or more important work on this subject
has ever been written.

Every woman and especially every prospective mother should read it. Its
cost is as nothing compared to its value. Price, $1.50 by mail.




The Food Value of Meat

Flesh Food Not Essential to Mental or Physical Vigor.

By W. R. C. LATSON, M. D.,


The most valuable work on Practical Dietetics that has been published.
The Food Question is considered in its relation to health, strength and
long life. Some idea of the scope may be seen from the following


CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION. Importance of the Subject. Influence of Foods on the
Health and Morality of the Community. The Most Important Question of
Dietetics. Classes of Foods. Description of Proteids. The Starches.
Conversion of Starches into Sugars. Fruit Sugar. The Fats. Salts. Effect
of Cooking Upon Foods.

DIGESTION. Definition of the Process. Saliva. The Ptyalin. Effect of
Eating Sugar with Starchy Foods. Gastric Digestion. The Stomach; The
Gastric Juice; Peptones; Digestion In the Intestines; Importance of
Digestion; Tabular Statement of the Digestive Process.

COMPOSITION OF FOODS. The Four Elements of Food; Proper Proportion of
Each Element; Selection of Balanced Foods; Table of Food Analyses; Value
of Cooked Vegetables; The Reason Why Many Vegetarians Fail; Fresh
Fruits; Pure Water; The Grains; The Legumes; Nuts.

FOOD VALUES OF FLESH MEATS. The Question at Issue; Biological Data, What
They Indicate; The Intestinal Tract; The Food Value of Meat; Poisons;
Disease Infection; The Strongest Argument Against the Use of Flesh Meat;
Vigorous Vegetarians; Intellectual Vegetarians; Vegetarianism and Vigor.

COMBINATIONS OF FOODS. Principles; Cooked and Uncooked Foods; Model
Menus; Breakfast; Luncheon; Dinner; Advantages of Vegetable Foods.

Price by Mail, in Paper. 25c, Cloth Binding, 50c.




COMMON DISORDERS

Causes, Symptoms, and Hygienic Treatment, by the use of Water,
Massotherapy, and other Rational Methods.

By W. R. LATSON, M. D.

Among the diseases considered may be mentioned Indigestion,
Constipation, Rheumatism, Neuralgia, Lung Troubles, Gout, Nervousness
and other minor complaints. The work contains nearly 300 pages,
profusely illustrated. Bound in Cloth. Price, $1.00. Sent by mail on
receipt of price.




The Up-to-date Woman

needs to know something more than simply How to Cook and follow recipes
brought to her attention in Cook Books


SHE SHOULD KNOW

What are the Best Foods for her family.
What Foods will keep all Well and Strong.
What is best for the Children.
What do the Men Need.
What Foods are Economical and Nutritious.
What are best Food Combinations.
How often is Meat Necessary.
What are the Best Meat Substitutes.
What is the Food Value of Fish.
What is the Food Value of Milk.
What is the Food Value of Nuts.
Are Beans Nutritious and Healthful.
Is Nut Butter better than Cow Butter.
Are Tea and Coffee Injurious.
Which Food Digests Quickly and which Slowly.
How to Get the Most Food Value for the Least Money.

All these and many other questions are answered in

Prof. Andrews Great Book




What Shall We Eat?

The Food Question from the standpoint of Health, Strength and Economy.
Indicating Best Foods for all Classes and Conditions.


This work covers every phase of the food question in a practical way.

Shows how food is digested and gives the constituent elements of all
food products, their cost, food values, time of digestion, etc.,
Comparative value of beef, mutton, pork, eggs, fish, fowl, oysters, the
grains, breads, peas, beans, milk, butter, cheese, sugar, beer, fruits,
nuts, etc., which make flesh, bone, nerve; which gives most for least
money. 25 tables showing results of nearly 1500 food analyses. Price in
leatherette binding, 50 cents, cloth 75 cents, postpaid.

If not satisfied money promptly returned. Every man should order this
for his wife, or some other woman. Send stamps.




The Enlightened Life and How to Live it

By W. R. C. LATSON, M. D.

Author of "Common Disorders," "The Attainment of Efficiency," "Food
Value of Meat," Etc.

This work contains a collection of Dr. Latson's strong editorials that
have appeared in Health-Culture, carefully revised and enlarged, with
other matter. The great interest that has been manifested in these
leaders will insure a demand for this work. The scope will be seen from
the following chapter headings:

Introduction--The Ultimate Ideal--The Mind and Its Body--What Shall a
Man Take in Exchange for His Soul?--Health as an Asset--The Waste of
Life--Health as a Factor in Business Success--The Causation of
Disease--Are Weakness and Disease Increasing?--The Detection of
Disease--The Prevention of Disease--Heredity and Disease--Disease: Its
Nature and Conquest--Methods of Healing--Drug Medication in the
Treatment of Disease--Religion and Medicine--Worry the Epidemic of the
Day--Race Suicide--"Race Suicide," Pro and Con--Simplified Living--The
Death-Dealing Detail--The Slaughter of the Innocents--Crimes Against
Children--Sleep and Rest--Mental and Physical Effects of Music--The
Common Sense of Foods and Feeding--The Mission of Pain--Drugs--The
Surgical Operation Frenzy--Vaccination; Blessing or Curse?--Free Water
Drinking as a Hygienic Measure--Evil Effects of Alcohol--The Pinnacles
of Absurdity.

Published in large, clear type, handsomely bound in cloth. Price, sent
prepaid, $1.00.




The Health Culture Magazine

ELMER LEE., A. M., M. D., EDITOR

PRINCIPLES AND OBJECTS

Health Culture seeks the advancement of humanity by declaring the
obvious teachings of nature.

Health Culture aims to educate the people out of superstition,
misunderstanding and fear arising from the imperfect interpretation of
natural principles.

Health Culture recognizes that health and comfort, happiness and long
life are desirable and attainable by the faithful observance of hygiene.
That neglect and abuse of natural and simple living inevitably leads to
weakness, degeneracy, disease and death.

Health Culture from the scientific sense as well as on grounds of
sentiment opposes the taking of life needless to obtain food for man.

Health Culture holds that food products of the vegetable kingdom are
ample and favorable for a safe, complete and full development of the
kingdom of man.

Health Culture opposes as needless and wasteful of life those research
activities known as vivisection, also as contrary to human interest the
use of drugs, serums, vaccines and chemicals as medicines or preventives
of disease by legal compulsion.

Health Culture is an illustrated Monthly, Standard Magazine size; $1.00
a year, 15 cents a No., Canadian subscriptions $1.25, Foreign $1.50.

=Address, The Health Culture Co., Passaic, N. J.=