The story which has already been mentioned of the wanton destruction by
the Parliamentary soldiers of ancient documents that had been preserved in
the Castle may quite reasonably be true, but unfortunately Hinderwell, who
seems to have been the first to record the tale,[1] does not give any
authority for his statement. Another story which is sometimes mentioned
among the people of Pickering states that Parliamentary soldiers were
quartered in the church during the Civil War, but we can place no reliance
upon the legend. Some details of the raising of train bands in the
district are given in the memoirs of Sir Hugh Cholmley, the gallant
defender of Scarborough Castle. Writing of the year 1636, he says, "I was
at this time made Deputy-lieutenant and Colonel over the Train-bands
within the hundred of Whitby Strand, Ryedale, Pickering, Lythe, and
Scarborough Town." Three years later Sir Hugh tells us that in preparation
for the king's march against the Scots, he had much business in mustering
and training the soldiers of the Train-bands, and many journeys to York to
consult with the Vice-President and other Deputy-Lieutenants. "About June
the king sent down his army into Yorkshire, and himself came to it in
August. The Earl of Northumberland was General from whom I had a
commission. Divers of the colonels of the Train-bands, with their
regiments, were called to march with the king into Northumberland; amongst
which I had been one, but at that time I had caught cold and a dangerous
sickness, in raising and training my whole regiment together on
Paxton-Moor near Thornton, where one Hallden, a stubborn fellow of
Pickering, not obeying his captain, and giving me some unhandsome
language, I struck him with my cane, and felled him to the ground. The
cane was tipped with silver, and hitting just under the ear, had greater
operation than I intended. But either the man was ill or else
counterfeited so, to be freed from service; which I willingly granted, and
glad when he was well: but it was a good monition not to be hasty in the
like or any other provocation, for passion doth not only blind the
judgement but produceth other ill effects."

[Footnote 1: Thomas Hinderwell, "History of Scarborough," 1811, p. 350.]

In 1640, when Sir Hugh (as a burgess for Scarborough) was attending the
Short Parliament in London, his regiment was commanded to march to the
Scottish Border. His brother Henry Cholmley, being Lieut.-Colonel, went
with it, but at Durham they were ordered back.

In November 1641 Sir Hugh was again attending Parliament, and at that time
he feared the advance of the Scots into Yorkshire, "which," he says, "did
not a little disquiet my mind and thoughts for my dear wife and children;
the snow being so great, I could not possibly remove them so soon as I
desired"; "but at the latter end of February, as soon as the ways were
passable, I had her and all my family in London." It must have been an
unusually prolonged period of snow to keep Sir Hugh and his family apart
for two or three months. Roxby Castle was his birthplace, and his account
of his early years there includes an accident which might have had fatal
results.


                            [1]JC
                     _________|_________
                     |                 |
                   [2]SR             [3]SRC
                              ___________|_____________
                              |       |       |       |
                            [4]SR   [5]J    [6]A    [7]M
     __________________________|______________________
     |       |       |       |       |       |       |
     |     [8]F    [9]R and [10]R  [11]M   [12]J   [13]E
     |                       |
     |                      [14]M
    [15]
   __|______
   |       |
 [16]K  [17]SH
           |
        [18]SRC
           |
        [19]SHC


[1]
John Cholmley of Cheshire.

[2]
Sir Richard,
Lt.-Gov. of the Tower in the time of King
Henry VIII.; d. without issue; m. Elizabeth,
one of the daus. of ---- Nevill of Thornton
Bridge; probably bought land there.

[3]
Sir Roger Cholmley,
First to settle in Yorkshire; m. Catherine, dau.
of Sir Marmaduke Constable of Flamborough.
Sir Roger knighted 5th of Henry VIII., when
English had a great victory over the Scots;
died April 28th, 1538; bought Roxby.

[4]
Sir Richard,
Called "The Great Black Knight of the
North"; inherited property; knighted at
battle of Musslebury Hill, 5th of Edw. VI.;
m. 1st Margaret, d. of Wm. Lord Conyers.

[5]
John,
Slain in
his youth.

[6]
Anne,
m. to the Earl
of Westmoreland.

[7]
Margaret,
m. Henry
Gascoigne of
Ledbury, near
Richmond.

[8]
Francis,
m. Mrs. June
Boulmer; died
without issue.

[9] and [10]
Richard and Roger,
m. 2 bastard daus. of Dallrivers.
[Both set on one side.]

[11]
Margaret.

[12]
Jane.

[13]
Elizabeth.

[14]
Marmaduke.

[15]
Purchased many lands in Yorks,
Manors of Whitby, Whitby lithe,
and Stakesby purchased in 1555;
lived at Roxby; m. 2nd Katherine
(d. 1598), dau. of Henry, 1st
Earl of Cumberland, widow of
Lord John Scrope of Bolton.

[16]
Katherine.

[17]
Sir Henry, m. Margaret, dau. of Sir Wm. Babthorpe; succeeded Francis.

[18]
Sir Richard Cholmley,
Born 1580, succeeded 1617, died 1632.

[19]
Sir Hugh Cholmley,
the defender of Scarborough Castle.
Born 1600, succeeded 1632.

GENEALOGICAL TREE OF THE CHOLMLEYS OF ROXBY, NEAR PICKERING.

(Taken from the details given in the memoirs of Sir Hugh Cholmley.)


"I was," he says, "the first child of my dear mother, born upon the 22nd
of July, being a Tuesday, and on the feast day commonly called Mary
Magdalen's day, in the year of our Lord God 1600, at a place called Roxby,
in the country of York, within the Hundred of Pickering lythe near to
Thornton, now much demolished, but heretofore the chief seat of my
great-grandfather, and where my grandfather, Sir Henry Cholmley, then
lived, which place (since I was married was sold by my father and self,
towards the payment of his debts)."

Sir Hugh then describes his weakness as a child due to the fault of his
nurse. This gave him such "a cast back" that he was a weak and sickly
child for many years.

"At three years old, the maid which attended me let me tumble out of the
great chamber window at Roxby, which (by God's providence) a servant
waiting upon my grandfather at dinner espying, leaped to the window, and
caught hold of my coat, after I was out of the casement. Soon after I was
carried to my father and mother, who then lived with her brother Mr John
Legard, at his house at Ganton nine miles from Roxby, where I continued
for the most part until I was seven years old; then my father and mother
going to keep house at Whitby, went with them, and beginning to ride a
little way by myself, as we passed over a common, called Paston moor [?
Paxton, above Ellerburne] one of my father's servants riding beside me, I
had a desire to put my horse into a gallop; but he running away, I cried
out, and the servant taking hold of my arm, with an intention to lift me
from my horse, let me fall between both, so that one of them, in his
gallop, trod on my hat; yet, by God's protection, I caught no harm."

When his father was living at Whitby he had another narrow escape. "The
next year," he writes, "being 1608 upon my very birth-day, being the feast
of Mary Magdalen, and I just eight years old, by God's great Providence, I
escaped as great, if not greater danger than this; which was, that, at my
Father's house, at Whitby aforesaid, there was a great fierce sow, having
two pigs near a quarter old, which were to be reared there, lying close
together asleep, near to the kitchen door, I being alone, out of folly and
waggery, began to kick one of them; in the interim another rising up,
occasioned me to fall upon them all, and made them cry; and the sow
hearing, lying close by, came and caught me by the leg, before I could get
up, and dragged me half a score yards, under the window of the room now
called the larder, and what in respect of the age and the amazement I was
in, could not help myself; from the leg she fell to bite me in the groin
with much fierceness; when the butler, carrying a glass of beer to my
father (then in his chamber) hearing me cry, set down the beer on the hall
table, and running out, found the sow passing from my groin to my throat."

Another famous name connected with this period is that of George Villiers,
second Duke of Buckingham. After the death of Charles II. the royal
favourite retired to his seat at Helmsley, his strength being very much
impaired by the vicious life he had led at Court. He seems to have devoted
himself to hunting and open-air sports. Certain stories connected with the
Duke and mixed up with the usual superstitions were told to Calvert nearly
a hundred years ago.

"Near the Checkers' Inn at Slapstean," he says, "there stood until a few
years agone the cottage in which there lived many years sen one Isaac Haw,
who in his day did hunt the fox with George Villiers, and many a queer
story did he use to tell. Here be one. There lived on the moor not over an
hour's ride from Kirkby Moorside, one Betty Scaife, who had a daughter
Betty, a good like wench." George Villiers seeing this girl one day is
said to have induced her to become his mistress either by force or with
her mother's consent. After having a dream she told Villiers to come near
her no more, foretelling at the same time the time and death he would die.
He was so affected by this that he is said to have ridden away and never
seen her again.

Haw also tells how he once rode on the moor with the spirit of the Duke of
Buckingham, being not aware at the time that his Grace was dead. Villiers
made an arrangement that when both were dead and the devil gave them a
holiday they would both hunt together on a certain moor.

"There be those whose word has been handed down to us," continues Calvert,
"who sware to having seen these two ahunting of a spirit fox with a spirit
pack of a moonlight night. I know one who hath in memory a song of that
day anent these two but it be so despert blasfemous that for the very fear
of injuring the chance of my own soul's salvation I do forbear to give it,
but if it be that you wish to copy on't, one Tom Cale a cobbler living in
Eastgate Pickering hath to my knowledge a copy on't."

[Illustration: THE HOUSE AT KIRBY MOORSIDE IN WHICH THE 2ND DUKE OF
BUCKINGHAM--THE FAVOURITE OF CHARLES II.--DIED.

The window of the bedroom is shown in the illustration. It is on the first
floor at the right hand side of the house.
]

The Duke lived to the age of sixty in spite of his life of unbridled vice,
and it seems that a sudden illness seized him after a hard day's hunting,
and he died at the house in Kirby Moorside where he was taken instead of
to Helmsley. The house is still standing, and one may even see the room in
which the reckless Duke expired. As may be seen from the illustration the
house is a good one, and at that time must have been, with one exception,
the best in the village. The lines by Pope descriptive of the favourite's
death are, therefore, quite unwarranted:--

  "In the worst inn's worst room, with mat half hung,
  The floors of plaster and the walls of dung."

It never was an inn, and the Rev. R. V. Taylor[1] has discovered that the
house was in the occupation of one of his tenants. I have carefully
examined the house without finding anything to suggest that such squalor
could have ever existed there. The staircase is very picturesque, and one
of the brass drop handles on the bedroom doors shows that the building was
a good one. The bedroom in which the Duke died has the fireplace blocked
up; there is a recessed window containing a seat, and the walls, where
they are panelled, are of fir, although the larger beams throughout the
house seem to be of oak.

[Footnote 1: "Yorkshire Notes and Queries," May 1904, p. 68.]

The sudden demise of this famous man must have created a sensation in the
village, and although the body was not buried at Kirby Moorside, the
parish register of that time has this illiterate entry[2]--

_"buried in the yeare of our Lord 1687
Marke Reame ..... Aprill y^e 12
Gorges viluas Lord dooke of bookingam etc. 19"_

[Footnote 2: The third volume of the registers at the top of page 4.]

A letter from Lord Arran to the Duke's late chaplain, dated April 17th,
1687, says, "I have ordered the corpse to be embalmed and carried to
Helmsley Castle and there to remain till my Lady Duchess her pleasure
shall be known. There must be speedy care taken; for there is nothing here
but confusion, not to be expressed. Though his stewards have received vast
sums, there is not so much as one farthing, as they tell me, for defraying
the least expense." From this it appears that he died on or before the
17th of April, and that after the embalming process had been performed the
intestines were buried at Kirby Moorside on the 19th and not on the 17th,
as stated by Gill in his "Vallis Eboracensis."

One of the tattered registers[1] of Kirby Moorside also contains the
following remarkable entry:--

"Dorythy Sowerbie of Bransdales (slayne with 6 bullett by theeves in the
night) was buryed the 23th (sic) Day of May 1654." A few years before this
in 1650 the burial is recorded of "a stranger that y^t sold stockins."

[Footnote 1: Vol. ii. p. 2]

On the first page of the register dated 1704, the vicar, "M. James
Musgrave," gives a list of "things belonging to the churich--a surplus, a
Hud, a challis, a patton, tow-flaggons [these are of pewter and are kept
in the church], a putter Dubler, a Tabill clorth, on napkin. A dubler for
christening."

During this period the Duchy records show that Pickering Forest was still
being robbed of its oaks, some of them being used to repair the defences
of Scarborough Castle during the Civil War.

"Wee are informed that there were xxx^tie Trees or  }
  thereaboutes cut downe in Newton dale within the  }
  said fforest and carried to Scarbrough Castle by  } 20 0 0"
  Order from Sir Hugh Cholmley then Gouernor of     }
  the same, to the value of                         }

Some of the other entries at the same time are given below.[1]

"Wee are informed that divers olde trees are cut downe  }
  within the fforest of Pickeringe in a place called    }lib.
  Deepdale and Helley Greene by Robert Pate by the      } 6 0 0
  Appointment of Mathew ffranke Esquire to the          }
  value of                                              }

Likewise wee are informed that John Hassell gent    }
  hath cut downe diuers trees in Dalbye within the  } 19 0 0
  said fforest to the value of                      }

Wee are likewise informed that Beatrice Hassell widdow  }
  hath cut downe diuers trees in Dalbye Hagges          } 12 0 0
  within the said fforest, to the value of              }

Wee are likewise informed That seuerall Tennantes of    }
  Goatland haue cut downe two hundred Trees and         }
  more within the fforest in the North part of          } 30 0 0
  Newtondale and Gillwood to the value of               }

And that Robert ffranke gent did take Composicions
  and summes of money of seuerall of the said
  Tennants of Goatland for the same wood.

And allso we are informed that there hath bene cut       }
  downe Two hundred Trees in Haughe Hagge                }
  within the said fforest, And that the said Trees were  } l. s. d.
  cut downe and Carried away by the poore people of      } 40 0  0
  Pickeringe in the yeares 1647 and 1648 to the          }
  value of                                               }

[Footnote 1: From a thin foolscap book containing, inter alia, the
findings of the Juries of the Courts Leet, etc., in the possession of the
Rev. Arthur Hill of Thornton-le-dale.]

From the same book we discover that

"George Grayson holdes by Copie of Court Roll one
Cottage in Pickeringe and one Garth thereunto belonging,
dated the 11th of Aprill 1659 And was
admitted Tennant thereof by John Syms then
Steward and paid ffine                      0 0 4"

This is of considerable interest in view of the fact that the Grayson
family are still tenants of the Duchy.

Tenants are mentioned as holding property in "Smiddiehill" and "Hungate
Greene," and the entry given below is interesting on account of the
mention of the market cross that has completely disappeared.

"Jane Moone widdow holdes one Messuage and one
parcell of waste ground in Pickering neare to the
Market Crosse and was admitted Tennant thereof
by John Sym, now deputie Steward, by Copie dated
the 22d of November 1659: And paid ffine for per
Admittance ...                              0 8 1"

Many of the small houses of Pickering must have been built at this time.
One near the castle gateway has a stone in the gable end bearing the
initials E.C.W., and the date 1646, another with a thatched roof on the
south side of Eastgate, dated 1677, is now fast going to ruin. The roofs
were no doubt at that time chiefly covered with thatch, and the whole town
must have been extremely picturesque. The stocks, the shambles, and the
market cross stood in the centre of the town, and there were none of the
unpleasant features that modern ideas, unchecked by a sense of fitness and
proportion, bring in their wake.

The castle, we have seen, was in a far more perfect state than at the
present time, but the church must have appeared much as it does to-day.
The circular wooden pulpit is Georgian, and thus the one that preceded it
has disappeared. Two of the three bells that still hang in the tower bear
the date 1638. The treble bell is inscribed "Praise the Lord," and sounds
the note G sharp. The middle bell gives F sharp and the inscription is
"Soli deo gloria." Hanging in the bellcote of the schools adjoining the
church is the small bell dated 1632 that was removed from the Bruce Chapel
in 1857 when the schools were built. Before that date children were taught
in the Bruce Chapel.

In Archbishop Sharp's manuscripts (page 106) preserved at Bishopthorpe
there is a detailed account of the parish of Pickering. It is dated 1706,
and is given under the heading of "Dean of York's Peculiars." There are
numerous abbreviations, but the meaning is plain in most instances.

"_Pickering Vic. St Peter and St Paul_.

"1706. No Papist.

"A[nno] R[egni] Edw. I. 13. The Manor, Castle, Forest of Pickering were
given to Edmund E. of Lancaster and so became thenceforward part of that
Dutchy. The Church of Pickering was by Hen. I. given to the Deanery of
York, w^th the soke thereof and all the chappells and tithes belonging. It
is let at the rent of 100 li.

"The Vicarage consists of a house &c. And the tithe Hay of Garths w^ch may
yield 7 or 8 Load in a year to the vicar, and all the small tithes of the
Parish. Besides an augmentation of 20 li p an. made since the
Restauration.

"This is a large parish in which are 2 Chappells neither of them endowed
as the minister Mr Newton tells me, but he allows 5th to a neighboring
minister to serve the one and the other he goes to himself. This vicarage,
of the D^ns Collation is val in my B at 28 li. It is I hope worth 60 li
[not above 40 K.B. 8. 3. 9. T 16-40b.] _The Deans Tenant pays 20 li of
it._

"Within this Parish are the Towns of Newton upon Rocliff, Blansby Park,
Kinthorp. Here also is Dereholm Grange and Loft Maress Grange. 1707. 41
(indistinct) John Pickering Vr.; 1715 Robert Hargreaves, Vicar; 1740 Sam^l
Hill Vicar.

"1745. George Dodsworth.

"1706 Papists 9.                £ S. D.

"The Chappell of Goteland. 1716 4 0  0

"Being distant above 8 miles from the Parish Church
was by Dean Scot A.D. 1635 allowed the privilege of
Sepulture for the inhab. Saveing to the Mother
Church all its dues 1706 Certifyd by ye (indistinct) to
the Dean to be worth 4 0 0 Arising out of
Surplice Fees and Voluntary Contribution William
Prowde, Curate 1722 Jonathan Robinson, Curate."

[Illustration: The Maypole on Sinnington Green. The centre of many village
festivities in the past centuries.]

The country folk were in much the same state in regard to their morals and
superstitions as in the Georgian Era described in the next chapter, but it
is of great interest to know that efforts towards improvement were being
made as early as the year 1708. The following account given by Calvert of
an attempt to stop the May dance at Sinnington would show either that
these picturesque amusements were not so harmless as they appear at this
distance, or else that the "Broad Brims" were unduly severe on the
innocent pleasures of the time. The account is taken by Calvert "from one
Nares book."

[Illustration: An inverted stone coffin of much earlier date used as a
seventeenth century gravestone at Wykeham Abbey.]

"In the year 1708 there did come a great company of Broad Brims for to
stop the May Dance about the pole at Sinnington, and others acting by
concert did the like at Helmsley, Kirby Moorside and Slingsby, singing and
praying they gat them round about the garland pole whilst yet the may
Queen was not yet come but when those with flute and drum and dancers came
near to crown the Queen the Broad Brims did pray and sing psalms and would
not give way while at the finish up there was like for to be a sad end to
the day but some of the Sinnington Bucks did join hands in a long chain
and thus swept them clean from the pole. At Slingsby there was a great
dordum of a fight, but for a great while the Broad Brims have set their
faces against all manner of our enjoyment."

Fine examples of the carved oak cabinets, chests, and other pieces of
furniture of this period still survive in some of the houses of Pickering.
The cabinets generally bear the date and the initials of the maker, and
the I.B. to be seen on some of the finest pieces from this district are
the initials of John Boyes of Pickering, whose work belongs chiefly to the
time of William and Mary.



CHAPTER XI

_The Forest and Vale in Georgian Times, 1714 to 1837_


With the accession of King George the First in 1714 we commence a new
section of the history of Pickering, a period notable in its latter years
for the sweeping away to a very large extent of the superstitions and
heathen practices which had survived until the first quarter of the
nineteenth century.

The town had probably altered very little in its general appearance since
the time of the Restoration. Most of the roofs were thatched; the castle
was probably more dismantled within the outer walls, but the church of the
Georgian period must have been almost identically the same as during the
century that preceded it, and as it remained until the restoration in
1879.

At the top of the market-place stood the stocks at the side of the old
stone-built shambles that disappeared in 1857, having for many generations
formed a background to the groups of buyers and sellers in the steep and
picturesque street. We can people the scene with the quaint costumes of
the eighteenth century; knee-breeches and long waistcoats are to be seen
in every direction, the three-cornered hat and the wig tied with a black
ribbon are worn by the better classes. The wives and daughters of the
squires and lesser gentry reflect in a modified form the fashions
prevailing in London, and to be observed in actuality among the gay crowds
that thronged the Spa at Scarborough, assuming and discarding the
hooped-petticoat according to the mode of the moment. We can see the
farmers of the Vale and those from the lonely dales discussing the news of
the week and reading the scarce and expensive newspapers that found their
way to Pickering. How much they understood of the reasons for the great
European wars and alliances it is not easy to say, but when the reports
came of victories to the British armies, assisted although they may have
been by paid allies, the patriotic feelings of these Yorkshiremen did not
fail to manifest themselves in a heavier consumption of beer than usual.
We can hear the chink of glasses and the rattle of pewter tankards in the
cosy parlours of the "White Swan," the "George," and the rest; we can hear
as the years go by the loud cheers raised for Marlborough, for Wolfe, for
Nelson, or for Wellington, while overhead the church bells are ringing
loudly in the old grey tower. These were the days of the highwaymen, and
even as late as 1830 a postman was robbed near the moorland village of
Lockton, on his way to Whitby. The driver of the mailcart at that time
used to carry a large brass-mounted cavalry pistol, which was handed to
him when he had mounted his box by one of the two old ladies who acted as
the post-mistresses of Pickering. It is not much more than ten years since
the death of Francis Gibson, a butcher of East Ayton, who was over a
hundred years old and remembered the capture of the last highwayman who
was known to carry on the old-time profession in the neighbourhood. He was
tracked to an inn at East Ayton where he was found sleeping. Soon
afterwards he found himself on the road to York, where he was hanged.

The road across Seamer Moor between Ayton and Scarborough was considered
sufficiently dangerous for those who travelled late to carry firearms.
Thus we can see Mr Thomas Chandler of the Low Hall at West Ayton--a
Justice of the Peace--having dined with some relations in Scarborough,
returning at a late hour. The lights of his big swinging barouche drawn by
a pair of fat chestnuts shine out on the white road; the country on either
side is unenclosed, and masked men may appear out of the shadows at any
moment. But if they are about they may have heard that Mr Chandler carries
a loaded pistol ready for emergencies, for they always let him reach his
house in safety.

To the simple peasants highwaymen were probably considered of small
account in comparison to the apparitions that haunted many parts of the
lonely country. Nearly every part of the moor had its own wraith or
boggle, and the fear of these ghosts was so widespread that in many cases
the clergy were induced to publicly lay them, after which were seen no
more.

To record the advent of these strange beliefs is impossible, for who can
tell how or when they originated? We can only describe them at the time of
their destruction. Chaucer, writing in the fourteenth century, seemed to
imagine that belief in elves and fairies had received its death-blow in
his own time, for in "The Wife of Bath's Tale," he says--

  "In tholdé dayés of the Kyng Arthour,
   Of which that Britons speken greet honour,
   All was this land fulfild of faïrye.
   The elf queene with hir joly compaignye
   Dauncéd ful ofte in many a greené mede.
   This was the olde opinion as I rede,--
   I speke of manye hundred yeres ago,--
   But now kan no man se none elvés mo,
   For now the greté charitee and prayeres
   Of lymtours, and othere hooly freres,
   That serchen every lond and every streem,
   As thikke as motés in the sonné beem,--
   Bléssynge hallés, chambres, kichenes, boures,
   Citees, burghes, castels, hyé toures
   Thrópés, bernés, shipnes, dayeryes,--
   This maketh that ther been no faïryes."

Five hundred years, however, had to pass before the most implicit belief
in hobs, wraiths, and boggles was to disappear, and even at the present
day those who have intimate associations with the population of the North
Yorkshire moors know that traces of the old superstitions still survive.

Several books have been written on the folklore of Yorkshire and from them
it is possible to get a rough idea of the superstitions common to many
parts of the county, but these do not particularly concern the district
surrounding Pickering. We should probably have never heard of many curious
facts specially belonging to this part of the county if a small manuscript
book of closely written notes had not been discovered by Mr Richard
Blakeborough of Stockton-on-Tees, who has kindly allowed me to quote from
it. The stories were collected by one George Calvert, who writes in 1823,
and frequently mentions that the customs he describes were rapidly dying
out. Under the heading of "Witch Hags who have dwelt hereabouts" he
writes--

"They be so great in number that mayhap it will shew the more wisdom, if
mention be made only of those who in their day wrought some wondrous deed
or whose word cast fear upon all."

From this list I have picked out those that belong to the neighbourhood of
Pickering, and by the letters placed after each name one can discover in
the key given below the special arts practised by each "hag."


"Nancy Nares o' Pickering" [T V Z W Y].
"Nanny Pearson o' Goathland" [X].
"Nan Skaife o' Spaunton Moor," called also Mary or Jenny.
"Aud Mother Migg o' Cropton" [Z].
    (Her real name was Sabina Moss).
"Sally Craggs o' Allerston" [V Z].
"Dina Sugget o' Levisham" [W Z].
"Hester Mudd o' Rosedale" [T V].
"And Emma Todd o' Ebberston [Y].

KEY TO LETTERS AGAINST THE WITCHE'S NAMES.

T  Did also use the evil eye.
U  Could turn thersels into a hare.
V  Could turn thersels into a cat.
W  Had a familiar.
X  Could cripple a quickening bairn.
Y  Well up in all matters of the black art.
Z  Did use ye crystal.


"All these," says Calvert, "were at one time of great note and did in
their day work great deed and cast many an evil spell and charm and were
held in great fear by great many good and peaceful folk. It be not for me
to here put an argument in the favour of what do now be doubted and
scorned by some. I will but say that I have seen and know that which hath
been wrought by these hags o' the broom and of their power which they held
at their beck and wink the which is not to be set on one side at the flip
and flout of our young masters and misses, fresh from some teaching drove
into their brain pans by some idiotick and skeptick French teacher. I
therefore say no more on this matter."

Nancy Skaife of Spaunton Moor had a wonderful receipt for making a magic
cube, and as she was a famous witch of her time and was reputed to possess
most remarkable powers of foretelling events to come, it will be
interesting to learn the ingredients of her magic cubes.

[Illustration: Two ways of marking Magic Cubes. (_From Calvert's MS. Book
of Folklore_.)]

"Get you of the skull the bone part of a gibbetted man so much as one
ounce which you will dry and grind to a powder until when searced it be as
fine as wheatenmeal, this you will put away securely sealed in a glass
vial for seven years. You will then about the coming of the end of that
time (for your cube must be made on the eve of the day come seven years of
his gibbetting) get you together these several matters, all well dried and
powdered and finely searced so much as three barley corns weight of each

Bullock blood.
Moudy [mole] blood.
Great Flitter mouse blood.
Wild Dove blood.
Hag-worm head.
Toade heart.
Crab eyes.
Graveyard moss and worms.

These being all gotten together on the eve of that day make a stiff dough
of wheaten meal to the which you will add all the other powders working
them to a stiff mass and into cubes of one inch square, to be pressed to a
hollow, then they are to be set away to dry in a warm place for seven
months to the day when with a sharp screever you shall deeply screeve the
like of these upon each side, but be you mindful to screeve in the order
as here ordered always turning the cube over and towards the left hand,
the fifth side by turning the cube towards you, the sixth from you and
thus you make your magic cube."

"The proper way to draw the virtue from and read a forecast with such
cubes," says Calvert, "as yet I know not, but I learn that one Jane
Craggs, a mantu maker of Helmsley, not only owns a cube but does at times
play the craft for the entertainment of her lady visitors who wish their
fortunes casting. I learn from Betty [Ellis] that these cubes were tossed
upon the table and then used by the consultation of a book like unto that
of the witche's garter but this book Betty kens nothing of its
whereabouts. She aims one of her grandchilder must have gone off with it."

In the chapter devoted to Tudor times I have given an Elizabethan cure for
an "ill caste" by a witch, but Calvert also tells us of a method for
removing the spell from a "witch-held" house. "Of one thing I hear," he
says, "which be minded unto this present day the which be that a bunch of
yarrow gathered from off a grave and be cast within a sheet that hath
covered the dead and this be setten fire to and cast within the door of
any house thought to be witch held or having gotten upon it a spell of
ill-luck, it shall be at once cleansed from whatsoever ill there be come
again it as I hear even fevers and the like are on the instant driven
forth. And this," he quaintly adds, "be worth while of a trial."

Of the awesome sights to be seen at night time Calvert gives many details.

"There be over anenst Cropton towards Westwood seen now and again at times
wide asunder a man rushing fra those happening to cross his road with
flaming mouth and having empty eye sockets, a truly terrible apparition
for to come across of a sudden.

"At Bog Hall at times there is seen a plain specter of a man in bright
armour who doth show himself thus apparrelled both on the landing and in a
certain room.

"At that point where the Hodge and Dove mix their waters there is to be
seen on Hallow Een a lovely maiden robed in white and having long golden
hair down about her waist there standing with her bare arm thrown about
her companion's neck which is a most lovely white doe, but she allowed
none to come near to her.

"To the west of Brown Howe and standing by a boulder there be seen of a
summer's eve a maiden there seated a-combing out her jet black tresses so
as to hide her bare breast and shoulders, she looking to be much shamed to
there do her toilet.

"And at the high end of Carlton anenst Helmsley there be seen at times a
lovely maiden much afrighted galopping for very life oft casting her een
behind her."

[Illustration: A SCENE IN NEWTON DALE WHEN THE COACH RAILWAY BETWEEN
PICKERING AND WHITBY WAS IN USE IN 1836. (_From Belcher's book on the
Pickering and Whitby Railway, 1836_.)]

Concerning the existence of this lovely maiden we have indisputable
evidence given us, for Calvert says that in the year 1762 "Jim Shepherd o'
Reskelf seed the maiden galloping."

Then there was the figure of "Sarkless Kitty"; but this spectre, we are
told, "having been public laid will now be seen never again and has the
very mention of her name be now a thing forbid by all it must soon come to
pass that the memory of this lewd hussey will be entire forgot and it of a
truth be better so."

But this only rouses one's curiosity, for the spectre must have been
surpassingly terrible to require the suppression of its very name.

It was in August in the year 1807 or 1809 (the manuscript is too much
soiled to be sure of the last figure) that either the Vicar of Lastingham
or his curate-in-charge publicly laid this spirit, which had for many
years haunted the wath or ford crossing the river Dove where it runs at no
great distance from Grouse Hall.

The ceremony was performed at the request of the whole countryside for
there was a widespread outcry over the last victim. He was a farmer's son
who, having spent the evening with his betrothed, was riding homewards
somewhat late, but he never reached his house. On the next day his cob was
found quietly grazing near the dead body of its master lying near the
ford. There were no signs of a struggle having taken place, there were no
wounds or marks upon the body, and his watch and money had not been
touched, so every one concluded that he had seen Sarkless Kitty.

In the year 1770 the ford "had come to be of such ill repute that men
feared to cross after dark and women refused to be taken that way,"
although as far as is known it was only men who came to harm from seeing
Sarkless Kitty. The apparition was that of an exceedingly lovely girl who
appeared "as a nude figure standing upon the opposite bank to that of the
approaching wayfarer." Her beauty was so remarkable that those who had the
ill-luck to come across the spectre could not refrain from gazing at it,
and all who did so were believed to have died either at the same moment or
soon afterwards.

Calvert, however, tells us that one Roland Burdon, who possessed a "Holy
Seal," came face to face with Sarkless Kitty, but fortified by its virtues
he survived the vision; then he adds: "This same Roland did slay in single
combat the great worm or Dragon which at one time did infest Beck Hole to
the loss of many young maidens the which it did at sundry times devour. He
slew it after a fierce battle lasting over half a day throw the great
power of the Holy Seal being about his person. This worm did also infest
Sneaton Moor."

If we are to believe anything at all of this prodigious story we must
place it among those which have been handed down from the time of the
Danes and have become somewhat confused with later superstitions.

Coming back to the story of the beautiful spectre we find that in 1782 a
certain Thomas Botran wrote down all the information he could find out in
his time concerning the story of Sarkless Kitty, and Mr Blakeborough has
added to it everything else that he has discovered relating to it.

It seems that there lived near Lastingham towards the close of the
seventeenth century a girl named Kitty Coglan whose beauty was so
remarkable that "folk at divers times come much out of their way in the
pleasant hope of a chance for to look upon the sweetness of her face." She
was, however, extremely vain, and her mother seems to have heard stories
of her bad conduct, for she began to worry herself over her daughter's
behaviour. Having had a curious dream she asked Takky Burton, the wise man
of Lastingham, to tell her what it meant. He told her that the wonderful
gem of her dream was her daughter Kitty, who like the gem had blemishes
beneath the surface. Soon after this Kitty married the only son of a small
farmer, but after they had lived together about four months he
disappeared, and then Kitty seems to have gone from bad to worse. How long
after this it was that the tragedy occurred is not known, but one day
Kitty's naked dead body was found by the wath that her spirit afterwards
haunted.

Two other stories that were at one time well known in the neighbourhood of
Pickering must be mentioned. One feature of these old time legends is very
noticeable, that is, how each ends with a moral usually of virtue
overcoming vice. This was probably in some instances a new touch of colour
given to the stories during the time when a religious wave swept over the
dales.

"The White Cow of Wardle Rigg" is a good example of an old time legend,
that owing to a natural process of alteration became gradually fitted to
the beliefs and superstitions of each age in which it was told. How the
story came to be localised is not known, but in its last phase it had
reached this form.

Once an old couple lived near to Wardle Rigg, and bad seasons and other
misfortunes had brought the wolf very near to their door. One night there
passed by the humble cottage a little old lady driving along a thin and
hungry looking white cow, she craved a crust and a drink of water for
herself and shelter for the poor beast, this was readily granted by the
old couple, they gave the old lady the easy-chair by the fire, and gave
her of the best from their poor larder. She learnt from them how poor they
were, and sorrowed with them.

In the middle of the night she called to them, as she stole silently out
of the house, that for their kindness she left them all the worldly
possessions she had, namely her white cow. This they were in no wise
grateful for, because they could scarcely afford to feed it and it was too
poor to sell or to hope to draw a drop of milk from.

But in the morning what was their surprise to find not a poor three parts
starved cow, but a plump well fed animal, and with a bag full of milk, it
indeed gave more milk than any cow they had ever known or heard of, their
hay had also during the night grown to be quite a huge stack.

It was soon found that their butter was the best in all the dales, and was
sought after far and wide, so that the old people were gradually filling
their stocking with money. Added to this it was presently discovered that
all who drank of the white cow's milk were cured, almost instantly, of a
dreadful plague, which in the dales at that time was sending many young
folk to an early grave. The fame of this wonderful cow soon spread. The
old couple had given the milk to all those who fell ill of the plague, and
people came to them from far off places.

It was then that their landlord determined by wicked arts to gain
possession of this wonderful white cow, and sell the milk at a great
price. His own child, his youngest daughter, falling ill of the plague
determined him to carry out his evil design, and it was with sorrow and
tears that the old folk watched their landlord lead their cow away.

When half way over the moor he was met by an old dame, "Where drivest thou
my cow?" she demanded. Getting but a surly reply, and a threat to drive
over her, she cried, "Let me teach thee how to milk my cow." So saying she
seized hold of the cow's udder, crying out, "There's death in thee,
there's death in thee," and then ran away. The landlord on reaching home
was taking a cupful of the magic milk to his daughter, but setting it down
for a moment a cat unseen commenced to lap from the cup and died
instantly. The landlord then saw that in his greed he had outwitted
himself. The good dame was brought to milk it under a promise of
restoration, and all ended well.

The other story is known as "The Legend of Elphi." Elphi the Farndale
dwarf was doubtless at one time the central figure of many a fireside
story and Elphi's mother was almost equally famous. The most tragic story
in which they both play their leading parts is that of Golpha the bad
Baron of Lastingham and his wicked wife. The mother helped in hiding some
one Golpha wished to torture. In his rage he seized the mother, and
sentenced her to be burnt upon the moor above Lastingham.

Elphi to save his mother, called to his aid thousands of dragon-flies, and
bade them carry the news far and wide, and tell the fierce adders, the
ants, the hornets, the wasps and the weasels, to hurry early next day to
the scene of his mother's execution and rescue her. Next morning when the
wicked Golpha, his wife, and their friends gathered about the stake and
taunted the old dame, they were set upon and killed, suffering great
agonies. But Elphi and his mother were also credited with all the power of
those gifted with a full knowledge of white magic, and their lives seem to
have been spent in succouring the weak. Mr Blakeborough tells me that the
remembrance of these two is now practically forgotten, for after most
careful enquiry during the last two years throughout the greater part of
Farndale, only one individual has been met with who remembered hearing of
this once widely known dwarf.

The hob-men who were to be found in various spots in Yorkshire were fairly
numerous around Pickering. There seem to have been two types, the kindly
ones, such as the hob of Hob Hole in Runswick Bay who used to cure
children of whooping-cough, and also the malicious ones. Calvert gives a
long list of hobs but does not give any idea of their disposition.

Lealholm Hob.
Hob o' Trush.
T'Hob o' Hobgarth,
Cross Hob o' Lastingham.
Farndale Hob o' High Farndale.
Some hold Elphi to have been a hob of Low Farndale.
T'Hob of Stockdale.
Scugdale Hob.
Hodge Hob o' Bransdale.
Woot Howe Hob.
T'Hob o' Brackken Howe.
T'Hob o' Stummer Howe.
T'Hob o' Tarn Hole.
Hob o' Ankness.
Dale Town Hob o' Hawnby.
T'Hob o' Orterley.
Crookelby Hob.
Hob o' Hasty Bank.
T'Hob o' Chop Gate.
Blea Hob.
T'Hob o' Broca.
T'Hob o' Rye Rigg.
Goathland Hob o' Howl Moor.
T'Hob o' Egton High Moor.

The Hob of Lastingham was presumably named after the cross above the
village, and not on account of his disposition.

Elphi we have seen had an excellent reputation and some eulogistic verses
on him, written in a "cook book" and signed J.L., 1699, give further
evidence of his good character.

Elphi bandy legs,               Elphi little chap,
Bent an wide apart,             Thoff he war so small
Neea yan i, this deeal [dale],  War big wi deeds o' kindness,
Awns a kinder heart.            Drink tiv him yan an all.
Elphi great heead               Him at fails ti drain dry,
Greatest ivver seen.            Be it mug or glass
Neea yan i' this deeal          Binnot woth a pescod
Awns a breeter een.             Nor a buss fra onny lass.

About the middle of the eighteenth century the people of Cropton were
sadly troubled by "a company of evil water elves having their abode in a
certain deep spring at the high end of that village," and in order to rid
themselves of the sprites, a most heathen ceremony was conducted at the
spring, "three wenches" taking a prominent part in the proceedings which
are quite unprintable.

[Illustration: RELICS OF WITCHCRAFT FOUND IN THE NEIGHBOURHOOD OF
PICKERING.

The little figure shown in the centre is made of pitch, beeswax, bullock's
blood, hog's lard, and fat from a bullock's heart. It was used for casting
spells or people, the pin being stuck in the figure wherever the
"ill-cast" was required to fall. The magic cube and ring are made of
similar ingredients to the figure. The sigils or charms are made of lead.
]

Belief in the power of the witches and wise men was universal, and youths
and maidens applied to the nearest witch in all their love affairs. The
magic cube, the witches' garter, leaden charms known as sigils, and the
crystal were constantly in use to secure luck, to ward off evil and to
read the future.

One of the witches was believed to have fallen out with the Devil for,
says Calvert, "John Blades, ironmonger of Kirby Moorside, tells me he well
minds hearing of a despert fierce fight which on a time did happen between
ye Devil and an old witch over their dues, over anenst Yaud Wath (ford)
and whilst they did so fight, one by stealth did slip himself over and in
that wise did for ever break her spell."

I am able to give an illustration of one of the figures made by a witch of
these parts for causing some bodily injury to happen to her client's
enemy. The custom was a common one in the circles of witchcraft. A youth
having a rival for the hand of some attractive maiden and wishing him
every imaginary evil he would apply to "Aud Mother Migg" or one of the
other hags of the neighbourhood and explaining his position the witch
would prepare a small figure of the rival. The ingredients would be of the
same class as the magic cube already fully described (generally pitch,
beeswax, hog's lard, bullock's blood, and fat from a bullock's heart), and
in order to cause his rival to lose an eye, or to go lame, or deaf, or to
have any particular complaint in any particular part of his body the
jealous lover had merely to stick a pin in that portion of the little
brown figure. The ceremony was elaborate, especially in regard to the
disposal of that part of the mixture not used to make the figure, for in
every case the cunning old women worked on the imaginations of their
dupes. There can be no doubt that the morals of the country folk during
the eighteenth century were at an exceedingly low ebb. The practice of
compelling girls who had misconducted themselves to stand in church for
three Sundays was only given up at Pickering in the first quarter of the
nineteenth century. Calvert describes how the miserable girl was first
required to go before the parson or the squire or anyone of the "quality"
to name the child's father, and "be otherwise questioned, and if it so
happened that the squire was one of the hard-drinking class it was more
than likely that he came well on in his cups. If so it would be more like
than otherwise that he would put the lass and all present to shame by the
coarse ... questions he would ask the poor wench. I have heard shame cried
aloud myself by those who then came together.

"On the Sunday when the poor lass had to do her first penance it was in
this wise--She had to walk from her home to the church porch with a soiled
white sheet cast over her head to her feet, and there stand from the
ringing of the first bell calling to morning prayer, and as the good folk
did so pass her to ask of them for to pray for her soul and forgiveness of
her great sin and frailty; and thither did she have to stand until the
parson, after the reading of the morning prayer, did go to her and bring
her into the church with the psalm of _miserere mei_ which he shall sing
or say in English. Then shall he put her before all those present, but
apart from them, when he shall publicly call upon her to confess her fault
which, be she a single wench she did say aloud, 'wherefore I ... putting
aside my maiden duty to Almighty God have yielded unto the vile sin of
fornication with ... who is the true father of my child, may Almighty God
forgive me my sin.' But be it a wedded woman then she shall stand
bareheaded and barelegged, and instead of fornication she shall say the
word adultery, she being nobbut covered with a sheet from the shoulders.
At this day (1824) I cannot but say I am glad to say that there be a good
feeling abroad for its abolishment, indeed, there be in many places so
strong a feeling again this way of judging our daughters for a fault of
this kind that they have bidden the clergy to set their faces against any
lass ever being so judged, and though our clergy be in the main but a
despert reckless lot, I hear that mostly they are of the same mind as
those they do hold as their flock. Indeed, at one village not far from
here a father set his back against his lass standing at the church, though
she had been so judged to do, and the whole of thereabouts siding with the
lass it was held by the parson and his fox-chasing, wine-bibbing crew for
to pull in their tongues a piece which they most wisely did, or, for a
truth, they would have found themselves astride of the wrong horse. It is
now time this shameful practice was for ever laid on one side for it be
not for the good of our own daughters that they witness such sights even
in a place called God's house, but it oft be ought but that to our shame
and the greater shame of all who hold its government of it. I could here
give you a good list of curious cases of the which for the most part I did
witness myself of both the hearing and of the standing of both many wed
and single so browten to public shame, but as it would be to no good
purpose I will hold from the putting pen to paper in this matter, letting
what hath been wrote end this matter, for of a truth it is to a better
purpose that both pen, ink, paunce box and paper, can be putten."
Concerning the innumerable customs and superstitions associated with the
dead and dying, Calvert collected a number of interesting facts. "It be
held by many," he writes, "that a dying body cannot quit this life if they
do be lying upon a bed which happen to have pigeon feathers gotten in by
chance.

"A body cannot get their time over with ease to themselves if there be one
in the room who will not give them up. It be better for all such who
cannot bring themselves to part with those they love to withdraw from the
room so that death may enter and claim his rights.

"It be held to be a sure sign that an ailing body will die if there be a
downcome of soot.

"It be also a sure sign that death be awaiting for his own if an ullot
[owlet] do thrice hoot so that the ailing one do hear it and remark
thereon.

"It be an ill sign if a death glow be seen to settle upon the face of an
ailing one or if such cry out they do see a shroud o' the quilt.

"If there be a death watch heard, then the ailing one need not longer hold
on to hope, for it be for that time gone from that house and will not
enter again until a corpse be hugged out.

"It be an ill sign to the dying if a dark winged moth make at the bed
light and fall at it, but it be a good sign should a light winged one come
thrice and go its way unharmed. Even if it do fall at it, it doth say
nothing worse than the ailing one will soon die but that the death shall
be the freeing of a happy soul.

"An ailing one shall surely die if a dog come and howl thrice under the
window.

"It be a good sign of peace to a parting soul if there do come near to the
window a white dove.

"It be the custom as soon as death doth enter the chamber for one present
to immediate rake out the fire, turn the seeing glass to the wall and on
the instant stop the clock, but this stopping of the clock in the
death-room be not at all places a common practise. After the boddy hath
been attended to in all its proper officies it be a good sign if the eyes
do shut of themselves, if not then but a few years sen it was held to be
the work of some evil spirits in some cases owing to a misspent life. In
those days it was the common thing for to get or borrow a pair of leaden
sigs (charms) from some wise dame or good neighbour, the like of those
made by Betty Strother and others wise in such matters. They being magic
made did ward off not only from about the bed but from the room itself all
the deamons of every sort and kind and did hold the een fast shutten so
that neither witch or hellspell could get aback of their power and cungel
them open again.

"Many there be who yet do grace their dead with a salt platter putten upon
the breast of the corpse, and all those friends who do view the dead and
it be the common custom for all so to do, do first touch the corpse on the
face or hands and then lay their own hands upon the platter first having
full and free forgiven the dead any fault or ill-feeling they had in life
held as a grudge again the dead.

"In some spots it is a common thing for the wake wail to be sung over the
boddy each night it be in the house as also for a rushlight to be kept
alight from sunset to sunrise and for the death watchers for to tend the
dead throw the night owther in the same room or in one so held that those
watching could see the corpse, and they due at this day deggle the quilt
and floor with rue water.

"It be always most carefull seen to that no four-footed thing come nigh
hand, for it would be a despert ill thing if such by any mishap did run
just across or loup over the corpse.

"There be always a great arval feast after the funeral to which all
friends are bidden."

The remedies of this period were not greatly superior to those of the
seventeenth century if one may judge from the gruesome concoction the
details of which were given to Calvert by William Ness of Kirby Moorside.

"For the certain cure of a cancer take a pound of brown honey when the
bees be sad from a death in ye house, which you shall take from the hive
just turned of midnight at the full of the moon. This you shall set by for
seven days when on that day you shall add to it the following all being
ready prepared afore. One ounce of powdered crabs clawes well searced,
seven oyster shells well burnt in a covered stone or hard clay pot, using
only the white part thereof. One dozen snails and shells dried while they
do powder with gently rubbing and the powder of dried earth worms from the
churchyard when the moon be on the increase but overcast, which you will
gather by lanthorn which you must be sure not to let go out while you be
yet within the gate or there virtue be gone from them. All these make into
a fine powder and well searce, this been ready melt the honey till it
simmer then add three ounces each of brown wax, rossin, and grease of a
fat pigg, and when all be come at the boil divide your powders to seven
heaps and add one at a time. Do not shake your paper on which the powder
hath been put but fold it carefully and hurry it at some grave as there be
among what be left some dust of ye wormes which have fed upon ye dead. So
boil it till all be well mixed and then let cool and if it be too stiff
add swine grease till it work easy. When you would use it warm a little in
a silver spoon and annoint the sore holding a hot iron over till it be
nearly all soaked in, then sprinkle but a little finely doubled searced
powder of viper where there be matter. This hath been tried many times and
on different folk in these dales and hath done wonderous cures when all
else failed them. And these words wrate on lambs skin with lambs blood and
hung above the ill one's head hath wrought a most magick wonders of
healing and some I do find ready to take oath on it. I leave it so."

But Pickering was not very much behind the rest of England when we
discover that in the second edition of "A collection of above 300 receipts
in Cookery, Physick and Surgery" published in 1719, and printed and sold
in London is given the following:--

"A _very good_ snail-water _for a_ consumption. Take half a peck of
Shell-snails, wipe them and bruise them Shells and all in a Mortar; put to
them a gallon of New Milk; as also Balm, Mint, Carduus, unset Hyssop, and
Burrage, of each one handful; Raisons of the Sun stoned, Figs, and Dates,
of each a quarter of a pound; two large Nutmegs: Slice all these, and put
them to the Milk, and distil it with a quick fire in a cold Still; this
will yield near four Wine-quarts of Water very good; you must put two
ounces of White Sugar-candy into each Bottle, and let the Water drop on it;
stir the Herbs sometimes while it distils, and keep it cover'd on the
Head with wet Cloths. Take five spoonfuls at a time, first and last, and
at Four in the Afternoon."

It was only about eighty years ago that the old custom of racing for the
bride's garter on wedding days was given up. In the early years of last
century an improvement in public morals showed itself in a frequently
expressed opinion that the custom was immodest, and gradually the practice
was dropped the bride merely handing a ribbon to the winner of the race.

[Illustration: A LOVE GARTER, DATED 1749.

The spaces were for the initials of the wearer of the garter and her
betrothed. These garters were raced for on wedding days, the winner of the
race being allowed to take the bride's garter.
]

Immediately after the wedding-ring had been put on, the youths of the
company would race from the church porch to the bride's house, and the
first who arrived claimed the right of removing the garter from her left
leg, the bride raising her skirts to allow him to do so. He would
afterwards tie it round his own sweetheart's leg as a love charm against
unfaithfulness. The bridegroom never took part in the race, but anyone
else could enter, runners often coming from distant villages to take part.

At the time of the outcry against the custom it is interesting to find
one, William Denis of Pickering, writing to a friend and stating that
"this racing for the bride's garter and the taking of the same from the
leg of the bride, is one of the properest public functions we have so far
as modesty is concerned."

Elaborately worked garters were worn "by any lass who would be happy in
her love." The one illustrated here is drawn from a sketch given by
Calvert. It bears the date 1749 and the two spaces were for the initials
of the lovers.

A Pickering man named Tom Reid who was living in 1800 but was an old man
then, was in his day a noted runner and won many races. He must have owned
several of these garters which are now so difficult to find. It is said
that one of the vicars of Pickering did much to put an end to the belief
in the powers of the garters as charms, collecting them whenever he had an
opportunity. He also put his foot down on every form of superstition,
forbidding the old folk to tell their stories.

The village maidens considered it a most binding vow to remain true to
their sweethearts if they washed their garters in St Cedd's Well at
Lastingham on the eve of St Agnes. Other practices performed at the same
spot are, like the spectre of Sarkless Kitty, better forgotten.

There can be little doubt that the death blow to this mass of ignorant
superstition came with the religious revival brought about by the
Methodists. Despite the hostile reception they had in many places the
example of their Christian behaviour made itself felt, and as the years
went by parents became sufficiently ashamed of their old beliefs to give
up telling them to their children. This change took place between about
1800 and 1840, but the influences that lay behind it date from the days of
John Wesley.

The sports common in the early part of last century include:--

Fox-hunting.
Badger-drawing.
Duck hunting with dogs and sometimes duck and owl diving.
Cock-fighting.
Cock-throwing at Eastertide.
Bull baiting and sometimes ass baiting.
Squirrel-hunting.
Rat-worrying.

"To make it quite sure to you howe greatly cocking was in voge seventy
years agone," says Calvert, "I have heard my own grandfather tell how he
and others did match their cocks and fight em for secret sake in the crypt
of Lastingham Church."

The entrance to the crypt was not at that time in the centre of the nave,
and the fact that it could be reached from the north side without going
into the church would make the desecration seem a far less scandalous
proceeding than it sounds.

It has also been supposed that Mr Carter, curate-in-charge of Lastingham
at a time prior to 1806, allowed his wife to keep a public-house in the
crypt. There is only one authentic account[1] of this parson-publican as
far as I have been able to discover and although it makes no mention of
the crypt it states that Mr Carter used to take _down_ his violin to play
the people a few tunes. If this did not indicate the crypt it may have
meant that he took his violin down from the vicarage to the inn, which may
have been the "Blacksmith's Arms" that adjoins the churchyard on the east
side. The parlour is certainly a much more cheerful place for refreshment
than the dark and chilly crypt, and it is interesting to find that the
benches in the inn are composed of panelling which I am told was formerly
in the church.

[Footnote 1: Anonymous booklet entitled "Anecdotes and Manners of a few
Ancient and Modern oddities, etc." Published at York, 1806.]

As the whole idea of the parson's wife conducting a public-house is
somewhat preposterous, although we have already been told that the clergy
at that time were on the whole "a despert reckless lot," it is interesting
to read the original account. "The Rev. Mr Carter, when curate of
Lastingham," it says, "had a very large family, with only a small income
to support them, and therefore often had recourse to many innocent
alternatives to augment it; and as the best of men have their enemies--too
often more than the worst, he was represented to the Archdeacon by an
invidious neighbour, as a very disorderly character, particularly by
keeping a public-house, with the consequences resulting from it. The
Archdeacon was a very humane, worthy, good man who had imbibed the
principles, not only of a parson, but of a Divine, and therefore treated
such calumniating insinuations against his subordinate brethren, with that
contempt which would ultimately accrue to the satisfaction and advantage
to such as listen to a set of sycophantic tattlers. ...therefore at the
ensuing visitation, when the business of the day was over, he in a very
delicate and candid manner, interrogated Mr C. as to his means of
supporting so numerous a family ... which was answered as related to me by
one well acquainted with the parties, in nearly the following words:--

"'I have a wife and thirteen children, and with a stipend of £20 per
annum, increased only by a few trifling surplice fees, I will not impose
upon your understanding by attempting to advance any argument to show the
impossibility of us all being supported from my church preferment: But I
am fortunate enough to live in a neighbourhood where there are many
rivulets which abound with fish, and being particularly partial to
angling, I am frequently so successful as to catch more than my family can
consume while good, of which I make presents to the neighbouring gentry,
all of whom are so generously grateful as to requite me with something
else of seldom less value than two or threefold.--This is not all: my wife
keeps a Public-House, and as my parish is so wide that some of my
parishioners have to come from ten to fifteen miles to church, you will
readily allow that some refreshment before they return must occasionally
be necessary, and where can they have it more properly than where their
journey is half performed? Now, sir, from your general knowledge of the
world, I make no doubt but you are well assured that the most general
topicks, in conversation at Public-Houses, are Politics and Religion, with
which, God knows, ninety-nine out of one hundred of those who participate
in the general clamour are totally unacquainted; and that perpetually
ringing in the ears of a Pastor, who has the welfare and happiness of his
flock at heart, must be no small mortification. To divert their attention
from those foibles over their cups, I take down my violin and play them a
few tunes, which gives me an opportunity of seeing that they get no more
liquor than necessary for refreshment; and if the young people propose a
dance I seldom answer in the negative; nevertheless when I announce it
time for their return they are ever ready to obey my commands, and
generally with the donation of sixpence, they shake hands with my
children, and bid God bless them.--Thus my parishioners derive a triple
advantage, being instructed, fed and amused at the same time: moreover,
this method of spending their Sundays being so congenial with their
inclinations, that they are imperceptibly led along the path of piety and
morality ...'" with many other arguments Mr Carter supported his case so
that "the Archdeacon very candidly acknowledged the propriety of Mr C.'s
arguments in defence of his conduct, and complimented him on his
discernment in using the most convenient vehicle for instruction."

Concerning a case of bear-baiting we have a most detailed account which
Calvert heads with "The Baiting of a Bear at Pickering, Tuesday, Aug.
15th, 1809, which I did myself witness." Then he begins: "A week Wednesday
senight there did with drum and pan pipes parade publickly the streets of
this town two mountebanks leading by a chain a monster brown bruin which,
as well as it being a good dancer and handing of its pole, its master did
aclaim it to be the master of any dog of no odds what be its breed and
which they would match for a crown to come off conqueror if given fair
play and a fifteen-foot chain. Now it happening that in these parts there
be living several sporting men some of which be owners of bull dogs of
good courage and nowther dog nor master ever shirking a fight more than
one dog was entered for to test its skill."

A day was fixed for the contests which were to take place in the
castleyard, and soon the news was so handed from mouth to mouth that the
demand for seats in the rough wooden stand, erected for those who chose to
pay, was so great that another stand was built and the first one was
enlarged.

On the appointed day a huge concourse including "farmers, butchers,
hucksters, badgers, cadgers, horse-jobbers, drovers, loafers and scamps
and raggels of all kinds" assembled in the castleyard.

There were "not a few young sparks and bespurred and beruffled bucks come
thither from as far as Hull" who had brought with them certain overdressed
women.

The first dog matched against the bear was owned by one Castle Jack "a
worthless waistrel." The bear received the rush of the dog standing on his
hind legs and gripped him in his forepaws, biting and crushing him to
death. After this no one seemed inclined to let their dogs go to such
certain death and the assemblage gradually became disorderly and many
quarrels and fights took place before the crowd finally dispersed.

Calvert says, "and so when I did withdraw myself, the whole crowd seemed
to be owther cursing, fighting, or loudly proffering for to fight any one.
As I took my steps back to my uncle I could not help but consider that
those of the Methodist holding, who did as we went towards the green [at
the west end of the market-place] beg and pray of us to be mindfull of our
sinfull pleasures and of the wroth to come and who did pray us to then
turn from our sinfull course, and though we who did pass them did so with
scoffs and ... gibes in some cases, yet I could not help but in my heart
consider that they were fully in the right on't."

There is a remarkable story recorded of the fatal result of hunting a
black-brushed fox found at Sinnington. It was on Thursday, January 13th,
1803, that "a black-brush'd fox was setten up at the high side of
Sinnington. Some there were who left the hounds the instant they seed the
colour of its brush for they minded that one who lived in those parts over
a hundred years agone and who was held to be wise in dark things had owned
a black-brushed reynard as a companion and which being on the moor on a
time when hounds came that way they gave chace and presently killed, w^ch
did so vex the wise dame that she was heard to cast a curse upon all those
who should ever after give chace to one of its offspring and it hath being
noted that by times when there be a black brush and it do be hunted that
it is never catched and there be always some ill fall upon him who does
first clap eyes on't and set the hounds on its scent. On this very day did
some then present give chace and followed for ower three good hours while
baith men, horses and hounds were all dead beat and just when they did aim
for to claim its brush one Holliday fell from his horse and brake his
neck, and he it was who had first set een on't. They were then close upon
Chop Yatt ower forty mile by the course they had run. It was then brought
to mind that one Blades a score years afore had been suddenly called to
account on the same venture.

"One verse of an old hunting ditty which tells a tale of four bold riders
who came by their death ower a cragg afollowing one of this same breed
many years agone now, it tells in this wise:--

"Draw rein and think, bold hunter halt,
Sly Reynard let go free,
To ride ahint yon full black brush
Means death to you or me.
No luck can come so get you home
And there tie up your steed,
Yon black brush is ye devil wand
It scents ye grave to feed."

The Sinnington hounds have long been famous in the North Riding, and their
history goes back to the earliest days of fox-hunting in these parts. The
Bilsdale being the only pack that claims an earlier origin. William
Marshall, the agricultural writer (mentioned a few pages further on),
hunted with the Sinnington pack for many years, and Jack Parker, huntsman
of last century, was a very notable character whose witty anecdotes are
still remembered. The silver-mounted horn illustrated here bearing the
inscription "Sinnington Hunt 1750" is preserved at Pickering. Until about
twenty-five years ago the pack was "trencher fed," the hounds being
scattered about in twos and threes at the various farms and houses in the
neighbourhood. The kennels are now at Kirby Moorside.

[Illustration: THE OLD HORN OF THE SINNINGTON HUNT. It is dated 1750 on
one of the silver bands.] A curious "Dandy Horse" race was held at
Pickering on June 22, 1813. Calvert describing it in his quaint way says:
"On this day, Tuesday, June 22, 1813, Robert Kitching, Hungate, Pickering
and S. Hutchinson of Helmsley, did bring off the wager they had laid of
ten guineas apiece for their men to race from Pickering to Helmsley
astride each of his master's dandy horse, which is a machine having two
wheels in a line afixed with forks to a support beam upon which there
resteth a saddle so high from the ground that the rider hath a grip on the
ground, for it be by the pressure of the foot upon the ground that this
new horse is shoved along, there be also a handle to hold by with a soft
pad, this is for to rest the chest against as to gain a greater grip with
the feet, the two Gladiators started fair away at ten of the clock, there
been then come together from all parts upwards it was held of two thousand
people, many on horseback arriving for to see this novel race from start
to finish." However, when the opponents had covered about half the
distance, one of them overstrained himself and gave up and the other
admitted that "he was ommaist at the far end" so that the crowd assembled
at Helmsley to see the finish waited in vain for the riders.

Although Pickering is several miles from the sea some of the more
important people of the town were for many years closely interested in the
whaling industry. It was about the year 1775, that Mr Nicholas Piper and
some of his friends made a bold financial venture in the purchase of the
_Henrietta_ which became in time one of the most successful Greenland
whalers sailing from the port of Whitby. Some of the ship's logs and also
an account book are preserved by Mr Loy at Keld Head Hall, and from them I
have been able to obtain some interesting facts. For a year or two the
ship yielded no profits, but in 1777 there was a sum of £640 to be divided
between the partners in the enterprise. Gradually the profits increased
until they produced an annual total of about £2000.

Some of the entries in the account book are curious. These are some of the
items in the preliminary expenses:--

"Jowsey's Bill for harpoon stocks and seal clubs,   £3  2  8
To ye master to get hands in Shetland,              21  0  0
To ye sailors to drink as customary ye first
  voyage,                                            1  1  0
A crimp shipping seamen,                             0  6  0

Then in 1776 comes:--

"By ye crimp's bill Sept. ye 20th,                 225  0  6

Each voyage meant an advantage to Pickering, for it supplied the salt pork
for the sailors. These are some of the entries:--

"1776. Paid for piggs at Pickering,                     £65   5  0
 1777.   Do.   do.                                       59  19  6
       Tom Dobson for carriage of do.,                    1  11  0
       Window broke by firing a signal gun for
         sailing,                                         0   4  6
1778.  Cheeses at Pickering,                            £ 2  10  9
       Paid for Piggs at Pickering,                      55  14  5
       Tom Dobson for carriage of piggs,                  1   3  0
1779.  James Gray's lodging ashore time of ye smallpox,   0  15  0
       Paid for piggs at Pickering,                      51   2  0
       Paid at Saltergate for boys eating, etc.,          0   4  6

[Illustration: A Typical Cottage of the Oldest Type.

This is at Hutton Buscel. The small window lighting the ingle-nook is
invariably in this position in the oldest cottages, and the recess and the
carved oak cupboard door are usually to be found in the wall as in the
illustration. In this, as in most of the cottages, a kitchen range has
taken the place of the open hearth.
]

One imagines that these boys were in charge of the pigs. But they must
have been pork by that time for the next entry is:--

"To Tom Dobson for carriage of pork,                    £1  16  0

and another entry mentions that it was packed in barrels at Pickering.

"1780. Grundall Saltergate for lads eating, etc.,       £0  8   6

Then comes a gap of about eight years, several pages having been torn out.

"1789. Robt. Dobson for carriage of pork,               £1  4   0
 1792. Lads at Saltergate as they came home,             0  2   6
 1793. A man coming to Pickering to bring news of
         ship--be ashore,                                0  8   0

This apparently means that a man was sent to Pickering to tell the owners
that the _Henrietta_ had arrived.

"1799. Piggs at Pickering,                            £125  9   8
 1801.     Do.,                                        181  8   8
 1802.     Do.,                                        208  4   6
 1815. Old Tom's expenses, turnpikes at Pickering,       0  6   6

In 1785 when the _Henrietta_ made her annual voyage to the northern seas
she had on board William Scoresby who in five years' time was to become
captain of the vessel. He was the son of a small farmer at Cropton and was
born on the 3rd of May 1760. His parents wished him to keep to
agricultural pursuits and after a very brief education at the village
school he commenced this arduous form of labour at the age of nine. He
kept to this work until he was twenty when he could no longer resist his
longings for a broader sphere of work. To obtain this he went to Whitby
and apprenticed himself to a ship-owner. He acquired a thorough knowledge
of seamanship with great rapidity and in his second year of service at sea
detected an error in the reckoning which would otherwise have caused the
loss of the ship. For this, his only reward was the ill-will of the mate
whose mistake he had exposed. He therefore joined the _Speedwell_ an
ordnance ship carrying stores to Gibraltar but falling in with the Spanish
fleet the _Speedwell_ was captured. Her men having been taken to Cadiz
they were sent inland to San Lucar de Mayor. From that place, through
being somewhat carelessly guarded, Scoresby and one of his companions were
successful in making their escape. They reached England after various
adventures and Scoresby having endured many hardships at sea settled down
again to farm work at Cropton for two years. Although having only the very
smallest means he was married at this time to Lady Mary Smith (she was
born on Lady-day), the eldest daughter of Mr John Smith, a landed
proprietor in a small way and a native of Cropton.

Having reached the position of skipper of the famous _Henrietta_, in 1790,
when only thirty years of age, Scoresby was saved from the financial
extremes to which he was likely to have been reduced, owing to his small
income and the increasing expenses of his family. Having successfully
commanded the _Henrietta_ for seven seasons and having augmented in this
way the incomes of the half-dozen Pickeronians interested in the success
of the ship, Captain Scoresby's reputation stood high in the Greenland
trade. In 1798 he accepted the more advantageous offers of a London firm
to command the _Dundee_. It was on his third voyage in that ship that,
having called at Whitby as usual to say good-bye to his wife and children,
Scoresby allowed his third child, William, to go on board the ship as she
lay in the roads. When the time came for him to go ashore he was nowhere
to be found, for having taken into his head the idea of going the voyage
with his father the little fellow had hidden himself. The shouts for
"Master William," however, brought him to the top of the companion at the
last moment, but his father, understanding the boy's great desire to stay
in the ship, decided to take him.

The voyage was notable on account of a very exciting incident on meeting
with a foreign privateer. The _Dundee_ was armed with twelve guns and was
manned by a crew of between fifty and sixty men, so that if brought to
extremities the ship could have made a good defence. Scoresby, however,
had every reason for avoiding a conflict, so keeping his ship in an
apparently defenceless state, with all the ports closed, he sent the men
to their quarters to prepare the guns for immediate action. No sign of
excitement or commotion was allowed to appear on deck so that when the
privateer came within shouting distance Scoresby walking the quarter deck
and the helmsmen steering were the only living beings visible to the
stranger. Suddenly, however, the six gun ports on each side of the
_Dundee_ are raised and a row of untompioned cannon are seen pointing
towards the enemy's broadside. The stratagem, according to the account
given by the younger Scoresby,[1] was such a huge surprise for the enemy
that he suddenly hauled off under full sail and not a shot was fired on
either side.

[Footnote 1: Scoresby, the Rev. William, D.D., "My Father," p. 108.]

After this voyage young Scoresby went back to school again until 1803 when
he became an apprentice on board the _Resolution_, a new ship of Whitby,
commanded and partly owned by his father. For several years he made the
Greenland voyage in the _Resolution_ and was chief officer when, in the
year 1806, his father forced the ship through the pack ice, as far north
as 81° 3O'. This was for long the highest point reached by any vessel and
the ship's cargo was completed in thirty-two days with twenty-four whales,
two seals, two walruses, two bears and a narwhal. The elder Scoresby who
was about six feet in height was a man of extraordinary muscular power.
His many successful voyages reveal his first-class qualities as a seaman
and navigator and his good judgment in emergencies seems to have been
almost instinctive. Although he is described[1] as an Arctic navigator,
exploration was only incidental to whale-catching, but his inventions of
the ice-drill and the crow's-nest did much to make Arctic voyages more
feasible.

[Footnote 1: "Dictionary of National Biography."]

The versatility of his son William was remarkable, for he may be described
as master mariner, author and divine and even then his varied scientific
knowledge is overlooked. During his latter years he was particularly
interested in magnetism and in 1856 made his last voyage in order to carry
out a series of systematic observations.

His life, written by his nephew R.E. Scoresby-Jackson, is of great
interest and Cropton may well be proud that it gave Dr Scoresby to the
world.

The memory of the _Henrietta_ is not likely to be forgotten so easily as
that of the Scoresbys, for gateposts made from whale jaws are common near
the coast of north eastern Yorkshire, and one on the road from Pickering
to Scarborough, between the villages of Hutton Buscel and East Ayton,
bears the name of the famous ship.

A contemporary of the Scoresbys was John Jackson, R.A. He was the son of a
tailor of Lastingham and was born at that very remote village on the 31st
May 1778. As a boy he showed a predilection for portrait-painting in the
sketches he made of his companions, although his father discouraged his
efforts in that direction, not wishing to lose his boy's services as an
apprentice to the tailoring business. When he was about nineteen he had
the good fortune to be introduced to Lord Mulgrave who brought him to the
notice of the Earl of Carlisle and soon after we find him studying the
great collection of pictures at Castle Howard.

Jackson's first attempt at a painting in oils was a copy of a portrait by
Sir Joshua Reynolds lent to him by Sir George Beaumont. Lastingham was
unable to supply him with proper materials, but he managed to obtain some
very rough paints and brushes from the village house-painter and glazier,
and with these crude materials made such an admirable copy that Sir George
or Lord Mulgrave or both together advised him to go to London, promising
him £50 a year during the time that he was working as a student. From this
time his progress was rapid. In 1804 he exhibited at the Royal Academy for
the first time, in 1815 he was elected an associate and in 1817 he
received the full honours of the Academy. Although he was a Wesleyan
Methodist, Jackson was broad-minded in his religious opinions, for he made
a copy of Correggio's "Christ in the Garden of Gethsemane" (with the
figures increased to life size) for Lastingham parish church. The picture
is now on the north side of the apse but its original position was above
the communion table and in order to give the picture sufficient space and
light the apse of Transitional Norman date was very roughly treated.
Jackson contributed £50 towards the alterations, but the restoration at a
later date has fortunately wiped out these disfigurements.

Another boy destined to become a tailor was Francis Nicholson who was born
at Pickering in 1753. His father, who was a weaver, gave young Francis a
good education in Pickering, and wisely abandoning the tailoring idea the
boy was sent to Scarborough for instruction from an artist. After three
years he returned to Pickering and occupied himself in painting portraits
and pictures of horses, dogs and game for local patrons. Then followed a
period of study in London, where Nicholson made great progress and
eventually began to devote himself to water colours, for which in his long
life he was justly famous, well deserving the name generally given to him
as the "Father of water colour painting."

William Marshall, the agricultural expert and writer to whom we owe the
establishment of the Board of Agriculture was baptised at Sinnington on
28th July 1745. He was in his own words "born a farmer" and used to say
that he could trace his blood through the veins of agriculturists for
upwards of four hundred years. After fourteen years in the West Indies, he
undertook, at the age of twenty-nine, the management of a farm near
Croydon in Surrey. It was there, in 1778, that he wrote his first book. He
showed the manuscript to Dr Johnson who objected to certain passages
sanctioning work on Sundays in harvest time, so Marshall omitted them. His
greatest work was "A General Survey, from personal experience, observation
and enquiry, of the Rural Economy of England."

The country was divided into six agricultural divisions, the northern one
being represented by Yorkshire in two volumes. In the first of these, the
preface is dated from Pickering, December 21st, 1787, and the second
chapter is devoted to an exceedingly interesting account of the broad
valley to which Marshall gives the title "The Vale of Pickering." When he
died in 1818 he was raising a building at Pickering for a College of
Agriculture on the lines he had laid down in a book published in 1799.

His proposal for the establishment of a "Board of Agriculture, or more
generally of Rural Affairs" was carried out by Parliament in 1793, and so
valuable were his books considered that in 1803 most of them were
translated into French and published in Paris under the title of "La
Maison rustique anglaise." The inscription on Marshall's monument in the
north aisle of Pickering church which states that "he was indefatigable in
the study of rural economy" and that "he was an excellent mechanic, had a
considerable knowledge of most branches of science, particularly of
philology, botany and chemistry" is not an over statement of his merits.

[Illustration: The Ingle-Nook in Gallow Hill Farm near Brompton. Where
Wordsworth stayed just at the time of his marriage with Mary Hutchinson.]

In the year 1800 the little farm at Gallow Hill near Brompton was taken by
one Thomas Hutchinson whose sister Mary kept house for him. She was almost
the same age and had been a schoolfellow of the poet Wordsworth at Penrith
and had kept up her friendship with his family since that time, having
visited them at Racedown and Dove Cottage, while the Wordsworths had
stayed at the Hutchinson's farm at Sockburn-on-Tees. There was nothing
sudden or romantic therefore in the marriage which took place at Brompton
in 1802. Wordsworth and his sister Dorothy went down from London to the
pretty Yorkshire village in September, and stayed at the little farmhouse,
whose parlour windows looked across the Vale of Pickering to the steep
wolds on the southern side. The house, as far as I can discover, has not
been altered in the century which has elapsed, and the cosy ingle-nook in
the room on the right of the entrance remains full of memories of the poet
and his betrothed--his "perfect woman, nobly planned." On the fourth of
October the wedding took place in Brompton Church. The grey old steeple
surrounded and overhung by masses of yellow and brown foliage in the
centre of the picturesque, and in many respects, ideal little village,
must have formed a perfect setting for the marriage of one who was
afterwards to become the Poet Laureate of his country. The register for
the years 1754-1810 contains the following entry:--

"_Banns of Marriage_ ...

William Wordsworth of Grasmere in Westmoreland, Gentleman, _and_ Mary
Hutchinson _of_ Gallow Hill in the Parish of Brompton _were married in
this_ Church _by_ Licence _this_ fourth _Day of_ October _in the year one
thousand_ eight _Hundred and_ two _by me_ John Ellis officiating min^r.

This marriage was solemnized between us."

[Illustration: Facsimile of the Signatures in the Register.]

"In the presence of THOMAS HUTCHINSON.
JOANNA HUTCHINSON.
JOHN HUTCHINSON."

The same day Wordsworth with his wife and sister drove to Thirsk and two
days afterwards reached Grasmere, where they soon settled down to an
uneventful life at Dove Cottage. Dorothy Wordsworth could not "describe
what she felt," but we are told that she accepted her sister-in-law
without a trace of jealousy.

There is still preserved in Pickering one of the parchments on which were
enrolled the names of all those who were liable for service in the
militia. It is headed

"Militia Enrollment 1807-8"

and begins:--

"An enrollment of the names of the several persons who have been chosen by
ballot to serve in the Militia for five years for the west part of the
sub-division of Pickering Lyth in the North Riding of the County of York
and also of the several substitutes who have been produced and approved to
serve for the like term and for such further term as the Militia shall
remain embodied, if within the space of five years His Majesty shall order
the Militia to be drawn out and embodied and are enrolled in the place of
such principals whose names are set opposite thereto in pursuance of an
act of the 47th of King George III., Cap. 71, entitled an act for the
speedily completing the Militia of Great Britain and increasing the same
under certain delimitations and restrictions (14th Aug. 1807)."

The thirty-six men were taken as follows:--

 8 from Middleton.
 5  "   Kirby Misperton.
16  "   Pickering.
 1  "   Ellerburne.
 1  "   Levisham.
 3  "   Sinnington.
 1  "   Thornton.

Jonathan Goodall, a farmer of Middleton, induced Geo. Thompson of
Pickering, a farmer's servant, 30 years old, to stand for him, paying him
£42.

Wm. Newton, a farmer of Middleton, had to pay Geo. Allen, a linen draper
of Richmond, £47, 5s. as substitute.

The smallest amount paid was £20, and the largest sum was £47, 5s.

Substitutes seem to have been hard to find in the neighbourhood of
Pickering, and those few whose names appear had to be heavily paid. George
Barnfather, a farm servant of Kirby Misperton agreed to serve as a
substitute on payment of £42, and a cartwright of Goathland agreed for the
same sum, while men from Manchester or Leeds were ready to accept half
that amount.

The extreme reluctance to serve of a certain Ben Wilson, a sweep of
Middleton, is shown in a story told of him by a very old inhabitant of
Pickering whose memory is in no way impaired by her years. She tells us
that this Wilson on hearing of his ill-luck seized a carving-knife and
going to the churchyard put his right hand on a gate-post and fiercely cut
off the two fingers required for firing a rifle. He avoided active service
in this way and often showed his mutilated hand to the countryfolk who may
or may not have admired the deed.

In 1823 Pickering was kept in touch with Whitby, York and Scarborough by
coaches that ran three times a week. On Monday, Wednesday and Friday a
coach (Royal Mail) left the "Black Swan" in the market place for Whitby at
the painfully early hour of four o'clock in the morning; another Royal
Mail left Pickering for York at half-past three in the afternoon on
Sunday, Tuesday and Thursday. The stages were from

Whitby to Saltergate.
Saltergate to Pickering.
Pickering to Malton.
Malton to Spital Beck.
Spital Beck to York.

There was also what was called the "Boat Coach" that ran between Pickering
and Scarborough.

One of the last drivers of these coaches became a guard on the North
Eastern Railway, and he still lives in Pickering at the time of writing.

The parish chest in the vestry of Pickering Church contains among other
papers a number of apprenticeship deeds of a hundred to a hundred and
fifty years ago, in which the master promises that he will educate the boy
and "bring him up in some honest and lawful calling and in the fear of
God," and in most cases to provide him with a suit of clothes at the
completion of his term, generally at the age of twenty-one years.

The odd papers registering the arrival of new inhabitants in the district
include one dated 1729, and in them we find a churchwarden possessing such
a distinguished name as Hotham, signing that surname without a capital,
and in 1809 we find an overseer of the poor only able to make his mark
against the seal.

The largest bell in the church tower is dated 1755 and bears the
inscription, "First I call you to God's word, and at last unto the Lord."
It is said that this bell was cracked owing to the great strength of one
of the ringers, and that the date 1755 is the year of the re-casting. The
flagon is the only piece of the church plate belonging to this period. It
was made in 1805 by Prince of York.

In the year 1837 the Rev. Joseph Kipling, grandfather of Mr Rudyard
Kipling, was living at Pickering, and on the 6th of July of that year a
son, John, was born. Mr Joseph Kipling was a Wesleyan minister, and his
residence at Pickering was only a temporary one.

Another Wesleyan who was living at this time was John Castillo, the author
of many quaint poems in the Yorkshire dialect, and an original local
preacher as well. He died in 1845, and his grave is to be seen in the
burial-ground of the Wesleyan Chapel. It bears a verse from "Awd Isaac,"
the poem by which he is best known--

"Bud noo his eens geean dim i' deeath,
Nera mare a pilgrim here on eeath,
His sowl flits fra' her shell beneeath,
    Te reealms o' day,
Whoor carpin care an' pain an' deeath
    Are deean away."

In 1720 a new chapel was built at Pickering for Protestant Dissenters, but
before that time--as early as 1702--Edward Brignall's house was set apart
for divine worship by Dissenters. An Independent Church was formed in
1715, the people probably meeting in private houses for several years.
After this, little is known until 1788, when the Independent Church was
again established, and in the following year a chapel was built, and it
was enlarged in 1814.

It is an interesting fact that about 1862 the small manual organ in the
Independent church was played by a Mr Clark, who was organist at the
Parish church in the morning and at the chapel in the afternoon and
evening. Before this time the Independents had contented themselves with
violins and a bass viol, and for a time with a clarionette.

In 1801, the population of Pickering was 1994, and at the last census
before the accession of Queen Victoria it had increased to 2555.

During the Georgian period Pickering's only external illumination at night
was from that precarious "parish lantern," the moon. The drainage of the
town was crude and far too obvious, and in all the departments for the
supply of daily necessities, the individualistic system of wells,
oil-lamps or candles and cesspools continued without interference from any
municipal power.

The houses and cottages built at this time are of stone among the hills,
and of a mixture of brick and stone in the vale. Examples of cottages can
be seen in the village of Great Habton. They are dated 1741 and 1784, and
are much less picturesque than those of the seventeenth century, though
village architecture had not then reached the gaunt ugliness of the early
Victorian Age.

The parish registers throughout the district were regularly kept, and as a
rule contain nothing of interest beyond the bare records of births, deaths
and marriages. The great proportion of villagers, however, who at this
time signed their names with a mark, shows that the art of writing was
still a rare thing among the peasantry. The church account books of the
period reveal many curious items such as the frequent repairs of the
_thatch_ on the vestry at Middleton (thatched churches are still to be
seen in Norfolk and Suffolk), and "£5, 19s. 6d. in all for the Violin or
Base Musick" of the same church.

Churchwarden architecture of the deal boards and whitewash order made
hideous many of the village churches that required repairs at this time,
and if one discovers a ramshackle little porch such as that just removed
at Ellerburne, or a big window with decayed wooden mullions cut in a wall,
regardless of symmetry, one may be quite safe in attributing it to the
early years of the nineteenth century. One of the staple industries of
Pickering and the adjoining villages at this time was weaving, and a great
number of the cottages had the room on the opposite side of the passage to
the parlour fitted up with a loom.

We have now seen many aspects of the daily life in and near Pickering
during the Georgian period. We know something of sports and amusements of
the people, of their religious beliefs, their work, their customs at
marriages and deaths, and we also have some idea of the dreadful beings
that these country folk trembled at during the hours of darkness. We have
discovered more than one remarkable man who was born and bred in these
primitive surroundings, and we have learnt something of one of the trades
that helped to make Pickering prosperous.



CHAPTER XII

_The Forest and Vale from Early Victorian Times to the Present Day_

A.D. 1837 to 1905


This most recent stage in the development of Pickering is marked by the
extinction of the few remaining customs that had continued to exist since
mediæval times. One of the most hardy of these survivals was the custom of
"Riding t' fair," as it was generally called. It only died out about
twenty years ago when the Pickering Local Board purchased the tolls from
the Duchy of Lancaster, so that it has been possible to obtain a
photographic record of two of the Duchy tenants who used to take part in
the ceremony. On market mornings the Steward of the Duchy armed with a
sword in a richly gilt scabbard would repair to the castle on horseback,
where he would be joined by two freeholders of Duchy land, also mounted;
one carrying the antique halbert and the other the spetum that are now
preserved in a solicitor's office in Eastgate.[1] They would then ride
down to the top of the market-place, where the steward would take out of
his pocket a well-worn piece of parchment and read the following
proclamation.

"_O'yes! O'yes! O'yes!_

"Our Sovereign Lady the Queen and the Reverend John Richard Hill, Lord of
this Manor, proclaim this fair by virtue of Her Majesty's writ of _ad quod
Damnum_, for establishing the same for buying and selling of horses,
geldings, cattle, sheep, swine, and all sorts of merchandise brought here
to be sold, and do hereby order and direct a court of Pye Powder to be
held at the house of Robert Simpson, where all matters in Difference will
be heard and determined according to Law and Justice, and that no person
do presume to buy or sell anything but between the rising and setting of
the Sun, and they do strictly charge and command all persons to be of good
behaviour during the continuance of this Fair.

"God save the Queen and the Lord of the Manor."

[Footnote 1: Mr Arthur Kiching's office. The sword is kept by Mr Boulton.]

[Illustration: THE OLD CUSTOM OF RIDING T' FAIR AT PICKERING.

Two of the Duchy tenants carrying the halbert and spetum as they used to
appear when the market proclamation was read.
]

[Illustration: THE HALBERT (7 feet long) and SPETUM (6 feet 2 inches)
that were carried by the men who accompanied the Steward of the Duchy when
he declared the markets open.]

The parchment is now in the possession of the present steward of the Duchy
property, Mr J.D. Whitehead, who was appointed in 1887 and was the last to
read the proclamation. From the market-place the steward with his armed
attendants rode to the east end of Hungate, and to one or two other points
in the town, reading the proclamation at each place.

The Court Leet, or, as its full title appears, the Court Leet, View of
Frank Pledge, Court Baron, Copy-hall and Customary Court of the Castle
Manor and Honour of Pickering, still meets every second year in October or
November. Twenty-seven out of thirty-eight townships used to be
represented by a constable and four men. Appointed annually and with much
solemnity were the following list of officials:--

2 Constables.
2 Market Searchers.
2 Yarn Tellers.
2 Reeves.
2 Ale Tasters.
2 Leather Searchers.
2 Pinders (for stray cattle).
2 Water Searchers.

Of all these only the two pinders are now appointed to deal with stray
cattle, and the sole use of the court at the present time is that of the
enforcement of the clearing out of the drains and ditches on the Duchy
property. The fines levied average from 6d. to 5s., but I have seen the
record of as large an amount as 10s. imposed on a tenant who had allowed a
tree to obstruct the flow of the water. The importance of keeping the
level fields of the Vale properly drained is obvious, for a permanent
obstruction might easily mean the flooding of a considerable area.

The jury dines at the expense of the Duchy of Lancaster at each meeting,
and there is a "View Supper," as it is called, a week before the meeting,
when the jury, having spent the whole day examining the ditches and drains
between the fields, gather in the evening at one of the inns. The steward
contributes a quarter of mutton, and the Lord of the Manor a couple of
hares for soup.

[Illustration: AN OLD KEY BELONGING TO THE CASTLE.

(_Now kept by Mr John, Westmoreland, Bailiff_.)
]

The Court Leet still appoints the town's bellman in an informal manner;
until lately he was reappointed and sworn in every year. At the present
time the holder of the office is Levi Massheder, who has painted over the
door of his house the curious inscription, "His Honourable Majesty's
bellman."

In July 1857 the old shambles that stood at the top of the market-place,
and in which three bullocks a week were killed by the six butchers, came
down to be replaced by the unsightly building that now disfigures the main
street of the town. It is a matter for surprise that the townsfolk did not
utilise a valuable opportunity and put up in its place something that
would have added to the attractiveness of the place and at the same time
have commemorated the reign of Queen Victoria. The building might have had
an open space beneath that would have been useful in bad weather on market
days. The disappearance of the shambles occurred about the same time as
the sweeping away of the stocks that stood on the north side of them, for
these were the years of a great municipal awakening in Pickering, an
awakening that unfortunately could not distinguish between an insanitary
sewer and the obsolete but historic and quite inoffensive stocks; both had
to disappear before the indiscriminating wave of progress.

[Illustration: The Shambles at Pickering. A sketch plan and elevation
drawn from details given by old inhabitants.]

In October 1846 the railway between Whitby and Pickering, that had been
built ten years before for a horse-drawn coach, was opened for steam
traction, and although this event is beyond the memories of most of the
present-day Pickeronians, there is still living in the town a man named
Will Wardell who is now seventy-seven, and as a boy of twelve acted as
postillion to the horse railway. Postillions were only employed for a
short time, the horse or horses being soon afterwards driven from the
coach.

As a rule they employed one horse from Pickering to Raindale, where there
was a public-house; then two to Fenbogs, and one to Bank Top above
Goathland. If the wind were fair the coach would run to Grosmont by
itself, after that one horse took the coach to Whitby. If more than one
horse were used they were yoked tandem; five were kept at Raindale, where
Wardell lived. There were two coaches, "The Lady Hilda" and the "Premier";
they were painted yellow and carried outside, four in front, four behind,
and several others on the top, while inside there was room for six.
Wardell helped to make the present railway, and has worked for fifty-five
years as a platelayer on the line. He remembers Will Turnbull of Whitby
who used to act as guard on the railway coach, and in the same capacity on
the stage-coach from Pickering to York. He made the journey from Whitby to
York and back daily, the coach running in conjunction with the railway
coach; the two drivers were Mathew Groves and Joseph Sedman.

Gas, which must have been a perpetual wonder to the village folk when they
came into Pickering, made its appearance in 1847; but even at the time of
writing the town is only illuminated from the 10th of August until the end
of April, and even in that period the streets are plunged in darkness at
11 p.m. The drainage of the town was taken in hand to some extent about
fifty years ago, and the pestilential ditches and sewers that existed to
within thirty years of the present time have gradually disappeared. Then
between thirty and forty years ago the great spring in the limestone at
Keld Head was utilised to give the town a water-supply, and thus the wells
and pumps were superseded. Before the Local Board came into being about
half a century ago, piles of timber were allowed to lie in Eastgate, and
generally one may imagine the rather untidy quaintness so strongly
characteristic of the engravings that illustrate country scenes in that
period.

In 1841 or thereabouts there was a great gale that carried away the sails
of the windmill which stood near the railway station, and a year or two
afterwards the brick tower was demolished.

The early years of Queen Victoria's reign saw the destruction of several
picturesque features, and they also witnessed the decease of some more of
the old customs that were still fighting for their existence. Some of the
old folks can just remember hearing their fathers tell of "the standing in
church," described in the last chapter, and they quite well remember when
the children used to receive prizes for saying poetry in front of the
Communion-table in the parish church. Stang-riding continued up to
twenty-five years ago in spite of the opposition of the police. Two
figures to represent the individuals who had earned popular disfavour were
placed in a cart and taken round the town for three successive nights,
accompanied by a noisy crowd, who sang--

"Arang atang atang
Here do we ride the stang,
Not for my cause nor your cause
Do we ride the stang,
But for the sake of old...."

On the third night the effigies were burnt.

There was formerly a gallery at the west end of the church where the choir
and organ were situated so that during the musical portions of the
services the congregation turned towards the west to face the choir. About
fifty years ago the leader who started the tune with a trumpet was James
Ruddock "a bedstuffer." An old pitch-pipe used for starting the tunes was
recently discovered by Mr J. Grant James, vicar of Marske-in-Cleveland.

Hungate Bridge, an iron structure, having made its appearance in 1864, is,
as may be imagined, no ornament to the town.

In November 1851 the weathercock on the spire of the church was blown off,
and in the following year it was replaced.

The restoration in 1878-79 included the very difficult work of renewing
the Norman foundations of the tower, which were quite unable to continue
to support the crushing weight of the spire. Sir Gilbert Scott, who
inspected the tower and was pointed out several of the results of the
unequal strains on the fabric, solemnly warned those concerned not to be
stingy with cement if they wished to save the tower. The advice was taken,
and after the removal of the crushed and rotten stones and many other
repairs the tower and spire were left in a state of greatly increased
security. The framework supporting the bells dated from about 1450, and as
there were no louvres to the windows for a long time, rain and snow must
have been blown in upon the woodwork, for it was found to be entirely
rotten, and it was astonishing that the timbers had not given way under
the great weight of the bells.

[Illustration: THE OLD FIRE-ENGINE AT PICKERING.]

It is an old custom that is still preserved to ring the biggest, or the
"pancake" bell, as it is often called, at eleven in the morning on Shrove
Tuesday. At that welcome sound the children are allowed to leave school
for the day, the shops are closed, and a general holiday is observed in
the town. The work bell is rung every morning from 5.55 to 6.0, and from
6.0 to 6.5 every evening from March to November, and the bells are rung
backwards to call out the fire brigade. The curious little fire-engine
upon which the town used to rely is still preserved in a shed in
Willowgate. It is one of those primitive little contrivances standing on
very small solid wheels, suggesting those of a child's toy horse.

Until the restoration of the church the pulpit was of the two-decker type,
the clerk's desk being under the pulpit, with the reading-desk at the
side. The inlaid sounding-board which was taken out of the church at the
restoration is now preserved in the vicarage. It was in these days, namely
about thirty years ago, that the sexton and his deputy used to visit the
public-houses during church time in order to fetch out those who were
wasting the precious hours. At Christmas time the waits still enliven the
early hours with their welcomes to each individual member of every family.
The two men, whose names are Beavers and Stockdale, carry a concertina and
greet the household after this well-known fashion, "Drawing to -----
o'clock and a fine frosty morning. Good morrow morning, Mr -----. Good
morrow morning, Mrs -----," and so through the entire family. This process
commences a week before Christmas and is continued until a week
afterwards. In the villages the custom of "lucky birds" still survives.
The boy who first reaches any house on Christmas morning is called a
"lucky bird," and unless great misfortune is courted some small coin must
be given to that boy. On New Year's Day the same process applies to girls,
but they have no particular designation. Badger-baiting in the castle is
still remembered, but at the present time lawn-tennis is the only game
that is played there. This brings one to the everyday facts of Pickering
life, which may sound almost too prosaic for any record, but taken in
contrast with the conditions of life that have gone before they are the
most recent page of that history which continues to be made day by day in
the town.

The Pickeronian can no longer call himself remote in the sense of
communication with the rest of the world, for the North-Eastern Railway
takes him to York in little more than an hour, and from that great station
he can choose his route to London and other centres by the Great Northern,
the Great Central, or by the Midland Railway, and he can return from
King's Cross to Pickering in about five hours. But this ease of
communication seems to have made less impression upon the manners and
customs of the town and neighbourhood than might have been imagined. It
may perhaps show itself in the more rapid importation from London of a
popular street tune or in the fashions of dress among the women-kind, but
there are still great differences in the ways of living of the country
folk and in the relations of squire and peasant.

Superstitions still linger among the moorland folk, and the custom of
placing a plate of salt upon the breast of one who is dying is still
continued here and there in a covert fashion. Clocks are still stopped,
fires raked out, and looking-glasses turned to the wall at the moment of
death, but such acts of deference to the world of fancy are naturally only
seen by those who have intimate experience of the cottage life of these
parts, and the casual visitor sees no traces of them.

The town at one time had a newspaper of its own. It was known as the
_Pickering Mercury_, and was started in the summer of 1857; but it perhaps
found Scarborough competition too much for it, for now it is almost
forgotten, and an evening paper produced in the big watering-place is
shouted round the streets of the town every night.

The changes that the present century may witness will possibly work
greater transformations than any that have gone before, and not many years
hence this book will no doubt be described as belonging to the rough and
ready, almost primitive times of the early part of the twentieth century.
The historian of a hundred years hence will sigh for the complete picture
of daily life at Pickering at the present day, which we could so easily
give, while he at that very moment may be failing to record the scenes of
his own time that are to him so wofully commonplace.



CHAPTER XIII

_Concerning the Villages and Scenery of the Forest and Vale of Pickering_

  "Wide horizons beckoning, far beyond the hill,
  Little lazy villages, sleeping in the vale,
  Greatness overhead
  The flock's contented tread
  An' trample o' the morning wind adown the open trail."

H.H. Bashford.


[Illustration: The Market Cross at Thornton-le-Dale.

The stocks are quite modern, replacing the old ones which were thrown away
when the new ones were made.
]

The scenery of this part of Yorkshire is composed of two strikingly
opposite types, that of perfectly wild, uncultivated moorlands broken here
and there by wooded dales, and the rich level pasture lands that occupy
the once marshy district of the Vale. The villages, some phases of whose
history we have traced, are with a few exceptions scattered along the
northern margin of the Vale. Lastingham, Rosedale Abbey, Levisham,
Lockton, and Newton are villages of the moor. Edstone, Habton, Normanby,
Kirby Misperton, and Great Barugh are villages of the Vale; but all the
rest occupy an intermediate position on the slopes of the hills. In
general appearance, many of the hamlets are rather similar, the grey stone
walls and red tiles offering less opportunity for individual taste than
the building materials of the southern counties. Despite this difficulty,
however, each village has a distinct character of its own, and in the
cases of Thornton-le-Dale and Brompton, the natural surroundings of hill,
sparkling stream, and tall masses of trees make those two villages unique.
A remarkable effect can sometimes be seen by those who are abroad in the
early morning from the hills overlooking the wide valley; one is at times
able to see across the upper surface of a perfectly level mist through
which the isolated hills rising from the low ground appear as islets in a
lake, and it requires no effort of the imagination to conjure up the
aspect of the valley when the waters of the Derwent were held up by ice in
the remote centuries of the Ice Age. Sometimes in the evening, too, a
pleasing impression may be obtained when the church bells of the villages
are ringing for evening service. At the top of Wrelton Cliff, the sound of
several peals of bells in the neighbouring villages floats upwards across
the broad pastures, and it seems almost as though the whole plain beneath
one's feet were joining in the evening song. Along the deep ravine of
Newton Dale, in all weathers, some of the most varied and richly coloured
pictures may be seen. If one climbs the rough paths that lead up from the
woods and meadows by the railway, the most remarkable aspects of the
precipitous sides are obtained. In a book published in 1836,[1] at the
time of the opening of the railway between Whitby and Pickering, a series
of very delicate steel engravings of the wild scenery of Newton Dale were
given. One of them shows the gorge under the deep gloom of a storm but
relieved with the contrast of a rainbow springing from one side of the
rocky walls. This effect may perhaps seem highly exaggerated, but on one
occasion when I was exploring part of the Dale, between Levisham and Fen
Bogs, I was astonished to see a brilliant rainbow backed by dense masses
of indigo clouds and occupying precisely the position of the one shown in
the old engraving. In such weather as this, when sudden rays of sunlight
fall upon the steep slopes of bracken and heather and on the precipitous
rocks above, the blazing colours seem almost unreal and the scenery
suggests Scotland more than any other part of England. From the edges of
the cañon, purple heather and ling stretch away on either side to the most
distant horizons, and one can walk for miles in almost any direction
without encountering a human being and rarely a house of any description.
The few cottages that now stand in lonely isolation in different parts of
the moors have only made their appearance since the Enclosures Act, so
that before that time these moors must have been one of the most extensive
stretches of uninhabited country in England. From the Saltersgate Inn,
some of the most remarkable views that the moorlands present are all
collected together in a comparatively small space. One looks towards the
west across a remarkably deep ravine with precipitous sides that leads out
of Newton Dale towards the old coach road upon which the lonely hostelry
stands. At the foot of the steep rocks, a stream trickles into a basin and
then falls downwards in a small cascade, finding its way into the
Pickering Beck that flows along the bottom of Newton Dale. From the inn
also, the great ravine we have been describing appears as an enormous
trench cut through the heathery plateau, and we are led to wonder how it
was that no legends as to its origin have survived until the present time.
The Roman road, which is supposed to have been built by Wade and his wife
when they were engaged on the construction of Mulgrave and Pickering
Castles, seems uninspiring beside the majestic proportions of Newton Dale.
To the south of the Saltersgate Inn lies the remarkable circular hollow
among the hills known as the Hole of Horcum, and the bold bluff known as
Saltersgate Brow rises like an enormous rampart from the smooth brown or
purple heather. To the west lies the peculiarly isolated hill known as
Blakey Topping, and, a little to the south, are the Bride Stones, those
imposing masses of natural rock that project themselves above the moor.
The Saltersgate Inn has lost the importance it once possessed as the
stopping-place for the coaches between Whitby and Pickering, but is still
the only place of refreshment for many miles across the moors, and its
very isolation still gives it an importance for those who seek sport or
exercise on these breezy wastes.

[Footnote 1: Henry Belcher, "The Scenery of the Whitby and Pickering
Railway," facing p. 51.]

Levisham and Lockton, the twin villages that stand upon the very edge of
the heather, are separated by a tremendous valley, and although from above
they may seem so close as to be almost continuous, in reality they are as
remote from one another as though they were separated by five or six
miles. To reach Levisham from Lockton means a break-neck descent of a very
dangerous character and a climb up from the mill and lonely church at the
bottom of the valley that makes one marvel how the village ever came to be
perched in a position of such inaccessibility. The older inhabitants of
Levisham tell you that in their young days the village was more populous,
and their statements are supported by the pathetic evidence of more than
one cottage lying in ruins with the interior occupied by a jungle of
nettles. The Vicarage is the only new building that breaks the mellowed
grey tones of the wide, grass-bordered street.

[Illustration: LOCKTON VILLAGE. The ash tree that grows on the church
tower can be seen in the drawing.]

Lockton is a larger and better preserved village. The little church with
its grey tower is noticeable on account of the vigorous ash-tree that
grows from the parapet. It has been there for many years, and I am told
that the roots have penetrated for a very great distance among the stones,
and may even be drawing their sustenance from the ground. In order to
prevent the undue growth of the tree, it is periodically cut down to one
branch, but even with this wholesale lopping the tree has forced many of
the stones from their original positions.

The interior of the church is a melancholy spectacle of churchwarden
methods, but probably Lockton will before many years receive that careful
restoration that has taken place at Ellerburne and Sinnington. The font is
one of those unadorned, circular basins which generally date from the
thirteenth century. One of the village inns is known as "The Durham Ox,"
and bears a sign adorned with a huge beast whose pensive but intelligent
eye looks down upon all passers-by. The village stocks that used to stand
outside the churchyard wall on the east side, near the present
schoolhouse, are remembered by the older inhabitants. They were taken away
about forty years ago. The few thatched cottages that remain in the
village are unfortunately being allowed to fall into disrepair, but this
is the case in most of the villages.

Newton, or, as its full name should be given, Newton-upon-Rawcliff, stands
on the verge of Newton Dale. Its small modern church has no interest for
the antiquary, but the broad roadway between the houses and the
whitewashed cottages thrown up against the strip of grass on either side
is picturesque enough.

Northwards from Newton lies the minute moorland hamlet of Stape, its
houses and its inn, "The Hare and Hounds," being perched indiscriminately
on the heather. Some miles beyond lies Goathland, that formerly belonged
to the parish of Pickering. The present church was built in 1895, but it
is here that the fine pre-Reformation chalice that originally belonged to
Pickering is still in use. The village has a large green overlooked here
and there by pretty cottages, and the proximity of the richly coloured
moorland scenery that lies spread out in every direction makes the place
particularly fascinating. The railway in the valley has brought a few new
houses to the village, but there seems little chance of any great
accretions of this nature, although the existence of the railway station
is a permanent menace to the rural character of the place.

Middleton, the hamlet immediately to the west of Pickering, lies along the
main road to Helmsley. Its interesting old church is surrounded by trees,
and might almost be passed unnoticed. The post-office is in one of the
oldest cottages. Its massive oak forks must have endured for many
centuries, and the framework of the doorway leading into the garden behind
must be of almost equal antiquity.

Between the years 1764 and 1766, John Wesley, on his northern circuit,
visited this unassuming little village and preached in the pulpit of the
parish church. A circular sun-dial bearing the motto "We stay not," and
the date 1782, appears above the porch, and the church is entered by a
fine old door of the Perpendicular period. A paddock on the west side of
the graveyard is known as the nun's field, but I have no knowledge of any
monastic institution having existed at Middleton. Aislaby, the next
village to the west, is so close that one seems hardly to have left
Middleton before one reaches the first cottage of the next hamlet. There
is no church here, and the only conspicuous object as one passes westwards
is the Hall, a large stone house standing close to the road on the south
side. Wrelton is only half a mile from Aislaby. It stands at the
cross-roads where the turning to Lastingham and Rosedale Abbey leaves the
Helmsley Road. The cottages are not particularly ancient, and there are no
striking features to impress themselves on the memory of the passer-by. At
Sinnington, however, we reach a village of marked individuality. The broad
green is ornamented with a bridge that spans the wide stony course of the
river Seven; but more noticeable than this is the very tall maypole that
stands on the green and appears in the distance as a tapering mast that
has been sloped out of perpendicular by the most prevailing winds. It was
around an earlier maypole that stood in the place of the existing one that
the scene between the "Broad Brims" and the merry-making villagers that
has already been mentioned took place nearly two centuries ago. The
present maypole was erected on May 29th 1882, replacing one which had come
into existence on the same day twenty years before. The recently restored
church of Sinnington stands slightly above the green, backed by the trees
on the rising ground to the north of the village. The new roof of red
tiles would almost lead one to imagine that the building was a modern one,
and one would scarcely imagine that it dates chiefly from the twelfth
century. A custom which is still remembered by some of the older villagers
was the roasting of a sheep by the small bridge on the green on November
23rd in Martinmas week. The children used to go round a few days before,
collecting money for the purchase of the sheep. Although these quaint
customs are no longer continued at Sinnington the green has retained its
picturesqueness, and towards evening, when the western sky is reflected in
the rippling waters of the Seven, the scene is a particularly pleasing
one.

Between Sinnington and Kirby Moorside about three miles to the west is the
site of the priory of Keldholm, but there are no walls standing at the
present time. Kirby Moorside is one of the largest villages in the
neighbourhood of Pickering. It has been thought that it may possibly have
been in Goldsmith's mind when he described the series of catastrophes that
befell the unfortunate household of the Vicar of Wakefield; but although I
have carefully read the story with a view to discovering any descriptions
that may suggest the village of Kirby Moorside, I can find very little in
support of the idea. Before the construction of the railway connecting
Pickering and Helmsley, this part of Yorkshire was seldom visited by any
one but those having business in the immediate neighbourhood; and even now
as one walks along the wide main street one cannot help feeling that the
village is still far removed from the influences of modern civilisation.
The old shambles still stand in the shadow of the Tolbooth, the somewhat
gaunt but not altogether unpleasing building that occupies a central
position in the village. Adjoining the shambles is the broken stump of the
market-cross raised upon its old steps, and close by also is the entrance
to the churchyard. The church occupies a picturesque position, and
contains, besides the Elizabethan brass to Lady Brooke, a _parvise_
chamber over the old porch. This little room is approached by a flight of
stone steps from the interior of the church and possesses a fireplace. It
has been supposed that the chamber would have been used by the monk who
served from Newburgh Priory when he had occasion to stay the night. The
brick windmill, built about a hundred years ago, that stands on the west
side of the village, is no longer in use, and has even been robbed of its
sails. At the highest part of the village street there are some extremely
old thatched cottages which give a very good idea of what must have been
the appearance of the whole place a century ago. The "King's Head" Inn and
the house adjoining it, in which the notorious Duke of Buckingham died,
are two of the oldest buildings of any size that now remain. An inn, a
little lower down the street has a picturesque porch supported by carved
posts, bearing the name "William Wood," and the date 1632. Kirby Moorside
has preserved, in common with two or three other villages in the
neighbourhood, its Christmastide mummers and waits. The mummers, who go
their rounds in daytime, are men dressed as women. They carry a small doll
in a box ornamented with pieces of evergreen and chant doggerel rhymes.

The beautiful scenery of Farndale and Kirkdale comes as a surprise to
those who visit Kirby Moorside for the first time, for the approach by
road in all directions, except from the north, does not lead one to
suspect the presence of such impressive landscapes, and from some points
Farndale has quite a mountainous aspect. The moors no longer reach the
confines of Kirby Moorside, as its name would suggest, for cultivation has
pushed back the waste lands for two or three miles to the north; but from
that point northwards all the way to Guisborough the wild brown moorland
is broken only in a few places by the fitful cultivation of the dales. The
church of Kirkdale, and what quarrying has left of the famous cave, stand
just at the point where the Hodge Beck leaves its confined course and
flows out into the flat levels of the Vale of Pickering. It is only,
however, after very heavy rains that the stony course of the stream at
this point shows any sign of water, for in ordinary weather the stream
finds its way through underground fissures in the limestone and does not
appear above the ground for a considerable distance. The little church of
Kirkdale, remarkable for its Saxon sun-dial and other pre-Norman remains,
is surrounded by masses of foliage, and the walk up the dale from this
point to the romantically situated Cauldron Mill is one of remarkable
beauty. As one follows the course of the beck higher and higher towards it
source north of Bransdale, the densely wooded sides become bare, and wide
expanses and the invigorating moorland air are exchanged for the rich land
scents and the limited views.

[Illustration: The "Black Hole" of Thornton-le-Dale. An underground cell
beneath some cottages which was formerly the village prison.]

The village of Lastingham is surrounded by beautiful hills and is almost
touched by the moors that lie immediately to the north. The Church has
already been described, and we have heard something of the strange story
of the ingenious methods for increasing his income of a former
curate-in-charge. Cropton occupies a position somewhat similar to that of
Newton, being on high ground with commanding views in all directions. The
little church is modern, but it has the stump of an ancient cross in the
graveyard, and commands a magnificent view towards the west and north. It
is in connection with this cross that a curious old rhyme is mentioned in
an old guide.

  "On Cropton Cross there is a cup,
   And in that cup there is a sup;
   Take that cup and drink that sup,
   And set that cup on Cropton Cross top."

There is a cottage on the east side of the street bearing the date 1695,
and the motto "Memento Mori," with the initials N.C., but more
interesting than this is one on the same side but at the southern end of
the village, and standing back more than the rest. This was used as a
madhouse at a time well remembered by some of the villagers. People from
Pickering and the surrounding district were sent here for treatment, and
I am told that the proprietor possessed a prescription for a very
remarkable medicine which was supposed to have a most beneficial effect
upon his partially demented patients. I am also told that this
prescription was given to one, Goodwill of Lastingham, who still possesses
it. Cropton is only a short distance from the Roman camps that lie all
surrounded and overgrown with dense plantations, so that it is impossible
for a stranger to discover their position unless he be lucky enough to
find some one close at hand to carefully describe the right track.

West of Pickering lies that long string of villages, generally less than
two miles apart, that extends nearly all the way to Scarborough. The first
point of interest as one goes towards Thornton-le-Dale from Pickering is
the grass-grown site of Roxby Castle, the birthplace of Sir Hugh Cholmley,
and the scene, as we know, of those conflicts between the retainers of Sir
Roger Hastings and Sir Richard Cholmley. The position must have been a
most perfect one for this ancient manor house, for standing a little
higher than the level ings and carrs of the marshy land, it was protected
from the cold northern winds by the higher ground above. From the top of
the steep hill west of the village, Thornton-le-Dale has an almost idyllic
aspect, its timeworn roofs of purple thatch and mellowed tiles nestling
among the masses of tall trees that grow with much luxuriance in this
sheltered spot at the foot of the hills. The village is musical with the
pleasant sound of the waters of the beck that flows from Dalby Warren, and
ripples along the margins of the roadways, necessitating a special
footbridge for many of the cottages. The ancient stocks that stood by the
crossroads have unfortunately disappeared, and in their place may be seen
the pathetic sight of a new pair that are not even a close copy of the old
ones. The old stone cross that stands by the stocks has not been replaced
by a modern one, and adds greatly to the interest of the central portion
of the village. On the road that leads towards Ellerburne there stand some
old cottages generally known as the Poorhouse. They are built on sloping
ground, and on the lower side there is a small round-topped tunnel leading
into a little cell dug out of the ground beneath the cottages. This little
village prison was known as the "Black Hole," and was in frequent use
about fifty years ago. An old resident in the village named Birdsall, who
is now in the Almshouses, remembers that the last woman who was placed in
the Black Hole was released by four men who forcibly broke their way in.
The quaint little church of Ellerburne and the few antique cottages that
make up the hamlet lie about a mile from Thornton up the steep valley to
the north. The hills on either side are crowned with plantations, but
farther up the dale appear the bare slopes of the edge of the moors.
Allerston lies at right angles to the main road. It is full of quaint
stone cottages, and is ornamented by the square tower of the church and
the cheerful brook that flows along the road side. The church at Ebberston
stands aloof from the village at the edge of the small park belonging to
the Hall. The situation is a very pleasant one, and the building attracts
one's attention on account of the wide blocked-up arch that is conspicuous
in the south wall west of the porch.

The next village westwards is Snainton, a more compact and town-like
hamlet than most of the others in the district. The church having been
rebuilt in about 1835, the place is robbed of one of its chief
attractions.

Brompton has already been mentioned in connection with Wordsworth's
wedding. The view over the bright green pastures of the Vale when seen
from the church porch is of conspicuous beauty, and the ponds that are
numerous in the village help to make picturesque views from many points.
The Hall is a large building possessing a ponderous bulk but little charm,
and it is only by the kindly aid of the plentiful trees and an extensive
growth of ivy that the squire's house does not destroy the rural sweetness
of the village.

Wykeham has a new church with a massive spire, but the tower of the old
building has fortunately been allowed to remain, and now answers the
purpose of a lich-gate. Only a few walls of the abbey now remain in close
proximity to Lord Downe's recently enlarged house.

[Illustration: HUTTON BUSCEL CHURCH.

The lower part of the tower is of Norman work. The head of the churchyard
cross is modern.
]

The church of Hutton Buscel is externally one of the most picturesque in
the district, and the pretty churchyard on steeply falling ground is a
charming feature of the village. The old Hall of the Osbaldestons is only
represented by the massive gates that give access to the schools built on
the site of the house that was burnt down about a century ago.

A curious story is told of Bishop Osbaldeston, whose monument is to be
seen in the church. During his stay at Hutton Buscel he often amused
himself with riding about the neighbourhood and conversing with any one he
happened to meet upon the road. "One morning he saw a chimney-sweeper's
boy laid on the roadside, whom he accosted as follows:--'Well, my lad,
where hast thou been this morning?' 'Sweeping your chimnies,' replied the
lad. 'And how much hast thou earned then?' said his lordship. 'Fifteen
shillings, my lord.' After his lordship had observed that he thought it a
very good business, the lad says, 'Yes, my lord, you see that _we black
coats_ get good livings for very little work.'"

The smaller villages of the Vale are without any particular interest in
themselves, apart from the wide and expansive landscapes that stretch away
in all directions to the enclosing hills that in distant times formed the
boundaries of the lake.

Great Habton has a small chapel of ease of very recent erection.

Ryton is chiefly composed of two or three farms and a dilapidated little
red brick building that scarcely deserves the name of church. The lane to
this hamlet from Great Habton is remarkable for the series of about a
dozen gates across the roadway.

Brawby and Butterwick have no particular features that impress themselves
on the mind, and Great Barugh, though more picturesque than either of
these, is chiefly interesting on account of its past.

Normanby lies on the dead level of the plain, and is watered by the Seven,
that flows between high embankments throughout most of its course after
leaving the high ground at Sinnington.

Salton lies a little to the west and is interesting on account of its
beautiful little Norman church. The cottages are situated on a patch of
green, and the whole place has a cheerful and tidy appearance.

At Kirby Misperton there is a very green pond by the church, and the
remains of the stocks may still be seen by the pretty rose-covered cottage
that contains the post-office. Many of the cottages were rebuilt between
1857 and 1877, the dates being conspicuous on their big gables.



CHAPTER XIV

_Concerning the Zoology of the Forest and Vale_


The great expanses of wild moorland, the deep, heavily wooded valleys, and
the rich and well-watered level country included in the scope of this book
would lead one to expect much of the zoology of the Pickering district,
and one is not disappointed. That the wild life is ample and interesting
will be seen from the following notes on the rarer varieties which Mr
Oxley Grabham of the York Museum has kindly put together.

On THE MOORS _the Curlew, the Golden Plover_, and the _Merlin_ nest
regularly together with other more common species.

In THE WOODS _the Woodcock, Pied Flycatcher_, and _Wood Wren_, together
with the _Green_ and _the Great Spotted Woodpeckers_, breed by no means
uncommonly.

In THE MARSHY AND LOW-LYING LANDS _the Snipe_ and _the Redshank_ find
congenial breeding quarters.

Many rarities have been obtained in the district such as _the Kite, the
Great Plover, the Smew_, and _the Golden Eagle_, and numerous varieties of
wildfowl during the winter months. I have seen large flocks of
_Crossbills_ and _Bramblings_ hunting for food in the severe weather, and
occasionally a small flock of _Waxwings_ appears in the district.

There is a well-protected _Heronry_ in the neighbourhood, and these fine
handsome birds may frequently be seen in the vicinity of the Costa, a
stream famous for the size and quality of its _Trout_ and _Grayling_.

From a sporting point of view there are few better districts in the north
of Yorkshire. _Grouse_ are abundant on the moors, and there is some most
excellent _Partridge_ ground at hand, whilst certain of the coverts are
famous for _Woodcock_ during the winter months.

_Foxes_ are numerous, and three packs of regular hounds, Lord Middleton's,
Sir Everard Cayley's, and the Sinnington, hunt the country, whilst the old
established trencher-fed Goathland pack accounts for a goodly number every
season.

_Otters_ and _Badgers_ are far more plentiful than most people have any
idea of; but, unfortunately, they are generally killed whenever a chance
of doing so presents itself, the trap and the gun being regularly employed
against them.

The usual smaller mammals are present in goodly numbers, and present no
special or peculiar features, with the exception of _the common Rat_,
which has been of late a perfect pest in some parts of the country; the
hedge bottoms have been riddled with rat holes. Gates and posts and rails
have been gnawed to bits, and in one instance a litter of young pigs were
worried during the night. On one farm alone, during the year 1904, over
two thousand rats were killed.

OF REPTILES, _the common Adder or Viper_, locally known as the Hag-Worm,
is numerous in the moorland districts. It seldom if ever attacks human
beings, but occasionally dogs and sheep get bitten with fatal results.
_The Slow or Blind Worm_ is also to be found here, as are the other usual
forms of reptiles.

OXLEY GRABHAM, M.A., M.B.O.U.



The famous breed of horses known as the Cleveland Bays come from this
district of Yorkshire. They are bred all over the district between
Pickering, Helmsley, Scarborough, and Middlesborough, and although efforts
have been made to raise them in other parts of England and abroad, it has
been found that they lose the hardness of bone which is such a
characteristic feature of the Cleveland bred animals. The Cleveland bay
coach horse is descended from the famous Darly Arabian, and preserves in a
wonderful manner the thoroughbred outline.




BOOKS OF REFERENCE


Akerman, J. Yonge, Remains of Pagan Saxondom, 1852-55.

Allen, J.R., Monumental History of the Early British Church, 1889.

Anecdotes and Manners of a few Ancient and Modern Oddities,   1806.

Anthropological Institute of Great Britain and Ireland, Journal of.

Associated Architectural Societies' Reports, vol. xii.

Atkinson, John C, A Glossary of the Cleveland Dialect, 1876;   Forty Years
in a Moorland Parish, 1891.

Bateman, Thomas, Ten Years' Diggings, 1861.

Bawdwen, Rev. W., Domesday Book, 1809.

Belcher, Henry, The Pickering and Whitby Railway, 1836.

Blakeborough, Richard, Wit, Character, etc., of the North Riding of
Yorkshire, 1898.

Brooke, John C, Illustration of a Saxon Inscription at Kirkdale,   1777.

Brown, Gerard Baldwin, The Arts in Early Britain, 1903.

Browne, G.F., Bishop of Bristol, Theodore and Wilfrith, 1897; The
Conversion of the Heptarchy, 1896.

Buckland, Wm., Dean of Westminster, Account of Fossil Bones at   Kirkdale,
1822.

Chaucer, Geoffrey, Canterbury Tales, 1902.

Cholmley, Sir Hugh, Bart., Memoirs of, 1787.

Clark, George Thos., Mediæval Military Architecture in England,   1884.

Codrington, Thos., C.E., Roman Roads in Britain, 1903.

Collection of above 300 Receipts in Cookery, Physick, and Surgery,   1719.

Corlass, R.W., Yorkshire Rhymes and Sayings, 1878.

Croll, James, Climate and Time in their Geological Relations,   1885.

Dawkins, Boyd, Early Man in Britain.

Domesday Book, Facsimile of the Survey by Col. Sir H. James, 1861-63.

Drake, Francis, Eboracum, 1736.

Eastmead, William, Historia Rievallensis, 1824.

England, Annals of, 1876.

Fawcett, Rev. Joshua, Church Rides in the Neighbourhood of Scarborough,
1848.

Frank, George, Ryedale, North Yorkshire Antiquities, 1888.

Fuller, Thomas, The History of the Worthies of England, 1840.

Gidley, Lewis, Bede's Ecclesiastical History of the English Church, 1870.

Giles, J.A., Bede's Ecclesiastical History of the English Church, 1840.

Gould, S. Baring, Yorkshire Oddities, 1874.

Hailstone, Edward the Elder, Portraits of Yorkshire Worthies, 1869.

Hatton, W.H., and Fox, W.E., The Churches of Yorkshire, 1879.

Henderson, William, Notes on the Folklore of the North Counties, 1879.

Hinderwell, Thomas, History of Scarborough, 1798.

Holinshed, Raphael, Chronicles of England, 1807-8.

Jackson, R.E. Scoresby, The Life of William Scoresby, 1861.

Jewitt, Llewellyn, The Ceramic Art in Early Britain, 1883; Grave Mounds
and their Contents, 1870.

Leland, John, The Itinerary of.

Marshall, William, The Rural Economy of Yorkshire, 1788.

Morris, Joseph E., The North Riding of Yorkshire, 1904.

Morris, M.C.F., Yorkshire Folk Talk, 1892.

Murray's Handbook for Yorkshire, 1904.

North Riding Records, 1894 and after. Edited by R.B. Turton.

Park, G.R., The Parliamentary Representation of Yorkshire, 1886.

Parkinson, Rev. Thos., Yorkshire Legends and Traditions, 1888.

Roy, Major-General Wm., The Military Antiquities of the Romans in Britain,
1793.

Scoresby, Wm., the Elder, Memorials of the Sea, 1851.

Smith, William, Old Yorkshire, 1881.

Stow, John, A Summarie of Englyshe Chronicles, etc., 1565.

Strangways, C.E. Fox, Geology of Oolitic and Liassic Rocks North of
Malton, 1881; Geology of Country between Whitby and Scarborough, 1846; The
Jurassic Rocks of Britain, 1846.

Tacitus, P.C., The Works of, Oxford Translation, 1848.

Windle, B.C.A., Remains of the pre-Historic Age in England, 1904; Life in
Early Britain, 1897.

Yorkshire Archæological and Topographical Association, Record Series, 1894
and after.

Yorkshire Archæological Journal, Vol. V., 1879.

Young, George, A History of Whitby, 1817.




APPENDIX

A LIST OF THE VICARS OF PICKERING


The living itself, at the time of the Norman Conquest, came into the
possession of the Crown, and remained at the king's gift till Henry I.
annexed it to the Deanery of York. It thus became one of the Dean's
peculiars, until in the last century his property was vested in the
Ecclesiastical Commissioners, and the patronage transferred to the
Archbishop.


1150       Hugh
13--?      Midelton, Thos de.        Resigned for the
                                     Church of Scalton
1341       Acaster, Hen de.          Dismissed
1349       Queldriks, Robert de
           Pokelington, Robert de.   Resigned for
                                     the Church at Holtby
1388       Laytingby, Will de
1568-1570  Coleman, William
1581-1600  Owrome, William
1602-1615  Mylls or Milnes, Edward.  Deprived 1615
1615-1659  Bright, Edward.           Died 1659
1661-1690  Staveley, Robert.         Died 1690
1691-1712  Newton, Joshua, A.M.      Died 1712
1713-1740  Hargreaves, Robert.       Died 1740
1740       Hill, Samuel
1745       Dodsworth, George
1764-1784  Harding, Samuel. (Blind.) Died 1784
1784-1786  Robinson, John
1786-1804  Harding, Samuel J.        Died 1804
1804-1809  Laye, W.T.                Died 1809
1809-1814  Graham, C.R.
1814-1857  Ponsonby, F.
1858-1863  Cockburn, G.A., M.A.
1863-1875  Bennett, Edward (Curate-in-charge)
1875-1881  Lightfoot, G.H. (Curate-in-charge)
1881-1902   "          "   (Vicar)
1902       Drage, E.W.


_"Here taketh the Makere of this Book his Leve."_



_"Now preye I to hem alle that herkne this litel tretys or rede, that ...
if ther be any thyng that displese hem, I preye hem also that they arrette
it to the defaute of myn unkonnynge, and not to my wyl, that wolde ful
fayn have seyd bettre if I hadde had konnynge."_

_Chaucer's Canterbury Tales._

[Illustration: A Sketch Map of the Pickering District]