But he didn't.

However, there was no chance whatever for Yearlings Pratt and
Judson to retreat unseen. The door across the hall had been left
open, and the tac. would be sure to detect their sudden departure.

Dick Prescott's first movement was to pounce upon his disordered
bedding, swiftly folding over the mattress, and laying the bed
clothing in the prescribed manner.

Then he tiptoed up to the dismayed Judson, whispering in that
yearling's ear as he knowingly winked at Pratt:

"If I'm not too abominably b.j., sir, won't you please come to my
table and help me bone math?"

It looked like a saving inspiration. As Dick slipped into his chair
he signed to Bert Dodge to stand at one end of the table. Judson
snatched up one of Dick's mathematical textbooks, opening to one
of the first pages at random. Dick turned sideways in his chair,
glancing up at the yearling with a rapt expression.

Yearling Pratt slipped into Greg's chair. Holmes and Anstey stood
on either side of him. Pratt began rapidly to sketch out a problem
that he chanced to remember from plebe year math.

Almost instantly the door swung open. Not one of the cadets
happened to be looking in that direction. As Captain Vesey, the
tac., white-gloved, stepped into the room he was just in time to
hear Cadet Judson say:

"Perhaps if you were to work out a formula in algebra, mister, you
would find the idea even more clear. But I think you understand it
now."

"Yes, sir, thank you," replied Cadet Prescott.

"This is the way I would explain the problem," murmured Mr.
Pratt, to Greg and Anstey. Just at that instant the yearling looked as
though butter couldn't melt in his mouth.

Turning a bit, Pratt caught sight of the tac., who stood looking on
as though transformed with wonder.

"Attention!" called Pratt at once.

All the others wheeled, Dick rising in order to do so. Six young
men who looked intensely earnest over study, faced the O.C.
respectfully.

Doubtless a bit taken back, certainly so if he had expected to find
anything wrong, Captain Vesey took two steps into the room,
glanced about him, then wheeled and walked out.

"I must be going now," uttered Yearling Judson a moment later.
"Call on me again, once in a while, if you need any help in math."

"Thank you very much, sir," murmured Cadet Prescott respectfully.

"Coming along now, Pratt?" called Judson.

"Yes; I must be getting back to my own bone," replied Yearling
Pratt.

It would have been out of the question for yearlings to thank
plebes for a service such as had just been rendered. So the late
hazers merely stepped from the room.

"Odd! Mighty queer!" muttered Captain Vesey to himself, as he
unhooked his sword and stood it in a corner over in the O.C.'s
office. "Mr. Judson and Mr. Pratt have a pretty bad reputation for
hazing. And yet, when I come upon them, it is to find them helping
the poor young greenhorns through the mazes of math. I wonder if
that was a put-up job on me."

"Well you are a silly ninny, Prescott!" uttered Cadet Dodge
disgustedly.

"Meaning--what?" asked Dick coolly.

"Those yearlings were just about caught redhanded."

"Yes."

"And you had to go to work and arrange amateur dramatics like a
flash. So when the tac. pops in here, he finds those most estimable
young ruffians conducting an innocent day school here!"

"Well?" demanded Prescott.

"Why didn't you leave it for that yearling couple to pull their own
chestnuts out of the fire?"

"Because," replied Dick quietly, "I'm not going to be the means, if
I can help it of having any man kicked out of this corps when he's
as anxious to be a soldier as I am!"

"You're a ninny, just the same!" Bert decided.

"And you're a hopeless minority here, Dodge, so come along back
to our room," broke in Anstey. "We've some boning of our own to
do before the call sounds for supper formation."

Before the battalion of cadets marched to supper, through the
heavy storm that night, the news of Dick Prescott's inspiration had
traveled pretty firmly through the yearling class.

It is against all West Point traditions to make a hero of a plebe.
Not a word of congratulation came to Cadet Prescott. It wouldn't
even save the young man from being the victim of a lot of hazing
pranks, for these inflictions were deemed necessary to the plebe's
training. None the less, the incident, as it became known, caused
the impression to spread that Cadet Prescott was a good fellow and
that he was likely to prove a credit to the grand old United States
Military Academy.

Hazing a thing of the past at West Point! The War Department and
the authorities at the Military Academy have done all they could,
and will continue to do all in their power to stamp out hazing.

Since the Congressional investigation in the early years of the
present century, much has been done to cut down the rigor of
hazing at West Point. General Mills stamped out much of it with
iron vigor. Colonel Scott dealt many hard blows to the system.
Other officers have bent their energies to the same problems. The
way of the hazer is perilous nowadays. In a word, of late years
hazing has been at a very low level at the United States Military
Academy.

It is, however, a practical impossibility to stamp out hazing wholly
in an institution where hazing has been one of the most cherished
traditions through many generations of cadets.

The hazing of today is milder; there is less of it, and, with rare
exceptions, it is less brutal. Yet hazing, in one form or another,
will doubtless continue at West Point through the twentieth
century as it did through the nineteenth.

The form of hazing has changed, if not the spirit. Sorely pressed by
tac.s, and by other officers stationed at West Point, the yearlings,
or second-year men, who do most of the hazing, have developed
new forms of the ancient sport, and some of these forms may be
carried on in actual sight of an Army officer without exciting his
suspicions.

Where possible, some of the old-style forms of more innocent and
purely mischievous hazing are retained. Where "necessary" new
hazes are employed that are bound to tax the best efforts of
disciplinary or other officers to detect.

Hazing is one of the diversions of men of mature age on the floor
of the New York Stock Exchange. Even in the United States
Senate there are recognized ways of hazing a new Senator who
displays too little reverence for the traditions of that august body.

Then why hope to abolish hazing utterly at West Point?




CHAPTER VIII

DICK BONES TROUBLE


As May drew on towards June there was, among the yearlings, a
noticeable falling off of interest in hazing. Every second-year man
in the corps found himself much more interested in his standing in
his studies than formerly.

Several of the yearlings had reason to feel acutely concerned over
their standing in academic work. That some of them would be "found"
and dropped from the corps on account of their deficiencies was almost
a foregone conclusion.

So the warm nights of May found anxious young men in all the
classes boning up to within a few minutes of the sound of taps.

Least anxious of all the cadets were the scores of new plebes. They
had been required to report in March mainly that they might
acquire the proper West Point habits of study and recitation before
going into the summer encampment. Hence these new plebes were
not to be treated very searchingly in the academic work.

One afternoon Greg, who had felt half ailing for twenty-four hours,
went on sick report and walked to the hospital to consult the
medical officer in charge.

Captain Goodwin looked Greg over and ordered him to remain at
hospital that night for observation and treatment, declaring that the
young plebe would doubtless be all right by morning.

Cadet Prescott was alone in their room, boning hard, at about nine
that evening, when a member of the cadet guard informed him that
he was wanted by the O.C. It was only to make an explanation of
something trivial that had occurred that afternoon.

As Dick rose, placing his desk in order, he decided to turn off the
gas during his absence. This he did, then left the room.

Crossing the area he climbed the stairs to the office of the O.C.
Pausing at the threshold, he saluted, then was bidden to enter.

Dick's report was quickly made. He was then permitted to return to
quarters.

As Cadet Prescott threw open his door the room was in darkness,
hardly any light entering from the hallway.

As Dick stepped into the room he was startled to see a dimly
defined figure bending over his cot.

In the poor light it seemed to Prescott that the intruder wore the
attire of a "cit."

Now, no civilian had any right in the room, nor in cadet barracks,
for that matter. Prescott's first swift conclusion was that some
scoundrel was there for wholly improper purposes.

"You rascal, I've got you!" exclaimed the plebe, crossing the room
almost in a single bound.

Swift as a flash Dick laid hands on the intruder, dragged him back
from the cot, wheeled him around and let drive a blow from the
shoulder that caught the prowler on the nose and sent him to the
floor.

"Let up, you b.j. plebe!" came a roar of smothered rage.

The body had fallen nearer the door, where the light from outside
was stronger.

Dick noted, with a thrill of dismay, that the other was attired not in
"cit." dress, but in the cadet gray.

"Hold on a minute," begged Prescott.

Striking a match he turned on the gas. As the light flamed up Dick
saw Cadet Corporal Spurlock standing before him, quivering with
rage.

"You b.j. plebe!" snarled Mr. Spurlock. "I'll take this out of you!"

"Certainly," replied Dick promptly. "But, first of all, I want to
assure you that I didn't see the uniform. I thought I had discovered
a cit. in here, and I knew no cit. could be here on any honest
business."

"Bosh!" growled Spurlock, who was holding a handkerchief to a
nose that was bleeding freely.

Cadet Prescott drew himself up, his eyes flashing.

"Pardon me, sir," returned Dick. "But you know, as well as I, sir,
that a lie is impossible to a cadet."

It was a hard report to get around that a cadet had told a lie. At
times cadets have been known to lie, but invariably, after
detection, they have been "cut" and forced out of the corps. So
lying is a rare occurrence, indeed, among the cadets.

"I'll make you settle for this, anyway," sputtered Cadet Corporal
Spurlock.

"Very good, sir," Dick answered resolutely.

"You'll settle at once, too, mister, or as soon as I've stopped
this flow."

"Very good, sir," Dick answered again. "But if I'm not too b.j., sir,
in talking at all, I'll call your attention to that clock. There is just
time for you to reach your quarters before taps sound."

Spurlock glanced hastily at the clock.

"You're right, mister," he admitted. "Then you may wait until you
hear from me, mister."

With that Spurlock walked quickly from the room.

Dick examined his cot and found that Spurlock had been engaged
in the humorous trick of placing some two score exploded caps
from target-rifle ammunition under his under sheet.

"He wanted me to jump into bed and go down plump on all those
caps, and then squirm there until after taps inspection," grinned
Prescott as he swiftly removed the stuff. "It would have been a
tough one, too--but now I guess I have a tougher proposition on my
hands."

Prescott sighed a trifle as he hastily undressed, placing his clothing
according to the regulations on the subject.

Just as he had finished taps sounded on the drum outside. Dick
turned off his gas, bounded into bed and lay there as the door
opened and the bull's-eye lantern of the subdivision inspector
flashed into the room.

"All right here, sir, or accounted for," Dick remarked to the
inspector, who hastily closed the door and hurried along on his
rounds.

True to the medical officer's promise Greg was discharged from
hospital the following morning, and permitted to report back to
full duty.

"What's this I hear, Dick, old ramrod?" Greg demanded as soon as
the chums were back in quarters from breakfast. "The news is
flying around fast that Mr. Spurlock is going to call you out."

"I expect that he is," Dick admitted ruefully, and then told his
chum all the details of the occurrence of the night before.

"Why, that doesn't strike me as fair excuse for a fight," Greg
muttered. "You explained and apologized."

"Mr. Spurlock wouldn't accept any apology."

"Just the same," argued Greg, "I don't believe you have to fight, in
this case. You can refuse, anyway, until the matter has been
examined into by the scrap committee of the yearling class. Now,
in view of the fact that you offered explanation and apology, I
don't believe that the yearling scrap committee can hold you to any
meeting with Mr. Spurlock this time. Let me handle this affair for
you, old ramrod."

"Greg," rejoined Dick, laying an affectionate hand on his
roommate's shoulder, "as long as I'm a new plebe I don't intend to
try to dig out of any fight that an upper class man demands from
me. Perhaps I could get the scrap committee to turn down Mr.
Spurlock's desire--but I don't mean to do anything of the sort. I did
all that I felt I could do consistently to stop the fight. Now it has
got to come off, or else it will be because Mr. Spurlock has
become more reasonable."

"He'll eat you up, that big fellow," mused Greg bitterly. "Mr.
Spurlock is at least fifteen pounds heavier than you. He has had a
year more of West Point gym work than you've had and he has the
reputation of being pretty nearly the yearling champion in the
ring."

"Of course I shall be thrashed," admitted Dick doggedly.
"However, that probably won't do me any permanent harm.
Besides, Greg, it's certain that I'll have to fight some yearling
sooner or later, so I may as well take the dose now. Every plebe, I
reckon, has to have one fight, anyway, with a yearling. It's a part of
the system here, from all I can hear."

Rap-tap sounded at the door.

"Come in," called Dick, but the door opened just as he was calling.
Mr. Kramer, of the yearling class, stepped inside.

"Mr. Spurlock requests me to inform Mr. Prescott that he demands
a fight, at as early a moment as possible."

"My compliments to Mr. Spurlock, and I will meet him--here in
barracks, to-night, I hope. Mr. Holmes has consented to act as one
of my seconds."

"Very good, sir," nodded Yearling Kramer stiffly. "Mr. Holmes,
will you step out and discuss the matter with me now?"

"Yes, sir," responded Greg. He was gone ten minutes. When he
returned Greg announced:

"There's an extra room on the top floor of the next subdivision.
The fight will take place there at nine to-night. Mr. Anstey has
agreed to help look after your interests."

"All right, and thank you, old fellow," nodded Dick, as he turned to
pick up a book.

Greg gulped and quivered behind his chum's back.

"He doesn't seem excited, but I know that I am," muttered Cadet
Holmes. "The dear old fellow won't lose anything through
nervousness, anyway."

Dick went through his studies and recitations as usual that day. If
the stiff ordeal of the coming night carried any twinges for him, it
wasn't noticeable in his demeanor. Yet Dick knew that the news
had gotten thoroughly about among the cadets. He saw many of the
new plebes gazing at him wonderingly.

When they returned from supper that night and reached their room,
Greg was manifestly nervous--nervous enough for the pair of them,
in fact.

"Dick, do you--do you expect to win?" asked Greg at last.

"Against a man like Mr. Spurlock?" smiled Cadet Prescott, and
turned back to his study.

At a little after half past eight Mr. Anstey knocked on the door and
came in.

"How's your form, Prescott, old ramrod?" the Virginian demanded.

"Fine, I hope," replied Dick laconically.

Greg heaved an inward sigh.

"Poor old Dick," he told himself. "I hate to see him hammered
black and blue in a bare-knuckles fight like this one!"




CHAPTER IX

PLEBE PRESCOTT'S FIRST FIGHT


"We'd better get on hand early," advised Greg. "You want to take
plenty of time about stripping for the fight. It would be throwing
some of your chances away, Dick, for you to strip and prepare
hurriedly, and step into the ring all flustered."

"You think I'm going to lose, don't you, Greg?" demanded Prescott
grimly.

"Oh, I hope not," protested Cadet Holmes staunchly.

"But you think so, just the same," smiled Dick. "Now, Greg, do
you remember the old Gridley High School spirit? Do you
remember that our coaches told us to enter every battle on gridiron
or diamond with the firm conviction that we couldn't be beaten?
That's the old Grid. spirit that has been stealing over me the last
few hours."

"It's a mighty good spirit to take into a fight," nodded Anstey.

Yet he, too, felt grave doubts that Prescott could come out of the
approaching fight anything but a mass of pounded pulp. Mr.
Spurlock was one of the highly accredited fighters of the yearling
class.

"Well, we'd better be moving," nodded Greg. When they reached
the unused room on the top floor of the next subdivision of plebes,
they found Cadet Lieutenant Edwards and Mr. Jennison, both of
the first class, already on hand. Mr. Devine, of the yearling class,
who was to be one of Spurlock's seconds, was also in the room.
There were two buckets of water, with sponges, and a supply of
rough towels.

Almost immediately after Mr. Spurlock and Mr. Kramer came in.

Both of the principals now began to strip. Each had chosen the
same fighting costume, consisting of old gray flannel trousers, belt,
rubber soled shoes and sleeveless sweater.

As Spurlock stood forth, arrayed for the battle, it was seen that he
was a man of magnificent build for one of his years. His chest
expansion was splendid. Over his chest and between his shoulders
formidable muscles stood well out. His arms were not fat, but
rather bulky with muscles. He made one think of a blacksmith.

Dick Prescott, being much lighter, did not make such an imposing
appearance. Yet he did not strip to look like a weakling. His chest
was fine, the muscles between his shoulder blades stood up well,
while his arms, far smaller than Spurlock's, displayed the long,
well-knit muscles of the Indian.

Two first class men had volunteered to act as the officials of the
fight, since, in a cadet fight, none of the officials can ever be of the
class represented by either combatant.

"Are you ready, gentlemen?" inquired Mr. Edwards, while Mr.
Jennison drew out a watch that had served at many a cadet fight.

"Ready, sir," replied Spurlock. "Ready, sir," added Prescott. "This
fight," announced the referee, "is to be to a finish. The rounds will
last two minutes each, with a minute's rest between. Queensbury
rules will be followed as far as they can be made to apply. This
being a bare-knuckle fight for a matter of principle, the
combatants will not shake hands."

There was an impressive pause, the referee turning to look at each
fighter in turn.

Spurlock stood at ease, his arms folded over his chest, a grin on his
face.

Plebe Prescott looked less confident. He stood with his fists
clenched at his sides.

"Time!" called Mr. Edwards.

Spurlock unfolded his arms, throwing them in an attitude of
semi-defense, as he coolly looked his opponent over.

Dick Prescott, on the other hand, threw his left foot forward,
planting it firmly though lightly. His left arm raked outward, while
his right fist came to a guard over his heart region.

"I suppose I've got to start this, as well as end it," jeered Mr.
Spurlock. He made a sudden leap forward, throwing his offense
low. Dick's left shot out to counter. Then Spurlock drove in, but
Prescott got away by nimble dodging. Each man had now turned;
the seconds jumped nimbly around, the referee following, while
Jennison, his gaze mostly on the watch, jumped nimbly into a
corner that he judged would not be used by the fighters.

"This isn't a sprint," sneered Spurlock, as he followed nimble Plebe
Prescott around, Dick doing some saving dodging, ducking and
sidestepping.

Nearly a dozen of Spurlock's blows Prescott succeeded in
escaping, though the plebe was kept so busily on the defensive that
he could not get back with anything to count.

"Stand up, you jumping-jack!" hissed Spurlock.

He did get in a short-arm jab on Dick's right lower ribs that made
the plebe gasp audibly.

Spurlock now started in to take advantage of this by getting the
plebe going. Dick, however, dodged less and countered better. He
took two nasty blows, then Mr. Jennison called.

"Time!"

"You're standing him off a heap better than I thought you could,"
whispered Anstey, as he and Greg sponged the plebe fighter off
quickly and then began to knead his muscles. While this was still
going on the referee again summoned the fighters forward.

The second round started. As before, Prescott kept mainly on the
defensive, though always watching his chance to come back at his
more powerful opponent. Spurlock began to press his man hard,
when, of a sudden, Prescott got in low under the other's guard,
came up and landed a blow on the Spurlock nose that brought the
first blood of the fight.

With an angry growl Spurlock leaped in now, to chase and wind up
his younger opponent.

But Dick did some nimble dodging, devoting his attention largely
to defending his eyes from assault.

Then, in turning, suddenly, Dick let one leg drag an instant behind
him. Spurlock, following like lightning, aimed a blow, but it fell
short, for he tripped over Dick's leg and fell sprawling.

Referee, time-keeper and plebe principals laughed. Spurlock's
seconds scowled.

But Dick generously drew back five or six feet, standing on the
defensive until Mr. Spurlock leaped to his feet, ready to renew the
combat.

Spurlock, however, had hurt one of his knees, in going down, just
enough to interfere with his nimbleness of pursuit during the rest
of the round. Time-keep Jennison soon ended that round.

"Mister," growled Yearling Kramer, turning around while Dick sat
between his seconds being sponged and kneaded, "don't be so
much of a coward! Don't run away and delay the finish. Stand up
as if you had some manhood!"

"Thank you, sir," replied Dick coldly. "I'm managing my end of
this fight."

"You b.j. little poltroon," snarled Kramer. "I'll call you out myself
if you have the nerve to talk back!" hissed Kramer.

"Is licking cowards your specialty?" demanded Prescott coolly.

But that settled it, making a coming fight with Kramer an absolute
necessity, now.

"Mr. Kramer," interrupted Mr. Edwards sternly, "this has gone far
enough. You must stop hectoring that plebe, sir. He has all he can
attend to as it is."

Kramer stopped, with a snap of the jaws. He didn't want to. But a
hint, on a matter of etiquette, or the code, from the first class man,
was as valid as a command. And Mr. Edwards had spoken in a
tone that was authoritative enough.

"You run all you want," whispered Greg indignantly. "You have a
right to. This room is smaller than a Queensbury ring."

"I shan't stop my footwork unless the referee orders it," replied
Prescott, in an under-tone.

"You're doing just right," nodded Anstey. "If you weren't Mr. Edwards
would stop it. He's running this fight on the fair-and-square. If I
have a fight I hope it will be my luck to have Mr. Edwards running the
job."

"How do you feel?" asked Anstey, in an undertone.

"All right," returned Dick. "But I had to trust to footwork to save
myself. Mr. Spurlock got nearly all my wind in that other round."

"Is your wind in again?" asked Greg anxiously.

"Yes; I think I feel as fine as my man does," replied Dick, stepping
up from the care of his handlers to await the command.

"Isn't Mr. Kramer the brute?" whispered Anstey indignantly.

"I'm not going to think of him, now," answered Plebe Prescott over
his shoulder. "I have all I can attend to at present."

"I'll get him now, Kramer," muttered Spurlock, as he rose. "Watch
me reduce that b.j. plebe to powder! I hope they have a spare cot
for him over at hospital."

Again the referee set them at it.

Mr. Spurlock encountered a mild surprise, for now Dick seemed
less inclined to trust to his nimble feet. He put up a stand-up front,
though several of Spurlock's sledge-hammer blows passed over
Dick's falling head.

Then the yearling began to fight lower.

The plebe put up a good series of counters, though he took another
bit of punishment in the short ribs, and began to back away.

Across the room, Mr. Spurlock began driving his victim, slowly
but systematically.

Dick retreated, putting up the best guard he could, dodging when
he had to.

But the yearling, full of the grim spirit of the thing, pursued
without undue haste, driving the plebe, a foot at a time, clean
across the room toward the opposite wall.

At last Spurlock had his victim all but leaning against the wall,
sorely pressed. Then, with a sudden tensing of his muscles, the
yearling let his left drive to "paste" the plebe's head against the
hard wall.




CHAPTER X

THE "BEAST" WHO SCORED


SMASH!

But the plebe wasn't there. Dick Prescott had counted on this, and
had wriggled out by a duck and a plunge forward that carried him
beyond momentary risk of Mr. Spurlock's following right.

The yearling's left fist landed with such force as to cause a half
square yard of plaster to fall with a thud.

With a yell of disgust Spurlock wheeled about, but the plebe was
waiting for him.

At just the right instant, Dick let fly with all his might with his
own left.

It caught the yearling over the right eye, closing it.

Just three or four feet back danced Prescott, then came forward
again. A blow set the yearling's nose to bleeding afresh.

Then bang! went the other eye closed. The upper class men gasped
with astonishment, for Spurlock was now getting into bad shape.

He was all but dazed, in fact; and had twenty-five seconds yet to
go in the round.

Then, as much in mercy as for anything else, Dick Prescott
dropped his left against the yearling's jawbone.

There was a crash as the dazed man went to the floor.

Instantly Mr. Jennison's voice rose, counting:

"One, two, three, four--"

"Take the full count, Spurdy," advised Kramer, bending forward
over his principal.

"--eight, nine, ten!" gasped out the timekeeper.

Mr. Spurlock had shown no sign of rising. In fact, he was still
unconscious.

"I award the fight to Mr. Prescott," called the cool, exact tones of
Mr. Edward.

Greg could have let out a whoop and danced a war-dance, but in
the presence of upper class men this plebe had to restrain himself.
Anstey's eyes flashed, but otherwise the Virginian bore himself
modestly.

"Carry Mr. Spurlock down to the door. Then summon
stretcher-bearers from the hospital," directed Mr. Edwards.

It was Yearling Devine who sprang to obey this direction.

Now Dick spoke, ever so quietly.

"Mr. Kramer, I understood that you did me the honor to call me
out."

"Eh?" muttered that other yearling. "Oh, yes; so I did. Whenever
you're ready, mister!"

"If Mr. Edwards and Mr. Jennison are willing," returned the plebe
coolly, "I'm ready as soon as Mr. Spurlock has been carried away."

"Oho, mister! B.j. to the end, are you?"

"No, sir; only anxious to atone for my b.j.-ety," replied Cadet
Prescott, with a little flash of his eyes.

Anstey had gone below with Devine, to render any help that could
be given.

"This is rather unusual, mister," suggested Mr. Edwards, glancing
at his watch. "However, if you really feel fit, and if it suits Mr.
Kramer--"

"Oh, anything will suit me," returned the yearling. Truth to tell,
Kramer wasn't by any means sure that he could whip this crafty
plebe. But the issue had been thrown fairly in his teeth. Moreover,
the honor of the yearling class was now at stake, and Kramer
wasn't the man to go back on his class.

"Listen, gentlemen," broke in Mr. Edwards. "This affair started a
little ahead of the time set. It is now nine-fifteen. In ten minutes or
less, we can have Mr. Spurlock on his way to cadet hospital.
Then, if you two mix it up spicily, we can have the affair over by
nine-forty. In any case I shall have to call the fight by that time,
and decide it a draw, if necessary. What say you?"

"Quite satisfactory, sir," nodded Kramer.

"Satisfactory, sir," added Prescott, waiting, as a plebe should, until
the yearling had spoken.

Devine was back almost at once. The seconds carried the still
unconscious Mr. Spurlock below to the waiting stretcher.
Immediately after Kramer dropped in on a classmate, who gladly
came upstairs to aid Mr. Devine in seconding Mr. Kramer.

Not an unnecessary moment did Mr. Kramer lose with his
stripping. He was ready in almost record time, presenting, bared, a
man of about Mr. Spurlock's proportions, weight and general
muscular fitness.

Mr. Edwards quickly recited the conditions, then called for the
start of the affair.

Figuring that Prescott must now be a good deal sore and at least a
bit winded, Mr. Kramer started in at a lively gait, trying to bear the
plebe down with swift, overpowering rushes and showers of blows.

Some of these landed on the plebe's sturdy body, the whacks
resounding. But the blows merely stirred Prescott's fighting blood
within him. Standing up fairly, with little footwork, but displaying
much more speed, Dick Prescott drove in blow after blow in such
bewildering succession as to all but daze the yearling.

Bang! Kramer's right eye was half closed just as Cadet Jennison
called the end of the first round.

"Great Scott, but that little fellow is a canned hurricane!" muttered
Devine, as he wrung out cloths in cold water and applied then to
Kramer's swelling eye. "Old man, you want to swing one blow
down on the top of his head, and crush him, if you want to save
your personal appearance."

"Won't I?" grunted Kramer. "Just watch me. I won't murder the
plebe, but I've stood all the fooling I'm going to."

As the combatants rushed at each other again Kramer struck out
two or three times; then clinched to save himself.

"Break away, there!" admonished Edwards sternly. "Get off!"

Again in that round Kramer clinched, despite the referee's sternest
orders.

"That's no way to meet a plebe, Mr. Kramer," cried Edwards
disgustedly.

After the second get-away Dick fairly danced around his man. A
blow on the nose brought Kramer's blood. Then his left eye went
all but shut. At that the yearling spun dizzily. Dick drove a light
blow in behind his man's ear. Down went Spurlock's "avenger"
sprawling on the floor.

Mr. Jennison began to count while Kramer lay on the floor, stirring
uneasily, yet not seeming to comprehend his seconds' warnings.

"--eight, nine, ten!" finished Mr. Jennison, then put the watch in his
pocket.

"The fight is awarded to Mr. Prescott, and it isn't nine thirty yet,"
announced Mr. Edwards.

Dick's jubilant seconds sponged him, rubbed him down, kneaded
his muscles and joyously assisted him in dressing.

Kramer, coming to presently, but with a face that Anstey said
"made him think of the Dismal Swamp," was assisted downstairs
by his seconds, and taken to the cadet hospital.

With the exception of the two yearlings whom Cadet Prescott had
thrashed to a finish, all who had taken any part in the fights were
in their beds, and lights out, when the subdivision inspectors
flashed their bull's-eye lanterns into the room a moment after taps
had sounded.

For the honor of the class another yearling, Garston, forced a
dispute within a few days, and Prescott had his third fight on his
hands. He won it, though, about as easily as he had the other two.

Three such victories left this plebe free from further fight
annoyance. Also, according to a tacitly understood rule, none of
these three yearlings could engage in hazing Mr. Prescott after
that.




CHAPTER XI

HOW CADET DODGE HELD POST NUMBER THREE


In the early days of the month of June, came all the glories of
Commencement.

The first class graduated, and went forth to receive their
commissions in the Regular Army.

The second class became the new first class, and head and arbiters
of all personal affairs in the battalion of cadets.

The yearlings now became second class men, and departed on
their summer furlough, to last until the latter part of August.

The old plebes moved up a peg, also, and became the new
yearlings, vested with all the power of hazing and otherwise
oppressing and training the plebes.

But for the new plebes--what? They were plebes just as much as
ever, and would be until the following June.

The day after the graduating class had departed, and the late
yearlings had followed in their trail, as the furloughed new second
class, what was left of the battalion marched forth out of barracks
into camp.

Here under the khaki-colored tents what was left of the battalion
settled down to the life of the soldier in the field.

An untrained eye might not have noticed much in the arrangement
of the camp. However, the tents of the main camp were arranged
along six company streets. There was also the larger tent of the
tactical officer in charge, the guard-tent, and some other tents used
in the administration of camp-life.

Now, every text-book was laid aside for the summer. Instruction
during camp period was to be in the practical duties that belong to
the soldier's life.

The new first class mourned the loss of a few members who had
been "found"--that is, who had failed in their studies just before
Commencement. More than a score had been dropped from the
new yearling class. Only two of the new plebes had been dropped,
they having been found wholly and absolutely unfit to keep the
brain-fagging pace of academic work at West Point.

"I never minded study back home," muttered Greg, as he and Dick
toiled setting their few belongings to rights under canvas. "But, the
way the study-gait is kept up here at West Point, I certainly say
'hurrah' with all my heart at the thought that books are closed for
all summer."

"We'll be back at the grind in September again," laughed Dick.
"And I'm assured that we haven't struck the real study-gait yet; that
these new three months from March on are only to break us in a
bit, so that we won't mind the real thing so much when we meet it
in September."

"Then you give me cause for gloomy thought," shuddered Greg.

"Make way for a future general," grinned Anstey, as, with both
arms full of belongings he forced his way into the tent. The cadets
were housed three to a tent, and Anstey, to the great delight of
Dick and Greg, had been assigned to bunk with them. Anstey, too,
was delighted, for the young Virginian was a gentleman of the
actual type, who had been growing steadily more weary of the
sham "gentleman" that Bert Dodge had so far illustrated.

"I'm tent orderly this week," announced Dick, with a grin. "I
received that very important news five minutes ago. I'm
responsible for the order and condition of the tent for this week, so
you fellows will have to step around to keep the tent in style to suit
me."

"Oh, if you're tent orderly," laughed Anstey, "then we don't have to
take the word from you."

"You don't?" demanded Prescott.

"No, indeed. If you're the orderly, then you're merely a striker."

A "striker," in the Army, is an enlisted man who is paid by an
officer for doing servant's work in spare time. Hence, a striker is,
in general, anyone engaged in menial service.

"Come on, Holmesy," urged Anstey, rising. "We'll go out for a
stroll. Striker, see to it that you have a flawless tent interior when
we return."

In his glee Anstey seized Greg by one arm and started to rush him
out of the tent.

"Oh, all right; go along," gibed Dick. "See who'll get the lash
though, when I turn in my report."

"Would you skin us?" demanded Anstey, halting in the doorway of
the tent and gazing back with a look of mock horror.

To "skin" a brother cadet is to report him for some dereliction in
duty, thereby bringing down discipline upon the offender.

"Skin you?" repeated Dick. "Yes, sir! If you leave me to bring
order out of all this military chaos I'll hand you in to the O.C. in a
way that will take every square inch of cuticle from your body."

"Traitor!" hissed Anstey tragically.

"Mister, it's a whole year yet before plebes can sing, laugh, or be
happy," came the muttered warning, as one of the newly-made
yearlings passed by the tent.

Anstey became silent at once. He had been at West Point long
enough to know his place as a plebe.

"Say," whispered Anstey presently, his eyes brimming over with
glee, "have you seen poor old Dodge to-day?"

"Not particularly," responded Prescott.

"Well, he's the maddest rookie (recruit) you ever saw! Having been
old Dodge's roommate up to reveille this morning, I am in a
position to state that he took advantage of the general laxity last
night, and slipped out of barracks after taps last night. He and
some other embryo cadets got a rowboat, through connivance with
a soldier in the engineer's detachment. They rowed across the
river, to Garrison, and had some kind of high old racket. It must
have been high," added Anstey pensively, "for I happened to turn
over in bed this morning, and I saw old Dodge slipping back into
the room about an hour before reveille."

"Well, what's he mad about, now?" demanded Dick.

"Why, he has been drawn for the new guard! He's on guard for
to-day and to-night!" chuckled Anstey gleefully. "Already dead for
sleep, his official duties will keep him without much more sleep
for twenty-four hours, or until the new guard goes on to-morrow.
Even then he'll have some other things to take up some of his
time."

By-and-by the tent was so much and well to rights that, when
Cadet Corporal Brodie, of the new yearling class, looked in, he
could find no fault with its appearance.

Dick sat down on his box. Greg did the same. Plebes are not
allowed campstools in the summer encampment--probably on the
theory that so much luxury would be certain to demoralize them.

"I'm going out for a wee bit stroll," drawled Anstey, after taking a
look in the tiny soldier's mirror to see that his appearance was in
apple-pie order.

"Don't make the mistake of forgetting, and calling on one of the
new yearlings," cautioned Dick dryly.

"There's no trace of insanity in our family history," responded
Anstey gravely, as he stepped outside.

Dick and Greg found they had much to talk about in comparing
notes of what each had learned about the nature of duties in the
summer camp. They were still thus engaged when Anstey bounded
back into the tent. The young Virginian looked as though he were
having a tremendously hard time to keep himself from exploding.

"Oh, this is rich!" he chuckled.

"What is?" inquired Dick, looking up in some mystification.

"What do you suppose Dodge has gone and done, now?"

"Said a kind word about me?" smiled Prescott.

"I didn't say anything about miracles," drawled the Virginian. "No;
poor old Dodge has drawn number three post for guard duty on the
late tour to-night!"

"Well, isn't three a good enough number?" asked Greg innocently.

"A good post, you meandering old puddin'-head!" retorted Anstey.
"Good? The post that goes by old Fort Clinton?"

"Well, it is a bit lonely, off there in the woods," admitted Cadet
Prescott.

"Lonely?" bubbled over Anstey. "And you've seen the ditch that
runs along by that post?"

"Naturally," nodded Dick. "You will probably remember that I got
past the eye-sight tests of the rainmakers" (doctors).

"Now, I've just been talking with a young cit. fellow, who's visiting
one of the officers on post," continued Anstey. "He tells me that,
every year, some of the yearlings slyly waylay a plebe whenever
they can catch him pacing on number three post late at night."

"What do they do to him?" questioned Prescott.

"Oh, they don't do a thing to him, I reckon," drawled the Virginian.
"At least, nothing that a jovial fellow can object to. They may roll
him down in the ditch, take his gun away from him, and hide it, or
some little thing like that."

"Then, see here," proposed Dick solemnly, "Dodge may not be the
most popular fellow in the corps, but he's one of us, anyway. He
belongs to our class. Anything that is done against him is, in a
measure, done to the whole class. Anstey, we ought to get Dodge
aside and warn him."

"Warn him?" repeated Anstey aghast. "Warn him--and spoil all the
fun!"

"I know I'd want to be warned, if it were likely to happen to me
to-night," insisted Dick soberly.

"Oh--well, I don't know but that you're right," assented Anstey
slowly. "Yes; I'm certain you are."

"Hullo, you raw-looking rookies," hailed Dodge, halting and
looking in through the doorway.

"Come in here a minute, Dodge," urged Anstey.

For an instant Dodge looked suspicious. Then he muttered:

"As you're not yearlings, I accept the invitation."

Very spick and span Dodge looked as he entered the tent. As a
member of the guard he wore a pair of immaculate white duck
trousers, which held the "spooniest" crease imaginable. His gray
coat and white gloves made him look more the dandy than usual.

"We've something to tell you, Dodge," Anstey continued almost in
a whisper, as the four plebes stood in a close bunch. "At least, old
ramrod says we ought to tell you."

Then, lowering his voice still more, Anstey gave an outline of what
the new yearlings were supposed to try to do to the lonely plebe on
post number three at the hour when ghosts walk.

"Humph!" rejoined Dodge quickly. "Let the yearlings try that sort
of trick, if they dare. Have those fellows no idea of the sacred
position of trust held by a United States sentinel? For I, on sentry
duty, represent the sovereignty of the United States just as much as
does any soldier patrolling a lonely post in the face of the enemy in
war time!"

"All very well," grinned Dick "But how are you going to prove it, if
the yearlings catch you napping tonight?"

"They won't," retorted Dodge pompously. "They shan't. And if any
fellow, I don't care who he is, tries to rush my post to-night he'll
feel the steel of one of Uncle Sam's bayonets prodding him in the
tenderest part of his worthless carcass!"

"Look out, Dodge!" cautioned Greg softly. "Don't let any of the
yearlings hear you canning a brag like that, or they'll get you if
they have to turn out the whole class after taps to do the job."

"Let 'em try it!" insisted Dodge. "And you fellows are at liberty to
tell anyone that I said it."

With that the speaker turned and strolled out of the tent, looking
rather miffed.

"The pompous old idiot!" muttered Anstey, in a tone of pained
disgust. "Oh, why did ever fond parents let a mentally irresponsible
chap like that come to a place like West Point for anyway?"

"Our skirts are clear, anyway," remarked Dick Prescott
consolingly. "We told him all we knew. If he doesn't act upon it,
it's his rifle, not ours, that gets fouled."

Dodge not only believed the hoax to be impossible, with him on
number three, but he was incautious enough to talk about it freely
among the plebes during the day.

As was almost certain to happen, one of the yearlings heard Dodge
sounding his trumpet of brag. That yearling, on the other side of a
tent wall, grinned, and presently took counsel with other yearlings.

It was almost at the stroke of taps that night when Bert Dodge
marched from guard tent with the relief under Cadet Corporal
Hasbrouck.

As the other sentry on number three fell in, and Dodge stepped out
to take up his vigil, Corporal Hasbrouck gave added instructions to
the new and untried sentry.

"Sometimes, Mr. Dodge, this post has been known to be about as
dangerous as one in war time."

"Yes, sir, answered Dodge respectfully, as he was bound to. Then
as the cadet corporal marched on with the relief, Dodge glanced
after the vanishing squad to mutter to himself:

"What a lot of nonsense. I'd like to see anyone rush me!"

"I wonder what Dodge will do on number three to-night," yawned
Anstey, just before the three tentmates fell asleep.

"Oh, I wonder what it will be," grinned Greg.

Then the three went sound asleep.

Dick turned later and awoke just in time to hear the voice of a
sentry calling:

"Half past eleven! Post number one, and all's we-ell!"

Then, a little further away, another voice took up the refrain:

"Post num-ber two, and all's we-ell!"

"Jupiter!" gasped sleepy Prescott, becoming instantly wide awake.
"Post number three doesn't answer. They've gone and got old
Dodge."

There was a rapid sound of feet in the company street as Corporal
Hasbrouck and the guard rushed along at double quick.

"Hey, you--wake up!" commanded Dick, vigorously prodding the
plebe sleepers on either side of him.

"All present, sir!" sleepily mumbled Anstey.

"What's up?" demanded Greg, sitting up.

"The very deuce!" retorted Dick. "There! Listen to that!"

"Bang!" sounded a rifle report. Then Corporal Hasbrouck's
bellowing voice could be heard:

"Officer of the day, post number three!" Some one could be heard
running down the street. A few moments passed, during which
Dick, Greg and Anstey sat up on their mattresses listening eagerly.

Then came the officer of the day running back.

There was another brief pause, or just long enough for the officer
of the day to make a report to the O.C. and to receive orders.

Tr-r-rat-tat-tat-tat! The drummers at guard tent were running out
the crisp summons of assembly.

"Get up! Tumble out lively for general roll call!" muttered Dick,
springing to his feet.

"What in the mischief can they have done to old Dodge?"
wondered Greg as he hurriedly pulled on his shoes.

"You men will turn out instantly," ordered a cadet corporal,
thrusting his head in at the tent doorway. "Elaborate dressing isn't
necessary."

Dick bolted out, followed by Anstey, Greg bringing up the rear.

Cadets by scores and hundreds were falling in by companies, while
the company commanders stood by watchful and alert.

Only the members of the guard were excused from this assembly.

Almost instantly orders rang out crisply, and the ranks closed.
Then the cadet adjutant, the roll in his hands, began to call the
names by companies, holding a pencil in readiness to check down
any cadet found absent.

Back of the adjutant stood the cadet officer of the day and Captain
Vesey, of the Army, who was the tac. doing duty as O.C.

The calling of the roll, while the cadets stood in ranks, wondering,
brought a surprise to Captain Vesey. Every cadet supposed to be in
camp was present or satisfactorily accounted for.

"When dismissed," rang the cadet adjutant's voice, "men not on
duty will return to their tents and finish the night's rest. Dismiss by
companies."

As the drowsy cadets turned back to their company streets there
was a buzz of eager, under-toned conversation. Some of the men
of the guard threw in enough information so that the main part of
the story became known and flew like fire through the camp.

When post number three failed to answer at half past eleven
Corporal Hasbrouck and a squad of the guard went to that post in
double-quick time.

Dodge was found to be absent from his post, but his rifle, with
bayonet fixed, was securely tied to a near-by bush in the position
of "port arms."

Dodge simply was not to be found. At one point signs of a scuffle
had been found, but the trail, after starting down the slope, soon
disappeared.

Cadet Dodge could not be found. No one, unless some unidentified
hazers, knew where that young sentry was.

Assembly had been sounded and all cadets called out for roll call
in order that it might be learned what cadets, if any, were absent
from camp without authority. But roll each had failed to show any
absentees.

Captain Vesey was furious. So was Lieutenant-Colonel Strong, the
commandant of cadets, who had just been summoned, and who
was now at the tac. tent questioning Hasbrouck and others.

Through the night no trace was found of Mr. Dodge.




CHAPTER XII

PRESCOTT GETS NUMBER THREE


When the cadet battalion marched off to mess the following morning the
mystery of Cadet Dodge's whereabouts was as big a mystery as ever.

At the tent of the O.C., however, things were seething. As soon as
the battalion returned to camp cadets were sent for in rapid
succession.

However, the trail remained as blind as ever. The various
detachments were ordered out for drill or practical instruction.

Our three young cadets were marched nearly two miles for
instruction in target practice. At the outset this work was with the
gallery rifle at short ranges.

At the close of practice the squad was marched back over the dusty
roads.

"Dodge has been found," was the smiling word passed around as
this detachment of plebes was dismissed inside camp limits.

"Where? How? When?"

The amazing story was told with a good deal of quiet laughter.

At about half past eight this morning one of the workmen
employed in a lumber yard at Garrison, across the river, walking in
behind a pile of lumber close to the river, was amazed to find a
pillow slip lying on the ground. What was much more astonishing
was the fact that a waist and a pair of legs protruded from the
pillowcase, and the feet were bound.

The workman, a dull-witted fellow, thought he had stumbled upon
a case of murder, and rushed back to the office. The manager
thereupon hurried to the spot and the mystery was quickly solved.

The pillowcase being removed, they saw Mr. Dodge, bound and
gagged.

He was promptly set free and questioned. But he refused any
information to the manager of the lumber yard, beyond stating that
he had been the victim of an outrage.

On the next trip of the ferry across the river Mr. Dodge returned,
the lumber yard manager accompanying him. Mr. Dodge had
reported, with a very crestfallen air, at the guard tent, and from
there had been hurried on to Captain Vesey's tent. Now the story
came out.

Mr. Dodge had just given the eleven o'clock hail, the night before,
when he was suddenly seized from behind and thrown flat. A
pillowcase was slipped over his head while he was held by so
many that struggling was out of the question. By the time the
pillowcase had been pulled down over his head Mr. Dodge also
discovered that he had been swiftly but most effectively bound.

For the rest he knew only that he had been carried down the slope,
unable to give any alarm, and that he had been lifted into a boat,
taken over the river and dumped in the lumber yard. Here he had
spent the rest of the night and the early morning until found. He
had tried, repeatedly, to free himself, but had failed.

This was all the material on which Captain Vesey, and his superior,
Lieutenant-Colonel Strong, had upon which to work, save for Dodge's
admission that he had been warned, the day before, by Cadets Prescott,
Holmes and Anstey. These three were accordingly summoned to the
O.C.'s tent and asked to explain.

"Mr. Prescott," asked Captain Vesey, "why did you warn Mr.
Dodge? What information had you that such an outrage on a
sentry was being planned?"

"I knew only what Mr. Anstey had told me, sir," replied Dick at
once.

"Mr. Anstey," demanded Captain Vesey, turning to the Virginian,
"what information did you have, and how did you obtain it?"

Back of the O.C. sat the K.C. (commandant of cadets), his dark
eyes fixed upon the witnesses.

"All the information I had, sir, was what a young cit. with whom I
talked yesterday morning told me about pranks that had been
played in past years upon plebes who had the late tour of post
number three."

"Your statement is that you had a conversation with a citizen, and
that he told you of pranks that had been played in former years?"

"Yes, sir; that was the intent of my statement."

"The citizen with whom you talked did not give you any hint that a
trick might be played last night?"

"No, sir; only in the general way that the citizen's stories made me
half suspect that something might be tried last night."

"Because Mr. Dodge was a plebe?"

"Yes, sir.

"And also because the plebe was Mr. Dodge?" Anstey hesitated an
instant, then shot out promptly.

"Yes, sir."

"Why did you think that Mr. Dodge was extremely likely to be
singled out?"

Cadet Anstey flushed and again hesitated.

"You are not required to say anything distinctly to the discredit or
disadvantage of Mr. Dodge, but you are required, Mr. Anstey, to
give any information that will aid the authorities in running down
this outrage and its perpetrators. Again, sir, why did you imagine
that Mr. Dodge would be singled out?"

"I knew, sir, that a good many upper class men regarded Mr.
Dodge as being decidedly b.j.," the Virginian admitted reluctantly.

"Then you attribute this affair to Mr. Dodge's unpopularity with
some of the upper class men?"

"I wouldn't say, sir, that Mr. Dodge is unpopular, but I think, sir,
that some of the upper class men feel that Mr. Dodge needs taking
in hand."

"For hazing?"

"For--er--well, sir--for general training."

"That is hazing--nothing more nor less," broke in the K.C. coldly.
"And we shall leave no stone unturned to stop this hazing and to
punish all perpetrators of hazing."

"Did Mr. Dodge accept your warning?" continued Captain Vesey.

"He did not, sir."

"Mr. Anstey, on your word as a cadet and a gentleman, you have
told me all you know of the affair?"

"Yes, sir."

"Mr. Prescott, on your word as a cadet and a gentleman, have you
told me all you know?"

"Yes, sir," Dick replied. "That is, sir, all except what is common
knowledge to all, yourself included, sir."

"Mr. Holmes, have you any knowledge bearing on this subject, in
addition to what has been stated by these other cadets?"

"None, sir."

"That is all for the present," nodded Captain Vesey. "You may go."

As soon as the cadets were out of hearing the "tac." turned to the
K.C.

"The motive back of this outrage on a sentry is all quite clear to
me, Colonel," spoke the subordinate officer. "Dodge is an
unpopular and b.j.-ish fellow. He has undoubtedly been making
his brags that he'd bag any yearlings who tried to interfere with
him on post. Some of the yearlings must have taken up the
challenge."

"Yet at roll call last night, which was held at once, every cadet
responded or was properly accounted for," broke in the K.C.
savagely.

"Yes, Colonel; but the young men had nearly half an hour in which
to work."

"They couldn't have rowed both ways across the Hudson and have
gotten back into camp in time for that swift roll call," retorted
Colonel Strong.

"Even that part of the affair doesn't seem very puzzling to me, sir,"
replied Captain Vesey. "Assuming that yearlings bagged Mr.
Dodge, as I think they did, they may have had citizen friends at
hand to carry out the rest of the affair with a boat. They may even
have arranged with soldiers belonging to one of the Army
detachments here."

"The only matter of importance now, Captain Vesey, is to find out
just which cadets, if cadets were engaged in the outrage, seized
Mr. Dodge on his post."

"In ferreting them out, Colonel, I will follow to the last extremity
any instructions you may give me, sir," promised Captain Vesey.

The K.C. tugged hard at his moustache, then scowled harder than
before.

"What do you think the chances are, Vesey, of our finding the
perpetrators?"

"Frankly, Colonel, I don't think we have a chance in a million,
unless some yearling concerned in the matter voluntarily
confesses."

"A yearling voluntarily confess!" snorted the K.C. rising. "Bah!"

Captain Vesey smiled after his superior officer had stalked out of
the tent. It is just barely possible that the younger officer,
remembering some prank of his own yearling days, wasn't
extraordinarily anxious to detect yearlings in an offense that would
result in depriving the Army of the further services of some very
bright and resourceful young men.

Hot, dusty, perspiring, first class men, yearlings and plebes came
back to camp in detachments from various tours of drum and
instruction. The only cadets who looked at all fresh were the
members of the guard, who were excused from the day's drills. Yet
for these returning ones, late in the afternoon of a hot day, there
was no immediate rest. Some of the cadets came back in service
clothes, others in khaki, still others in field costume of campaign
hat, flannel shirt, gray trousers and leggins. Immediately the young
men in all these varieties of uniform disappeared within their tents.
There was a subdued sound of great bustle. Then, almost in the
same instant, it seemed, cadets stepped from the various tents into
the open. Each was immaculate, very nearly glorious in spotless,
faultlessly pressed white duck trousers, topped by the gray
full-dress coat and hat. Each cadet carried his rifle now, except for
the cadet officers, who wore their swords.

With almost dizzying speed, after the return and the dressing, the
assembly was sounded. The company to which Dick and his
mates belonged was then, at the command, formed and inspected,
marched across the plain, over to the parade ground, where
hundreds of girls, in bright-hued dresses, and other visitors to West
Point awaited their coming.

With the cadet adjutant and cadet sergeant-major in place as
guides, the company came to its place in battalion formation.
Other companies marched in, and parade rest was ordered. Now, at
the command, a few movements in the manual of arms were
executed, the battalion presenting a beautiful line of gray, white
and flashing steel. Next the band, playing gayly, marched from left
of line, before the battalion, halting in place beyond the right of
line. Fifes and drums sounded the retreat. The sunset gun boomed
over the hollow beyond; down came the Stars and Stripes on one
more day of national life, while the band played "The Star
Spangled Banner" and all the men and boys among the spectators,
including several on-looking Army officers, uncovered their heads,
standing rigidly at attention. It was an awe-inspiring moment to
one who could feel the thrill of patriotism. This whole ceremony
of dress parade had about it the impressive solemnity of religious
worship.

There were yet some more formalities. Then the young men were
marched back. A few minutes after the sunset gun the men were
once more in their own company streets, and, for all cadets except
those of the guard, the work day was over. In the evening there
was to be a cadet hop at Cullom Hall, at which many of the
bright-faced girls who had watched dress parade would be present.
The evening after there would be a band concert in camp. So the
nights of the cadet summer were passed.

But the hops were not for the plebes. They could dance only in the
day time, under the watchful eyes of the dancing instructor, for
every plebe must take dancing lessons in summer until he has been
pronounced qualified. To a cadet hop, though there is no official
rule against it, no plebe ever presumes to go. Nor may he, for that
matter, mingle in the social life with the young lady visitors at the
post. He may try it, of course, but no well-informed girl will allow
a plebe to take the chances. If a plebe is caught actually paying
attention to any young woman the upper class men take care of
him in their own effective way. A plebe, like any other cadet, must
show courtesy to any woman who addresses him; beyond that the
young man must not go during his plebedom. "Flirtation Week" is
close by, but no plebe ever dares to stroll there.

This being the night of the hop, the upper class men were busy
with their toilets as soon as they returned from supper; or as many
of them were as had arranged to "drag a femme" to the hop. This is
cadet parlance for escorting a young lady to the dance. However,
some upper class men notoriously avoid attending hops.

"It's a fine thing, isn't it," growled Greg that evening, "to take a
lot of dancing lessons every week, and then, when the night comes
around, to stroll through the company streets and listen to the
orchestra in the distance."

"I'm not complaining," Dick replied.

"Yet you used to be fond of dancing."

"I am now."

"Then why don't you yearn to go to a hop?"

"I do. But see here, Greg. The fellow makes the best soldier, in the
end, I'll wager, who learns to keep his greatest desires in check. All
the restrictions thrown around the plebe by custom are intended to
make him the better man, soldier and officer by teaching him to
wait until his time comes."

"I congratulate you, mister," spoke a low but hearty voice from the
doorway of a tent the two plebes were passing. "You're coming on,
mister. Grin and bear it. You'll be happy one of these days!"

Dick and Greg glanced backward over their shoulders to see that
the speaker was Mr. Reynolds, member of the new first class and a
cadet captain. Reynolds usually attended the hops. But for to-night
he had only a telegram in the breast of his coat in the place of the
cherished "femme" whom he had hoped to "drag." As he stood in
his doorway, looking up at the inscrutable stars, Cadet Captain
Reynolds was taking his own lesson in patient waiting.

"Thank you, sir," Dick replied in a low tone, then faced front again.

That night another plebe was on post number three during the tour
ending at midnight. He was not molested, however, which was
most fortunate for mischief-loving yearlings, for the K.C. had
stationed two tacs. in hiding close by, to be promptly on hand in
case of any attempted trouble.

A few nights later it came Dick Prescott's turn to take the late tour
on post number three. He was both apprehensive and watchful, but
when the relief picked him up at midnight he had no report of any
kind to make.

It was well enough known throughout cadet camp that the
superintendent and all his subordinates were bent sternly on
stopping or severely punishing any attempts to interfere with
sentries.

As the weeks of hard work passed, and no more mysteries fell over
post number three it began to be felt that plebes might thereafter
walk there on the darkest night without worry.

One day in July Dick found himself again on guard, with post
number three for the "ghosts promenade"--that is, the tour ending
at midnight.

"Don't feel too secure, will you, old man?" begged Anstey. "Watch
out, just the same, won't you?"

"I always take that post as though it were one of especial danger,"
Dick answered seriously.

Which was well indeed, for Yearlings Davis, Graham and Poultney
were even then plotting behind the walls of their tent.




CHAPTER XIII

THE SENTRY MAKES A CAPTURE


"Post number one! Eleven o'clock, and all's well."

"Post number two! Eleven o'clock, and all's well!"

Cadet Prescott, midway on his post, came to a halt, bringing his
rifle to port arms.

"Post number three! Eleven o'clock, and all's well."

Nor did the plebe return his rifle to his shoulder and resume pacing
until he heard the hail taken up and repeated by the man on
number four. Thus the call traveled the rounds, back to number
one, and died out.

Just an instant later Plebe Prescott became suspicious that
something was wrong in his immediate vicinity.

Rain was threatening, and the sultry night was so dark that, on this
shaded post, the young sentry could see barely a few yards away
from him.

Yet Dick was certain he saw something flash darkly by, not far
away. It could hardly have been a shadow. Whatever it was, a
clump of bushes now concealed the moving something.

"Halt! Who's there?" hailed Cadet Prescott. He stopped to listen,
bringing his rifle once more down to port arms.

There was no response.

Certain, however, that his senses had not been deluded, the young
sentry stepped quickly toward the clump of bushes.

From the other side of the bushes came a sudden sound of
scrambling.

"Halt! Who's there?" demanded Prescott again.

Whoever it was, and plainly there was more than one man there,
the prowlers had no mind to be held up by the sentry or the guard.

"Halt, or I'll run a bayonet into you!" shouted Prescott resolutely.
"Corporal of the guard, post number three!" he bellowed aloud.

At the same time he was darting after the fugitives, whom it was
too dark to distinguish. From the very little that his eyes could
make out, however, it was his belief that the running men were
cadets.

Then one must have stumbled and fallen, for a figure lay between
two bushes as Prescott dashed up.

"Don't you attempt to rise until you get the word, or you'll feel the
jab of my bayonet," warned Dick.

He couldn't follow the others much further, anyway, as he had no
authority to leave his post. The man on number four must have
heard, and would be alert.

"Where are you, number three sentry!" came Cadet Corporal
Brodie's hail.

"Here, sir!" Dick answered. He still stood watching the figure that
lay in the shadow of the bushes. The fallen one had not attempted
to move. Dick Prescott was close enough to make a thrust with his
bayonet-tipped rifle if the fallen one made any effort to leap up.

That was as close as Dick intended to get until help was at hand,
for an old trick with cadets running the guard on a dark night on
this lonely stretch was to wait until the sentry got close enough,
then to reach out and grab him by the ankles, throwing him.

Always, when such a trick was played successfully, the offender
would be up, off and safe by the time the thrown sentry was on his
own feet again.

So Prescott, without in the least intending to let his prisoner get
away, did not venture close enough to risk being pitched over on
his back himself.

"Poor old skylarker, too! I'm sorry for him," muttered Dick, under
his breath. "I'm afraid this spells trouble for some yearling."

"What can I do, though? I show my own unfitness if I let anyone run
the guard past me."

"Call again, sentry on three!" directed the voice of Corporal
Brodie.

"Here, sir," Dick answered.

Then to the spot ran the corporal, followed by two men of the
guard.

"Two or more men attempted to cross this post, sir," Dick
reported. "One tripped, and I'm holding him."

"Head him off, if he attempts to run ahead," directed Mr. Brodie,
nodding to one of his men of the guard. "Now, then, get up, and let
us see whether you're a cadet, or only a banker's son."

But the figure did not rise.

"Get up, sir, I tell you," ordered Corporal Brodie, slowly stepping
past Prescott.

But the figure did not stir.

"Perhaps the man fell and stunned himself," muttered Brodie.
Passing his rifle to his left hand the corporal parted the bushes,
then bent over the prostrate one.

"Oh, hang you!" growled the cadet corporal. He seized the figure
with his right hand, yanked it upward, then hurled it out, letting it
fall again across the post.

"Is that the man you stopped, Mr. Prescott?" demanded Corporal
Brodie in disgust.

But instead of answering, at that moment, Dick straightened up,
brought his rifle to port, and hailed:

"Halt! Who's there?"

"The officer of the day," came out of the blackness.

"Advance, officer of the day, to be recognized," Dick replied.

Forward out of the deep shadow came Cadet Captain Reynolds.

"What's the trouble, Corporal?" inquired the latest arrival.

"Mr. Prescott reports that two or more persons attempted to run
across his post, sir. He overtook one, who stumbled. Mr. Prescott
was guarding his prisoner as I arrived, sir, and that was the
prisoner!"

Corporal Hasbrouck pointed in disdain at the stuffed figure that he
had hauled out from under the bushes and Dick's bayonet.

"A stuffed figure, in gray trousers and shirt, eh?" questioned
Captain Reynolds. "Sentry, were the two or three men who got
away from you of the same composition?"

"I don't know, sir," Dick answered, with mortification. "All I know,
sir, is that those who got away ran pretty fast, and made so little
noise that they doubtless wore rubber-soled shoes."

"You've been hoaxed, sentry," commented the officer of the day
dryly. "Corporal, have your men of the guard bring the prisoner up
to the guard tent. Sentry, if any more straw men attempt to cross
your post, bring them down as well as you did this one. The straw
men who got away from you made their way into camp, didn't
they?"

"Whoever escaped, sir, got into camp all right."

As the guard-house party returned, Dick resumed the pacing of
number three. He felt his face still blazing, from the quiet ridicule
of the officer of the day.

"I'll catch it to-morrow from everyone who thinks me worth
noticing," growled the plebe to himself. "However, though I tried
to do my full duty, I'm glad that was what I caught. I wouldn't care
to march a comrade in, a prisoner."

When the midnight relief came around, and Prescott's relief was
posted in his place, the young plebe knew the ordeal ahead of him.

As soon as the relieved squad was halted at the guard tent, and
Dick entered to get himself a cup of coffee and a sandwich or two,
his glance fell upon the stuffed figure, which reposed on the floor
at the back of the tent as though it had been a veritable prisoner.

"Did you shoot it, Prescott?" asked Derwent, the man who had just
been relieved on number four.

"No; he lassoed it with his neck-tie," jeered another man of the
guard.

"Wonder if the prisoner is hungry!" pursued Derwent. "Prescott,
the prisoner is yours. Attend to his feeding. And the poor fellow
should have some proper bedding, too, a chilly night like this."

"A merciful soldier wouldn't eat until he had seen his prisoner
fed," tantalized another.

Dick had his cup of coffee at his mouth.

"Prescott, old man," commented fat Smith, "you'll be commended
in general orders for distinguished bravery."

That was enough, in itself, to make Dick choke, but Smith
emphasized his remark by slapping Dick on the back. An ounce of
hot coffee, at least, "went down the wrong way." Choking and
gasping for breath, trying to expel the coffee from his windpipe,
and all the while obliged to lean well forward so as not to expel
any of the coffee over the front of his blouse, Dick thought he
never would get his breath again.

"Instead of feeding his prisoner, I believe Mr. Prescott has been
eating some of his prisoner," observed Corporal Hasbrouck dryly.
"Mr. Prescott, himself, appears to be full of straw at present."

The general laugh that followed didn't make it any easier for the
victim of all this nonsense. In laughing again Dick choked so that
he began to turn slightly black.

"Dry up, you hyenas!" ordered Cadet Captain Reynolds, as he
rushed to Prescott's relief. In a few moments the late sentry on
number three was breathing easily again. He threw himself down
on a mattress, and was soon asleep.

But in the morning he had to go through the ordeal ten-fold. As
Dick went to his tent to change some articles of clothing Bert
Dodge appeared in the company street.

"Hey, mister," called yearling Davis, after Bert, "I hear good news.
Last night the guard caught the chap who shanghaied you."

Even Greg and Anstey were prepared to quiz the "hero" of the
comic episode of the night before.

"That was a fine comic opera performance, old chap," grinned
Anstey.

"The next time you arrest a lay figure," suggested Greg, "at least be
good enough to capture one that's stuffed with lemons."

"Oh, the straw figure was a lemon, of a kind," laughed the
Virginian.

"Did the prisoner yell when you pricked point of your bayonet in
its flesh of husks?" Greg wanted to know.

"Do you expect the K.C. to mention you in orders for
distinguished gallantry?" demanded Anstey.

"Or to skin you on a suspicion of stealing straw from the artillery
stables?" snickered Greg.

"I know one funny thing about straw, anyway," declared Anstey,
turning around to Holmes.

"What?" asked Greg.

"It's bound to tickle you," declared the Virginian gravely.

Even at breakfast, in the cadet mess, Dick failed to get away from
his tormentors. One of the yearlings, seated at a table not far from
the one at which Prescott sat, called out to a classmate:

"Queer thing about that prisoner bagged on number three last
night. Did you hear who the prisoner turned out to be?"

"No-o-o," drawled the other yearling, while a hundred pairs of eyes
were turned on flame-faced Prescott.

"It was the class president of the beasts" (plebes).

"Kind of tough fate for the prisoner, though," railed another.

"What's that?"

"He's been sentenced to death. He is to be used as a target for the
plebe squads in target practice."

"That isn't a sentence of death; it's a guarantee of safety."

This last sally turned the laugh on the entire plebe class. Dick
flushed worse than ever when he saw many of his classmates
begin to squirm.

"They might, at least, take it all out on me, and leave the class
alone," muttered Dick to himself.

"Where are you going so fast, mister?" hailed a yearling, after the
return to camp, as he beheld a plebe hurrying down a company
street.

"I'm summoned as a witness before the general court-martial,"
called back Mr. Plebe, over his shoulder.

"Court-martial? I hadn't heard there was to be one."

"Yes, sir; they're going to try the prisoner caught on number three,
sir."

The yearling turned away grinning, for once not deeming it
necessary to rebuke a "beast" for attempting to make a smart
answer.

Out on the range, at target practice, two mornings later, Dick did
some especially bad shooting.

"Don't be afraid of hitting the target, Mr. Prescott," advised
Lieutenant Gerould dryly. "It's made of something more substantial
than straw."

A gleeful roar went up from some of the other "beasts."
Lieutenant Gerould eyed them in surprise, for this Army officer
was one of the few at West Point who had not already heard of
number three sentry's capture.

It was a fortnight ere Cadet Prescott could feel really secure
against more "joshing" over the incident.

"I'm better satisfied than if we had done what we set out to do to
that plebe," remarked Yearling Davis to his tentmates.

"Mr. Prescott is a rather decent sort--for a mere plebe," replied
Poultney. "Do you know, I think he's almost glad that he caught the
dummy we rigged for him. I believe the little beast would have
hated to catch a uniform stuffed with human flesh."




CHAPTER XIV

POOR GREG CAN'T EXPLAIN


The weeks slipped by, though not without the friction of sincerely
hard work.

Dick, Greg and many of their classmates, toiling, marching,
drilling under the hot sun that shone on the West Point plain and
drill areas, acquired deep coats of manly tan on faces, necks and
hands.

In many a story of West Point life the summer encampment is
made to appear "the good old summer time" of an Army career.
The West Point cadet knows better. It is a season of the hardest
work.

At an hour when most city-dwelling boys are turning over in bed
for another long and luxurious "snooze" the West Point cadet is up
and doing in earnest.

There is much instruction that the young man has to absorb.
Merely to take part is not enough. The young man must make
himself proficient in such branches of the soldier's art as cavalry
tactics, drill, horsemanship, scouting, artillery tactics and drill,
with drill at the guns of different calibers, and target practice with
field, siege, mountain, mortar, howitzer and seacoast guns, with a
lot of work in the service of mines.

Infantry tactics, with unceasing drill and a lot of target practice,
provide a great amount of work.

Then there is a wide range of work to be mastered in practical
military engineering, with the building of field fortifications,
obstacles, spar and trestle bridges, pontoon bridges, military
reconnoissance and sketching, map-making, surveying, military
signaling and telegraphy, wireless and telephone service, the
making of war material, the managing and handling of pack trains,
field manoeuvres, and--well, it's not a season of ideal play!

It was toward the end of this busy season of outdoor life that Greg
got into his most serious trouble up to that time, with an upper
class man.

The day had been unusually hot, even for West Point. Those of the
upper class men who felt the call to the evening's hop had dressed
with utmost care and departed for the ballroom and the glances of
soft eyes.

An unusually large number, however, were in camp this evening.

Tattoo sounds at 9.30. Men who wish are privileged to make up
their beds and turn in at this hour. Greg was among the large
number who went to sleep soon after tattoo this sultry night. For
that matter, young Holmes was lonely, both Dick and Anstey
having been drawn for guard duty.

Five minutes after tattoo Yearlings Davis and Poultney sauntered
down the company street.

"Suzz-zz! suzz-zz! Horwack!" came sonorously from the tent solely
occupied by Plebe Holmes.

"Great Washington!" muttered Poultney. "Who smuggled a
sawmill into camp?"

"The disturbance of the peace comes from this abode of beasts,"
declared Mr. Davis, halting and thrusting his head into the tent.

Greg did not awaken, but snored on with crescendo effects.

"We ought to teach a beast like that a lesson," whispered Poultney,
as he, also, stared in at the unconscious but offending Greg.

"How?"

A hurried, whispered conference followed. Right after that Mr.
Davis tied a stout cord to the tent-pole of the khaki house across
the company street. Four feet of this cord were supported, in the
crotches of two imbedded twigs, so that the cord lay about an inch
and a half above the ground for a space of four feet close to the
opposite tent. Then the balance of the cord was allowed to lie
harmless across the company street. The end of the cord these two
resourceful yearlings tied to a noose. Tiptoeing into Greg's tent
they slipped the noose over one of Greg's forefingers.

If, within the next few minutes, any passersby used that company
street, they plainly must have passed on Greg's side of the
thoroughfare, and thus have avoided fouling with the cord.

Cadets who "drag femmes" to hop, and who have to escort their
fair partners to hotel, or to some officer's house on the post, must
go from Cullum Hall with their fair charges, leave them at the
destined gate, and then return to camp, all within a stated,
scheduled time.

The time it properly takes to walk from Cullum Hall to the hotel
grounds, or to any officer's house, is all scheduled and kept track
of at the guard tent. The young man thus returning to camp after
taps reports to what building he escorted his "femme," and the
time of his return is noted on the guard report. If the cadet has
overstayed his time he is called to account for it the next day.

Yearling Butler had "dragged" this evening. He made guard tent on
time, after a quick walk back to camp. Reporting, Mr. Butler saw
the time noted by the amanuensis of the guard.

Then, feeling really sleepy, the yearling continued at a rather brisk
walk to the head of his company street, and turned down.

Just as luck would have it Mr. Butler did not pass on Greg's side of
the street, but passed rather close to the tent opposite.

Certainly the yearling's eyes were not on the ground. He saw not
the cord on this side of the street.

There was a catch, a trip, and Mr. Butler went to the ground,
mussing the knees of his spooniest pair of white ducks. Moreover,
he cut the palm of his right hand, slightly, on a sharp pebble.

The pulling on the cord gave Greg's right hand a sharp yank,
awakening the innocent plebe.

But Mr. Butler, having swiftly discovered the cord, and having
ascertained in what direction it ran, made a dive into the tent just
in time to see Greg sitting up on his mattress, holding the cord.

"So, mister," gruffed the yearling, "is this the way you amuse
yourself late at night?"

"Why--what--" stammered Cadet Holmes.

"Now, don't try any of that on me," urged Mr. Butler angrily.
"Mister, you're caught with the freight in your possession. What
are you holding that cord for, sir?"

"I--I don't know, sir," quavered Greg, who was just beginning to
feel awake after his rudely disturbed slumber.

"You--don't--know!" retorted Mr. Butler, in high dudgeon.

"What--what has happened, sir?" inquired Greg.

To Mr. Butler this seemed very much like adding insult to injury.

"You thought it was funny, did you, mister, to rig a cord across the
company street?" raged the yearling, though he kept his voice
down to a gentlemanly pitch. "You play tricks like that on upper
class men. Of all the b.j. imps that ever put on gray! Mister, all I'm
sorry for is that the officer of the day, or the O.C. didn't trip over
your cord! Or the K.C. himself!"

"Now, I want to understand this, sir," contended Cadet Holmes,
rising from his mattress and stepping forward. "I've just been
aroused out of a sound sleep, and I find myself with a cord tied to
one of my fingers."

"Oh, you do, mister?" jeered Mr. Butler harshly.

"And you, sir, come into this tent and accuse me of something.
What I am anxious to know, sir, is what it is that I am accused of."

"See here, mister, I've no more time to waste on a b.j. beast.
You've spoiled my best white ducks, and, incidentally, my temper.
You compound this by adding more b.j.-ety. If you don't know
what I'm going to do about it, wait until you hear from me, mister!"

Turning, very erect and stiff, in his outraged dignity, Mr. Butler
left the tent.

"Now, what on earth have I done, anyway?" wondered Greg.

In his perplexity he stepped to the doorway of his tent. He saw the
business-like arrangement of the cord, and all was clear to him,
now.

"Some hazer has rigged that cord and tied one end to my finger,"
gasped Plebe Holmes.

Then a grin overspread his face.

"Well, it was mighty clever, anyway."

An instant more, and the grin gave place to a serious look.

"Clever or not, it certainly spells trouble for me."

When the cadets returned from breakfast in the morning, and while
Greg was finishing the donning of field uniform for a forenoon of
drill, a shadow fell across the doorway of the tent.

Prescott and Anstey were still members of the guard, and therefore
absent.

"Mr. Holmes, I wish to speak with you," announced Mr. Haldane,
of the yearling class.

"Will you come in, sir?"

Haldane stepped just inside the tent, standing severely erect and
gazing coldly at the plebe.

"Mr. Butler demands a fight with you, mister, and as early as
possible."

There was no mention of possible apology. Evidently Mr. Butler
considered the affair one that could be remedied only by blows.

"Mr. Haldane, I don't wish to ask much delay. But the two friends
whom I shall want to represent me are on guard duty at present.
May I ask that you see Mr. Prescott?"

"Very good," acknowledged Mr. Haldane, and left the tent.

"Now, I'm in for it," muttered Greg ruefully. "And the queer part of
it is that I have to fight for a thing that I never did. But I'm not
going to make any denials now, unless Dick advises it."

It was evening, after the cadets had returned from supper, when
Mr. Haldane appeared and asked for Prescott. The two stepped
outside together, walking a little distance away to make the
necessary arrangements.

Dick was already in possession of the few facts that Greg had to
tell him. Dick had advised against denying the prank, for the
present, anyway.

"It would look like playing the baby act," Prescott had explained to
his chum, and in this view Anstey agreed.

Mr. Haldane and Dick came to a speedy understanding. The fight
was to take place the next morning, at the first peep of daylight.

Promptly, however, the affair became noised about through camp.

Butler was a considerably larger man than Greg, and looked in
every way more powerful. Cadet Corporal Atwater, who was
president of the yearling class, went to see Mr. Butler promptly.

"At least, Butler, if you insist that the fight must be fought, let the
scrap committee choose one of our class who is down nearer to the
plebe's size," urged Mr. Atwater.

"Under ordinary conditions, old fellow, I'd be tickled to do it,"
replied Mr. Butler. "But, in a trick of this kind, I couldn't get any
satisfaction out of anyone else hammering the b.j. beast who put
up such a tumble for me."

"I'm thinking the scrap committee may interfere with your plans,"
rejoined Atwater, shaking his head. "We don't want fighting to
degenerate into the appearance of bullying oppression of beasts."

"I'll have to abide by the decision of the scrap committee, of
course," admitted Butler. "But I hope the fellows won't interfere."

Cadet Corporal Atwater promptly called the scrap committee
together. Many newspaper writers, through ignorance, have
condemned the existence of a scrap committee at West Point,
claiming that it foments fights. The truth is that the scrap
committee is a court of honor, formed for adjusting nice
questions, and for preventing unfair fighting.

Cadet Butler was summoned before the scrap committee, and
stated his case. The decision of the scrap committee was that a
fight would have to take place, but that Mr. Holmes was privileged
to request the scrap committee to name a yearling who was
Holmes's own size and weight, this substitute to fight in Mr.
Butler's place at once.

Cadet Corporal Atwater thereupon promptly called at Greg's tent,
and stated the decision to the three tentmates.

"Mr. Prescott will answer for me, sir," Greg replied respectfully.

"Sir," Dick answered, "we appreciate the decision of the scrap
committee. We recognize that we are being used with the utmost
fairness, and that all Mr. Holmes's rights are being safeguarded in
the most honorable manner. Yet, sir, this fight has a peculiar
basis. More so than with most fights, I believe, sir, this is a purely
personal one. Mr. Holmes, therefore, is prepared, sir, to give
personal satisfaction. While the odds are very distinctly against
him, he wishes to show that he can take his trouncing like a cadet
and a gentleman. So, sir, with renewed assurances of our thanks
and appreciation, Mr. Holmes is ready to meet Mr. Butler at
daylight."

"That is well spoken, sir," replied Mr. Atwater. "I appreciate the
grit of Mr. Holmes's decision."

The president of the yearling class went back to acquaint Mr.
Butler with the outcome.

Until close of taps Greg practiced various blows, feints and dodges
in foot work.

"You can't win, Greg," advised Anstey. "Of course that's out of the
question. But, before you have to lose the count you want to make
sure of giving Mr. Butler enough facial decorations to keep him
satisfied for some time to come."

At taps the three tentmates lay down on their mattresses, Dick with
an alarm clock close to his hand.

Cadets Prescott and Anstey were soon sound asleep. Greg,
however, lay awake for a long time, thinking--thinking.

"If I had some of Dick's lightning speed, and his capacity for
sailing in like a cyclonic fury," thought Greg. "Whew, but I wish I
had always given more attention to boxing than I have done.
I will after this."

Finally, Greg dozed off. The next he knew was when a brief,
metallic "br-r-r-r?" sounded in the tent. In another instant Dick had
the clock and was smothering the noise. Greg Holmes leaped up.
It was the morning of his fight!




CHAPTER XV

GREG OVERHEARS A PRETTY GIRL'S TRIBUTE


In the tent it was still dark. It was at the fag-end of the night; the
time which, as military commanders know, most tries men's
bravery.

The latter part of the night had been cool. Now, in the brief space
before dawn the air was positively chilly.

Greg shivered.

Perhaps it was the chill of the air. It is also extremely likely that
Greg Holmes dreaded the conflict that was about to come off with
big Butler.

Be that as it may, Cadet Holmes went on briskly with his dressing.
The bravest man is he who, though afraid, goes straight ahead to
the goal of battle despite his fears.

Greg was more sensitive about blows than was his chum. Until he
got into the heat of action Cadet Holmes dreaded the very idea of
giving or taking a blow. There are many soldiers like this; but
when they get into action they are the bravest of the brave.

Dick and Anstey were also getting themselves swiftly in readiness.
To Dick, veteran of three West Point fights, the greatest cause for
regret seemed to lie in being robbed of some of their much-needed
sleep.

In almost no time, so it seemed, three cadets fully attired in
uniform, stole cautiously from the tent, slipping down the
company street.

Dick carried Greg's fighting clothes. Cadet Anstey carried a bucket
in which lay a sponge.

Whether cadet sentries on guard deliberately aid in letting fight
parties slip across a post it would be impossible to say. Certain it is
that Mr. Prescott, in the lead, reconnoitred carefully, then crossed
the post at the point furthest from the sentry's half-audible
footsteps. His two friends slipped over with him.

The faint gray of earliest dawn was just showing through the trees
when the plebe trio came in sight of the famous hollow below old
Fort Clinton.

Here already paced Mr. Plympton and Mr. Connors of the first
class. They were to take charge of the affair.

"Good morning, mister," nodded Mr. Plympton to Dick, as
Prescott came in sight at the head of his party. Greg and Anstey
came in for no particular notice from the first class men.

"Hullo, But!"

"Hullo, old Conjunction!"

These were the greetings that Butler received when he appeared,
followed by Haldane and Post. These young men, being yearlings,
were actually human beings. At least, that was the way the plebes
felt.

Now the stripping began rapidly. Each principal drew on a
sleeveless jersey and gymnasium trousers, the latter secured by a
belt. On the feet were rubber-soled shoes, as giving the best
chance for foothold on the damp ground.

The seconds began kneading the muscles of their principals, and
otherwise putting them in shape.

Mr. Butler yawned two or three times, appearing slightly bored.
Greg did not glance in the direction of his coming antagonist, but
Holmes's face was impassive, inscrutable. He did not appear
nervous. The moment had come, and Greg faced the situation
dumbly but absolutely without fear.

Then the principals were placed in their corners. Referee Plympton
stated the terms under which the meeting was to be held. Then at
the call, the two cadets leaped forward.

"Remember the moves we planned last night," had been Dick's last
whispered words.

On Butler's face rested a broad grin. He pranced about lightly,
swinging his hardmuscled arms. He intended to start with a bit of
easy nonsense, putting Holmes off his guard. Then the yearling's
plan was to make the affair a lesson in scientific mauling.

While Butler was dancing about, grinning, Greg, vastly more
watchful than he appeared to be, suddenly let his right out in a
feint, then followed with a left drive.

Butler all but struck this blow up, yet, as he darted back from the
parry, the yearling tasted blood from his own lower lip. That
taught him that even a despised little plebe like Mr. Holmes might
have his points of danger.

"Now, stand up and let us see how good your quick counter is,"
laughed the yearling, dancing about.

Butler's footwork was fine and fast, but Greg, watching him, only
pivoted about, putting up his hands with great speed. Thus Greg
blocked all but three or four lighter blows up to the time when the
time-keeper's interruption came.

"You won't need to do much in the rubbing line," whispered Greg,
as his seconds started in on him in his "corner." "My man, as yet,
hasn't any more than warmed me up."

"Look out for a smash on the nose, old fellow," warned Dick. "You
got first blood in a half-sort of way, by that cut on the other man's
lip. In this next round Mr. Butler will try to get the real first
blood."

"I hope so," muttered Greg dreamily. "For that one I believe I have
one of the best counters known."

Surely enough, in the beginning of the second round, Butler
feinted, then led off for a hard one on the plebe's nose. But the
delivery was the very one that Cadet Holmes wanted. He ducked,
feinted, and slammed in just above Mr. Butler's belt with such
force that the big yearling staggered. Yet Butler was a wary
fighter; he blocked Greg's follow-up scheme, then fought for time.
Towards the end of the round, however, Butler again tried for the
plebe's nose. This time he failed again, but Greg's counter-blow
landed on the point of a shoulder. Butler would have been away in
another instant, but Greg's right came out of a hook and tapped the
yearling emphatically on the end of his nose. As the yearling
fought back furiously the blood spurted from his nose.

Then, just before time was called, Greg got his left eye too much
in line with the yearling's right fist.

Dazed, Cadet Holmes was saved only by the word from the
time-keeper. Had the round lasted fifteen seconds more Mr. Butler
would have had the plebe out.