LADY MARY AND HER NURSE;

OR,

A PEEP INTO THE CANADIAN FOREST.

by

MRS. TRAILL




CONTENTS


CHAPTER I.

THE FLYING SQUIRREL--ITS FOOD--STORY OF A WOLF--INDIAN VILLAGE--WILD RICE

CHAPTER II.

SLEIGHING--SLEIGH ROBES--FUR CAPS--OTTER SKINS--OLD SNOW-STORM--OTTER
HUNTING--OTTER SLIDES--INDIAN NAMES--REMARKS ON WILD ANIMALS AND THEIR
HABITS

CHAPTER III.

PART I.--LADY MARY READS TO MRS. FRAZER THE FIRST PART OF THE HISTORY OF
THE SQUIRREL FAMILY

PART II.--WHICH TELLS HOW THE GREY SQUIRRELS GET ON WHILE THEY REMAINED
ON PINE ISLAND--HOW THEY BEHAVED TO THEIR POOR RELATIONS, THE CHITMUNKS--
AND WHAT HAPPENED TO THEM IN THE FOREST

PART III.--HOW THE SQUIRRELS GOT TO THE MILL AT THE RAPIDS--AND WHAT
HAPPENED TO VELVET-PAW

CHAPTER IV.

SQUIRRELS--THE CHITMUNKS--DOCILITY OF A PET ONE--ROGUERY OF A YANKEE
PEDLAR--RETURN OF THE MUSICAL CHITMUNK TO HIS MASTER'S BOSOM--SAGACITY OF
A BLACK SQUIRREL

CHAPTER V.

INDIAN BASKETS--THREAD--PLANTS--MAPLE SUGAR-TREE--INDIAN ORNAMENTAL WORKS
--RACOONS

CHAPTER VI.

CANADIAN FLOWERS--AMERICAN PORCUPINE--CANADIAN BIRDS--SNOW SPARROW-ROBIN
RED-BREAST

CHAPTER VII.

INDIAN BAG--INDIAN EMBROIDERY--BEAVER'S TAIL--BEAVER ARCHITECTURE--HABITS
OF THE BEAVER--BEAVER TOOLS--BEAVER MEADOWS

CHAPTER VIII.

INDIAN BOY AND HIS PETS--TAME BEAVER AT HOME--KITTEN, WILDFIRE--PET
RACOON AND THE SPANIEL PUPPIES--CANADIAN FLORA

CHAPTER IX.

NURSE TELLS LADY MARY ABOUT A LITTLE BOY WHO WAS EATEN BY A BEAR IN THE
PROVINCE OF NEW BRUNSWICK--OF A BABY THAT WAS CARRIED AWAY, BUT TAKEN
ALIVE--A WALK IN THE GARDEN--HUMMING BIRDS--CANADIAN BALSAMS

CHAPTER X.

AURORA BOREALIS, OR NORTHERN LIGHTS, MOST FREQUENTLY SEEN IN NORTHERN
CLIMATES--CALLED MERRY DANCERS--ROSE TINTS--TINT-LIKE APPEARANCE--LADY
MARY FRIGHTENED

CHAPTER XI

STRAWBERRIES--CANADIAN WILD FRUITS--WILD RASPBERRIES--THE HUNTER AND THE
LOST CHILD--CRANBERRIES--CRANBERRY MARSHES--NUTS

CHAPTER XII

GARTER SNAKES--RATTLE SNAKES--ANECDOTE OF A LITTLE BOY--FISHERMAN AND
SNAKE--SNAKE CHARMERS--SPIDERS--LAND TORTOISE

CHAPTER XIII

ELLEN AND HER PET PAWNS--DOCILITY OF PAN--JACK'S DROLL TRICKS--
AFFECTIONATE WOLF--FALL FLOWERS--DEPARTURE OF LADY MARY--THE END




A PEEP INTO THE CANADIAN FOREST.




CHAPTER I.

THE FLYING SQUIRREL--ITS FOOD--STORY OF A WOLF--INDIAN VILLAGE--WILD RICE.


"Nurse, what is the name of that pretty creature you have in your hand?
What bright eyes it has! What a soft tail, just like a grey feather! Is it
a little beaver?" asked the Governor's [Footnote: Lady Mary's father was
Governor of Canada.] little daughter, as her nurse came into the room
where her young charge, whom we shall call Lady Mary, was playing with her
doll.

Carefully sheltered against her breast, its velvet nose just peeping from
beneath her muslin neckerchief, the nurse held a small grey-furred animal,
of the most delicate form and colour.

"No, my lady," she replied, "this is not a young beaver; a beaver is a
much larger animal. A beaver's tail is not covered with fur; it is scaly,
broad, and flat; it looks something like black leather, not very unlike
that of my seal-skin slippers. The Indians eat beavers' tails at their
great feasts, and think they make an excellent dish."

"If they are black, and look like leather shoes, I am very sure I should
not like to eat them; so, if you please, Mrs. Frazer, do not let me have
any beavers' tails cooked for my dinner," said the little lady in a very
decided tone.

"Indeed, my lady," replied her nurse, smiling, "it would not be an easy
thing to obtain, if you wished to taste one, for beavers are not brought
to our market. It is only the Indians and hunters who know how to trap
them, and beavers are not so plentiful as they used to be."

Mrs. Frazer would have told Lady Mary a great deal about the way in which
the trappers take the beavers, but the little girl interrupted her by
saying, "Please, nurse, will you tell me the name of your pretty pet? Ah,
sweet thing! what bright eyes you have!" she added, caressing the soft
little head which was just seen from beneath the folds of the muslin
handkerchief to which it timidly nestled, casting furtive glances at the
admiring child, while the panting of its breast told the mortal terror
that shook its frame whenever the little girl's hand was advanced to coax
its soft back.

"It is a flying squirrel, Lady Mary," replied her nurse; "one of my
brothers caught it a month ago, when he was chopping in the forest. He
thought it might amuse your ladyship, and so he tamed it and sent it to me
in a basket filled with moss, with some acorns, and hickory-nuts, and
beech-mast for him to eat on his journey, for the little fellow has
travelled a long way: he came from the beech-woods near the town of
Coburg, in the Upper Province."

"And where is Coburg, nurse? Is it a large city like Montreal or Quebec?"

"No, my lady; it is a large town on the shores of the great Lake Ontario."

"And are there many woods near it?"

"Yes; but not so many as there used to be many years ago. The forest is
almost all cleared, and there are fields of wheat and Indian corn, and
nice farms and pretty houses, where a few years back the lofty forest grew
dark and thick."

"Nurse, you said there were acorns, and hickory-nuts, and beech-mast in
the basket. I have seen acorns at home in dear England and Scotland, and I
have eaten the hickory-nuts here; but what is beech-mast? Is it in
granaries for winter stores; and wild ducks and wild pigeons come from the
far north at the season when the beech-mast fall, to eat them; for God
teaches these, His creatures, to know the times and the seasons when His
bounteous hand is open to give them food from His boundless store. A great
many other birds and beasts also feed upon the beech-mast."

"It was very good of your brother to send me this pretty creature,
nurse," said the little lady; "I will ask Papa to give him some money."

"There is no need of that, Lady Mary. My brother is not in want; he has a
farm in the Upper Province, and is very well off."

"I am glad he is well off," said Lady Mary; "indeed, I do not see so many
beggars here as in England."

"People need not beg in Canada, if they are well and strong and can work;
a poor man can soon earn enough money to keep himself and his little ones."

"Nurse, will you be so kind as to ask Campbell to get a pretty cage for
my squirrel? I will let him live close to my dormice, who will be pleasant
company for him, and I will feed him every day myself with nuts and sugar,
and sweet cake and white bread. Now do not tremble and look so frightened,
as though I were going to hurt you; and pray, Mr. Squirrel, do not bite.
Oh! nurse, nurse, the wicked, spiteful creature has bitten my finger! See,
see, it has made it bleed! Naughty thing! I will not love you if you bite.
Pray, nurse, bind up my finger, or it will soil my frock."

Great was the pity bestowed upon the wound by Lady Mary's kind attendant,
till the little girl, tired of hearing so much said about the bitten
finger, gravely desired her maid to go in search of the cage, and catch
the truant, which had effected its escape, and was clinging to the
curtains of the bed. The cage was procured--a large wooden cage, with an
outer and an inner chamber, a bar for the little fellow to swing himself
on, and a drawer for his food, and a little dish for his water. The
sleeping-room was furnished by the nurse with soft wool, and a fine store
of nuts was put in the drawer; all his wants were well supplied, and Lady
Mary watched the catching of the little animal with much interest. Great
was the activity displayed by the runaway squirrel, and still greater the
astonishment evinced by the Governor's little daughter, at the flying
leaps made by the squirrel in its attempts to elude the grasp of its
pursuers.

"It flies! I am sure it must have wings. Look, look, nurse! it is here,
now it is on the wall, now on the curtains! It must have wings, but it has
no feathers!"

"It has no wings, dear lady, but it has a fine ridge of fur, that covers
a strong sinew or muscle between the fore and hinder legs; and it is by
the help of this muscle that it is able to spring so far, and so fast; and
its claws are so sharp that it can cling to a wall, or any flat surface.
The black and red squirrels, and the common grey, can jump very far, and
run up the bark of the trees very fast, but not so fast as the flying
squirrel."

At last Lady Mary's maid, with the help of one of the housemaids,
succeeded in catching the squirrel, and securing him within his cage. But
though Lady Mary tried all her words of endearment to coax the little
creature to eat some of the good things that had been provided so
liberally for his entertainment, he remained sullen and motionless at the
bottom of the cage. A captive is no less a captive in a cage with gilded
bars, and with dainties to eat, than if rusted iron shut him in, and kept
him from enjoying his freedom. It is for dear liberty that he pines, and
is sad, even in the midst of plenty!

"Dear nurse, why does my little squirrel tremble and look so unhappy?
Tell me if he wants anything to eat that we have not given him. Why does
he not lie down and sleep on the nice soft bed you have made for him in
his little chamber? See, he has not tasted the nice sweet cake and sugar
that I gave him."

"He is not used to such dainties, Lady Mary. In the forest, he feeds upon
hickory-nuts, and butter-nuts, and acorns, and beech-mast, and the buds of
the spruce, fir and pine kernels, and many other seeds and nuts and
berries, that we could not get for him; he loves grain too, and Indian
corn. He sleeps on green moss and leaves, and fine fibres of grass and
roots; and drinks heaven's blessed dew, as it lies bright and pure upon
the herbs of the field."

"Dear little squirrel, pretty creature! I know now what makes you sad.
You long to be abroad among your own green woods, and sleeping on the soft
green moss, which is far prettier than this ugly cotton wool. But you
shall stay with me, my sweet one, till the cold winter is passed and gone,
and the spring flowers have come again; and then, my pretty squirrel, I
will take you out of your dull cage, and we will go to St. Helen's green
island, and I will let you go free; but I will put a scarlet collar about
your neck before I let you go, that, if any one finds you, they may know
that you are my squirrel. Were you ever in the green forest, nurse? I hear
Papa talk about the 'Bush' and the 'Backwoods;' it must be very pleasant
in the summer, to live among the green trees. Were you ever there?"

"Yes, dear lady, I did live in the woods when I was a child. I was born
in a little log-shanty, far, far away up the country, near a beautiful
lake, called Rice Lake, among woods, and valleys, and hills covered with
flowers, and groves of pine, and white and black oaks."

"Stop, nurse, and tell me why they are called black and white; are the
flowers black and white?"

"No, my lady; it is because the wood of the one is darker than the other,
and the leaves of the black oak are dark and shining, while those of the
white oak are brighter and lighter. The black oak is a beautiful tree.
When I was a young girl, I used to like to climb the sides of the steep
valleys, and look down upon the tops of the oaks that grew beneath; and to
watch the wind lifting the boughs all glittering in the moonlight; they
looked like a sea of ruffled green water. It is very solemn, Lady Mary, to
be in the woods by night, and to hear no sound but the cry of the great
wood-owl, or the voice of the whip-poor-will, calling to his fellow from
the tamarack swamp; or, may be, the timid bleating of a fawn that has lost
its mother, or the howl of a wolf."

"Nurse, I should be so afraid; I am sure I should cry if I heard the
wicked wolves howling in the dark woods, by night. Did you ever know any
one who was eaten by a wolf?"

"No, my lady; the Canadian wolf is a great coward. I have heard the
hunters say, that they never attack any one, unless there is a great flock
together and the man is alone and unarmed. My uncle used to go out a great
deal hunting, sometimes by torchlight, and sometimes on the lake in a
canoe, with the Indians; and he shot and trapped a great many wolves and
foxes and racoons. He has a great many heads of wild animals nailed up on
the stoup in front of his log-house."

"Please tell me what a stoup is, nurse?"

"A verandah, my lady, is the same thing, only the old Dutch settlers gave
it the name of a stoup; and the stoup is heavier and broader, and not
quite so nicely made as a verandah. One day my uncle was crossing the lake
on the ice; it was a cold winter afternoon; he was in a hurry to take some
food to his brothers, who were drawing pine-logs in the bush. He had,
besides a bag of meal and flour, a new axe on his shoulder. He heard steps
as of a dog trotting after him; he turned his head, and there he saw close
at his heels, a big, hungry-looking grey wolf; he stopped and faced about,
and the big beast stopped and showed his white sharp teeth. My uncle did
not feel afraid, but looked steadily at the wolf, as much as to say,
'Follow me if you dare,' and walked on. When my uncle stopped, the wolf
stopped; when he went on, the beast also went on.

"I would have run away," said Lady Mary.

"If my uncle had let the wolf see that he was afraid of him, he would
have grown bolder, and have run after him and seized him. All animals are
afraid of brave men, but not of cowards. When the beast came too near, my
uncle faced him, and showed the bright axe, and the wolf then shrank back
a few paces. When my uncle got near the shore, he heard a long wild cry,
as if from twenty wolves at once. It might have been the echoes from the
islands that increased the sound; but it was very frightful, and made his
blood chill, for he knew that without his rifle he should stand a poor
chance against a large pack of hungry wolves. Just then a gun went off; he
heard the wolf give a terrible yell, he felt the whizzing of a bullet pass
him, and, turning about, saw the wolf lying dead on the ice. A loud shout
from the cedars in front told him from whom the shot came; it was my
father, who had been on the look-out on the lake shore, and he had fired
at and hit the wolf, when he saw that he could do so without hurting his
brother."

"Nurse, it would have been a sad thing if the gun had shot your uncle."

"It would; but my father was one of the best shots in the district, and
could hit a white spot on the bark of a tree at a great distance without
missing. It was an old Indian from Buckhorn Lake, who taught him to shoot
deer by torchlight, and to trap beavers."

"Well, I am glad that horrid wolf was killed, for wolves eat sheep and
lambs; and I dare say they would devour my little squirrel if they could
get him. Nurse, please to tell me again the name of the lake near which
you were born."

"It is called Rice Lake, my lady. It is a fine piece of water, more than
twenty miles long, and from three to five miles broad. It has pretty
wooded islands, and several rivers or streams empty themselves into it.
The Otonabee River is a fine broad stream, which flows through the forest
a long way. Many years ago, there were no clearings on the banks, and no
houses, only Indian tents or wigwams; but now, there are a great many
houses and farms."

"What are wigwams?"

"A sort of light tent, made with poles stuck into the ground, in a
circle, fastened together at the top, and covered on the outside with
skins of wild animals, or with birch bark. The Indians light a fire of
sticks and logs on the ground, in the middle of the wigwam, and lie or sit
all round it; the smoke goes up to the top and escapes. In the winter,
they bank it up with snow, and it is very warm."

"I think it must be a very ugly sort of house; and I am glad I do not
live in an Indian wigwam," said the little lady.

"The Indians are a very simple folk, my lady, and do not need fine
houses, like this in which your papa lives. They do not know the names or
uses of half the fine things that are in the houses of the white people.
They are happy and contented without them. It is not the richest that are
happiest, Lady Mary, and the Lord careth for the poor and the lowly. There
is a village on the shores of Rice Lake where the Indians live. It is not
very pretty. The houses are all built of logs, and some of them have
gardens and orchards. They have a neat church, and they have a good
minister, who takes great pains to teach them the Gospel of the Lord Jesus
Christ. The poor Indians were Pagans until within the last few years."

"What are Pagans, nurse?"

"People, Lady Mary, who do not believe in God, and the Lord Jesus Christ,
our blessed Saviour."

"Nurse, is there real rice growing in the Rice Lake? I heard my governess
say that rice grew only in warm countries. Now, your lake must be very
cold if your uncle walked across the ice."

"This rice, my lady, is not real rice. I heard a gentleman tell my father,
that it was, properly speaking, a species of oats, [Footnote: Zizania or
water oats.]--water oats he called it, but the common name for it is wild
rice. This wild rice grows in vast beds in the lake, in patches of many
acres. It will grow in water from eight to ten or twelve feet deep; the
grassy leaves float upon the water like long narrow green ribbons. In the
month of August, the stem that is to bear the flower and the grain rises
straight up, above the surface, and light delicate blossoms come out of a
pale straw colour and lilac. They are very pretty, and wave in the wind
with a rustling noise. In the month of October, when the rice is ripe, the
leaves turn yellow, and the rice-heads grow heavy and droop; then the
squaws--as the Indian women are called--go out in their birch-bark canoes,
holding in one hand a stick, in the other a short curved paddle, with a
sharp edge. With this, they bend down the rice across the stick, and strike
off the heads, which fall into the canoe, as they push it along through the
rice-beds. In this way they collect a great many bushels in the course of
the day. The wild rice is not the least like the rice which your ladyship
has eaten; it is thin and covered with a light chaffy husk. The colour of
the grain itself is a brownish green, or olive, smooth, shining, and
brittle. After separating the outward chaff, the squaws put by a large
portion of the clean rice in its natural state for sale; for this they get
from a dollar and a half to two dollars a bushel. Some they parch, either
in large pots, or on mats made of the inner bark of cedar or bass wood,
beneath which they light a slow fire, and plant around it a temporary hedge
of green boughs, closely set to prevent the heat from escaping; they also
plant stakes, over which they stretch the matting at a certain height above
the fire. On this they spread the green rice, stirring it about with wooden
paddles, till it is properly parched; this is known by its bursting and
showing the white grain of the flour. When quite cool it is stowed away in
troughs, scooped out of butter-nut wood, or else sewed up in sheets of
birch-bark or bass-mats, or in coarsely made birch-bark baskets."

"And is the rice good to eat, nurse?"

"Some people like it as well as the white rice of Carolina; but it does
not look so well. It is a great blessing to the poor Indians, who boil it
in their soups, or eat it with maple molasses. And they eat it when
parched without any other cooking, when they are on a long journey in the
woods, or on the lakes. I have often eaten nice puddings made of it with
milk. The deer feed upon the green rice. They swim into the water, and eat
the green leaves and tops. The Indians go out at night to shoot the deer
on the water; they listen for them, and shoot them in the dark. The wild
ducks and water-fowls come down in great flocks to fatten on the ripe rice
in the fall of the year; also large flocks of rice buntings and red wings
which make their roosts among the low willows, flags, and lilies close to
the shallows of the lake."

"It seems very useful to birds as well as to men and beasts," said little
Lady Mary.

"Yes, my lady, and to fishes also, I make no doubt; for the good God has
cast it so abundantly abroad on the waters, that I dare say they also have
their share. When the rice is fully ripe, the sun shining on it gives it a
golden hue, just like a field of ripened grain. Surrounded by the deep
blue waters, it looks very pretty."

"I am very much obliged to you, nurse, for telling me so much about the
Indian rice, and I will ask mamma to let me have some one day for my
dinner, that I may know how it tastes."

Just then Lady Mary's governess came to bid her nurse dress her for a
sleigh-ride, and so for the present we shall leave her; but we will tell
our little readers something more in another chapter about Lady Mary and
her flying squirrel.




CHAPTER II.

SLEIGHING--SLEIGH ROBES--FUR CAPS--OTTER SKINS--OLD SNOW-STORM--OTTER
HUNTING--OTTER SLIDES--INDIAN NAMES--REMARKS ON WILD ANIMALS AND THEIR
HABITS.


"Nurse, we have had a very nice sleigh-drive. I like sleighing very much
over the white snow. The trees look so pretty, as if they were covered
with white flowers, and the ground sparkled just like mamma's diamonds."

"It is pleasant, Lady Mary, to ride through the woods on a bright
sunshiny day, after a fresh fall of snow. The young evergreens, hemlocks,
balsams, and spruce-trees, are loaded with great masses of the new-fallen
snow; while the slender saplings of the beech, birch, and basswood are
bent down to the very ground, making bowers so bright and beautiful, you
would be delighted to see them. Sometimes, as you drive along, great
masses of the snow come showering down upon you; but it is so light and
dry, that it shakes off without wetting you. It is pleasant to be wrapped
up in warm blankets, or buffalo robes, at the bottom of a lumber-sleigh,
and to travel through the forest by moonlight; the merry bells echoing
through the silent woods, and the stars just peeping down through the
frosted trees, which sparkle like diamonds in the moonbeams."

"Nurse, I should like to take a drive through the forest in winter. It is
so nice to hear the sleigh-bells. We used sometimes to go out in the snow
in Scotland, but we were in the carriage, and had no bells."

"No, Lady Mary: the snow seldom lies long enough in the old country to
make it worth while to have sleighs there; but in Russia and Sweden, and
other cold Northern countries, they use sleighs with bells."

Lady Mary ran to the little bookcase where she had a collection of
children's books, and very soon found, in one of Peter Parley's books, a
picture of Laplanders and Russians wrapped in furs sleighing.

"How long will the winter last, nurse?" said the child, after she had
tired herself with looking at the prints; "a long, long time--a great many
weeks?--a great many months?"

"Yes, my lady; five or six months."

"Oh, that is nice--nearly half a year of white snow, and sleigh-drives
every day, and bells ringing all the time! I tried to make out a tune, but
they only seemed to say, 'Up-hill, up-hill! down-hill, down-hill!' all the
way. Nurse, please tell me what are sleigh-robes made of?"

"Some sleigh-robes, Lady Mary, are made of bear-skins, lined with red or
blue flannel; some are of wolf-skins, lined with bright scarlet cloth; and
some of racoon; the commonest are buffalo-skins: I have seen some of
deer-skins, but these last are not so good, as the hair comes off, and they
are not so warm as the skins of the furred or woolly-coated animals."

"I sometimes see long tails hanging down over the backs of the sleigh and
cutters--they look very pretty, like the end of mamma's boa."

"The wolf and racoon skin robes are generally made up with the tails, and
sometimes the heads of the animals are also left. I noticed the head of a
wolf, with its sharp ears, and long white teeth, looking very fierce, at
the back of a cutter, the other day."

"Nurse, that must have looked very droll. Do you know, I saw a gentleman
the other day, walking with papa, who had a fox-skin cap on his head, and
the fox's nose was just peeping over his shoulder, and the tail hung down
his back, and I saw its bright black eyes looking so cunning. I thought it
must be alive, and that it had curled itself round his head; but the
gentleman took it off, and showed me that the eyes were glass."

"Some hunters, Lady Mary, make caps of otter, mink, or badger skins, and
ornament them with the tails, heads, and claws."

"I have seen a picture of the otter, nurse; it is a pretty, soft-looking
thing, with a round head and black eyes. Where do otters live?"

"The Canadian otters, Lady Mary, live in holes in the banks of sedgy,
shallow lakes, mill-ponds, and sheltered creeks. The Indian hunters find
their haunts by tracking their steps in the snow; for an Indian or
Canadian hunter knows the track made by any bird or beast, from the deep
broad print of the bear, to the tiny one of the little shrewmouse, which
is the smallest four-footed beast in this or any other country.

"Indians catch the otter, and many other wild animals, in a sort of trap,
which they call a 'dead-fall.' Wolves are often so trapped, and then shot.
The Indians catch the otter for the sake of its dark shining fur, which is
used by the hatters and furriers. Old Jacob Snowstorm, an old Indian who
lived on the banks of the Rice Lake, used to catch otters; and I have
often listened to him, and laughed at his stories."

"Do, please, nurse, tell me what old Jacob Snow-storm told you about the
otters; I like to hear stories about wild beasts. But what a droll surname
Snow-storm is!"

"Yes, Lady Mary; Indians have very odd names; they are called after all
sorts of strange things. They do not name the children, as we do, soon
after they are born, but wait for some remarkable circumstance, some dream
or accident. Some call them after the first strange animal or bird that
appears to the new-born. Old Snow-storm most likely owed his name to a
heavy fall of snow when he was a baby. I knew a chief named Musk-rat, and
a pretty Indian girl who was named 'Badau'-bun,' or the 'Light of the
Morning.'"

"And what is the Indian name for Old Snow-storm?"

"'Be-che-go-ke-poor,' my lady."

Lady Mary said it was a funny sounding name, and not at all like
Snow-storm, which she liked a great deal better; and she was much amused
while her nurse repeated to her some names of squaws and papooses (Indian
women and children); such as Long Thrush, Little Fox, Running Stream,
Snow-bird, Red Cloud, Young Eagle, Big Bush, and many others.

"Now, nurse, will you tell me some more about Jacob Snow-storm and the
otters?"

"Well, Lady Mary, the old man had a cap of otter-skin, of which he was
very proud, and only wore on great days. One day as he was playing with
it, he said:--'Otter funny fellow; he like play too, sometimes. Indian go
hunting up Ottawa, that great big river, you know. Go one moonlight night;
lie down under bushes in snow: see lot of little fellow and big fellow at
play. Run tip and down bank; bank all ice. Sit down top of bank; good
slide there. Down he go splash into water; out again. Funny fellow those!'
And then the old hunter threw back his head, and laughed, till you could
have seen all his white teeth, he opened his mouth so wide."

Lady Mary was very much amused at the comical way in which the old Indian
talked.

"Can otters swim, nurse?"

"Yes, Lady Mary; the good God, who has created all things well, has given
to this animal webbed feet, which enable it to swim; and it can also dive
down in the deep water, where it finds fish and mussels, and perhaps the
roots of some water-plants to eat. It makes very little motion or
disturbance in the water when it goes down in search of its prey. Its coat
is thick, and formed of two kinds of hair; the outer hair is long, silky,
and shining; the under part is short, fine, and warm. The water cannot
penetrate to wet them,--the oily nature of the fur throws off the
moisture. They dig large holes with their claws, which are short, but very
strong. They line their nests with dry grass and rushes and roots gnawed
fine, and do not pass the winter in sleep, as the dormice, flying
squirrels, racoons, and bears do. They are very innocent and playful, both
when young and even after they grow old. The lumberers often tame them,
and they become so docile that they will come at a call or whistle. Like
all wild animals, they are most lively at night, when they come out to
feed and play."

"Dear little things! I should like to have a tame otter to play with, and
run after me; but do you think he would eat my squirrel? You know cats
will eat squirrels--so mamma says."

"Cats belong to a very different class of animals; they are beasts of
prey, formed to spring and bound, and tear with their teeth and claws. The
otter is also a beast of prey, but its prey is found in the still waters,
and not on the land; it can neither climb nor leap. So I do not think he
would hurt your squirrel, if you had one."

"See, nurse, my dear little squirrel is still where I left him, clinging
to the wires of the cage, his bright eyes looking like two black beads."

"As soon as it grows dark he will begin to be more lively, and perhaps he
will eat something, but not while we look at him--he is too shy for that."

"Nurse, how can they see to eat in the dark?"

"The good God, Lady Mary, has so formed their eyes that they can see best
by night. I will read you, Lady Mary, a few Verses from Psalm civ.:--

  "Verse 19. He appointed the moon for seasons: the sun knoweth his
   going down.

   20. Thou makest darkness, and it is night: wherein all the beasts
       of the forest do creep forth.

   21. The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from
       God.

   22. The sun ariseth, they gather themselves together, and lay them
       down in their dens.

   23. Man goeth forth unto his work and to his labour until the
       evening.

   24. O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom hast thou made
       them all: the eath is full of thy riches.

"Thus you see, my dear lady, that our heavenly Father taketh care of all
his creatures, and provideth for them both by day and by night."

"I remember, nurse, that my dormice used to lie quite still, nestled
among the moss and wool in their little dark chamber in the cage, all day
long; but when it was night they used to come out and frisk about, and run
along the wires, and play all sorts of tricks, chasing one another round
and round, and they were not afraid of me, but would let me look at them
while they ate a nut, or a bit of sugar; and the dear little things would
drink out of their little white saucer, and wash their faces and tails--it
was so pretty to see them!"

"Did you notice, Lady Mary, how the dormice held their food?"

"Yes, they sat up, and held it in their fore-paws, which looked just like
tiny hands."

"There are many animals whose fore-feet resemble hands, and these,
generally, convey their food to their mouths--among these are the squirrel
and dormice. They are good climbers and diggers. You see, my dear young
lady, how the merciful Creator has given to all his creatures, however
lowly, the best means of supplying their wants, whether of food or
shelter."

"Indeed, nurse, I have learned a great deal about squirrels, Canadian
rice, otters, and Indians; but, if you please, I must now have a little
play with my doll. Good-bye, Mrs. Frazer,--pray take care of my dear
little squirrel, and mind that he does not fly away." And Lady Mary was
soon busily engaged in drawing her wax doll about the nursery in a little
sleigh lined with red squirrel fur robes, and talking to her as all
children like to talk to their dolls, whether they be rich or poor--the
children of peasants, or governors' daughters.




CHAPTER III.

LADY MARY READS TO MRS. FRAZER THE FIRST PART OF THE HISTORY OF THE
SQUIRREL FAMILY.


One day Lady Mary came to her nurse, and putting her arms about her neck,
whispered to her,--"Mrs. Frazer, my dear good governess has given me
something--it is in my hand," and she slily held her hand behind her--
"will you guess what it is?"

"Is it a book, my lady?"

"Yes, yes, it is a book, a pretty book; and see, here are pictures of
squirrels in it. Mrs. Frazer, if you like, I will sit down on this cushion
by you and read some of my new book. It does not seem very hard."

Then Mrs. Frazer took out her work-basket and sat down to sew, and Lady
Mary began to read the little story, which, I hope, may entertain my
little readers as much as it did the Governor's daughter.

THE HISTORY OF A SQUIRREL FAMILY

It must be a pleasant thing to be a squirrel, and live a life of freedom
in the boundless forests; to leap and bound among the branches of the tall
trees; to gambol in the deep shade of the cool glossy leaves, through the
long warm summer day; to gather the fresh nuts and berries; to drink the
pure dews of heaven, all bright and sparkling from the opening flowers; to
sleep on soft beds of moss and thistle-down in some hollow branch rocked
by the wind as in a cradle. Yet, though this was the happy life led by a
family of pretty grey squirrels that had their dwelling in the hoary
branch of an old oak-tree that grew on one of the rocky islands in a
beautiful lake in Upper Canada, called _Stony Lake_ (because it was
full of rocky islands), these little creatures were far from being
contented, and were always wishing for a change. Indeed, they had been
very happy, till one day when a great black squirrel swam to the island
and paid them a visit. He was a very fine handsome fellow, nearly twice as
large as any of the grey squirrels; he had a tail that flourished over his
back, when he set it up, like a great black feather; his claws were sharp
and strong, and his eyes very round and bright; he had upright ears, and
long, sharp teeth, of which he made good use. The old grey squirrels
called him cousin, and invited him to dinner. They very civilly set before
him some acorns and beech-nuts; but he proved a hungry visitor, and ate as
much as would have fed the whole family for a week. After the grey
squirrels had cleared away the shells and scraps, they asked their greedy
guest where he came from, when Blackie told them he was a great traveller,
and had seen many wonderful things; that he had once lived on a forked
pine at the head of the Waterfall, but being tired of a dull life, he had
gone out on his travels to see the world; that he had been down the lake,
and along the river shore, where there were great places cut out in the
thick forest, called clearings, where some very tall creatures lived, who
were called men and women, with young ones called children; that though
they were not so pretty as squirrels--for they had no for on them, and
were obliged to make clothes to cover them and keep them warm--they were
very useful, and sowed corn and planted fruit-trees and roots for
squirrels to eat, and even built large grain stores to keep it safe and
dry for them.

This seemed very strange, and the simple little grey squirrels were very
much pleased, and said they should like very much to go down the lakes
too, and see these wonderful things.

The black squirrel then told them that there were many things to be seen
in these clearings: that there were large beasts, called oxen, and cows,
and sheep, and pigs; and these creatures had houses built for them to live
in; and all the men and women seemed to employ themselves about, was
feeding and taking care of them.

Now this cunning fellow never told his simple cousins that the oxen had
to bear a heavy wooden yoke and chain, and were made to work very hard;
nor that the cows were fed that they might give milk to the children; nor
that the pigs were fatted to make pork; nor that the sheep had their warm
fleeces cut off every year that the settlers might have the wool to spin
and weave. Blackie did not say that the men carried guns, and the dogs
were fierce, and would hunt poor squirrels from tree to tree, frightening
them almost to death with their loud, angry barking; that cats haunted the
barns and houses, and, in short, that there were dangers as well as
pleasures to be met with in these clearings; and that the barns were built
to shelter the grain for men, and not for the benefit of squirrels.

The black squirrel proved rather a troublesome guest, for he stayed
several days, and ate so heartily, that the old grey squirrels were
obliged to hint that he had better go back to the clearings, where there
was so much food, for that their store was nearly done.

When Blackie found that all the nice nuts were eaten, and that even
pine-kernels and beech-nuts were becoming scarce, he went away, saying that
he should soon come again.

The old grey squirrels were glad when they saw the tip of Blackie's tail
disappear, as he whisked down the trunk of the old oak; but their young
ones were very sorry that he was gone, for they liked very much to listen
to all his wonderful stories, which they thought were true; and they told
their father and mother how they wished they would leave the dull island
and the old tree, and go down the lakes, and see the wonderful things that
their black cousin had described.

But the old ones shook their heads, and said they feared there was more
fiction than truth in the tales they had heard, and that if they were wise
they would stay where they were. "What do you want more, my dear
children," said their mother, "than you enjoy here? Have you not this
grand old oak for a palace to live in; its leaves and branches spreading
like a canopy over your heads, to shelter you from the hot sun by day and
the dews by night? Are there not moss, dried grass, and roots beneath, to
make a soft bed for you to lie upon? and do not the boughs drop down a
plentiful store of brown ripe acorns? That silver lake, studded with
islands of all shapes and sizes, produces cool clear water for you to
drink and bathe yourselves in. Look at those flowers that droop their
blossoms down to its glassy surface, and the white lilies that rest upon
its bosom,--will you see anything fairer or better if you leave this
place? Stay at home and be contented."

"If I hear any more grumbling," said their father, "I shall pinch your
ears and tails." So the little squirrels said no more, but I am sorry to
say they did not pay much heed to their wise, old mother's counsels; for
whenever they were alone, all their talk was how to run away, and go
abroad to see the world, as their black cousin had called the new
settlement down the lakes. It never came into the heads of the silly
creatures that those wonderful stories they had been told originated in an
artful scheme of the greedy black squirrel, to induce them to leave their
warm pleasant house in the oak, that he and his children might come and
live in it, and get the hoards of grain, and nuts, and acorns, that their
father and mother had been laying up for winter stores.

Moreover, the wily black squirrel had privately told them that their
father and mother intended to turn them out of the nest very soon, and
make provision for a new family. This indeed was really the case; for as
soon as young animals can provide for themselves, their parents turn them
off, and care no more for them. Very different, indeed, is this from our
parents; for they love and cherish us as long as they live, and afford us
a home and shelter as long as we need it.

Every hour these little grey squirrels grew more and more impatient to
leave the lonely little rocky island, though it was a pretty spot, and the
place of their birth; but they were now eager to go abroad and seek their
fortunes.

"Let us keep our own counsel," said Nimble-foot to his sisters Velvet-paw
and Silver-nose, "or we may chance to get our tails pulled; but be all
ready for a start by early dawn to-morrow."

Velvet-paw and Silver-nose said they would be up before sunrise, as they
should have a long voyage down the lake, and agreed to rest on Pine Island
near the opening of Clear Lake. "And then take to the shore and travel
through the woods, where, no doubt, we shall have a pleasant time," said
Nimble-foot, who was the most hopeful of the party.

The sun was scarcely yet risen over the fringe of dark pines that skirted
the shores of the lake, and a soft creamy mist hung on the surface of the
still waters, which were unruffled by the slightest breeze. The little grey
squirrels awoke, and looked sleepily out from the leafy screen that shaded
their mossy nest. The early notes of the wood-thrush and song-sparrow, with
the tender warbling of the tiny wren, sounded sweetly in the still, dewy
morning air; while from a cedar swamp was heard the trill of the green
frogs, which the squirrels thought very pretty music. As the sun rose above
the tops of the trees, the mist rolled off in light fleecy clouds, and soon
was lost in the blue sky, or lay in large bright drops on the cool grass
and shining leaves. Then all the birds awoke, and the insects shook their
gauzy wings which had been folded all the night in the flower-cups, and the
flowers began to lift their heads, and the leaves to expand to catch the
golden light. There was a murmur on the water as it played among the
sedges, and lifted the broad floating leaves of the white water-lilies,
with their carved ivory cups; and the great green, brown, and blue
dragon-flies rose with a whirring sound, and darted to and fro among the
water flowers.

It is a glorious sight to see the sun rise at any time, for then we can
look upon him without having our eyes dazzled with the brightness of his
beams; and though there were no men and women and little children, in the
lonely waters and woods, to lift up their hands and voices in prayer and
praise to God, who makes the sun to rise each day, yet no doubt the great
Creator is pleased to see his creatures rejoice in the blessings of light
and heat.

Lightly running down the rugged bark of the old oak-tree, the little
squirrels bade farewell to their island home--to the rocks, mosses, ferns,
and flowers that had sheltered them, among which they had so often chased
each other in merry gambols. They thought little of all this, when they
launched themselves on the silver bosom of the cool lake.

"How easy it is to swim in this clear water!" said Silver-nose to her
sister Velvet-paw. "We shall not be long in reaching yonder island, and
there, no doubt, we shall get a good breakfast."

So the little swimmers proceeded on their voyage, furrowing the calm
waters as they glided noiselessly along; their soft grey heads and ears
and round black eyes only being seen, and the bright streaks caused by the
motion of their tails, which lay flat on the surface, looking like silver
threads gently floating on the stream.

Not being much used to the fatigue of swimming, the little squirrels were
soon tired, and if it had not been for a friendly bit of stick that
happened to float near her, poor Velvet-paw would have been drowned;
however, she got up on the stick, and, setting up her fine broad tail, went
merrily on, and soon passed Nimble-foot and Silver-nose. The current drew
the stick towards the Pine Island that lay at the entrance of Clear Lake,
and Velvet-paw leaped ashore, and sat down on a mossy stone to dry her fur,
and watch for her brother and sister: they, too, found a large piece of
birch-bark which the winds had blown into the water, and as a little breeze
had sprung up to waft them along, they were not very long before they
landed on the island. They were all very glad when they met again, after
the perils and fatigues of the voyage. The first thing to be done was to
look for something to eat, for their early rising had made them very
hungry. They found abundance of pine-cones strewn on the ground, but, alas
for our little squirrels! very few kernels in them; for the crossbills and
chiccadees had been at work for many weeks on the trees; and also many
families of their poor relations, the chitmunks or ground squirrels, had
not been idle, as our little voyagers could easily guess by the chips and
empty cones round their holes. So, weary as they were, they were obliged to
run up the tall pine and hemlock trees, to search among the cones that grew
on their very top branches. While our squirrels were busy with the few
kernels they chanced to find, they were startled from their repast by the
screams of a large slate-coloured hawk, and Velvet-paw very narrowly
escaped being pounced upon and carried off in its sharp-hooked talons.
Silver-nose at the same time was nearly frightened to death by the keen
round eyes of a cunning racoon, which had come within a few feet of the
mossy branch of an old cedar, where she sat picking the seeds out of a dry
head of a blue flag-flower she had found on the shore. Silvy, at this
sight, gave a spring that left her many yards beyond her sharp-sighted
enemy.

A lively note of joy was uttered by Nimblefoot, for, perched at his ease on
a top branch of the hemlock-tree, he had seen the bound made by
Silver-nose.

"Well jumped, Silvy," said he; "Mister Coon must be a smart fellow to
equal that. But look sharp, or you will get your neck wrung yet; I see we
must keep a good look-out in this strange country."

"I begin to wish we were safe back again in our old one," whined Silvy,
who was much frightened by the danger she had just escaped.

"Pooh, pooh, child; don't be a coward," said Nimble, laughing.

"Cousin Blackie never told us there were hawks and coons on this island,"
said Velvet-paw.

"My dear, he thought we were too brave to be afraid of hawks and coons,"
said Nimble. "For my part, I think it is a fine thing to go out a little
into the world. We should never see anything better than the sky and the
water, and the old oak-tree on that little island."

"Ay, but I think it is safer to see than to be seen," said Silvy, "for
hawks and eagles have strong beaks, and racoons sharp claws and
hungry-looking teeth; and it is not very pleasant, Nimble, to be obliged to
look out for such wicked creatures."

"Oh, true indeed," said Nimble; "if it had not been for that famous jump
you made, Silvy, and, Velvet, your two admirers, the hawk and racoon,
would soon have hid all your beauties from the world, and put a stop to
your travels."

"It is very well for brother Nimble to make light of our dangers,"
whispered Velvet-paw, "but let us see how he will jump if a big eagle were
to pounce down to carry him off."

"Yes, yes," said Silvy; "it is easy to brag before one is in danger."

The squirrels thought they would now go and look for some
partridge-berries, of which they were very fond, for the pine-kernels were
but dry husky food after all.

There were plenty of the pretty white star-shaped blossoms, growing all
over the ground under the pine-trees, but the bright scarlet twin-berries
were not yet ripe. In winter the partridges eat this fruit from under the
snow; and it furnishes food for many little animals as well as birds. The
leaves are small, of a dark green, and the white flowers have a very fine
fragrant scent. Though the runaways found none of these berries fit to
eat, they saw some ripe strawberries among the bushes; and, having
satisfied their hunger, began to grow very merry, and whisked here and
there and everywhere, peeping into this hole and under that stone.
Sometimes they had a good game of play, chasing one another up and down
the trees, chattering and squeaking as grey squirrels only can chatter and
squeak, when they are gambolling about in the wild woods of Canada.

Indeed, they made such a noise, that the great ugly black snakes lifted
up their heads, and stared at them with their wicked spiteful-looking
eyes, and the little ducklings swimming among the water-lilies, gathered
round their mother, and a red-winged blackbird perched on a dead tree gave
alarm to the rest of the flock by calling out, _Geck, geck, geck,_ as
loudly as he could. In the midst of their frolics, Nimble skipped into a
hollow log--but was glad to run out again; for a porcupine covered with
sharp spines was there, and was so angry at being disturbed, that he stuck
one of his spines into poor Nimble-foot's soft velvet nose, and there it
would have remained if Silvy had not seized it with her teeth and pulled
it out. Nimble-foot squeaked sadly, and would not play any longer, but
rolled himself up and went to sleep in a red-headed woodpecker's old nest;
while Silvy and Velvet-paw frisked about in the moonlight, and when tired
of play got up into an old oak which had a large hollow place in the crown
of it, and fell asleep, fancying, no doubt, that they were on the rocky
island in Stony Lake; and so we will bid them good night, and wish them
pleasant dreams.



Lady Mary had read a long while, and was now tired; so she kissed her
nurse, and-said "Now, Mrs. Frazer, I will play with my doll, and feed my
squirrel and my dormice."

The dormice were two soft, brown creatures, almost as pretty and as
innocent as the squirrel, and a great deal tamer; and they were called
Jeannette and Jeannot, and would come when they were called by their
names, and take a bit of cake or a lump of sugar out of the fingers of
their little mistress. Lady Mary had two canaries, Dick and Pet; and she
loved her dormice and birds, and her new pet the flying squirrel, very
much, and never let them want for food, or water, or any nice thing she
could get for them. She liked the history of the grey squirrels very much;
and was quite eager to get her book the next afternoon, to read the second
part of the adventures and wanderings of the family.




PART II.

WHICH TELLS HOW THE GREY SQUIRRELS GET ON WHILE THEY REMAINED ON PINE
ISLAND--HOW THEY BEHAVED TO THEIR POOR RELATIONS, THE CHITMUNKS--AND WHAT
HAPPENED TO THEM IN THE FOREST.


It was noon when the little squirrels awoke, and, of course, they were
quite ready for their breakfast; but there was no good, kind old mother to
provide for their wants, and to bring nuts, acorns, roots, or fruit for
them; they must now get up, go forth, and seek food for themselves. When
Velvet-paw and Silver-nose went to call Nimble-foot, they were surprised
to find his nest empty; but after searching a long while, they found him
sitting on the root of an upturned tree, looking at a family of little
chitmunks busily picking over the pine-cones on the ground; but as soon as
one of the poor little fellows, with great labour, had dug out a kernel,
and was preparing to eat it, down leaped Nimble-foot, and carried off the
prize; and if one of the little chitmunks ventured to say a word, he very
uncivilly gave him a scratch, or bit his ears, calling him a mean, shabby
fellow.

Now, the chitmunks were really very pretty. They were, to be sure, not
more than half the size of the grey squirrels, and their fur was short,
without the soft thick glossy look upon it of the grey squirrels'. They
were of a lively tawny yellow-brown colour, with long black and white
stripes down their backs; their tails were not so long nor so thickly
furred; and instead of living in the trees, they made their nests in logs
and wind-falls, and had their granaries and winter houses too under
ground, where they made warm nests of dried moss and grass and
thistledown; to these they had several entrances, so that they had always
a chance of refuge if danger were nigh. Like the dormice, flying
squirrels, and ground hogs, they slept soundly during the cold weather,
only awakening when the warm spring sun had melted the snow. [Footnote: It
is not quite certain that the chitmunk is a true squirrel, and he is
sometimes called a striped rat. This pretty animal seems, indeed, to form
a link between the rat and squirrel.]

The vain little grey squirrels thought themselves much better than these
little chitmunks, whom they treated with very little politeness, laughing
at them for living in holes in the ground, instead of upon lofty trees, as
they did; they even called them low-bred fellows, and wondered why they
did not imitate their high breeding and behaviour.

The chitmunks took very little notice of their rudeness, but merely said
that, if being high-bred made people rude, they would rather remain humble
as they were.

"As we are the head of all the squirrel families," said Silver-nose, "we
shall do you the honour of breakfasting with you to-day."

"We breakfasted hours ago, while you lazy fellows were fast asleep,"
replied an old chitmunk, poking his little nose out of a hole in the
ground.

"Then we shall dine with you: so make haste and get something good for
us," said Nimble-foot. "I have no doubt you have plenty of butter and
hickory-nuts laid up in your holes."

The old chitmunk told him he might come and get them, if he could.

At this the grey squirrels skipped down from the branches, and began to
run hither and thither, and to scratch among the moss and leaves, to find
the entrance to the chitmunks' grain stores. They peeped under the old
twisted roots of the pines and cedars, into every chink and cranny, but no
sign of a granary was to be seen.

Then the chitmunks said, "My dear friends, this is a bad season to visit
us; we are very poor just now, finding it difficult to get a few dry
pine-kernels and berries, but if you will come and see us after harvest, we
shall have a store of nuts and acorns."

"Pretty fellows you are!" replied Nimble, "to put us off with promises,
when we are so hungry; we might starve between this and harvest."

"If you leave this island, and go down the lake, you will come to a mill,
where the red squirrels live, and where you will have fine times," said
one of the chitmunks.

"Which is the nearest way to the mill?" asked Velvet-paw.

"Swim to the shore, and keep the Indian, path, and you will soon see it."

But while the grey squirrels were looking out for the path, the cunning
chitmunks whisked away into their holes, and left the inquirers in the
lurch, who could not tell what had become of them; for though they did
find a round hole that they thought might be one of their burrows, it was
so narrow that they could only poke in their noses, but could get no
further; the grey squirrels being much fatter and bigger than the slim
little chitmunks.

"After all," said Silvy, who was the best of the three, "perhaps, if we
had been civil, the chitmunks would have treated us better."

"Well," said Nimble, "if they had been good fellows, they would have
invited us, as our mother did cousin Blackie, and have set before us the
best they had. I could find it in my heart to dig them out of their holes,
and give them a good bite." This was all brag on Nimble's part, who was
not near so brave as he wished Silvy and Velvet-paw to suppose he was.

After spending some time in hunting for acorns, they made up their minds
to leave the island; and as it was not very far to the mainland, they
decided on swimming thither.

"Indeed," said Silver-nose, "I am tired of this dull place; we are not
better off here than we were in the little island in Stony Lake, where our
good old mother took care we should have plenty to eat, and we had a nice
warm nest to shelter us."

"Ah! well, it is of no use grumbling now; if we were to go back, we
should only get a scolding, and perhaps be chased off the island," said
Nimble. "Now let us have a race, and see which of us will get to shore
first;" and he leaped over Velvet-paw's head, and was soon swimming
merrily for the shore. He was soon followed by his companions, and in half
an hour they were all safely landed. Instead of going into the thick
forest, they agreed to take the path by the margin of the lake, for there
they had a better chance of getting nuts and fruit; but though it was the
merry month of June, and there were plenty of pretty flowers in bloom, the
berries were hardly ripe, and our little vagrants fared but badly. Besides
being hungry, they were sadly afraid of the eagles and fish-hawks that
kept hovering over the water; and when they went further into the forest
to avoid them, they saw a great white wood-owl, noiselessly flying out
from among the close cedar swamps, that seemed just ready to pounce down
upon them. The grey squirrels did not like the look of the owl's great
round shining eyes, as they peered at them, under the tufts of silky white
feathers, which almost hid his hooked bill; and their hearts sunk within
them, when they heard his hollow cry, "_Ho, ho, ho, ho!" "Waugh,
ho!"_ dismally sounding in their ears.

It was well that Velvet-paw was as swift afoot as she was soft, for one
of these great owls had very nearly caught her, while she was eating a
filbert that she had found in a cleft branch, where a nuthatch had fixed
it, while she pecked a hole in the shell. Some bird of prey had scared
away the poor nuthatch, and Velvet-paw no doubt thought she was in luck
when she found the prize; but it would have been a dear nut to her, if
Nimble, who was a sharp-sighted fellow, had not seen the owl, and cried
_"Chit, chit, chit, chit!"_ to warn her of her danger. _"Chit,
chit, chit, chit!"_ cried Velvet-paw, and away she flew to the very top
of a tall pine-tree, springing from one tree-top to another, till she was
soon out of the old owl's reach.

"What shall we do for supper to-night?" said Silver-nose, looking very
pitifully at Nimble-foot; whom they looked upon as the head of the family.

"We shall not want for a good supper and breakfast too, or I am very much
mistaken. Do you see that red squirrel yonder, climbing the hemlock-tree?
Well, my dears, he has a fine store of good things in that beech-tree. I
watched him run down with a nut in his teeth. Let us wait patiently, and
we shall see him come again for another; and as soon as he has done his
meal, we will go and take ours."

The red squirrel ran to and fro several times, each time carrying off a nut
to his nest in the hemlock; after a while, he came no more. As soon as he
was out of sight Nimble led the way, and found the hoard. The beech was
quite hollow in the heart, and they went down through a hole in the branch,
and found a store of hazel-nuts, with acorns, hickory-nuts, butter-nuts,
and beech-mast, all packed quite close and dry. They soon made a great hole
in the red squirrel's store of provisions, and were just choosing some nuts
to carry off with them, when they were disturbed by a scratching against
the bark of the tree. Nimble, who was always the first to take care of
himself, gave the alarm, and he and Velvet-paw, being nearest to the hole,
got off safely; but poor Silvy had the ill luck to sneeze, and before she
had time to hide herself the angry red squirrel sprang upon her, and gave
her such a terrible cuffing and scratching, that Silvy cried out for mercy.
As to Nimble-foot and Velvet-paw, they paid no heed to her cries for help;
they ran away, and left her to bear the blame of all their misdeeds, as
well as her own. Thieves are always cowards, and are sure to forsake one
another when danger is nigh.

The angry red squirrel pushed poor Silvy out of her granary, and she was
glad to crawl away, and hide herself in a hole at the root of a
neighbouring tree, where she lay in great pain and terror, licking her
wounds, and crying to think how cruel it was of her brother and sister to
leave her to the mercy of the red squirrel. It was surely very cowardly of
Foot-foot and Velvet-paw to forsake her in such a time of need; nor was
this the only danger that befel poor Silvy. One morning, when she put her
nose out of the hole, to look about her before venturing out, she saw
seated on a branch, close beside the tree she was under, a racoon, staring
full at her, with his sharp cunning black eyes. She was very much afraid
of him, for she thought he looked very hungry; but as she knew that
racoons are very fond of nuts and fruit, she said to herself, "Perhaps if
I show him where the red squirrel's granary in the beech-tree is, he will
not kill me." Then she said very softly to him, "Good Mister Coon, if you
want a very nice breakfast, and will promise to do me no hurt, I will tell
you where to find plenty of nuts."

The coon eyed her with a sly grin, and said, "If I can get anything more
to my taste than a pretty grey squirrel, I will take it, my dear, and not
lay a paw upon your soft back."

"Ah! but you must promise not to touch me, if I come out and show yon
where to find the nuts," said Silvy.

"Upon the word and honour of a coon!" replied the racoon, laying one
black paw upon his breast; "but if you do not come out of your hole, I
shall soon come and dig you out, so you had best be quick; and if you
trust me, you shall come to no hurt."

Then Silvy thought it wisest to seem to trust the racoon's word, and she
came out of her hole, and went a few paces to point out the tree, where
her enemy the red squirrel's store of nuts was; but as soon as she saw
Mister Coon disappear in the hollow of the tree, she bade him good-bye,
and whisked up a tall tree, where she knew the racoon could not reach her;
and having now quite recovered her strength, she was able to leap from
branch to branch, and even from one tree to another, whenever they grew,
close and the boughs touched, as they often do in the grand old woods in
Canada; and so she was soon far, far away from the artful coon, who waited
a long time, hoping to carry off poor Silvy for his dinner.

Silvy contrived to pick up a living by digging for roots, and eating such
fruits as she could find; but one day she came to a grassy cleared spot,
where she saw a strange-looking tent, made with poles stuck into the
ground and meeting at the top, from which came a bluish cloud that spread
among the trees; and as Silvy was very curious, she came nearer, and at
last, hearing no sound, ran up one of the poles, and peeped in, to see
what was within side, thinking it might be one of the fine stores of grain
that people built for the squirrels, as her cousin Blackie had made her
believe. The poles were covered with sheets of birch-bark, and skins of
deer and wolves, and there was a fire of sticks burning in the middle,
round which some large creatures were sitting on a bear's skin, eating
something that smelt very nice. They had long black hair, and black eyes,
and very white teeth. Silvy felt alarmed at first; but thinking they must
be the people who were kind to squirrels, she ventured to slip through a
slit in the bark, and ran down into the wigwam, hoping to get something to
eat; but in a minute the Indians jumped up, and before she had time to
make her escape she was seized by a young squaw, and popped into a birch
box, and the lid shut down upon her: so poor Silvy was caught in a trap;
and all for believing the artful black squirrel's tales.

Silver-nose remembered her mother's warning now, when it was too late; she
tried to get out of her prison, but in vain; the sides of the box were too
strong, and there was not so much as a single crack for a peep-hole. After
she had been shut up some time, the lid was raised a little, and a dark
hand put in some bright, shining hard grains for her to eat. This was
Indian corn, and it was excellent food; but Silvy was a long, long time
before she would eat any of this sweet corn, she was so vexed at being
caught and shut up in prison; besides, she was very much afraid that the
Indians were going to eat her. After some days, she began to get used to
her captive state; the little squaw used to feed her, and one day took her
out of the box, and put her into a nice light cage, where there was soft
green moss to lie on, a little bark dish with clear water, and abundance of
food. The cage was hung up on the bough of a tree, near the wigwam, to
swing to and fro as the wind waved the tree. Here Silvy could see the birds
flying to and fro, and listen to their cheerful songs. The Indian women and
children had always a kind look, or a word to say to her; and her little
mistress was so kind to her, that Silvy could not help loving her. She was
very grateful for her care; for when she was sick and sulky, the little
squaw gave her bits of maple-sugar and parched rice out of her hand. At
last Silvy grew tame, and would suffer herself to be taken out of her
house, to sit on her mistress's shoulder, or in her lap; and though she
sometimes ran away and hid herself, out of fun, she would not have gone far
from the tent of the good Indians, on any account. Sometimes she saw the
red squirrels running about in the forest, but they never came very near
her; but she used to watch ail day long for her brother Nimble-foot, or
sister Velvet; but they were now far away from her, and no doubt thought
that she had been killed by the red squirrel, or eaten up by a fox or
racoon.



"Nurse, I am so glad pretty Silvy was not killed, and that the good
Indians took care of her."

"It is time now, my dear, for you to put down your book," said Mrs.
Frazer, "and to-morrow we will read some more."

"Yes, if you please, Mrs. Frazer," said Lady Mary.




PART III.

HOW THE SQUIRRELS GOT TO THE MILL AT THE RAPIDS--AND WHAT HAPPENED TO
VELVET-PAW.


Nimble-foot and Velvet-paw were so frightened by the sight of the red
squirrel, that they ran down the tree without once looking back to see
what had become of poor Silver-nose; indeed the cowards, instead of
waiting for their poor sister, fled through the forest as if an army of
red squirrels were behind them. At last they reached the banks of the
lake, and, jumping into the water, swam down the current till they came to
a place called the "Narrow," where the wide lake poured its waters through
a deep rocky channel, not more than a hundred yards wide; here the waters
became so rough and rapid, that our little swimmers thought it wisest to
go on shore. They scrambled up the steep rocky bank, and found themselves
on a wide open space, quite free from trees, which they knew must be one
of the great clearings the traveller squirrel had spoken of. There was a
very high building on the water's edge, that they thought must be the mill
that the chitmunks had told them they would come to; and they were in good
spirits, as they now expected to find plenty of good things laid up for
them to eat, so they went in by the door of the mill.

"Dear me, what a dust there is!", said Nimble, looking about him; "I
think it must be snowing."

"Snow does not fall in hot weather," said Velvet; "besides, this white
powder is very sweet and nice;" and she began to lick some of the flour
that lay in the cracks of the floor.

"I have found some nice seeds here," said Nimble, running to the top of a
sack that stood with the mouth untied; "these are better than pine-kernels,
and not so hard. We must have come to one of the great grain-stores that
our cousin told us of. Well, I am sure the people are very kind to have
laid up so many good things for us squirrels."

When they had eaten as much as they liked, they began to run about to see
what was in the mill. Presently, a man came in, and they saw him take one
of the sacks of wheat, and pour it into a large upright box, and in a few
minutes there was a great noise--a sort of buzzing, whirring, rumbling,
dashing, and splashing;--and away ran Velvet-paw in a terrible fright, and
scrambled up some beams and rafters to the top of the wall, where she sat
watching what was going--on, trembling all over; but finding that no harm
happened to her, took courage, and after a time ceased to be afraid. She
saw Nimble perched on a cross-beam looking down very intently at
something; so she came out of her corner and ran to him, and asked what he
was looking at.

"There is a great black thing here," said he, "I cannot tell what to make
of him at all; it turns round, and round, and round, and dashes the water
about, making a fine splash." (This was the water-wheel.)

"It looks very ugly indeed," said Velvet-paw, "and makes my head giddy to
look at it; let us go away. I want to find out what these two big stones
are doing," said she; "they keep rubbing against one another, and making a
great noise."

"There is nothing so wonderful in two big stones, my dear," said Nimble;
"I have seen plenty bigger than these in Stony Lake."

"But they did not move about as these do; and only look here at the white
stuff that is running down all the time into this great box. Well, we
shall not want for food for the rest of our lives; I wish poor Silvy were
with us to share in our good luck."

They saw a great many other strange things in the mill, and they thought
that the miller was a very funny-looking creature; but as they fancied
that he was grinding the wheat into flour for them, they were not much
afraid of him; they were more troubled at the sight of a black dog, which
spied them out as they sat on the beams of the mill, and ran about in a
great rage, barking at them in a frightful way, and never left off till
the miller went out of the mill, when he went away with his master, and
did not return till the next day; but whenever he saw the grey squirrels,
this little dog, whose name was "Pinch," was sure to set up his ears and
tail, and snap and bark, showing all his sharp white teeth in a very
savage manner.

Not far from the mill was another building: this was the house the miller
lived in; and close by the house was a barn, a stable, a cow-shed, and a
sheep-pen, and there was a garden full of fruit and flowers, and an
orchard of apple-trees close by.

One day Velvet-paw ran up one of the apple-trees and began to eat an
apple; it looked very good, for it had a bright red cheek, but it was hard
and sour, not being ripe. "I do not like these big, sour berries," said
she, making wry faces as she tried to get the bad taste out of her mouth
by wiping her tongue on her fore-paw. Nimble had found some ripe currants;
so he only laughed at poor Velvet for the trouble she was in.

These little grey squirrels now led a merry life; they found plenty to
eat and drink, and would not have had a care in the world, if it had not
been for the noisy little dog Pinch, who let them have no quiet, barking
and baying at them whenever he saw them; and also for the watchful eyes of
a great tom-cat, who was always prowling about the mill, or creeping round
the orchard and outhouses; so that with all their good food they were not
quite free from causes of fear, and no doubt sometimes wished themselves
safe back on the little rocky island, in their nest in the old oak-tree.

Time passed away--the wheat and the oats were now ripe and fit for the
scythe, for in Canada the settlers mow wheat with an instrument called a
"cradle scythe." The beautiful Indian corn was in bloom, and its long pale
green silken threads were waving in the summer breeze. The blue-jays were
busy in the fields of wheat; so were the red-winged blackbirds, and the
sparrows, and many other birds, great and small; field-mice in dozens were
cutting the straw with their sharp teeth, and carrying off the grain to
their nests; and as to the squirrels and chitmunks, there were scores of
them, black, red, and grey, filling their cheeks with the grain, and
laying it out on the rail fences and on the top of the stumps to dry,
before they carried it away to their storehouses. And many a battle the
red and the black squirrels had, and sometimes the grey joined with the
red, to beat the black ones off the ground.

Nimble-foot and his sister kept out of these quarrels as much as they
could; but once they got a severe beating from the red squirrels for not
helping them to drive off the saucy black ones, who would carry away the
little heaps of wheat, as soon as they were dry.

"We do not mean to trouble ourselves with laying up winter stores," said
Nimble one day to his red cousins; "don't you see Peter, the miller's man,
has got a great wagon and horses, and is carting wheat into the barn for
us?"

The red squirrel opened his round eyes very wide at this speech. "Why,
Cousin Nimble," he said, "you are not so foolish as to think the miller is
harvesting that grain for your use. No, no, my friend; if you want any,
you must work as we do, or run the chance of starving in the winter."

Then Nimble told him what their cousin Blackie had said. "You were wise
fellows to believe such nonsense!" said the red squirrel. "These mills and
barns are all stored for the use of the miller and his family; and what is
more, my friend, I can tell you that men are no great friends to us poor
squirrels, and will kill us when they get the chance, and begrudge us the
grain we help ourselves to."

"Well, that is very stingy," said Velvet-paw; "I am sure there is enough
for men and squirrels too. However, I suppose all must live, so we will
let them have what we leave; I shall help myself after they have stored it
up in yonder barn."

"You had better do as we do, and make hay while the sun shines," said the
red squirrel.

"I would rather play in the sunshine, and eat what I want here," said
idle Velvet-paw, setting up her fine tail like a feather over her back, as
she ate an ear of corn.

"You are a foolish, idle thing, and will come to no good," said the red
squirrel. "I wonder where you were brought up?"

I am very sorry to relate that Velvet-paw did not come to a good end, for
she did not take the advice of her red cousin, to lay up provisions during
the harvest; but instead of that, she ate all day long, and grew fat and
lazy; and after the fields were all cleared, she went to the mill one day,
when the mill was grinding, and seeing a quantity of wheat in the feeder
of the mill, she ran up a beam and jumped down, thinking to make a good
dinner from the grain she saw; but it kept sliding down and sliding down
so fast, that she could not get one grain, so at last she began to be
frightened, and tried to get up again, but, alas! this was not possible.
She cried out to Nimble to help her; and while he ran to look for a stick
for her to raise herself up by, the mill-wheel kept on turning, and the
great stones went round faster and faster, till poor Velvet-paw was
crushed to death between them. Nimble was now left all alone, and sad
enough he was, you may suppose.

"Ah," said he, "idleness is the ruin of grey squirrels, as well as men,
so I will go away from this place, and try and earn an honest living in
the forest. I wish I had not believed all the fine tales my cousin the
black squirrel told me."

Then Nimble went away from the clearing, and once more resolved to seek
his fortune in the woods. He knew there were plenty butter-nuts, acorns,
hickory-nuts, and beech-nuts, to be found, besides many sorts of berries;
and he very diligently set to work to lay up stores against the coming
winter.

As it was now getting cold at night, Nimble-foot thought it would be wise
to make himself a warm house; so he found out a tall hemlock-pine that was
very thick and bushy at the top; there was a forked branch in the tree,
with a hollow just fit for his nest. He carried twigs of birch and beech,
and over these he laid dry green moss, which he collected on the north
side of the cedar-trees, and some long grey moss that he found on the
swamp maples, and then he stripped the silky threads from the milk-weeds,
and the bark of the cedar and birch-trees. These he gnawed fine, and soon
made a soft bed; he wove and twisted the sticks, and roots, and mosses
together, till the walls of his house were quite thick, and he made a sort
of thatch over the top with dry leaves and long moss, with a round hole to
creep in and out of.

Making this warm house took him many days' labour; but many strokes will
fell great oaks, so at last Nimble-foot's work came to an end, and he had
the comfort of a charming house to shelter him from the cold season. He
laid up a good store of nuts, acorns, and roots: some he put in a hollow
branch of the hemlock-tree close to his nest; some he hid in a stump, and
another store he laid under the roots of a mossy cedar. When all this was
done, he began to feet very lonely, and often wished no doubt that he had
had his sisters Silvy and Velvet-paw with him, to share his nice warm
house; but of Silvy he knew nothing, and poor Velvet-paw was dead.

One fine moonlight night, as Nimble was frisking about on the bough of a
birch-tree, not very far from his house in the hemlock, he saw a canoe land
on the shore of the lake, and some Indians with an axe cut down some
bushes, and having cleared a small piece of ground, begin to sharpen, the
ends of some long poles. These they stuck into the ground close together in
a circle; and having stripped some sheets of birch-bark from the
birch-trees close by, they thatched the sides of the hut, and made a fire
of sticks inside. They had a dead deer in the canoe, and there were several
hares and black squirrels, the sight of which rather alarmed Nimble; for he
thought if they killed one sort of squirrel, they might another, and he was
very much scared at one of the Indians firing off a gun close by him. The
noise made him fall down to the ground, and it was a good thing that it was
dark among the leaves and grass where the trunk of the tree threw its long
shadow, so that the Indian did not see him, or perhaps he might have loaded
the gun again, and shot our little friend, and made soup of him for his
supper.

Nimble ran swiftly up a pine-tree, and was soon out of danger. While he
was watching some of the Indian children at play, he saw a girl come out
of the hut with a grey squirrel in her arms; it did not seem at all afraid
of her, but nestled to her shoulder, and even ate out of her hand; and
what was Nimble's surprise to see that this tame grey squirrel was none
other than his own pretty sister Silver-nose, whom he had left in the
hollow tree when they both ran away from the red squirrel.

You may suppose the sight of his lost companion was a joyful one; he
waited for a long, long time, till the fire went out, and all the Indians
were fast asleep, and little Silvy came out to play in the moonlight, and
frisk about on the dewy grass as she used to do. Then Nimble, when he saw
her, ran down the tree, and came to her and rubbed his nose against her,
and licked her soft fur, and told her who he was, and how sorry he was for
having left her in so cowardly a manner, to be beaten by the red squirrel.

The good little Silvy told Nimble not to fret about what was past, and
then she asked him for her sister Velvet-paw. Nimble had a long sorrowful
tale to tell about the death of poor Velvet; and Silvy was much grieved.
Then in her turn she told Nimble all her adventures, and how she had been
caught by the Indian, girl, and kept, and fed, and tamed, and had passed
her time very happily, if it had not been for thinking about her dear lost
companions. "But now," she said, "my dear brother, we will never, part
again; you shall be quite welcome, to share my cage, and my nice stores of
Indian corn, rice, and nuts, which my kind mistress gives me."

"I would not be shut up in a cage, not even for one day," said Nimble,
"for all the nice and grain in Canada. I am a free squirrel, and love my
liberty. I would not exchange a life of freedom in these fine old woods,
for all the dainties in the world. So, Silvy, if you prefer a life of
idleness and ease to living with me in the forest, I must say good-bye to
you."

"But there is nothing to hurt us, my dear Nimble--no racoons, nor foxes,
nor hawks, nor owls, nor weasels; if I see any hungry-looking birds or
beasts, I have a safe place to run to, and never need be hungry!"

"I would not lead a life like that, for the world," said Nimble. "I
should die of dullness; if there is danger in a life of freedom, there is
pleasure too, which you cannot enjoy, shut up in a wooden cage, and fed at
the will of a master or mistress."

"Well, I shall be shot if the Indians awake and see me; so I shall be off."

Silvy looked very sorrowful; she did not like to part from her newly-found
brother, but she was unwilling to forego all the comforts and luxuries her
life of captivity afforded her.

"You will not tell the Indians where I live, I hope, Silvy, for they
would think it a fine thing to hunt me with their dogs, or shoot me down
with their bows and arrows."

At these words Silvy was overcome with grief, so jumping off from the log
on which she was standing, she said, "Nimble, I will go with you and share
all your perils, and we will never part again." She then ran into the
wigwam; and going softly to the little squaw, who was asleep, licked her
hands and face, as if she would say, "Good-bye, my good kind friend; I
shall not forget all your love for me, though I am going away from you for
ever."

Silvy then followed Nimble into the forest, and they soon reached his
nice comfortable nest in the tall hemlock-tree.



"Nurse, I am glad Silvy went away with Nimble, are not you? Poor Nimble
must have been so lonely without her, and then you know it must have
seemed so hard to him if Silvy had preferred staying with the Indians, to
living with him."

"Those who have been used to a life of ease do not willingly give it up,
my dear lady; thus you see, love for her old companion was stronger even
than love of self. But I think you must have tired yourself with reading
so long to me."

"Indeed, nurse, I must read a little more, for I want you to hear how
Silvy and Nimble amused themselves in the hemlock-tree."

Then Lady Mary went on and read as follows.



Silvy was greatly pleased with her new home, which was as soft and as
warm as clean dry moss, hay, and fibres of roots could make it. The
squirrels built a sort of pent or outer roof of twigs, dry leaves, and
roots of withered grass, which was pitched so high that it threw off the
rain and kept the inner house very dry. They worked at this very
diligently, and also laid up a store of nuts and berries. They knew that
they must not only provide plenty of food for the winter, but also for the
spring months, when they could get little to eat beside the buds and bark
of some sort of trees, and the chance seeds that might still remain in the
pine-cones.

Thus the autumn months passed away very quickly and cheerfully with the
squirrels while preparing for the coming winter. Half the cold season was
spent, too, in sleep; but on mild sunny days the little squirrels, roused
by the bright light of the sunbeams on the white and glittering snow,
would shake themselves, rub their black eyes, and after licking themselves
clean from dust, would whisk out of their house and indulge in merry
gambols up and down the trunks of the trees, skipping from bough to bough,
and frolicking over the hard crisp snow, which scarcely showed on its
surface the delicate print of their tiny feet, and the sweep of their fine
light feathery tails. Sometimes they met with some little shrewmice,
running on the snow. These very tiny things are so small, they hardly look
bigger than a large black beetle; they lived on the seeds of the tall
weeds, which they, might be seen climbing and clinging to, yet were hardly
heavy enough to weigh down the heads of the dry stalks. It is pretty to
see the footprints of these small shrewmice, on the surface of the fresh
fallen snow in the deep forest-glades. They are not dormant during the
winter like many of the mouse tribe, for they are up and abroad at all
seasons; for however stormy and severe the weather may be, they do not
seem to heed its inclemency. Surely, children, there is One who cares for
the small tender things of earth, and shelters them from the rude blasts.

Nimble-foot and Silver-nose often saw their cousins, the black squirrels,
playing in the sunshine, chasing each other merrily up and down the trees,
or over the brush-heaps; their jetty coats, and long feathery tails,
forming a striking contrast with the whiteness of the snow, above which
they were sporting. Sometimes they saw a few red squirrels too, but there
was generally war between them and the black ones.

In these lonely forests, everything seems still and silent, during the
long wintry season, as if death had spread a white pall over, the earth,
and hushed every living thing into silence. Few sounds are heard through
the winter days, to break the death-like silence that reigns around,
excepting the sudden rending and cracking of the trees in the frosty air,
the fall of a decayed branch, the tapping of a solitary woodpecker, two or
three small species of which still remain after all the summer birds are
flown; and the gentle, weak chirp of the little tree-creeper, as it runs
up and down the hemlocks and pines, searching the crevices of the bark for
insects. Yet in all this seeming death lies hidden the life of myriads of
insects, the huge beast of the forest, asleep in his lair, with many of
the smaller quadrupeds, and forest-birds, that, hushed in lonely places,
shall awake to life and activity as soon as the sun-beams shall once more
dissolve the snow, unbind the frozen streams, and loosen the bands which
held them in repose.

At last the spring, the glad joyous spring, returned. The leaf-buds,
wrapped within their gummy and downy cases, began to unfold; the dark
green pines, spruce, and balsams began to shoot out fresh spiny leaves,
like tassels, from the ends of every bough, giving out the most refreshing
fragrance; the crimson buds of the young hazels, and the scarlet blossoms
of the soft maple, enlivened the edges of the streams; the bright coral
bark of the dogwood seemed as if freshly varnished, so brightly it glowed
in the morning sunshine; the scream of the blue jay, the song of the robin
and wood-thrush, the merry note of the chiccadee, and plaintive cry of the
pheobe, with loud hammering strokes of the great red-headed woodpecker,
mingled with the rush of the unbound forest streams, gurgling and
murmuring as their water flowed over the stones, and the sighing of the
breeze, playing in the tree-tops, made pleasant and ceaseless music. And
then as time passed on, the trees unfolded all their bright green leaves,
the buds and forest flowers opened; and many a bright bell our little
squirrels looked down upon, from their leafy home, that the eye of man had
never seen.

It was pleasant for our little squirrels, just after sunset, in the still
summer evenings, when the small silver stars came stealing out, one by
one, in the blue sky, to play among the cool dewy leaves of the grand old
oaks and maples; to watch the fitful flash of the fireflies, as they
glanced here and there, flitting through the deep gloom of the forest
boughs, now lost to sight, as they closed their wings, now flashing out
like tiny tapers, borne aloft by unseen hands in the darkness. Where that
little creek runs singing over its mossy bed, and the cedar-boughs bend
down so thick and close, that only a gleam of the bright water can be
seen, even in the sunlight--there the fireflies crowd, and the damp
foliage is all alive with their dazzling light.

In this sweet still hour, just at the dewfall, the rush of whirring wings
may be heard from the islands, or in the forest, bordering on the water's
edge; and out of hollow logs and hoary trunks of trees come forth the
speckled night-hawks, cutting the air with their thin sharp wide wings,
and open beak, ready to entrap the unwary moth, or moskitoe, that float so
joyously upon the evening air. One after another, sweeping in wider
circles, come forth these birds of prey, till the whole air seems alive
with them; darting hither and thither, and uttering wild shrill screams,
as they rise higher and higher in the upper air, till some are almost lost
to sight. Sometimes one of them will descend with a sudden swoop, to the
lower regions of the air, just above the highest tree-tops, with a hollow
booming sound, as if some one were blowing in an empty vessel.

At this hour, too, the bats would quit their homes in hollow trees and
old rocky banks, and flit noiselessly abroad, over the surface of the
quiet star-lit lake; and now also would begin the shrill, trilling note of
the green-frog, and the deep hoarse bass of the bull-frog, which ceases
only at intervals, through the long, warm summer night. You might fancy a
droll sort of dialogue was being carried on among them. At first, a great
fellow, the patriarch of the swamp, will put up his head, which looks very
much like a small pair of bellows, with yellow leather sides; and say in a
harsh, guttural tone, "Go to bed, go to bed, go to bed."

After a moment's pause, two or three will rise and reply, "No, I won't!
no, I won't! no, I won't!"

Then the old fellow, with a growl, replies,--"Get out, get out, get out,"
--and forthwith, with a rush, and a splash, and a dash, they raise a chorus
of whirring, grating, growling, grunting, whistling sounds, which make you
hold your ears. When all this hubbub has lasted some minutes, there is a
pop, and a splash, and down go all the heads under the weeds and mud; and
after another pause, up comes the old father of the frogs, and begins
again with the old story--"Go to bed, go to bed, go to bed," and so on.
During the heat of the day, the bull-frogs are silent; but as the day
declines, and the air becomes cooler, they re-commence their noisy chorus.

I suppose these sounds, though not very pleasant to the ears of men, may
not be so disagreeable to those of wild animals. I dare say neither Nimble
nor Silvy were in the least annoyed by the hoarse note of the bull-frog;
but gambolled as merrily among the boughs and fresh dewy leaves, as if
they were listening to sweet music, or the songs of the birds.

The summer passed away very happily; but towards the close of the warm
season, the squirrels, Nimble and Silvy, resolved to make a journey to the
rocky island on Stony lake, to see the old squirrels, their father and
mother. So they started at sunrise one fine pleasant day, and travelled
along, till one cool evening, just as the moon was beginning to rise above
the pine-trees, they arrived at the little rocky islet where they first
saw the light; but when they eagerly ran up the trunk of the old oak-tree,
expecting to have seen their old father and mother, they were surprised
and terrified by seeing a wood-owl in the nest.

As soon as she espied our little squirrels, she shook her feathers, and
set up her ears--for she was a long-eared owl--and said, "What do you want
here?--ho, ho, ho, ho!

"Indeed, Mrs. Owl," said Nimble, "we come hither to see our parents, whom
we left here a year ago. Can you tell us where we shall find them?"

The owl peered out of her ruff of silken feathers, and after wiping her
sharp bill on her breast, said, "Your cousin the black squirrel beat your
father and mother out of their nest a long time ago, and took possession
of the tree and all that was in it, and they brought up a large family of
little ones, all of which I pounced upon one after another, and ate.
Indeed, the oaks here belong to my family; so finding these impudent
intruders would not quit the premises, I made short work of the matter,
and took the law into my own hands."

"Did you kill them?" asked Silvy, in a trembling voice.

"Of course I did, and very nice tender meat they were," replied the
horrid old owl, beginning to scramble out of the nest, and eyeing the
squirrels at the same time with a wicked look.

"But you did not eat our parents too?" asked the trembling squirrels.

"Yes, I did; they were very tough, to be sure, but I am not very
particular."

The grey squirrels, though full of grief and vain regret, were obliged to
take care of themselves. There was, indeed, no time to fee lost, so they
made a hasty retreat. They crept under the roots of an old tree, where
they lay till the morning; they were not much concerned for the death of
the treacherous black squirrel who had told so many stories, got
possession of their old nest, and caused the death of their parents; but
they said--"We will go home again to our dear old hemlock-tree, and never
leave it more." So these dear little squirrels returned to their forest
home, and may be living there yet.



"Nurse," said Lady Mary, "how do you like the story?"

Mrs. Frazer said it was a very pretty one.

"Perhaps my dear little pet is one of Nimble or Silvy's children. You
know, nurse, they might have gone on their travels too when they were old
enough, and then your brother may have chopped down the tree and found
them in the forest."

"But your squirrel, Lady Mary, is a flying squirrel, and these were only
common grey ones, which are a different species. Besides, my dear, this
history is but a fable."

"I suppose, nurse," said the child, looking up in her nurse's face,
"squirrels do not really talk."

"No, my dear, they have not the use of speech as we have, but in all ages
people have written little tales called fables, in which they make birds
and beasts speak as if they were men and women, it being an easy method of
conveying instruction."

"My book is only a fable then, nurse? I wish it had been true; but it is
very pretty."




CHAPTER IV.

SQUIRRELS--THE CHITMUNKS-DOCILITY OF A PET ONE--ROGUERY OF A YANKEE
PEDLAR--RETURN OF THE MUSICAL CHITMUNK TO HIS MASTER'S BOSOM--SAGACITY OF
A BLACK SQUIRREL.


"Mrs. Frazer, are you very busy just now?" asked Lady Mary, coming up to
the table where her nurse was ironing some lace.

"No, my dear, not very busy, only preparing these lace edgings for your
frocks. Do you want me to do anything for you?"

"I only want to tell you that my governess has promised to paint my dear
squirrel's picture, as soon as it is tame, and will let me hold it in my
lap, without flying away. I saw a picture of a flying squirrel to-day, but
it was very ugly--not at all like mine; it was long and flat, and its legs
looked like sticks, and it was stretched out, just like one of those
muskrat skins that you pointed out to me in a fur store. Mamma said it was
drawn so, to show it while it was in the act of flying; but it is not
pretty--it does not show its beautiful tail, nor its bright eyes, nor
soft silky fur. I heard a lady tell mamma about a nest full of dear, tiny
little flying squirrels; [Footnote: Tame flying squirrels may be purchased
at the Pantheon, in Oxford Street.] that her brother once found in a tree
in the forest; he tamed them, and they lived very happily together, and
would feed from his hand. They slept in the cold weather like dormice; in
the day-time they lay very still, but would come out, and gambol, and
frisk about at night. But somebody left the cage open, and they all ran
away except one, and that he found in his bed, where it had run for
shelter with its little nose under his pillow. He caught the little
fellow, and it lived with him till the spring, when it grew restless, and
one day got away, and went off to the woods."

"These little creatures are impatient of confinement, and will gnaw
through the woodwork of the cage to get free, especially in the spring of
the year. Doubtless, my dear, they pine for the liberty which they used to
enjoy before they were captured by man."

"Nurse, I will not let my little pet be unhappy. As soon as the warm days
come again, and my governess has taken his picture, I will let him go
free. Are there many squirrels in this part of Canada?"

"Not so many as in Upper Canada, Lady Mary. They abound more in some
years than in others. I have seen the beech and oak woods swarming with
black squirrels. My brothers have brought in two or three dozen in one
day. The Indians used to tell us that want of food, or very severe weather
setting in, in the north, drive these little animals from their haunts.
The Indians, who observe these things more than we do, can generally tell
what sort of winter it will be, from the number of wild animals in the
fall."

"What do you mean by the fall, nurse?"

"The autumn in Canada, my lady, is called so from the fall of the leaves.
I remember one year was remarkable for the great number of black, grey,
and flying squirrels; the little striped chitmunk was also plentiful, and
so were weasels and foxes. They came into the barns and granaries, and
into the houses, and destroyed great quantities of grain; besides gnawing
clothes that were laid out to dry; this they did to line their nests with.
Next year there were very few to be seen."

"What became of them, nurse?"

"Some, no doubt, fell a prey to their enemies, the cats, foxes, and
weasels, which were also very numerous that year; and the rest, perhaps,
went back to their own country again."

"I should like to see a great number of these pretty creatures travelling
together," said Lady Mary.

"All wild animals, my dear, are more active by night than by day, and
probably make their long journeys during that season. The eyes of many
animals and birds are so formed, that they see best in the dim twilight,
as cats, and owls, and others. Our heavenly Father has fitted all his.
creatures for the state in which he has placed them."

"Can squirrels swim like otters and beavers, nurse? If they come to a
lake or river, can they cross it?"

"I think they can, Lady Mary; for though these creatures are not formed
like the otter, or beaver, or muskrat, to get their living in the water,
they are able to swim when necessity requires them to do so. I heard a
lady say that she was crossing a lake, between one of the islands and the
shore, in a canoe, with a baby on her lap. She noticed a movement on the
surface of the water. At first she thought it might be a water snake, but
the servant lad who was paddling the canoe, said it was a red squirrel,
and he tried to strike it with the paddle; but the little squirrel leaped
out of the water to the blade of the paddle, and sprang on the head of the
baby, as it lay on her lap; from whence it jumped to her shoulder, and
before she had recovered from her surprise, was in the water again,
swimming straight for the shore, where it was soon safe in the dark pine
woods."

This feat of the squirrel delighted Lady Mary, who expressed her joy at
the bravery of the little creature. Besides, she said she had heard that
grey squirrels, when they wished to go to a distance in search of food,
would all meet together, and collect pieces of bark to serve them for
boats, and would set up their broad tails like sails, to catch the wind,
and in this way cross large sheets of water.

"I do not think this can be true," observed Mrs. Frazer; "for the
squirrel, when swimming, uses his tail as an oar or rudder to help the
motion, the tail lying flat on the surface of the water; nor do these
creatures need a boat, for God, who made them, has _given them_ the
power of swimming at their need."

"Nurse, you said something about a ground squirrel, and called it a
chitmunk. If you please, will you tell me something about it, and why it
is called by such a curious name?"

"I believe it is the Indian name for this sort of squirrel, my dear. The
chitmunk is not so large as the black, red, or grey squirrels. It is
marked along the back with black and white stripes; the rest of its fur is
a yellowish tawny colour. It is a very playful, lively, cleanly animal,
somewhat resembling the dormouse in its habits. It burrows under ground.
Its nest is made with great care, with many galleries which open at the
surface, so that when attacked by an enemy, it can run from one to another
for security."

[Footnote: The squirrel has many enemies; all the weasel tribe, cats, and
even dogs attack them. Cats kill great numbers of these little animals. The
farmer shows them as little mercy as he does rats and mice, as they are
very destructive, and carry off vast quantities of grain, which they store
in hollow trees for use. Not contenting themselves with one, granary, they
have several in case one should fail, or perhaps become injured by
accidental causes. Thus do these simple little creatures teach us a lesson
of providential care for future events.]

"How wise of these little chitmunks to think of that!" said Lady Mary.

"Nay, my dear child, it is God's wisdom, not theirs. These creatures work
according to his will; and so they always do what is fittest and best for
their own comfort and safety. Man is the only one of God's creatures who
disobeys Him."

These words made Lady Mary look grave, till her nurse began to talk to
her again about the chitmunk.

"It is very easily tamed, and becomes very fond of its master. It will
obey his voice, come at a call or a whistle, sit up and beg, take a nut or
an acorn out of his hand, run up a stick, nestle in his bosom, and become
quite familiar. My uncle had a tame chitmunk that was much attached to
him; it lived in his pocket or bosom; it was his companion by day and by
night. When he was out in the forest lumbering, or on the lake fishing, or
in the fields at work, it was always with him. At meals it sat by the side
of his plate, eating what he gave it; but he did not give it meat, as he
thought that might injure its health. One day he and his pet were in the
steam-boat, going to Toronto. He had been showing off the little
chitmunk's tricks to the ladies and gentlemen on board the boat, and
several persons offered him money if he would sell it; but my uncle was
fond of the little thing, and would not part with it. However, just before
he left the boat, he missed his pet; for a cunning Yankee pedlar on board
had stolen it. My uncle knew that his little friend would not desert its
old master; so he went on deck where the passengers were assembled, and
whistled a popular tune familiar to the chitmunk. The little fellow, on
hearing it, whisked out of the pedlar's pocket, and running swiftly along
a railing against which he was standing, soon sought refuge in his
master's bosom."

Lady Mary clapped her hands with joy, and said, "I am so glad, nurse,
that the chitmunk ran back to his old friend. I wish it had bitten that
Yankee pedlar's fingers."

"When angry, these creatures will bite very sharply, set up their tails,
and run to and fro, and make a chattering sound with their teeth. The red
squirrel is very fearless for its size, and will sometimes turn round and
face you, set up its tail, and scold. But they will, when busy eating the
seeds of the sunflower or thistle, of which they are very fond, suffer you
to stand and watch them without attempting to run away. When near their
granaries, or the tree where their nest is, they are unwilling to leave
it, running to and fro, and uttering their angry notes; but if a dog is
near, they make for a tree, and as soon as they are out of his reach, turn
round to chatter and scold, as long as he remains in sight. When hard
pressed, the black and flying squirrels will take prodigious leaps,
springing from bough to bough, and from tree to tree. In this manner they
baffle the hunters, and travel a great distance over the tops of the
trees. Once I saw my uncle and brothers chasing a large black squirrel. He
kept out of reach of the dogs, as well as out of sight of the men, by
passing round and round the tree as he went up, so that they could never
get a fair shot at him. At last, they got so provoked that they took their
axes, and set to work to chop down the tree. It was a large pine-tree, and
took them some time. Just as the tree was ready to fall, and was wavering
to and fro, the squirrel, who had kept on the topmost bough, sprang nimbly
to the next tree, and then to another, and by the time the great pine had
reached the ground, the squirrel was far away in his nest among his little
ones, safe from hunters, guns, and dogs."

"The black squirrel must have wondered, I think, nurse, why so many men
and dogs tried to kill such a little creature as he was. Do the black
squirrels sleep in the winter as well as the flying squirrels and
chitmunks?"

"No, Lady Mary; I have often seen them on bright days chasing each other
over logs and brush heaps, and running gaily up the pine-trees. They are
easily seen from the contrast which their jetty black coats make with the
sparkling white snow. These creatures feed a good deal on the kernels of
the pines and hemlocks; they also eat the buds of some trees. They lay up
great stores of nuts and grain for winter use. The flying squirrels sleep
much, and in the cold season lie heaped upon each other, for the sake of
warmth. As many as seven or eight may be found in one nest asleep. They
sometimes awaken, if there come a succession of warm days, as in the
January thaw; for I must tell you that in this country we generally have
rain and mild weather for a few days in the beginning of January, when the
snow nearly disappears from the ground. About the 12th, [Footnote: This
remark applies more particularly to the Upper Province.] the weather sets
in again steadily cold; when the little animals retire once more to sleep
in their winter cradles, which they rarely leave till the hard weather is
over."

"I suppose, nurse, when they awake, they are glad to eat some of the food
they hare laid up in their granaries?"

"Yes, my dear, it is for this they gather their hoards in mild weather;
which also supports them in the spring months, and possibly even during
the summer, till grain and fruit are ripe. I was walking in the harvest
field one day, where my brothers were cradling wheat. As I passed along
the fence, I noticed a great many little heaps of wheat lying here and
there on the rails, also upon the tops of the stumps in the field. I
wondered at first who could have placed them there, but presently noticed
a number of red squirrels running very swiftly along the fence, and
perceived that they emptied their mouths of a quantity of the new wheat,
which they had been diligently employed in collecting from the ears that
lay scattered over the ground. These little gleaners did not seem to be at
all alarmed at my presence, but went to and fro as busy as bees. On taking
some of the grains into my hand, I noticed that the germ or eye of the
kernels was bitten clean out."

"What was that for, nurse? can you tell me?"

"My dear young lady, I did not know at first, till, upon showing it to my
father, he told me that the squirrels destroyed the germ of the grain,
such as wheat or Indian corn, that they stored up for winter use, that it
might not sprout when buried in the ground or in a hollow tree."

"This is very strange, nurse," said the little girl. "But I suppose,"
she added, after a moment's thought, "it was God who taught the squirrels
to do so. But why would biting out the eye prevent the grain from growing?"

"Because the eye or bud contains the life of the plant; from it springs
the green blade, and the stem that bears the ear, and the root that
strikes down to the earth. The flowery part, which swells and becomes soft
and jelly-like, serves to nourish the young plant till the tender fibres
of the roots are able to draw moisture from the ground."

Lady Mary asked if all seeds had an eye or germ.

Her nurse replied that all had, though some were so minute that they
looked no bigger than dust, or a grain of sand; yet each was perfect in
its kind, and contained the plant that would, when sown in the earth,
bring forth roots, leaves, buds, flowers, and fruits in due season.

"How glad I should have been to see the little squirrels gleaning the
wheat, and laying it in the little heaps on the rail fence. Why did they
not carry it at once to their nests?"

"They laid it out in the sun and wind to dry; for if it had been stored
away while damp, it would have moulded, and have been spoiled. The
squirrels were busy all that day; when I went to see them again, the grain
was gone. I saw several red squirrels running up and down a large
pine-tree, which had been broken by the wind at the top; and there, no
doubt, they had laid up stores. These squirrels did not follow each other
in a straight line, but ran round and round in a spiral direction, so that
they never hindered each other, nor came in each other's way: two were
always going up, while the other two were going down. They seem to work in
families; for the young ones, though old enough to get their own living,
usually inhabit the same nest, and help to store up the grain for winter
use. They all separate again in spring. The little chitmunk does not live
in trees, but burrows in the ground, or makes its nest in some large hollow
log. It is very pretty to see the little chitmunks, on a warm spring day,
running about and chasing each other among the moss and leaves; they are
not bigger than mice, but look bright and lively. The fur of all the
squirrel tribe is used in trimming, but the grey is the best and most
valuable. It has often been remarked by the Indians, and others, that the
red and black squirrels never live in the same place; for the red, though
the smallest, beat away the black ones. The flesh of the black squirrel is
very good to eat; the Indians also eat the red."

Lady Mary was very glad to hear all these things, and quite forgot to
play with her doll. "Please, Mrs. Frazer," said the little lady, "tell me
now about beavers and muskrats." But Mrs. Frazer was obliged to go out on
business; she promised, however, to tell Lady Mary all she knew about
these animals another day.




CHAPTER V.

INDIAN BASKETS--THREAD PLANTS--MAPLE SUGAR TREE--INDIAN ORNAMENTAL WORKS--
RACOONS


It was some time before Lady Mary's nurse could tell her any more
stories. She received a letter from her sister-in-law, informing her that
her brother was dangerously ill, confined to what was feared would prove
his deathbed, and that he earnestly desired to see her before he died. The
Governor's lady, who was very kind and good to all her household, readily
consented to let Mrs. Frazer go to her sick relation.

Lady Mary parted from her dear nurse, whom she loved very tenderly, with
much regret. Mrs. Frazer told her that it might be a fortnight before she
could return, as her brother lived on the shores of one of the small
lakes, near the head waters of the Otonabee river, a great way off; but
she promised to return as soon as she could, and to console her young
mistress for her absence, said she would bring her some Indian toys from
the backwoods.

The month of March passed away pleasantly, for Lady Mary enjoyed many
delightful sleigh-drives with her papa and mamma, who took every
opportunity to instruct and amuse her. On entering her nursery one day,
after enjoying a long drive in the country, great was her joy to find her
good nurse sitting quietly at work by the stove. She was dressed in deep
mourning, and looked much thinner and paler than when she had last seen
her.

The kind little girl knew, when she saw her nurse's black dress, that her
brother must be dead; and with the thoughtfulness of a true lady, remained
very quiet, and did not annoy her with questions about trifling matters;
she spoke low and gently to her, and tried to comfort her when she saw
large tears falling on the work which she held in her hand, kindly said,
"Mrs, Frazer, you had better go and lie down and rest yourself, for you
must be tired after your long long journey."

The next day Mrs. Frazer seemed to be much better; and she showed Lady
Mary an Indian basket, made of birch-bark, very richly wrought with
coloured porcupine-quills, and which had two lids.

Lady Mary admired the splendid colours, and strange patterns on the basket.

"It is for you, my dear," said her nurse, "open it, and see what is in
it." Lady Mary lifted one of the lids, and took out another small basket,
of a different shape and pattern. It had a top, which was sewn down with
coarse-looking thread, which her nurse told her was nothing but the sinews
of the deer, dried and beaten fine, and drawn out like thread. Then,
taking an end of it in her hand, she made Lady Mary observe that these
coarse threads could be separated into a great number of finer ones,
sufficiently delicate to pass through the eye of a fine needle, or to
string tiny beads.

"The Indians, my lady, sew with the sinews of the wild animals they kill.
These sinews are much stronger and tougher than thread, and therefore are
well adapted to sew together such things as moccasins, leggings, and
garments made of the skins of wild animals. The finer threads are used for
sewing the beads and quill ornaments on moccasins, sheaths, and pouches,
besides other things that I cannot now think of.

"They sew some things with the roots of the tamarack, of larch; such as
coarse birch-baskets, bark canoes, and the covering of their wigwams. They
call this 'wah-tap,' [Footnote: Asclepia paviflora.] (wood-thread,) and
they prepare it by pulling off the outer rind and steeping it in water. It
is the larger fibres which have the appearance of small cordage when
coiled up and fit for use. This 'wah-tap' is very valuable to these poor
Indians. There is also another plant, called Indian hemp, which is a small
shrubby kind of milk-weed, that grows on gravelly islands. It bears white
flowers, and the branches are long and slender; under the bark there is a
fine silky thread covering the wood; this is tough, and can be twisted and
spun into cloth. It is very white and fine, and does not easily break.
There are other plants of the same family, with pods full of fine shining
silk; but these are too brittle to spin into thread. This last kind, Lady
Mary, which is called Milk-weed flytrap, I will show you in summer."
[Footnote: Asclepia Syriaca.]

But while Mrs. Frazer was talking about these plants, the little lady was
examining the contents of the small birch-box. "If you please, nurse, will
you tell me what these dark shining seeds are?"

"These seeds, my dear, are Indian rice; an old squaw, Mrs. Peter Noggan,
gave me this as a present for 'Governor's daughter,'" and Mrs. Frazer
imitated the soft, whining tone of the Indian, which made Lady Mary laugh.

"The box is called a 'mowkowk.' There is another just like it, only there
is a white bird,--a snow-bird, I suppose it is intended for--worked on the
lid." The lid of this box was fastened down with a narrow slip of
deer-skin; Lady Mary cut the fastening, and raised the lid,--"Nurse, it is
only yellow sand; how droll, to send me a box of sand!"

"It is not sand; taste it, Lady Mary."

"It is sweet--it is sugar! Ah! now I know what it is that this kind old
squaw has sent me; it is maple-sugar; and is very nice. I will go and show
it to mamma."

"Wait a little, Lady Mary, let us see what there is in the basket besides
the rice and the maple-sugar."

"What a lovely thing this is! dear nurse, what can it be?"

"It is a sheath for your scissors, my dear; it is made of doe-skin,
embroidered with white beads, and coloured quills split fine, and sewn
with deer-sinew thread. Look at these curious bracelets."

Lady Mary examined the bracelets, and said she thought they were wrought
with beads; but Mrs. Frazer told her that what she took for beads were
porcupine quills, cut out very finely, and strung in a pattern. They were
not only neatly but tastefully made; the pattern, though a Grecian scroll,
having been carefully imitated by some Indian squaw.

"This embroidered knife-sheath is large enough for a hunting-knife," said
Lady Mary, "a '_couteau de chasse_,'--is it not?"

"This sheath was worked by the wife of Isaac Iron, an educated chief of
the Mud Lake Indians; she gave it to me because I had been kind to her in
sickness."

"I will give it to my dear papa," said Lady Mary, "for I never go out
hunting, and do not wish to carry a large knife by my side;" and she laid
the sheath away, after having admired its gay colours, and particularly
the figure of a little animal worked in black and white quills, which was
intended to represent a racoon.

"This is a present for your doll; it is a doll's mat, woven by a little
girl, aged seven years, Rachel Muskrat; and here is a little canoe of red
cedar, made by a little Indian boy."

"What a darling little boat, and there is a fish carved on the paddles."
This device greatly pleased Lady Mary, who said she would send Rachel a
wax doll, and little Moses a knife, or some other useful article, when
Mrs. Frazer went again to the Lakes; but when her nurse took out of the
other end of the basket a birch-bark cradle, made for her doll, worked
very richly, she clapped her hands for joy, saying, "Ah, nurse, you should
not have brought me so many pretty things at once, for I am too happy!"

The remaining contents of the basket consisted of seeds and berries, and
a small cake of maple-sugar, which Mrs. Frazer had made for the young
lady. This was very different in appearance from the Indian sugar; it was
bright and sparkling, like sugar-candy, and tasted sweeter. The other
sugar was dry, and slightly bitter: Mrs. Frazer told Lady Mary that this
peculiar taste was caused by the birch-bark vessels, which the Indians
used for catching the sap as it flowed from the maple-trees.

"I wonder who taught the Indians how to make maple-sugar?" asked the child.

"I do not know;" replied the nurse. "I have heard that they knew how to
make this sugar when the discoverers of the country found them. [Footnote:
However this may be, the French settlers claim the merit of converting the
sap into sugar.] It may be that they found it out by accident. The
sugar-maple when wounded in March, and April, yields a great deal of sweet
liquor. Some Indians may have supplied themselves with this juice, when
pressed for want of water; for it flows so freely in warm days in spring,
that several pints can be obtained from one tree in the course of the day.
By boiling this juice, it becomes very sweet; and at last, when all the
thin watery part has gone off in steam, it becomes thick, like honey; by
boiling it still-longer, it turns to sugar, when cold. So you see, my dear,
that the Indians may have found it out by boiling some sap, instead of
water, and letting it remain on the fire till it grew thick."

"Are there many kinds of maple-trees, that sugar can be made from,
nurse?" asked the little girl.

"Yes, [Footnote: All the maple tribe are of a saccharine nature. Sugar has
been made in England from the sap of the sycamore.] my lady; but I believe
the sugar-maple yields the best sap for the purpose; that of the
birch-tree, I have heard, can be made into sugar; but it would require a
larger quantity; weak wine, or vinegar, is made by the settlers of
birch-sap, which is very pleasant tasted. The people who live in the
backwoods, and make maple-sugar, always make a keg of vinegar at the
sugaring off."

"That must be very useful; but if the sap is sweet, how can it be made
into such sour stuff as vinegar?"

Then nurse tried to make Lady Mary understand that the heat of the sun,
or of a warm room, would make the liquor ferment, unless it had been
boiled a long time, so as to become very sweet, and somewhat thick. The
first fermentation, she told her, would give only a winy taste; but if it
continued to ferment a great deal, it turned sour, and became vinegar.

"How very useful the maple-tree is, nurse! I wish there were maples in
the garden, and I would make sugar, molasses, wine, and vinegar; and what
else would I do with my maple-tree?"

Mrs. Frazer laughed, and said,--"The wood makes excellent fuel; but is
also used in making bedsteads, chests of drawers, and many other things.
There is a very pretty wood for furniture, called 'bird's-eye maple;' the
drawers in my bedroom that you think so pretty are made of it; but it is a
disease in the tree that causes it to have these little marks all through
the wood. In autumn, this tree improves the forest landscape, for the
bright scarlet leaves of the maple give a beautiful look to the woods in
the fall. The soft maple, another species, is very bright when the leaves
are changing, but it gives no sugar."

"Then I will not let it grow in my garden, nurse!"

"It is good for other purposes, my dear. The settlers use the bark for
dyeing wool; and a jet black ink can be made from it, by boiling down the
bark with a bit of copperas, in an iron vessel; so you see it is useful.
The bright red flowers of this tree look very pretty in the spring; it
grows best by the water-side, and some call it 'the swamp maple.'"

This was all Mrs. Frazer could tell Lady Mary about the maple-trees. Many
little girls, as young as the Governor's daughter, would have thought it
very dull to listen to what her nurse had to say about plants and trees;
but Lady Mary would put aside her dolls and toys, to stand beside her to
ask questions, and listen to her answers; the more she heard, the more she
desired to hear, about these things. "The hearing ear, and the seeing eye,
are two things that are never satisfied," saith the wise king Solomon.

Lady Mary was delighted with the contents of her Indian basket, and spent
the rest of her play-hours in looking at the various articles it
contained, and asking her nurse questions about the materials of which
they were made. Some of the bark boxes were lined with paper, but the
doll's cradle was not, and Lady Mary perceived that the inside of it was
very rough, caused by the hard ends of the quills with which it was
ornamented. At first, she could not think how the squaws worked with the
quills, as they could not possibly thread them through the eye of a
needle; but her nurse told her that when they want to work any pattern in
birch-bark, they trace it with some sharp-pointed instrument, such as a
nail, or bodkin, or even a sharp thorn; with which they pierce holes close
together round the edge of the leaf, or blade, or bird they have drawn out
on the birch-bark; into these holes they insert one end of the quill, the
other end is then drawn through the opposite hole, pulled tight, bent a
little, and cut off on the inside. This any one of my young readers may
see, if they examine the Indian baskets or toys, made of birch-bark. "I
have seen the squaws in their wigwams at work on these things, sitting
cross-legged on their mats,--some had the quills in a little bark dish on
their laps, while others held them in their mouths--not a very safe nor
delicate way; but Indians are not very nice in some of their habits," said
Mrs. Frazer.

"Nurse, if you please, will you tell me what this little animal is
designed to represent," said Lady Mary, pointing to the figure of the
racoon worked in quills on the sheath of the hunting-knife.

"It is intended for a racoon, my lady," replied her nurse.

"Is the racoon a pretty creature like my squirrel?"

"It is much larger than your squirrel; its fur is not nearly so soft or
so fine; the colour being black and grey, or dun; the tail barred across,
and bushy,--you have seen many sleigh-robes made of racoon-skins, with the
tails looking like tassels at the back of the sleighs."

"Oh, yes, and a funny cunning-looking face peeping out too!"

"The face of this little animal is sharp, and the eyes black and keen,
like a fox; the feet bare, like the soles of our feet, only black and
leathery; their claws are very sharp; they can climb trees very fast.
During the winter the racoons sleep in hollow trees, and cling together
for the sake of keeping each other warm. The choppers find as many as
seven or eight in one nest, fast asleep. Most probably the young family
remain with the old ones until spring, when, they separate. The racoon in
its habits is said to resemble the bear; like the bear, it lives chiefly
on vegetables, especially Indian corn, but I do not think that it lays by
any store for winter. They sometimes awake if there come a few warm days,
but soon retire again to their warm cosy nests."

"Racoons will eat eggs; and fowls are often taken by them,--perhaps this
is in the winter, when they wake up and are pressed by hunger."

Her nurse said that one of her friends had a racoon which he kept in a
wooden cage, but he was obliged to have a chain and collar to keep him
from getting away, as he used to gnaw the bars asunder; and had slily
stolen away and killed some ducks, and was almost as mischievous as a fox,
but was very lively and amusing in his way.

Lady Mary now left her good nurse, and took her basket, with all its
Indian treasures, to show to her mamma,--with whom we leave her for the
present.




CHAPTER VI.

CANADIAN BIRDS--SNOW SPARROW--ROBIN RED-BREAST--CANADIAN FLOWERS--
AMERICAN PORCUPINE.


"Spring is coming, nurse! Spring is coming at last!" exclaimed the
Governor's little daughter, joyfully. "The snow is going away at last. I
am tired of the white snow, it makes my eyes ache. I want to see the brown
earth, and the grass, and the green moss, and the pretty flowers again."

"It will be some days before this deep covering of snow is gone. The
streets are still slippery with ice, which it will take some time, my
lady, to soften."

"But, nurse, the sun shines, and there are little streams of water
running along the streets in every direction; see, the snow is gone from
under the bushes and trees in the garden. I saw some dear little birds
flying about, and I watched them perching on the dry stalks of the tall
rough weeds, and they appeared to be picking seeds out of the husks. Can
you tell me what birds they were?"

"I saw the flock of birds you mean, Lady Mary; they are the common
snow-sparrows; [Footnote: Fringilla nivalis.] almost our earliest
visitants; for they may be seen in April, mingled with the brown
song-sparrow, [Footnote: Fringilla melodia.] flitting about the garden
fences, or picking the stalks of the tall mullein and amaranths, to find
the seeds that have not been shaken out by the autumn winds; and possibly
they also find insects cradled in the husks of the old seed-vessels. These
snow-sparrows are very hardy, and though some migrate to the States in the
beginning of winter, a few stay in the Upper Province, and others come back
to us before the snow is all gone."

"They are very pretty, neat-looking birds, nurse; dark slate colour, with
white breasts."

"When I was a little girl, I used to call them my Quaker-birds, they
looked so neat and prim. In the summer you may find their nests in the
brush-heaps near the edge of the forest; they sing a soft, low song."

"Nurse, I heard a bird singing yesterday, when I was in the garden; a
little plain brown bird, nurse."

"It was a song-sparrow, Lady Mary. This cheerful little bird comes with
the snow-birds, often before the robin."

"Oh, nurse, the robin! I wish you would show me a darling robin
redbreast. I did not know they lived in Canada."

"The bird that we call the robin in this country, my dear, is not like
the little redbreast you have seen at home; our robin is twice as large;
though in shape resembling the European robin; I believe it is really a
kind of thrush. It migrates in the fall, and returns to us early in the
spring."

"What is migrating, nurse; is it the same as emigrating?"

"Yes, Lady Mary, for when a person leaves his native country, and goes to
live in another country, he is said to emigrate. This is the reason why
the English, Scotch, and Irish families who come to live in Canada are
called Emigrants."

"What colour are the Canadian robins, nurse?"

"The head is blackish, the back lead colour, and the breast is pale
orange; not so bright a red, however, as the real robin."

"Have you ever seen their nests, nurse?"

"Yes, my dear, many of them. It is not a pretty nest; it is large, and
coarsely put together, of old dried grass, roots, and dead leaves,
plastered inside with clay, mixed with bits of straw, so as to form a sort
of mortar. You know, Lady Mary, that the blackbird and thrush build nests,
and plaster them in this way."

The little lady nodded her head in assent. "Nurse, I once saw a robin's
nest when I was in England; it was in the side of a mossy ditch, with
primroses growing close beside it; it was made of green moss, and lined
with white wool and hair; it was a pretty nest, with nice eggs in it, much
better than your Canadian robin's nest."

"Our robins build in upturned roots, in the corners of rail fences, and
in the young pear-trees and apple-trees in the orchard. The eggs are a
greenish blue. The robin sings a full, clear song; indeed he is our best
songster. We have so few singing-birds, that we prize those that do sing
very much."

"Does the Canadian robin come into the house in winter, and pick up the
crumbs, as the dear little redbreasts do at home?"

"No, Lady Mary, they are able to find plenty of food abroad, when they
return to us; but they hop about the houses and gardens pretty freely. In
the fall, before they go away, they may be seen in great numbers, running
about the old pastures, picking up worms and seeds."

"Do people see the birds flying away together, nurse?"

"Not often, my dear, for most birds congregate together in small flocks
and depart unnoticed; many go away at night, when we are sleeping; and
some fly very high on cloudy days, so that they are not distinctly seen
against the dull grey sky. The water birds, such as geese, swans, and
ducks, take their flight in large bodies. They are heard making a
continual noise in the air, and may be seen grouped in long lines, or in
the form of the letter V lying on its side, (<), the point generally
directed southward or westward, the strongest and oldest birds acting as
leaders: when tired, these aquatic generals fall backward into the main
body, and are replaced by others."

Lady Mary was much surprised at the order and sagacity displayed by wild
fowl in their flight; and Mrs. Frazer told her that some other time she
would tell her some more facts respecting their migration to other
countries.

"Nurse, will you tell me something about birds' nests, and what they make
them of?"

"Birds that live chiefly in the depths of the forest, or in solitary
places, far away from the haunts of men, build their nests of ruder
materials, and with less care in the manner of putting them together;
dried grass, roots, and a little moss, seem to be the materials they make
use of. It has been noticed by many persons, my dear, that those birds
that live near towns and villages and cleared farms, soon learn to make
better sorts of nests, and to weave into them soft and comfortable things,
such as silk, wool, cotton, and hair."

"That is very strange, nurse."

"It is so, Lady Mary; but the same thing may also be seen among human
beings. The savage nations are contented with rude dwellings made of
sticks and cane, covered with skins of beasts, bark, or reeds; but when
they once unite together in a more social state, and live in villages and
towns, a desire for improvement takes place; the tent of skins, or the
rude shanty, is exchanged for a hut of better shape; and this in time
gives place to houses and furniture of more useful and ornamental kinds."

"Nurse, I heard mamma say, that the Britons who lived in England were
once savages, and lived in caves, huts, and thick woods; that they dressed
in skins, and painted their bodies like the Indians."

"When you read the history of England, you will see that such was the
case," said Mrs. Frazer.

"Nurse, perhaps the little birds like to see the flowers, and the
sunshine, and the blue sky, and men's houses. I will make my garden very
pretty this spring, and plant some nice flowers to please the dear little
birds."

Many persons would have thought such remarks very foolish in our little
lady, but Mrs. Frazer, who was a good and wise woman, did not laugh at the
little girl; for she thought it was a lovely thing to see her wish to give
happiness to the least of God's creatures, for it was imitating His own
goodness and mercy, which delight in the enjoyment of the things which He
has called into existence.

"Please, Mrs. Frazer, will you tell me which flowers will be first in
bloom?"

"The very first is a plant that comes up without leaves."

"Nurse, that is the Christmas-rose; [Footnote: Winter Aconite.] I have
seen it in the old country."

"No, Lady Mary, it is the colt's-foot; [Footnote: Tussilago Farfara.] it
is a common looking, coarse, yellow-blossomed flower; it is the first that
blooms after the snow; then comes the pretty snow-flower or hepatica. Its
pretty tufts of white, pink, or blue starry flowers, may be seen on the
open clearing, or beneath the shade of the half-cleared woods, or upturned
roots and sunny banks. Like the English daisy, it grows everywhere, and
the sight of its bright starry blossoms delights every eye."

"The next flower that comes in is the dog's-tooth-violet." [Footnote:
Erythronium.]

"What a droll name!" exclaimed Lady Mary, laughing.

"I suppose it is called so from the sharpness of the flower-leaves
(petals), my lady, but it is a beautiful yellow lily; the leaves are also
pretty; they are veined or clouded with milky white or dusky purple. The
plant has a bulbous root, and in the month of April sends up its single,
nodding, yellow-spotted flowers; they grow in large beds, where the ground
is black, moist and rich, near creeks on the edge of the forest."

"Do you know any other pretty flowers, nurse?"

"Yes, my lady, there are a great many that bloom in April and May; white
violets, and blue, and yellow, of many kinds; and then there is the spring
beauty, [Footnote: Claytonia.] a delicate little flower with pink striped
bells, and the everlasting flower, [Footnote: Graphalium.] and saxifrage,
and the white and dark red lily, that the Yankees call 'white and red
death.' [Footnote: Trillium, or Wake Robin.] These have three green
leaves about the middle of the stalk, and the flower is composed of three
pure white or deep red leaves--petals my father used to call them; for my
father, Lady Mary, was a botanist, and knew the names of all the flowers,
and I learned them from him.

"The most curious is the mocassin flower. The early one is bright golden
yellow, and has a bag or sack which is curiously spotted with ruby red,
and its petals are twisted like horns. There is a hard thick piece that
lies down just above the sack or mocassin part; and if you lift this up,
you see a pair of round dark spots like eyes, and the Indians say it is
like the face of a hound, with the nose and black eyes plain to be seen;
two of the shorter curled brown petals look like flapped ears, one on each
side of the face.

"There is a more beautiful sort, purple and white, which blooms in
August; the plant is taller, and bears large lovely flowers."

"And has it a funny face and ears too, nurse?"

"Yes, my dear, but the face is more like an ape's; it is even more
distinct than in the yellow mocassin. When my brother and I were children,
we used to fold back the petals and call them baby flowers; the sack, we
thought, looked like a baby's white frock."

Lady Mary was much amused at this notion.

"There are a great number of very beautiful and also very curious flowers
growing in the forest," said Mrs. Frazer; "some of them are used in
medicine, and some by the Indians for dyes, with which they stain the
baskets and porcupine quills. One of our earliest flowers is called the
blood-root; [Footnote: Sanguivaria.] it comes up a delicate white folded
bud, within a vine-shaped leaf, which is veined on the under side with
orange yellow. If the stem or the root of this plant be broken, a scarlet
juice drops out very fast--it is with this the squaws dye red and orange
colours."

"I am glad to hear this, nurse; now I can tell my dear mamma what the
baskets and quills are dyed with."

"The flower is very pretty, like a white crocus, only not so large. You
saw some crocuses in the conservatory the other day, I think, my dear
lady."

"Oh, yes, yellow ones, and purple too, in a funny china thing with holes
in its back, and the flowers came up through the holes. The gardener said
it was a porcupine."

"Please, nurse, tell me of what colours real porcupine quills are?"

"They are white and greyish-brown."

Then Lady Mary brought a print and showed it to her nurse, saying,
"Nurse, is the porcupine like this picture?"

"The American porcupine, my dear, is not so large as this species; its
spines are smaller and weaker. It resembles the common hedgehog more
nearly. It is an innocent animal, feeding mostly on roots [Footnote: There
is a plant of the lily tribe, upon the roots of which the porcupine feeds,
as well as on wild bulbs and berries, and the bark of the black spruce and
larch. It will also eat apples and Indian corn.] and small fruits; it
burrows in dry stony hillocks, and passes the cold weather in sleep. It
goes abroad chiefly during the night. The spines of the Canadian porcupine
are much weaker than those of the African species. The Indians trap these
creatures and eat their flesh. They bake them in their skins in native
ovens,--holes made in the earth, lined with stones, which they make very
hot, covering them over with embers."

Mrs. Frazer had told Lady Mary all she knew about the porcupine, when
Campbell, the footman, came to say that her papa wanted to see her.




CHAPTER VII.

INDIAN BAG--INDIAN EMBROIDERY--BEAVER'S TAIL--BEAVER ARCHITECTURE--HABITS
OF THE BEAVER--BEAVER TOOLS--BEAVER MEADOWS.


When Lady Mary went down to her father, he presented her with a beautiful
Indian bag, which he had brought from Lake Huron, in the Upper Province.
It was of fine doeskin, very nicely wrought with dyed moose-hair, and the
pattern was very pretty; the border was of scarlet feathers on one side,
and blue on the other, which formed a rich silken fringe at each edge.
This was a present from the wife of a chief on Manitoulin Island. Lady
Mary was much delighted with her present, and admired this new-fashioned
work in moose-hair very much. The feathers, Mrs. Frazer told her, were
from the summer red bird or war bird, and the blue bird, both of which,
Lady Mary said, she had seen. The Indians use these feathers as ornaments
for their heads and shoulders on grand occasions.

Lady Mary recollected hearing her mamma speak of Indians who wore mantles
and dresses of gay feathers. They were chiefs of the Sandwich Islands, she
believed, who had these superb habits.

"Dear nurse, will you tell me anything more about birds and flowers
to-day?" asked Lady Mary, after she had put away her pretty bag.

"I promised to tell you about the beavers, my lady," replied Mrs. Frazer.

"Oh, yes, about the beavers that make the dams and the nice houses, and
cut down whole trees. I am glad you can tell me something about those
curious creatures; for mamma bought me a pretty picture, which I will show
you, if you please," said the little girl. "But what is this odd-looking,
black thing here? Is it a dried fish? It must be a black bass? Yes, nurse,
I am sure it is."

The nurse smiled, and said, "It is not a fish at all, my dear; it is a
dried beaver's tail. I brought it from the back lakes when I was at home,
that you might see it. See, my lady, how curiously the beaver's tail is
covered with scales; it looks like some sort of black leather, stamped in
a diaper pattern. Before it is dried, it is very heavy, weighing three or
four pounds. I have heard my brothers and some of the Indian trappers say,
that the animal makes use of its tail to beat the sides of the dams and
smoothe the mud and clay, as a plasterer uses a trowel. Some people think
otherwise, but it seems well suited from its shape and weight for the
purpose, and, indeed, as the walls they raise seem to have been smoothed
by some implement, I see no reason to disbelieve the story."

"And what do the beavers make dams with, nurse?"

"With small trees cut into pieces, and drawn in close to each other; and
then the beavers fill the spaces between with sods, and stones, and clay,
and all sorts of things that they gather together and work up into a solid
wall. The walls are made broad at the bottom, and are several feet in
thickness, to make them strong enough to keep the water from washing
through them. The beavers assemble together in the fall, about the months
of October and November, to build their houses and repair their dams. They
prefer running water, as it is less likely to freeze. They work in large
parties, sometimes fifty or a hundred together, and do a great deal in a
short time. They work during the night."

"Of what use is the dam, nurse?"

"The dam is for the purpose of securing a constant supply of water, without
which they could not live. When they have enclosed the beaver-pond, they