VI


There must have been in this troubled country many such sad scenes as I
have tried to recall. Father and son were to part with hot words, brother
to take sides against brother. My unpleasant half-hour was but prophetic of
that which was to come in worse shape, and to last for years.

My Aunt Gainor said, "Do not tell your mother," and I assuredly did not.

"He will tell her. He tells her everything, soon or late. I must see her at
once. Your father is becoming, as the French say, impossible. The times,
and these wrangling Friends, with their stupid testimonies, irritate him
daily until he is like a great, strong bull, such as the Spaniards tease to
madness with little darts and fireworks. You see, Hugh, events are prickly
things. They play the deuce with obstinate people. Your father will be
better away from home. He has never been in England, and he will see how
many, like Mr. Pitt and Colonel Barre, are with us. As for myself, I have
been a bit of a fool about you, and your father is more or less right. We
must abjure sack and take physic."

"What?" said I.

"To be plain, we must--that is, you must--play less and drink less, and in
your father's absence look sharply, with my help, to his business."

I was to need other doctors before I mended my ways. I said my aunt was
right, and I made certain good resolutions, which were but short-lived and
never reached adult maturity of usefulness.

My aunt walked with me north between the warehouses, taverns, and
ship-chandlers on the riverfront, and so across the bridge over Dock Creek,
and up to Third street. She said I must not talk to her. She had thinking
to do, and for this cause, I suppose, turning, took me down to Pine street.
At St. Peter's Church she stopped, and bade me wait without, adding, "If I
take you in I shall hear of it; wait."

There was a midday service at this time, it being Lent. I waited idly,
thinking of my father, and, as I before said, vexed and sorry and ashamed
by turns. Often now I pause before I enter this sacred edifice, and think
of that hour of tribulation. I could hear the fine, full voice of the Rev.
Dr. Duche as he intoned the Litany. He lies now where I stood, and under
the arms on his tomb is no record of the political foolishness and
instability of a life otherwise free from blame. As I stood, Mrs. Ferguson
came out, she who in days to come helped to get the unlucky parson into
trouble. With her came my aunt.

"I said a prayer for thee, Hugh," she whispered. "No; no cards in Lent, my
dear Bess. Fie! for shame! This way, Hugh;" and we went east, through Pine
street, and so to the back of our garden, where we found a way in, and,
walking under the peach-trees, came to where my mother sat beneath a
plum-tree, shelling peas, her great Manx cat by her side.

She wore a thin cap on top of the curly head, which was now wind-blown out
of all order. "Come, Gainor," she cried, seeing us; "help me to shell my
peas. Thou shalt have some. They are come in a ship from the Bermudas. What
a pretty pale green the pods are! I should like an apron of that colour."

"I have the very thing, dear. Shall it be the minuet pattern, or plain?"

"Oh, plain. Am I not a Friend? _Une Amie? Ciel!_ but it is droll in French.
Sarah Logan is twice as gay as I, but John does not love such vanities.
_Quant a moi, je les adore_. It seems odd to have a colour to a religion. I
wonder if drab goodness be better than red goodness. But what is wrong,
Gainor? Yes, there is something. Hugh, thy collar is torn; how careless of
me not to have mended it!"

Then my Aunt Gainor, saying nothing of my especial difficulty, and leaving
out, too, her London news, related with remarkable clearness the reasons
why my father should go overseas in the early fall and be gone for a year.
The mother went on quietly shelling the peas, and losing no word. When
Gainor had done, the bowl of peas was set aside, and my mother put back her
curls, fixed her blue eyes on her sister-in-law, and was silent for a
moment longer. At last she said, "It were best, for many reasons best. I
see it," and she nodded her head affirmatively. "But my son? my Hugh?"

"You will have him with you at home. Everything will go on as usual, except
that John will be amusing himself in London."

At this the little lady leaped up, all ablaze, so to speak. Never had I
seen her so moved. "What manner of woman am I, Gainer Wynne, that I should
let my husband go alone on the seas, and here and there, without me? I will
not have it. My boy is my boy; God knows I love him; but my husband comes
first now and always, and thou art cruel to wish to part us."

"But I never wished to part you. Go with him, Marie. God bless your sweet
heart! Leave me your boy; he cannot go. As God lives, I will take care of
him!"

Upon this the two women fell to weeping in each other's arms, a thing most
uncommon for my Aunt Gainor. Then they talked it all over, as if John Wynne
were not; when it would be, and what room I was to have, and my clothes,
and the business, and so on--all the endless details wherewith the cunning
affection of good women knows to provide comfort for us, who are so apt to
be unthankful.

It amazed me to see how quickly it was settled, and still more to learn
that my father did not oppose, but fell in with all their plans.

Now back of all my weaknesses and folly I had, as I have said, some of the
sense of honour and proud rectitude of my father, who strictly abided by
his creed and his conscience. I returned no more that day to the
counting-house, but, saying to my mother I had business, I went off, with a
hunk of bread, to my boat, and down the creek to the Delaware. I pulled
out, past our old playground on the island, and far away toward the Jersey
shore, and then, as the sun fell, drifted with the tide, noting the ruddy
lines of the brick houses far away, and began to think.

The scene I had gone through had made a deep impression. It has been ever
so with me. Drinking, gaming, betting, and worse, never awakened my
conscience or set me reflecting, until some sudden, unlooked-for thing took
place, in which sentiment or affection was concerned. Then I would set to
work to balance my books and determine my course. At such times it was the
dear mother who spoke in me, and the father who resolutely carried out my
decision.

The boat drifted slowly with the flood-tide, and I, lying on the bottom,
fell to thought of what the day had brought me. The setting sun touched the
single spire of Christ Church, and lit up yellow squares of light in the
westward-looking windows of the rare farm-houses on the Jersey shore.
Presently I was aground on the south end of Petty's Island, where in
after-years lay rotting the "Alliance," the remnant ship of the greatest
sea-fight that ever was since Grenville lay in the "Revenge," with the
Spanish fleet about him. I came to ground amid the reeds and spatter-docks,
where the water-lilies were just in bud. A noisy orchestra of frogs, with,
as Jack said, fiddles and bassoons in their throats, ceased as I came, and
pitched headlong off the broad green floats. Only one old fellow, with a
great bass voice, and secure on the bank, protested loudly at intervals,
like the owl in Mr. Gray's noble poem, which my Jack loved to repeat.

At last he--I mean my frog--whose monastery I had disturbed, so vexed me,
who wanted stillness, that I smacked the water with the flat of an oar,
which he took to be a hint, and ceased to lament my intrusion.

I was now well on to twenty, and old enough to begin at times to deal
thoughtfully with events. A young fellow's feelings are apt to be extreme,
and even despotic, so that they rule the hour with such strength of sway as
may be out of proportion to the cause. I might have seen that I had no just
cause to blame myself, but that did not help me. The mood of distressful
self-accusation was on me. I had no repeated impulse to smile at what, in
my father's conduct, had appeared to me a little while ago odd, and even
amusing. I could never please him. I had grinned as I always did when risks
were upon me. He never understood me, and I was tired of trying. What use
was it to try? I had one of those minutes of wishing to die, which come
even to the wholesome young. I was well aware that of late I had not, on
the whole, satisfied my conscience; I knew this quite too well; and now, as
I lay in the boat discontented, I felt, as the youthful do sometimes feel,
as if I were old, and the ending of things were near. It was but a mood,
but it led up to serious thought. There are surely hours in youth when we
are older than our years, and times in age when we are again young.
Sometimes I wonder whether Jack was right, who used to say it may be we are
never young or old, but merely seem to be so. This is the queer kind of
reflection which I find now and then in Jack's diary, or with which he used
to puzzle me and please James Wilson. Of course a man is young or is old.
and there's an end on 't, as a greater man has said. But Jack has
imagination, and I have none.

I asked myself if I had done wrong in what I had said. I could not see that
I had. With all my lifelong fear of my father, I greatly honoured and
respected him, finding in myself something akin to the unyielding firmness
with which he stood fast when he had made up his mind.

That this proud and steadfast man, so looked up to by every one, no matter
what might be their convictions religious or political, should have been
humiliated by a woman, seemed to me intolerable; this was the chief outcome
of my reflections. It is true I considered, but I fear lightly, my own
misdoings. I made up my mind to do better, and then again the image of my
father in his wrath and his shame came back anew. I turned the boat, and
pulled steadily across the river to our landing.

My father was in the counting-house in his own room, alone, although it was
full late. "Well?" he said, spinning round on his high stool. "What is it?
Thou hast been absent, and no leave asked."

"Father," I said, "if I was wrong this morning I wish to ask thy pardon."

"Well, it is full time."

"And I am come to say that I will take the punishment here and now. I did
not run away from that."

"Very good," he replied, rising. "Take off thy fine coat."

I wished he had not said this of my coat. I was in a heroic temper, and the
sarcasm bit cruelly, but I did as I was bid. He went to the corner, and
picked up a rattan cane. To whip fellows of nineteen or twenty was not then
by any means unusual. What would have happened I know not, nor ever shall.
He said, "There, I hear thy mother's voice. Put on thy coat." I hastened to
obey him.

The dear lady came in with eyes full of tears, "What is this, John, I hear?
I have seen Gainor. I could not wait. I shall go with thee."

"No," he said; "that is not to be." But she fell on his neck, and pleaded,
and I, for my part, went away, not sorry for the interruption. As usual she
had her way.

I remember well this spring of '73. It was early by some weeks, and
everything was green and blossoming in April. My father and mother were not
to sail until the autumn, but already he was arranging for the voyage, and
she as busily preparing or thinking over what was needed.

When next I saw my Aunt Gainor, she cried out, "Sit down there, bad boy,
and take care of my mandarin. He and my great bronze Buddha are my only
counsellors. If I want to do a thing I ask Mr. Mandarin--he can only nod
yes; and if I want not to do a thing I ask Buddha, and as he can neither
say no nor yes, I do as I please. What a wretch you are!"

I said I could not see it; and then I put my head in her lap, as I sat on
the stool, and told her of my last interview with my father, and how for
two days he had hardly so much as bade me good-night.

"It is his way, Hugh," said my aunt. "I am sorry; but neither love nor time
will mend him. He is what his nature and the hard ways of Friends have made
him."

I said that this was not all, nor the worst, and went on to tell her my
latest grievance. Our family worship at home was, as usual with Friends in
those days, conducted at times in total silence, and was spoken of by
Friends as "religious retirement." At other times, indeed commonly, a
chapter of the Bible was read aloud, and after that my father would
sometimes pray openly. On this last occasion he took advantage of the
opportunity to dilate on my sins, and before our servants to ask of Heaven
that I be brought to a due sense of my iniquities. It troubled my mother,
who arose from her knees in tears, and went out of the room, whilst I,
overcome with anger, stood looking out of the window. My father spoke to
her as she opened the door, but she made no answer, nor even so much as
turned her head. It brought to my memory a day of my childhood, when my
father was vexed because she taught me to say the Lord's Prayer. He did not
approve, and would have no set form of words taught me. My mother was angry
too, and I remember my own amazement that any one should resist my father.

When I had told my aunt of the indignity put upon me, and of the fading
remembrance thus recalled, she said, "John Wynne has not changed, nor will
he ever." She declared that, after all, it was her fault--to have treated
me as if I were a man, and to have given me too much money. I shook my
head, but she would have it she was to blame, and then said of a sudden,
"Are you in debt, you scamp? Did John pray for me!" I replied that I owed
no one a penny, and that she had not been remembered. She was glad I was
not in debt, and added, "Never play unless you have the means to pay. I
have been very foolish. That uneasy woman, Bessy Ferguson, must needs tell
me so. I could have slapped her. They will have thy sad case up in Meeting,
I can tell thee."

"But what have I done!" I knew well enough.

"Tut! you must not talk that way to me; but it is my fault. Oh, the time I
have had with your mother! I am not fit, it seems, to be left to take care
of you. They talk of leaving you with Abijah Hapworthy--sour old dog! I
wish you joy of him!"

"Good heavens!" I exclaimed; for among my aunt's gay friends I had picked
up such exclamatory phrases as, used at home, would have astonished my
father.

"Rest easy," said Mistress Wynne; "it is not to be. I have fought your
battle, and won it. But I have had to make such promises to your father,
and--woe is me!--to your mother, as will damn me forever if you do not help
me to keep them. I can fib to your father and not care a snap, but lie to
those blue eyes I cannot."

"I will try, Aunt Gainor; indeed I will try." Indeed, I did mean to.

"You must, you must. I am to be a sort of godmother-in-law to you, and
renounce for you the world, the flesh, and the devil; and that for one of
our breed! I shall be like a sign-post, and never go the way I point. That
was Bessy Ferguson s malice. Oh, I have suffered, I can tell you. It is I,
and not you, that have repented."

"But I will; I do."

"That is all very well; but I have had my whipping, and you got off yours."

"What do you mean, aunt?"

"What do I mean? Here came yesterday Sarah Fisher, pretty gay for a Quaker,
and that solemn Master Savory, with his sweet, low voice like a nice girl's
tongue, and his gentle ways. And they are friends of thy people, who are
distressed at thy goings on; and Nicholas Waln has seen thee with two sons
of Belial in red coats, come out of the coffeehouse last month at evening,
singing songs such as are not to be described, and no better able to take
care of yourself than you should be. They did think it well and kind--hang
'em, Hugh!--to consider the matter with me. We considered it--we did,
indeed. There be five people whose consciences I am to make you respect.
And not one of them do I care for, but Mother Blue-eyes. But I must! I
must! It was all true, sir, what Friend Wain said; for you had reason
enough left to come hither, and did I not put you to bed and send for Dr.
Chovet, who grinned famously, and said, '_Je comprends_' and went to call
on your father on a hint from me, to declare you were _enrhume'_, and
threatened with I know not what; in fact, he lied like a gentleman. You
made a noble recovery, and are a credit to the doctor. I hope you will pay
the bill, and are ashamed."

I was, and I said so.

"But that is not all. These dear Quakers were the worst. They were really
sorry, and I had to put on my best manners and listen; and now everybody
knows, and you are the talk of the town. Those drab geese must out with the
whole naughtiness, despite the company which came in on us, and here were
Mr. Montresor and that ape Etherington grinning, and, worst of all, a
charming young woman just come to live here with her aunt, and she too must
have her say when the Quakers and the men were gone."

"And what did she say?" I did not care much. "And what is her name?"

"Oh, she said the Quakers were rather outspoken people, and it was a pity,
and she was sorry, because she knew you once, and you had taken her part at
school."

"At school?"

"Yes. She is Darthea Peniston, and some kin of that Miss de Lancey, whom
Sir William Draper will marry if he can."

"Darthea Peniston?" I said, and my thoughts went back to the tender little
maid who wept when I was punished, and for whom I had revenged myself on
Master Dove.

"Quite a Spanish beauty," said my Aunt Wynne; "a pretty mite of a girl, and
not more money than will clothe her, they say; but the men mad about her.
Come and see her to-morrow if you are sober."

"O Aunt Gainor!"

"Yes, sir. I hear Mr. Montresor has leave from Anthony Morris to invite you
to 'The Colony in Schuylkill' to-morrow. It is well your father has gone to
visit Mr, Yeates at Lancaster."

"I shall behave myself, Aunt Gainer."

"I hope so. The Fish House punch is strong."

I went home thinking of Miss Darthea Peniston, and filled with desire to
lead a wiser life. It was full time. My aunt's lavish generosity had, as I
have said, given me means to live freely among the officers, who were, with
some exceptions, a dissolute set. To be with them made it needful to
become deceitful and to frame excuses, so that, when I was supposed to be
at my aunt's, or riding, I was free that past winter to go on
sleighing-parties or to frequent taverns, pleased with the notice I got
from men like Montresor and the officers of the Scotch Grays.

I have dwelt not at all on these scenes of dissipation. It is enough to
mention them. My father was wrapped up in his business, and full of cares
both worldly and spiritual; for now Friends were becoming politically
divided, and the meetings were long and sometimes agitated.

My good mother was neither deceived nor unconcerned. She talked to me
often, and in such a way as brings tears to my eyes even now to think of
the pain I gave her. Alas! it is our dearest who have the greatest power to
wound us. I wept and promised, and went back to my husks and evil company.

I have no wish to conceal these things from my children. It is well that
our offspring when young should think us angels; but it were as well that
when they are older they should learn that we have been men of like
passions with themselves, and have known temptation, and have fought, and
won or lost, our battles with sin. It is one of the weaknesses of nations,
as well as of children, that they come to consider their political fathers
as saints. I smile when I think of the way people nowadays think of our
great President, as of a mild genius, incapable of being moved to anger or
great mirth, a man unspotted of the world. They should have heard him at
Monmouth, when Lee failed him in a time of peril, or seen him, as I have
seen him, soberly merry over his wine with Knox. But some day you shall see
him as my friend Jack and I saw him, and you will, I trust, think no worse
of him for being as human as he was just.

The day of my more honest repentance was near, and I knew not that it was
to be both terrible and of lasting value. I sometimes reflect upon the
curious conditions with which my early manhood was surrounded. Here was I,
brought up in the strictest ways of a sect to which I do no injustice if I
describe it as ascetic. At home I saw plain living, and no luxury, save in
regard to food, which my father would have of the best money could buy. I
was taught the extreme of non-resistance, and absolute simplicity as to
dress and language. Amusements there were none, and my father read no books
except such as dealt with things spiritual, or things commercial. At my
aunt's, and in the society I saw at her house, there were men and women who
loved to dance, gamble, and amuse themselves. The talk was of bets, racing,
and the like. To be drunk was a thing to be expected of officers and
gentlemen. To avenge an insult with sword or pistol was the only way to
deal with it. My father was a passive Tory, my aunt a furious Whig. What
wonder that I fell a victim to temptation?




VII


The next day, having seen to matters of business in the morning, I set out
after dinner in my finest clothes to join my friends. I fear that I
promised my mother to be careful, and to be at home by nine o'clock.

I met Captain Montresor at the London Coffeehouse, at High and Front
streets, and, having taken a chaise, drove out through the woods to the
upper ferry, and thence to Egglesfield, the seat of Mr. Warner, from whom
the club known then as "The Colony in Schuylkill" held under a curious
tenure the acre or two of land where they had built a log cabin and founded
this ancient and singular institution. Here were met Anthony Morris, who
fell at Trenton, Mr. Tench Francis, sometime Attorney-General, Mifflin, and
that Galloway who later became a Tory, with Mr. Willing, and others of less
note, old and young. I was late for the annual ceremony of presenting three
fish to Mr. Warner, this being the condition on which the soil was held,
but I saw the great pewter dish with the Penn arms, a gift from that
family, on which the fish were offered.

It was a merry and an odd party; for, clad in white aprons, the
apprentices, so called, cooked the dinner and served it; and the punch and
Madeira went round the table often enough, as the "king's health" was
drunk, and "success to trade," and "the ladies, God bless them!"

I liked it well, and, with my aunt's warning in mind, drank but little, and
listened to the talk, which was too free at times, as was the bad custom of
that day, and now and then angry; for here were some who were to die for
their country, and some who were to fail it in the hour of need.

Despite my English friends, and thanks to Mr. Wilson and my Aunt Gainor, I
was fast becoming an ardent Whig, so that the talk, in which I had small
share, interested me deeply. At last, about seven, the pipes having been
smoked and much punch taken, the company rose to go, some of them the worse
for their potations.

We drove into town, and at the coffee-house put up and paid for our chaise.
I said good-by to Mr. Montresor, who, I think, had been charged by Miss
Wynne to look after me, when a Captain Small, whom I knew, stopped me. He
was well known as one of the most reckless of the younger officers, a
stout, short man, rather heroically presented long afterward, in Trumbull's
picture of the "Death of Warren," as trying to put aside the bayonets. As I
paused to reply, I saw Jack Warder standing on the other side of the
street. He nodded, smiling, and made as if he were about to cross over. He
had many times talked with me seriously this winter, until I had become
vexed, and told them he was a milksop. After this I saw little of him. Now
I was annoyed at the idea that he was spying upon my actions, and
therefore, like a fool, merely nodded, and, turning my back on him, heard
Mr. Small say: "You must not go yet, Mr. Wynne. We are to have supper
upstairs, and you will like to see a gentleman of your name, Mr. Arthur
Wynne, of the Scots Grays. He tells me he is of distant kin to you."

Montresor said I had better go home, but Etherington asked if I wanted my
bottle and nurse; and so at last, partly from pride and partly out of
curiosity to see this other Wynne, I said I would remain long enough to
welcome the gentleman and take a social glass. When we entered the room
upstairs, I found a supper of cold meats and, as usual, punch and liquors.
There were two dozen or more officers in undress jackets, their caps and
swords in the corners, and also two or three of the younger men of the Tory
or doubtful parties.

Several officers called to me to sit with them, for I was a favourite, and
could troll a catch or sing parts fairly well. My companion, Small, said,
"This way, Wynne," and, followed by Montresor and the colonel of the Scots
Grays, whose name I forget, we moved to a table remote from the door. Here
Montresor, pushing past Small, said: "Captain Wynne, I have the honour to
present to you Mr. Hugh Wynne, one of your family, I hear."

Upon this there rose to greet me a gentleman in the undress uniform of the
Grays. He was tall and well built, but not so broad or strong as we other
Wynnes; certainly an unusually handsome man. He carried his head high, was
very erect, and had an air of distinction, for which at that time I should
have had no name. I may add that he was dressed with unusual neatness, and
very richly; all of which, I being but a half-formed young fellow, did much
impress me.

He looked at me so steadily as we came near that it gave me a rather
unpleasant impression; for those who do not meet the eye at all are
scarcely less disagreeable than those who too continually watch you, as was
this man's way. I was rather young to be a very careful observer of men's
faces, but I did see that Captain Wynne's bore traces of too convivial
habits.

As I recall his dark, regular features, I remember, for we met often
afterward, that the lower part of his face was too thin, and that in repose
his mouth was apt not to remain fully shut, a peculiarity, as I now think,
of persons of weak will.

My first feeling of there being something unpleasing about him soon left
me. He rose, and, with graciousness and the ease and manner of one used to
the best society, moved around the table and took my hand.

"I am but a far-away kinsman," he said, "but I am charmed to make your
acquaintance. You are like the picture of old Sir Robert at Wyncote, where
I was last year for the otter-hunting."

I greeted him warmly. "And art thou living at Wyneote?" I asked rather
awkwardly.

"No, I do not live at home. I am but a cadet, and yours is the elder
branch." Then he added gaily, "I salute you, sir, as the head of our old
house. Your very good health!" And at this, with a charm of manner I have
seen but rarely, he put a hand on my shoulder, and added, "We must be
friends, Cousin Wynne, and I must know your father, and above all Mistress
Wynne. Montresor never ceases talking of her."

I said it would give me pleasure to present him; then, delighted to hear of
Wyncote, I sat down, and, despite a warning look from Montresor, began to
take wine with this newly found kinsman.

Mr. Arthur Wynne was a man fully ten years my senior. He had served in the
Guards, and in the Indies, and was full of stories of court and camp and
war, such as every young fellow of spirit likes to hear.

Captain Montresor lingered awhile, and then, finding it vain to persist
in his purpose, gave it up, and fell to talking with one of his
fellow-officers, while I went on questioning my cousin as to the Wynnes
to their uttermost generation. Either he cared little about them, or he
knew little, for he seemed much to prefer to tell queer stories about the
court ladies, and my Lord Chesterfield's boor of a son, who had such
small manners and such a large appetite, and of Sir Guy Carleton, whom he
was about to join in Canada. He advised me to get a pair of colours as my
aunt had once desired, and seemed surprised when I paraded my friend Mr.
Wilson's opinions as my own, and talked of taxation and the oppression
under which commerce had to be carried on. In fact, as to this I knew
something; but in this, as in other matters, he deferred to me as one
does to a well-informed talker of one's own age, now setting me right
with admirable courtesy, and now cordially agreeing.

What with his evident desire to be friendly, and the wine I was taking, I
fell an easy prey to one who rarely failed to please when he was so minded.
Too well amused to reflect that the hours were swiftly passing, I sat,
taking glass after glass mechanically. As the night went on we had more
punch, and the dice began to rattle on the tables, despite the landlord's
remonstrance, who feared to fall into the hands of the law and lose his
licence. But a lively major called out that here was licence enough, and
hustled him out of the room, calling for more rum-punch, and stronger.

Meanwhile the smoke grew thick and thicker. Here and there a song broke
out, and the clink of coin and the rattle of dice went on. Then, when at
last Montresor came to our table and said he was going, and would I come
too, I rose, and, bidding my kinsman good-by, went with the captain. I
heard him swear as he found the door locked. No one seemed to know who had
the key, and as for me, not ill-pleased, and past feeling regret, I turned
back and stood over a table where some officers were throwing a main.

Then I saw in a corner a poor fellow who used to be an usher at the
academy, and who, having taken to drink, had lost his place. Now he was a
sort of servitor in the coffee-house, and had gotten locked up in the room
and could not escape. He had taken refuge in a corner at a deserted table,
and, sitting unnoticed, was solacing himself with what was left of a bowl
of punch. A sense of not altogether maudlin pity came upon me, and I went
over and sat down beside him. No one took any heed of us. The air was heavy
with pipe-smoke, oaths, mad catches of song, clink of glasses, and rattle
of dice noisily cast, with here and there a toast cried; so that it was
hard to see for the smoke, or to hear a man speak.

"Why, Savoy! How earnest thou here?" I said.

"The devil fetched me, I guess."

He was far gone in liquor. "I am like Mr. Sterne's starling: 'I can't get
out.' Ever read Mr. Sterne's--what is it?--oh, his 'Sentimental Journey'?"

Here was one worse than I, and I felt inclined to use what Friends call a
precious occasion, a way being opened.

"This is a sad business, Savoy," I said.

"Dre'ful," he returned. "_Facilis descensus taverni._ No use to talk to me.
I am tired of life. I am going to die. Some men shoot themselves, some like
the rope, and some cold water. You know what Bishop what's-his-name--I mean
Jeremy Taylor--says about ways to die: 'None please me.' But drink is the
best. I mean to drink myself dead--dead--d--dead," and here he fell on to
my shoulder. Letting him down easily, I loosed his neckerchief, and stood
beside him, pitiful and shocked. Then in a moment I felt that I was drunk.
The room whirled, and with an effort I got to the open window, stumbling
over legs of men, who looked up from their cards and cursed me.

Of what chanced after this I knew for a time but little, until I was in one
instant sobered. This was an hour later, and nigh to twelve o'clock. What
took place I heard from others; and, as it concerns a turning-point in my
life, I shall try to relate it as if I myself had been conscious all the
while.

The better for air, I went over to a table in the centre of the room not
far from the door. Leaning heavily on Captain Small's shoulder, I threw on
the table the last gold joe my aunt had given me with her final lesson in
morals.

"Best in three, Etherington."

"Take it," he cried.

I threw double sixes, he threes, and I deuce ace. Then he cast some numbers
as good. Certainly the devil meant to have me. I threw a third time; a six
and a five turned up, and he an ace and a four. I had won. "Double or
quits," I said; "one throw." I won again, and at this I went on until the
pile of gold grew beneath my eyes, amid laughter, curses, and all manner of
vileness. Presently I heard the colonel exclaim, "This won't do,
gentlemen," and I felt some one trying to draw me from the table. It was
Captain Wynne. I cried out, "Hands off! no liberties with me! I am the head
of thy house; thou art only a cadet." He laughed as I pushed him aside.

"You said double or quits," cried the stout major. How he got into the game
I knew not.

"It is a mere boy! for shame!" cried the colonel. "I forbid it."

"I am a gentleman," I said. "Thou canst order thy officers; thou canst not
order me," and as I spoke I cast so hard that I crushed the box. I heard
some one cry, "A damn pretty Quaker! By George, he has lost! A clean
hundred pounds!" Even in this drunken revel there was a pause for a moment.
I was, after all, but a tipsy lad of twenty, and some were just not far
enough gone to feel that it might look to others an ugly business. The
colonel said something to Major Milewood as to disrespect, I hardly know
what; for at this moment there was a loud knocking at the door. In the lull
that followed I heard the colonel's voice.

Then the tumult broke out anew. "By Jove, it is a woman!" cried Wynne. "I
hear her. Wine and women! A guinea to a guinea she's pretty!"

"Done!" cried some one.

"Here's the key," said the major; "let's have her in."

"_Place aux dames_," hiccoughed a cornet.

The colonel rose, but it was too late. Wynne, seizing the key, unlocked the
door and threw it wide open, as my mother, followed by Jack Warder, entered
the room, and stood still a moment, dazed.

Captain Wynne, leering and unsteady, caught at her waist, exclaiming, "By
George! she might be younger, but I've won. A toast! a toast! A Quaker, by
George!"

Whether I was sobered or not, I know not. I can only say that of a sudden I
was myself, and strangely quiet. I saw the dear lady, brave, beautiful, and
with her curls falling about her neck, as she shrank back from the man's
touch.

"Come, Hugh," she said.

"Yes, mother," I said; "but first--" and I struck Captain Wynne full in the
face, so that, unprepared as he was, he fell over a table and on to the
floor.

Every one started up. There was instant silence.

In a moment he was on his feet, and, like myself, another man. Turning, he
said, with amazing coolness, wiping the blood away, for I was strong, and
had hit hard, "Madam, I beg your pardon; we have been behaving like beasts,
and I am fitly punished. As to you, Mr. Wynne, you are a boy, and have
undertaken to rough it with men. This shall go no further."

"It shall go where I please," I cried.

"No, no; Hugh, Hugh!" said my mother.

"'We will talk it over to-morrow," said the captain; and then, turning, "I
mean, gentlemen, that this shall stop here. If any man thinks I am wrong,
let him say so. I shall know how to settle accounts with him."

"No, no," said the colonel; "you are right, and if any officer thinks
otherwise, I too am at his service." In the silence which came after he
added, "Permit me, madam;" and offering his arm to my mother, we following,
they went downstairs, Jack and I after them, and so into the street and the
reproachful calm of the starlit April night.




VIII


"Even so far away as now," says Jack, writing in after-days, "it grieves me
to think of that winter, and of this mad scene at the London Coffee-house.
When I saw Hugh go in with the officers, I waited for an hour, and then
went away. Returning later, I learned that he was still upstairs. I felt
that if I stayed until he came forth, although he might not be in a way to
talk to me, to know that I had waited so long might touch him and help him
to hear me with patience. I walked to and fro until the clock had struck
twelve, fearful and troubled like a woman. Sometimes I think I am like a
woman in certain ways, but not in all.

"There were many people who loved Hugh, but, save his mother, none as I
did. He had a serious kindliness in his ways, liking to help people, and
for me at certain times and in certain crises a reassuring directness of
swift dealing with matters in hand, most sustaining to one of my hesitating
nature. His courage was instinctive, mine the result of obedience to my
will, and requiring a certain resolute effort.

"I think of him always as in time of peril, throwing his head up and his
shoulders back, and smiling, with very wide-open eyes, like his mother's,
but a deeper blue. The friendship of young men has often for a partial
basis admiration of physical force, and Hugh excelled me there, although I
have never been considered feeble or awkward except among those of another
sex, where always I am seen, I fear, to disadvantage.

"Just after twelve I saw a woman coming hastily up Front street. As she
came to a pause in the light which streamed from the open door, I knew her
for Madam Marie, as she had taught me to call her. She wore a _caleche_
hood, fallen back so that I saw her hair, half tumbled from under the thin
gauze cap worn on the top of the head by most Quakers. She was clad quite
too slightly, and had for wrap only a thin, gray silk shawl.

"'_Mon Dieu!_' she exclaimed, 'I had to come. Jack, is he here? _Il faut
que je monte_, I must go upstairs.' In excitement she was apt to talk
French, and then to translate. 'Let me go,' said I; but she cried out, 'No,
no! come!'

"There were many rough folks without, and others called together by the
noise above, and no wonder. I said,' Come in; I will go up with thee.' She
pushed me aside, and, with staring eyes, cried, _'Ou est l'escalier?'_ As
we went through the coffee-room, the loungers looked at her with surprise.
She followed me without more words, ran by me on the stairs, and in a
moment beat fiercely on the door, crying, _'Ouvrez!_ open! quick!' Then
there was that madhouse scene."

And this was how it came about, as Jack has here told, that, still hot and
angry, but much sobered, I, her son, walked beside my mother till we came
to our door, and Jack left us, saying:

"Wilt thou see me to-morrow?"

I said, "Yes. God bless thee! Thou art the real son," and we entered.

Then it was sweet to see her; she said no word of reproach except, "_Il ne
faut pas me donner ton baiser du soir._ No, no; I am not to be kissed." And
so I went, sorrowful and still dizzy, up to my sleepless couch.

At the first gray light of dawn I rose, and was soon away half a mile from
shore in my boat. As I came up from my first plunge in the friendly river,
and brushed the water from my eyes, I do assure you the world seemed
different. The water was very cold, but I cared nothing for that. I went
home another and a better man, with hope and trust and self-repose for
company. That hour in the water at early morn forever after seemed to me a
mysterious separation between two lives, like a mighty baptismal change.
Even now I think of it with a certain awe.

I pulled home as the sun rose, and lingered about until our servants came
in for the early worship of the day. Soon I had the mother's kiss, and
underwent a quick, searching look, after which she nodded gaily, and said,
"_Est-ce que tout est bien, mon fils?_ Is all well with thee, my son?" I
said, "Yes--yes." I heard her murmur a sweet little prayer in her beloved
French tongue. Then she began to read a chapter. I looked up amazed. It was
the prodigal's story.

I stood it ill, thinking it hard, that she should have made choice of that
reproachful parable. I stared sideways out at the stream and the ships, but
lost no word, as, with a voice that broke now and then, she read the
parable to its close. After this should have come prayer, silent or spoken;
but, to my surprise, she said, "We will not pray this morning," and we went
in to breakfast at once.

As for me, I could not eat. I went out alone to the garden and sat down. I
knew she would come to me soon. It seemed to me a long while. I sat on the
grass against a tree, an old cherry, as I remember, and waited.

I can see her coming toward me under the trees, grave and quiet and sweet.
The great beauty, Sarah Lukens, who married in mid-war the gallant Lennox,
used to say of my mother that she put some sugar into all her moods; and it
was true. I have seen her angry. I had rather have faced my father in his
wildest rage than her. Why was she not angry now? She had vast reason for
displeasure. After men have become wise enough to understand woman, I
protest there will remain the mother, whom no man will ever comprehend.

"What a beautiful day, Hugh! And you had a good swim? was it cold f Why may
not girls swim? I should love it."

Next she was beside me on the grass, my head on her bosom, saying, with a
little sob, as if she had done some wrong thing:

"I-I did not choose it, dear; indeed I did not. It came in order with the
day, as your father reads; and I--I did not think until I began it, and
then I would not stop. It is strange for it to so chance. I wonder where
that prodigal's mother was all the while? Oh, you are better than that
wicked, wicked prodigal. I never would have let him go at all--never if I
could have helped it, I mean. _Mon Dieu!_ I think we women were made only
for prayer or for forgiveness; we can stop no sin, and when it is done can
only cry, 'Come back! come back! I love you!'"

If I cried on that tender heart, and spoke no word, and was but a child
again, I am sure that it was of all ways the best to tell her that never
again should she be hurt by any act of mine.

"See, there is Judith at the door, wondering where I am," she said, "and
what is to be for dinner. I must go and get ready the fatted calf. Ah, I
would not have left one alive. Yes, yes, I can jest, because I am no more
afraid, _mon fils_, nor ever shall be."

Upon this I would have said something of my deep shame, and of the swine
among whom I had wallowed.

"No," she cried; "_c'est fini, mon cher_. It is all over. The swine will
eat alone hereafter." She would hear no more, only adding, "As for me, I
want to be told once how brave I was. Jack said so; indeed he did. I _was_
brave, was I not?"

"Don't, dear mother! please! I cannot bear it." Somehow this plea, so
childlike, to be praised for what must have cost so much, quite overcame
me.

"Yes, yes," she said; "I understand thee, and I shall always. How strong
thou art, _mon fils!_ I was proud of thee, even in that sty of pigs in red
coats. And he behaved like a gentleman, and hath wondrous self-command. I
would see him again; who is he?"

I told her his name.

"_Que c'est drole_. That is curious. Thy cousin! No doubt we shall see him
to-day, and thy father. I shall tell him all--all. He must know."

"Yes, he must know," I said; "but I will tell him myself."

"He will be angry, but that is part of thy punishment."

Then I told her, too, I had lost an hundred pounds, as I believed, and she
said:

"That is, after all, the least. There are pearls of my sister's I never
wear. Thy aunt must take them and pay this debt. Go now to thy business as
if nothing had happened, and I will send thee the pearls by Tom. No, no; it
is to be as I say; I must have my way."

What could I do? I kissed her, and we parted. I made no promises, and she
asked for none. I like to think of how, after all, I left with her this
sense of quiet trust.

I have said that the daily march of events never so influenced my life as
did critical occasions. This was surely one of them. I do not now regret
the knowledge of a baser world which I thus acquired. It has been of use to
me, and to some with whose lives I have had to deal.

Of the wrath of my father, when I humbly confessed my sins, it is not
needful to speak at length. For business calamities he was ready enough,
and lacked not decision; but in this matter he was, as I could see,
puzzled. He strode up and down, a great bulk of a man, opening and shutting
his hands, a trick he had in his rare moments of doubt or of intense
self-repression.

"I know not what to do with thee," he said over and over; "and thou didst
strike the man, thy cousin? Well, well! and hurt him, I am told? And he did
not return the blow!"

I had not said so. Thus I knew that other busy tongues had been at work.
For my life, I could not see whether he looked upon the blow as my worst
iniquity, or deep in his heart was hardly grieved at it.

"Thou didst strike him? I must consider of thee; I must take counsel. Go!
thou wilt bring my gray hairs in sorrow to the grave." And so I left him,
still striding to and fro, with ever the same odd movement of his hands. He
took counsel, indeed, and for me and for him the most unwise that ever a
troubled man could have taken. It was some days before this unpleasant
scene took place, and meanwhile I had seen my aunt.

She was taking snuff furiously when I entered, and broke out at once, very
red in the face, and walking about in a terrible rage. My mother used to
say that the first thing one saw of my Aunt Gainor was her nose. It had
been quite too much of a nose for the rest of her face, until gray hair and
some change wrought by time in the architecture of her fine head helped to
make it more in harmony with the rest of her features. Somehow it arrested
my attention now, and Heaven knows why it seemed to me more odd than ever.

"This is a fine repentance indeed! What are you staring at, you fool? Here
has been that wild curlew, Bess Ferguson, with an awful tale of how you
have gambled and lost an hundred pounds, and half killed an unlucky cousin.
Who the deuce is the man? A nice godchild you are! A proper rage I am in,
and Dr. Rush tells me I am never to get excited! You should hear Mrs.
Galloway; duels and murder are the least of her talk; and, upon my word,
you know no more of the small sword than of--I know not what. I must send
you to Pike for lessons. When is it to be?"

"My dear aunt," I cried, "I wish all these Tory cats of yours were dead!"

At this she broke into laughter, and sat down.

"Cats! and didn't they miaow! That sweet girl-boy, Jack Warder, has been
here too; sent, I suppose, by that dear Jesuit, your mother. How he
blushes! I hear you behaved like a gentleman even in your cups. I like the
lad; I did not use to. He is a manly miss. Sit down, and tell me all about
it. Bless me! how hot I am!"

Upon this I knew I had won my battle, and went on to tell the whole story.
When I produced my pearls, of which I was horribly ashamed, she broke out
anew, declaring we were all mere traders, and did we think her a
pawnbroker? and ended by giving me an hundred pounds, and bidding me to be
careful and pay at once, as it was a debt of honour. "As to the pearls, let
Madam Marie keep them for thy wife."

Thus ended a sorry business. It was to be told, and I have told it; but
none, not even my mother or Jack, knew how deep a mark it left upon my
character, or how profoundly it affected my life.

My friend Jack shall say the requiescat of this chapter of my life, which I
have so unwillingly recorded. There was one more thing needed to complete
its misery. Says Jack:

"Hugh Wynne and I fell apart this last winter of '72 and '73. It was my
fault." This I do not understand. "Came then that hideous night in April,
and all the rest; and Hugh I saw the day after, and begged him to forgive
me because I had so easily deserted him. I took him later a kind message
from Mr. James Wilson; for our small city knew it all. Friends looked at
him as one disgraced, except Friend Rupert Forest, who, to my amusement,
seemed to enjoy to hear the whole story, saying, 'Alas! alas!' and yet, as
I saw, far more pleased than distressed. It brought to my mind the battle
he had set us to fight out when we were boys. For a week or two Hugh was
dispirited, but after that, when the colonel had called, and his cousin,
Arthur Wynne, began to be more and more with him, he took heart, and faced
our little world, and would let no one, except myself, say a word to him of
the time of his downfall; this I think I never did, save perhaps once, and
that long after.

"There was no need to preach. Converted devils make the best saints. I
never was as good as Hugh, because I lacked courage to be wicked. Hugh was
no saint, but he drank no more for a long while; and was ever after
moderate. As to cards and dice, it was much the same."

What Jack has here written is all nonsense. He was a better man than I, and
never was nor could have been a bad one.




IX


I have said that one event had to be recorded before I completed the story
of that episode of which I was weary of hearing. My father--and it was
against all his habits in regard to most matters--reminded me almost daily
of my misdeeds. He hoped I did not drink any more, and he would even look
at the square flasks on the shelf to see, as I suspected, if they had been
used. To be prayed for was worst of all, and this he did more than once. It
was all of it unwise, and but for my mother I should have been even more
unhappy. I can see now that my father was this while in distress, feeling
that he must do something, and not knowing what to do.

In his business life there had always been a way opened, as Friends say. He
did not see that what I needed was what it was not in his nature to give,
and thus it came about that we drew apart, and perhaps neither then nor at
any later time were, or could ever have been, in the kindlier relation
which makes the best of friendships that of the grown-up son with the
elderly father.

At last, after a month or more, when it was far on in June, he ceased to
trouble me, and to walk up and down, opening and shutting his hands, as he
recounted my sins. He had reached an unfortunate decision, of which I was
soon to feel the results.

In the mean time my cousin, Mr. Arthur Wynne, had come into very close
intimacy with all our family circle. As he had much to do with my later
life, it is well to return a little, and to detail here what followed after
the night of my mother's visit to the coffee-house.

Next day, in the evening, came the colonel of the Scots Grays, and desired
to see me in the sitting, room, my father being still in Lancaster.

"Mr. Wynne," he said, "Captain Wynne has asked me to call in reference to
that unhappy business of last night. He begs to make his excuses to Mrs.
Wynne in this letter, which may I ask you to deliver? And after this action
on his part I trust you will see your way to regret the blow you struck."

I was quiet for a moment, feeling that I must be careful what answer I
made. "I cannot feel sorry," I said; "I do not regret it."

"That is a pity, Mr. Wynne. You should remember that Mr. Arthur Wynne could
not have known who the lady was. A blow is a thing no gentleman can, as a
rule, submit to; but this has been discussed by Sir William Draper and
myself, and we feel that Mr. Arthur Wynne cannot challenge a boy of
eighteen."

"I am twenty," I replied.

"Pardon me--of twenty, who is his cousin. That is the real point I would
make. You have the best of it. You were right, quite right; but, by St.
George, you are a hard hitter! Mr. Wynne would have come in person, but he
is hardly fit to be seen, and a sign-painter is just now busy painting his
eyelids and cheek, so as to enable him to appear out of doors."

The colonel treated me with the utmost respect, and, as a young fellow
naturally would be, I was embarrassed more than a little, but not at all
dissatisfied with the condition of my cousin. I said awkwardly that il he
was willing to forget it I supposed I ought to be.

"I think so," said the colonel. "Suppose you leave it with me, and in a day
or two talk it over with him. Indeed, he is a most charming gentleman, and
a worthy member of a good old house."

I said I would leave it with the colonel, and upon this he said, "Good-by,
and come and dine with the mess some day, but don't hit any more of us;"
and so, laughing, he went away, leaving me flattered, but with the feeling
that somehow he had gotten the better of me.

My mother declared it was a beautiful letter, writ prettily, but
ill-spelled (neither George the king nor our own George could spell well).
She would not let me see it. I did years afterward. In it he spoke of me as
a boy, and she was cunning enough to know that I should not like that.

It was a week before we saw Mr. Arthur Wynne. My father had meanwhile
vented his first wrath on me, and I was slowly getting over the strong
sense of disgust, shame, contrition, and anger, and had settled down
earnestly to my work. I hardly recognised the man who came in on us after
supper, as my mother and I sat in the orchard, with my father in a better
humour than of late, and smoking a churchwarden, which, you may like to
know, was a long clay pipe. The smoke sailed peacefully up, as I sat
looking at its blue smoke-rings. How often since have I seen them float
from the black lips of cannon, and thought of my father and his pipe!

We discussed the state of trade, and now and then I read aloud bits from
the Boston "Packet" of two weeks back, or my mother spoke of their
September voyage, and of what would be needed for it, a voyage being looked
upon as a serious affair in those times.

"I found your doors hospitably open," said the captain, appearing, "and the
servant said I should find you here; so I have taken my welcome for
granted, and am come to make my most humble excuses to Mrs. Wynne."

We all rose as he drew near, my mother saying in my ear as he approached,
"It is Arthur Wynne. Now, Hugh, take care!"

This newly found cousin was, like all of us, tall, but not quite so broad
as we other Wynnes. He was of swarthy complexion from long service in the
East, and had black hair, not fine, but rather coarse. I noticed a scar on
his forehead. He shook hands, using his left hand, because, as I learned,
of awkwardness from an old wound. But with his left lie was an expert
swordsman, and, like left-handed swordsmen, the more dangerous.

"We are glad to see thee, Cousin Wynne," said my mother.

Seeing the marks of my handiwork still on his cheek, I took his greeting
with decent cordiality, and said, "Sit down; wilt thon smoke a pipe, Cousin
Arthur?"

He said he did not smoke, and set himself, with the address of a man used
to a greater world than ours, to charm those whom no doubt he considered to
be quite simple folk. In a few minutes the unpleasantness of the situation
was over. He and my father were at one about politics, and I wisely held my
peace. He let fall a discreet sentence or two about the habits of soldiers,
and his own regrets, and then said, laughing:

"Your son is not quite of your views as a Friend in regard to warfare."

"My son is a hasty young man," said my father, and I felt my mother's touch
on my arm.

Our cousin was in no way upset by this. He said, "No, no, cousin; he is
young, but not hasty. I was fitly dealt with. We are hot-blooded people, we
Wynnes. The ways of Friends are not our ways of dealing with an injury; and
it was more--I wish to say so--it was an insult. He was right."

"There is no such thing as insult in the matter," said my father. "We may
insult the great Master, but it is not for man to resent or punish."

"I fear as to that we shall continue to differ." He spoke with the utmost
deference. "Do you go to Wyncote? I hear you are for England in the
autumn."

"No; I shall be too full of business. Wyncote has no great interest for
me."

"Indeed? It might perhaps disappoint you--a tumble-down old house, an
embarrassed estate. My brother will get but a small income when it falls to
him. My father fights cocks and dogs, rides to hounds, and, I grieve to
say, drinks hard, like all our Welsh squires."

I was surprised at Ms frank statement. My mother watched him curiously,
with those attentive blue eyes, as my father returned;

"Of a certainty, thou dost not add to my inducements to visit Wyncote. I
should, I fear, be sadly out of place."

"I am afraid that is but too true, unless your head is better than mine. We
are a sad set, we Wynnes. All the prosperity, and I fear much of the
decency of the family, crossed the ocean long ago."

"Yet I should like to see Wyneote," said I. "I think thou didst tell me it
is not thy home."

"No; a soldier can hardly be said to have a home; and a younger brother,
with a tough father alive, and an elder brother on an impoverished estate,
must needs be a wanderer."

"But we shall make thee welcome here," said my father, with grave kindness.
"We are plain people, and live simply; but a Wynne should always find, as
we used to say here, the latch-string outside."

With a little more talk of the Wynnes, the captain, declining to remain
longer, rose, and, turning to me, said, "I hear, Cousin Hugh, that you
refused to say that you were sorry for the sharp lesson you gave me the
other night. I have made my peace with your mother."

"I shall see that my son behaves himself in future. Thou hast heard thy
cousin, Hugh?"

I had, and I meant to make it up with him, but my father's effort as a
peacemaker did not render my course the more easy. Still, with the
mother-eyes on me, I kept my temper.

"I was about to say thou hast done all a man can do," said I.

"Then let us shake hands honestly," he replied, "and let bygones be
bygones."

I saw both my parents glance at me. "I should be a brute if I did not say
yes, and mean it, too; but I cannot declare that I am sorry, except for the
whole business." And with this I took his left hand, a variety of the
commonplace ceremony which always, to my last knowledge of Captain Wynne,
affected me unpleasantly.

He laughed. "They call us hi Merionethshire the wilful Wynnes. You will
find me a good friend if you don't want the things I want, I am like most
younger brothers, inclined to want things. I thank you all for a pleasant
hour. It is like home, or better." With this he bowed low to my mother's
curtsey, and went away, chatting as I conducted him to the door, and
promising to sail with me, or to fish.

Naturally enough, on my return I found my parents discussing our newly
found relative. My mother thought he talked much of himself; and had been
pleasanter if he had not spoken so frankly of his father. My father said
little, except that there seemed to be good in the young man.

"Why should we not forgive that in him which we must forgive in our own
son?"

My father had some dreadful power to hurt me, and to me only was he an
unjust man; this may have been because my wrong-doing troubled both his
paternal and his spiritual pride. I was about to say that there was little
likeness between my sin and that of my cousin; but I saw my mother, as she
stood a little back of my father's great bulk, shake her head, and I held
my tongue. Not so she.

"If thou hadst been a woman in my place, John Wynne, thou wouldst be far
from saying the thing thou hast said."

Never had I heard or seen in our house a thing like this. I saw, in the
fading light, my father working his hands as I have described, a signal of
restrained anger, and, like anything physically unusual in one we love, not
quite pleasant to see. But my mother, who knew not fear of him nor of any,
went on, despite his saying, "This is unseemly--unseemly, wife."

"Thou art unjust, John, to my son."

"Thy son?"

"Yes; mine as well as thine. I have faith that thou, even thou, John,
wouldst have done as my boy did."

"I? I?" he cried; and now I saw that he was disturbed, for he was moving
his feet like some proud, restrained horse pawing the grass. At last he
broke the stillness which followed his exclamations: "There is but one
answer, wife. Both have been brutes, but this boy has been kept near to
godly things all his life. Each First-day the tongues of righteous men have
taught him to live clean, to put away wrath, to love his enemies; and in a
day--a minute--it is gone, and, as it were, useless, and I the shame of the
town."

I hoped this was all; but my mother cried, "John! John! It is thy pride
that is hurt. No, it is not seemly to dispute with thee, and before thy
son. And yet--and yet--even that is better than to let him go with the
thought that he is altogether like, or no better than, that man. If thou
hast a duty to bear testimony, so have I." And thus the mother of the
prodigal son had her say. No doubt she found it hard, and I saw her dash
the tears away with a quick hand, as she added, "If I have hurt thee, John,
I am sorry."

"There is but one answer, wife. Love thy enemy; do good to them that
despitefully use thee. Thou wilt ruin thy son with false kindness, and who
shall save him from the pit?"

I turned at last in a storm of indignation, crying, "Could I see my mother
treated like a street-wench or a gutter-drab, and lift no hand? I wish I
had killed him!"

"See, wife," said my father. "Yes, even this was to be borne."

"Not by me!" I cried, and strode into the house, wondering if ever I was to
be done with it.

The day after no one of us showed a sign of this outbreak. Never had I seen
the like of it among us; but the Quaker habit of absolute self-repression,
and of concealment of emotion again prevailed, so that at breakfast we met
as usual, and, whatever we may have felt, there was no outward evidence of
my mother's just anger, of my father's bitterness, or of my own disgust.




X


I was not yet to see the end of my iniquity, and was to feel the
consequences in ways which, for many a day, influenced my life and actions.

It was toward the end of June. The feeling of uneasiness and dread was
becoming more and more felt, not only in commerce, which is so sensitive,
but also in the social relations of men. The king's officers were more
saucy, and, like all soldiers, eager for active service, imagining an easy
victory over a people untrained in war. Such Tory pamphleteers as the
foul-tongued Massachusetts writer, Daniel Leonard, were answering "Vindex"
(Mr. Adams) and the widely read letters of "An American Farmer." The plan
of organised correspondence between the colonies began to be felt in some
approach to unity of action, for at this time the out-spoken objection to
the views of the king and his facile minister was general, and even men
like Galloway, Chew, the Allens, and John Penn stood with varying degrees
of good will among those who were urging resistance to oppression. As yet
the too mighty phantom of independence had not appeared on the horizon of
our stormy politics, to scare the timid, and to consolidate our own
resistance.

I worked hard with my father at our lessening and complicated business,
riding far into the country to collect debts, often with Jack, who had like
errands to do, and with whom I discussed the topics which were so often,
and not always too amiably, in question at my Aunt Gainor's table. I was
just now too busy to be much with my old favourites, the officers. Indeed,
I was wise enough to keep away from them.

My cousin I saw often, both at my aunt's, as I shall relate, and elsewhere;
for he came much to our house, and my father found it agreeable to talk
over with him the news of the day. My mother did not like him as well, but
she held her peace, and, like every other man, he was attracted by her
gaiety, and quaint way of looking at men and things.

Mr. Wilson I saw at times, as he still had, I know not why, a fancy for me,
and loved well to sail with me of evenings over to Kaighn's Point to fish,
or down to Gloucester to bob for crabs. I owed him much. A profound
knowledge of law, variety of reading, and a mind which left broadly on our
after-history the marks of his powerful intellect, were at my service. He
used to caution me how I spoke of his opinions to others, and he would then
discuss with freedom politics and the men whose figures were fast rising
into distinctness as leaders to be listened to and trusted. Many of them he
knew, and thus first I heard clearly what manner of persons were Patrick
Henry and the Adamses, Dickinson, Peyton Randolph, and others less
prominent. In this way I came to be more and more confirmed in the opinions
my Aunt Gainor so resolutely held, and also more careful how I expressed
them. Indeed, although but twenty years of age, I was become quite suddenly
an older and graver man. Mr. Wilson surprised me one day by saying
abruptly, as he pulled up a reluctant crab, "Do you never think, Hugh, that
we shall have war!"

I was indeed amazed, and said so. Then he added, "It will come. My place
will not be in the field, but, whether you like it or not, you will see
battles. You were made for a soldier, Hugh, Quaker or no Quaker."

I thought it odd that two people as different as my Aunt Gainor and he
should have the same belief that we were drifting into war. She had said to
me the night before that she had known Lord North as a boy, and that the
king was an obstinate Dutchman, and would make his minister go his way,
adding, "When it comes you will be in it; you can't escape."

No one else whom I knew had any such belief. Wilson's views and prediction
sent me home thoughtful enough.

That evening my father said to me, "We go to Merion the day after
to-morrow." It was there we spent our summers. "To-morrow will be
Fourth-day. It is our last day of Meeting in the town. There will, perhaps,
be some wise words said as to present confusions, and I wish thee to hear
them, my son."

I said, "Yes; at seven, father?" I was, however, astonished; for these
occasional night Meetings in the middle of the week were but rarely
attended by the younger Friends, and, although opened with such religious
observances as the society affected, were chiefly reserved for business and
questions of discipline. I had not the least desire to go, but there was no
help for it.

Our supper took place at six on this Wednesday, a little earlier than
usual, and I observed that my father drank several cups of tea, which was
not his habit. Few people took tea since the futile tax had been set upon
it; but my father continued to drink it, and would have no concealment, as
was the custom with some Whigs, who in public professed to be opposed to
the views of the crown as to the right to collect indirect taxes,

Seeing that I did not drink it, and knowing that I liked nothing better
than a good dish of tea, he asked me why I did not partake of it. Not
willing to create new trouble, I said I did not want any. He urged the
matter no further, but I saw he was not well pleased. We set off soon after
in silence, he walking with hands behind his back clasping his gold-headed
cane, his collarless coat and waistcoat below his beaver, and the gray hair
in a thick mass between. He wore shoes, fine drab short-clothes, and black
silk stockings, all without buckles; and he moved rapidly, nodding to those
he met on the way, to the Bank Meeting-house, in Front Street, above Arch.

It was a simple, one-story, brick building, set a few feet above the level
of the roadway. The gables and shutters were painted white, as was also the
plain Doric doorway, which had a pillar on each side. I judged by the
number of both sexes entering that it was an unusual occasion. There were
many drab-coated men, and there were elderly women, in gowns of drab or
gray, with white silk shawls and black silk-covered cardboard bonnets. Here
and there a man or woman was in gayer colours or wore buckles, and some had
silver buttons; but these were rare. The Meeting-room was, so to speak, a
large oblong box with whitewashed walls. A broad passage ran from the door
to the farther end; on the right of it sat the men, on the left the women;
against the remoter wall, facing the rude benches, were three rows of
seats, one above the other. On these sat at the back the elders, and in
front of them the overseers. The clerk of the Meeting had a little desk
provided for him. Over their heads was a long sounding-board.

To me the scene had been familiar for years; but to-day it excited my
attention because of an air of expectation, and even of excitement, among
the few more youthful Friends. I saw, as we entered, furtive glances cast
at my father and myself; but as to this I had grown to be of late more or
less indifferent, and had no anticipation of what was to follow later.

I had become, since my sad downfall, a more serious and thoughtful young
man, and far better fitted to feel the beauty and the spirituality of these
Meetings than I had been before. When the doors were closed I sat silent in
prayer; for some ten minutes increasing stillness came upon one and all of
the three or four hundred people here met together.

As I waited, with long-trained patience, for full twenty minutes, a yet
deeper quiet fell on the figures seated on each side of the aisle. For a
time none of the men uncovered, but soon a few took off their broad hats,
having remained with them on their heads long enough to satisfy custom by
this protest against the ways of other men. The larger number kept their
hats on their heads. Then a strange incident took place: a woman of middle
age, but gray, her hair fallen about her shoulders, entered noisily, and,
standing before the elders, cried out in a loud voice, as though in
affliction and sore distress, "See to your standing; the Lord is about to
search and examine your camp. Ho! ye of little faith and less works, the
hand of God is come upon you--the mighty hand of punishment." As she spake
thus wildly she swayed to and fro, and seemed to me disordered in mind.
Finally she passed across the space in front of the overseers, to the
women's side, and then back again, repeating her mad language. My Aunt
Gainor's great bronze Buddha was not more motionless than they who sat on
the elders' seats. At last the woman faced the Meeting, and went down the
aisle, waving her hands, and crying out, "I shall have peace, peace, in
thus having discharged my Lord's errand." The many there met did justice to
their discipline. Scarce a face showed the surprise all must have felt. No
one turned to see her go out, or seemed to hear the door banged furiously
after her. The covered heads remained silent and undisturbed; the rows of
deep bonnets were almost as moveless. Fully ten minutes of perfect silence
followed this singular outburst. Then I saw the tall, gaunt figure of
Nicholas Wain rise slowly, a faint but pleasant smile on his severe face,
while he looked about him and began:

"Whether what ye have heard be of God I cannot say. The time hath troubled
many souls. The woman, Sarah Harris, who hath, as some are aware, borne
many sweet and pleasing testimonies to Friends in Wilmington, I know not.
Whether what ye have heard be of God or but a rash way of speech, let us
feel that it is a warning to Friends here assembled that we be careful of
what we say and do. It hath been borne in upon me that Friends do not fully
understand one another, and that some are moved to wrath, and some inclined
to think that Friends should depart from their ways and question that which
hath been done by the rulers God hath set over us. Let us be careful that
our General Epistles lean not to the aiding of corrupt and wicked men, who
are leading weak-minded persons into paths of violence." And here he sat
down.

A moment later got up Thomas Scattergood, grim and dark of visage. None of
his features expressed the slightest emotion, although even from the
beginning he spoke with vehemence and his body rocked to and fro.

"The days are darkening; the times are evil. Our master, set over us by
God, has seen fit to tax certain commodities, that means may be raised for
the just government of these colonies, where we and our fathers have
prospered in our worldly goods, under a rule that has left us free to
worship God as seems best to us. And now we are bid by men, not of our
society, ungodly self-seekers, sons of darkness, to unite with them in the
way of resistance to the law. There have even been found here among us
those who have signed agreements to disobey such as are set over us,
unmindful of the order to render to Caesar that which is his. Let there be
among Friends neither fear nor any shortcoming. Let us bear testimony
against evil-doers, whether they be of us or not. Let us cut down and
utterly cast forth those who depart from righteousness. Are they not of the
scum which riseth on the boiling pot? There is a time for Friends to
remonstrate, and a time to act. I fear lest these too gentle counsels of
Friend Waln be out of time and out of place. Away with those who, hearing,
heed not. Let them be dealt with as they should be, with love for the
sinner, but with thought as to the evil which comes of unscourged examples,
so that when again we are met in the Quarterly Meeting there shall be none
among us to stir up discord, and we can say to other Meetings, 'As we have
done, so do ye. Make clean the house of the Lord.'"

The night was now upon us, and the ringing tones of the speaker were heard
through the darkness before he sat down. While all waited, two Friends lit
the candles set in tin sconces against the pillars of the gallery, and, in
the dim light they gave, the discussion went on.

Then I saw that Arthur Howell was about to speak. This able and
tender-minded man usually sat in Meeting with his head bent, his felt hat
before his eyes, wrapped in thought, and lifted above all consideration of
the things of this earth. As he began, his rich, full voice filled the
space, and something in its pleading sweetness appealed to every heart. He
spoke as one who, having no doubt, wondered that any one else should doubt,
and he brought the discussion to a decisive point at once.

"It is well," he said, "that all should be convinced by those who, from age
and influence among Friends, have the best right of speech. Nevertheless,
since this is a Meeting for discipline, let all be heard with fairness and
order. Men have gone astray. They have contended for the asserting of civil
rights in a manner contrary to our peaceable profession and principles,
and, although repeatedly admonished, do not manifest any disposition to
make the Meeting a proper acknowledgment of their outgoings. Therefore it
is that we bear our testimony against such practices, and can have no unity
with those who follow them until they come to a sense of their errors.
Therefore, if this be the sense of our Meeting, let the clerk be moved to
manifest the feelings of the Meeting to these members, signing on our
behalf, for the matter hath already been before us twice, and hath been
deeply and prayerfully considered by ourselves; and I am charged to tell
Friends that these members who have thus gone astray are unwilling to be
convinced by such as have sought to bring them to a better mind. This hath
been duly reported, and overseers having thus failed, it doth only remain
to abide by the sense of our Meeting. But this I have already said: the
matter hath been prayerfully considered."

After this, others spoke, but all elder Friends understood that the
business had been disposed of, and little attention was given to those who
rose after Friend Howell sat down. Indeed, that they were ill-advised to
speak at all was plainly to be read in the countenances of many.

This was my first experience of an evening Meeting, and, even to one
acquainted with all the ways of Friends, the scene was not without its
interest. The night was now dark outside. The tallow dips ran down and
flared dismally. A man with snuffers went to and fro, and the pungent
odours of candles, burned out and to be replaced, filled the room.

In the quiet which followed Arthur Howell's refined and distinct accents, I
looked at the row of placid faces where the women sat, some rosy, some old,
all in the monastic cell of the bonnet, which made it as impossible to see,
except in front, as it is for a horse with blinders. I wondered how this
queer headgear came to have been made, and recalled my aunt's amusement at
the care exercised as to its form and material. Few there, I think, let
their thoughts wander, and in front of me the row of drab coats and wide
felt or beaver hats remained almost motionless.

At last James Pemberton, the esteemed clerk of the Meeting, rose. "I am
moved," he said, "by the Spirit to declare that the sense, and also the
weight, of the Meeting is that Cyrus Edson and William Jameson be advised,
in accordance with the instructed wish of Friends."

He then sat down. There was no vote taken. Even had a majority of those
present been hostile to the proposed action, it is improbable that any
protest would have been made. The clerk's statement that the weight of the
Meeting was affirmative, would have been held to settle the matter, as it
appeared best to a limited number of those recognised, through their piety
and strict living, to be competent to decide for the rest.

I was now assured that this was all, and looked to see two of the elders
shake hands, which is the well-recognised signal for the Meeting to break
up; but as the elders did not move, the rest sat still and waited. By and
by I saw Nicholas Wain extend his hand to my father, who, looking steadily
before him, made no sign of perceiving this intention to dismiss Friends. A
still longer pause followed. As I learned afterward, no further speaking
was anticipated. No one stirred. For my part, I was quite ready to go, and
impatiently awaited the signal of dismissal. A minute or two passed; then I
was aware of a short, neatly built man, who rose from a bench near by. His
face was strong, irregular of feature, and for some reason impressed me. I
could see even in the indistinct light that he flushed deeply as he got up
on his feet. He received instant attention, for he went past me, and,
standing in the passageway, was quiet for a moment. He was, I think, not
over thirty, and seemed embarrassed at the instant attention he received.
For a few minutes he appeared to seek his words, and then, quite suddenly,
to find them in eloquent abundance.

"It is not usual," he said, "for disowned members of the society to openly
protest. Neither are these our brothers here to-day. Nor, were they with
us, are they so skilled with the tongue as to be able to defend themselves
against the strong language of Thomas Scattergood or the gentle speech of
Arthur Howell. I would say a word for them, and, too, for myself, since
nothing is more sure than that I think them right, and know that ye will,
before long, cast out me, to whom your worship is sweet and lovely, and the
ways of Friends for the most part such as seem to me more acceptable than
those of any other Christian society. Whether it be that old memories of
persecution, or too great prosperity, have hardened you, I do not know. It
does seem to me that ye have put on a severity of dress and life that was
not so once, and that undue strictness hath destroyed for us some of the
innocent joys of this world. I also find unwholesome and burdensome that
inner garment of self-righteousness in which ye clothe yourselves to judge
the motives of your fellow-men.

"So far as the law went against such views as you entertained, none did
more resist them, in your own way, than did you; but now the English across
the seas tell us that the liberty our fathers sought on these shores is to
be that which pleases a corrupt and pliant ministry, and not that which is
common to men of English blood. Some brave men of our society say, 'Let us
make a stand here, lest worse things come. Let us refuse to eat, drink, or
wear the articles they assume to tax, whether we will or not.' There is no
violence. Believe me, there will be none if we are one throughout the
colonies. But if not--if not--if grave old men like you, afraid of this
mere shadow of passive resistance, dreading to see trade decay and the fat
flanks of prosperity grow lean--if you are wholly with our oppressors,
passively with them, or, as some believe, actively, then--then, dear
friends, it will be not the shadow, but the substance, of resistance that
will fall in blood and ruin on you and on all men--on your easy lives and
your accumulated gains.

"Aye, look to it! There is blood on the garments of many a man who sits
fearfully at home, and thinks that because he does nothing he will be free
of guilt when the great account is called."

On this a rare exception to the tranquillity of Meeting occurred. Daniel
Offley, by trade a farrier, rose and broke in, speaking loudly, as one used
to lift his voice amid the din of hammers: "Wherefore should this youth
bring among us the godless things of worldly men?" His sonorous tones rang
out through the partial obscurity, and shook, as I noticed, the scattered
spires of the candle flames. "This is no time for foolish men to be heard,
where the elders are of a mind. The sense of the Meeting is with us. The
weight of the Meeting is with us. The king is a good king, and who are we
to resist? Out with those who are not of our ways! Let the hammer fall on
the unrighteous, lest the sheep be scattered, and the Shepherd leave them."

At this queer mixture of metaphors I saw the previous speaker smile, as he
stood in the aisle. Next I heard the gentle voice of James Pemberton break
in on the uncouth speech of the big farrier.

"It is the custom of Friends that all men who feel to be moved to tell us
aught shall be heard. Friend Wetherill, we will hear thee to an end." He
spoke with the courteous ease of a well-bred gentleman, and the smith sat
down.

Friend Wetherill paused a moment, looking to left and right along the lines
of deeply interested and motionless faces. Then he continued: "On what you
and others do in these days depends what shall come upon us. Let no man
deceive you, not even the timid counsel of gray hairs or the wariness of
wealth. The guinea fears; the penny fights; and the poor penny is to-day
deeply concerned. You take shelter under the law of Christ, to live, as far
as possible, at peace with all men. As far as possible? It should at times
be felt that Paul's limitation is also a command. Do not resist him who
would slay a child or wrong a woman--that is how you read the law of God.

"It is extremes which bring ruin to the best Christian societies, and if
the mass of men were with you civil order would cease, and the carefully
builded structure of civilisation would perish. You are already undergoing
a process of dry decay, and as you dry and dry, you harden and shrink, and
see it not. A wild woman has told you to set your camp in order. See to it,
my friends; see to it!"

For not less than a minute the speaker remained silent, with bended head,
still keeping the wonderfully steady attention of this staid assembly. Very
slowly he lifted his face, and now, as he began again, it was with a look
of tender sweetness: "It was far back in Second-month, 1771, I began to be
encompassed by doubts as to the course Friends were taking. To-day I am
assured in spirit that you are wrong in the support you gave, and, let me
say, are giving, to an unjust cause. I think I take an innocent liberty to
express myself on this occasion, also according to the prospect I have of
the matter. There is something due to the king, and something to the cause
of the public. When kings deviate from the righteous law of justice in
which kings ought to rule, it is the right, aye, and the religious duty, of
the people to be plain and honest in letting them know where. I am not a
person of such consequence as to dictate; but there is in me and in you a
court, to which I confidently appeal. I _have_ appealed to it in prayer, as
to what my course shall be, I obey my conscience. Take heed that you do not
act rashly."

Here again, after these calm words, he paused, and then said, with emphatic
sternness, "As my last words, let me leave with you the admonition of the
great founder of this colony. 'I beseech you,' he says, 'for the sake of
Christ, who so sharply prohibited making others suffer for their religion,
that you have a care how you exercise power over other men's consciences.
My friends, conscience is God's throne in man, and the power of it His
prerogative!' These are solemn words. Whether you leave me to live among
you, free to do what seems right to me, or drive me forth, who have no wish
to go, now and always I shall love you. That love you cannot take away, nor
weaken, nor disturb."

I was sorry when the melody of this clear voice ceased. The speaker, wiping
the moisture from his brow, stood still, and, covering his face with his
hands, was lost in the prayer which I doubt not followed.

A long interval of absence of all sound came after he ceased to speak. No
one replied. The matter was closed, a decision reached, and the clerk
instructed. I knew enough to feel sure that those manly tones of appeal and
remonstrance had failed of their purpose.

At this moment I saw an elderly man on the seat before me rise, and with
deliberateness kneel in prayer; or, as Friends say, Israel Sharpless
appeared in supplication. At first, as he began to be heard, Friends rose
here and there, until all were afoot and all uncovered. The silence and
reverent bended heads, and the dim light, affected me as never before. Many
turned their backs on the praying man, an odd custom, but common, As he
prayed his voice rose until it filled the great room; and of a sudden I
started, and broke out in a cold sweat, for this was what I heard:

"O Lord, arise, and let Thine enemies be scattered. Dip me deeper in
Jordan. Wash me in the laver of regeneration. Give me courage to wrestle
with ill-doers. Let my applications be heard.

"Father of mercy, remember of Thy pity those of the young among us who,
being fallen into evil ways, are gone astray. We pray that they who have
gambled and drunk and brought to shame and sorrow their elders may be
recovered into a better mind, and sin no more. We pray Thee, Almighty
Father, that they be led to consider and to repent of deeds of violence,
that those among us whom the confusion of the tunes has set against the law
and authority of rulers be better counselled; or, if not, strengthen us so
to deal with these young men as shall make pure again Thy sheepfold, that
they be no longer a means of leading others into wickedness and
debauchery." I heard no more. This man was a close friend of my father. I
knew but too well that it was I who was thus reproved, and thus put to
shame. I looked this way and that, the hot blood in my face, thinking to
escape. Custom held me. I caught, as I stared, furtive glances from some of
the younger folk. Here and there some sweet, gentle face considered me a
moment with pity, or with a curiosity too strong for even the grim
discipline of Friends. I stood erect. The prayer went on. Now and then I
caught a phrase, but the most part of what he said was lost to me. I looked
about me at times with the anguish of a trapped animal.

At last I saw that my gentle-voiced speaker, Wetherill, was, like myself,
rigid, with upheld head, and that, with a faint smile on his face, he was
looking toward me. Minute after minute passed. Would they never be done
with it? I began to wonder what was going on under those bent gray hats and
black bonnets. I was far away from penitence or remorse, a bruised and
tormented man, helpless, if ever a man was helpless, under the monotonous
and silent reproach of some hundreds of people who had condemned me
unheard. It did seem as if it never would end.

At last the voice died out. The man rose, and put on his hat. All resumed
their seats and their head-coverings. I saw that Friend Scattergood
extended a hand to my father, who was, as I have not yet stated, an elder.
The grasp was accepted. Elders and overseers, both men and women, rose, and
we also. I pushed my way out, rudely, I fear. At the door James Pemberton
put out his hand. I looked him full in the face, and turned away from the
too inquisitive looks of the younger Friends. I went by my father without a
word. He could not have known what pain his method of saving my soul would
cost me. That he had been in some way active in the matter I did not doubt,
and I knew later that my opinion was but too correct.

Hastening down Front street with an overwhelming desire to be alone, I
paused at our own door, and then, late as it was, now close to ten, I
unmoored my boat, and was about to push off when I felt a hand on my
shoulder. It was Samuel Wetherill.

"Let me go with thee, my boy," he said. "We should talk a little, thou and
I."

I said, "Yes. Thou art the only man I want to see to-night."

There were no more words. The moon was up as I pulled down Dock Creek and
out on my friendly river.

"Let thy boat drift," he said. "Perhaps thou art aware, Hugh Wynne, how
grieved I was; for I know all that went before. I somehow think that thou
hast already done for thyself what these good folk seemed to think was
needed. Am I right?"

"Yes," I said.

"Then say no more. James Wilson has spoken of thee often. To be loved of
such a man is much. I hear that thou hast been led to think with us, and
that, despite those wicked wild oats, thou art a young man of parts and
good feelings, thoughtful beyond thy years."

I thanked him almost: in tears; for this kindly judgment was, past belief,
the best remedy I could have had.

"I saw thy great suffering; but in a year, in a month, this will seem a
thing of no import; only, when thou art calm and canst think, hold a
Meeting in thy own heart, and ask thy quiet judgment, thy conscience, thy
memory, if prayer be needed; and do it for thyself, Hugh."

I said, "Thank thee," but no more. I have ever been averse to talking of my
relations to another world, or of what I believe, or of what I am led
thereby to do in hours of self-communion. I sat wishing my father were like
this, a tender-hearted yet resolute man.

Seeing me indisposed to speak, he went on: "If we could but keep the better
part of Friends' creed, and be set free to live at peace with the law, to
realise that to sit down quietly under oppression may be to serve the
devil, and not God! Thou knowest, as well as I, that divers Friends have
publicly avowed the ministry, and allege that whatever they may do is a
just punishment of rebellion. We are going to have a serious settlement,
and it will become us all, Hugh, young and old, to see that we are on the
right side, even if we have to draw the sword. And thou and I shall not be
alone of Friends. There are Clement and Owen Biddle, and Christopher
Marshall, and more."

I was surprised, and said so.

"Yes, yes," he said; "but I talk to thee as to a man, and these things are
not to be spread abroad. I trust I have been to thee a comfort; and, now
the moon is setting, let us go home."

I thanked him as well as I knew how. He had indeed consoled me.

When I came in my father had gone to bed, but my mother was waiting to see
me. She caught me in her arms, and, weeping like a child, cried, "Oh, I
have heard! He did not tell me beforehand, or I should have forbade it.
Thou shouldst never have gone! never! It was cruel! _Mon Dieu!_ how could
they do it!"

It was I who now had to comfort, and this helped me amazingly, and yet
added to my just anger; for why must she, who was innocent, be thus made to
suffer? My father, when he came in, had asked for me. He had met my cousin,
who had seen me going down Front street, and had hinted that I meant to
find comfort at the coffee-house among the officers. She knew better, and
had said her mind of this kinsman and his ways; upon which my father had
gone angry to his bed. I was beginning to have an increasing distrust and
dislike of Arthur, and the present news did not lessen either feeling. So
at last here was an end of the consequences of my sad night at the
coffee-house.




XI


The next day we went to our farm in Merion. My father said no word of the
Meeting, nor did I. The summer of '73 went on. I rode in to my work daily,
sometimes with my father, who talked almost altogether of his cattle or of
his ventures, never of the lowering political horizon. He had excused
himself from being a consignee of the tea, on the score of his voyage,
which was now intended for September.

My aunt lived in summer on the farther slope of Chestnut Hill, where, when
the road was in order, came her friends for a night, and the usual
card-play. When of a Saturday I was set free, I delighted to ride over and
spend Sunday with her, my way being across country to one of the fords on
the Schuylkill, or out from town by the Ridge or the Germantown highroad.
The ride was long, but, with my saddle-bags and Lucy, a new mare my aunt
had raised and given me, and clad in overalls, which we called tongs, I
cared little for the mud, and often enough stopped to assist a chaise out
of the deep holes, which made the roads dangerous for vehicles.

Late one day in August, I set out with my friend Jack to spend a Sunday
with my Aunt Gainor. Jack Warder was no w a prime favourite, and highly
approved. We rode up Front street, and crossed the bridge where Mulberry
street passed under it, and is therefore to this day called Arch street,
although few know why. The gay coats of officers were plentiful, farmers in
their smocks were driving in with their vegetables, and to the right was
the river, with here and there a ship, and, beyond, the windmill on the
island. We talked of the times, of books, of my father's voyage, and of my
future stay with my aunt.

Although Jack's father was a Quaker, he was too discreet a business man not
to approve of Jack's visits to my aunt, and too worldly not to wish for his
son a society to which he was not born; so Mrs. Ferguson and Mrs. Galloway
made much of Jack, and he was welcome, like myself, at Cliveden, where the
Chews had their summer home.

The Tory ladies laughed at his way of blushing like a girl, and, to Jack's
dismay, openly envied his pink-and-white skin and fair locks. They treated
him as if he were younger than I, although, as it chanced, we were born on
the same day of the same year; and yet he liked it all--the gay women, the
coquettish Tory maids, even the "genteel" Quaker dames, such as Mrs. Sarah
Logan or Mrs. Morris, and the pretty girls of the other side, like Sarah
Lukens and the Misses Willing, with their family gift of beauty. These and
more came and went at my aunt's, with men of all parties, and the grave
Drs. Rush and Parke, and a changing group of English officers.

In the little old house at Belmont, the Rev. Richard Peters was glad to sit
at cards with the Tory ladies, whose cause was not his, and still less that
of Richard, his nephew. At times, as was the custom, sleighing parties in
winter or riding-parties in summer used to meet at Cliveden or
Springetsbury, or at a farm-house where John Penn dwelt while engaged in
building the great house of Lansdowne, looking over trees to the quiet
Schuylkill.

We rode out gaily this August afternoon, along the Germantown road,
admiring the fine farms, and the forests still left among the cultivated
lands. Near Fisher's Lane we saw some two or three people in the road, and,
drawing near, dismounted. A black man, who lay on the ground, groaning with
a cut head, and just coming to himself, I saw to be my aunt's coachman
Caesar. Beside him, held by a farmer, was a horse with a pillion and
saddle, all muddy enough from a fall. Near by stood a slight young woman in
a saveguard petticoat and a sad-coloured, short camlet cloak.

"It is Miss Darthea Peniston," said Jack.

"Miss Peniston," I said, dismounting, "what has happened?"

She told me quietly, that, riding pillion to stay with my aunt, the horse
had fallen and hurt Caesar, not badly, she thought. She had alighted on her
feet, but what should she do? After some discussion, and the black being
better, we settled to leave him, and I proposed that Jack, the lighter
weight, should ride my Aunt Gainor's horse, with Miss Peniston on the
pillion behind him. Upon this Jack got red, at the idea, I suppose, of Miss
Darthea's contemplating the back of his head for four miles. The young
woman looked on with shy amusement.

At this moment Caesar, a much pampered person, who alone of all her house
dared give my aunt advice, declared he must have a doctor. Jack, much
relieved, said it was inhuman to leave him in this case, and put an end to
our discussion by riding away to fetch old Dr. de Benneville.

Miss Darthea laughed, said it was a sad thing a woman should have no
choice, and pretended to be in misery as to my unfortunate lot. I said
nothing, but, after looking Caesar's horse over, I gave my saddle to be
kept at the farmer's, and put the coachman's saddle on my mare Lucy, with
the pillion behind made fast to the saddle-straps arranged for this use.
Then I looked well to the girths, and mounted to see how Lucy would like
it. She liked it not at all, and was presently all over the road and up
against the fence of the old graveyard I was to see again in other and
wilder days.

I saw the little lady in the road watching me with a smiling face, by no
means ill pleased with the spectacle. At last I cried, "Wait!" and putting
Miss Lucy down the road for a mile at a run, soon brought her back quite
submissive.

"Art thou afraid?" I said.

"I do not like to be asked if I am afraid. I am very much afraid, but I
would die rather than not get on your mare." So a chair was fetched, Miss
Peniston put on her linen riding-mask, and in a moment was seated behind
me. For ten minutes I was fully taken up with the feminine creature under
me. At last I said:

"Put an arm around my waist. I must let her go. At once!" I added; for the
mare was getting to rear a little, and the young woman hesitated. "Do as I
tell thee!" I cried sharply, and when I felt her right arm about me, I
said, "Hold fast!" and gave the mare her head. A mile sufficed, with the
double burden, so to quiet her that she came down to her usual swift and
steady walk.

When there was this chance to talk without having every word jolted out in
fragments, the young person was silent; and when I remarked, "There is now
an opportunity to chat with comfort," said:

"I was waiting, sir, to hear your excuses; but perhaps Friends do not
apologise."

I thought her saucy, for I had done my best; and for her to think me
unmannerly was neither just nor kind.

"If I am of thy friends--"

"Oh, Quakers, I meant. Friends with a large F, Mr. Wynne."

"It had been no jesting matter if the mare had given thee a hard fall."

"I should have liked that better than to be ordered to do as your worship
thought fit."

"Then thou shouldst not have obeyed me."

"But I had to."

"Yes," I said. And the talk having fallen into these brevities. Miss
Peniston was quiet awhile, no doubt pouting prettily; her face was, of
course, hid from me.

After a while she said something about the milestones being near together,
and then took to praising Lucy, who, I must say, had behaved as ill as a
horse could. I said as much, whereon I was told that mares were jealous
animals; which I thought a queer speech, and replied, not knowing well how
to reply, that the mare was a good beast, and that it was fair flattery to
praise a man's horse, for what was best in the horse came of the man's
handling.

"But even praise of his watch a man likes," said she. "He has a fine
appetite, and likes to fatten his vanity."

She was too quick for me in those days, and I never was at any time very
smart at this game, having to reflect too long before seeing my way. I said
that she was no doubt right, but thus far that I had had thin diet.

Perhaps saying that Lucy was gay and well bred and had good paces was meant
to please the rider. This woman, as I found later, was capable of many
varieties of social conduct, and was not above flattering for the mere
pleasure it gave her to indulge her generosity, and for the joy she had in
seeing others happy.

Wondering if what she had said might be true, held me quiet for a while,
and busied with her words, I quite forgot the young woman whose breath I
felt now and then on my hair, as she sat behind me.

Silence never suited Miss Peniston long in those days, and especially not
at this time, she being in a merry mood, such as a little adventure causes.
Her moods were, in fact, many and changeful, and, as I was to learn, were
too apt to rule even her serious actions for the time; but under it all was
the true law of her life, strongly charactered, and abiding like the
constitution of a land. It was long before I knew the real woman, since for
her, as for the most of us, all early acquaintance was a masquerade, and
some have, like this lady, as many vizards as my Aunt Gainor had in her
sandalwood box, with her long gloves and her mitts.

The mare being now satisfied to walk comfortably, we were going by the
Wister house, when I saw saucy young Sally Wister in the balcony over the
stoop, midway of the penthouse. She knew us both, and pretended shame for
us, with her hands over her face, laughing merrily. We were friends in
afterlife, and if you would know how gay a creature a young Quakeress could
be, and how full of mischief, you should see her journal, kept for Deborah
Logan, then Miss Norris. It has wonderful gaiety, and, as I read it,
fetches back to mind the officers she prettily sketches, and is so
sprightly and so full of a life that must have been a joy to itself and to
others, that to think of it as gone and over, and of her as dead, seems to
me a thing impossible.

It was not thought proper then for a young woman to go on pillion behind a
young man, and this Miss Sally well knew. I dare say she set it down for
the edification of her young friend.

"The child" (she was rather more than that) "is saucy," said my lady, who
understood well enough what her gestures meant. "I should like to box her
ears. You were very silent just now, Mr. Wynne. A penny is what most folks'
thoughts are bid for, but yours may be worth more. I would not stand at a
shilling."

"Then give it to me," said I. "I assure thee a guinea were too little."

"What are they?"

"Oh, but the shilling."

"I promise."

"I seem to see a little, dark-faced child crying because of a boy in
disgrace--"

"Pretty?" she asked demurely.

"No, rather plain."

"You seem to have too good a memory, sir. Who was she?"

"She is not here to-day."

"Yes, yes!" she cried. "I have her--oh, somewhere! She comes out on
occasions. You may never see her; you may see her to-morrow."

I was to see her often. "My shilling," I said.

"That was only a jest, Mr. Wynne. My other girl has stolen it, for
remembrance of a lad that was brave and--"

"He was a young fool! My shilling, please."

"No, no!"

At this I touched the mare with my spur. She, not seeing the joke, pranced
about, and Miss Darthea was forced to hold to my waist for a minute.

"The mare is ill broke," she cried. "Why does she not go along quietly?"

"She hates dishonesty," said.

"But I have not a penny."

"Thou shouldst never run in debt if thon art without means. It is worse
than gambling, since here thou hast had a consideration for thy money, and
I am out of pocket by a valuable thought."

"I am very bad. I may get prayed over in Meeting, only we do not have the
custom at Christ Church."

I was struck dumb. Of course every one knew of my disaster and what came of
it; but that a young girl should taunt me with it, and for no reason,
seemed incredible. No one ever spoke of it to me, not even Mistress
Ferguson, whose daily food was. the saying of things no one else dared to
say. I rode on without a word.

At last I heard a voice back of me quite changed--tender, almost tearful.
"Will you pardon me, Mr. Wynne? I was wicked, and now I have hurt you who
was once so good to me. Your aunt says that I am six girls, not one, and
that--Will you please to forgive me?"

"Pray don't; there is nothing to forgive. I am over-sensitive, I suppose.
My friend Mr. Wilson says it is a great thing in life to learn how to
forget wisely. I am learning the lesson; but some wounds take long to heal,
and this is true of a boy's folly. Pray say no more." I put the mare to
trotting, and we rode on past Cliveden and Mount Airy, neither speaking for
a while.

I wondered, as we rode, at her rashness of talk and her want of
consideration; and I reflected, with a certain surprise, at the frequent
discovery, of late, on how much older I seemed to be. It was a time which
quickly matured the thoughtful, and I was beginning to shake off, in some
degree, the life-long shackles of limitation as to conduct, dress, and
minor morals, imposed upon me by my home surroundings. In a word, being
older than my years, I began to think for myself. Under the influence of
Mr. Wetherill I had come, as without him I could not have done, to see how
much there was of the beautiful and noble in the creed of Fox and Penn, how
much, too, there was in it to cramp enterprise, to limit the innocent joys
of life, to render progress impossible, and submission to every base man or
government a duty.

I had learned, too, in my aunt's house, the ways and manners of a larger
world, and, if I had yielded to its temptations, I had at least profited by
the bitter lesson. I was on the verge of manhood, and had begun to feel as
I had never done before the charm of woman; this as yet I hardly knew.

As we breasted the hill, and saw beneath us the great forest-land spread
out, with its scattered farms, an exclamation of delight broke from my
companion's lips. It was beautiful then, as it is today, with the far-seen
range of hills beyond the river, where lay the Valley Forge I was to know
so well, and Whitemarsh, all under the hazy blue of a cool August day, with
the northwest wind blowing in my face.

Within there were my aunt and some young women, and my Cousin Arthur, with
explanations to be made, after which my young woman hurried off to make her
toilet, and I to rid me of my riding-dress.

It was about seven when we assembled out of doors under the trees, where on
summer days my Aunt Gainor liked to have supper served. My Cousin Wynne
left Mrs. Ferguson and came to meet me. We strolled apart, and he began to
ask me questions about the tea cargoes expected soon, but which came not
until December. I said my father's voyage would prevent his acting as
consignee, and this seemed to surprise him and make him thoughtful, perhaps
because he was aware of my father's unflinching loyalty. He spoke, too, of
Mr. Wilson, appearing--and this was natural enough--to know of my intimacy
with the Whig gentleman. I was cautious in my replies, and he learned, I
think, but little. It was a pity, he said, that my father would not visit
Wyncote. It seemed to me that he dwelt overmuch on this matter, and my
aunt, who greatly fancied him, was also of this opinion. I learned long
after that he desired to feel entirely assured as to the certainty of this
visit not being made. I said now that I wished I had my father's chance to
see our Welsh home, and that I often felt sorry my grandfather had given it
up.

"But he did," said my cousin, "and no great thing, either. Here you are
important people. We are petty Welsh squires, in a decaying old house, with
no money, and altogether small folk. I should like to change places with
you."

"And yet I regret it," said I. My Aunt Gainor had filled me full of the
pride of race.

I spoke as we approached the group about my aunt, and I saw his face take
an expression which struck me. He had a way of half closing his eyes, and
letting his jaw drop a little. I saw it often afterward. I suspect now that
he was dealing intensely with some problem which puzzled him.

He seemed to me to be entirely unconscious of this singular expression of
face, or, as at this time, to be off his guard; for the look did not
change, although I was gazing at him with attention. Suddenly I saw come
down the green alley, walled with well-trimmed box, a fresh vision of her
who had been riding with me so lately. My cousin also became aware of the
figure which passed gaily under the trees and smiled at us from afar.

"By George! Hugh," said Arthur, "who is the sylph? what grace! what grace!"

For a moment I did not reply. She wore a silken brocade with little
broidered roses here and there, a bodice of the same, cut square over a
girl-like neck, white, and not yet filled up. Her long gloves were held up
to the sleeve by tightens of plaited white horsehair, which held a red
rosebud in each tie; and her hair was braided with a ribbon, and set high
in coils on her head, with but little powder. As she came to meet us she
dropped a curtsey, and kissed my aunt's hand, as was expected of young
people.

I have tried since to think what made her so unlike other women. It was not
the singular grace which had at once struck my cousin; neither was she
beautiful. I long after hated Miss Chew for an hour because she said
Darthea Peniston had not one perfect feature. She had, notwithstanding,
clear, large brown eyes, and a smile which was so variously eloquent that
no man saw it unmoved. This was not all. Her face had some of that charm of
mystery which a few women possess--a questioning look; but, above all,
there was a strange flavour of feminine attractiveness, more common in
those who are older than she, and fuller in bud; rare, I think, in one
whose virgin curves have not yet come to maturity. What she was to me that
summer evening she was to all men--a creature of many moods, and of great
power to express them in face and voice. She was young, she loved
admiration, and could be carried off her feet at times by the follies of
the gay world.

If you should wonder how, at this distant day, I can recall her dress, I
may say that one of my aunt's lessons was that a man should notice how a
woman dressed, and not fail at times to compliment a gown, or a pretty
fashion of hair. You may see that I had some queer schoolmasters.

I said to my cousin, "That is Miss Darthea Peniston."

"Darthea," he repeated. "She looks the name. Sad if she had been called
Deborah, or some of your infernally idiotic Scripture names."

He was duly presented, and, I must say, made the most of his chances for
two days, so that the elder dames were amused at Darthea's conquest, my
cousin having so far shown no marked preference for any one except the
elder Miss Franks, who was rich and charming enough to have many men at her
feet, despite her Hebrew blood.

In truth he had been hit hard that fatal August afternoon, and he proved a
bold and constant wooer. With me it was a more tardy influence which the
fair Darthea as surely exerted. I was troubled and disturbed at the
constancy of my growing and ardent affection. At first I scarce knew why,
but by and by I knew too well; and the more hopeless became the business,
the more resolute did I grow; this is my way and nature.

During the remaining weeks of summer I saw much of Miss Peniston, and
almost imperceptibly was made at last to feel, for the first time in my
life, the mysterious influence of woman. Now and then we rode with my aunt,
or went to see the troops reviewed. I thought she liked me, but it soon
became only too clear that at this game, where hearts were trumps, I was no
match for my dark, handsome cousin, in his brilliant uniform.




XII


On September 1, 1773, and earlier than had been meant, my father set sail
for London with my ever dear mother. Many assembled to see the "Fair
Trader" leave her moorings. I went with my people as far as Lewes, and on
account of weather had much ado to get ashore. The voyage down the Delaware
was slow, for from want of proper lights we must needs lay by at night, and
if winds were contrary were forced to wait for the ebb.

While I was with them my father spoke much to me of business, but neither
blamed my past, nor praised my later care and assiduity in affairs. He was
sure the king would have his way, and, I thought, felt sorry to have so
readily given up the consigneeship of the teas. I was otherwise minded, and
I asked what was to be done in the event of certain troubles such as many
feared. He said that Thomas, his old clerk, would decide, and my Aunt
Gainor had a power of attorney; as to the troubles I spoke of, he well knew
that I meant such idle disturbances of peace as James Wilson and Wetherill
were doing their best to bring about.

"Thy Cousin Arthur is better advised," he said, "and a man of sound
judgment. Thou mightst seek worse counsel on occasion of need."

I was surprised at this, for I should have believed, save as to the king,
they could not have had one opinion in common.

Far other were those sweeter talks I had with my mother, as we sat on the
deck in a blaze of sunlight. She burned ever a handsome brown, without
freckles, and loved to sit out, even in our great heats. She would have me
be careful at my aunt's not to be led into idleness; for the rest I had her
honest trust; and her blue eyes, bright with precious tears, declared her
love, and hopeful belief. I must not neglect my French--it would keep her
in mind; and she went on in that tongue to say what a joy I had been in her
life, and how even my follies had let her see how true a gentleman I was.
Then, and never before, did she say a thing which left on my mind a fear
that life had not brought and kept for her throughout all the happiness
which so good and noble a creature deserved.

"There is much of thy father in thee, Hugh. Thou art firm as he is, and
fond of thine own way. This is not bad, if thou art thoughtful to see that
thy way is a good way. But do not grow hard. And when thou art come to love
some good woman, do not make her life difficult."

"But I love no woman, _ma mere_," I cried, "and never shall, as I love
thee. It is the whole of my love thou hast, _chere, chere maman_; thou
hast it all."

"Ah, then I shall know to divide with her, Hugh; and I shall be generous
too. If thou hast any little fancies that way, thou must write and tell me.
Oh, _mon fils_, thou wilt write often, and I must know all the news. I do
hear that Darthea Peniston is in thy aunt's house a good deal, and Madam
Ferguson, the gossip, would have me believe thou carest for her, and that
Arthur Wynne is taken in the same net. I liked her. I did not tell thee
that thy Aunt Gainor left her with me for an hour while she went into King
street to bargain for a great china god. What a gay, winning creature it
is! She must needs tell me all about herself. Why do people so unlock their
hearts for me?"

I laughed, and said she had a key called love; and on this she kissed me,
and asked did I say such pretty things to other women? Darthea was now to
live with her aunt, that stiff Mistress Peniston, who was a fierce Tory.
"She will have a fine bargain of the girl. She has twenty ways with her,
real or false, and can make music of them all like a mocking-bird. Dost
thou like her, Hugh?--I mean Darthea."

I said, "Yes."

"And so do I," she ran on. "I loved her at sight. But if ever thou dost
come to love her--and I see signs, oh, I see signs--if ever,--then beware
of thy Cousin Wynne. I heard him once say to thy father, 'If there is only
one glass of the Madeira left, I want it, because there is only one.' And
there is only one of a good woman. What another wants that man is sure to
want, and I do not like him, Hugh. Thou dost, I think. He has some reason
to linger here. Is it this woman? Or would lie spy out the land to know
what we mean to do? I am sure he has orders to watch the way things are
going, or why should not he have gone with Sir Guy Carleton to Quebec? It
is a roundabout way to go through Philadelphia."

I said I did not know; but her words set me to thinking, and to wondering,
too, as I had not done before. Another time she asked me why Arthur talked
so as to disgust my father out of all idea of going to see the home of his
ancestors. I promised to be careful of my relations with my cousin, whom I
liked less and less as time ran on.

At Lewes we parted. Shall I ever forget it? Those great blue eyes above the
gunwale, and then a white handkerchief, and then no more. When I could no
longer see the ship's hull I climbed a great sand-dune, and watched even
the masts vanish on the far horizon. It was to me a solemn parting. The
seas were wide and perilous in those days, the buccaneers not all gone, and
the trading ship was small, I thought, to carry a load so precious.

As the sun went down I walked over the dunes, which are of white sand, and
forever shifting, so as at one time to threaten with slow burial the little
town, and at another to be moving on to the forest. As they changed, old
wrecks came into view, and I myself saw sticking out the bones of sailors
buried here long ago, or haply cast ashore. A yet stranger thing I beheld,
for the strong northwest wind, which blew hard all day and favoured the
"Fair Trader," had so cast about the fine sand that the buried snow of last
winter was to be seen, which seemed to me a thing most singular. When I
told Jack, he made verses about it, as he did sometimes, but would show
them only to me. I forget entirely what he wrote; how a man can make verses
and dig rhymes out of his head has always been to me a puzzle.

At the town inn, "The Lucky Fisherman," I saw, to my surprise, Jack on
horseback, just arrived. He said he had a debt to collect for his father.
It was no doubt true, for Jack could not tell even the mildest fib and not
get rose-red. But he knew how I grieved at this separation from my mother,
and, I think, made an occasion to come down and bear me company on my long
ride home. I was truly glad to have him. Together we wandered through the
great woodlands Mr. Penn had set aside to provide firewood forever for the
poor of Lewes.

The next day we sent Tom on ahead with our sacks to Newcastle, where we
meant to bait ourselves and our horses. But first we rode down the coast to
Rehoboth, and had a noble sea-bath; also above the beach was a bit of a
fresh-water lake, most delicious to take the salt off the skin. After this
diversion, which as usual dismissed my blue devils, we set out up the coast
of the Bay of Delaware, and were able to reach Newcastle that evening, and
the day after our own homes.

This ride gave us a fine chance for talk, and we made good use of it.

As we passed between the hedges and below the old Swede church nigh, to
Wilmington, Jack fell into talk of Darthea Peniston. Why we had not done so
before I knew not then; we were both shy of the subject. I amused myself by
insisting that she was but a light-minded young woman with no strong basis
of character, and too fond of a red coat. It did amuse me to see how this
vexed Jack, who would by no means accept my verdict. We conversed far
longer on the stormy quarrels of the colonies and their stepmother England,
who seemed to have quite forgot of what blood and breed they were.

Concerning my Cousin Wynne, with whom at first I had been much taken, Jack
was not inclined to speak freely. This I foolishly thought was because
Arthur laughed at him, and was, as he knew, of some folks' notion that Jack
was a feminine kind of a fellow. That he had the quick insight and the
heart of a woman was true, but that was not all of my dear Jack.

My aunt came back to town early in September, and I took up my abode in her
town house, where a new life began for me. Letters went and came at long
intervals. Our first reached me far on in October.

My mother wrote: "There is great anger here in London because of this
matter of the tea. Lord Germaine says we are a tumultuous rabble; thy
father has been sent for by Lord North, and I fear has spoken unadvisedly
as to things at home. It is not well for a wife to differ with her husband,
and this I will not; nevertheless I am not fully of his way of thinking as
to these sad troubles; this, however, is not for any eye or ear but thine.
Benjamin, Franklin was here to see us last week. He seems to think we might
as well, or better, pay for the tea, and this suited thy father; but after
thus agreeing they went wide apart, Franklin having somewhat shed his
Quaker views. I did fear at times that the talk would be strong.

"When he had gone away, thy father said he never had the Spirit with him,
and was ever of what creed did most advantage him, and perhaps underneath
of none at all. But this I think not. He hath much of the shrewd wisdom of
New England, which I like not greatly; but as to this, I know some who have
less of any wisdom, and, after all, I judge not a man so wise, and so much
my elder.

"General Gage, lately come hither on a visit, we are told assured the king
that no other colony would stand by Massachusetts, and that four regiments
could put an end to the matter. I am no politician, but it makes me angry
to hear them talk of us as if we were but a nursery of naughty children. It
seems we are to pay for the tea, and until we do no ships may enter Boston
harbour. Also all crown officers who may commit murder are to be tried in
England; and there is more, but I forget."

This was most of it fresh news to us. Meanwhile Hutchinson, the governor of
the rebel State, was assuring Lord North that to resist was against our
interest, and we, being "a trading set," would never go to extremes. "As
if," said Wilson, "nations, like men, had not passions and emotions, as
well as day-books and ledgers."

Meanwhile at home our private affairs were rapidly wound up and put in good
condition. My father found it difficult to collect his English debts, and
so had to limit his purchases, which we stowed as they came over, declining
to sell. As business failed, I was more and more at leisure, and much in
the company of my cousin, whom to-day I disliked, and tomorrow thought the
most amusing and agreeable of companions. He taught me to shoot ducks at
League Island, and chose a good fowling-piece for me.

On Sundays I went to hear my aunt's friend, the Rev. Mr. White, preach at
Christ Church, and would not go to Meeting, despite Samuel Wetherill, whose
Society of Free Quakers did not come to life until 1780. Meanwhile by
degrees I took to wearing finer garments. Cards I would never touch, nor
have I often, to this day.

One morning, long after my parents left, my Aunt Gainor looked me over
with care, pleased at the changes in my dress, and that evening she
presented me with two fine sets of neck and wrist ruffles, and with paste
buckles for knees and shoes. Then she told me that my cousin, the captain,
had recommended Pike as a fencing-master, and she wished me to take
lessons; "for," said she, "who knows but you may some day have another
quarrel on your hands, and then where will you be?"

I declared that my father would be properly furious; but she laughed, and
opened and shut her fan, and said he was three thousand miles away, and
that she was my guardian, and responsible for my education. I was by no
means loath, and a day later went to see the man with my Cousin Arthur, who
asked, as we went, many questions about my mother, and then if my father
had left England, or had been to Wyncote.

I had, as he spoke, a letter in my pocket writ in the neat characters I
knew so well; our clerk coming from New York had just given it to me, and
as I had not as yet read it, liking for this rare pleasure to taste it when
alone, I did not mention it to my cousin. I told him I was sure my father
would not go to Wales, both because of business, and for other reasons; but
I hoped when he came back to get leave to be a year away, and then I should
be sure to visit our old nest.

My cousin said, "A year--a year," musingly, and asked when my parents would
return.

I said, "About next October, and by the islands," meaning the Madeiras.

To this Arthur Wynne returned, in an absent fashion, "Many things may
happen in a year."

I laughed, and said his observation could not be contradicted.

"What observation?" he replied, and then seemed so self-absorbed that I
cried out:

"What possesses thee, Cousin Wynne? Thou art sad of late. I can tell thee
the women say thou art in love."

"And if I were, what then?"

This frankness in a man so mature seemed to me odd, when I thought how shy
was the growing tenderness my own heart began to hide. His words troubled
me. It could only be Darthea Peniston. After a silence, such as was
frequent in my cousin, he added, "I fear that blushing friend of yours is
fluttering about a certain bright candle. A pity the lad were not warned.
You are my cousin, and of course my friend. I may have to go away soon, and
I may ask you to do a certain thing for me when I am gone. No man nor lad
shall stand in my way, and you must hold your tongue too."

I was puzzled and embarrassed. I said cautiously, "We shall see." But as to
Jack Warder, I liked not what he said, and for two reasons. I knew that,
living next door to Darthea, he was with her almost daily; and here was a
new and terrible fear, for who could help but love her? Nor could I hear
with patience Jack so contemptuously put aside as a child.

"Cousin Arthur," I said, "thou art mistaken in Warder. There is no more
resolute or courageous man. Jack's shy ways and soft fashions make him seem
like a timid girl, but I would advise no one to count on this." I went on,
hesitating, "He is an older friend than thou, and--holloa, Jack!" for here
was the dear fellow himself, smiling and blushing; and where had the
captain been of late? and that awkward left hand was taken, and Jack would
come with us and see us play with the small sword, and would like to go
after the ducks to-morrow. He seemed happy and pleased to meet us.

Pike was a little man who had a room among the shops on Second street. He
wore, as I had often seen, a laced cocked hat, and was clad in a red coat,
such as none wore except Creoles from the French settlements, or gentlemen
from the Carolinas. He had the straight figure and aggressive look all men
carry who teach the sword, and a set belief that no man could teach him
anything--a small game-cock of a fellow, who had lost one eye by an unlucky
thrust of a foil.

I will let Jack's journal, not writ till long after, tell the story for a
while. He saw more than I at the time, even if he understood it all as
little.

"I saw Hugh strip," he writes, "and was amused to see Pike feel his muscles
and exclaim at his depth of chest. Then he showed him how to wear the wire
mask, while the captain and I sat by and looked on.

"Hugh was awkward, but he had a wrist of steel, and when once he had caught
the ideas of Pike, who talked all the time in a squeaky voice, his guard
was firm. Pike praised him, and said he would learn soon. The thing so
attracted me that I was fain to know how it felt to hold a foil; and saying
as much, the captain, who fenced here daily, said: 'It is my breathing-time
of day, as Prince Hamlet says. By George! you should see Mr. Garrick in
that fencing scene! I will give Mr. Warder a lesson. I have rather a fancy
for giving young men lessons.'

"In a minute I saw my foil fly six feet away with such, a wrench of the
wrist as made my arm tingle.

"'Hold the foil lightly. Not so stiff.' said Pike, and we began again. Of
course I was as a child before this man, and again and again he planted a
button where he pleased, and seemed, I thought, to lunge more fiercely than
is decent, for I was dotted with blue bruises that evening.

"At last I gave up, and the captain and Pike took the foils, while we sat
and watched them. He was more than a match for Pike, and at last crying,
'Take care! here is a _botte_ you do not know,' caught him fair in the left
chest.

"'By George! Mr. Wynne, that is a pretty piece of play! I remember now
Major Montresor tried to show it to me. He said it was that way you killed
Lord Charles Trevor.'

"I was shocked to know he had killed a man, and Hugh looked up with his big
mother-eyes, while the captain said coolly:

"'Yes; a sad business, and about a woman, of course. It is dreadful to have
that kind of a disposition, boys, that makes you dangerous to some one who
wants what you want. He was very young too. A pity! a pity!'

"Hugh and I said nothing; but I had the odd notion that he was threatening
us. One gets these ideas vaguely in youth, and sometimes after-events
justify them. However, the fancy soon took me to fence with Hugh in his
room, for I dared not risk asking my father's leave. As Hugh got his
lessons both from Pike and the captain, and became very expert, I got on
pretty nearly as fast as he.

"At times we practised in our shirt-sleeves in the garden at Miss Wynne's,
or fenced with Graydon, who was later the most expert small sword we had in
the army. Hugh soon became nearly as skilful, but I was never as clever at
it."

One day we were busy, as Jack has described, when who should come out into
the garden but Mistress Wynne and Darthea, and behind them the captain. We
dropped our points, but Miss Peniston cried out, "Go on! go on!" and,
laughing, we fell to again.

Presently I, a bit distracted, for I was facing Darthea's eyes, felt Jack's
foil full on my chest. Darthea clapped her hands, and, running forward,
would pin a bunch of red ribbons she took from her shoulder on Jack's
sleeve. Jack fell back, as red as the ribbons, and my aunt cried out,
"Darthea, you are too forward!"

The young woman flushed, and cast down the bow, and as Arthur Wynne bent to
pick it up set her foot on it. I saw the captain rise, and stand with the
half-shut eyes and the little drop of the jaw I have already mentioned. My
aunt, who liked the girl well, went after her at once as she left us in a
pet to return to the house. I saw my aunt put a hand on her shoulder, and
then the captain, looking vexed, followed after. An hour later I went to
look for the ribbon. It was gone, and for years I knew not where, till, in
a little box in Jack's desk, I came upon it neatly tied up.

Young as I was, I began to see that here were Captain Wynne, and possibly
my friend, in the toils of a girl,--she was but seventeen,--and I, alas! no
better off; but of this I breathed not a word to any. Jack hung about her
and fell back when any less shy man wanted his place. I felt that he was
little likely to have his way, and that neither he nor I had much chance in
such a game against a man like my cousin. He had played with hearts before,
and the maid listened like Desdemona to this dark-browed soldier when he
talked of courts and kings, and faraway Eastern battles, and the splendour
of the Orient. My aunt, whom nothing escaped, looked on much amused.
Perhaps she did not take as serious the love-affairs of lads like Jack and
me. We were like enough to have a dozen before we were really captured.
That I was becoming at twenty-one more thoughtful and resolute than far
older people, she did not see, and she was sometimes vexed at my sober
ways. I was at times gay enough, but at others she would reproach me with
not taking more pains to please her guests. Society, she said, had duties
as well as pleasures. My friend Jack no one fully understood in those days,
nor knew the sweet manhood and the unselfishness that lay beneath his
girl-like exterior.

One day, late in November, my aunt and I were, for a wonder, alone, when
she dropped the cards with which she was playing, and said to me: "Hugh,
there is something serious between that mischievous kitten and your cousin.
They are much talked of. If you have a boy-fancy that way, get rid of it. I
don't see through the man. He has been telling her about the fine house at
Wyncote, and the great estate, and how some day he will have it, his elder
brother being far gone in a phthisis."

"There must be some mistake," I said. "Thou knowest what he told my
father."

"Yes; I don't like it," she went on; "but the girl is caught. He talks of
soon having to join Sir Guy Carleton in Canada. And there is my dear
girl-boy trapped too, I fear. But, really, he is such a child of a fellow
it hardly matters. How many does she want in her net? The fish may
squabble, I fear. A sweet thing she is; cruel only by instinct; and so gay,
so tender, so truthful and right-minded with all her nonsense. No one can
help loving her; but to-day she has one mood, and to-morrow another. There
will be a mad massacre before she is done with you all. Run away, Hugh!
run! Make love to Kitty Shippen if you want to get Miss Darthea."

I laughed, but I had little mirth in my heart.

"Aunt Gainor," I said, "I love that woman, and no other man shall have her
if I can help it."

"If? if? Stuff! you can't help it. Don't be a fool! The sea is full of
fish. This is news indeed."

"The land has but one Darthea," said I. "I am a boy no longer, Aunt Gainor.
Thou hast made me tell thee, and, now it is out, I may as well say I know
all about my cousin. He as good as told me, and in a way I did not like.
The man thinks I am a boy to be scared out of going my own way. I have told
no one else; but if I can get her I will, and it is no laughing matter."

"I am sorry, Hugh," she said. "I knew not it was so serious. It is hard to
realise that you are no more a boy, and must have the sorrows my sex
provides for you. I like her, and I would help you if I could, but you are
late." And she went on shuffling the cards, while I took up a book, being
inclined to say no more.

That evening two letters came by the New York packet. One from my father I
put aside. It was dated outside, and was written two weeks later than my
mother's, which I read first. I opened it with care.

  "MY OWN DEAR SON: Thy last sweet letter was a great refreshment to me,
  and the more so because I have not been well, having again my old ache in
  the side, but not such as need trouble thee. I blush to hear the pretty
  things thy letters say; but it is love that holds thy pen, and I must not
  be too much set up in my own esteem. How much love I give thee in return
  thou knowest, but to pay in this coin will never beggar us. I love thee
  because thou art all I can desire, and again because thou lovest me, and
  again for this same dear reason which is all I can say to excuse my
  mother-folly. Thy father is well, but weary of this great town; and we
  both long to be at home."

Then there was more about my Aunt Wynne, and some woman-talk for her
friends about the new fashions, which do not concern her, she being not of
this world. "Am I not?" she says. "I love it all--the sea, even the sea,
and flowers, and our woods, and, dear me! also gay gowns. I hope the last I
got here will not disturb the Meeting, and my new muff,--very big it
is,--and a green joseph to ride in. I mean to ride with thee next spring
often--often." And so on, half mother, half child, with bits of her dear
French, and all about a new saddle for me, and silver spurs. The postscript
was long.

"I saw last week a fair Quaker dame come out of Wales. I asked her about
the Wynnes. She knew them not, but told me of their great house, and how it
was a show-place people went to see, having been done over at great cost;
and how a year or two since coal was found on the estate, and much iron, so
that these last two years they were rich, and there was some talk of making
the present man a baronet. Also that the elder brother is ill, nigh to
death. It seems strange after what thy cousin said so often. Thy father is
away in Holland. I will tell him when he is come back. Be cautious not to
talk of this. I never liked the man."

I sat back in my chair to read it all over again, first giving my aunt my
father's letter. In a few minutes I heard a cry, and saw my aunt, pale and
shaken, standing up, the letter in her hand.

"My God!" I cried, "what is it? Is it my mother?"

"Yes, yes!" she said. "Be strong, my boy! She is--dead!"

For a moment I saw the room whirl, and then, as my Aunt Gainor sat down, I
fell on my knees and buried my face in her lap. I felt her dear old hands
on my head, and at last would have the letter. It was brief.

"MY SON: The hand of God has fallen heavily upon me. Thy mother died to-day
of a pleurisy which none could help. I had not even the consolation to hear
her speak, since, when I came from Holland, she was wandering in talk of
thee, and mostly in French, which I know not. I seek to find God's meaning
in this chastisement. As yet I find it not. It is well that we should not
let bereavements so overcome us as to make us neglect to be fervent in the
business of life, or to cease to praise Him who has seen fit to take away
from us that which it may be we worshipped as an idol. What more is to say
I leave until I see thee. My affairs are now so ordered that I may leave
them. I shall sail in a week for home in the ship in which I came out, and
shall not go, as I did mean, to the islands."

It seemed to me, as I read and re-read it, a cold, hard letter. I said as
much to my aunt some days after this; but she wisely urged that my father
was ever a reticent man, who found it difficult to let even his dearest see
the better part of him.

I have no mind to dwell on this sad calamity. I went to and fro, finding
neither possibility of repose nor any consolation. I saw as I rode, or lay
in my boat, that one dear face, its blue-eyed tenderness, its smile of
love. I could never thus recall to sight any other of those who, in
after-years, have left me; but this one face is here to-day as I write,
forever smiling and forever young.

And so time ran on, and nigh to Christmas day my father came home. The
weather was more mild than common, and his ship met no delay from ice. I
joined him off Chester Creek. He was grayer, older, I thought, but not
otherwise altered, having still his erect stature, and the trick I have
myself of throwing his head up and his shoulders back when about to meet
some emergent occasion. I saw no sign of emotion when we met, except that
he opened and shut his hands as usual when disturbed. He asked if I were
well, and of my Aunt Gainor, and then, amid the tears which were choking
me, if I were satisfied as to the business, and if the tea had arrived. I
said yes, and that the ship had been sent away without violence. He said it
was a silly business, and the king would soon end it; he himself had been
too hasty--with more to like effect.

It seemed to me while we talked as though he had just come from my mother's
death-bed, whereas a long time had elapsed, and he had been able to get
over the first cruel shock. My own grief was still upon me, and I wondered
at his tranquillity. A little later he said:

"I see thou hast taken to the foolishness of black garments. This is thy
aunt's doings." In fact, it was her positive wish. I made no reply, but
only looked him in the face, ready to cry like a child.

"Why hast thou no answers, Hugh? Thy tongue used to be ready enough. Thou
hast thy mother's eyes. I would thou hadst them not."

This was as near as he ever came to speech of her, whom, to my amazement,
he never again mentioned. Was it a deeper feeling than I knew, that so
silenced him, or did he wish to forget her! I know not. Some deal thus with
their dead. He bade my aunt take away my mother's clothes, and asked no
questions as to how she disposed of them; nor for a month did he desire my
return home.

What then passed between him and my Aunt Gainor I do not know; but he said
nothing more of my dress, although I wore mourning for six months. Nor did
he say a word as to my exactness and industry, which was honestly all they
should have been. At meals he spoke rarely, and then of affairs, or to
blame me for faults not mine, or to speak with cold sarcasm of my friends.

Except for Jack, and my Aunt Gainor, and Wilson and Wetherill, of whom I
saw much, I should have been miserable indeed. Captain Wynne still came and
went, and his strange intimacy with my father continued. I thought little
of it then, and for my own part I liked to hear of his adventurous life,
but the man less and less; and so the winter of '73 and '74 went by with
fencing and skating and books, which now I myself ordered to suit me, or
found in Mr. Logan's great library, of which I was made free.

In March my cousin left us for Canada and the army. Once I spoke before him
of the news in my mother's postscript; but he laughed, saying he had heard
some such rumours, but that they were not true. They did not much trouble a
hungry beggar of a younger son with letters; still if there had been such
good news he should have heard it. He wished it might be so and as to his
brother, poor devil! he would last long enough to marry and have children.
Were the ducks still in the river! He said no more to me of Darthea, or of
what I was to do for him, but he found a way at need, I am sure, to get
letters to her, and that without difficulty. At last, as I have said, he
was gone to join Sir Guy. I was not sorry.

Mrs. Peniston, Darthea's aunt, usually talked little, and then of serious
matters as if they were trivial, and of these latter as if they were of the
utmost importance. With regard to this matter of Darthea and my cousin, she
was free of speech and incessant, so that all the town was soon assured of
the great match Darthea would make. The fine house at Wyncote grew, and the
estate also. Neither Jack nor I liked all this, and my friend took it sadly
to heart, to my Aunt Gainor's amusement and Mrs. Ferguson's, who would
have Dr. Rush set up a ward in the new hospital for the broken-hearted
lovers of Darthea. When first Jack Warder was thus badgered, he fell into
such a state of terror as to what the madcap woman would say next that he
declined all society for a week, and ever after detested the Tory lady.

I became, under the influence of this much-talked-of news, as mute as Jack;
but, while he had only a deep desire toward sadness, and to stay away from
her who had thus defeated his love, I, neither given over to despair nor
hope, had only a fierce will to have my way; nor, for some reason or for
none, did I consider Jack's case as very serious,--my aunt it much
amused,--so little do we know those who are most near to us.

No sooner was the redcoat lover gone awhile than, as Miss Chew declared,
Darthea put off mourning for the absent. Indeed, the pretty kitten began
once more to tangle the threads of Jack's life and mine. For a month Jack
was in favour, and then a certain captain, but never I, until one day late
in April. She was waiting among my aunt's china for her return, and had set
the goggle-eyed mandarin to nodding, while, with eyes as wide as his, she
nodded in reply, and laughed like a merry child.

I stood in the doorway, and watched this delicious creature for a minute
while she amused herself--and me also, although she knew it not. "Say No!"
she cried out to the great china nobleman; quite a foot high he was. But,
despite her pretence at altering his unvaried affirmative, it still went
on. My lady walked all around him, and presently said aloud: "No! no! It
must be No! Say No!" stamping a foot, as if angry, and then of a sudden
running up to the mandarin and laughing. "He has a crack in his head. That
is why he says Yes! Yes! I must be a female mandarin, and that is why I say
No! No! I wonder does he talk broken China?"

At this moment she saw my tall black figure in a corner mirror, and made
some exclamation, as if startled; an instant later she knew it was I, but
as if by magic the laughing woman was no longer there. What I saw as she
came toward me was a slight, quiet nun with eyes full of tears.

I was used to her swift changes of mood, but what her words, or some of
them, meant I knew not; and as for this pitying face, with its sudden
sadness, what more did it mean? Major Andre said of her later that Mistress
Darthea was like a lake in the hills, reflecting all things, and yet
herself after all. But how many such tricksy ways, pretty or vexing, she
was to show some of us in the years to come did not yet appear.

In a moment I seemed to see before me the small dark child I first knew at
school. Why was she now so curiously perturbed? "Mr. Wynne," she said, "you
never come near me now--oh, not for a month! And to-day your aunt has shown
me a part of the dear mother's letter, and--and--I am so sorry for you! I
am indeed! I have long wanted to say so. I wish I could help you. I do not
think you forget easily, and--and--you were so good to me when I was an
ugly little brat. I think your mother loved me. That is a thing to make one
think better of one's self. I need it, sir. It is a pretty sort of vanity,
and how vain you must be, who had so much of her love!"

"I thank thee," I said simply. Indeed, for a time I was so moved that say
more I could not. "I thank thee, Miss Peniston. There is no one on earth
whom I would rather hear say what thou hast said,"

I saw her colour a little, and she replied quickly, "I am only a child, and
I say what comes to my lips; I might better it often if I stayed to think."

"No!" I cried. Whenever she got into trouble--and she was ready to note
the tenderness in my voice--this pretty pretext of the irresponsibility of
childhood would serve her turn. "No," said I; "I like dearly to hear my
mother praised,--who could praise her too much?--but when it is thou who
sayest of her such true things, how shall I tell thee what it is to me who
love to hear thee talk--even nonsense?"

"I talk nonsense? Do I?"

"Yes, sometimes. I--want thee to listen to me. I have cared for thee--"

"Now please don't, Mr. Wynne. They all do it, and--I like you. I want to
keep some friends."

"It is useless. Darthea. I am so made that I must say my say. Thou mayest
try to escape, and hate it and me, but I have to say I love thee. No, I am
not a boy. I am a man, and I won't let thee answer me now."

"I do not want to. It would hurt you. You must know; every one knows. It
was his fault and my aunt's, all this gossip. I would have kept it quiet."

"It will never be," I broke out. "Thou wilt never marry that man!" I knew
when I said this that I had made a mistake. I had learned to distrust
Arthur; but I had too little that was of moment to say against him to make
it wise to speak as I had done. I was young in those days, and hasty.

"Who?" says my lady, all on fire. "What man? Jack Warder? And why not? I do
not know what I shall do."

"It is not my dear Jack," I cried. "Why dost thou trifle with me?"

"Your dear Jack, indeed! How he blushes! _I_ might ask _him_. He never
would have the courage."

"It is my cousin, Arthur Wynne, as thou well knowest. And thou art wicked
to mock at an honest gentleman with thy light talk. Thou dost not know the
man, this man, my cousin."

"Only a boy would be so foolish or so unfair as to speak thus of one behind
his back, and to a woman too, who--" And she paused, confused and angry.

I could not tell her what was only suspicion or hearsay as to my cousin's
double statements concerning his father's estate, or how either she or we
were deceived. I had, in fact, lost my head a little, and had gone further
than was wise. I would not explain, and I was too vexed to say more than
that I would say the same to his face. Then she rejoined softly:

"Tell it to me. You are as mysterious as Miss Wynne; and have I not a right
to know?"

"No," I said; "not now, at least. Thou mayest tell him if thou wilt."

"If I will, indeed! Every one is against him--you and Mistress Wynne and
that impudent boy, Jack Warder, despite his blushes. Oh, he can be bold
enough. Isn't he a dear fellow?"

How could one deal with a woman like this? I hesitated, and as I did so,
not having ready anything but sad reproaches of her levity, my aunt
appeared in the doorway.

"Are you two children quarrelling?" she said, in her outspoken way. "You
will have time to repent. Here has been your father, sir, to-day, and his
affairs in Jamaica are all in a nice pickle, and you and the old clerk are
to up and away in the packet for Kingston, and that to-morrow."

"Indeed!" I cried. I was not sorry.

"I envy you," said my lady, as demure as you please. "You will fetch me a
feather fan, and come back soon. I hate all those cornets and captains, and
now I shall have no one but Jack."

My aunt looked on amused. Her news was true indeed, and with no chance to
talk to any one, except to say a mere good-by to Jack, I spent the evening
with my father and our head clerk over the business which took me away so
hastily. At early morning on a cold day at the close of April, 1774, we
were gliding down the Delaware with all sail set.

The voyage was long, the winds contrary. I had ample leisure to reflect
upon my talk with Darthea. I was sure she must have known she was to me not
as other women. Except for the accident of this chance encounter, I might
long have waited before finding courage to speak. I had made nothing by it,
had scarce had an answer, and should, like enough, have fallen back into
the coldness of relation, by which she had so long kept me at a distance. I
had been foolish and hasty to speak of my cousin at all; it did but vex
her.

Of my errand in Jamaica there is little to be said. My father's letters
were of business only. Of these long months and of what went on at home I
heard but little from him, and with my request to have the gazettes he had
evidently no mind to comply; nor were the chances of letters frequent. I
heard, indeed, from my aunt but twice, and from Jack thrice; but he said
nothing of Darthea. Years after I found in his record of events:

"Hugh left us the last of April. It may be he cares too much for that
wayward witch, Darthea."

I should say that it was at this time or soon after my dear friend began to
keep a somewhat broken diary of events. What he says of former years was
put on paper long afterward.

"If I did but know," writes Jack, "that he is seriously taken, I should
understand, alas! what not to do. But as to some things Hugh is a silent
man. I think, as Mr. Wilson says, some men are made for friends, and some
for lovers. I fear the latter is not my role. Is there--can there be--such
a thing as revering a woman too much to make successful love? I think I see
what Darthea is more truly than does my dear Hugh. There must come a day
when she will show it. Sometimes I can hardly trust myself with her; and I
yearn to tell her that I alone know her, and that I love her. I must watch
myself. If it really be that Hugh cares for her, and yet I were to be the
fortunate man, how could I face him again, having had the advantage of his
long absence? It seems strange that I should ask myself if I am more her
lover than his friend. He does not talk of her to me.

"It is now September, '74, and Hugh must soon return. Mr. Gage is
fortifying Boston Neck, and we have had the mischievous Boston Port Bill,
and Virginia up in a rage, which I do not understand. We, who have our
commerce crippled by foolish laws, may well be on the side of resistance;
but why the planters should put in peril their only tobacco market I see
less well. A Continental Congress is to meet here on the fifth day of this
month, and already the town is alive with gentlemen from the South and
North.

"No doubt Darthea has letters from Mr. Arthur Wynne. I think Mr. Wilson
judges that man correctly. He says he is selfish, and more weak as to
morals than really bad, and that he will be apt to yield to sudden
temptation rather than to plan deliberate wickedness. Why should he have
need to plan at all! Mistress Wynne says he does not like Hugh. How could
any not like my Hugh, and how do women see the things which we do not?

"It is sad to see my father's state of mind. Yesterday he was with me to
visit Mr. Hancock, very fine in a purple velvet coat with gold buttons, and
a flowered waistcoat. He is our correspondent in Boston. My father came
home a hot Whig; and tomorrow is Meeting-day, and he will be most
melancholy, and all for the king if this and that should happen. John Wynne
can turn Mm which way he likes. If my Hugh remains of a Whig mind--and who
less like to change?--he will have a hot time with his father, I fear."

Is it any wonder I. his friend, loved this man? He seemed so gentle that
all but I, even James Wilson, misunderstood him. No more obstinate fellow
ever was or will be. I ought to say "determined," for there was always a
reason of head or heart for what he would or would not do, and I really
think that in all his noble life he had but one hour of weakness, of which
by and by I may have to tell.




XIII


I was to have come home earlier, but in June I got letters from my father
instructing me to await a vessel which would reach Jamaica in June, and
sail thence to Madeira. There were careful instructions given as to
purchase of wines, and the collection of delayed payments for staves, in
the wine islands.

I did not like it, but I was young, and to travel had its charm after all.
Had there been no Darthea, I had been altogether pleased. The excuse of
this new business made me smile. It was clear my father was using that
pretext to keep me out of the mischief which was involving most young men
of courage, and creating in them a desire to train as soldiers in the
organisations which were everywhere being formed. He was unwise enough to
say that my cousin, from whom he had heard, sent his love, and was glad I
was out of our disloyal and uneasy country.

There was no help for it, and thus it chanced that not until September did
I see the red brick houses of my native city. Late news I had almost none,
for none reached me, and I was become wild with desire to learn what the
summer months had brought forth.

On the fifth, day of September, 1774, at seven in the morning, I saw my
Jack in a boat come out to meet me as we came to anchor in the stream. He
looked brown and handsome, reddening with joy as he made me welcome. All
were well, he said. I did not ask for Darthea.

My father was on the slip, and told me that business might wait until the
evening. My aunt had not been well, and would see me at once. This really
was all, and I might have been any one but his son for what there was in
his mode of meeting me. I walked with Jack to my Aunt Gainor's, where he
left me. I was pleased to see the dear lady at her breakfast, in a white
gown with frills and a lace tucker, with a queen's nightcap such as Lady
Washington wore when I first saw her. Mistress Wynne looked a great figure
in white, and fell on my neck and kissed me; and I must sit down, and here
were coffee and hot girdle-cakes and blueberries, and what not. Did I like
Jamaica? And had I fetched some fans? She must have her choice; and rum,
she hoped, I had not forgot. How well I looked, and my eyes were bluer than
ever! Was it the sea had got into them? and so on.

I asked about the Congress, and she was off in a moment. Mr. John Adams had
been to see her, and that cat, Bessy Ferguson, had been rude to him. An
ill-dressed man, but clear of head and very positive; and the members from
Virginia she liked better. Mr. Peyton Randolph had called; and I would like
Mr. Pendleton; he had most delightful manners. Mr. Livingston had been good
enough to remember me, and had. asked for me. He thought we must soon
choose a general, and Mr. Washington had been talked of.

"Has it come to that?" said I.

"Yes; all the North is up, and Gage has more troops and is at work
intrenching himself, he who was to settle us with three regiments. Mrs.
Chew was here, and behaved like the lady she is. But they are all in a nice
mess, Master Hugh, and know not what to do. I hate these moderates. Mr.
Washington is a man as big as your father, and better builded. I like him,
although he says little and did not so much as smile at Bessy Ferguson's
nonsense. And Darthea--you do not ask about Darthea. She is playing the
mischief with Jack and her captain. She will not let me talk about him. He
is in Boston with Mr. Gage, I hear. Why don't you tell me about yourself?"

"How could I, Aunt Gainor? Thou--" and I laughed.

Then she became grave. "You will have to declare yourself and take sides;
and how can I counsel you to resist your father? You must think it over and
talk to Mr. Wilson. He is of the Congress. Poor Mr. Wetherill the Meeting
has a mind to bounce, and he takes it hard. Come back at eleven, and we
will go to Chestnut street, where they meet, and see the gentlemen go into
the Carpenters' Hall. I came to town on purpose. And now go; I must dress."

At half-past ten--my aunt very splendid--we drove down Second street and up
Chestnut, where was a great crowd come to look on. Dr. Rush, seeing my
aunt's chariot, got in at Second street, and, being one of the members,
enabled us to get near to Carpenters' Alley, where at the far end, back
from the street, is the old building in which the Congress was to be held.
Jack met us here, and got up beside the coachman. I think none had a better
view than we. Andrew Alien came to speak to us, and then Mr. Galloway, not
yet scared by the extreme measures of which few as yet dreamed, and which
by and by drove these and many other gentlemen into open declarations for
the crown.

I saw James Pemberton looking on sadly, and near him other Friends with
sour aspects. Here and there militia uniforms were seen amid the dull
grays, the smocks of farmers and mechanics, and the sober suits of
tradesmen, all come to see.

"The Rev. Dr. Duche passed us," says Jack, whom now I quote, "in a fine wig
and black silk small-clothes. He was to make this day the famous prayer
which so moved Mr. Adams." And later, I may add, he went over to the other
side. "Soon others came. Some we knew not, but the great Dr. Rush, pointed
out such as were of his acquaintance.

"'There.' he said, 'is Carter Braxton. He tells me he does not like the New
England men--either their religion or their manners; and I like them both.'
The doctor was cynical, I thought, but very interesting. I set down but
little of what he said or I saw; for most of it I forget.

"'There Is the great Virginia orator, Mr. Patrick Henry,' said the doctor.
He was in simple dress, and looked up at us curiously as he went by with
Pendleton and Mr. Carroll. 'He has a great estate--Mr. Carroll,' said the
doctor. 'I wonder he will risk it.' He was dressed in brown silk breeches,
with a yellow figured waistcoat, and, like many of them, wore his sword.
Mr. Franklin was not yet come home, and some were late.

"Presently the doctor called, and a man in the military dress of the
Virginia militia turned toward us. 'Colonel Washington,' said our doctor,
'will permit me to present him to a lady, a great friend of liberty.
Mistress Wynne, Colonel Washington.'

"'I have already had the honour,' he said, taking off his hat--a scrolled
beaver.

"'He is our best soldier, and we are fortunate that he is with us,' said
the doctor, as the colonel moved away."

The doctor changed his mind later, and helped, I fear, to make the trouble
which came near to costing Conway his life. I have always been a great
admirer of fine men, and as the Virginia colonel moved like Saul above the
crowd, an erect, well-proportioned figure, he looked taller than he really
was, but, as my aunt had said, was not of the bigness of my father.

"He has a good nose," said my Aunt Gainor, perhaps conscious of her own
possessions in the way of a nasal organ, and liking to see it as notable in
another; "but how sedate he is! I find Mr. Peyton Randolph more agreeable,
and there is Mr. Robert Morris and John Dickinson."

Then John Adams went by, deep in talk with Roger Sherman, whom I thought
shabbily dressed; and behind them Robert Livingston, whom my aunt knew.
Thus it was, as I am glad to remember, that I beheld these men who were to
be the makers of an empire. Perhaps no wiser group of people ever met for a
greater fate, and surely the hand of God was seen in the matter; for what
other colony--Canada, for example,--had such men to show? There, meanwhile,
was England, with its great nobles and free commons and a splendid story of
hard-won freedom, driving madly on its way of folly and defeat.

Of what went on within the hall we heard little. A declaration of rights
was set forth, committees of correspondence appointed, and addresses issued
to the king and people of Great Britain. Congress broke up, and the winter
went by; Gage was superseded by Sir William Howe; Clinton and Burgoyne were
sent out, and ten thousand men were ordered to America to aid the purposes
of the king.

The cold season was soon upon us, and the eventful year of '75 came in with
a great fall of snow, but with no great change for me and those I loved. A
sullen rage possessed the colonies, and especially Massachusetts, where the
Regulation Acts were quietly disregarded. No counsellors or jurymen would
serve under the king's commission. The old muskets of the French and Indian
wars were taken from the corners and put in order. Men drilled, and women
cast bullets.

Failing to corrupt Samuel Adams and Hancock, Gage resolved to arrest them
at Concord and to seize on the stores of powder and ball. "The heads of
traitors will soon decorate Temple Bar," said a London gazette; and so the
march of events went on. In the early spring Dr. Franklin came home in
despair of accommodation; he saw nothing now to do but to fight, and this
he told us plainly. His very words were in my mind on the night of April
23d of this year of '75, as I was slowly and thoughtfully walking over the
bridge where Walnut crossed the Dock Creek, and where I stayed for a moment
to strike flint and steel in order to light my pipe. Of a sudden I heard a
dull but increasing noise to north, and then the strong voice of the bell
in the state-house. It was not ringing for fire. Somewhat puzzled, I walked
swiftly to Second street, where were men and women in groups. I stopped a
man and asked what had chanced. He said, "A battle! a battle! and General
Gage killed." Couriers had reached the coffee-houses, but no one on the
street seemed to have more than this vague information; all were going
toward Chestnut street, where a meeting was to be held, as I learned, and
perhaps fuller news given out.

I pushed on, still hearing the brazen clamour of the bell. As I crossed
High street I came upon James Wilson and Mr. Graydon. They stopped me to
tell of the great tidings just come by swift post-riders of the fight at
Lexington. After giving me the full details, Wilson left us. Said Graydon?
very serious: "Mr. Wynne, how long are you to be in deciding? Come and join
Mr. Cadwalader's troop. Few of us ride as well as you."

I said I had been thinking.

"Oh, confound your thinkings! It is action now. Let the bigwigs think."

I could not tell a man I then knew but slightly how immense was my
reluctance to make this complete break with the creed of my father, and to
absolutely disobey him, as I knew I must do if I followed my inclinations;
nor did I incline to speak of such other difficulties as still kept me
undecided. I said at last that if I took up arms it would be with
Macpherson or Cowperthwaite's Quakers.

"Why not?" he said. "But, by George! man, do something! There are, I hear,
many Friends among the Cowperthwaite Blues. Do they give orders with 'thou'
and 'thee,' I wonder?"

I laughed, and hurried away. The town was already in a state of vast
excitement, women in tears, and men stopping even those they did not know
to ask for news. I ran all the way to my aunt's, eager to tell it. In the
hall I stood a minute to get my breath, and reflect. I knew full well, as I
recognised various voices, that my intelligence would mean tears for some,
and joy for others.

My long-taught Quaker self-control often served me as well as the practised
calm I observed to be the expression assumed by the best-bred officers of
the army on occasions that caused visible emotion in others. I went in
quietly, seeing a well-amused party of dames and younger folk, with, over
against the chimneypiece, the great Benjamin Franklin, now in the full
prime of varied usefulness, a benevolent face, and above it the great dome
of head, which had to me even then a certain grandeur. He was talking
eagerly with Mistress Wynne--two striking figures.

Mr. Galloway was in chat with his kinsman, Mr. Chew. The younger women, in
a group, were making themselves merry with my friend Jack, who was a bit
awkward in a fine suit I had plagued him into buying. And what a beauty he
was, as he stood, half pleased with the teasing, blushing now and then, and
fencing prettily in talk, as I knew by the laughter! At the tables the
elder women were gambling. and intent on their little gains and losses,
while the vast play of a nobler game was going on in the greater world of
men.

To my surprise, I saw among the guests an English lieutenant. I say "to my
surprise," for the other officers had gone of their own accord, or had been
ordered to leave by the Committee of Safety. This one, and another, were,
as I learned afterward, on their way through the town to join General Gage.
There was evidently some dispute as to the cards. I heard high-pitched
voices, and "spadille," "basto," "matador"--all the queer words of
quadrille, their favoured game.

The lieutenant was bending over Mrs. Perguson's chair. He was a fellow I
had seen before and never liked, a vulgar-featured man, too fat for his
years, which may have been some twenty-eight. He played the best hand of
all of them, and, as my aunt declared, that was quite enough; for the rest
she could keep any man in order. I held back in the gloom of the hall,
looking at their busy gaiety, and wondering what they would say to my news.

As I went in I heard Woodville, the lieutenant, say, "The king--play the
king, Mrs. Ferguson."

"No advice!" cried Mrs. Galloway.

"But I am betting," said he. "The king forever! We have won, madam. The
king is always in luck."

I could not resist saying, "The king has lost, ladies."

My aunt turned, and knew I meant something. I suppose my face may have been
more grave than my words. "What is it, Hugh?"

"I have strange news, Aunt Gainor."

"News? and what?" As she spoke the talk ceased, and every one looked up.

"There has been a fight at Lexington. Major Pitcairn is beat, and my Lord
Percy. The farmers were all up to hinder them as they were on their way to
seize our powder, and to take Mr. Hancock. The king has lost some three
hundred men, and we under a hundred."

"Good heavens!" said Mr. Galloway. "But it cannot be true."

A pause came after, as I said there was no doubt of it.

Dr. Franklin asked if I was sure. I said, "Yes; I have it of James Wilson,
and the town is already in an uproar over it." The great philosopher
remained deep in thought a moment, while the women sat or stood in fear, or
whispering excitement. At last he said he must go, and that it was the
beginning of war, and welcome too. Then he bowed gravely and went out. As
he left, the stillness which had prevailed for a time was broken.

A dozen questions fell on me from all sides. I could only repeat my story,
as Jack went by me to go out and hear, if possible, more of the news than I
had to tell.

At last Mr. Chew said thoughtfully, "If it be true, it is a sad business;
but, really, how can it be, Hugh? How could a lot of farmers, without good
arms and discipline, put to rout a body of trained men, well armed?"

"I think," said Galloway, "we shall have quite another version to-morrow.
How does it strike you, Mr. Woodville?"

"Oh, quite absurd," said the officer. "You may reassure yourselves, ladies;
such a loss, too, would be incredible, even in regular war. I think we may
go on with our game, Mrs. Ferguson." He was very pompous, but none seemed
inclined to take his advice.

"And yet I don't like it," said a lady of the Tory side.

"And I do," said Mistress Wynne. "It is as good news as I have heard this
many a day."

"It is nonsense!" said the officer; "sheer nonsense! You have strange
notions, madam, as to what is good news. It is only another rebel lie."

"I think not," said I, venturing to add that men who could kill squirrels
would rarely miss a man, and that many of the older farmers had fought
Indians and French, and had, I suspected, picked off the officers.

"How horrid!" said Darthea.

Had a stray bullet found my cousin I should not have grieved profoundly.

"You see where all your neutrality and loyalty have brought you," said
Mistress Wynne. "I wish King George were with Mr. Gage; he might learn
wisdom. 'T is but the beginning of a good end."

"May I remind you," said Woodville, very red in the face, "that I am his
Majesty's officer?"

"No, you may not remind me. A fig for his Majesty!" cried my aunt, now in
one of her tantrums.

"Shame!" cried Mrs. Ferguson, rising, as did the rest, some in tears and
some saying Mrs. Ferguson was right, or the Lord knows what--not at all a
pleasant scene; the men very silent, or vexed, or troubled.

My Aunt Gainor, as they filed out, made them each her finest curtsey.
Darthea stood still, looking grave enough. Mr. Woodville, the lieutenant,
lingered, made his adieus very decently, and went out, I showing him the
way. On the step he said: "I do not quarrel with women; but I have heard
that in Mistress Wynne's house, to which, as an officer of his Majesty, I
cannot submit."

"Well?" I said; and my abominable propensity to grin got the better of me.

"You seem amused, sir," he said.

I was by no means amused.

"I suppose you are responsible," he added. "Miss Wynne might have better
manners, and her nephew more courage. However, I have said what ought to be
enough with English gentlemen. Good-evening."

"I have half a mind to give thee a good honest thrashing," said I.

"I dare say. You are big enough, Master Quaker; but I presume that about
the weapons common among men of honour you know as much as I know of making
horseshoes."

I was now cool enough and angry enough to have killed him. "Thy friend can
find me here," said I. "I trust I shall be able to satisfy thee."

With this he went away, and I stood looking after his stumpy figure. I was
again in a broil, not of my making; just a bit of ill luck, for here was a
nice business. I went in, and was caught on my way upstairs by my Aunt
Gainor, who called me into the sitting-room.

Still too furious to be prudent, she broke out before Darthea. "Insolent
idiots! I hope I made Mr. Galloway understand, and the rest of them too! I
trust Bessy Ferguson will never darken my doors again!" She walked up and
down, and at last upset a big mandarin, who came head down on the hearth.

"I wish he were Mr. Gage!" said my aunt, contemplating the fragments.

"I dare say he was a Tory," says Darthea, who feared no one. "And I am a
Tory too, Miss Wynne, I would have you to know."

"I dare say," said my aunt; "it doesn't matter much, what you think, or
what you are. You had some words with that stupid man, sir; I saw you. He
looked as if he did not like it. Oh, I heard you, too."

I vainly shook my head at her.

"Are you two going to fight? I am not sorry! I wish I could have that cat
Ferguson out."

"I hope---oh---I am sure, Mr. Wynne, it cannot be. How dreadful!" said
Darthea.

"Nonsense!" cried my aunt. "A man cannot stand everything like a woman."

I said plainly, seeing how vain my aunt had made concealment, that there
had been some words, but that I trusted no harm would come of it.

"But there will! there will!" said Miss Peniston.

"Mercy upon us!" cried my aunt; for here was Darthea on the floor, and
burnt feathers and vinegar at hand, servants running about, my aunt
ordering "Cut her stay-strings!" as I was turned out, hearing my aunt
declare, "I do believe she is in love with all the men. Is it you or the
captain? What a shameless monkey to tumble all of a heap that way! It is
hardly decent. Do go away, you goose! 'Tis a way she has. Did never you see
a woman faint?"

I never did, and I was scared faint myself. What between Darthea's fainting
spell, and this quarrel not of my seeking, I was uncomfortable enough. I
had no one but Jack to appeal to; and here was a pair of Quaker lads, just
over twenty-two, in a proper scrape. I had not the least intention of
getting out of it, save in one way. The sneer at my aunt was more than I
could endure. What my father would think was another matter.

Mr. Wilson used to say: "When you are in difficulties dispose of the worst
first;" and so I resolved, as I must fight the man, and that was the
imminent matter, to set aside all thought of my parent, until I was done
with Mr. Woodville. Jack I took for granted, and so left a note with the
servant asking my opponent's friend to call on Jack at an hour when he was
like to be alone. Before I could leave to warn him of what was on hand my
aunt came to me.

"I sent that girl home in the chaise. It was her fear lest some one may be
hurt, but she really has no excuse. She talked quite wild as she came to--
I mean of you and Arthur Wynne--just mere babble. And, O Hugh! I am a
drivelling old maid, and have taught you all manner of nonsense, and now I
have got you into trouble. Don't let him kill you, Hugh. Cannot it be
stopped? I told Darthea to hold her tongue, and I am so miserable, Hugh;
and when I think of your dead mother, and all I promised, what shall I do?"
And the kind old lady penitently wept over me, as if I were run through
already.

I felt, as you may imagine, the embarrassment and doubt a young man feels
when about to protest by a single act against the creed of conduct which he
has been taught to follow since he could remember. I smiled, too, as I
recalled our first school duel, and how Jack and I ran away.

My aunt, seeing there was nothing more to be done, and having said quite
enough, retired, I am sure to pray for me, and for herself as the main
cause of my coming risk. She would have liked to see me well out of the
affair, but I do believe would not have had me excuse myself to my
lieutenant, let what might occur. Indeed, she did her best to keep Miss
Darthea from betraying what, but for my aunt's rash outburst, would not
have gone beyond those immediately concerned.

It was late in the afternoon, when I found Jack writing in his father's
house. I must have looked grave, for he rose quickly and, coming to meet
me, set a hand on each of my shoulders--a way he had, but only with me.

"What is it?" he said; "not the news?"

"No." In fact, it had clean gone out of my mind.

"I have had trouble with Mr. Woodville, and now I must fight him." And on
this I related the whole adventure, Jack listening intently.

"Thou shouldst have an older man than I, Hugh. These affairs may often be
mended, I learn, without coming to violence." He seemed a little
embarrassed, and reddened, hesitating as he spoke, so that, stupidly not
comprehending him as I should have done, I said hastily that the man had
insulted my aunt, and that there was but one way out of it, but that I
could try to get some one else, if to act as my friend was not to his
taste.

"At this time," he writes, "when Hugh came so near to hurting me, I was
really going through in my mind what he had already disposed of in his. At
Pike's we heard of nothing but duels. I had long been Pike's pupil. The
duel had come to seem to us, I fear, the natural and inevitable ending of a
quarrel. Such was the belief of my good friend Mistress Wynne's set, and of
the officers whose opinions as to social matters we had learned to regard
as final.

"And yet the absurdity of two Quaker lads so trapped struck me as it did
not Hugh. The man must surely have thought him older than he was, but so
did most. I feared that I should not do my friend justice; and then I
thought of dear Mistress Gainor, whom I now loved, and for whom to lose
Hugh would be as death in life; and so, quickly turning it over for one mad
moment, I wondered if I could not someway get this quarrel on to my own
shoulders. When I answered Hugh I must have made him misunderstand me, or
so I think from what he said. When he exclaimed he could get some one else,
I made haste to put myself right. We had little time, however, to discuss
the matter, for at this moment came a Captain Le Clere with Hugh's note.

"Hugh was now in one of his quiet, smiling moods, when from his face you
would have said there was some jest or wager in question, and from his
talk, which had a kind of intensity of distinct articulation, that it was,
as I thought it, most serious. He was coldly civil to Mr. Le Clere, and to
me apart said, 'Small swords, and the governor's woods by the spring' as if
he were arranging a quite familiar and every-day affair.

"I frankly declared that I was new to an office of this kind, and must
trust to Mr. Le Clere's honour and courtesy. He seemed pleased at this, and
thought a pity of so young a man to have such a difficulty, expressing his
hopes of accommodation, which I knew Hugh too well to think possible.

"As soon as we had arranged the needed preliminaries, and Mr. Le Clere had
gone, I went to borrow small swords of Pike, arranging to come for them
after dark. Duels were common enough even in our Quaker town, especially
among gentlemen of his Majesty's service. Although illegal, so strongly was
it felt that for certain offences there was no other remedy possible, that
it was difficult to escape the resort to weapons if those involved were of
what we who are of it like to call the better class.

"At daybreak Hugh and I were waiting in the woods where--near to what Mr.
Penn meant as a public square, a little east of Schuylkill-Eighth
street--was an open space, once a clearing, but now disused, and much
overgrown. We were first on the ground, and I took occasion to tell Hugh of
Pike's counsels--for he had at once guessed what we were about--to watch
his opponent's eyes, and the like. Hugh, who was merry, and had put aside
such thoughts of the future as were troubling me, declared that it was the
mouth a man should watch, which I think is the better opinion. I said, of
course, nothing of what Pike told me as to Mr. Woodville being a first-rate
player, and only advised my friend to be cautious.

"Mr. Woodville, who came with Le Clere and a surgeon, was a short lump of a
man, and an odd contrast to his friend, who was long and lank. The pair of
them looked like Don Quixote and his squire. The short man I felt quite
confident Hugh could handle, and was surprised, seeing his build, that Pike
should have declared him a good blade. Mr. Le Clere was very civil, and I
followed his directions, knowing, as I have said, but little of such
affairs.

"Our men being stripped to the shirt, and ready, Mr. Le Clere and I drew
away some twenty feet. Then, to my surprise, the lean officer said to me,
'Mr. Warder, shall I have the honour to amuse you with a turn? Here are our
own swords of a length, as you see.'

"I was anything rather than amused. I had heard of this foolish English
custom of the friends also engaging. I knew that it was usual to make the
offer, and that it was not needful to accept; but now, as I saw my Hugh
standing ready with his sword upon the ground, I began to shake all over,
and to colour. Such hath always been my habit when in danger, even from my
boyhood. It is not because I am afraid. Yet, as it seems to another like
fear, to feel it sets me in a cold rage, and has many times, as on this
occasion, led me into extremes of rashness.

"I suppose Mr. Le Clere saw my condition, and unhappily let loose on his
face a faint smile. 'At your service,' I said, and cast off my coat.

"'It is not necessary, sir,' he replied, a bit ashamed to engage a fellow
like me, who shook and blushed, and looked to be about seventeen.

"'We are losing time,' said I, in a fury, not over-sorry to be thus or in
any way distracted from Hugh's peril. In truth, I need have had small fear
for him. For two years Hugh and I had fenced almost daily, and what with
Pike and Arthur Wynne, knew most of the tricks of the small sword.

"The next moment Le Clere cried, 'On guard, gentlemen!' and I heard the
click of the blades as they met. I had my hands full, and was soon aware of
Le Clere's skill. I was, however, as agile as a cat, and he less clever
with his legs than his arm. Nor do I think he desired to make the affair
serious. In a few minutes--it seemed longer--I heard an oath, and, alarmed
for Hugh, cast a glance in his direction. I saw his foe fall back, his
sword flying some feet away. My indiscretion gave my man his chance. His
blade caught in my rolled-up sleeve, bent, and, as I drove my own through
his shoulder, passed clean through the left side of my neck. With a great
jet of blood, I fell, and for a little knew no more."

This account from Jack's journal is a better statement of this sad business
than I could have set down. I saw with horror Jack and Le Clere salute, and
then was too full of business to see more, until I had disarmed Mr.
Woodville, badly wounding his sword-hand, a rare accident. And here was my
Jack dead, as I thought. I think I can never forget that scene; Mr. Le
Clere, gaunt and thin, lifting his late foe, the surgeon kneeling and busy,
my own man hot and wrathful, cursing like mad, and wrapping his hand about
with a handkerchief, clearly in pain, and I waiting for the word of death
or life.

At last the doctor said, "It is bad--bad, but not fatal. How came it, Le
Clere? You told me that neither you nor Mr. Woodville meant anything
serious."

I was kneeling by Jack, and was not intended to hear what all were too hot
and excited to guard by bated breath.

"Damn it, doctor!" returned Le Clere. "It is no use to talk. I never
imagined that youngster would take me at my word."

"You will be in hot water here," said the doctor. "I would advise you to
get away, and soon."

"And we shall supply amusement to every mess in the army," said Woodville,
with an abundance of bad language. "Quakers indeed!"

Jack's eyes opened, and he said, "Thou art not hurt, Hugh?"

"No, no!" I answered, and, relieved a little, turned to Mr. Le Clere: "We
shall, I fear, have to ask thy chaise of thee. We came afoot. I will send
it back at once."

Le Clere said, "Of course; with all my heart."

"Thou wilt pardon me," said I, "if I advise thee to accept the doctor's
advice, and get away with all speed. I should be sorry if thou wert
arrested. The feeling against gentlemen of thy profession is unhappily
strong just now."

Le Clere looked me over with a quick glance of something like curiosity,
and said, as he gave his hand, "You are a gallant gentleman, Mr. Wynne. You
will permit an older man to say so. I trust we may meet again. Are all
Quakers as clever at swordplay?"

I said a civil word, seeing Jack smile as he lay with my bloody coat under
his head. Then, as I remembered that perhaps Mr. Woodville might not be
satisfied, I went up to him and said, "I am at thy service, sir, if thou
art not contented to let us be quit of this matter."

"It must needs rest now," he replied. "Damn your tricks!"

"Sir!" said I.

"Holloa!" says Le Clere; "this won't do. Keep your temper. This way, Mr.
Wynne." And he drew me aside.

It was full time; I was beginning to get my blood up, and was in a rage.

"This comes," he said, "of going out with a fellow that has risen from the
ranks. Why do your ladies receive every one who wears a red coat? Let me
help you with your friend. I am most sorry. For my share, I have a neat
reminder in the shoulder. Mr. Warder has the wrist of a blacksmith"--which
was true, and for good reason.

There is no need to tell of the wrath and incapacity of poor Jack's father,
I got away as soon as Dr. Rush arrived, and, promising to return in an
hour, went off with a smile from my Jack, and a "Thank God! Hugh, that it
was not thou who had the worst of it."

It was about seven as I knocked at my aunt's door, and, passing the black
page, ran upstairs. My aunt was in the breakfast-room; she came to meet me
in a morning gown, and to my astonishment was very tranquil, but with eyes
that looked anxious, and far more red than common.

"Sit down, sir. I want to hear about this ridiculous business."

"It may seem so to thee," said I; "I am glad if it amuses thee."

"Stuff! Talk decent English, man. That was like your father. Is--are
you--is any one hurt?"

I said that was what we went for, and so told her the whole sorry business.

"And it was for me, sir!" she cried; "for me! And my dear brave girl-boy!
Is it dangerous?"

I hoped not. We had both left our marks on the English officers. That she
liked. Then she was silent awhile.

"Here is come a note from the kitten. Will you have it? It may be all you
will ever get of her. She says she has held her tongue; I can't--I don't
believe her--and asks me to let her know if any are hurt. I will. Does she
suppose gentlemen go out just to look at one another? Ridiculous!"

I spoke at last of my father; of how he would take this matter, of his
increasing acerbity, and of my own unhappy life, where I found nothing to
replace my mother's love. My last disaster and poor Jack's wound seemed
like enough to widen the gap between me and my parent, and my Aunt Gainor
was troubled.

"You must be first to tell him," said my aunt. "I think he will say but
little. He has given you up as a sheep lost in the darkness of iniquity,
and too black to be found easily."

I begged her not to jest. I was sore and sick at heart.

"Eat your breakfast," she said, "and get it over with your father."

I hurried through the meal, and went upstairs, to find my sleeve full of
blood, although no harm had been done but what was easily set right by what
Dr. Rush called a bit of diachylon plaster. (I think I spell it correctly.)

As I went by Darthea's home I cast a glance up at the open window, and saw
my lady looking out. She was pale, and as she called to me I could not but
go in, for, indeed, she ran herself to open the door.

"Come in! Oh, just a moment!" she cried. "Your aunt has written me a note,
and it tells me almost nothing--nothing."

I was in no very kindly humour with Miss Darthea. Since our talk about my
cousin she had been very high and mighty, and would have little to say to
me except unpleasant things about the angry politics of the day. I said I
was glad to have heard she had told no one of what my aunt's rash speech
had let slip. I had better have held my own tongue. Darthea was in another
mood to-day, and all at once became quiet and dignified.

"I gave my word, Mr. Wynne. When you know me better you will learn that I
can keep it. Is--is Mr. Warder much hurt?"

"Yes," I said; "he is in great peril." I saw how anxious she was, and was
vexed enough to want to hurt her.

"Oh, you men! you men!" she cried. "Will he die, do you think? Poor boy!"
She sat down and began to cry. "He must not die; why did you lead him into
such wicked trouble?"

It was vain to explain how little I had to do with the matter. Did she love
Jack? I little knew in those days how tender was this gentle heart, how it
went out, tendril-like, seeking it knew not what, and was for this reason
ever liable to say too much, and to give rise to misapprehension.

"O Darthea!" I cried. "Dost thou love my Jack? I shall be the last to come
in his way. I have said I love thee myself, and I can never change. But how
can it be? how can it be? And my cousin? O Darthea!"

"I love no one, sir. I love everybody. I--I think you are impertinent, Mr.
Wynne. Is it your business whom I love? My God! there is blood on your
hand! Are you hurt?"

It was true; a little blood was trickling down my wrist. She was all
tenderness again. I must not go; here was her handkerchief; and so on--till
I longed to take her in my arms, she made me so sorry for her I said it was
of no moment, and I must go.

"You will come soon again, and tell me about Jack."

I went away, not wondering that all the world should love her.

I hastened to Jack's home, and there found Dr. Rush and Dr. Glentworth, who
was later to be the physician of Mr. Washington. My aunt, preceding me, had
taken possession. Mr. Warder was reduced to a condition of abject
obedience, and for a month and more my aunt hardly left her girl-boy's
pillow. Indeed, it was long before I was let to see him, and then he was
but a spectre of himself, with not enough blood to blush with. Our officers
very promptly left for New York the day after our fight, and we heard no
more of them.

It would have been of little use to tell this long story but for the
consequences to me and to others. I should have done well to see my father
at once; but I could not get away, and sat till noon, asking every now and
then what I could do, and if Jack were better, despite the fact that I was
told he was doing well.

Mr. Warder was one of those people who, once a crisis seems over, must
still be doing something, and to be rid of him he was sent by my aunt to
get certain articles the doctors did or did not need. It seemed wise to
this gentleman, having completed his errands, to pay a visit of condolence
to my father, and thus it was that greater mischief was made.

About two I got away, and set forth to see my parent. Already the news was
out, and I was stopped over and over to explain what had happened. It was
the hour of dinner; for Friends dined at two, but my aunt and the gayer set
at four.

My father turned from his meal, and coldly looked me all over,--my arm was
in a sling, on which Dr. Rush had insisted,--and last into my eyes. "Well,"
he said, "thou art come at last. Fortunately, Friend Warder has been here,
and I know thy story and the mischief into which thou hast led his poor
lad. It is time we had a settlement, thou and I. Hast thou fear neither of
God nor of man? A rebellious son, and a defier of authority! It is well thy
mother is dead before she saw thee come to this ruin of soul and body."

"My God! father," I cried; "how canst thou hurt me thus! I am in sorrow for
Jack, and want help. To whom should I go but to thee? O mother, mother!" I
looked around at the bare walls, and down at the sanded floor, and could
only bury my face in my hands and weep like a baby. What with all the day
had brought, and Darthea and Jack, and now this stern old man silent,
impassive, unmoved by what was shaking me like a storm,--although I loved
him still for all his hardness,--I had no refuge but in tears.

He rose, and I sat still, thinking what I should say. "When thou art ready
to turn from thy sin and ask pardon of God and of me, who am brought to
shame on thy account, I will talk with thee."

Upon this I set myself between him and the door. "We cannot part this way.
It is too terrible."

"That was a matter thou hadst been wise to consider long ago, Hugh."

"No!" I cried. I was as resolved as he. "I must be heard. How have I
offended? Have I neglected thy business? who can say so? I was insulted in
Meeting, and I went where men do not trample on a penitent boy, and if I
have gone the way of my aunt's world, is it my fault or thine? I have gone
away from what, in thy opinion, is right as regards questions in which the
best and purest side with me. Am I a child, that I may not use my own
judgment?" It was the first time in my life that I had plainly asserted my
freedom to think and to act.

To my surprise, he stood a moment in silence, looking down, I as quiet,
regarding him with eager and attentive eyes. Then he said, seeking my gaze,
"I am to blame; I have too much considered thy chances of worldly gain. I
know not whence thou hast thy wilfulness." As I looked in the face of this
strong, rock-like man, I wondered; for he went on, "Not from me, Hugh, not
from me--"

"Stop!" I said. "Thou hast said enough." I feared lest again he should
reproach her of whose sweetness I had naught but a gift of the blue eyes
that must have met his with menace. I saw, as his hands shook, tapping the
floor with his cane, how great were both his anger and his self-control.

"It were well, my son, that this ended. I hope thou wilt see thy way to
better courses. Thy cousin was right. He, too, is a man not of my world,
but he saw more clearly than I where thou wert going."

"What!" I cried, "and thou canst think this? Thou hast believed and trusted
Arthur Wynne! What did he say of me?"

"I will not be questioned."

"The man lied to thee," I cried,--"why, I do not know,--and to others also.
Why did he deceive us as to Wyncote? What reason had he? As he lied about
that, so does he seem to have lied about me. By heaven! he shall answer me
some day."

"I will hear no profanity in my house. Stand aside! Dost thou not hear me?
Am I to be disobeyed in my own house?"

I but half took in his meaning, and stood still. The next moment he seized
me by the lapels of my coat, and, spinning me round like a child, pushed me
from him. I fell into the great Penn chair he had turned from the table
when he rose. He threw open the door, and I saw him walk quickly down the
hall and out into the orchard garden.

For a week he did no more than speak to me a word when business made it
needful, and then the monotonous days went on as before in the gray, dismal
home, out of which the light of life's gladness departed when those dear
mother-eyes were closed in death.




XIV


While, throughout that sad summer, my Jack was slowly coming back to
health, even the vast events of the war now under way moved me but little.
My Aunt Gainor would think of no one but her young Quaker. Her house was no
longer gay, nor would she go to the country, until Mr. Warder agreed that
she should take Jack with us to the Hill Farmhouse, where, in the warm
months, she moved among her cattle, and fed the hens, and helped and
bullied every poor housewife far and near.

In a bright-tinted hammock I fetched from Madeira, Jack used to lie under
the apple-trees that June and July, with my aunt for company; better could
hardly have been. When I came from town in June, with news of what the
farmers and their long rifles had done at Bunker Hill, it was a little too
much for Jack's strength, and he burst into tears. But Dr. Rush declared
that self-control was an affair of physical health, and that he who had too
little blood--and Jack was lily-white--could be neither courageous, nor
able to contain his emotions. I suppose it may be true.

I went in and out of town daily, my father being unwilling to go to Merion.
At times I met James Wilson, who was steadily urging me to enter the army.
Wetherill had scarce any other words for me. But my father, Jack's
condition, and my aunt's depending on me, all stood in my way, and I did
but content myself with an hour's daily drill in town with others, who were
thus preparing themselves for active service.

We were taught, and well too, by an Irish sergeant--I fear a deserter from
one of his Majesty's regiments. As Jack got better, he was eager to have me
put him through his facings, but before he was fit the summer was nigh
over.

It had been a time of great anxiety to all men. The Virginia colonel was
commander-in-chief; a motley army held Sir William Howe penned up in
Boston, and why he so quietly accepted this sheep-like fate no man of us
could comprehend. My aunt, a great letter-writer, had many correspondents,
and one or two in the camp at Cambridge.

"My Virginia fox-hunter," said my aunt, "is having evil days with the New
England farmers. He is disposed to be despotic, says--well, no matter who.
He likes the whipping-post too well, and thinks all should, like himself,
serve without pay. A slow man it is, but intelligent," says my Aunt Gainor;
"sure to get himself right, and patient too. You will see, Hugh; he will
come slowly to understand these people."

I smiled at the good lady's confidence, and yet she was right. They took
him ill at first in that undisciplined camp, and queer things were said of
him. Like the rest, he was learning the business of war, and was to commit
many blunders and get sharp lessons in this school of the soldier.

These were everywhere uneasy times. Day after day we heard of this one or
that one gone to swell the ever-changing number of those who beset Sir
William. Gondolas--most unlike gondolas they were--were being built in
haste for our own river defence. Committees, going from house to house,
collected arms, tent-stuffs, kettles, blankets, and what not, for our
troops. There were noisy elections, arrests of Tories; and in October the
death of Peyton Randolph, ex-president of the Congress, and the news of the
coming of the Hessian hirelings. It was a season of stir, angry discussion,
and stern waiting for what was to come; but through it all my Jack
prospered mightily in health, so that by September 20 he was fit to leave
us.

I still think pleasantly of all the pretty pictures of pale, fair-haired
Jack in the hammock, with Darthea reading to him, and the Whig ladies with
roses from their gardens, and peaches and what not, all for Jack, the hero,
I being that summer but a small and altogether unimportant personage.

When my Jack went home again, we began at once to talk over our plans for
joining Mr. Washington; I made sure that now there was no greater obstacle
in my way than my father's opinions. Alas! in November my aunt took what
Dr. Rush called a pernicious ague, and, although bled many times and fed on
Jesuits' bark, she came near to dying. In January she was better, but was
become like a child, and depended upon me for everything. If I but spoke of
my desire to be in the field, she would fall to tears or declare me
ungrateful. She was morally weakened by her disease, and did seem to have
changed as to her character. I lamented to Jack that it was my fate to
stay, and he must go alone; I would follow when I could.

It was far into April before my aunt was entirely her old self, but as
early as the close of January she had decided that she was well, and that
to be well you must get rid of doctors. She told the great physician as
much, and he left her in vast disgust. Society she would now have had for
remedial distraction, but the war had made of it a dismal wreck. The Tories
had been warned or sent away; the moderates hardly fared better; and the
old gay set was broken up. Nevertheless it was not until far later, in
July, '77, that Mr. Chew, Mr. Penn, and other as important neutrals, were
ordered to leave the city; until then some remnants of the governor's set
kept up more or less of the pleasant life they had once led. But there were
no more redcoats in their drawing-rooms, and our antagonists were of the
last who had lingered. Even before their departure, any gentleman of the
king's service was sure to be told to leave, and meanwhile was apt to find
a militiaman at his door.

My aunt would have none of them that winter, and her old Tory friends
ceased to be seen at her house, save only Darthea, whilst continental
uniforms and gentlemen of the Congress were made warmly welcome; but alas!
among these was no match for her at piquet, and she felt that no one had
sacrificed more for the country than had she.

In February of '76 a double change took place among us, and to my great
discontent. I had seen much of Darthea in the fall and early winter of '75,
and had come to know her better. She was fond of riding with my aunt, who
had a strong gray stallion full of tricks, but no master of the hardy old
lady, whom neither horse nor man ever dismayed. The good spinster was by no
means as vigorous as I could have wished, but ride she would on all clear
days whether cold or not, and liked well to have Darthea with us. When ill
she was a docile patient, but, once afoot, declared all doctors fools, and
would have no more of them "and their filthy doses."

We rode of sunlit winter days out to Germantown, or upon the wood roads
over Schuylkill, my Aunt Gainor from good nature being pleased to gallop
ahead, and leave us to chat and follow, or not, as might suit us.

One fine crisp morning in February we were breasting at a walk the slippery
incline of Chestnut Hill, when Darthea, who had been unusually silent, said
quite abruptly:

"I am going away, Mr. Wynne."

I was instantly troubled. "Where?" I said.

"Next week, and to New York. My aunt can no longer stand all this mob of
rebels. We go to New York, and for how long I know not. Since, in
September, our friend, Dr. John Kearsley, was mobbed and maltreated, my
aunt declares you unfit to live among. I must say I thought it brutal, sir.
When men of sense and breeding like Mr. Penn, Mr. Chew, and Dr. Kearsley,
cannot live unmolested it is time, my aunt thinks, to run."

"No one annoys Mr. Penn or Mr. Chew," said I. "To my mind, they are
neutrals, and worse than open foes; but thy doctor is a mad Tory, and a
malignant talker. I saw the matter, and I assure thee it was overstated. He
lost his temper; 't is a brave gentleman, and I would he were with us. But
now that both sides are sure at last that they are really at war, these men
who live among us and are ready to welcome every redcoat must have their
lesson. It must be Yes or No, in a war like this."

"But I hate that," she returned; "and to be comfortable and snug, and to
love ease and Madeira and a quiet horse, and a book and a pipe and a nap of
an afternoon, and then to have certain of the baser sort cry, 'Get up and
kill somebody!' I think I am with Mr. Ross and believe that, 'let who will
be king, I well know I shall be subject.' Imagine my Aunt Peniston's fat
poodle invited to choose between exile and killing rats."

"My dear Darthea, for thee to preach caution and neutrality is delightful."

"Did it sound like that Mr. Congregation?"

"No; to tell the truth, I think it did not."

"Indeed, you are right," says she. "I am a red-hot Tory, sir. I scare
Margaret Chew out of her sweet wits when I talk blood, blood, sir; and as
to Miss Franks,--she hates to be called Becky,--when I say I hope to see
Mr. Washington hanged, she vows he is too fine a man, and she would only
hang the ugly ones. So take care, Mr. Stay-at-home, take care; I am no
neutral."

"Thank thee," I said, lifting my hat. "I like open enemies best."

"Oh, I will say a good word for you, when it comes to that, and you will
need it. Sir Guy will have Ticonderoga soon, and Mr. Howe New York; so
that, with my loyal cousins and the king in possession, we shall at least
be in civilised society."

"There is a well-worn proverb," said I, "about counting chickens. Where
shalt thou be in New York?"

"Cousin De Lancey has asked us to stay with them. When the king's troops
return to your rebel town we shall come back, I suppose."

"I am sorry," I said. "All my friends are flitting like swallows. Poor Mr.
Franks is to go, it seems, and the gay Miss Rebecca; but she likes the
redcoats best, and another is of the same mind, I fear."

"I am not over-grieved to go myself," said Darthea, "and we will not
quarrel just now about the redcoats. Have you seen Mr. Warder to-day?"

"I have not."

"Then I am the bearer of ill news. He is to join your new general in a week
or two. He could not find you this morning. I think he was relieved to know
I should tell you. How much lie cares for you! It is not like a, man
friendship. It is like the way we weak girls care for one another. How can
he be such a brave gentleman as he seems--as he must be? I should have
thought it would be you who would have gone first. Why do you not go? Here
is Miss Wynne's pet girl-boy away to fight, and you--why do not you go?"

I was puzzled, as well I might be. "Dost thou want me to go!"

A quick light came into those brown eyes, and a little flush to the cheeks
as she said,--oh, so very quickly,--"I want all my friends to do what seems
to them right."

"I am glad to answer," I said. "It seems to me my duty to be with the army;
my friends have gone, and now Graydon, the last to leave, has also gone. I
fancy people smiling to see me still at home--I who am so positive, so
outspoken. But here is my father, with whom if I go I break for life, and
here is my Aunt Gainor, who bursts into tears if I do but mention my wish
to leave her."

"I see," said Darthea, not looking at me; "now I understand fully; I did
not before. But--will you think it strange if--if I say--I, a good and
loyal woman--that you should go, and soon?" Then there was a long pause,
and she added, "When will this cruel war end?"

"God knows," said I. "Thank thee; thou art right, Darthea."

Another pause as long came after, when she said abruptly, and in quite
another voice, "You do not like Mr. Arthur Wynne; why do you not?"

I was startled. One never knew when she would get under one's guard and put
some prickly question.

"Dost thou think I have reason to like him?" I said. "I did like him once,
but now I do not; nor does he love me any better. Why dost thou ask me?"

"Oh, for--no matter! I am not going to say why."

"I think thou knowest, Darthea, that he is no friend of mine."

"Let us join your aunt," she said gravely.

"One word more," said I, "and I shall trouble thee no further. Best sure
that, come what may, there is one man who loves thee with a love no man can
better."

"I wish you had not said that. There are some, Mr. Wynne, who never know
when to take No for an answer."

"I am one," said I.

To this she made no reply, and rode on looking ahead in a dreamy way that
fetched back to my memory a prettiness my dear mother had. Presently
turning, she said:

"Let it end here; and--and my name is Miss Peniston, please."

There was no pettishness in her voice--only a certain dignity which sits
better on little women than on little men, and provokes no smile. She was
looking at me with a curious steadiness of gaze as she spoke. It was my
last chance for many a day, and I could not let her go with a mere bow of
meek submission.

"If I have been rude or discourteous, I am more sorry than I can say. If I
called thee Darthea, it was because hope seemed to bring us nearer for one
dear moment. Ah! I may call thee Miss Peniston, but for me always thou wilt
be Darthea; and I shall love Darthea to the end, even when Miss Peniston
has come to be a distant dream and has another name. I am most sorry to
have given thee annoyance. Forget that, and pardon me."

"Mr. Wynne, you are a kindly and courteous gentleman. I wish--and you must
not misapprehend me--that I loved you. Oh, I do not. Your aunt, who is so
good to me, is a fierce wooer. I am afraid of her, and--she must be miles
away; let us join her." And with this she shook her bridle, and was off at
speed, and my mare and I at her side.

If I have made those who loved Darthea Peniston and me understand this
winning soul, I shall be glad; and if not I shall at least have had the
pleasure of repeating words and describing actions which live in my
remembrance with such exactness as does not apply to much of what, to the
outer world, may seem far better entitled to be remembered. She had it in
her to hurt you, help you, pity you, mock or amuse you, and back of it all
was the honesty and truth of a womanhood capable of courageous conduct, and
despising all forms of meanness. That she was variously regarded was
natural. Margaret Shippen said she cared only for dress and the men; and
the witty Miss Franks, seeing further, but not all, said that Darthea
Peniston was an actress of the minute, who believed her every role to be
real. My wise aunt declared that she was several women, and that she did
not always keep some of them in order. It was clear, to me at least, that
she was growing older in mind, and was beginning to keep stricter school
for those other women with whom my aunt credited this perplexing little
lady.

Before I quite leave her for a time, I must let Jack say a word. It will
tell more than I then knew or could know, and will save me from saying that
which were better said by another.

"At last there is certainty of a long war, and I, being well again, must
take my side. It is fortunate when choice is so easy, for I find it often
hard in life to know just what is right. Poor Hugh, who has gone further
than I from our fathers' faith, will still declare he is of Friends; but he
commonly drops our language if he is not excited or greatly interested, and
the rest will go too. It is strange that his resoluteness and clear notions
of duty have so helped me, and yet that he is so caught and tied fast by
Miss Gainor's dependence upon him, and by his scruples as to his father. He
cannot do the thing he would. Now that my own father has sold out his
business, I at least am left without excuse. I shall go at once, for fear I
shall change my mind." A more unlikely thing I cannot imagine to have
happened to John Warder.

"I saw Darthea to-day," he goes on to write. "She is going to New York. She
talked to me with such frankness as almost broke my heart. She does not
know how dear she is to me. I was near to telling her; but if she said
No,--and she would,--I might--oh, I could not see her again. I had rather
live in doubt. And whether Hugh loves her or not I would I knew. Mistress
Wynne does but laugh and say, 'Lord bless us! they all love her!' Hugh is,
as to some things, reticent, and of Darthea likes so little to speak that I
am led to think it is a serious business for him; and if it be so, what can
I but go! for how could I come between him and a woman he loved? Never,
surely. Why is life such a tangle? As concerns this thing, it is well I am
going. What else is left for me? My duty has long been plain.

"I did venture to ask Darthea of Mr. Arthur Wynne. She said quietly, 'I
have had a letter to-day;' and with this she looked at me in a sort of
defiant way. I like the man not at all, and wonder that women fancy him so
greatly. When I said I was sorry she was going, she replied, 'It is no
one's business;' and then added, 'nor Mr. Wynne's neither,' as if Hugh had
said a word. In fact, Miss Peniston was almost as cross and abrupt as dear
Miss Wynne at her worst. If ever, God willing, I should marry her,--there,
I am blushing even to think of such a sweet impossibility,--she would drive
me frantic. I should be in small rages or begging her pardon every
half-hour of the day.

"What will Hugh say when he hears the Meeting means to disown us? It
troubles me deeply. My father is trembling too, for since a month he is all
for resisting oppression, and who has been talking to him I do not know.
Miss Wynne called him a decrepit weathercock to me last month, and then was
in a fury at herself, and sorry too; but she will talk with him no more. It
cannot be because he has sold his Holland cloths so well to the clothier-
general. I never can think that.

"When I saw Miss Wynne, and would have seen Hugh had he been in, I told her
of my meaning to go away by the packet to Burlington, and thence through
New Jersey. She said it was well, but that Hugh should not go yet. He
should go soon. Mr. Lee, the new general, had been to see her--a great
soldier, she was told. But she had not liked him, because he let her
believe he came of the same family as Mr. Richard Henry Lee of Virginia,
whereas this is not so. He was lank, sour, and ill dressed, she said, and
fetched his two dogs into the house. When he saw Hugh, he said it was time
all the young men were out. Miss Wynne disliked this, and it is reported
that Mrs. Ferguson and she, meeting after church, had nearly come to blows,
because Mrs. Ferguson had said the people who made the war should be in the
war, and on this the old lady desired to know if this arrow was meant for
her or for her nephew. Mrs. F., not lacking courage, said she might choose.

"So Madam Wynne is pulled this way and that, and I must go alone; and I
shall have a lieutenant's commission, and a pretty fellow am I to order
other men about. I like best the continental line."

I saw Jack the day after my ride with Miss Peniston. I said sadly that he
was right, and we talked it all over that week, running down the river at
early morning after ducks, and through the wide channel between League
Island and the Neck; or else we were away to Red Bank, or to the Jersey
coast, if the ice permitted, as it often did. It was a wonderful, open
winter, as it chanced, and we had more than our usual share of the ducks,
which were very abundant. As we lay in the gray weeds below the bluff at
Red Bank, we little thought of what it was to see. Our gallant Mercer, who
fell at Princeton, was to give a name to the fort we built long after; and
there, too, was to die Count Donop, as brave a man, far from home, sold by
his own prince to be the hireling of a shameful king.

The ducks flew over thick, and between times, as we waited, we talked at
intervals of the war, of Montgomery's failure to capture Quebec, and of the
lingering siege of Boston; of how the brutal destruction of Norfolk in
December had stirred the Virginians, and indeed every true heart in the
colonies. Jack would write when occasion served.

That last day (it was now February, as I have said) we supped with my aunt,
Jack and I. After the meal was over, she went out of the room, and, coming
back, gave Jack a handsome, serviceable sword, with a proper sash and tie.
Then she must make him take a hundred pounds in a purse she had netted; and
when he would not she said he was going to school, and must have a tip, and
would hear no more, and kissed him, at which he got very red. Indeed, she
was deeply moved, as was plain to see from the way she talked, speaking
fast, and saying all manner of foolish things.

This business of the sword troubled me more than it ought to have done, and
I resolved that nothing should long keep me out of the field; but alas! it
was many a day before my going became possible. And so my Jack went away,
and Miss Peniston.

The war was dull for a time, as the armies got ready for a spring at each
other's throats. At last, in March, his Excellency seized Dorchester
Heights, and Boston became no longer tenable. Howe left it on March 17,
and, what was as desirable, some two hundred cannon and vast stores of
ammunition. Then, on Cambridge Common, our chief threw to the free winds
our flag, with its thirteen stripes, and still in the corner the blood-red
cross of St. George.

Late in this winter of '75-'76, an event took place, or rather the sequel
of an event, which made me feel deeply the embarrassment in which the
condition of my aunt and father placed me. He who reads may remember my
speaking of a young fellow whom I saw at the Woodlands, John Macpherson. I
took a great fancy to him later, and we fished and shot together until he
went away, in August of '75, to join Arnold for his wild march into Canada.

His father, broken and sad, now brought to my aunt the news of his son's
death in the assault on Quebec, and, speechless with grief, showed her the
young fellow's letter, writ the night before he fell. He wrote, with other
matter: "I cannot resist the inclination I feel to assure you that I
experience no reluctance in this cause to venture a life I consider as only
lent, and to be used when my country demands it." He went on to say that,
if he died, he could wish his brother William, an adjutant in the king's
army, would not continue in the service of our enemies. I saw, too, General
Schuyler's letter of condolence, but this was later.

Nothing had moved me like this. I went away, leaving the father and my
aunt. People came to this strong woman, sure of her tenderest help, and I
trust she comforted her friend in his loss. This was the first officer of
our own set our city lost in war, and the news, I think, affected me more
than any. How, indeed, could I dare to stay when the best manhood of the
land was facing death in a cause as dear to me as to any?

In June a new calamity fell on me, or I should say on my father; for I felt
it but little, or only as in some degree a release from bonds which I
hesitated to sever by my own act. On the morning of June 25, my father
called me into his counting-room, and, closing the door, sat down, I, as
was thought fit, standing until told to be seated. Since he made no sign of
any such desire on his part, I knew at once that this was not to be a talk
about our affairs, in which, I may say, I had no interest except as to a
very moderate salary.

"Thou wilt have to-day a call from Friend Pemberton. The overseers are
moved, at last, to call thee to an account. I have lost hope that thou wilt
forsake and condemn thy error. I have worked with the overseers to give
thee and thy friend, John Warder, time, and this has been with tenderness
accorded. No good is yet come of it. If this private admonition be of no
effect, thy case will come before overseers again, and thou wilt be dealt
with as a disorderly person, recommended to be disowned, when thy misdeeds
come to be laid before the Quarterly Meeting for discipline. Already the
Yearly Meeting hath found fault with us for lax dealing with such as thou
art. Thou hast ceased to obey either thy father or thy God, and now my
shame for thee is opened to all men."

Not greatly moved I listened to this summary of what was to happen. "It is
too late," I said, "to argue this matter, my dear father. I cannot sin
against my conscience. I will receive Mr. Pemberton as thy friend. He is a
man whom all men respect and many love, but his ways are no longer my ways.
Is that all?" I added. I feared any long talk with my father. We were as
sure to fall out at last as were he and my Aunt Gainor.

"Yes," he said; "that is all. And tell Wilson to bring me the invoice of
the 'Saucy Sally.'"

This time neither of us had lost temper. He had transacted a piece of
business which concerned my soul, and I had listened. It had left me sore,
but that was an old and too familiar story. Reflecting on what had passed
in the counting-house,--and my conclusion now shows me how fast I was
growing older,--I put on my hat at once, and set out to find the overseer
deputed to make a private remonstrance with my father's son. I suppose that
my action was also hastened by a disinclination to lie still, awaiting an
unpleasant and unavoidable business.

Finding James Pemberton in his office, I told him that my errand was out of
respect to relieve him of the need to call upon a younger man. He seemed
pleased, and opened the matter in a way so gentle and considerate that I am
sure no man could have bettered the manner of doing it. My attention to
business and quieter life had for a time reassured the overseers. He would
not speak of blood-guiltiness now, for out of kindness to my distressed
parent they had seen fit to wait, and for a time to set it aside. My father
had been in much affliction, and Friends had taken note of this. Now he had
to call to my mind the testimony of Friends as to war, and even how many
had been reported to the Yearly Meeting for Sufferings on account of
righteous unwillingness to resist constituted authority, and how men of my
views had oppressed and abused them. Had I read the letter of the Yearly
Meeting of 1774, warning members not to depart from their peaceful
principles by taking part in any of the political matters then being
stirred up, reminding all Friends that under the king's government they had
been favoured with a peaceful and prosperous enjoyment of their rights, and
the like?

I listened quietly, and said it was too late to discuss these questions,
which were many; that my mind was fully made up, and that as soon as
possible I meant to enter the army. He had the good sense to see that I was
of no inclination to change; and so, after some words of the most tender
remonstrance, he bade me to prayerfully consider the business further,
since overseers would not meet at once, and even when they did there would
be time to manifest to Friends a just sense of my errors.

I thanked him, and went my way, making, however, no sign of grace, so that,
on July 4 of this 1776, late in the evening, I received in my aunt's
presence a letter from Isaac Freeman, clerk of the Meeting, inclosing a
formal minute of the final action of Friends in my case.

"What is that?" said Aunt Gainor, very cheerful over a letter of thanks to
her for having sold at cost to the Committee of Safety the cloth of Holland
and the blankets she had induced my father to buy for her. She had stored
them away for this hour of need, and was now full of satisfaction because
of having made my father the means of clothing the continental troops.

"Read it aloud. What is it, sir?" I was smiling over what a few years
before would have cost me many a bitter thought.

"Give it me! What is it?" Then she put on a pair of the new spectacles with
wire supports to rest on the ears. "Dr. Franklin gave me these new
inventions, and a great comfort too. I cannot endure bridge glasses; they
leave dents in one's nose. You have not seen him lately. He was here
to-day. You should see him, Hugh. He was dressed very fine in a velvet coat
with new, shilling buttons, and bless me! but he has got manners as fine as
his ruffles, and that is saying a good deal--Mechlin of the best. You would
not know the man."

With this she began to look at my letter. "Hoity-toity, sir! this is a fine
setting down for a naughty Quaker." And she read it aloud in a strong
voice, her head back, and the great promontory of her nose twitching at the
nostrils now and then with supreme contempt:

  "'To HUGH WYNNE: A minute, this Tenth-day of Sixth-month, 1776, from the
  monthly Meeting of Friends held at Philadelphia.

  "'Whereas Hugh Wynne hath had his birth and education among Friends,
  and, as we believe, hath been convinced of that divine principle which
  preserves the followers thereof from a disposition to contend for the
  asserting of civil rights in a manner contrary to our peaceful
  profession, yet doth not manifest a disposition to make the Meeting a
  proper acknowledgment of his outgoings, and hath further declared his
  intention to continue his wrong-doing;

  "'Therefore, for the clearing of truth and our society, we give forth our
  testimony against such breaches, and can have no unity with him, the said
  Hugh Wynne, as a member of our society until he become sensible of his
  deviations, and come to a sense of his error, and condemn the same to the
  satisfaction of Friends; which is that we, as Christian men, desire.

  "'Signed in, and on behalf of, the Meeting by

                                                     "'ISAAC FREEMAN,
                                                           "'_Clerk_.'

"What insolent nonsense!" cried Miss Wynne. "I hope your father is
satisfied. I assure you I am. You are free at last. Here was James Warder
to-day with a like document to the address of my dear Jack. I was assured
that it was a terrible disgrace. I bade him take snuff and not be any
greater fool than nature had made him. He took my snuff and sneezed for ten
minutes. I think it helped him. One can neither grieve nor reason when one
is sneezing. It is what Dr. Rush calls a moral alterative. Whenever the man
fell to lamenting, I gave him more snuff. I think it helped him. And so the
baa-lambs of Meeting have disowned their two black sheep. Well, well! I
have better news for you. Mr. Carroll was here just now, with his charming
ways. One would think when he is talking that one is the only woman alive.
If I thought the priests taught him the trick, I would turn papist. You
should observe his bow, Hugh. I thought Mr. Chew's bow not to be surpassed;
but Mr. Carroll--oh, where was I?"

"Some good news," I said.

"Yes, yes. He tells me the Congress this evening voted for a Declaration of
Independence."

"Indeed!" I cried. "So it has come at last. I, too, am free, and it is time
I went away, Aunt Gainor."

"We will see," she said. "How can I do without you? and there is your
father too. He is not the man he was, and I do not see, Hugh, how you can
leave him yet."

It was too true, as my last interview had shown me. He was no longer the
strong, steadily obstinate John Wynne of a year or two back. He was less
decisive, made occasional errors in his accounts, and would sometimes
commit himself to risky ventures. Then Thomas Mason, our clerk, or my aunt
would interfere, and he would protest and yield, having now by habit a
great respect for my aunt's sagacity, which in fact was remarkable.

I went back to my work discontented, and pulled this way and that, not
clearly seeing what I ought to do; for how could I leave him as he now was?
My aunt was right.

Next day I heard Captain John Nixon read in the state-house yard the noble
words of the declaration. Only a few hundred were there to hear it, and its
vast consequences few men as yet could apprehend. Miss Norris told me not
long after that she climbed on a barrow and looked over their garden wall
at Fifth street and Chestnut; "and really, Mr. Wynne, there were not ten
decent coats in the crowd." But this Miss Norris was a hot Tory, and
thought us all an underbred mob, as, I fear, did most of the proprietary
set--the men lacking civil courage to fight on either side, and amazed that
Mr. Wilson, and Mr. Reed, and Mr. Robert Morris, and the Virginia gentry,
should side with demagogues like Adams and Roger Sherman.

And so time ran on. I fenced, drilled, saw my companions drift away into
war, and knew not how to escape. I can now look back on my dismissal from
Meeting with more regret than it gave my youth. I have never seen my way to
a return to Friends; yet I am still apt to be spoken of as one of the small
number who constitute, with Wetherill and Owen and Clement Biddle, the
society of Friends known as Free Quakers. To discuss why later I did not
claim my place as one of these would lead me to speaking of spiritual
affairs, and this, as I have elsewhere said, I never do willingly, nor with
comfort to myself.

One afternoon in September of this year I was balancing an account when my
father came in and told me that Mason, our clerk, had just had a fall in
the hold of one of our ships. The day after I saw him, and although his
hurts were painful they hardly seemed to justify my father in his desire
that now at last he should take a long rest from work.

This threw all the detail of our affairs as largely into my hands as was
possible with a man like my father. I think he guessed my intention to
leave him for the army, and gladly improved this chance to load me with
needless affairs, and all manner of small perplexities. My aunt was
better--in fact, well; but here was this new trouble. What could I do? My
father declared that the old clerk would soon be able to resume his place,
and meanwhile, he should have no one to help him but me. Now and then, to
my surprise, he made some absurd business venture, and was impatient if I
said a word of remonstrance. Twice I was sent to Maryland to see after our
tobacco plantations. I was in despair, and became depressed and querulous,
seeing no present way, nor any future likelihood, of escape. My father was
well pleased, and even my aunt seemed to me too well satisfied with the ill
turn which fate had done me. My father was clearly using the poor old
clerk's calamity as an excuse to keep me busy; nor was it at all like him
to employ such subterfuges. All his life long he had been direct, positive,
and dictatorial; a few years back he would have ordered me to give up all
idea of the army, and would as like as not have punished resistance with
cold-blooded disinheritance. He was visibly and but too clearly changing
from the resolute, uncompromising man he had once been. Was he cunning
enough to know that his weakness was for me a bondage far stronger than his
more vigorous rule had ever been?




XV


My personal difficulties were not made more easy to bear by the course of
public events. Howe had taken New York. In November Fort Washington fell.
Jack, who was within its walls, got away, but was slightly wounded. Our
English general, Lee, had begun already to intrigue against Mr. Washington,
writing, as Dr. Rush confided to my aunt, that he, Lee, ought to be made
dictator. My aunt received the impression that the doctor, who loved his
country well, was becoming discontented with our chief; but neither then
nor later did she change her own opinion of the reserved and courteous
Virginian.

He soon justified her views of his capacity. On December I he broke down
the bridges in his rear over the Raritan, and marched through Jersey with a
dwindling army. At Princeton he had but three thousand men; destroying
every boat, he wisely put the broad Delaware between his army and the
enemy.

Lord Cornwallis halted at the river, waiting for it to freeze that he might
cross, and until this should happen went back with Howe to New York. About
December 15 of '76, General Lee was captured, and, strange as it may now
seem, no calamity yet come upon us created more consternation. Meanwhile
our own alarmed citizens began to bury their silver plate. While the feeble
were flying, and the doubtful were ready to renew their oath to the king,
the wary and resolute commander-in-chief saw his chance.

To aid his courageous resolve came Sullivan and Gates from Lee's late
command. "At sunset on Christmas day we crossed the Delaware," writes Jack.
"My general was in a small boat, with Knox, and two boatmen. We were ten
hours in the ice, and marched nine miles, after crossing, in a blinding
storm of sleet. By God's grace we took one thousand of those blackguard
Hessians, and, but for Cadwalader's ill luck with the ice, would have got
Donop also. I had a finger froze, but no worse accident.

"I dare say you know we fell back beyond Assunpink Creek, below Trenton.
There we fought my lord marquis again with good fortune. Meanwhile he
weakened his force at Princeton, and, I fancy, thought we were in a trap;
but our general left fires burning, passed round the enemy's left, and, as
we came near Princeton at sunrise, fell upon Colonel Mawhood on his way to
join Cornwallis. I was close to General Mercer when we saw them, and had as
usual a fit of the shakes, hang them! Luckily there was small leisure to
think.

"In the first onset, which was fierce, our brave general was mortally
wounded; and then, his Excellency coming up, we routed them finely. So away
went Cornwallis, with the trapped hot after the trappers. We have the
Jerseys and two thousand prisoners. I do not think even Miss Wynne can
imagine what courage it took for our general to turn as he did on an army
like that of Cornwallis'. Are you never coming?

"It is sad that the Southern officers look upon us and those of New England
as tradesfolk, and this makes constant trouble, especially among the
militia, who come and go much as they please. I have had no personal
difficulty, but there have been several duels, of which little is said.

"It is to be hoped that Congress will now order all enlistments to be for
the war, else we shall soon be in a mortal bad way. Hast heard of Miss
Peniston?"

This letter came soon after the smart little winter campaign in Jersey had
made us all so happy.

"It will last a good while yet," said James Wilson. "And when are you
going, Hugh?" Indeed, I began at last to see a way opened, as we of Friends
say; for now, in the spring, our old clerk hobbled back to his desk, and I
knew that my father would no longer be left without friendly and familiar
help. But before he could assume his full duties August was upon us-August
of '77, a year for me most eventful. Darthea's letters to my aunt grew less
and less frequent, and, as I thought, had an air of sadness unusual in this
gladsome creature. Once she spoke of Captain Wynne as absent, and once that
he, like Jack, had had a slight wound in the storm of Fort Washington. Of
politics she could say nothing, as her letters had usually to pass our
lines.

On July 31 Washington knew that Howe's fleet was off the Delaware capes.
Meanwhile he had crossed that river into Pennsylvania, and hurried his army
across country, finally encamping on a Saturday at Nicetown, some five
miles from Philadelphia. I rode out that evening to meet Jack, whose troop
camped even nearer to town, and close to the tents of the headquarters
staff. The general lay for this night at Stenton, where our Quaker friends,
the Logans, lived. He was shown, I was told, the secret stairway and the
underground passage to the stable and beyond, and was disposed to think it
curious.

Jack, now a captain, in a new suit of blue and buff, looked brown and
hardy, and his figure had spread, but the locks were as yellow and the
cheeks as rosy as ever I knew them.

Dear Aunt Gainor made much of him that evening, and we talked late into the
night of battles and generals and what had gone with Lord Howe. I went to
bed discontented, feeling myself to be a very inconsiderable person, and
Jack rode away to camp. The next day being Sunday, the 24th of August, his
Excellency marched into town by Front street at the head of the flower of
his army, in all about eleven thousand. Fine men they were, but many half
clad and ill shod; fairly drilled too, but not as they were later in the
war. The town was wild with delight, and every one glad save the Tories and
the Quakers, many of whom remained all day in their houses.

This march being made only to exhibit the army to friend and foe, the
troops moved out High street and by the middle ferry across the Schuylkill,
on their way toward the Delaware to meet Mr. Howe, who, having landed at
the head of Elk River, was now on his way toward Philadelphia. His troops
were slow, the roads bad and few, the ague in great force and severe--or so
we heard. I rode sadly with our people as far as Darby, and then turned
homeward a vexed and dispirited man. It was, I think, on the 4th of August
that our general, who had ridden on in advance of his army, first met
Marquis Lafayette.

My aunt, who spoke French with remarkable fluency and a calm disregard of
accent and inflections, was well pleased to entertain the French gentleman,
and at her house I had the happiness to make his acquaintance, greatly, as
it proved, to my future advantage. He was glad to find any who spoke his
own tongue well, and discussed our affairs with me, horrified at the lack
of decent uniforms and discipline, but, like me, pleased with the tall,
strong men he saw in our ranks. Later my acquaintance with French was of
much use to me; so little can a man tell what value an accomplishment will
have for him.

The marquis was very young, and somewhat free in stating his opinions. At
this time he thought Mr. Howe intended Charleston, and, like others, was
amazed at his folly in not going up the Delaware Bay to land his troops.
His strange strategy left Burgoyne to the fate in store for him at
Saratoga, where the latter general was to act a first part in a tragic
drama much finer than those he wrote, which were so greatly praised by the
fine ladies in London, and indeed by some better critics.

A letter of Jack's came to hand during this week. In it he said my aunt
must leave, as he was sure we had not force enough to keep General Howe out
of Philadelphia. But the old lady said, "Not I, indeed!" and I think no
mortal power could have induced her to go away. She even declined to bury
her silver, as many had done. Not so the rest of the Whigs. Every one fled
who knew where to go, or who feared to be called to account; and none would
hear of defending the town, as should have been attempted.

Jack's letter went on to say that in Delaware the general had a narrow
escape. "He rode out," says Jack, "with Marquis Lafayette on a
reconnaissance, attended by but two officers and an orderly. General
Sullivan had an officer follow with a half-troop; but the general, fearing
such numbers might attract attention, ordered them to wait behind a
thicket. Looking thence, they saw the general ride direct toward a picket
of the enemy, which from their vantage they could see, but he could not. An
English officer, perceiving him, seemed to give an order to fire; but as
the men raised their pieces he struck them up. As he was about to give the
order to fire, the general, being satisfied, had turned his back to ride
away. It is a curious tale, is it not? and none can explain it."

Long years after I myself met an English officer, a General Henderson, in
Canada, and on my telling him the incident, he said at once it was he who
was concerned, and that when the general turned to ride away he could not
make up his mind to shoot down a man who had turned his back. He was amazed
and pleased to know who it was he thus spared.

On the 11th of September, at evening, came the disaster of Brandywine, and
on the 26th Lord Cornwallis marched into our city, with two batteries and
the Sixteenth Dragoons and Grenadiers. They were received quietly, and that
evening my Cousin Arthur appeared at our house. My father, who had been
very inert of late, seemed to arouse himself, and expressed quite forcibly
his joy and relief at the coming of the troops. He recounted his griefs,
too: how that, refusing the militia tax, the Committee of Safety had taken
away his great tankard, and later two tables, which was true enough. Then,
to my amazement, my father declared Arthur must stay with us, which he was
nothing loath to do.

I was cool, as you may suppose, but it was difficult for man or woman to
resist Arthur Wynne when he meant to be pleasant; and so, putting my
dislike aside, I found myself chatting with him about the war and what not.
In fact, he was a guest, and what else could I do?

My aunt kept herself indoors and would none of the Galloways and Allens,
who had come back in swarms, nor even the neutrals, like Mr. Penn, whom she
much liked. The day after the town was occupied, Captain Wynne appeared
early in the morning, as we were discussing a matter of business. He took
it for granted, I presume, that my aunt would see him, and went past the
turbaned black boy despite his small remonstrances. My aunt rose to the
full of her great height, her nose in the air, and letting fall a lapful of
papers.

"To what," she said, "have I the honour to owe a visit from Mr. Wynne? Is
my house an inn, that any officer of the king may enter whether I will or
not?"

Although he must have been surprised, he was perfectly at his ease. Indeed,
I envied him his self-possession.

"Madam," he said, "I am charged with a letter from Miss Peniston."

"You may put it on the table," says Mistress Wynne. "My brother may choose
his society. I ask the same privilege. It will not consist of gentlemen of
your profession."

Mr. Wynne's face grew black under its dark skin. "Madam," he said, "I stay
nowhere as an unwelcome guest. I thank you for past kindness, and I humbly
take my leave. I could have done you a service as to this business of the
quartering of officers, and you shall still have my good offices for the
sake of the many pleasant hours I have passed in your house. As my Cousin
Hugh says nothing, I am glad to think that he is of a different opinion
from that which you have put in words so agreeably." With this he went
away, leaving my aunt red in the face, and speechless with wrath.

I thought he had the best of it; but I merely said, "My dear aunt, you
should not have been so hard with him." I did, indeed, think it both unwise
and needless.

"Stuff and nonsense!" says Miss Wynne, walking about as my father used to
do. "I do not trust him, and he has got that girl in his toils, poor child!
I wonder what lies he has told her. How does he hold her? I did think that
was past any man's power; and she is unhappy too. When a woman like Darthea
begins to find a man out, she can't help showing it, and some are more
frank on paper than in talk; that is her way. I am afraid I made mischief
once, for I told him long ago that I meant her to marry you; and then I saw
he did not like it, and I knew I had been a goose. Whatever is the reason
he hates you, Hugh? Oh yes, he does--he does. Is it the woman? I will have
no redcoats in my house."

I got a chance to say--what I was sorry to have to say--how little need
there was for him to fear poor me, whom Darthea wished to have nothing to
do with, I thought.

"Her loves are like her moods, my dear Hugh; who knows how long they will
last? Until a woman is married she is not to be despaired of."

I shook my head sadly and went out.

I returned late in the evening, to order my horse to be saddled and sent to
me before breakfast next morning; for I kept it at no cost in my aunt's
ample stable. To my horror, I found a sentinel at the door, and the hall
full of army baggage. In the parlour was a tall Hessian, General von
Knyphausen, and Count Donop and others, smoking, much at their ease. They
were fairly civil, but did not concern themselves greatly if I liked it or
not. I found my aunt in bed, in a fever of vain anger.

She had the bed-curtains drawn, and when I was bid to enter, put aside the
chintz so as to make room for her head, which appeared in a tall nightcap.
I am unfit, I fear, to describe this gear; but it brought out all her large
features very strongly, and to have seen her would have terrified a Hessian
regiment.

"My house is full of Dutch dogs," she cried. "As soon as they came they
ordered bones." In fact, they had asked quite civilly if they might have
supper.

"I saw them at their feed," says my aunt, "and the big beast, General
Knyphausen, spread my best butter on his bread with his thumb, sir--his
thumb! Count Donop is better; but Von Heiser! and the pipes! heavens!" Here
she retreated within her curtains, and I heard her say, "Bessy Ferguson saw
them come in, and must sail across the street and tell Job--the page with
the turban--to congratulate me for her, and to advise me to get a keg of
sauerkraut."

I assured my aunt that fortunately these were gentlemen, but she was
inconsolable, declaring herself ill, and that Dr. Rush must come at once.

"But," I said, "he is gone with all the Congress to York."

"Then I shall die," moaned my aunt.

At last, knowing her well, I said, "Is it not too sad?"

"What's that? What?"

"Mr. Howe has taken Mrs. Pemberton's carriage and the pair of sorrels for
his own use."

At this my Aunt Gainor's large face reappeared, not as melancholic as
before, and I added, "Friend Waln has six to care for, and Thomas
Scattergood has the Hessian chaplain and a drunken major. The rest of
Friends are no better off."

"Thank the Lord for all His mercies!" said Miss Wynne.

"And Mr. Cadwalader's house on Little Dock street Sir William has."

"A pity that, Hugh. The fine furniture will pay for it, I fear. I think,
Hugh, I am better, or I shall be soon."

"They talk of the Meeting over the way for a barrack, Aunt Gainor." Now
this was idly rumoured, but how could one resist to feed an occasion so
comic?

"I think I should die contented," said Miss Wynne. "Now go away, Hugh. I
have had my medicine, and I like it." She was quick at self-analysis, and
was laughing low, really happier for the miseries of her Tory
acquaintances.

After the bedroom comedy, which much amused me and out of which my aunt got
great comfort, she was inclined to be on better terms with the officers so
abruptly thrust upon her. For a while, however, she declined to eat her
meals with them, and when told that they had had Colonel Montresor to dine,
and had drunk the king's health, she sent all the glasses they had used
down to the blacks in the kitchen, and bade them never to dare set them on
her table again. This much delighted Count Donop, who loved George of
Hanover no better than did she, and I learned that she declared the
bread-and-butter business was the worst of Von Knyphausen, and was no doubt
a court custom. As to Count Donop, she learned to like him. He spoke queer
French, and did not smoke. _"Je ne foume pas chamais, madame,"_ he said;
_"mais le Cheneral, il foume touchours, et Von Heiser le meme,"_ which was
true. The count knew her London friends, and grieved that he was sent on a
service he did not relish, and in which later he was to lose his life.

My aunt fed them well, and won at piquet, and declared they were much to be
pitied, although Von Heiser was a horror. When he had knocked down her
red-and-gold Delft vase, the gods and the other china were put away, and
then the rugs, because of the holes his pipe ashes burned, and still she
vowed it was a comfort they were not redcoats. Them she would have
poisoned.

Captain Andre alone was an exception. When, in 1776, he was made a prisoner
by Montgomery in Canada, and after that was on parole at Lancaster, I met
him; and as he much attracted me, my aunt sent him money, and I was able to
ease his captivity by making him known to our friends, Mr. Justice Yeates
and the good Cope people, who, being sound Tories, did him such good turns
as he never forgot, and kindly credited to us. Indeed, he made for my aunt
some pretty sketches of the fall woods, and, as I have said, was welcome
where no other redcoat could enter.

My aunt was soon easier in mind, but my own condition was not to be envied.
Here was Arthur Wynne at my father's, the Hessians at my aunt's, the Tories
happy, seven or eight thousand folks gone away, every inn and house full,
and on the street crowds of unmannerly officers. It was not easy to avoid
quarrels. Already the Hessian soldiers began to steal all manner of
eatables from the farms this side of Schuylkill. More to my own
inconvenience, I found that Major von Heiser had taken the privilege of
riding my mare Lucy so hard that she was unfit to use for two days. At last
my aunt's chicken-coops suffered, and the voice of her pet rooster was no
more heard in the land. I did hear that, as this raid of some privates
interfered with the Dutch general's diet, one of the offenders got the
strappado. But no one could stop these fellows, and they were so bold as to
enter houses and steal what they wanted, until severe measures were taken
by Mr. Howe. They robbed my father boldly, before his eyes, of two fat
Virginia peach-fed hams, and all his special tobacco. He stood by, and said
they ought not to do it. This, as they knew no tongue but their own, and as
he acted up to his honest belief in the righteousness of non-resistance,
and uttered no complaint, only served to bring them again. But this time I
was at home, and nearly killed a corporal with the Quaker staff Thomas
Scattergood gave my father. The adventure seemed to compensate Miss Wynne
for her own losses. The corporal made a lying complaint, and but for Mr.
Andre I should have been put to serious annoyance. Our boys used to say
that the Hessian drum-beat said, "Plunder, plunder, plun, plun, plunder."
And so for the sad remnant of Whig gentles the town was made in all ways
unbearable.

There are times when the life sands seem to run slowly, and others when
they flow swiftly, as during this bewildering week. All manner of things
happened, mostly perplexing or sad, and none quite agreeable. On the 28th,
coming in about nine at night, I saw that there were persons in the great
front sitting-room, which overlooked Dock Creek. As I came into the light
which fell through the open doorway, I stood unnoticed. The room was full
of pipe smoke, and rum and Hollands were on the table, as was common in the
days when Friends' Meeting made a minute that Friends be vigilant to see
that those who work in the harvest-fields have portions of rum. My father
and my cousin sat on one side, opposite a short, stout man almost as
swarthy as Arthur, and with very small piercing eyes, so dark as to seem
black, which eyes never are.

I heard this gentleman say, "Wynne, I hear that your brother is worse.
These elder brothers are unnatural animals, and vastly tenacious of life."
On this I noticed my cousin frown at him and slightly shake his head. The
officer did not take the hint, if it were one, but added, smiling, "He will
live to bury you; unfeeling brutes--these elder brothers. Damn 'em!"

I was shocked to notice how inertly my father listened to the oath, and I
recalled, with a sudden sense of distress, what my aunt had said of my
father's state of mind. The young are accustomed to take for granted the
permanency of health in their elders, and to look upon them as unchanging
institutions, until, in some sad way, reminded of the frailty of all living
things.

As I went in, Arthur rose, looked sharply at me, and said, "Let me present
my cousin, Mr. Hugh Wynne, Colonel Tarleton."

I bowed to the officer, who lacked the politeness to rise, merely saying,
"Pleased to see you, Mr. Wynne."

"We were talking," said Arthur, "when you came of the fight at the river
with the queer name--Brandywine, isn't it?"

"No," said my father; "thou art mistaken, and I wished to ask thee, Arthur,
what was it thou wert saying. We had ceased to speak of the war. Yes; it
was of thy brother."

"What of thy brother?" said I, glad of this opening.

"Oh, nothing, except Colonel Tarleton had news he was not so well." He was
so shrewd as to think I must have overheard enough to make it useless to
lie to me. A lie, he used to say, was a reserve not to be called into
service except when all else failed.

"Oh, was that all?" I returned. "I did hear, Cousin Arthur, that the
Wyncote estate was growing to be valuable again; some coal or iron had been
found."

"So my mother writes me," said Tarleton. "We are old friends of your
family."

"You know," I said, "we are the elder branch." I was bent on discovering,
if possible, the cause of my cousin's annoyance whenever Wyncote was
mentioned.

"I wish it were true about our getting rich," said Arthur, with the relaxed
look about the jaw I had come to know so well; it came as he began to
speak. "If it were anything but idle gossip, Tarleton, what would it profit
a poor devil of a younger son? They did find coal, but it came to nothing;
and indeed I learn they lost money in the end."

"I have so heard," said my father, in a dull way. "Who was it told me? I
forget. They lost money."'

I looked at him amazed. Who could have told him but Arthur, and why? Until
a year back his memory had been unfailing.

I saw a queer look, part surprise, part puzzle, go over Tarleton's face, a
slight frown above, as slight a smile below. I fancy he meant to twit my
cousin for he said to me:

"And so you are of the elder branch, Mr. Hugh Wynne. How is that, Arthur?
How did the elder branch chance to lose that noble old house?"

My cousin sat rapping with his fingers on the table what they used to call
the "devil's tattoo," regarding me with steady, half-shut eyes--a too
frequent and not well-mannered way he had, and one I much disliked. He said
nothing, nor had he a chance, for I instantly answered the colonel: "My
father can tell you."

"About what, Hugh?"

"About how we lost our Welsh estate."

My father at this lifted his great bulk upright in the old Penn chair, and
seemed more alive.

"It is Colonel Tarleton who asks, not I."

"It is an old story." He spoke quite like himself. "Our cousin must know it
well. My father suffered for conscience' sake, and, being a Friend, would
pay no tithes. For this he was cast into jail in Shrewsbury Gate House, and
lay there a year, suffering much in body, but at peace, it may surely be
thought, as to his soul. At last he was set free on condition that he
should leave the country."

"And the estate?" asked Tarleton.

"He thought little of that. It was heavily charged with debt made by his
father's wild ways. I believe, too, there was some agreement with the
officers of the crown that he should make over the property to his next
brother, who had none of his scruples. This was in 1670, or thereabouts. A
legal transfer was made to my uncle, who, I think, loved my father, and
understood that, being set in his ways, he would defy the king's authority
to the end. And so--wisely I think--the overruling providence of God
brought us to a new land, where we have greatly prospered."

"And that is all?" said the colonel. "What a strange story! And so you are
Wynne of Wyneote, and lost it."

"For a greater gain," said my father. "My son has a silly fancy for the old
place, but it is lost--lost--sold; and if we could have it at a word, it
would grieve me to see him cast in his lot among a set of drunken, dicing,
hard-riding squires--a godless set. It will never be if I can help it. My
son has left the creed of his father and of mine, and I am glad that his
worldly pride cannot be further tempted. Dost thou hear, Hugh?"

There was a moment of awkward silence. My father had spoken with violence,
once or twice striking the table with his fist until the glasses rang.
There was something of his old vehemence in his statement; but as a rule,
however abrupt when we were alone, before strangers he was as civil to me
as to others. My cousin, I thought, looked relieved as my father went on;
and, ceasing to drum on the table, he quietly filled himself a glass of
Hollands.

I was puzzled. What interest had Arthur to lie about the value of Wyncote
if it was irretrievably lost to us? As my father ended, he glanced at me
with more or less of his old keenness of look, smiling a little as he
regarded me. The pause which came after was brief, as I have said; for my
reflections, such as they were, passed swiftly through my mind, and were as
complete as was under the circumstances possible.

"I am sorry for you," said Tarleton. "An old name is much, but one likes to
have with it all the memories that go with its ancient home."

"That is true," said I; "and, if my father will pardon me, I like still to
say that I would have Wyncote to-day if I could."

"Thou canst not," said my father. "And what we cannot have--what God has
willed that we shall not have--it were wise and well to forget. It is my
affair, and none of thine. Wilt thou taste some of my newly come Madeira,
Friend Tarleton?"

The colonel said "No," and shortly after left us, my cousin going with him.

My father sat still for a while, and then said as I rose, "I trust to hear
no more of this nonsense. Thy aunt and thy mother have put it in thy
foolish head. I will have no more of it--no more. Dost thou hear?"

I said I would try to satisfy him, and so the thing came to an end.

The day after this singular talk, which so much puzzled me, Arthur said at
breakfast that he should be pleased to go with me on the river for white
perch. I hesitated; but, my father saying, "Certainly; he shall go with
thee. I do not need him," I returned that I would be ready at eleven.

We pulled over toward Petty's Island, and when half-way my cousin, who was
steering, and had been very silent for him, said:

"Let her drift a bit; I want to talk to you."

I sat still and listened.

"Why do not you join our army? A commission were easily had."

I replied that he knew my sentiments well, and that his question was
absurd.

"No," he said; "I am your friend, although you do not think so. By George!
were I you, I would be on one side or the other. I like my friends to do
what is manly and decisive." "Holloa!" thinks I; "has Darthea been talking?
And why does he, an officer of the king, want me to go?"

"I shall go some day," I replied, "but when, I know not yet. It seems to me
queer counsel to give a good rebel. When does Miss Peniston return?" I
said.

"What the deuce has that got to do with it? Yes, she is coming back, of
course, and soon; but why do not you join your army?"

"Let us drop that," I said. "There are many reasons; I prefer not to
discuss the matter."

"Very good," he said; "and, Hugh, you heard a heap of nonsense last night
about Wyncote. Tarleton had too much of your father's rum-punch. Your
people were lucky to lose the old place, and how these tales of our being
rich arose I cannot imagine. Come and see us some day, and you will no
longer envy the lot of beggared Welsh squires."

All of this only helped the more to make me disbelieve him; but the key to
his lies I had not, and so I merely said it would be many a day before that
could happen.

"Perhaps," he returned; "but who knows? The war will soon be over."

"When will Miss Peniston be in town?" said I.

He was not sure; but said I put it in his mind to say something.

"Well?" said I, on my guard.

He went on: "I am a frank man, Cousin Hugh."

At times he was, and strangely so; then the next minute he would be
indirect or lie to you. The mixture made it hard to understand what he was
after.

"I trust," he went on, "that you will pardon me if I say that in England
custom does not sanction certain freedoms which in the colonies seem to be
regarded as of no moment. I am not of this opinion. Miss Peniston is, I
hope, to be my wife. She is young, impulsive, and--well, no matter. Some
men take these things coolly; I do not. I am sure you will have the good
sense to agree with me. When a woman is pledged to a man, it is fit that
she should be most guarded in her relations with other men. I--"

Here I broke in, "What on earth does all this mean?"

"I will tell you. Your aunt writes now and then to Miss Peniston."

"Certainly," said I.

"Yes; she says, too, things concerning you and that lady which are not to
my taste."

"Indeed!"

"I have been so honoured as to see some of these famous epistles. I think
Darthea is pleased to torment me at times; it is her way, as you may happen
to know. Also, and this is more serious, you have yourself written to
Darthea."

"I have, and several times. Why not?"

"These letters," he went on, "she has refused to show to me. Now I want to
say--and you will pardon me--that I permit no man to write to a woman whom
I am to marry unless I do not object."

"Well?" I said, beginning to smile, after my unmanageable habit.

"Here I do object."

"What if I say that, so long as Miss Peniston does not seem displeased, I
care not one farthing who objects!"

"By George!" cried he, leaping up in the boat.

"Take care; thou wilt upset the skiff."

"I have half a mind to."

"Nonsense! I can swim like a duck."

"This is no trifle, sir," he returned. "I will allow no man to take the
liberty you insist on. It amazes me that you do not see this as I do. I am
sorry, but I warn you once for all that I--"

"I am at your service, sir," I broke in.

"Pshaw! nonsense! I am a guest in your father's house. I have thought it my
duty, for your sake and my own, to say what I have said. When I know that
you have again disobeyed my reasonable and most earnest wish, I shall
consider how to deal with the matter. I have been forbearing so far, but I
cannot answer for the future."

"Cousin Arthur," I replied, "this seems to me a silly business, in which we
have both lost our tempers. I have no hope that Miss Peniston will ever
change her mind, and I am free to say to you that I think it useless to
persist; but nevertheless--"

"Persist!"

"I said 'persist.' Until Miss Peniston is no longer Miss Peniston, I shall
not cease to do all that is in my power to make her change her mind."

"And you call that honourable--the conduct of a gentleman and a kinsman?"

"Yes; I, too, can be frank. I would rather see her marry any other man than
yourself. You have sought to injure me, why I shall tell you at my own
time. I think you have been deceiving all of us as to certain matters. Oh,
wait! I must have my say. If you were--what I do not think you--a
straight-forward, truthful man, I should think it well, and leave Miss
Peniston to what seems to be her choice. You have been frank, and so am I,
and now we understand each other, and--no; I heard you to an end, and I
must insist that I too be heard. I am not sorry to have had this talk. If I
did not care for her who has promised you her hand, I should be careless as
to what you are, or whether you have been an enemy in my home while
pretending to be a friend. As it is, I love her too well not to do all I
can to make her see you as I see you; and this, although for me there is no
least hope of ever having a place in her heart. I am her friend, and shall
be, and, until she forbids, shall claim every privilege which, with our
simpler manners, the name of friend carries with it. I trust I am plain."

"Plain? By heavens! yes. I have borne much, but now I have only to add that
I never yet forgave an insult. You would be wiser to have a care. A man who
never yet forgave has warned you. What I want I get; and what I get I
keep."

"I think," I said, "that we will go ashore."

"With all my heart." And in absolute silence I pulled back. At the slip he
left me without a word, and I secured the boat and walked away, having
found ample subject for reflection. Nor was I altogether discontented at my
cousin's evident jealousy.

The afternoon of this memorable day I rode out on poor Lucy, whom I had put
for safety in our home stables. I went out High to Seventh street, and up
to Race street road, where there was better footing, as it had been kept in
order for the sport which made us call it Race street, and not Sassafras,
which is its real name. I was brought to a stand about Twelfth street, then
only an ox-path, by the bayonet of a grenadier, the camps lying about this
point. I turned to ride back, when I heard a voice I knew crying:

"Holloa, Mr. Wynne! Are you stopped, and why?"

I said I knew no reason, but would go south. I was out for a ride, and had
no special errand.

"Come with me then," he said pleasantly. "I am now the engineer in charge
of the defences." This was my Aunt Gainor's old beau, Captain Montresor,
now a colonel.

"I am sorry your aunt will see none of us, Mr. Wynne. If agreeable to you,
we will ride through the lines."

I asked nothing better, and explaining, awkwardly I fear, that my aunt was
a red-hot Whig, we rode south to Spruce street, past the Bettering-house at
Spruce and Eleventh streets, where the troops which had entered with Lord
Cornwallis were mostly stationed. The main army lay at Germantown, with
detachments below the city, on the east and west banks of the Schuylkill,
to watch our forts at Red Bank and the islands which commanded the Delaware
River and kept the British commander from drawing supplies from the great
fleet which lay helpless below.

As we went by, the Grenadiers were drilling on the open space before the
poorhouse. I expressed my admiration of their pointed caps, red, with
silver front plates, their spotless white leggings and blue-trimmed scarlet
coats.

"Too much finery, Mr. Wynne. These are a king's puppets, dressed to please
the whim of royalty. If all kings took the field, we should have less of
this. Those miserable devils of Mr. Morgan's fought as well in their dirty
skin shirts, and can kill a man at murderous distance with their long
rifles and little bullets. It is like gambling with a beggar. He has all to
get, and nothing to lose but a life too wretched to make it worth keeping."

I made no serious reply, and we rode westward through the governor's woods
to the river. As we turned into an open space to escape a deep mud-hole,
Mr. Montresor said:

"It was here, I think, you and Mr. Warder made yourselves agreeable to two
of our people." I laughed, and said it was a silly business and quite
needless.

"That, I believe," he cried, laughing, "was their opinion somewhat late.
They were the jest of every regimental mess for a month, and we were
inclined to think Mr. Washington had better raise a few regiments of
Quakers. Are you all as dangerous?"

"Oh, worse, worse," I said. "Jack Warder and I are only half-fledged
specimens. You should see the old fellows." Thus jesting, we rode as we
were able until we reached the "banks of the Schuylkill, picketed on both
shores, but on the west side not below the lower ferry, where already my
companion was laying a floating bridge which greatly interested me.

"We have a post on the far hill," he said, "I am afraid to Mr. Hamilton's
annoyance. Let us follow the river."

I was able to guide him along an ox-road, and past garden patches across
High street, to the upper ferry at Callowhill street. Here he pointed out
to me the advantage of a line of nine forts which he was already building.
There was to be one on the hill we call Fairmount to command the upper
ferry. Others were to be set along to the north of Callowhill street road
at intervals to Cohocsink Creek and the Delaware.

The great trees I loved were falling fast under the axes of the pioneers,
whom I thought very awkward at the business. Farm-houses were being torn
down, and orchards and hedges levelled, while the unhappy owners looked on
in mute despair, aiding one another to remove their furniture. The object
was to leave a broad space to north of the forts, that an attacking force
might find no shelter. About an hundred feet from the blockhouses was to be
an abatis of sharpened logs, and a mass of brush and trees, through which
to move would be difficult.

I took it all in, and greedily. The colonel no doubt thought me an
intelligent young fellow, and was kind enough to answer all my questions.
He may later have repented his freedom of speech. And now I saw the reason
for all this piteous ruin. Compensation was promised and given, I heard,
but it seemed to me hard to be thus in a day thrust out of homes no doubt
dear to these simple folk. We went past gardens and fields, over broken
fences, all in the way of destruction. Tape-lines pegged to the earth
guided the engineers, and hundreds of negroes were here at work. Near to
Cohocsink Creek we met the second Miss Chew, riding with her father. He was
handsome in dark velvet, his hair clubbed and powdered beneath a flat
beaver with three rolls, and at his back a queue tied with a red ribbon. He
had remained quietly inactive and prudent, and, being liked, had been let
alone by our own party. It is to be feared that neither he nor the ribbon
was quite as neutral as they had been. Miss Margaret looked her best. I
much dislike "Peggy," by which name she was known almost to the loss of
that fine, full "Margaret," which suited better her handsome, uptilted head
and well-bred look.

On the right side rode that other Margaret, Miss Shippen, of whom awhile
back I spoke, but then only as in pretty bud, at the Woodlands. It was a
fair young rose I now saw bowing in the saddle, a woman with both charm and
beauty. Long after, in London, and in less merry days, she was described by
Colonel Tarleton as past question the handsomest woman in all England. I
fear, too, she was the saddest.

"And where have you kept yourself, Mr. Wynne?" she asked. "You are a
favourite of my father's, you know. I had half a mind not to speak to you."

I bowed, and made some gay answer. I could not well explain that the
officers who filled their houses were not to my taste.

"Let me present you to Mr. Andre," said Mr. Shippen, who brought up the
rear.

"I have the honour to know Mr. Wynne," said the officer. "We met at
Lancaster when I was a prisoner in '76; in March, was it not? Mr. Wynne did
me a most kind service, Montresor. I owe it to him that I came to know that
loyal gentleman, Mr. Cope, and the Yeates people, who at least were loyal
to me, I have not forgotten it, nor ever shall."

I said it was a very small service, and he was kind to remember it.

"You may well afford to forget it, sir; I shall not," he returned. He was
in full uniform j not a tall man, but finely proportioned, with remarkably
regular features and a clear complexion which was set off to advantage by
powdered hair drawn back and tied in the usual ribboned queue.

We rode along in company, happy enough, and chatting as we went, Mr. Andre,
as always, the life of the party. He had the gracious frankness of a
well-mannered lad, and, as I recall him, seemed far younger than his years.
He spoke very feelingly aside to me of young Macpherson, who fell at
Quebec. He himself had had the ill luck not to be present when that gallant
assault was made. He spoke of us always as colonials, and not as rebels;
and why was I not in the service of the king, or perhaps that was a
needless question?

I told him frankly that I hoped before long to be in quite other service.
At this he cried, "So, so! I would not say it elsewhere. Is that so? It is
a pity, Mr. Wynne; a hopeless cause," adding, with a laugh, that I should
not find it very easy to get out of the city, which was far too true. I
said there were many ways to go, but how I meant to leave I did not yet
know. After I got out I would tell him. We had fallen back a little as we
talked, the road just here not allowing three to ride abreast.

"I shall ask the colonel for a pass to join our army," I said merrily.

"I would," said he, as gay as I; "but I fear you and Mistress Wynne will
have no favours. Pray tell her to be careful. The Tories are talking."

"Thanks," said I, as we drew aside to let pass a splendid brigade of
Hessians, fat and well fed, with shining helmets.

"We are drawing in a lot of men from Germantown," said Andre, "but for what
I do not know. Ah, here comes the artillery!"

I watched them as we all sat in saddle, while regiment after regiment
passed, the women admiring their precision and soldierly bearing. For my
part, I kept thinking of the half-clad, ill-armed men I had seen go down
these same streets a little while before. "I will go," I said to myself;
and in a moment I had made one of those decisive resolutions which, once
made, seem to control me, and to permit no future change of plan.

By this time we were come to the bridge over Cohocsink Creek, I having
become self-absorbed and silent. The colonel called my attention to his
having dammed the creek, and thus flooded the low meadows for more complete
defence. I said, "Yes, yes!" being no longer interested.

Mr. Shippen said, "We will cross over to the 'Rose of Bath' and have a
little milk-punch before we ride back." This was an inn where, in the
garden, was a mineral water much prescribed by Dr. Kearsley. I excused
myself, however, and, pleading an engagement, rode slowly away.

I put up my mare in my aunt's stable, and went at once into her parlour,
full of my purpose.

I sat down and told her both the talk of two days before with Tarleton and
my cousin, and also that I had had in my boat.

She thought I had been foolishly frank, and said, "You have reason to be
careful, Hugh. That man is dangerous. He would not fight you, because that
would put an end to his relations with your father. Clerk Mason tells me he
has already borrowed two hundred pounds of my brother. So far I can see,"
she went on; "the rest is dark--that about Wyncote, I mean. Darthea, when
once she is away, begins to criticise him. In a word, Hugh, I think he has
reason to be jealous."

"O Aunt Gainor!"

"Yes. She does not answer your letters, nor should she, but she answers
them to me, the minx! a good sign, sir."

"That is not all, aunt. I can stand it no longer. I must go; I am going."

"The army, Hugh?"

"Yes; my mind is made up. My two homes are hardly mine any longer. Every
day is a reproach. For my father I can do little. His affairs are almost
entirely wound up. He does not need me. The old clerk is better."

"Will it be hard to leave me, my son?"

"You know it will," said I. She had risen, tall and large, her eyes soft
with tears.

"You must go," she said, "and may God protect and keep you. I shall be very
lonely, Hugh. But you must go. I have long seen it."

Upon this, I begged she would see my father often, and give me news of him
and of Darthea whenever occasion served. Then she told me Darthea was to
return to the city in two days, and she herself would keep in mind all I
had wished her to do. After this I told her of the difficulties I should
meet with, and we talked them over. Presently she said, "Wait;" then left
the room, and, coming back, gave me a sword the counterpart of Jack's.

"I have had it a year, sir. Let me see," she cried, and would have me put
it on, and the sash, and the buff-and-blue sword-knot. After this she put a
great hand on each shoulder just as she had done with Jack, and, kissing
me, said, "War is a sad thing, but there are worse things. Be true to the
old name, my son." Nor could she bide it a moment longer, but hurried out
with her lace handkerchief to her eyes, saying as she went, "How shall I
bear it! How shall I bear it!"

She also had for me a pair of silver-mounted pistols, and an enamelled
locket with my mother's ever dear face within, done for her when my mother
was in England by the famous painter of miniatures, Mr. Cosway.

And now I set about seeing how I was to get away. Our own forces lay at
Pennypacker's Mills, or near by; but this I did not know until later, and
neither the British nor I were very sure as to their precise situation. It
was clear that I must go afoot. As I walked down Second street with this on
my mind, I met Colonel Montresor with a group of officers. He stopped me,
and, after civilly presenting me, said:

"Harcourt and Johnston"--this latter was he who later married the saucy
Miss Franks and her fortune--"want to know if you have duck-shooting here
on the Schuylkill."

Suddenly, as I stood, I saw my chance and how to leave the town. I said,
"It is rather early, but there are a few ducks in the river. If I had a
boat I would try it to-morrow, and then perhaps, if I find sport, one of
you would join me the day after."

"Very good," said they, as well pleased as I.

"And the boat?" I said.

The colonel had one, a rather light skiff, he told me. He used it to go up
and down to look at the bridges he was now busily laying. When I asked for
its use the next day, he said Yes, if I would send him some ducks; adding
that I should need a pass. He would send it that evening by a sergeant, and
an order for the skiff, which lay on this side at the lower ferry. I
thanked him, and went away happy in the success of my scheme.

I came upon Andre just after. "Not gone yet?" he said.

I replied, "Not yet; but I shall get away."

He rejoined that he would not like to bet on that, and then went on to say
that if my aunt had any trouble as to the officers quartered on her, would
she kindly say so. The Hessians were rough people, and an exchange might be
arranged. Gentlemen of his own acquaintance could be substituted. He
himself was in Dr. Franklin's house. It was full of books, and good ones
too.

I thanked him, but said I fancied she was Whig enough to like the Hessians
better.

On Second street I bought a smock shirt, rough shoes, and coarse knit
stockings, as well as a good snapsack, and, rolling them up securely, left
them at home in the hay-loft. My sword and other finery I must needs leave
behind me. I had no friends to say good-bye to, and quite late in the
evening I merely ran in and kissed my aunt, and received eight hundred
pounds in English notes, her offering to the cause, which I was to deliver
to the general. Her gift to me was one hundred pounds in gold, just what
she gave to my Jack. The larger sum she had put aside by degrees. It
embarrassed me, but to refuse it would have hurt her.

I carefully packed my snapsack, putting the gold in bags at the bottom, and
covering it with the flannel shirts and extra shoes which made up my
outfit. I could not resist taking my pistols, as I knew that to provide
myself as well in camp would not be possible. The bank-bills I concealed in
my long stockings, and would gladly have been without them had I not seen
how greatly this would disappoint my aunt. She counted, and wisely, on
their insuring me a more than favourable reception. Lastly, I got me a
small compass and some tobacco for Jack.

It must be hard for you, in this happier day, when it is easy to get with
speed anywhere on swift and well-horsed coaches, to imagine what even a
small journey of a day or two meant for us. Men who rode carried horseshoes
and nails. Those who drove had in the carriage ropes and a box of tools for
repairs. I was perhaps better off than some who drove or rode in those
days, for afoot one cannot be stalled, nor easily lose a shoe, although
between Philadelphia and Darby I have known it to happen.

I knew the country I was to travel, and up to a point knew it well; beyond
that I must trust to good fortune. Early in the evening came a sergeant
with the promised order for the boat, and a pass signed by Sir William
Howe's adjutant. At ten I bade my father good-night and went upstairs,
where I wrote to him, and inclosed the note in one for my aunt. This I gave
to Tom, our coachman, with strict orders to deliver it late the next day. I
had no wish that by any accident it should too early betray my true
purpose. My gun I ostentatiously cleaned in the late afternoon, and set in
the hall.

No one but my aunt had the least suspicion of what I was in act to do. At
last I sat down and carefully considered my plan, and my best and most
rapid way of reaching the army. To go through Germantown and Chestnut Hill
would have been the direct route, for to a surety our army lay somewhere
nigh to Worcester, which was in the county of Philadelphia, although of
late years I believe in Montgomery. To go this plain road would have taken
me through the pickets, and where lay on guard the chief of the British
army. This would, of course, be full of needless risks. It remained to
consider the longer road. This led me down the river to a point where I
must leave it, shoulder my snapsack, and trudge down the Darby, road, or
between it and the river. Somewhere I must cross the highway and strike
across-country as I could to the Schuylkill River, and there find means to
get over at one of the fords. Once well away from the main road to Darby
and Wilmington, I should be, I thought, safe. After crossing the Schuylkill
I hoped to get news which would guide me. I hardly thought it likely that
the English who lay at Germantown and Mount Airy would picket beyond the
banks of the Wissahickon. I might have to look out for foraging English
west of the Schuylkill, but this I must chance. I was about to leave home,
perhaps forever, but I never in my life went to bed with a more satisfied
heart than I bore that night.




XVI


At break of day I woke, and, stealing downstairs, took gun, powder-horn,
and shot, and in the stable loft put the ammunition in the top of my
snapsack; then, quickly changing my clothes, concealed those I had put off
under the hay, and so set out.

The town was all asleep, and I saw no one until I passed the
Bettering-house, and the Grenadiers cleaning their guns, and powdering
their queues and hair, and thence pushed on to the river. The lower ferry,
known also as Gray's, lay just a little south of where the Woodlands, Mr.
Andrew Hamilton's house, stood among trees high above the quiet river.

A few tents and a squad of sleepy men were at the ferry. I handed my order
and pass to the sergeant, who looked me over as if he thought it odd that a
man of my class should be so equipped to shoot ducks. However, he read my
pass and the order for the boat, pushed the skiff into the water, and
proposed, as he lifted my snapsack, to let one of his men row me. I said
No; I must drift or paddle on to the ducks, and would go alone. Thanking
him, I pushed out into the stream. He wished me good luck, and pocketed my
shilling.

It was now just sunrise. I paddled swiftly downstream. Not a hundred yards
from the ferry I saw ducks on the east shore, and, having loaded, paddled
over to Rambo's Rock, and was lucky enough to get two ducks at a shot.
Recrossing, I killed two more in succession, and then pushed on, keeping
among the reeds of the west bank. As I passed Bartram's famous garden, I
saw his son near the river, busy, as usual, with his innocent flowers.

A half-mile below I perceived, far back of the shore, a few redcoats.
Annoyed no little,--for here I meant to land,--I turned the boat, still
hidden by the tall reeds, and soon drew up the skiff at Bartram's, where,
taking gun and snapsack, I went up the slope. I found Mr. William Bartram
standing under a fine cypress his father had fetched as a slip from Florida
in 1731. He was used to see me on the river, but looked at my odd costume
with as much curiosity as the sergeant had done. He told me his father had
died but ten days before, for which I felt sorry, since, except by Friends,
who had disowned the good botanist, he was held in general esteem. I
hastily but frankly told Mr. Bartram my errand. He said: "Come to the
house. A company or two has just now passed to relieve the lower fort."

After I had a glass of milk, and good store of bread and butter, I asked
him to accept my gun, and that he would do me the kindness to return the
skiff, and with it to forward a note, for the writing of which Mrs. Bartram
gave me quill and paper.

I wrote:

    "Mr. Hugh Wynne presents his compliments to Mr. Montresor, and returns
  his skiff. He desires Mr. Montresor to accept two brace of ducks, and
  begs to express his sincere thanks for the pass, which enabled Mr. Wynne
  to make with comfort his way to the army. Mr. Wynne trusts at some time
  to be able to show his gratitude for this favour, and meanwhile he
  remains Mr. Montresor's obedient, humble servant.

    "October 1, 1777.

    "Mr. Wynne's most particular compliments to Mr. Andre. It proved easier
  to escape than Mr. Andre thought."

I could not help smiling to think of the good colonel's face when he should
read this letter. I glanced at the arms over the fireplace, thanked the
good people warmly, and, as I went out, looked back at the familiar words
old John Bartram set over the door in 1770:

  'T is God alone, Almighty Lord,
  The Holy One by me adored.

It seemed the last of home and its associations. I turned away, passed
through the grounds, which extended up to the Darby road, and, after a
careful look about me, moved rapidly southward. Here and there were
farm-houses between spurs of the broken forest which, with its many farms,
stretched far to westward. I met no one.

I knew there was a picket at the Blue Bell Inn, and so, before nearing it,
I struck into a woodland, and, avoiding the farms, kept to the northwest
until I came on to a road which I saw at once to be Gray's Lane. Unused to
guiding myself by compass, I had again gotten dangerously near to the
river. I pushed up the lane to the west, and after half an hour came upon a
small hamlet, where I saw an open forge and a sturdy smith at work. In a
moment I recognised my old master, Lowry, the farrier. I asked the way
across-country to the Schuylkill. He stood a little, resting on his hammer,
not in the least remembering me. He said it was difficult. I must take
certain country lanes until I got into the Lancaster road, and so on.

I did not wish to get into the main highway, where foragers or outlying
parties might see fit to be too curious. I said at last, "Dost not thou
know thy old prentice, Hugh Wynne?"

I felt sure of my man, as he had been one of the Sons of Liberty, and had
fallen out with Friends in consequence, so that I did not hesitate to
relate my whole story. He was pleased to see me, and bade me enter and see
his wife. As we stood consulting, a man cried out at the door:

"Here are more Hessians." And as he spoke we heard the notes of a bugle.

"Put me somewhere," I said, "and quick."

"No," he cried. "Here, set your snapsack back of this forge. Put on this
leather apron. Smudge your face and hands."

It took me but a minute, and here I was, grimy and black, a smith again,
with my sack hid under a lot of old iron and a broken bellows.

As they rode up--some two dozen yagers--I let fall the bellows handle, at
which my master had set me to work, and went out to the doorway. There, not
at all to my satisfaction, I saw the small Hessian, Captain von Heiser, our
third and least pleasant boarder, the aide of General Knyphausen. Worse
still, he was on Lucy. It was long before I knew how this came to pass.
They had two waggons, and, amidst the lamentations of the hamlet, took
chickens, pigs, and grain, leaving orders on the paymaster, which, I am
told, were scrupulously honoured.

Two horses needed shoeing at once, and then I was told Lucy had a loose
shoe, and my master called me a lazy dog, and bid me quit staring or I
would get a strapping, and to see to the gentleman's mare, and that in a
hurry. It was clear the dear thing knew me; for she put her nose down to my
side to get the apples I liked to keep for her in my side pockets. I really
thought she would betray me, so clearly did she seem to me to understand
that here was a friend she knew. A wild thought came over me to mount her
and ride for my life. No horse there of the heavy Brandenburgers could have
kept near her. It would have been madness, of course, and so I took my
six-pence with a touch of my felthat, and saw my dear Lucy disappear in a
cloud of dust, riding toward the town.

"That was a big risk for thee," said the smith, wiping the sweat from his
forehead with his sleeve. "I will mount and ride with thee across-country
through the Welsh Barony. There thou wilt not be far from the river. It is
a good ten-mile business."

After a little, when I had had some milk and rum, the horses were saddled,
and we crossed by an ox-road through the forest past the settlement of
Cardington, and then forded Cobb's Creek, A cross-road carried us into the
Haverford road, and so on by wood-ways to the old Welsh farms beyond
Merion.

We met no one on the way save a farmer or two, and here, being near to the
Schuylkill, my old master farrier took leave of me at the farm of Edward
Masters, which lay in our way, and commended me to the care of this good
Free Quaker.

There I was well fed, and told I need to look out only on this side the
river for Tories. They were worse than Hessianers, he said, and robbed like
highwaymen. In fact, already the Tories who came confidently back with the
British army had become a terror to all peaceful folk between Sweedsboro
and our own city. Their bands acted under royal commissions, some as honest
soldiers, but some as the enemies of any who owned a cow or a barrel of
flour, or from whom, under torture, could be wrested a guinea. All who were
thus organised came at length to be dreaded, and this whether they were bad
or better. Friend Masters had suffered within the week, but, once over the
Schuylkill, he assured me, there need be no fear, as our own partisans and
foragers were so active to the north of the stream as to make it perilous
for Tories.

With this caution, my Quaker friend went with me a mile, and set me on a
wood path. I must be put over at Hagy's Ford, he feared, as the river was
in flood and too high for a horse to wade; nor was it much better at
Young's Ford above. Finally he said, "The ferryman is Peter Skinner, and as
bad as the Jersey Tories of that name. If thou dost perceive him to talk
Friends' language in reply to thy own talk, thou wilt do well to doubt what
he may tell thee. He is not of our society. He cannot even so speak as that
it will deceive. Hereabouts it is thought he is in league with Fitz." I
asked who was Fitz. He was one, I was told, who had received some lashes
when a private in our army, and had deserted. The British, discovering his
capacity, now used him as a forager; but he did not stop at hen-roosts,

With this added warning, I went on, keeping north until I came to the Rock
road, by no means misnamed, and so through Merion Square to Hagy's Ford
Lane and the descent to the river. I saw few people on the way. The stream
was in a freshet, and not to be waded. My ferryman was caulking a dory. I
said:

"Wilt thou set me across, friend, and at what charge?"

To this he replied, "Where is thee bound?"

I said, "To White Marsh."

"Thee is not of these parts."

"No."

He was speaking the vile tongue which now all but educated Friends speak,
and even some of these; but at that time it was spoken only by the vulgar.

"It will cost thee two shillings."

"Too much," said I; "but thou hast me caught I must over, and that soon."

He was long about getting ready, and now and then looked steadily across
the stream; but as to this I was not troubled, as I knew that, once beyond
it, I was out of danger.

I paid my fare, and left him looking after me up the deep cut which led to
the more level uplands. Whistling gaily, and without suspicion, I won the
hilltop by what I think they called Ship Lane.

Glad to be over Schuylkill and out of the way of risks, I sat down by the
roadside at the top of the ascent. The forest was dense with underbrush on
either side, and the hickories, and below them the sumachs, were already
rich with the red and gold of autumn. Being rather tired, I remained at
rest at least for a half-hour in much comfort of body and mind. I had been
strongly urged by my love for Darthea to await her coming; but decisions
are and were with me despotic, and, once I was of a mind to go, not even
Darthea could keep me. Yet to leave her to my cousin and his wiles I hated.
The more I discussed him in the council of my own thoughts, the more I was
at a loss. His evident jealousy of one so much younger did seem to me, as
it did to my aunt, singular. And why should he wish me to be away, as
clearly he did? and why also malign me to my father I I smiled to think I
was where his malice could do me no harm, and, rising, pulled my snapsack
straps up on my shoulders, and set my face to the east.

Of a sudden I heard to left, "Halt, there!" I saw a long rifle covering me,
and above the brush a man's face. Then stepped out to right, as I obeyed
the order, a fellow in buckskin shirt and leggings, with a pistol. I cried
out, "I surrender;" for what else could I do? Instantly a dozen men, all
armed, were in the road, and an ill-looking lot they were. The leader, a
coarse fellow, was short and red of face, and much pimpled. He had hair
half a foot long, and a beard such as none wore in those days.

I had but time to say meekly, "Why dost thou stop me, friend?" when he
jerked off my sack and, plunging a hand inside, pulled out a pistol.

"A pretty Quaker! Here," and he put back the pistol, crying, as the men
laughed, "sergeant, strap this on your back. Quick! fetch out the horses;
we will look him over later. Up with him behind Joe! Quick--a girth! We
have no time to waste. A darned rebel spy! No doubt Sir William may like to
have him."

In truth, no time was lost nor any ceremony used, and here was I strapped
to the waist of a sturdy trooper, behind whom I was set on a big-boned roan
horse, and on my way home again.

"Which way, Captain Fitz?" said the sergeant. "The ford is high." In a
moment we were away, in all, as I noted, about a score.

The famous Tory chief--he was no better than a bold thief--made no reply,
but rode northwest with his following for a lower ford, as I fancied. He
went at speed through the open pine forest, I, my hands being free, holding
on to my man as well as I could, and, as you may suppose, not very happy, A
mile away we came out on a broad road. Here the captain hesitated, and of
a sudden turned to left toward the river, crying loudly, with an oath,
"Follow me!" The cause was plain.

Some twenty troopers came out into the road not a hundred yards distant,
and instantly rode down on us at a run. Before we could get as swift a
pace, they were close upon us; and then it was a wild and perilous race
downhill for the river, with yells, curses, and pistol-balls flying, I as
helpless, meanwhile, as a child. The big roan kept well up to the front
near the captain. Looking back, through dust and smoke, I saw our pursuers
were better horsed and were gaining. A man near me dropped, and a horse
went down. With my left hand I caught hold of the strap which fastened me
to the rascal in the saddle. He was riding for life, and too scared to take
note of the act. I gave the buckle a quick jerk, and it came loose, and the
strap fell. I clutched the man by the throat with my right hand, and
squeezed his gullet with a death-grip. He made with his right hand for a
holster pistol, losing his stirrups, and kicking as if in a fit. I only
tightened my grip, and fetched him a crack under the left ear with my
unengaged hand. He was reeling in the saddle when, at this instant, I was
aware of a horseman on my right. I saw a sabre gleam in air above us, and,
letting go my scamp's throat, I ducked quickly below his left shoulder as I
swung him to left, meaning to chance a fall. He had, I fancy, some notion
of his peril, for he put up his hand and bent forward, I saw the flash of a
blade, and, my captor's head falling forward, a great spout of blood shot
back into my face, as the pair of us tumbled together headlong from his
horse. I was dimly conscious of yells, oaths, a horse leaping over me, and
for a few seconds knew no more. Then I sat up, wiped the blood away, and
saw what had happened.

The trooper lay across me dead, his head nearly severed from the trunk, and
spouting great jets of blood. A half-dozen dead or wounded were scattered
along the road. Not a rod away was the sergeant who had my sack pinned
under his horse, and far ahead, in a cloud of dust, that terrible swordsman
riding hard after the bandit. Fitz, well mounted, got off, I may add, and,
with three or four, swam the river, living to be hanged, as he well
deserved.

By the time I was up and staggering forward, bent on recovering my sack,
the leader, who had given up the chase, rode toward me. I must have been a
queer and horrid figure. I was literally covered with blood and mud. The
blood was everywhere,--in my hair, over my face, and down my neck,--but I
wanted my precious sack.

"Halt!" he cried out. "Here, corporal, tie this fellow."

"Pardon me," said I, now quite myself. "I was the prisoner of these
rascals."

"Indeed? Your name?"

"Hugh Wynne."

"Where from?"

"From the city."

"Where to?"

"To join the army."

"Your business? What are you?"

"Gentleman."

"Good heavens! you are a queer one! We shall see. Are you hurt! No! Great
Caesar! you are an awful sight!"

"I was tied to that fellow you disposed of, and with your permission I will
get my snapsack yonder."

"Good; get it. Go with him, corporal, and keep an eye on him."

In a half-hour the dead were stripped and pitched aside, the wounded cared
for in haste, and the horses caught.

"Can you ride?" said my captor. "By George, you must!"

"Yes, I can ride."

"Then up with you. Give him a leg."

I wanted none, and was up in a moment on the bare back of a big farm mare;
their errand had been, I learned, the purchase of horses. The captain bade
me ride with him, and, turning north, we rode away, while the big brute
under me jolted my sore bones.

"And now," said the captain, "let me hear, Mr. Wynne, what you have to say.
Take a pull at my flask."

I did so, and went on to relate my adventures briefly--the duck-shooting,
which much amused him, the escape at the forge, and what else seemed to be
needed to set myself right. He looked me over again keenly.

"You had a close thing of it."

"Yes," said I; "you are a terrible swordsman, and a good one, if you will
pardon me."

"I meant to cut him on the head, but he put his neck where his head should
have been. There is one rascal the less; but I missed the leader. Hang
him!"

"He will take care of that," said I.

Then my companion said I must join his troop, and would I excuse his rough
dealing with me?

I declared myself well content, and explained as to his offer that I was
much obliged, and would think it over; but that I desired first to see the
army, and to find my friend, Captain Warder, of the Pennsylvania line.

"Yes; a stout man and dark?"

"No; slight, well built, a blond."

"Good; I know him. I was testing your tale, Mr. Wynne. One has need to be
careful in these times." For a few moments he was silent, and then asked
sharply, "Where did you cross?"

I told him.

"And are there any outlying pickets above the upper ferry on the west
bank!"

I thought not, and went on to tell of the bridging of the river, of the
lines of forts, and of the positions held in the city by the Grenadiers and
the Highlanders. A large part of the army, I said, was being withdrawn from
Germantown, I supposed with a view to attack the forts below the city.

"What you say is valuable, Mr. Wynne." And he quickened the pace with an
order, and pushed on at speed.

It seemed to me time to know into whose company I had fallen, and who was
the hardy and decisive rider at my side.

"May I take the liberty to ask with what command I am?"

"Certainly. I am Allan McLane, at your service. I will talk to you later;
now I want to think over what you have told me. I tried to get into the
city last week, dressed as an old woman; they took my eggs--Lord, they were
aged!--but I got no farther than the middle ferry. Are you sure that troops
are being withdrawn from Germantown?"

I said I was, and in large numbers. After this we rode on in silence
through the twilight. I glanced now and then at my companion, the boldest
of our partisan leaders, and already a sharp thorn in the side of General
Howe's extended line. He was slight, well made, and dark, with some
resemblance to Arthur Wynne, but with no weak lines about a mouth which, if
less handsome than my cousin's, was far more resolute.

I was ready to drop from my rough steed when we began, about nine at night,
to see the camp-fires of our army on either side of Skippack Creek. A halt
at the pickets, and we rode on around the right flank among rude huts, rare
tents, rows of spancelled horses,--we call it "hobbled" nowadays,--and so
at last to a group of tents, the headquarters of the small cavalry
division.

"Halt!" I heard; and I literally almost tumbled off my horse, pleased to
see the last of him.

"This way, sir," said McLane. "Here is my tent. There is a flask under the
pine-needles. I have no feather-bed to offer. Get an hour's rest; it is all
you can have just now. When I find out the headquarters, you must ride
again." And he was gone.

I found a jug of water and a towel; but my attempts to get the blood and
mud out of my hair and neck were quite vain. I gave it up at last. Then I
nearly emptied the flask which McLane had left me, set my sack under my
head, pulled up a blanket, and in a minute was out of the world of war and
sound asleep.

I do not know how long my slumber lasted on my fragrant bed of pine. I
heard a voice say, "Are you dead, man?" And shaken roughly, I sat up,
confused, and for a moment wondering where I was.

"Come," said McLane. "Oh, leave your sack."

"No," I said, not caring to explain why.

In a moment I was in the saddle, as fresh as need be, the cool October
night-wind in my face.

"Where are we bound?" I asked.

"Headquarters. I want you to tell your own news. Hang the man!" We had
knocked down a lurching drunkard, but McLane stayed to ask no questions,
and in a half-hour we pulled up in the glare of a huge fire, around which
lay aides, some asleep and others smoking. A few yards away was a row of
tents.

McLane looked about him. "Holloa, Hamilton!" he cried to a slight young man
lying at the fire. "Tell his Excellency I am here. I have news of
importance."

A moment after, the gentleman, who was to become so well known and to die
so needlessly, came back, and we followed him to the largest of the tents.
As he lifted the fly he said, "Captain McLane to see your Excellency."

On a plain farm-house table were four candles, dimly lighting piles of
neatly folded papers, a simple camp-bed, two or three wooden stools, and a
camp-chest. The officer who sat bareheaded at the table pushed aside a map
and looked up. I was once more in the presence of Washington. Both McLane
and I stood waiting--I a little behind.

"Whom have you here, sir?"

"Mr. Wynne, a gentleman who has escaped in disguise to join the army. He
has news which may interest your Excellency." As he spoke I came forward.

"Are you wounded, sir?"

"No," said I; "it is another man's blood, not mine." He showed no further
curiosity, nor any sign of the amazement I had seen in the faces of his
aides-de-camp on my appearance at the camp-fire.

"Pray be seated, gentlemen. Do me the favour, Captain McLane, to ask
Colonel Hamilton to return. Mr. Wynne, you said?"

"Yes, your Excellency."

Then, to set myself right, I told him that I had had the honour to have met
him at the house of my aunt, Mistress Wynne. "With permission, sir," I
added, "I am charged to deliver to your Excellency eight hundred pounds
which Mistress Wynne humbly trusts may be of use to the cause of liberty."
So saying, I pulled the English notes out of my long stockings and laid
them before him.

"I could desire many recruits like you," he said. "Mr. Hamilton, I beg to
present Mr. Wynne. Have the kindness to make memoranda of what he may tell
us." He spoke with deliberation, as one who had learned to weigh his words,
not omitting any of the usual courteous forms, more common at that time
than in our less formal day. General Knox came in as we sat down.

He was a sturdy man with a slight stoop, and had left his book-shop in
Boston to become the trusted friend and artillery officer of the great
Virginian, who chose his men with slight regard to the tongues of the
Southern officers, for whom they were too often "shopkeepers" or "mere
traders."

"Report of court martial on Daniel Plympton, deserter," said Knox. The
general took the papers, and for ten minutes at least was intently
concerned with what he read. Then he took a pen and wrote a line and his
name, and, looking up, said, "Approved, of course. Parade his regiment at
daybreak for execution. Your pardon, gentlemen." And at once he began to
put to me a series of questions rather slowly. The absence of hurry
surprised me, young as I was, and not yet apt to take in all I might see.
Every minute some one appeared. There were papers to sign, aides coming and
going, impatient sounds out, a man's death decreed; but with no sign of
haste he went on to finish.

At last he rose to his feet, we also standing, of course. "Are you sure
that Sir William has recalled any large force from Grermantown?--any large
force?"

I knew that the Grenadiers and many Hessians had come in, and a
considerable part of the artillery, but to what extent or precisely in what
numbers I could not be sure. He seemed to me to be intensely considering
what I told him.

At last he said, "You must be tired. You have brought much needed help, and
also good news." Why good I did not then understand. "And now what do you
desire? How can I serve you, Mr. Wynne?"

I said I wished to be in the ranks for a time, until I learned a little
more of the duty.

He made no comment, but turning to McLane, said, "Captain McLane, you will
care for this gentleman. I trust occasion may serve, Mr. Wynne, to enable
me to offer Mistress Wynne my thanks. When you desire a commission, Mr.
Hamilton will kindly remind me of the service you have done your country
to-day. You have acted with your usual discretion, Captain McLane.
Good-night, gentlemen." We bowed and went out.

On our way back we rode a footpace, while the captain, now ready enough to
talk, answered my many questions. "Yes; the general was a reserved,
tranquil man, with a chained-up devil inside of him; could lay a whip over
a black fellow's back if a horse were ill groomed, or call a man--and he a
general--a d---- drunkard; but that would be in the heat of a fight. An
archbishop would learn to swear in the army, and the general had no more
piety than was good for men who were here to commit murder."

The next day I set out afoot, as I preferred, to look for Jack, and a nice
business I found it. The army was moving down the Skippack road to
Worcester township, and the whole march seemed, to me at least, one great
bewildering confusion of dust, artillery, or waggons stalled, profane aides
going hither and thither, broken fences, women standing at farm-house
doors, white and crying, as the long line of our foot passed; and over all
rang sharp the clink and rattle of flanking cavalry as the horse streamed
by, trampling the ruddy buckwheat-fields, and through ravaged orchards and
broken gardens. Overhead, in a great cloud high in air, the fine dust was
blown down the line by the east wind. It was thick and oppressive, choking
man and horse with an exacting thirst, mocked by empty wells and defiled
brooks. No one knew where any one else was, and in all my life, save on one
memorable evening, I never heard as great a variety of abominable language.

I had done my best, by some change of underclothes and the industrious use
of soap and water, to make my appearance less noticeable; but it was still
bad enough, because I had no outer garments except those I was wearing. Had
I been better dressed, I had fared better; for in those days clothes were
considered, and you might easily tell by his costume if a man were a
mechanic, a farmer, a small trader, or a gentleman.

I fell at last upon an officer who was endeavouring to get his horse a
share of wayside ditch water. I said to him, seeing my chance, that his
horse had picked up a stone; if he would wait a moment I would knock it
out. On this, and upon his thanking me, I asked where I might find Wayne's
brigade, for in it, as I knew, was my captain of the Third Pennsylvania
Continental foot. He told me it was a mile ahead. Comforted by this news, I
walked on, keeping chiefly in the fields, for there alone was it possible
to get past the marching columns.

About eleven there was a halt. I passed a lot of loose women in carts, many
canvas-covered commissary waggons, footsore men fallen out, and some asleep
in the fields,--all the scum and refuse of an army,--with always dust,
dust, so that man, beast, waggons, and every green thing were of one dull
yellow. Then there was shouting on the road; the stragglers fled left and
right, a waggon of swearing women turned over into a great ditch, and with
laughter, curses, and crack of whip, two well-horsed cannon and caissons
bounded over the field, crashing through a remnant of snake fence, and so
down the road at speed. I ran behind them, glad of the gap they left. About
a mile farther they pulled up, and going by I saw with joy the red and buff
of the Pennsylvania line. Behind them there was an interval, and thus the
last files were less dusty. But for this I should have gone past them. A
soldier told me that this was the regiment I sought, and, searching the
ranks eagerly as they stood at ease, I walked swiftly along.

"Holloa!" I shouted. I saw Jack look about him. "Jack!" I cried. He ran to
me as I spoke. I think I should have kissed him but for the staring
soldiers. In all my life I never was so glad. There was brief time allowed
for greetings. "Fall in! fall in!" I heard. "March!"

"Come along," he said. And walking beside him, I poured out news of home,
of my Aunt Gainor, and of myself.

A mile beyond we halted close to the road near to Methacton Hill, where, I
may add, we lay that night of October 2. Having no tents, Jack and I slept
on the ground rolled up in Holland blankets, and sheltered in part by a
wicky-up, which the men contrived cleverly enough.

I saw on our arrival how--automatically, as it seemed to me--the regiments
found camping-grounds, and how well the ragged men arranged for shelters of
boughs, or made tents with two rails and a blanket. The confusion
disappeared. Sentries and pickets were posted, fires were lit, and food
cooked. The order of it seemed to me as mysterious as the seeming disorder
of the march.

After some talk with Jack, I concluded to serve as a volunteer, at least
for a few weeks, and learn the business better before I should decide to
accept the general's kindness. Accordingly I took my place in the ranks of
Jack's company, and, confiding most of my gold to his care, kept in a belt
under my clothes not more than six guineas, as I remember. No uniform was
to be had at any price; but I was hardly worse off than half of the men who
made up our company. A musket, and what else was wanted, I obtained without
trouble, and as to the drill, I knew it well enough, thanks to the Irish
sergeant who had trained us at home.

Our duties, of course, kept us much apart--that is, Jack and myself; but as
he made use, or pretended to make use, of me as an orderly, I was able to
see more of him than otherwise would have been possible. My pistols I asked
him to use until I could reclaim them, and I made him happy with the
tobacco I brought, and which I soon saw him dividing among other officers;
for what was Jack's was always everybody's. And, indeed, because of this
generosity he has been much imposed upon by the selfish.




XVII


On this night of the 2d of October, Jack told me we should move next
morning or the day after. He had seen General Wayne on an errand for our
colonel. "A strong talker, the general; but as ready to fight as to talk."
In fact, ammunition was issued, and before dawn on the 4th the myriad
noises of an army breaking camp aroused me. It was a gray morning
over-head, and cool. When we fell into line to march, Jack called me out of
the ranks.

"There will be a fight, Hugh. Mr. Howe has sent troops into Jersey, and
weakened his hold on the village, or so it is thought. In fact, you know
that, for it was you that fetched the news. If--I should get killed--you
will tell your aunt--not to forget me--and Darthea too. And my father--my
father, Hugh--I have written to him and to Miss Wynne--in case of
accident." The day before a fight Jack was always going to be killed. I do
not think I ever thought I should be hit. I had, later in the war, a
constant impression that, if I were, it would be in the stomach, and this
idea I much disliked. I fell to thinking of Darthea and Jack, wondering a
little, until the drum and fife struck up, and at the word we stepped out.

I have no intention to describe more of the fight at Germantown than I saw,
and that was but little. It seemed to me confusion worse confounded, and I
did not wonder that Graydon had once written me from the North that we were
in a "scuffle for liberty." The old village was then a long, broken line of
small, gray stone houses, set in gardens on each side of the highway, with
here and there a larger mansion, like the Chew House, Cliveden, and that of
the Wisters.

The ascent from the city is gradual. At Mount Airy it is more abrupt, and
yet more steep at Chestnut Hill, where my aunt's house, on the right, looks
down on broken forests, through which the centre marched by the Perkiomen
road. The fight on our right wing I knew nothing of for many a day.

As we tramped on our march of many miles, the fog which the east wind
brought us grew thicker, but there was less dust. Soon after dusk of
morning we came out of the woods, and moved up the ascent of Chestnut Hill,
where I wondered to find no defences. There were scarce any houses
hereabouts, and between the hill and the descent to Mount Airy our own
regiment diverged to the left, off the road. There were hardly any fences
to trouble us, and where the lines were broken by gardens or hedges, we
went by and remade the line, which was extended more to left as we moved
away from the highway.

At length we were halted. I was thinking of the glad days I had spent
hereabouts when we heard to right the rattle of muskets. McLane had driven
in the advance picket of the enemy. Then the right of our own force fell on
some British light infantry, and, swinging the left on the right as a
pivot, our own flanking regiment faced their guns, so that we were in part
back on the main road. The sun came out for a little, but the fog
thickened, and it was lost. I saw Jack look at me, and noticed how flushed
he was, and that his face was twitching. So heavy was the fog that, as we
saw the guns, we were almost on them. To see fifty feet ahead was
impossible. I saw two red flashes as the muskets rang out. There were wild
cries, quick orders: "Fire! fire!" And with a great shout we ran forward, I
hearing Jack cry, "The bayonet! the bayonet!" I saw in the smoke and fog
men fall to right and left, and in a moment was after Jack, who stood
between the guns, fencing with two big grenadiers. I clubbed one of them
with my butt, and Jack disposed of the second.

Meanwhile the English line had broken, and men who had fallen hurt or were
standing were crying for quarter. I saw none given. It was horrible. Our
men were paying a sad debt, contracted on the 20th of September, when Grey
surprised Wayne at Paoli, and there were no wounded left and few prisoners.

It was a frightful scene, and when the officers succeeded to stop the
slaughter, the account had been mercilessly settled, and there was scarce a
living enemy in sight. Hastily reforming, we went on again, more to left of
the main road, through tents, scattered baggage, dying horses, and misty
red splotches where the scarlet uniforms lay thick on the wet grass. As we
pushed on, the fog broke a little, and a confused mass of redcoats was
seen, some running, and some following tumultuously their colonel,
Musgrave, into the solid stone house of Cliveden, while the larger number
fled down the road and over the fields.

Meanwhile Sullivan's people came up. Two cannon set across the road--they
were but four-pounders--opened with small effect on the stone house. The
fire from the windows was fierce and fatal. Men dropped here and there,
until Jack called to us to lie down. We were at this time behind the
mansion. As we lay, I saw Jack walking to and fro, and coolly lighting a
pipe. Our company lay to the left a little, and away from the rest of the
regiment. I called to Jack:

"Let us rush it, Jack, and batter down the back door."

Jack, as I rose, called out to me, with a fierce oath, to keep still and
obey orders. I dropped, and as I did so saw an officer with a white flag
shot down as he went forward to ask a surrender.

Then we were ordered to march, leaving a regiment to continue the siege; a
half-hour had been lost. We went at a run quite two miles down the slope,
now on, now off the main street, with red gleams now and then seen through
this strangeness of fog. The British were flying, broken and scattered,
over the fields.

I heard "Halt!" as we swung parallel with the road at the market-place,
where the Grenadiers made a gallant stand, as was known by the more orderly
platoon firing. Then we, too, broke out in great blaze, and after, what
with fog and smoke, a fight in a cellar were as good.

The next minute our people came down the highway, and, between the two
fires, the English again gave way. I heard, "Forward! We have 'em!" Some
near me hesitated, and I saw Jack run by me crying, "The bayonet, men!
After me!" I saw no more of Jack for many a day. We were in the wide
marketplace--a mob of furious men, blind with fog and smoke, stabbing,
clubbing, striking, as chance served. My great personal strength helped me
well. Twice I cleared a space, until my musket broke. I fell twice, once
with a hard crack on the head from the butt of a musket. As some English
went over me, I stabbed at them madly, and got a bayonet thrust in my left
arm. I was up in a moment, and for a little while, quite unarmed, was in
the middle of a confused mass of men raging and swearing like maniacs.
Suddenly there was no one to be seen near me; the noise of muskets, the
roar of cannonry, red flashes in the fog in front--that was all, as I stood
panting and dazed. Next I heard wild cries back of me, and the crash of
musketry. Stephens's division, coming up behind us, began to fire,
mistaking us, in the infernal darkness, for an enemy. Our people broke
under it, and, passing me, ran, beaten; for the panic spread in the very
moment of victory.

I turned, not understanding, stumbled over a dead man, and suddenly felt as
if a stone had struck my left leg above the knee. I fell instantly, and for
a time--I do not know how long--lost consciousness. It could have been but
a few moments.

When I came to myself, I got up, confused and giddy, and began to walk, but
with painful difficulty, stumbling over dead or wounded men. Our people
were gone, and I saw no one for a little, till I heard the quick tramp of
feet and saw through the fog the red line of a marching regiment almost
upon me. I made an effort to fall to one side of the street, but dropped
again, and once more knew nothing. I think they went over me. When evening
came, I found myself lying with others on the sidewalk in front of the
Wister house. How I was taken thither I know as little as any. I was stiff,
sore, and bloody, but soon able to look about me. I found a bandage around
my leg, and felt in no great pain unless I tried to move. Men in red coats
came and went, but none heeded my cry for water, until an old servantwoman,
who during the fight had refused to leave the house, brought me a drink. I
knew her well. I tried to tell her who I was, but my parched tongue failed
me, and a rough corporal bade her begone. My watch, a good silver one, was
stolen, but my money-belt was safe.

Beside me were many other wounded, one man hideous with his jaw broken; he
seemed to me dying. By and by soldiers fetched others. Then a detachment of
Virginians went past, in their fringed skin shirts, prisoners, black with
smoke, dirty and sullen. Surgeons' aids came and went in and out, and soon
the sidewalk was crowded with the wounded. At last they carried a dying
general into the house. I asked his name, but no one answered me. It was
the brigadier Agnew, now lying at rest in the lower burial-ground by
Fisher's Lane.

An officer came and counted us like sheep. About nine a row of carts
stopped,--country waggons seized for the purpose,--and, with small
tenderness, we were told to get in, or at need lifted in. I was put, with
eight others, in a great Conestoga wain without a cover. Soon a detachment
of horse arrived, and thus guarded, we were carted away like logs.

The road was never good, but now it was full of holes and cut up by the
wheels of artillery. I shall never forget the misery of that ride. I set my
teeth and resolved to utter no groan. Before us and behind us were many
loads of wounded men, chiefly such as seemed fit to travel. There were nine
of us. One was dead before we reached town. As we jolted on, and the great
wain rocked, I heard the crack of the drivers' whips, and far and near, in
the darkness or near beside me, curses, prayers, mad screams of pain, or
men imploring water.

When near to Nicetown, came on a cold, heavy rain which chilled us to
shivering. I let my handkerchief get soaked, and sucked it. Then I wet it
again--the rain a torrent--and gave it into the hand of him who was next
me. He could not use his arm, nor could I turn to aid him, nor did he
answer me.

At times we waited on the way, so that it was one in the morning when we
found ourselves in Chestnut street in front of the State-House. It was
still dismally raining. We were told to get out, and with help I did so, a
line of soldiers standing on each side; but no one else near, and it was
too dark to see if any whom I knew were to be seen. When they pulled out
the man next to me, his head fell, and it was clear that he was dead. He
was laid on the sidewalk, and we were helped or made to crawl upstairs to
the long room in the second story.

Here some surgeons' mates came and saw to us quite patiently. Soldiers
fetched bread and water. I asked a pleasant kind of youth, a surgeon's aid,
to let my aunt know of my condition. He said he would, and, without the
least doubt that he would keep his word, I managed to get into a position
of partial ease, and, sure of early relief, lay awaiting the sleep which
came at last when I was weary with listening to the groans of less patient
men. The young surgeon never troubled himself with the delivery of my
message. May the Lord reward him!




XVIII


The mad screams of a man in an agony of pain awoke me on this Sunday,
October 5, at daybreak. The room was a sorry sight. Some had died in the
night, and were soon carried out for burial. I lay still, in no great pain,
and reflected on the swift succession of events of the past week. I had had
bad luck, but soon, of course, my aunt or father would know of my
misfortune. As I waited for what might come, I tried to recall the events
of the battle. I found it almost impossible to gather them into consecutive
clearness, and often since I have wondered to hear men profess to deliver a
lucid history of what went on in some desperate struggle of war. I do not
believe it to be possible.

Being always of a sanguine turn of mind, I waited, full of comforting hope.
About five, after some scant food, we were told to get up and go
downstairs. It was still dark because of the continuous rain and overcast
skies. I refused to walk, and was lifted by two men and put in a waggon. A
few early idlers were around the door to see us come out. I looked eagerly
for a face I knew, but saw none. Our ride was short. We went down Sixth
street, and drew up at the Walnut street front of the prison, called, while
the British held the town, the Provost. It was unfinished, a part being
temporarily roofed over with boards. At the back was a large yard with high
walls. Some, but not all, of the windows in the upper story had transverse
slats to keep those within from seeing out. On the Sixth street side were
none of these guards, and here the windows overlooked the potter's field,
which now we call Washington Square.

As I managed, with some rough help, to get up the steps, a few early risen
people paused to look on. Others came from the tumble-down houses on the
north side of Walnut street, but again I was unfortunate, and saw none I
knew.

My heart fell within me as I looked up at the gray stone walls and grated
windows. The door soon closed behind a hundred of us, not a few being of
the less severely wounded. Often in passing I had thought, with a boy's
horror, of this gloomy place, and tried to imagine how I should feel in
such a cage. I was to learn full well.

With fifteen others, I was shut up in a room about twenty-two feet square,
on the Sixth street side and in the second story. I was, but for a Virginia
captain, the only wounded man among these, the rest being stout country
fellows, ruddy and strong, except one lean little man, a clerk, as I
learned later, and of the commissary department.

As I had again refused to walk upstairs, I was carried, and not rudely laid
down by two soldiers in a corner of the bare room, now to be for many a day
our prison. The rest sat down here and there in dull silence, now and then
looking at the door as if there hope was to be expected to enter. I called
the Virginia captain, after an hour had gone by, and asked him to lift and
ease my hurt leg. He was quick to help, and tender. In a few minutes we
came to know each other, and thus began a friendly relation which has
endured to this present time.

For a day or two soldiers were employed as turnkeys, but then a lot of
rough fellows took their places, and we began to feel the change. I may say
the like of our food. For a week it was better than our pot-luck in camp.
We had rye bread, tea without sugar, and horribly tough beef; but within
two weeks the ration fell to bread and water, with now and then salt or
fresh beef, and potatoes or beans, but neither rum nor tea. A surgeon
dressed my wounds for a month, and then I saw him no more. He was a surly
fellow, and would do for me nothing else, and was usually half intoxicated.
The arm was soon well, but the leg wound got full of maggots when it was no
longer cared for, and only when, in January, I pulled out a bit of bone did
it heal.

Once a day, sometimes in the morning, more often in the afternoon, we were
let out in the yard for an hour, watched by sentries, and these also we
heard outside under our windows. Observing how quickly the big country
louts lost flesh and colour, I set myself to seeing how I could keep my
health. I talked with my unlucky fellow-prisoners, ate the food even when
it was as vile as it soon became, and when in the yard walked up and down
making acquaintances as soon as I was able, while most of the rest sat
about moping. I felt sure that before long some one would hear of me and
bring relief. None came.

The scoundrel in charge was a Captain Cunningham. He had risen from the
ranks. A great, florid, burly, drunken brute, not less than sixty years
old, This fellow no doubt sold our rations, for in December we once passed
three days on rye bread and water, and of the former not much; one day we
had no food.

He kicked and beat his victims at times when drunk, and when I proposed to
him to make ten pounds by letting my aunt know where I was, he struck me
with a heavy iron key he carried, and cut open my head, as a great scar
testifies to this day.

In late December the cold became intense, and we were given a blanket
apiece to cover us as we lay on the straw. We suffered the more from
weather because it chanced that, in October, the frigate "Augusta" blew up
in the harbour, and broke half the panes of glass. In December the snow
came in on us, and was at times thick on the floor. Once or twice a week we
had a little fire-wood, and contrived then to cook the beans, which were
rarely brought us more than half boiled.

We did our best, the captain and I, to encourage our more unhappy
companions, who, I think, felt more than we the horrors of this prisoned
life. We told stories, got up games, and I induced the men to go a-fishing,
as we called it; that is, to let down their ragged hats through the broken
window-panes by cords torn from the edges of our blankets. Now and then the
poor folks near by filled these nets with stale bread or potatoes; but one
day, after long ill luck, a hat was of a sudden felt to be heavy, and was
declared a mighty catch, and hauled up with care. When it was found to be
full of stones, a strange misery appeared on the faces of these eager,
half-starved wretches. The little clerk said, "We asked bread, and they
gave us a stone," and of a sudden, broke out into hideous exuberance of
blasphemy, like one in a minute distraught. It was believed Cunningham had
been he who was guilty of this cruel jest; but as to this I have no
assurance. Our efforts to cultivate patience, and even gay endurance, by
degrees gave way, as we became feeble in body, and the men too hungry to be
comforted by a joke. At last the men ceased to laugh or smile, or even to
talk, and sat in corners close to one another for the saving of body
warmth, silent and inert.

A stout butcher, of the Maryland line, went mad, and swore roundly he was
George the king. It was hard, indeed, to resist the sense of despair which
seemed at last to possess all alike; for to starvation and cold were added
such filth and vileness as men of decent habits felt more than those
accustomed to be careless as to cleanliness.

The Virginian, one Richard Delaney, soon got over a slight hurt he had, and
but for him I should not be alive to-day. The place swarmed with rats, and
he and I set to work capturing them, filling their holes as they came out
at evening, and chasing them until we caught them. They kept well in the
intense cold, and when we were given fire-wood, we cooked and ate them
greedily.

Meanwhile death was busy among the starving hundreds thus huddled together.
We saw every day hasty burials in the potter's field. I wrote twice, with
charred wood, on the half of a handkerchief, and threw it out of the
window, but no good came of this; I suppose the sentries were too vigilant.

A turnkey took one of my guineas, promising to let my aunt hear of me. I
saw him no more. As to Cunningham, he was either too drunk to care, or
expected to make more out of our rations than by a bribe, and probably did
not credit the wild promises of a ragged prisoner. At all events, no good
came of our many efforts and devices, which were more numerous than I have
patience to relate. From the beginning my mind was full of schemes for
escaping, and these I confided to Delaney. They served, at least, to keep
hope fat, as he said.

Early in December I began to have dysentery, and could eat no more, or
rarely; but for Delaney I should have died. He told me, about this time,
that the men meant to kill Cunningham and make a mad effort to overcome the
guard and escape. It seemed to me the wildest folly, but they were grown
quite desperate and resolute for something--all but the butcher, who sang
obscene songs or doleful hymns, and sat dejected in a corner.

The day after I saw the little commissary clerk talking in the yard to
Cunningham, and that evening this rascal appeared with two soldiers and
carried off four of the dozen left in our room; for within a week several
had died of the typhus, which now raged among us. The next morning the
clerk was found dead, strangled, as I believe, in the night, but by whom we
never knew.

I got over the dysentery more speedily than was common, but it was quickly
followed by a burning fever. For how long I know not I lay on the floor in
the straw, miserably rolling from side to side. The last impression I
recall was of my swearing wildly at Delaney because he would insist on
putting under me his own blanket. Then I lost consciousness of my pain and
unrest, and knew no more for many days. I came to a knowledge of myself to
find Delaney again caring for me, and was of a sudden aware how delicious
was the milk he was pouring down my throat. What else Delaney did for me I
know not, except that he found and cared for my money, and bribed the
turnkey with part of it to bring me milk daily for some two weeks. But that
we had hid the guineas for a while in the ashes of the fireplace, I should
have lost this chance and have died; for one day Cunningham made us all
strip, and searched us thoroughly.

About the end of January, Delaney, seeing me bettered and able to sit up a
little, told me this strange story. While I was ill and unconscious, an
officer had come to inspect the prison. Cunningham was very obsequious to
this gentleman, and on Delaney's seizing the chance to complain, said it
was a pack of lies, and how could he help the dysentery and typhus? All
jails had them, even in England, which was too true.

"I went on," said Delaney, "to say that it was an outrage to confine
officers and men together, and that Mr. Wynne and myself should be put on
parole. The inspector seemed startled at this, and said, 'Who?' I had no
mind to let a lie stand in your way, and I repeated, 'Captain Wynne,'
pointing to you, who were raving and wild enough. He came over and stood
just here, looking down on you for so long that I thought he must be sorry
for us. Then he said, in a queer way, and very deliberately, 'Will he get
well? He ought to be better looked after.' Cunningham said it was useless,
because the surgeon had said you would be over yonder (pointing to the
potter's field) in a day or two." Which, in fact, was his cheerful
prediction. It was safe to say it of any who fell ill in the jail.

"This officer appeared puzzled or undecided. He went out and came back
alone, and leaned over you, asking me to pull the blanket from your face. I
did so, as he seemed afraid to touch it. You, my dear Wynne, were saying
'Dorothea' over and over; but who is Dorothea the Lord knows, or you. The
officer, after standing a while, said, 'it was a pity, but it was of no
use; you would die.' As for me, I told him that we were officers starving,
and were entitled to better treatment. He said he would see to it; and that
is all. He went away, and we are still here; but if ever--"

I broke in on Delaney's threat with, "Who was the man?"

"Cunningham consigned me to a more comfortable climate than this when I
asked him, and the turnkey did not know."

"What did he look like?" said I.

"He was tall, very dark, and had a scar over the left eye."

"Indeed? Did he have a way of standing with half-shut eyes, and his mouth a
little open?"

"Certainly. Why, Wynne, you must know the man."

"I do--I do. He is my cousin."

"I congratulate you." And so saying, he went away to the door to receive
our rations, of which now every one except ourselves stole whatever he
could lay hands on.

It did seem to me, as I lay still, in much distress of body, and thought
over that which I now heard for the first time, that no man could be so
cruel as Arthur had shown himself. Time had gone by, and he had done
nothing. If, as appeared likely, he was sure I was almost in the act of
death, it seemed yet worse; for how could I, a dying man, hurt any one? If
for any cause he feared me, here was an end of it. It seemed to me both
stupid and villainous. He had warned me that I had everything to dread from
his enmity if I persisted in writing to Darthea. Assuredly he had been as
good as his word. He was unwilling to risk any worldly advantages by giving
me a gentleman's satisfaction, and could coldly let me die far from the
love of those dear to me, in not much better state than a pig perishing in
a sty. Nay; the pig were better off, having known no better things.

I thought much as I lay there, having been near to death, and therefore
seriously inclined, how impossible it must ever be for me to hate a man
enough to do as Arthur had done. As the days went on, the hope which each
week brought but hatched a new despair; and still I mended day by day; and
for this there was a singular cause. I kept thinking of the hour when my
cousin and I should meet; and as I fed this animal appetite I won fresh
desire to live, the motive serving as a means toward health of body.

Concerning what had caused Arthur to lift no finger of help, I tried to
think no more. If it were because of Darthea, why should he so fear me? I
wished he had more reason. He must have learned later that I was still
alive, and that I was, when he saw me, in no state to recognise him. It
looked worse and worse as I thought about it, until Delaney, hearing me
talk of nothing else, told me I would go mad like the butcher if I let
myself dwell longer upon it. Thus wisely counselled, I set it aside.

It was now the beginning of February; I was greatly improved, and fast
gaining strength, but had lost, as I guessed, nearly three stone. There
were but six of us left, the butcher dying last on his rotten straw in
awful anguish of terror and despair. Delaney and I consoled each, other all
this dreary winter, and we did all men could do for the more unfortunate
ones, whose sicknesses and deaths made this hell of distress almost
unbearable.

The food was at times better, and then again, as a drunkard's caprice
willed, there might be none for a day. If we were ourselves wretched and
starved, we were at least a source of comfort and food to those minor
beings to whom we furnished both board and bed.

I do not mean to tell over the often-heard story of a prison; what we did
to while away the hours; how we taxed our memories until the reading, long
forgotten, came back in morsels, and could be put together for new pleasure
of it.

There was one little man who had been a broken-down clergyman, and had
entered the army. His chief trouble was that he could get no rum, and of
this he talked whenever we would listen. He had, like several sots I have
known, a remarkable memory, and was thus a great resource to us, as he
could repeat whole plays, and a wonderful amount of the Bible. As it was
hard to arouse him, and get him to use his power to recall what he had
read, in an evil hour we bribed him with some choice bits of our noble
rations. After this the price would rise at times, and he became greedy.
His mind gave way by degrees, but he still kept his memory, being also more
and more eager to be paid for his power to interest or amuse us.

When he grew melancholy and sleepless, and walked about all night, it was a
real addition to our many evils. He declared that he must soon die, and I
heard him one night earnestly beseeching God, in language of great force
and eloquence, to forgive him. In the morning he was dead, having strangled
himself resolutely with a strip of blanket and a broken rung of a stool,
with which he had twisted the cord. It must have taken such obstinate
courage as no one could have believed him to possess. He had no capacity to
attach men, and I do not think we grieved for him as much as for the loss
of what was truly a library, and not to be replaced.

On the 3d of February I awakened with a fresh and happy thought in my mind.
My good friend the late lamented Dr. Franklin, used to say that in sleep
the mind creates thoughts for the day to hatch. I am rather of opinion that
sleep so feeds and rests the brain that when first we awaken our power to
think is at its best. At all events, on that day I suddenly saw a way to
let the sweet outside world know I was alive.

At first I used to think of a chaplain as a resource, but I never saw one.
The surgeon came no more when I grew better. Being now able to move about a
little, I had noticed in the yard at times, but only of late, a fat
Romanist priest, who was allowed to bring soup or other food to certain
prisoners. I soon learned that, because Cunningham was of the Church of
Rome, those who were of his own faith were favoured. Indeed, now and then a
part of my lessening guineas obtained from these men a share of the
supplies which the priest, and, I may add, certain gray-clad sisters, also
brought; but this was rare.

That day in the yard I drew near to the priest, but saw Cunningham looking
on, and so I waited with the patience of a prisoned man. It was quite two
weeks before my chance came. The yard being small, was literally full of
half-clad, whole-starved men, who shivered and huddled together where the
sunlight fell. Many reeled with weakness; most were thin past belief, their
drawn skin the colour of a decayed lemon. From this sad crowd came a
strange odour, like to cheese, and yet not like that. Even to remember it
is most horrible. Passing near to a stout old Sister of Charity, I said
quietly:

"I have friends who would help me. For God's love, see Miss Wynne in Arch
street, across from the Meeting."

"I will do your errand," she said.

"Others have said so, sister, and have lied to me."

"I will do it," she said. "And if she is away?"

I thought of my father. He seemed my natural resource, but my cousin would
be there. A final hope there was. I was foolish enough to say, "If she is
not in town, then Miss Darthea Peniston, near by. If you fail me, I shall
curse you while I live."

"I will not fail you. Why should you poor prisoners be so ill used? Trust
me."

I turned away satisfied, remembering that when I left Darthea was about to
return. If she came to know, that would be enough. I had faith in her
friendship and in her; and--if ever I saw her again--should I tell her
what now I knew of Arthur Wynne? I learned many lessons in this awful
place, and among them caution. I would wait and see.

Both Delaney and I strongly desired an exchange, and not merely a parole.
We imagined exchanges to be frequent. My own dilemma, Delaney pointed out,
was that I was not of the army, although I had been in it. And so we
speculated of things not yet come about, and what we would do when they did
come.

The next day went by, and the morning after, it being now February 19, we
were all in the yard. A turnkey came and bade me follow him. I went, as you
may imagine, with an eager heart, on the way, as I hoped, out of this death
in life. As I questioned the man, he said there was an order for a lady to
see me.

Now at this time my hair was a foot long, and no way to shear it. We had
taken the blankets of the dead, and made us coats by tearing holes through
which to thrust our arms. Then, as we lacked for buttons, or string for
points, we could do no more than wrap these strange gowns about us so as to
cover our rags.

My costume troubled me little. I went to the foul-smelling room, now empty,
and waited until the man came back. As he opened the door, I saw the good
Sister of Charity in the hall, and then--who but Darthea? She was in a long
cloak and great muff, and held in her hand a winter mask.

Seeing me in this blue blanket, all unshorn, and with what beard I had
covering my face, when all men but Hessians shaved clean, I wonder not, I
say, that, seeing this gaunt scarecrow, she fell back, saying there was
some mistake.

I cried out, "Darthea! Darthea! Do not leave me. It is I! It is I, Hugh
Wynne."

"My God!" she cried, "it is Hugh! It is! it is!" At this she caught my lean
yellow hand, and went on to say, "Why were we never told? Your Aunt Wynne
is away. Since we thought you dead, she has ordered mourning, and is gone
to her farm, and leaves the servants to feed those quartered on her. But
you are not dead, thank God! thank God! I was but a day come from New York,
and was at home when the dear old sister came and told me. I made her sit
down while I called my aunt. Then Arthur came, and I told him. He was
greatly shocked to hear it. He reminded me that some while before he had
told me that he had seen a man who looked like you in the jail, and was
about to die; and now could it--could it have been you? He is for duty at
the forts to-day, but to-morrow he will get you a parole. He supposed a day
made no matter; at all events, he must delay that long. I never saw him so
troubled."

"Well he might be," thought I. I merely said, "Indeed?" But I must have
looked my doubt, for she added quickly:

"Who could know you, Mr. Wynne?"

I stood all this while clutching at my blanket to cover my filth and rags,
and she, young and tender, now all tears, now flashing a smile in between,
like the pretty lightning of this storm of gentle pity.

"And what fetched you here to this awful place?" I said. "God knows how
welcome you are, but--"

"Oh," she cried, "when Arthur went, I said I would wait, but I could not.
My aunt was in a rage, but I would go with the dear sister; and then I
found Sir William, and Mr. Montresor was there; and you will be helped, and
an end put to this wickedness. But the parole Arthur will ask for--that is
better."

"Darthea," I said hoarsely, my voice breaking, "I have been here since
early in October. I have been starved, frozen, maltreated a hundred ways,
but I can never take a parole. My friend Delaney and I are agreed on this.
As to exchanges, I have no rank, and I may be a year inactive. I will take
my chance here." I think death had been preferable to a parole obtained for
me by Arthur Wynne. No; I was not made of my father-rock to do this and
then to want to kill the man. I could not do that. I put it on the parole.
Delaney and I had agreed, and on this I stood firm.

She implored me to change my mind. "How obstinate you are!" she cried. "Do
you never change? Oh, you are dreadfully changed! Do not die; you must
not." She was strange in her excitement.

Then I thought to ask to have Delaney in, and to bid him tell that vile and
wicked story; but it seemed no place nor time to hurt her who had so helped
me, daring to do what few young women had ever dared even to think of. As I
hesitated, I was struck with a thought which was like a physical pain. It
put myself and the other wretched business quite out of my head.

"O Darthea!" I cried, "you should never have come here. Go at once. Do not
stay a minute. This is a house poisoned. Seven died of fever in this room.
Write me what else is to say, but go; and let me have some plain clothes
from home, and linen and a razor and scissors and, above all," and I
smiled, "soap. But go! go! Why were you let to come?"

"I will go when I have done. Why did I come? Because I am your friend, and
this is the way I read friendship. Oh, I shall hear of it too. But let him
take care; I would do it again. And as to this parole, he shall get it for
you to-morrow, if you like it or not. I will write to you, and the rest you
shall have; and now good-by. I am to be at home for Mr. Montresor in a
half-hour. This is but a bit of payment for the ugly little girl, who is
very honest, sir, I do assure you."

"Do go," I cried. "And, oh, Darthea, if this is your friendship, what would
be your love!"

"Fie! fie! Hush!" she said, and was gone.

In two hours came a note, and I learned, for I had asked to hear of the
war, that Washington was not dead. We had been told that he was. I heard,
too, of Burgoyne's surrender, news now near to five months old, of Count
Donop's defeat and death, of the fall of our forts on the Delaware, of Lord
Cornwallis gone to England, of failures to effect exchanges. Then she went
on to write: "Your father was, strange to say, roused out of a sort of
lethargy by the news of your death. Jack managed to get a letter to your
aunt to say you were missing, and Arthur had search made for you; but many
nameless ones were buried in haste, and he could not find your name on the
lists of prisoners." None had been made to my knowledge. "We all thought
you dead. Your aunt is in mourning, but only of late, thinking it could not
be that you were lost to her. It is well, as you do not like your cousin,
that you should know how kind he has been, and what a comfort to your
father. Indeed,--and now it will amuse you,--he told Arthur, you being
dead, he had still a son, and would consider Arthur as his heir. All this
ought to make you think better of Arthur, whom, I do believe, you have no
reason to dislike. I beg of you to think otherwise of him; my friends must
be his. And have I not proved I am a friend? I fear I cannot at once get
news of you to Mistress Wynne, who has gone to live at the Hill Farm." And
so, with other kind words, she ended, and I, putting the note in a safe
place, sat on my straw, and laughed to think of Arthur's filial care and
present disappointment.

In a few hours came the turnkey, quite captured by Darthea, and no doubt
the richer for a good fee. He fetched a portmantle just come, and an order
to put me in a room alone. I left Delaney with sorrow, but hoped for some
way to help him. In an hour I was clean for the first time in five months,
neatly shaven, my hair somehow cut, and I in sweet linen and a good, plain
gray suit, and a beaver to match. Then I sat down to think, the mere hope
of escape making me weak, and what came of it you shall hear.

The next day I was ordered forth with a few others, and, luckily, late in
the afternoon. I covered my fine clothes with the blanket and went out. In
the yard, just before our time was up, I saw the sister, to my delight, and
perceived too, with joy, that the prisoners did not recognise me, decently
shaven as I was. Only one thing held me back or made me doubt that I was
now close to liberty: I was so feeble that at times I staggered in walking.
I knew, however, that when my new clothes became familiar in the jail my
chance of escape would be over. I must take the present opportunity, and
trust to luck.

My scheme I had clearly thought out. I meant, when in the yard, to drop the
blanket cover, and coolly follow the sister, trusting to my being taken, in
my new garments, for a visitor. It was simple, and like enough to succeed
if my strength held out. It was dusk, and a dark, overclouded day. A bell
was rung, this being the signal for the gang of prisoners to go to their
rooms. Falling back a little, I cast aside the blanket, and then following
the rest, was at once in the hall, dimly lit with lanterns. It was some
eighty feet long. Here I kept behind the group, and went boldly after the
stout sister. No one seemed disposed to suspect the well-dressed gentleman
in gray. I went by the turnkey, keeping my face the other way. I was some
fifteen feet from the great barred outer door. The two sentries stepped
back to let the sister go by. Meanwhile the gate-keeper, with his back to
me, was busy with his keys. He unlocked the door and pulled it open. A
greater lantern hung over it. I was aghast to see the wretch, Cunningham,
just about to enter. He was sure to detect me. I hesitated, but the lookout
into space and liberty was enough for me. The beast fell back to let the
sister pass out. I dashed by the guards, upset the good woman, and, just
outside of the doorway, struck Cunningham in the face--a blow that had in
it all the gathered hate of five months of brutal treatment. He fell back,
stumbling on the broad upper step. I caught him a second full in the neck,
as I followed. With an oath, he rolled back down the high steps, as I,
leaping over him, ran across Walnut street. One of the outside guards fired
wildly, but might as well have killed some passer-by as me.

Opposite were the low houses afterward removed to enlarge Independence
Square. I darted through the open door of a cobbler's shop, and out at the
back into a small yard, and over palings into the open space. It was quite
dark, as the day was overcast. I ran behind the houses to Fifth street.
Here I jumped down the raised bank and turned northward.

Beside me was a mechanic going home with his lantern, which, by military
law, all had to carry after fall of night. He looked at me as if in doubt,
and I took my chance, saying, "Take no notice. I am a prisoner run away
from the jail."

"I'm your man," he said. "Take the lantern, and walk with me. I hear those
devils." And indeed there was a great noise on Walnut street and in the
square. Men were dimly seen running to and fro, and seizing any who had no
lanterns.

We went on to Chestnut street, and down to Second. I asked him here to go
to Dock Creek with me.

At my own home I offered him my last guinea, but he said No. I then told
him my name, and desired he would some day, in better times, seek me out.
And so the honest fellow left me. Many a year after he did come to me in
debt and trouble, and, you may be sure, was set at ease for the rest of his
life.

Looking up, I saw light in the window, and within I could see Arthur and
three other officers. The liquors and decanters were on a table, with bread
and cheese, plain to be seen by hungry eyes. My father's bulky form was in
his big Penn arm-chair, his head fallen forward. He was sound asleep.
Colonel Tarleton had his feet on a low stool my mother used for her basket
of sewing material and the stockings she was so constantly darning.
Harcourt and Colonel O'Hara were matching pennies, and my cousin was
standing by the fire, speaking now and then, a glass in his hand.

The dog asleep in the stable was no more considered than was my poor father
by these insolent guests. An almost overmastering rage possessed me as I
gazed through the panes; for no one had closed the shutters as was usually
done at nightfall. I was hungry, cold, and weak, and these--! I turned
away, and went down the bank of Dock Creek to the boat-house. It was
locked, and this made it likely my boat had escaped the strict search made
by the British. No one being in sight, I went around the house to the
stable at the farther end of the garden. As I came near I smelled the smoke
of our old Tom's pipe, and then seeing him, I called softly, "Tom! Tom!"

He jumped up, crying, "Save us, Master Hugh!" and started to run. In a
moment I had him by the arm, and quickly made him understand that I was
alive, and needed food and help. As soon as he was recovered from his
fright, he fetched me milk, bread, and a bottle of Hollands. After a greedy
meal, he carried to the boat, at my order, the rest of the pint of spirits,
oars, paddle, and boat-key. On the way it occurred to me to ask for Lucy.
She had been seized by the Hessian, Von Heiser, and was in my aunt's
stable. I had not asked about the mare without a purpose; I was in a state
of intense mental clearness, with all my wits in order. In the few minutes
that followed I told Tom not to let any one know of my coming, and then,
pushing off, I dropped quietly down the creek.

It was cold and very dark, and there was some ice afloat in small masses,
amidst which my boat, turning with no guidance, moved on the full of the
ebb tide toward the great river. For about two hundred yards I drifted,
lying flat on my back. At the outlet of the creek was a sudden turn where
the current almost fetched me ashore on the south bank. There from the slip
nearly overhead, as the boat whirled around, I heard a sentinel call out,
"Stop there, or I fire!" I remained motionless, feeling sure that he would
not risk an alarm by reason of a skiff gone adrift. As he called again the
boat slewed around, and shot, stern first, far out into the great flood of
the Delaware. Never had it seemed to me a dearer friend. I was free.
Cautiously using the paddle without rising, I was soon in mid-river. Then I
sat up, and, taking a great drink of the gin, I rowed up stream in the
darkness, finding less ice than I had thought probable.

My plan now was to pull up to Burlington or Bristol; but I soon found the
ice in greater masses, and I began to be puzzled. I turned toward Jersey,
and hither and thither, and in a few minutes came upon fields of moving
ice. It was clear that I must land in the city, and take my chance of
getting past the line of sentries. I pulled cautiously in at Arch street,
and saw a sloop lying at a slip. Lying down, I used the paddle until at her
side. Hearing no sound, I climbed up over her low rail, and made fast the
boat. I could see that no one was on deck. A lighted lantern hung from a
rope near the bow. I took it down, and boldly stepped on the slip. A
sentry, seeing me come, said, "A cold night, captain." "Very," I rejoined,
and went on up the slope. Chance had favoured me. In a few minutes I saw my
aunt's house, shut up, but with a light over the transom of the hall door.
I passed on, went up to Third street, around to the back of the premises,
and over the palings into the long garden behind the dwelling. As I stood
reflecting I heard Lucy neigh, and no voice of friend could have been
sweeter. I smiled to think that I was a man in the position of a thief, but
with a right to take whatsoever I might need. I began to suspect, too, that
no one was in the house. Moving toward it with care, I found all the back
doors open, or at least not fastened. A fire burned on the kitchen hearth,
and, first making sure of the absence of the servants, I shot the bolt of
the hall door, fastened the pin-bolts of the windows which looked on the
front street, and went back to the kitchen with one overruling desire to be
well warmed. I had been cold for four months. Making a roaring fire, I
roasted myself for half an hour, turning like a duck on a spit. Heat and
good bread and coffee I craved most. I found here enough of all, but no
liquors; the gin I had finished, a good pint, and never felt it. Still
feeling my weakness, and aware that I needed all my strength, I stayed yet
a minute, deep in thought, and reluctant to leave the comfort of the
hearth. At last I took a lantern and went upstairs. The china gods and
beasts were all put away, the silver tankards and plate removed, the rugs
gone. My good Whig aunt had done her best to make her despotic boarders no
more comfortable than she could help. All was neglect, dust, and dirt;
pipes and empty bottles lay about, and a smell of stale tobacco smoke was
in the air. Poor Aunt Gainor!

Upstairs the general had moved into the room sacred to her spinster
slumbers. The servants had taken holiday, it seemed, and the officers
appeared to have been indifferent, or absent all day; for this room was in
a vile condition, with even the bed not yet made up, and the curtains torn.
In this and the front chamber, used commonly as my aunt's own sitting-room,
was a strange litter of maps, papers, and equipments, two swords, a brace
of inlaid pistols, brass-plated, two Hessian hats, the trappings of a
Brunswick chasseur, and a long military cloak with a gold-braided
regimental number under a large crown on each shoulder. A sense of
amusement stole over me, although I was so tired I could have fallen with
fatigue. I was feeling my weakness, and suffering from what even to a man
in health would have been great exertion. A full flask of rum lay on the
table; I put it in my pocket, leaving the silver cover. Next I put on the
long cloak, a tall Anhalter helmet, and a straight, gold-mounted sword. The
pistols I took also, loading and priming them, and leaving only the box
where they had lain.

It was now almost ten, and I could not hope to be long left in easy
possession. Then I turned to the table. Much of the confused mass of papers
was in German. I put in my pocket a beautifully drawn map of our own lines
at Valley Forge. I gave it to Alexander Hamilton soon after the war.

A small pipe--I think the Germans call meerschaum--I could not despise,
nor a great bundle of tobacco, which I thrust into the inside pouch of the
cloak.

Last I saw a sealed letter to Lieutenant-Colonel Ernst Ludwig Wilhelm von
Specht, also one to Colonel Montresor. These were much to my purpose.
Finally, as I heard the great clock on the stairway strike ten, I scribbled
on a sheet of paper under Von Knyphausen's arms, "Captain Allan McLane
presents his compliments to General von Knyphausen, and hopes he will do
Captain McLane the honour to return his visit.--February 20, 1778, 10 P.
M."

I laughed as I went downstairs, in that mood of merriment which was my one
sign of excitement at the near approach of peril. A pause at the grateful
fire, and a moment later I was saddling Lucy, looking well to girth and
bit, and last buckling on the spurs of a Hessian officer.

In a few minutes I was trotting up Fifth street. I knew only that the too
extended lines had been drawn in close to the city, after the sharp lesson
at Germantown; but I did not know how complete were the forts and abatis
crossing from the Delaware to the Schuylkill, to the north of Callowhill
street. I meant to pass the lines somewhere, trusting to the legs of Lucy,
who well understood the change of riders, and seemed in excellent
condition.

I turned off into the fields to the westward at Vine street, riding
carefully; and soon, as I moved to north, saw that fences, fruit-trees, and
the scattered remnant of the wood were gone. Stumbling through mud and over
stumps, I began to see before me one of Montresor's blockhouses, and
presently, for now the night was far too clear, the forms of sentries on
top. Dismounting, I moved aside a hundred yards, so that I passed unseen
between two of these forts. But a good piece to the north of them I came on
a strong stockade, and saw beyond it a hazy mass of what I took to be a
monster tangle of dead trees, well fitted to delay a storming-party. Then I
remembered my ride with Montresor. I was caught. I stood still in the
night, wondering what to do: behind me the hum and glow of the city, before
me freedom and darkness.

A man thinks quickly in an hour like that. I mounted, feeling the lift of
my weak body an exertion, and rode back into Vine, and so to Front street.
A hundred yards before me was a great camp-fire, to left of where the road
to Germantown diverges. I saw figures about it passing to and fro. I felt
for my pistols in the holsters of the saddle, and cocked the one on my
right, loosened the long straight Hessian blade, and took the two letters
in my bridle-hand.

As I rode up I saw, for the fire was brightly blazing, that there were
tents, pickets to left and right, men afoot, and horses not saddled. A
sergeant came out into the road. "Halt!" he cried. In broken English, I
said I had a letter for Colonel Montresor, to be given in the morning when
he would be out to inspect the lines, and one for Lieutenant-Colonel von
Specht. The man took the letters. I meant to turn back, wheel, and go by at
speed; but by evil luck a wind from the north blew open my cloak, and in
the brilliant firelight he saw my gray clothes.

"Holloa!" he cried. "What's the word? You are not in uniform. Get off!" So
saying, he caught the rein he had dropped, a man or two running toward us
as he spoke.

If I could, I would have spared the man: but it was his life or mine; I
knew that. I fired square at his chest, the mare reared, the man fell with
a cry. I let Lucy have both spurs. She leaped as a deer leaps, catching a
fellow in the chest with her shoulder, and was off like a crazy thing. I
looked ahead; the way was clear. A glance back showed me the road full of
men. I heard shouts, orders, shot after shot. I was soon far beyond danger,
and going at racing speed through the night; but I had scared up a pleasant
hornets' nest. The last picket was a quarter of a mile ahead, perhaps. I
pulled up, and with difficulty made the mare walk. There were fires on both
sides, and a lot of alert soldiers out in the road. I turned off into the
fields behind a farm-house, glad of the absence of fences. The next moment
I felt the mare gather herself with the half-pause every horseman knows so
well. She had taken a ditch, and prettily too.

Keeping off the highway, but in line with it, I went on slowly, leaning
over in the saddle. After a mile, and much stumbling about, I ceased to
hear noises back of me, and turned, approaching the road I had left. No one
was in sight. Why I was not followed by the horse I know not. I wrapped my
cloak about me, and rode on up the deserted highway. I was free, and on
neutral ground. All I had to fear was an encounter with one of the foraging
parties which kept the country around in constant terror. I met no one. The
sole unpleasant thought which haunted my cold night ride was the face of
the poor devil I had shot. I put it aside. Prison life had at least taught
me the habit of dismissing the torment of vain reflection on an irreparable
past.

I went by the old burying-ground of Germantown, and the rare houses, going
slowly on account of the road, which was full of deep holes, and so through
the market-place where we made our last charge.

At last I breasted the slippery rise of Chestnut Hill, and throwing my
cloak over the mare, that I had taught to stand, went up to the door of my
Aunt Gainor's house.

I knocked long before I was heard. A window was opened above me, and a
voice I loved called out to know what I wanted. I replied, "It is I, Hugh.
Be quick!" A moment later I was in her dear old arms, the servants were
called up, and my faithful Lucy was cared for. Then I fell on a settle, at
the limit of my strength. I was put to bed, and glad I was to stay there
for two days, and not even talk. Indeed, what with good diet and milk and
spirits and clean sheets, I slept as I had not done for many a night.

As soon as I was up and fit to converse, I was made to tell my story over
and over. Meanwhile my aunt was desperately afraid lest we should be
visited, as was not rare, by foragers or Tory partisans. I must go, and at
once. Even war was to be preferred to this anxiety. But before I went she
must tell me what she thought of this strange business of my cousin. I had
been wise not to tell Darthea. A rascal like Arthur would trip himself up
soon or late. Then she fell to thinking, and, bidding me cease for a
little, sat with her head in her large hands, having her elbows on the
table.

"Hugh," she said at last, "he must have more cause to be jealous than we
know. He has still more now. Is it only the woman? Can it be anything about
the estate in Wales? It must be; you remember how he lied to us about it;
but what is it?"

"He thinks I regret the loss of Wyncote, and that I would like to have it.
I am afraid I found it pleasant to say so, seeing that it annoyed him."

"I wish he may have some such cause to hate you, and no other. But why?
Your grandfather made a legal conveyance of an unentailed property, got
some ready money,--how much I never knew,--and came away. How can you
interfere with Arthur? The Wynnes, I have heard, have Welsh memories for an
insult. You struck him once."

"The blow!" and I smiled. "Yes; the woman! Pray God it be that. The
estate--he is welcome to it. I hardly think a Welsh home would bribe me to
leave my own country. But I do not see, aunt, why you so often talk as if
Wyncote were ours, and stolen from us. I do not want it, and why should I?"

"Is not that unreasonable, Hugh?" she returned, with more quietness in the
way of reply than was usual when she was arguing. "You are young now. The
anger between England and ourselves makes all things in Great Britain seem
hateful to you, to me, to all honest colonials; but this will not last.
Peace will come one day or another, and when it does, to be Wynne of
Wyncote--"

"Good gracious, Aunt Gainor! let us set this aside. Arthur Wynne's lies
have stirred us all to think there must be some reason for such a keen
desire to mislead me, you, and my father--above all, my father. But it is
my father's business, not mine; nor, if I may be excused, is it yours."

"That is true, or would be if your father were well or interested. He is
neither--neither; and there is something in the matter. I shall ask my
brother."

"You have done that before."

"I have, but I got nothing. Now he is in such a state that he may be more
free of speech. I think he could be got to tell me what neither he nor my
own father liked to speak of."

Upon this, I told my aunt that I did trust she would not take advantage of
my father's weak mind to get that which, when of wholesome wits, he had
seen fit to conceal. I did not like it.

"Nonsense!" she cried, "nonsense! if you could have the old home--"

"But how can I? It is like promising fairy gold, and I don't want it. I
should like to go there once and see it and my cousins, and come home to
this country."

I was, in fact, weary of the thing, and my aunt would have talked it over
all day. She could not see why I was so set in my mind. She kept urging
that something would turn up about it, and we should have to act; then I
would change my mind. I hardly knew why that which once had been a
delightful and mysterious bait now lured me not at all. What with the great
war, and my own maturity, and Darthea, Wyncote had shrunken out of the
world of my desires. It was too dreamy a bribe for one of my turn of mind.
I would have given half Wales for an hour alone with Arthur Wynne.

Then through my meditations I heard, "Well, mark my word, Master Absolute;
there is some flaw in their title, and--and soon or late--"

"Oh, please, aunt--"

"Well, do not make up your mind. I am afraid of you when you make up your
mind. You are as set in your ways as your father. Do you remember what
Nicholas Wain said of him: 'When John Wynne puts down his foot, thou hast
got to dig it up to move him'?"

She was right; nor did I defend myself. I laughed, but was sad too,
thinking of my poor old father, whom I could not see, and of how far he was
now from being what his friend had described.

I said as much. My aunt replied, "Yes, it is too true; but I think he is
less unhappy, and so thinks Dr. Rush."

After this our talk drifted away, and my aunt would once more hear of my
note in McLane's name left for the Hessian general. "I hope yet to ask him
of it," she cried, "and that dear Mr. Andre--I can see his face. It is the
French blood makes him so gentle. Catch him for me in the war. I should
like to have him on parole for a sixmonth." And at this she laughed, and
heartily, as she did most things.

When this talk occurred we were in a great front room in the second story.
There was a deep bow--window to westward, and here my aunt liked to be at
set of sun, and to look over what seemed to be a boundless forest; for the
many scattered farms were hid away in their woodland shelters, so that from
this vantage of height it looked as though the country beyond might be one
great solitude. Nearer were well-tilled farms, on which the snow still lay
in melting drifts.

As we sat, I was smoking the first tobacco I had had since I left the jail.
This habit I learned long before, and after once falling a captive to that
consoler and counsellor, the pipe, I never gave it up. It is like others of
the good gifts of God: when abused it loses its use, which seems a silly
phrase, but does really mean more than it says. Jack hath somewhere writ
that words have souls, and are always more than they look or say. I could
wish mine to be so taken. And as to tobacco and good rum, Jack said--but I
forget what it was--something neat and pretty and honest, that took a good
grip of you. The tricks an old fellow's memory plays him are queer enough.
I often recall the time and place of something clever a friend hath said
long ago, but when I try to get it back, I have but a sense of its
pleasantness, as of a flavour left in the mouth, while all the wise words
of his saying are quite forgot. Dr. Rush thinks that we are often happy or
morose without apparent cause, when the mind is but recalling the influence
of some former joy or grief, but not that which created either. The great
doctor had many hard sayings, and this was one.

As I sat reflecting, I felt a sudden consciousness of the pleasure my
tobacco gave, and then of how delightful it was to be, as it were, growing
younger day by day, and of how, with return of strength, came a certain
keenness of the senses as to odours, and as to what I ate or drank. It
seemed to me a kind of reward for suffering endured with patience.

My Aunt Gainor sat watching me with the pleasure good women have over one
too weak to resist being coddled. When I had come to this happy condition
of wanting a pipe, as I had jolted out of my pouch the tobacco I stole, she
went off and brought the good weed out of the barn, where she had saved her
last crop under what scant hay the Hessian foragers left her. I must smoke
in her own library, a thing unheard of before; she loved to smell a good
tobacco.

"O Aunt Gainor!"

"But Jack!" she said. She did not like to see Jack with a pipe. He looked
too like a sweet girl, with his fair skin and his yellow hair.

I smoked on in mighty peace of mind, and soon she began again, being rarely
long silent, "I hope you and your cousin will never meet, Hugh."

The suddenness of this overcame me, and I felt myself flush.

"Ah!" she said, "I knew it. There is little love lost between you."

"There are things a man cannot forgive."

"Then may the good God keep you apart, my son."

"I trust not," said I. "I can forgive an insult, even if I am Welsh and a
Wynne; but oh, Aunt Gainor, those added weeks of misery, foulness, filth,
and pain I owe to this man! I will kill him as I would kill any other
vermin." Then I was ashamed, for to say such things before women was not my
way.

"I could kill him myself," said my aunt, savagely. "And now do have some
more of this nice, good gruel," which set me to laughing.

"Let him go," said I, "and the gruel too."

"And that is what you must do, sir. You must go. I am all day in terror."

And still I stayed on, pretty easy in mind; for my aunt had set a fellow on
watch at Mount Airy, to let us know if any parties appeared, and we kept
Lucy saddled. I sorely needed this rest and to be fed; for I was a mere
shadow of my big self when I alighted at her door on that memorable 20th of
February.

The day before I left this delightful haven between jail and camp, came one
of my aunt's women slaves with a letter she had brought from the city, and
this was what it said:

  "DEAR MISTRESS WYNNE: At last I am honoured with the permission to write
  and tell you that Mr. Hugh Wynne is alive. It was cruel that the general
  would not earlier grant me so small a favour as to pass an open letter;
  but Arthur found much difficulty, by reason, I fear, of your well-known
  opinions. He was on the way to the jail when he heard of Mr. Hugh Wynne's
  having escaped, after dreadfully injuring the poor man who took such good
  care of him all winter. How it came that he lay five months in this vile
  abode neither Arthur nor I can imagine, nor yet how he got out of the
  town.

  "Arthur tells me that insolent rebel, Allan McLane, broke into your house
  and stole the beautiful sword the Elector of Hesse gave to General von
  Knyphausen, and what more he took the Lord knows. Also he left an
  impudent letter. The general will hang him whenever he catches him; but
  there is a proverb: perhaps it is sometimes the fish that is the better
  fisherman.

  "I have a queer suspicion as to this matter, and as to the mare Lucy
  being stolen. I am so glad it is I that have the joy to tell you of Mr.
  Hugh Wynne's safety; and until he returns my visit, and forever after, I
  am, madam,

                                         "Your devoted, humble servant,
                                                                "DARTHEA.

  "To Mad(e) Wynne,
    "At the Hill Farm,
      "Chestnut Hill."

My aunt said it was sweet and thoughtful of Darthea, and we had a fine
laugh over the burglary of that bad man, McLane. The woman went back with
two notes stitched into the lining of her gown; one was from, my aunt, and
one I wrote; and to this day Darthea alone knows what it said. God bless
her!

It was March 20 of '78 before I felt myself fully able to set out for camp.
I had run no great risk. The country had been ravaged till it was hard to
find a pig or a cow. Farmers were on small rations, and the foragers had
quit looking for what did not exist. One dull morning I had the mare
saddled, and got ready to leave. It was of a Friday I went away; my aunt as
unwilling to have me set out as she had been eager to have me go the day
before. My Quaker training left me clear of all such nonsense, and, kissing
the dear lady, I left her in tears by the roadside.




XIX


It is a good eighteen-mile ride to Valley Forge over the crooked Perkiomen
road, which, was none the better for the breaking up of the frost. I rode
along with a light heart, but I was watchful, being so used to disastrous
adventures. Happily, I met with no difficulties.

A few miles from the bridge General Washington had built, I fell in with
a party of horse. The officer in command seemed at first suspicious, but
at last sent me on with two troopers. On the last Sunday of the month
Friends were persistently in the habit of flocking into the city to
General Meeting. They were not unwelcome, for they were apt to carry news
of us, and neither we nor the enemy regarded them as neutrals. Our
Commander-in-chief, in an order of this day, declared "that the plans
settled at these meetings are of the most pernicious tendency," and on
this account directed General Lacy "that the parties of light horse be so
disposed as to fall in with these people."

It was one of these parties of horse I had encountered. The officer sent me
on with a guard, and thus, in the company of two troopers, I rode through a
fairly wooded country to the much-worn road leading down to the river. Here
my guards left me with the picket at the bridge. It was a half-hour before
the officer here stationed was satisfied, and meanwhile I stared across the
Schuylkill at the precipitous bluffs, and wondered where lay the army which
had passed the winter back of them. A few men along the far shore, and on
the hill beyond a little redoubt, were all the signs of life or of war and
its precautions. The bridge, over which presently I rode, was of army
waggons weighted with stone, and on top rails with rude scantling. On the
high posts driven into the river-bed for stay of the bridge were burned the
names of the favourite generals. Once over, I walked Lucy up a cleft in the
shore cliff, and came out on the huts of General Varnum's brigade. The
little world of an army came in view. I was on the first rise from the
stream, a mile and a half to the south of the Valley Creek. To westward the
land fell a little, and then rose to the higher slope of Mount Joy. To
north the land again dropped, and rose beyond to the deep gulch of the
Valley Creek. On its farther side the fires of a picket on Mount Misery
were seen. Everywhere were regular rows of log huts, and on the first
decline of every hill slope intrenchments, ditches, redoubts, and
artillery. Far beyond, this group of hills fell gradually to the rolling
plain. A mile away were the long outlying lines of Wayne, and the good
fellows with whom I had charged at Germantown.

Everywhere the forests were gone. Innumerable camp-fires and a city of log
huts told for what uses they had fallen. On the uplands about me ragged men
were drilling; far away I heard the cavalry bugles. A certain sense of
elation and gaiety came over me. It lasted no long time, as I rode Lucy
over the limestone hillocks and down to the lesser valley, which far away
fell into the greater vale of Chester.

The worst of the winter's trials were over, and yet I was horror-struck at
the misery and rags of these poor fellows. No wonder men deserted, and
officers were resigning in scores, desperate under the appeals of helpless
wife and family in far-away homes. It was no better on the upland beyond.
Everywhere were rude huts in rows, woeful-looking men at drill, dejected
sentries, gaunt, hungry, ill clothed, with here and there a better-dressed
officer to make the rest look all the worse.

I thought of the grenadier British troops, fat and strong, in the city I
had fled from, and marvelled to think of what kept them from sweeping this
squalid mob away, as a housewife switches out the summer flies. Full of
thought, I rode a mile through the melting drifts of snow, and came on
Wayne's brigade, which held the lines looking in this direction.

I was long about it; but at last a man pointed out a hut, and I went in.
"Holloa, Jack!" I cried.

"Hugh! Hugh! Where on earth are you from?" And he flushed as he used to do,
and gave me a great bear-hug, saying, "And you are not dead! not dead!
Thank God! thank God!"

Thus again we met, to my unspeakable joy. He was about as lean as I had
been, but on the whole, thanks to his florid skin, looked well or better
than the best of that half-fed army. How we talked, how we poured out our
news that cold March afternoon, I shall not take space to tell; nor his
great wonder at seeing me after all had believed me dead.

After supper came a half-dozen officers, and I heard all the camp gossip,
and was made heartily welcome. Everything was on the mend, they said.
Steuben was drilling the men; Greene was the new and efficient
quartermaster-general. Supplies were pouring in. Mrs. Washington and Lady
Stirling had come. The French were sure to make a treaty with us. As they
talked of their privations I learned, for the first time, of the full
horrors of the winter camp at the forge in the valley. There was still
enough wretchedness to show how far worse must have been the pitiable
condition of the army during that winter of '77-'78. I passed the next day
at rest with Jack. I had had enough of the volunteer business, and
determined, to Jack's regret, to take service with the horse. I was still
unfit to march, and it seemed to me wise for this reason to stick to Lucy's
good legs, at least until my own were in better order.

I think Jack felt that he was under some necessity to take care of me, or
from that affection he has ever shown desired to keep me near him. He only
hoped I would not incline to join McLane's troop, and when I asked why,
declaring that to be my utmost desire, he said it was a service of needless
peril.

Upon this I laughed so that the hut shook, and poor Jack became quite
disconcerted, and fell to making a variety of excuses. It is of this he
says:

"Hugh is come from death, and there is more to live for. For me, that am
often unready and weak, here is again his ever just helpfulness. He is but
a shadow of himself, and I cannot wonder that he is so bitter against the
enemy, or that he desires, less on account of his bodily feebleness than
from a wish to revenge his cruel treatment, to serve with the horse. They
are never more quiet than gadflies. It is dangerous duty, and should it
cost this dear life, how shall I ever face Mistress Wynne?"

I myself had but one thought in my own mind this Sunday in March, as I rode
through the east wind. It is my way, and always was, to have but a single
idea in mind, and to go straight to my object the nearest way. He was right
in his belief that it was my burning wish to pay the debts of my poor
abused body. I knew not when we should move, and the dislike of tiresome
drills under Steuben, with a restless, perhaps a wholesome, instinct to
lead a more active life, conspired to make my hatred seem reasonable.

I could see, as I rode along through the cantonment and the long lines of
huts, how well chosen was the valley camp. The Schuylkill flowing from the
Blue Hills turned here to eastward, the current was deep, the banks were
high and precipitous. To the west, in a deep gorge, the Valley Creek
protected the camp. Bunning down from Mount Joy, a broad spur turned
northward to the Schuylkill. Between this ridge and the river lay an
angular table-land, falling to the valley beyond. Along this ridge, and
high on Mount Joy, were the intrenchments laid out by Du Portail, and
within them were the camps of rare tents and the rows of wooden huts.

Riding north amid the stumps and the lessening drifts of snow, past the
dark huts, and the files of ragged men in line for morning service, I came
down to the angle between the Valley Creek and the Schuylkill. The river
was full, and ran a gray-brown flood. Where the trampled slope rose from
the creek I came upon a small but solid house, built of gray and ruddy
sandstones, a quaint, shell-curved penthouse above the open doorway. Here
were horses held by orderlies, the blue and white of French uniforms,
buff-and-blue officers, and the guard of fifty light horse on a side road
in the saddle, facing the house. I knew I had found the headquarters.
Looking about, I saw, to my joy, Mr. Hamilton talking with some of our
allies. I rode up, and as they turned, I said, "I am Mr. Hugh Wynne,
Colonel Hamilton."

"Good heavens, sir! You are not dead then, after all!"

"No," I said, laughing; "I am alive, thank you. I have been in prison for
months, and I am come now to ask for that commission in the light horse
about which I must beg you to remind his Excellency."

"No wonder," said he, "I did not recognise you. We are now going to morning
service. I will see to it at once. We thought you dead. Indeed, his
Excellency wrote to Mistress Wynne of you. The general has full powers at
last, and you are sure of your commission. Now I must leave you."

A few more needed words were said, and I drew aside to see the staff ride
away. In a few minutes the young aide came back.

"You may join McLane at once. You will have an acting commission until a
more formal one reaches you. I suppose you have no news?"

"None," I said, "except of how a British jail looks."

"His Excellency desires your company at dinner to-day at six."

I said I had no uniform.

"Look at mine," he cried, laughing. "I have only one suit, and the rest are
hardly better off."

I drew back and waited. In a few minutes the general came out, and
mounting, sat still until all of the staff were in the saddle.

He had changed greatly from the fresh, clear-skinned country gentleman I
saw first in Philadelphia. His face was more grave, his very ruddy skin
less clear and more bronzed. I observed that his eyes were deep set, light
blue in colour, and of unusual size; his nose was rather heavy and large;
the mouth resolute and firm, with full lips. His general expression was
sedate and tranquil. In full, neat buff and blue, his hair powdered, the
queue carefully tied, he sat very erect in the saddle, and looked to be a
good horseman.

This is all I remember at that time of this high-minded gentleman. I heard
much of him then and later; and as what I heard or saw varies a good deal
from the idea now held of him, I shall not refrain from saying how he
seemed to us, who saw him in camp and field, or in the hour of rare
leisure. But I shall do better, perhaps, just now to let my friend say what
he seemed to be to his more observant and reflective mind. It was writ long
after.

"Abler pens than mine," says Jack, "have put on record the sorrowful glory
of that dreadful campground by Valley Forge. It is strongly charactered in
those beseeching letters and despatches of the almost heartbroken man, who
poured out his grief in language which even to-day no man can read unmoved.
To us he showed only a gravely tranquil face, which had in it something
which reassured those starving and naked ones. Most wonderful is it, as I
read what he wrote to inefficient, blundering men, to see how calmly he
states our pitiful case, how entirely he controls a nature violent and
passionate beyond that of most men. He was scarcely in the saddle as
commander before the body which set him there was filled with
dissatisfaction.

"I think it well that we know so little of what went on within the walls of
Congress. The silence of history has been friendly to many reputations.
There need be no silence as to this man, nor any concealment, and there has
been much. I would have men see him as we saw him in his anger, when no
language was too strong; in his hour of serene kindliness, when Hamilton,
the aide of twenty, was 'my boy'; in this starving camp, with naked men
shivering all night in their blankets by the fires, when 'he pitied those
miseries he could neither relieve nor prevent.' Am I displeased to think
that although he laughed rarely he liked Colonel Scammel's strong stories,
and would be amused by a song such as no woman should hear?

"This serene, inflexible, decisive man, biding his hour, could be then the
venturesome soldier, willing to put every fortune on a chance, risking
himself with a courage that alarmed men for his life. Does any but a fool
think that he could have been all these things and not have had in him the
wild blood of passion? He had a love for fine clothes and show. He was, I
fear, at times extravagant, and, as I have heard, could not pay his
doctor's bill, and would postpone that, and send him a horse and a little
money to educate his godson, the good doctor's son. As to some of his
letters, they contained jests not gross, but not quite fit for grave
seigniors not _virginibus puerisque_. There is one to Lafayette I have been
shown by the marquis. It is most amusing, but--oh, fie! Was he religious? I
do not know. Men say so. He might have been, and yet have had his hours of
ungoverned rage, or of other forms of human weakness. Like a friend of
mine, he was not given to speech concerning his creed."

My Jack was right. Our general's worst foes were men who loved their
country, but who knew not to comprehend this man. I well remember how I
used to stop at the camp-fires and hear the men talk of him. Here was no
lack of sturdy sense. The notion of Adams and Rush of appointing new
major-generals every year much amused them, and the sharp logic of cold and
empty bellies did not move them from the belief that their chief was the
right man. How was it they could judge so well and these others so ill?

He had no tricks of the demagogue. He coveted no popularity. He knew not to
seek favour by going freely among the men. The democratic feeling in our
army was intense, and yet this reserved aristocrat had to the end the love
and confidence of every soldier in the ranks.




XX


I shall pass lightly over the next two months. I saw Jack rarely, and
McLane kept us busy with foraging parties and incessant skirmishes. Twice
we rode disguised as British troopers into the very heart of the city, and
at night as far down as Second street bridge, captured a Captain Sandford
and carried him off in a mad ride through the pickets. The life suited maid
Lucy and myself admirably. I grew well and strong, and, I may say, paid one
of my debts when we stole in and caught a rascal named Varnum, one of our
most cruel turnkeys. This hulking coward went out at a run through the
lines, strapped behind a trooper, near to whom I rode pistol in hand. We
got well peppered and lost a man. I heard Varnum cry out as we passed the
outer picket, and supposed he was alarmed, as he had fair need to be.

We pulled up a mile away, McLane, as usual, laughing like a boy just out of
a plundered apple-orchard. To my horror Varnum was dead, with a ball
through his brain. His arms, which were around the trooper's waist, were
stiffened, so that it was hard to unclasp them. This rigidness of some men
killed in battle I have often seen.

On Saturday, the 16th of May, Marquis Lafayette came to our huts and asked
me to walk apart with him. We spoke French at his request, as he did not
wish to be overheard, and talked English but ill. He said his Excellency
desired to have fuller knowledge of the forts on the Neck and at the lower
ferry, as well as some intelligence as to the upper lines north of the
town. Mr. Hamilton thought me very fit for the affair, but the
general-in-chief had said, in his kind way, that I had suffered too much to
put my neck in a noose, and that I was too well known in the town, although
it seemed to him a good choice.

When the marquis had said his say I remained silent, until at last he added
that I was free to refuse, and none would think the worse of me; it was not
an order.

I replied that I was only thinking how I should do it.

He laughed, and declared he had won a guinea of Mr. Hamilton. "I did bet on
your face, Monsieur Vynne. I make you my compliments, and shall I say it is
'Yes'?"

"Yes; and I shall go to-morrow, Sunday." And with this he went away.

When I told McLane he said it was a pity, because the redcoats were to have
a grand fandango on the 18th, and he meant to amuse himself that evening,
which he did to some purpose, as you shall hear.

I spent the day in buying from a farmer a full Quaker dress, and stained my
face that night a fine brownish tint with stale pokeberry juice. It was all
the ink we had.

Very early on the 17th I rode at dawn with a trooper to my aunt's house,
and in the woods back of it changed my clothes for the Quaker rig and
broad-brimmed hat. To my delight, my aunt did not know me when I said I
wanted to buy her remaining cow. She was angry enough, until I began to
laugh and told her to look at me. Of course she entreated me not to go, but
seeing me resolved, bade me take the beast and be off. She would do without
milk; as for me, I should be the cause of her death.

I set out about six with poor Sukey, and was so bothered by the horrible
road and by her desire to get back to her stall that it was near eleven in
the morning before we got to town. As usual, food was welcome, and a
trooper was sent with me to the commissary at the Bettering-house, where I
was paid three pounds six after much sharp bargaining in good Quaker talk.
A pass to return was given me, and with this in my pocket I walked away.

I went through the woods and the Sunday quiet of the camps without trouble,
saying I had lost my way, and innocently showing my pass to everybody. Back
and to south of the works on Callowhill were the Hessians and the Fourth
foot. The Seventh and Fourteenth British Grenadiers lay from Delaware
Seventh to westward; the Yagers at Schuylkill Third street, or where that
would be on Mr. Penn's plan; and so to Cohocsink Creek dragoons and foot.
North of them were Colonel Montresor's nine blockhouses, connected by a
heavy stockade and abatis, and in front of this chevaux-de-frise and the
tangled mass of dead trees which had so beaten me when I escaped. The
stockade and the brush and the tumbled fruit-trees were dry from long
exposure, and were, I thought, well fitted to defy attack.

I turned west again, and went out to the Schuylkill River, where at the
upper ferry was now a bridge with another fort. Then I walked southward
along the stream. The guards on the river-bank twice turned me back; but at
last, taking to the woods, I got into the open farm country beyond South
Street, and before dark climbed a dead pine and was able to see the fort
near to Mr. Andrew Hamilton's seat of the Woodlands, set high above the
lower ferry, which was now well bridged.

Pretty tired, I lay down awhile, and then strolled off into town to get a
lodging. When past Walnut street I found the streets unusually full. I had
of purpose chosen First-day for my errand, expecting to find our usual
Sunday quiet, but the licence of an army had changed the ways of this
decorous town. Every one had a lantern, which gave an odd look of
festivity, and, to comply with the military rule, I bought me a lantern.
Men were crying tickets for the play of the "Mock Doctor" on Tuesday, and
for Saturday, "The Deuce is in Him!" Others sold places for the race on
Wednesday, and also hawked almanacs and Tory broadsides. The stores on
Second street were open and well lighted, and the coffee-house was full of
redcoats carousing, while loose women tapped on the windows and gathered at
the doors. All seemed merry and prosperous. Here and there a staid Quaker
in drab walked up the busy street on his homeward way, undistracted by the
merriment and noise of the thronged thoroughfare. A dozen redcoats went by
to change the guards set at the doors of general officers. A negro paused
on the sidewalk, crying, "Pepper-pot, smoking hot!" Another offered me the
pleasant calamus-root, which in those days people liked to chew. A man in a
red coat walked in the roadway ringing a bell and crying, "Lost child!"
Sedan-chairs or chaises set down officers. The quiet, sedate city of Penn
had lost its air of demure respectability, and I felt like one in a strange
place. This sense of alien surroundings may have helped to put me off my
guard; for, because of being a moment careless, I ran a needless risk. Over
the way I saw two blacks holding lanterns so as to show a great bill pasted
on a wall. I crossed to look at it. Above was a Latin motto, which I cannot
now recall, but the body of it I remember well:

    "All Intrepid, able-bodied Heroes who are willing to serve against the
  Arbitrary Usurpations of a Tyranickal Congress can now, by enlisting,
  acquire the polite Accomplishments of a Soldier.

    "Such spirited Fellows will, besides their Pay, be rewarded at the End
  of the War with
                                Fifty Acres
                                 of Land,
  To which every Heroe may retire and Enjoy His Lass and His Bottle."

This so much amused me that I stood still to gaze; for below it was seen
the name of an old schoolmate, William Alien, now a lieutenant-colonel, in
want of Tory recruits.

I felt suddenly a rousing whack on the back, and turning in a rage, saw two
drunken grenadiers.

"Join the harmy, friend; make a cussed fine Quaker bombardier."

I instantly cooled, for people began to stop, pleased at the fun of baiting
a Quaker. The others cried, "Give us a drink, old Thee-and-Thou!" Some
soldiers paused, hoping for a ring and a fight. I was pushed about and
hustled. I saw that at any moment it might end ill. I had a mighty mind
toward anything but non-resistance, but still, fearing to hit the fellows,
I cried out meekly, "Thou art wrong, friends, to oppress a poor man." Just
then I heard William Allen's voice back of me, crying, "Let that Quaker
alone!" As he quickly exercised the authority of an officer, the gathering
crowd dispersed, and the grenadiers staggered away. I was prompt enough to
slip down High street, glad to be so well out of it.

At the inn of the "Bag of Nails," on Front street, I found a number of
Friends, quiet over their Hollands. I sat down in a dark corner, and would
have had a well-earned bowl; but I was no sooner seated than in came a man
with a small bell, and, walking among the guests, rang it, saying, "It is
half after ten, and there will be no more liquor served. No more! no more!"

I knew that it would be impossible to break this decree, and therefore
contented myself with cold beef and cole-slaw. I went to bed, and thought
over the oddity of my being helped by William Allen, and of how easily I
might have been caught.

In washing next morning I was off my guard, and got rid of the most of my
pokeberry juice. I saw my folly too late, but there was no help for it. I
resolved to keep my wide brim well down over my face, seeing in a mirror
how too much like my own self I had become.

I settled my score and went out, passing down the river-front. Here I
counted and took careful note of the war-ships anchored all the way along
the Delaware. At noon I bought an "Observer," and learned that Mr. Howe had
lost a spaniel dog, and that there was to be a great festival that night in
honour of Sir William Howe's departure for England. Would Darthea be there?
I put aside the temptation to see that face again, and set about learning
what forts were on the neck of land to south, where the two rivers, coming
together at an angle, make what we call the Neck. It was a wide lowland
then, but partly diked and crossed by many ditches; a marshy country much
like a bit of Holland, with here and there windmills to complete the
resemblance.

It was so open that, what with the caution required in approaching the
block forts and the windabout ways the ditches made needful, it was late
before I got the information I needed. About nine on this 18th of May, and
long after dusk, I came upon the lower fort, as to which the general was
desirous of more complete knowledge. I walked around it, and was at last
ordered off by the guards.

My errand was now nearly done. My way north took me close to Walnut Grove,
the old country-seat of my father's friend, Joseph Wharton, whom, on
account of his haughty ways, the world's people wickedly called the Quaker
duke, The noise of people come to see, and the faint strains of distant
music, had for an hour reminded me, as I came nearer the gardens of Walnut
Grove, that what McLane had called the great fandango in honour of Sir
William Howe was in full activity. Here in the tall box alleys as a child I
had many times played, and every foot of the ground was pleasingly
familiar.

The noise increased as I approached through the growing darkness; for near
where the lane reached the Delaware was a small earthwork, the last of
those I needed to visit. I tried after viewing it to cross the double rows
of grenadiers which guarded this road, but was rudely repulsed, and thus
had need to go back of their line and around the rear of the mansion. When
opposite to the outhouses used for servants I paused in the great crowd of
townsfolk who were applauding or sullenly listening to the music heard
through the open windows. I had no great desire to linger, but as it was
dark I feared no recognition, and stayed to listen to the fine band of the
Hessians and the wild clash of their cymbals, which, before these Germans
came, no one had heard in the colonies. My work was over. I had but to go
far back of the house and make my way to camp by any one of the ferries.
Unluckily the music so attracted me that I stayed on, and, step by step,
quite at my ease, drew nearer to the mansion.

The silly extravagance of the festival, with its afternoon display of
draped galleys and saluting ships gay with flags, and its absurd mock show
of a tournament in ridiculous costumes, I have no temptation to describe,
nor did I see this part of it. It was meant to honour Sir William Howe, a
man more liked than respected, and as a soldier beneath contempt. I had no
right to have lingered, and my idle curiosity came near to have cost me
dear. The house was precisely like Mount Pleasant, later General Arnold's
home on the Schuylkill. In the centre of a large lawn stood a double
mansion of stone, and a little to each side were seen outhouses for
servants and kitchen use. The open space toward the water was extensive
enough to admit of the farcical tilting of the afternoon. A great variety
of evergreen trees and shrubs gave the house a more shaded look than the
season would otherwise have afforded. Among these were countless lanterns
illuminating the grounds, and from the windows on all sides a blaze of
light was visible. Back of the house two roads ran off, one to west and one
to north, and along these were waggons coming and going, servants,
orderlies, and people with supplies.

At this locality there was much confusion, and, picking up a pair of
lanterns, I went unquestioned past the guard on the south side of Walnut
Lane. Indeed, the sentries here and most of the orderlies were by this time
well in liquor. Once within the grounds, which I knew well, I was perfectly
at home. No one of the guests was without at the side or front. Now and
then a servant passed through the alleys of clipped box to see to the
lanterns. I was quite alone. In the shelter of a row of low hemlocks and
box I stood on a garden-seat at the south side of the house, fifteen feet
from a large bow-window, and, parting the branches, I commanded a full view
of the dancing-room. I had no business here, and I knew it; I meant but to
look and be gone. The May night was warm and even sultry, so that the
sashes were all raised and the curtains drawn aside. I saw with ease a
charming scene.

The walls were covered with mirrors lent for the occasion, and the room I
commanded was beautifully draped with flags and hangings. Young blacks
stood at the doors, or came and went with refreshments. These servants were
clad in blue and white, with red turbans and metal collars and bracelets.
The six Knights of the Blended Roses, or some like silliness, had cast
their queer raiments and were in uniform. Their six chosen ladies were
still in party-coloured costumes, which were not to my taste. Most of the
women--there were but some threescore, almost all Tories or Moderates--were
in the gorgeous brocades and the wide hooped skirts of the day. The
extravagance of the costumes struck me. The head-dresses, a foot above the
head with aigrets and feathers and an excess of powder, seemed to me quite
astonishing.

I stood motionless, caught by the beauty of the moving picture before me. I
have ever loved colour, and here was a feast of it hard to equal. There
were red coats and gold epaulets, sashes and ribboned orders, the green and
red of the chasseurs of Brunswick, blue navy uniforms, the gold lace and
glitter of staff-officers, and in and out among them the clouds of floating
muslin, gorgeous brocades, flashing silk petticoats, jewels, and streaming
ribbons. The air was full of powder shaken from wig, queue, and head-dress;
spurs clinked, stiff gown skirts rustled. The moving mass of colour, lovely
faces, and manly forms bent and swayed in ordered movement as the music of
the grenadier band seemed to move at will these puppets of its harmony.

They were walking a minuet, and its tempered grace, which I have never
ceased to admire, seemed to suit well the splendour of embroidered gowns
and the brilliant glow of the scarlet coats. I began to note the faces and
to see them plainly, being, as I have said, not fifteen feet away from the
window. Sir William Howe was dancing with Miss Redman. I was struck, as
others have been, with his likeness to Washington, but his face wanted the
undisturbed serenity of our great chief's. I dare say he knew better than
to accept as his honest right the fulsome homage of this parting festival.
I thought indeed that he looked discontented. I caught glimpses of Colonel
Tarleton bowing to Miss Bond. Then I saw Miss Franks sweeping a deep
curtsey to Lord Cathcart as he bowed. There were the fair Shippen women,
the Chews, the provost's blonde daughter with Sir John Wrottesley, Mrs.
Ferguson, my aunt's "Tory cat," in gay chat with Sir Charles Calder,
Galloways, Allens--a pretty show of loyal dames, with--save the
officers-few young men I knew.

I started as Darthea moved across the window-space on the arm of Andre,
while following them were Montresor and my cousin. I felt the blood go to
my face as I saw them, and drew back, letting the parted branches come
together. With this storm of love and hate came again the sudden reflection
that I had no right to be here, and that I was off the track of duty. I
stood a moment; the night was dark; lights gleamed far out on the river
from the battleships. The strains of their bands fell and rose, faintly
heard in the distance.

I saw as it were before me with distinctness the camp on the windy hill,
the half-starved, ragged men, the face of the great chief they loved. Once
again I looked back on this contrasting scene of foolish luxury, and turned
to go from where I felt I never should have been. Poor old Joseph Wharton!
I smiled to think that, could he have known to what worldly use his quiet
Quaker home had come, he would have rolled uneasy in his unnamed grave in
the ground of the Arch Street Meeting.

Turning, I gave a few moments of thought to my plans. Suddenly the music
ceased, and, with laughter and pretty cries of expectation, gay gown and
fan and hoop and the many-coloured uniforms trooped out from the doors, as
I learned later, to see the fireworks, over which were to be set off for
final flattery in fiery letters, "_Tes Lauriers Sont Immortels_." I hope he
liked them, those unfading laurels! The shrubbery was at once alive with
joyous women and laughing men.

I had not counted on this, and despite my disguise I felt that any moment
might put me in deadly peril. The speedy fate of a spy I knew too well.

They were all around me in a minute, moving to and fro, merry and chatting.
I heard Andre say to Darthea, "It must please the general; a great success.
I shall write it all to London. Ah, Miss Peniston! how to describe the
ladies!"

"And their gowns!" cried Darthea, "their gowns!"

"I am reduced to desperation," said Andre. "I must ask the women to
describe one another; hey, Wynne?" They were now standing apart from the
rest, and I, hid by the bushes, was not five feet away.

"A dangerous resource," returned Wynne. "The list of wounded vanities would
be large. How like a brown fairy is Miss Pranks! Who shall describe her? No
woman will dare."

"You might ask Mr. Oliver de Laneey," said Miss Darthea. "She would be
secure of a pretty picture."

"And you," said Wynne--"who is to be your painter?"

"I shall beg for the place," cried Andre.

"I think I shall take some rebel officer," said Darthea, saucily. "Think
how fresh we should look to those love-starved gentlemen whom Sir William
has brought to such abject submission."

Andre laughed, but not very heartily. As to Wynne, he was silent. The
captain went on to say how sad it was that just as the general was ready to
sweep those colonials out of existence--

"Why not say rebels, Andre?" Wynne broke in.

"Better not! better not! I never do. It only makes more bitter what is bad
enough. But where are the fireworks?"

Meanwhile I was in dire perplexity, afraid to stir, hoping that they would
move away.

"There is a seat hereabouts," said my cousin.

"You must be tired, Miss Peniston."

"A little."

"I will look," said Wynne. "This way."

As I was in possession of the seat, I got down at once, but in two steps
Arthur was beside me, and for an instant the full blaze from the window
caught me square in the face. He was nearest, but Darthea was just behind
him, and none other but Andre close at hand.

"By heavens!" I heard, and my cousin had me by the collar. "Here, Andre! A
spy! a spy! Quick!"

I heard a cry from Darthea, and saw her reel against my cousin's shoulder.

"Help! help! I am--ill."

Arthur turned, exclaiming, "Darthea! My God!" and thus distracted between
her and me, let slack his hold. I tore away and ran around the house,
upsetting an old officer, and so through the shrubbery and the servants,
whom I hustled one way and another. I heard shouts of "Spy!" "Stop thief!"
and the rattle of arms all around me. Several waggons blocked the roadway.
I felt that I must be caught, and darted under a waggon body. I was close
to the lines as I rose from beneath the waggon.

At this instant cannonry thundered out to north, and a rocket rose in air.
The grenadiers looked up in surprise. Seeing the momentary disorder of
these men, who were standing at intervals of some six feet apart, I darted
through them and into the crowd of spectators. I still heard shouts and
orders, but pushed in among the people outside of the guard, hither and
thither, using my legs and elbows to good purpose. Increasing rattle of
musketry was heard in the distance, the ships beating to quarters, the
cries and noises back of me louder and louder. I was now moving slowly in
the crowd, and at last got clean away from it.

What had happened I knew not, but it was most fortunate for me. When a few
yards from the people I began to run, stumbling over the fields, into and
through ditches, and because of this alarm was at last, I concluded,
reasonably safe.

[Illustration: "HERE ANDRE! A SPY"]
Page 376
Hugh Wynne