MARIUS THE EPICUREAN, VOLUME ONE WALTER PATER

    Cheimerinos oneiros, hote mêkistai hai vyktes.+

    +"A winter's dream, when nights are longest."
    Lucian, The Dream, Vol. 3.




CONTENTS


    PART THE FIRST

    1. "The Religion of Numa": 3-12
    2. White-Nights: 13-26
    3. Change of Air: 27-42
    4. The Tree of Knowledge: 43-54
    5. The Golden Book: 55-91
    6. Euphuism: 92-110
    7. A Pagan End: 111-120

    PART THE SECOND

    8. Animula Vagula: 123-143
    9. New Cyrenaicism: 144-157
    10. On the Way: 158-171
    11. "The Most Religious City in the World": 172-187
    12. "The Divinity that Doth Hedge a King": 188-211
    13. The "Mistress and Mother" of Palaces: 212-229
    14. Manly Amusement: 230-243




MARIUS THE EPICUREAN, VOLUME ONE

PART THE FIRST


CHAPTER I: "THE RELIGION OF NUMA"

[3] As, in the triumph of Christianity, the old religion lingered
latest in the country, and died out at last as but paganism--the
religion of the villagers, before the advance of the Christian Church;
so, in an earlier century, it was in places remote from town-life that
the older and purer forms of paganism itself had survived the longest.
While, in Rome, new religions had arisen with bewildering complexity
around the dying old one, the earlier and simpler patriarchal religion,
"the religion of Numa," as people loved to fancy, lingered on with
little change amid the pastoral life, out of the habits and sentiment
of which so much of it had grown. Glimpses of such a survival we may
catch below the merely artificial attitudes of Latin pastoral poetry;
in Tibullus especially, who has preserved for us many poetic details of
old Roman religious usage.

     At mihi contingat patrios celebrare Penates,
     Reddereque antiquo menstrua thura Lari:

[4] --he prays, with unaffected seriousness.  Something liturgical,
with repetitions of a consecrated form of words, is traceable in one of
his elegies, as part of the order of a birthday sacrifice.  The hearth,
from a spark of which, as one form of old legend related, the child
Romulus had been miraculously born, was still indeed an altar; and the
worthiest sacrifice to the gods the perfect physical sanity of the
young men and women, which the scrupulous ways of that religion of the
hearth had tended to maintain.  A religion of usages and sentiment
rather than of facts and belief, and attached to very definite things
and places--the oak of immemorial age, the rock on the heath fashioned
by weather as if by some dim human art, the shadowy grove of ilex,
passing into which one exclaimed involuntarily, in consecrated phrase,
Deity is in this Place!  Numen Inest!--it was in natural harmony with
the temper of a quiet people amid the spectacle of rural life, like
that simpler faith between man and man, which Tibullus expressly
connects with the period when, with an inexpensive worship, the old
wooden gods had been still pressed for room in their homely little
shrines.

And about the time when the dying Antoninus Pius ordered his golden
image of Fortune to be carried into the chamber of his successor (now
about to test the truth of the old Platonic contention, that the world
would at last find itself [5] happy, could it detach some reluctant
philosophic student from the more desirable life of celestial
contemplation, and compel him to rule it), there was a boy living in an
old country-house, half farm, half villa, who, for himself, recruited
that body of antique traditions by a spontaneous force of religious
veneration such as had originally called them into being.  More than a
century and a half had past since Tibullus had written; but the
restoration of religious usages, and their retention where they still
survived, was meantime come to be the fashion through the influence of
imperial example; and what had been in the main a matter of family
pride with his father, was sustained by a native instinct of devotion
in the young Marius.  A sense of conscious powers external to
ourselves, pleased or displeased by the right or wrong conduct of every
circumstance of daily life--that conscience, of which the old Roman
religion was a formal, habitual recognition, was become in him a
powerful current of feeling and observance.  The old-fashioned, partly
puritanic awe, the power of which Wordsworth noted and valued so highly
in a northern peasantry, had its counterpart in the feeling of the
Roman lad, as he passed the spot, "touched of heaven," where the
lightning had struck dead an aged labourer in the field: an upright
stone, still with mouldering garlands about it, marked the place.  He
brought to that system of symbolic [6] usages, and they in turn
developed in him further, a great seriousness--an impressibility to the
sacredness of time, of life and its events, and the circumstances of
family fellowship; of such gifts to men as fire, water, the earth, from
labour on which they live, really understood by him as gifts--a sense
of religious responsibility in the reception of them.  It was a
religion for the most part of fear, of multitudinous scruples, of a
year-long burden of forms; yet rarely (on clear summer mornings, for
instance) the thought of those heavenly powers afforded a welcome
channel for the almost stifling sense of health and delight in him, and
relieved it as gratitude to the gods.

The day of the "little" or private Ambarvalia was come, to be
celebrated by a single family for the welfare of all belonging to it,
as the great college of the Arval Brothers officiated at Rome in the
interest of the whole state.  At the appointed time all work ceases;
the instruments of labour lie untouched, hung with wreaths of flowers,
while masters and servants together go in solemn procession along the
dry paths of vineyard and cornfield, conducting the victims whose blood
is presently to be shed for the purification from all natural or
supernatural taint of the lands they have "gone about." The old Latin
words of the liturgy, to be said as the procession moved on its way,
though their precise meaning was long [7] since become unintelligible,
were recited from an ancient illuminated roll, kept in the painted
chest in the hall, together with the family records.  Early on that day
the girls of the farm had been busy in the great portico, filling large
baskets with flowers plucked short from branches of apple and cherry,
then in spacious bloom, to strew before the quaint images of the
gods--Ceres and Bacchus and the yet more mysterious Dea Dia--as they
passed through the fields, carried in their little houses on the
shoulders of white-clad youths, who were understood to proceed to this
office in perfect temperance, as pure in soul and body as the air they
breathed in the firm weather of that early summer-time.  The clean
lustral water and the full incense-box were carried after them.  The
altars were gay with garlands of wool and the more sumptuous sort of
blossom and green herbs to be thrown into the sacrificial fire,
fresh-gathered this morning from a particular plot in the old garden,
set apart for the purpose.  Just then the young leaves were almost as
fragrant as flowers, and the scent of the bean-fields mingled
pleasantly with the cloud of incense.  But for the monotonous
intonation of the liturgy by the priests, clad in their strange, stiff,
antique vestments, and bearing ears of green corn upon their heads,
secured by flowing bands of white, the procession moved in absolute
stillness, all persons, even the children, abstaining from [8] speech
after the utterance of the pontifical formula, Favete
linguis!--Silence!  Propitious Silence!--lest any words save those
proper to the occasion should hinder the religious efficacy of the rite.

With the lad Marius, who, as the head of his house, took a leading part
in the ceremonies of the day, there was a devout effort to complete
this impressive outward silence by that inward tacitness of mind,
esteemed so important by religious Romans in the performance of these
sacred functions.  To him the sustained stillness without seemed really
but to be waiting upon that interior, mental condition of preparation
or expectancy, for which he was just then intently striving.  The
persons about him, certainly, had never been challenged by those
prayers and ceremonies to any ponderings on the divine nature: they
conceived them rather to be the appointed means of setting such
troublesome movements at rest.  By them, "the religion of Numa," so
staid, ideal and comely, the object of so much jealous conservatism,
though of direct service as lending sanction to a sort of high
scrupulosity, especially in the chief points of domestic conduct, was
mainly prized as being, through its hereditary character, something
like a personal distinction--as contributing, among the other
accessories of an ancient house, to the production of that aristocratic
atmosphere which separated them from newly-made people.  But [9] in the
young Marius, the very absence from those venerable usages of all
definite history and dogmatic interpretation, had already awakened much
speculative activity; and to-day, starting from the actual details of
the divine service, some very lively surmises, though scarcely distinct
enough to be thoughts, were moving backwards and forwards in his mind,
as the stirring wind had done all day among the trees, and were like
the passing of some mysterious influence over all the elements of his
nature and experience.  One thing only distracted him--a certain pity
at the bottom of his heart, and almost on his lips, for the sacrificial
victims and their looks of terror, rising almost to disgust at the
central act of the sacrifice itself, a piece of everyday butcher's
work, such as we decorously hide out of sight; though some then present
certainly displayed a frank curiosity in the spectacle thus permitted
them on a religious pretext.  The old sculptors of the great procession
on the frieze of the Parthenon at Athens, have delineated the placid
heads of the victims led in it to sacrifice, with a perfect feeling for
animals in forcible contrast with any indifference as to their
sufferings.  It was this contrast that distracted Marius now in the
blessing of his fields, and qualified his devout absorption upon the
scrupulous fulfilment of all the details of the ceremonial, as the
procession approached the altars.

[10] The names of that great populace of "little gods," dear to the
Roman home, which the pontiffs had placed on the sacred list of the
Indigitamenta, to be invoked, because they can help, on special
occasions, were not forgotten in the long litany--Vatican who causes
the infant to utter his first cry, Fabulinus who prompts his first
word, Cuba who keeps him quiet in his cot, Domiduca especially, for
whom Marius had through life a particular memory and devotion, the
goddess who watches over one's safe coming home.  The urns of the dead
in the family chapel received their due service.  They also were now
become something divine, a goodly company of friendly and protecting
spirits, encamped about the place of their former abode--above all
others, the father, dead ten years before, of whom, remembering but a
tall, grave figure above him in early childhood, Marius habitually
thought as a genius a little cold and severe.

     Candidus insuetum miratur limen Olympi,
     Sub pedibusque videt nubes et sidera.--

Perhaps!--but certainly needs his altar here below, and garlands to-day
upon his urn.  But the dead genii were satisfied with little--a few
violets, a cake dipped in wine, or a morsel of honeycomb.  Daily, from
the time when his childish footsteps were still uncertain, had Marius
taken them their portion of the family meal, at the second course,
amidst the silence [11] of the company.  They loved those who brought
them their sustenance; but, deprived of these services, would be heard
wandering through the house, crying sorrowfully in the stillness of the
night.

And those simple gifts, like other objects as trivial--bread, oil,
wine, milk--had regained for him, by their use in such religious
service, that poetic and as it were moral significance, which surely
belongs to all the means of daily life, could we but break through the
veil of our familiarity with things by no means vulgar in themselves. A
hymn followed, while the whole assembly stood with veiled faces.  The
fire rose up readily from the altars, in clean, bright flame--a
favourable omen, making it a duty to render the mirth of the evening
complete.  Old wine was poured out freely for the servants at supper in
the great kitchen, where they had worked in the imperfect light through
the long evenings of winter.  The young Marius himself took but a very
sober part in the noisy feasting.  A devout, regretful after-taste of
what had been really beautiful in the ritual he had accomplished took
him early away, that he might the better recall in reverie all the
circumstances of the celebration of the day.  As he sank into a sleep,
pleasant with all the influences of long hours in the open air, he
seemed still to be moving in procession through the fields, with a kind
of pleasurable awe.  That feeling was still upon him as he [12] awoke
amid the beating of violent rain on the shutters, in the first storm of
the season.  The thunder which startled him from sleep seemed to make
the solitude of his chamber almost painfully complete, as if the
nearness of those angry clouds shut him up in a close place alone in
the world.  Then he thought of the sort of protection which that day's
ceremonies assured.  To procure an agreement with the gods--Pacem
deorum exposcere: that was the meaning of what they had all day been
busy upon.  In a faith, sincere but half-suspicious, he would fain have
those Powers at least not against him.  His own nearer household gods
were all around his bed.  The spell of his religion as a part of the
very essence of home, its intimacy, its dignity and security, was
forcible at that moment; only, it seemed to involve certain heavy
demands upon him.



CHAPTER II: WHITE-NIGHTS

[13] To an instinctive seriousness, the material abode in which the
childhood of Marius was passed had largely added.  Nothing, you felt,
as you first caught sight of that coy, retired place,--surely nothing
could happen there, without its full accompaniment of thought or
reverie.  White-nights! so you might interpret its old Latin name.*
"The red rose came first," says a quaint German mystic, speaking of
"the mystery of so-called white things," as being "ever an
after-thought--the doubles, or seconds, of real things, and themselves
but half-real, half-material--the white queen, the white witch, the
white mass, which, as the black mass is a travesty of the true mass
turned to evil by horrible old witches, is celebrated by young
candidates for the priesthood with an unconsecrated host, by way of
rehearsal." So, white-nights, I suppose, after something like the same
analogy, should be [14] nights not of quite blank forgetfulness, but
passed in continuous dreaming, only half veiled by sleep.  Certainly
the place was, in such case, true to its fanciful name in this, that
you might very well conceive, in face of it, that dreaming even in the
daytime might come to much there.

The young Marius represented an ancient family whose estate had come
down to him much curtailed through the extravagance of a certain
Marcellus two generations before, a favourite in his day of the
fashionable world at Rome, where he had at least spent his substance
with a correctness of taste Marius might seem to have inherited from
him; as he was believed also to resemble him in a singularly pleasant
smile, consistent however, in the younger face, with some degree of
sombre expression when the mind within was but slightly moved.

As the means of life decreased, the farm had crept nearer and nearer to
the dwelling-house, about which there was therefore a trace of workday
negligence or homeliness, not without its picturesque charm for some,
for the young master himself among them.  The more observant passer-by
would note, curious as to the inmates, a certain amount of dainty care
amid that neglect, as if it came in part, perhaps, from a reluctance to
disturb old associations.  It was significant of the national
character, that a sort of elegant gentleman farming, as we say, had
been much affected by some of the most cultivated [15] Romans.  But it
became something more than an elegant diversion, something of a serious
business, with the household of Marius; and his actual interest in the
cultivation of the earth and the care of flocks had brought him, at
least, intimately near to those elementary conditions of life, a
reverence for which, the great Roman poet, as he has shown by his own
half-mystic pre-occupation with them, held to be the ground of
primitive Roman religion, as of primitive morals.  But then, farm-life
in Italy, including the culture of the olive and the vine, has a grace
of its own, and might well contribute to the production of an ideal
dignity of character, like that of nature itself in this gifted region.
Vulgarity seemed impossible.  The place, though impoverished, was still
deservedly dear, full of venerable memories, and with a living
sweetness of its own for to-day.

To hold by such ceremonial traditions had been a part of the struggling
family pride of the lad's father, to which the example of the head of
the state, old Antoninus Pius--an example to be still further enforced
by his successor--had given a fresh though perhaps somewhat artificial
popularity.  It had been consistent with many another homely and
old-fashioned trait in him, not to undervalue the charm of
exclusiveness and immemorial authority, which membership in a local
priestly college, hereditary in his house, conferred upon him.  To set
a real value on [16] these things was but one element in that pious
concern for his home and all that belonged to it, which, as Marius
afterwards discovered, had been a strong motive with his father.  The
ancient hymn--Fana Novella!--was still sung by his people, as the new
moon grew bright in the west, and even their wild custom of leaping
through heaps of blazing straw on a certain night in summer was not
discouraged.  The privilege of augury itself, according to tradition,
had at one time belonged to his race; and if you can imagine how, once
in a way, an impressible boy might have an inkling, an inward mystic
intimation, of the meaning and consequences of all that, what was
implied in it becoming explicit for him, you conceive aright the mind
of Marius, in whose house the auspices were still carefully consulted
before every undertaking of moment.

The devotion of the father then had handed on loyally--and that is all
many not unimportant persons ever find to do--a certain tradition of
life, which came to mean much for the young Marius.  The feeling with
which he thought of his dead father was almost exclusively that of awe;
though crossed at times by a not unpleasant sense of liberty, as he
could but confess to himself, pondering, in the actual absence of so
weighty and continual a restraint, upon the arbitrary power which Roman
religion and Roman law gave to the parent over the son. [17] On the
part of his mother, on the other hand, entertaining the husband's
memory, there was a sustained freshness of regret, together with the
recognition, as Marius fancied, of some costly self-sacrifice to be
credited to the dead.  The life of the widow, languid and shadowy
enough but for the poignancy of that regret, was like one long service
to the departed soul; its many annual observances centering about the
funeral urn--a tiny, delicately carved marble house, still white and
fair, in the family-chapel, wreathed always with the richest flowers
from the garden.  To the dead, in fact, was conceded in such places a
somewhat closer neighbourhood to the old homes they were thought still
to protect, than is usual with us, or was usual in Rome itself--a
closeness which the living welcomed, so diverse are the ways of our
human sentiment, and in which the more wealthy, at least in the
country, might indulge themselves.  All this Marius followed with a
devout interest, sincerely touched and awed by his mother's sorrow.
After the deification of the emperors, we are told, it was considered
impious so much as to use any coarse expression in the presence of
their images.  To Marius the whole of life seemed full of sacred
presences, demanding of him a similar collectedness.  The severe and
archaic religion of the villa, as he conceived it, begot in him a sort
of devout circumspection lest he should fall short at any point of the
demand upon him of anything [18] in which deity was concerned.  He must
satisfy with a kind of sacred equity, he must be very cautious lest he
be found wanting to, the claims of others, in their joys and
calamities--the happiness which deity sanctioned, or the blows in which
it made itself felt. And from habit, this feeling of a responsibility
towards the world of men and things, towards a claim for due sentiment
concerning them on his side, came to be a part of his nature not to be
put off.  It kept him serious and dignified amid the Epicurean
speculations which in after years much engrossed him, and when he had
learned to think of all religions as indifferent, serious amid many
fopperies and through many languid days, and made him anticipate all
his life long as a thing towards which he must carefully train himself,
some great occasion of self-devotion, such as really came, that should
consecrate his life, and, it might be, its memory with others, as the
early Christian looked forward to martyrdom at the end of his course,
as a seal of worth upon it.

The traveller, descending from the slopes of Luna, even as he got his
first view of the Port-of-Venus, would pause by the way, to read the
face, as it were, of so beautiful a dwelling-place, lying away from the
white road, at the point where it began to decline somewhat steeply to
the marsh-land below.  The building of pale red and yellow marble,
mellowed by age, which he saw beyond the gates, was indeed but the
exquisite [19] fragment of a once large and sumptuous villa. Two
centuries of the play of the sea-wind were in the velvet of the mosses
which lay along its inaccessible ledges and angles.  Here and there the
marble plates had slipped from their places, where the delicate weeds
had forced their way.  The graceful wildness which prevailed in garden
and farm gave place to a singular nicety about the actual habitation,
and a still more scrupulous sweetness and order reigned within.  The
old Roman architects seem to have well understood the decorative value
of the floor--the real economy there was, in the production of rich
interior effect, of a somewhat lavish expenditure upon the surface they
trod on.  The pavement of the hall had lost something of its evenness;
but, though a little rough to the foot, polished and cared for like a
piece of silver, looked, as mosaic-work is apt to do, its best in old
age.  Most noticeable among the ancestral masks, each in its little
cedarn chest below the cornice, was that of the wasteful but elegant
Marcellus, with the quaint resemblance in its yellow waxen features to
Marius, just then so full of animation and country colour.  A chamber,
curved ingeniously into oval form, which he had added to the mansion,
still contained his collection of works of art; above all, that head of
Medusa, for which the villa was famous.  The spoilers of one of the old
Greek towns on the coast had flung away or lost the [20] thing, as it
seemed, in some rapid flight across the river below, from the sands of
which it was drawn up in a fisherman's net, with the fine golden
laminae still clinging here and there to the bronze.  It was Marcellus
also who had contrived the prospect-tower of two storeys with the white
pigeon-house above, so characteristic of the place. The little glazed
windows in the uppermost chamber framed each its dainty landscape--the
pallid crags of Carrara, like wildly twisted snow-drifts above the
purple heath; the distant harbour with its freight of white marble
going to sea; the lighthouse temple of Venus Speciosa on its dark
headland, amid the long-drawn curves of white breakers.  Even on summer
nights the air there had always a motion in it, and drove the scent of
the new-mown hay along all the passages of the house.

Something pensive, spell-bound, and but half real, something cloistral
or monastic, as we should say, united to this exquisite order, made the
whole place seem to Marius, as it were, sacellum, the peculiar
sanctuary, of his mother, who, still in real widowhood, provided the
deceased Marius the elder with that secondary sort of life which we can
give to the dead, in our intensely realised memory of them--the
"subjective immortality," to use a modern phrase, for which many a
Roman epitaph cries out plaintively to widow or sister or daughter,
still in the land of the living.  Certainly, if any [21] such
considerations regarding them do reach the shadowy people, he enjoyed
that secondary existence, that warm place still left, in thought at
least, beside the living, the desire for which is actually, in various
forms, so great a motive with most of us.  And Marius the younger, even
thus early, came to think of women's tears, of women's hands to lay one
to rest, in death as in the sleep of childhood, as a sort of natural
want.  The soft lines of the white hands and face, set among the many
folds of the veil and stole of the Roman widow, busy upon her
needlework, or with music sometimes, defined themselves for him as the
typical expression of maternity. Helping her with her white and purple
wools, and caring for her musical instruments, he won, as if from the
handling of such things, an urbane and feminine refinement, qualifying
duly his country-grown habits--the sense of a certain delicate
blandness, which he relished, above all, on returning to the "chapel"
of his mother, after long days of open-air exercise, in winter or
stormy summer.  For poetic souls in old Italy felt, hardly less
strongly than the English, the pleasures of winter, of the hearth, with
the very dead warm in its generous heat, keeping the young myrtles in
flower, though the hail is beating hard without.  One important
principle, of fruit afterwards in his Roman life, that relish for the
country fixed deeply in him; in the winters especially, when the
sufferings of [22] the animal world became so palpable even to the
least observant.  It fixed in him a sympathy for all creatures, for the
almost human troubles and sicknesses of the flocks, for instance.  It
was a feeling which had in it something of religious veneration for
life as such--for that mysterious essence which man is powerless to
create in even the feeblest degree.  One by one, at the desire of his
mother, the lad broke down his cherished traps and springes for the
hungry wild birds on the salt marsh.  A white bird, she told him once,
looking at him gravely, a bird which he must carry in his bosom across
a crowded public place--his own soul was like that!  Would it reach the
hands of his good genius on the opposite side, unruffled and unsoiled?
And as his mother became to him the very type of maternity in things,
its unfailing pity and protectiveness, and maternity itself the central
type of all love;--so, that beautiful dwelling-place lent the reality
of concrete outline to a peculiar ideal of home, which throughout the
rest of his life he seemed, amid many distractions of spirit, to be
ever seeking to regain.

And a certain vague fear of evil, constitutional in him, enhanced still
further this sentiment of home as a place of tried security. His
religion, that old Italian religion, in contrast with the really
light-hearted religion of Greece, had its deep undercurrent of gloom,
its sad, haunting imageries, not exclusively confined to the walls [23]
of Etruscan tombs.  The function of the conscience, not always as the
prompter of gratitude for benefits received, but oftenest as his
accuser before those angry heavenly masters, had a large part in it;
and the sense of some unexplored evil, ever dogging his footsteps, made
him oddly suspicious of particular places and persons.  Though his
liking for animals was so strong, yet one fierce day in early summer,
as he walked along a narrow road, he had seen the snakes breeding, and
ever afterwards avoided that place and its ugly associations, for there
was something in the incident which made food distasteful and his sleep
uneasy for many days afterwards.  The memory of it however had almost
passed away, when at the corner of a street in Pisa, he came upon an
African showman exhibiting a great serpent: once more, as the reptile
writhed, the former painful impression revived: it was like a peep into
the lower side of the real world, and again for many days took all
sweetness from food and sleep.  He wondered at himself indeed, trying
to puzzle out the secret of that repugnance, having no particular dread
of a snake's bite, like one of his companions, who had put his hand
into the mouth of an old garden-god and roused there a sluggish viper.
A kind of pity even mingled with his aversion, and he could hardly have
killed or injured the animals, which seemed already to suffer by the
very circumstance of their life, being what they [24] were.  It was
something like a fear of the supernatural, or perhaps rather a moral
feeling, for the face of a great serpent, with no grace of fur or
feathers, so different from quadruped or bird, has a sort of humanity
of aspect in its spotted and clouded nakedness.  There was a humanity,
dusty and sordid and as if far gone in corruption, in the sluggish
coil, as it awoke suddenly into one metallic spring of pure enmity
against him.  Long afterwards, when it happened that at Rome he saw, a
second time, a showman with his serpents, he remembered the night which
had then followed, thinking, in Saint Augustine's vein, on the real
greatness of those little troubles of children, of which older people
make light; but with a sudden gratitude also, as he reflected how
richly possessed his life had actually been by beautiful aspects and
imageries, seeing how greatly what was repugnant to the eye disturbed
his peace.

Thus the boyhood of Marius passed; on the whole, more given to
contemplation than to action.  Less prosperous in fortune than at an
earlier day there had been reason to expect, and animating his
solitude, as he read eagerly and intelligently, with the traditions of
the past, already he lived much in the realm of the imagination, and
became betimes, as he was to continue all through life, something of an
idealist, constructing the world for himself in great measure from
within, by the exercise [25] of meditative power.  A vein of subjective
philosophy, with the individual for its standard of all things, there
would be always in his intellectual scheme of the world and of conduct,
with a certain incapacity wholly to accept other men's valuations.  And
the generation of this peculiar element in his temper he could trace up
to the days when his life had been so like the reading of a romance to
him.  Had the Romans a word for unworldly?  The beautiful word
umbratilis perhaps comes nearest to it; and, with that precise sense,
might describe the spirit in which he prepared himself for the
sacerdotal function hereditary in his family--the sort of mystic
enjoyment he had in the abstinence, the strenuous self-control and
ascêsis, which such preparation involved. Like the young Ion in the
beautiful opening of the play of Euripides, who every morning sweeps
the temple floor with such a fund of cheerfulness in his service, he
was apt to be happy in sacred places, with a susceptibility to their
peculiar influences which he never outgrew; so that often in
after-times, quite unexpectedly, this feeling would revive in him with
undiminished freshness.  That first, early, boyish ideal of priesthood,
the sense of dedication, survived through all the distractions of the
world, and when all thought of such vocation had finally passed from
him, as a ministry, in spirit at least, towards a sort of hieratic
beauty and order in the conduct of life.

[26] And now what relieved in part this over-tension of soul was the
lad's pleasure in the country and the open air; above all, the ramble
to the coast, over the marsh with its dwarf roses and wild lavender,
and delightful signs, one after another--the abandoned boat, the ruined
flood-gates, the flock of wild birds--that one was approaching the sea;
the long summer-day of idleness among its vague scents and sounds.  And
it was characteristic of him that he relished especially the grave,
subdued, northern notes in all that--the charm of the French or English
notes, as we might term them--in the luxuriant Italian landscape.

NOTES

13. *Ad Vigilias Albas.



CHAPTER III: CHANGE OF AIR

Dilexi decorem domus tuae.

[27] THAT almost morbid religious idealism, and his healthful love of
the country, were both alike developed by the circumstances of a
journey, which happened about this time, when Marius was taken to a
certain temple of Aesculapius, among the hills of Etruria, as was then
usual in such cases, for the cure of some boyish sickness.  The
religion of Aesculapius, though borrowed from Greece, had been
naturalised in Rome in the old republican times; but had reached under
the Antonines the height of its popularity throughout the Roman world.
That was an age of valetudinarians, in many instances of imaginary
ones; but below its various crazes concerning health and disease,
largely multiplied a few years after the time of which I am speaking by
the miseries of a great pestilence, lay a valuable, because partly
practicable, belief that all the maladies of the soul might be reached
through the subtle gateways of the body.

[28] Salus, salvation, for the Romans, had come to mean bodily sanity.
The religion of the god of bodily health, Salvator, as they called him
absolutely, had a chance just then of becoming the one religion; that
mild and philanthropic son of Apollo surviving, or absorbing, all other
pagan godhead.  The apparatus of the medical art, the salutary mineral
or herb, diet or abstinence, and all the varieties of the bath, came to
have a kind of sacramental character, so deep was the feeling, in more
serious minds, of a moral or spiritual profit in physical health,
beyond the obvious bodily advantages one had of it; the body becoming
truly, in that case, but a quiet handmaid of the soul.  The priesthood
or "family" of Aesculapius, a vast college, believed to be in
possession of certain precious medical secrets, came nearest perhaps,
of all the institutions of the pagan world, to the Christian
priesthood; the temples of the god, rich in some instances with the
accumulated thank-offerings of centuries of a tasteful devotion, being
really also a kind of hospitals for the sick, administered in a full
conviction of the religiousness, the refined and sacred happiness, of a
life spent in the relieving of pain.

Elements of a really experimental and progressive knowledge there were
doubtless amid this devout enthusiasm, bent so faithfully on the
reception of health as a direct gift from God; but for the most part
his care was held to take [29] effect through a machinery easily
capable of misuse for purposes of religious fraud.  Through dreams,
above all, inspired by Aesculapius himself, information as to the cause
and cure of a malady was supposed to come to the sufferer, in a belief
based on the truth that dreams do sometimes, for those who watch them
carefully, give many hints concerning the conditions of the body--those
latent weak points at which disease or death may most easily break into
it.  In the time of Marcus Aurelius these medical dreams had become
more than ever a fashionable caprice.  Aristeides, the "Orator," a man
of undoubted intellectual power, has devoted six discourses to their
interpretation; the really scientific Galen has recorded how
beneficently they had intervened in his own case, at certain
turning-points of life; and a belief in them was one of the frailties
of the wise emperor himself.  Partly for the sake of these dreams,
living ministers of the god, more likely to come to one in his actual
dwelling-place than elsewhere, it was almost a necessity that the
patient should sleep one or more nights within the precincts of a
temple consecrated to his service, during which time he must observe
certain rules prescribed by the priests.

For this purpose, after devoutly saluting the Lares, as was customary
before starting on a journey, Marius set forth one summer morning on
his way to the famous temple which lay [30] among the hills beyond the
valley of the Arnus.  It was his greatest adventure hitherto; and he
had much pleasure in all its details, in spite of his feverishness.
Starting early, under the guidance of an old serving-man who drove the
mules, with his wife who took all that was needful for their
refreshment on the way and for the offering at the shrine, they went,
under the genial heat, halting now and then to pluck certain flowers
seen for the first time on these high places, upwards, through a long
day of sunshine, while cliffs and woods sank gradually below their
path.  The evening came as they passed along a steep white road with
many windings among the pines, and it was night when they reached the
temple, the lights of which shone out upon them pausing before the
gates of the sacred enclosure, while Marius became alive to a singular
purity in the air.  A rippling of water about the place was the only
thing audible, as they waited till two priestly figures, speaking Greek
to one another, admitted them into a large, white-walled and clearly
lighted guest-chamber, in which, while he partook of a simple but
wholesomely prepared supper, Marius still seemed to feel pleasantly the
height they had attained to among the hills.

The agreeable sense of all this was spoiled by one thing only, his old
fear of serpents; for it was under the form of a serpent that
Aesculapius [31] had come to Rome, and the last definite thought of his
weary head before he fell asleep had been a dread either that the god
might appear, as he was said sometimes to do, under this hideous
aspect, or perhaps one of those great sallow-hued snakes themselves,
kept in the sacred place, as he had also heard was usual.

And after an hour's feverish dreaming he awoke--with a cry, it would
seem, for some one had entered the room bearing a light.  The footsteps
of the youthful figure which approached and sat by his bedside were
certainly real.  Ever afterwards, when the thought arose in his mind of
some unhoped-for but entire relief from distress, like blue sky in a
storm at sea, would come back the memory of that gracious countenance
which, amid all the kindness of its gaze, had yet a certain air of
predominance over him, so that he seemed now for the first time to have
found the master of his spirit.  It would have been sweet to be the
servant of him who now sat beside him speaking.

He caught a lesson from what was then said, still somewhat beyond his
years, a lesson in the skilled cultivation of life, of experience, of
opportunity, which seemed to be the aim of the young priest's
recommendations.  The sum of them, through various forgotten intervals
of argument, as might really have happened in a [32] dream, was the
precept, repeated many times under slightly varied aspects, of a
diligent promotion of the capacity of the eye, inasmuch as in the eye
would lie for him the determining influence of life: he was of the
number of those who, in the words of a poet who came long after, must
be "made perfect by the love of visible beauty."  The discourse was
conceived from the point of view of a theory Marius found afterwards in
Plato's Phaedrus, which supposes men's spirits susceptible to certain
influences, diffused, after the manner of streams or currents, by fair
things or persons visibly present--green fields, for instance, or
children's faces--into the air around them, acting, in the case of some
peculiar natures, like potent material essences, and conforming the
seer to themselves as with some cunning physical necessity.  This
theory,* in itself so fantastic, had however determined in a range of
methodical suggestions, altogether quaint here and there from their
circumstantial minuteness.  And throughout, the possibility of some
vision, as of a new city coming down "like a bride out of heaven," a
vision still indeed, it might seem, a long way off, but to be granted
perhaps one day to the eyes thus trained, was presented as the motive
of this laboriously practical direction.

"If thou wouldst have all about thee like the colours of some fresh
picture, in a clear [33] light," so the discourse recommenced after a
pause, "be temperate in thy religious notions, in love, in wine, in all
things, and of a peaceful heart with thy fellows."  To keep the eye
clear by a sort of exquisite personal alacrity and cleanliness,
extending even to his dwelling-place; to discriminate, ever more and
more fastidiously, select form and colour in things from what was less
select; to meditate much on beautiful visible objects, on objects, more
especially, connected with the period of youth--on children at play in
the morning, the trees in early spring, on young animals, on the
fashions and amusements of young men; to keep ever by him if it were
but a single choice flower, a graceful animal or sea-shell, as a token
and representative of the whole kingdom of such things; to avoid
jealously, in his way through the world, everything repugnant to sight;
and, should any circumstance tempt him to a general converse in the
range of such objects, to disentangle himself from that circumstance at
any cost of place, money, or opportunity; such were in brief outline
the duties recognised, the rights demanded, in this new formula of
life.  And it was delivered with conviction; as if the speaker verily
saw into the recesses of the mental and physical being of the listener,
while his own expression of perfect temperance had in it a fascinating
power--the merely negative element of purity, the mere freedom from
taint or flaw, in exercise [34] as a positive influence.  Long
afterwards, when Marius read the Charmides--that other dialogue of
Plato, into which he seems to have expressed the very genius of old
Greek temperance--the image of this speaker came back vividly before
him, to take the chief part in the conversation.

It was as a weighty sanction of such temperance, in almost visible
symbolism (an outward imagery identifying itself with unseen
moralities) that the memory of that night's double experience, the
dream of the great sallow snake and the utterance of the young priest,
always returned to him, and the contrast therein involved made him
revolt with unfaltering instinct from the bare thought of an excess in
sleep, or diet, or even in matters of taste, still more from any excess
of a coarser kind.

When he awoke again, still in the exceeding freshness he had felt on
his arrival, and now in full sunlight, it was as if his sickness had
really departed with the terror of the night: a confusion had passed
from the brain, a painful dryness from his hands.  Simply to be alive
and there was a delight; and as he bathed in the fresh water set ready
for his use, the air of the room about him seemed like pure gold, the
very shadows rich with colour.  Summoned at length by one of the
white-robed brethren, he went out to walk in the temple garden.  At a
distance, on either side, his guide pointed out to him the Houses of
Birth and Death, erected for the reception [35] respectively of women
about to become mothers, and of persons about to die; neither of those
incidents being allowed to defile, as was thought, the actual precincts
of the shrine.  His visitor of the previous night he saw nowhere again.
But among the official ministers of the place there was one, already
marked as of great celebrity, whom Marius saw often in later days at
Rome, the physician Galen, now about thirty years old.  He was
standing, the hood partly drawn over his face, beside the holy well, as
Marius and his guide approached it.

This famous well or conduit, primary cause of the temple and its
surrounding institutions, was supplied by the water of a spring flowing
directly out of the rocky foundations of the shrine.  From the rim of
its basin rose a circle of trim columns to support a cupola of singular
lightness and grace, itself full of reflected light from the rippling
surface, through which might be traced the wavy figure-work of the
marble lining below as the stream of water rushed in.  Legend told of a
visit of Aesculapius to this place, earlier and happier than his first
coming to Rome: an inscription around the cupola recorded it in letters
of gold.  "Being come unto this place the son of God loved it
exceedingly:"--Huc profectus filius Dei maxime amavit hunc locum;--and
it was then that that most intimately human of the gods had given men
the well, with all its salutary properties.  The [36] element itself
when received into the mouth, in consequence of its entire freedom from
adhering organic matter, was more like a draught of wonderfully pure
air than water; and after tasting, Marius was told many mysterious
circumstances concerning it, by one and another of the bystanders:--he
who drank often thereof might well think he had tasted of the Homeric
lotus, so great became his desire to remain always on that spot:
carried to other places, it was almost indefinitely conservative of its
fine qualities: nay! a few drops of it would amend other water; and it
flowed not only with unvarying abundance but with a volume so oddly
rhythmical that the well stood always full to the brim, whatever
quantity might be drawn from it, seeming to answer with strange
alacrity of service to human needs, like a true creature and pupil of
the philanthropic god.  Certainly the little crowd around seemed to
find singular refreshment in gazing on it.  The whole place appeared
sensibly influenced by the amiable and healthful spirit of the thing.
All the objects of the country were there at their freshest.  In the
great park-like enclosure for the maintenance of the sacred animals
offered by the convalescent, grass and trees were allowed to grow with
a kind of graceful wildness; otherwise, all was wonderfully nice.  And
that freshness seemed to have something moral in its influence, as if
it acted upon the body and the merely bodily [37] powers of
apprehension, through the intelligence; and to the end of his visit
Marius saw no more serpents.

A lad was just then drawing water for ritual uses, and Marius followed
him as he returned from the well, more and more impressed by the
religiousness of all he saw, on his way through a long cloister or
corridor, the walls well-nigh hidden under votive inscriptions
recording favours from the son of Apollo, and with a distant fragrance
of incense in the air, explained when he turned aside through an open
doorway into the temple itself.  His heart bounded as the refined and
dainty magnificence of the place came upon him suddenly, in the flood
of early sunshine, with the ceremonial lights burning here and there,
and withal a singular expression of sacred order, a surprising
cleanliness and simplicity.  Certain priests, men whose countenances
bore a deep impression of cultivated mind, each with his little group
of assistants, were gliding round silently to perform their morning
salutation to the god, raising the closed thumb and finger of the right
hand with a kiss in the air, as they came and went on their sacred
business, bearing their frankincense and lustral water.  Around the
walls, at such a level that the worshippers might read, as in a book,
the story of the god and his sons, the brotherhood of the Asclepiadae,
ran a series of imageries, in low relief, their delicate light and
shade being [38] heightened, here and there, with gold.  Fullest of
inspired and sacred expression, as if in this place the chisel of the
artist had indeed dealt not with marble but with the very breath of
feeling and thought, was the scene in which the earliest generation of
the sons of Aesculapius were transformed into healing dreams; for
"grown now too glorious to abide longer among men, by the aid of their
sire they put away their mortal bodies, and came into another country,
yet not indeed into Elysium nor into the Islands of the Blest.  But
being made like to the immortal gods, they began to pass about through
the world, changed thus far from their first form that they appear
eternally young, as many persons have seen them in many
places--ministers and heralds of their father, passing to and fro over
the earth, like gliding stars. Which thing is, indeed, the most
wonderful concerning them!"  And in this scene, as throughout the
series, with all its crowded personages, Marius noted on the carved
faces the same peculiar union of unction, almost of hilarity, with a
certain self-possession and reserve, which was conspicuous in the
living ministrants around him.

In the central space, upon a pillar or pedestal, hung, ex voto, with
the richest personal ornaments, stood the image of Aesculapius himself,
surrounded by choice flowering plants.  It presented the type, still
with something of the [39] severity of the earlier art of Greece about
it, not of an aged and crafty physician, but of a youth, earnest and
strong of aspect, carrying an ampulla or bottle in one hand, and in the
other a traveller's staff, a pilgrim among his pilgrim worshippers; and
one of the ministers explained to Marius this pilgrim guise.--One chief
source of the master's knowledge of healing had been observation of the
remedies resorted to by animals labouring under disease or pain--what
leaf or berry the lizard or dormouse lay upon its wounded fellow; to
which purpose for long years he had led the life of a wanderer, in wild
places.  The boy took his place as the last comer, a little way behind
the group of worshippers who stood in front of the image.  There, with
uplifted face, the palms of his two hands raised and open before him,
and taught by the priest, he said his collect of thanksgiving and
prayer (Aristeides has recorded it at the end of his Asclepiadae) to
the Inspired Dreams:--

"O ye children of Apollo! who in time past have stilled the waves of
sorrow for many people, lighting up a lamp of safety before those who
travel by sea and land, be pleased, in your great condescension, though
ye be equal in glory with your elder brethren the Dioscuri, and your
lot in immortal youth be as theirs, to accept this prayer, which in
sleep and vision ye have inspired.  Order it aright, I pray you,
according to your loving-kindness to men.  Preserve me [40] from
sickness; and endue my body with such a measure of health as may
suffice it for the obeying of the spirit, that I may pass my days
unhindered and in quietness."

On the last morning of his visit Marius entered the shrine again, and
just before his departure the priest, who had been his special director
during his stay at the place, lifting a cunningly contrived panel,
which formed the back of one of the carved seats, bade him look
through.  What he saw was like the vision of a new world, by the
opening of some unsuspected window in a familiar dwelling-place.  He
looked out upon a long-drawn valley of singularly cheerful aspect,
hidden, by the peculiar conformation of the locality, from all points
of observation but this.  In a green meadow at the foot of the steep
olive-clad rocks below, the novices were taking their exercise.  The
softly sloping sides of the vale lay alike in full sunlight; and its
distant opening was closed by a beautifully formed mountain, from which
the last wreaths of morning mist were rising under the heat. It might
have seemed the very presentment of a land of hope, its hollows brimful
of a shadow of blue flowers; and lo! on the one level space of the
horizon, in a long dark line, were towers and a dome: and that was
Pisa.--Or Rome, was it? asked Marius, ready to believe the utmost, in
his excitement.

All this served, as he understood afterwards [41] in retrospect, at
once to strengthen and to purify a certain vein of character in him.
Developing the ideal, pre-existent there, of a religious beauty,
associated for the future with the exquisite splendour of the temple of
Aesculapius, as it dawned upon him on that morning of his first
visit--it developed that ideal in connexion with a vivid sense of the
value of mental and bodily sanity.  And this recognition of the beauty,
even for the aesthetic sense, of mere bodily health, now acquired,
operated afterwards as an influence morally salutary, counteracting the
less desirable or hazardous tendencies of some phases of thought,
through which he was to pass.

He came home brown with health to find the health of his mother
failing; and about her death, which occurred not long afterwards, there
was a circumstance which rested with him as the cruellest touch of all,
in an event which for a time seemed to have taken the light out of the
sunshine.  She died away from home, but sent for him at the last, with
a painful effort on her part, but to his great gratitude, pondering, as
he always believed, that he might chance otherwise to look back all his
life long upon a single fault with something like remorse, and find the
burden a great one.  For it happened that, through some sudden,
incomprehensible petulance there had been an angry childish gesture,
and a slighting word, at the very moment of her departure, actually for
the last time.  Remembering this [42] he would ever afterwards pray to
be saved from offences against his own affections; the thought of that
marred parting having peculiar bitterness for one, who set so much
store, both by principle and habit, on the sentiment of home.

NOTES

32. *[Transliteration:] Ê aporroê tou kallous.  +Translation:
"Emanation from a thing of beauty."



CHAPTER IV: THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE

     O mare!  O littus! verum secretumque Mouseion,+
     quam multa invenitis, quam multa dictatis!
                               Pliny's Letters.

[43] IT would hardly have been possible to feel more seriously than did
Marius in those grave years of his early life.  But the death of his
mother turned seriousness of feeling into a matter of the intelligence:
it made him a questioner; and, by bringing into full evidence to him
the force of his affections and the probable importance of their place
in his future, developed in him generally the more human and earthly
elements of character.  A singularly virile consciousness of the
realities of life pronounced itself in him; still however as in the
main a poetic apprehension, though united already with something of
personal ambition and the instinct of self-assertion.  There were days
when he could suspect, though it was a suspicion he was careful at
first to put from him, that that early, much [44] cherished religion of
the villa might come to count with him as but one form of poetic
beauty, or of the ideal, in things; as but one voice, in a world where
there were many voices it would be a moral weakness not to listen to.
And yet this voice, through its forcible pre-occupation of his childish
conscience, still seemed to make a claim of a quite exclusive
character, defining itself as essentially one of but two possible
leaders of his spirit, the other proposing to him unlimited
self-expansion in a world of various sunshine.  The contrast was so
pronounced as to make the easy, light-hearted, unsuspecting exercise of
himself, among the temptations of the new phase of life which had now
begun, seem nothing less than a rival religion, a rival religious
service.  The temptations, the various sunshine, were those of the old
town of Pisa, where Marius was now a tall schoolboy.  Pisa was a place
lying just far enough from home to make his rare visits to it in
childhood seem like adventures, such as had never failed to supply new
and refreshing impulses to the imagination.  The partly decayed pensive
town, which still had its commerce by sea, and its fashion at the
bathing-season, had lent, at one time the vivid memory of its fair
streets of marble, at another the solemn outline of the dark hills of
Luna on its background, at another the living glances of its men and
women, to the thickly gathering crowd [45] of impressions, out of which
his notion of the world was then forming.  And while he learned that
the object, the experience, as it will be known to memory, is really
from first to last the chief point for consideration in the conduct of
life, these things were feeding also the idealism constitutional with
him--his innate and habitual longing for a world altogether fairer than
that he saw.  The child could find his way in thought along those
streets of the old town, expecting duly the shrines at their corners,
and their recurrent intervals of garden-courts, or side-views of
distant sea.  The great temple of the place, as he could remember it,
on turning back once for a last look from an angle of his homeward
road, counting its tall gray columns between the blue of the bay and
the blue fields of blossoming flax beyond; the harbour and its lights;
the foreign ships lying there; the sailors' chapel of Venus, and her
gilded image, hung with votive gifts; the seamen themselves, their
women and children, who had a whole peculiar colour-world of their
own--the boy's superficial delight in the broad light and shadow of all
that was mingled with the sense of power, of unknown distance, of the
danger of storm and possible death.

To this place, then, Marius came down now from White-nights, to live in
the house of his guardian or tutor, that he might attend the school of
a famous rhetorician, and learn, among [46] other things, Greek.  The
school, one of many imitations of Plato's Academy in the old Athenian
garden, lay in a quiet suburb of Pisa, and had its grove of cypresses,
its porticoes, a house for the master, its chapel and images.  For the
memory of Marius in after-days, a clear morning sunlight seemed to lie
perpetually on that severe picture in old gray and green.  The lad went
to this school daily betimes, in state at first, with a young slave to
carry the books, and certainly with no reluctance, for the sight of his
fellow-scholars, and their petulant activity, coming upon the sadder
sentimental moods of his childhood, awoke at once that instinct of
emulation which is but the other side of sympathy; and he was not
aware, of course, how completely the difference of his previous
training had made him, even in his most enthusiastic participation in
the ways of that little world, still essentially but a spectator. While
all their heart was in their limited boyish race, and its transitory
prizes, he was already entertaining himself, very pleasurably
meditative, with the tiny drama in action before him, as but the mimic,
preliminary exercise for a larger contest, and already with an implicit
epicureanism. Watching all the gallant effects of their small
rivalries--a scene in the main of fresh delightful sunshine--he entered
at once into the sensations of a rivalry beyond them, into the passion
of men, and had already recognised a certain [47] appetite for fame,
for distinction among his fellows, as his dominant motive to be.

The fame he conceived for himself at this time was, as the reader will
have anticipated, of the intellectual order, that of a poet perhaps.
And as, in that gray monastic tranquillity of the villa, inward voices
from the reality of unseen things had come abundantly; so here, with
the sounds and aspects of the shore, and amid the urbanities, the
graceful follies, of a bathing-place, it was the reality, the tyrannous
reality, of things visible that was borne in upon him.  The real world
around--a present humanity not less comely, it might seem, than that of
the old heroic days--endowing everything it touched upon, however
remotely, down to its little passing tricks of fashion even, with a
kind of fleeting beauty, exercised over him just then a great
fascination.

That sense had come upon him in all its power one exceptionally fine
summer, the summer when, at a somewhat earlier age than was usual, he
had formally assumed the dress of manhood, going into the Forum for
that purpose, accompanied by his friends in festal array.  At night,
after the full measure of those cloudless days, he would feel well-nigh
wearied out, as if with a long succession of pictures and music. As he
wandered through the gay streets or on the sea-shore, the real world
seemed indeed boundless, and himself almost absolutely free in it, with
a boundless [48] appetite for experience, for adventure, whether
physical or of the spirit.  His entire rearing hitherto had lent itself
to an imaginative exaltation of the past; but now the spectacle
actually afforded to his untired and freely open senses, suggested the
reflection that the present had, it might be, really advanced beyond
the past, and he was ready to boast in the very fact that it was
modern.  If, in a voluntary archaism, the polite world of that day went
back to a choicer generation, as it fancied, for the purpose of a
fastidious self-correction, in matters of art, of literature, and even,
as we have seen, of religion, at least it improved, by a shade or two
of more scrupulous finish, on the old pattern; and the new era, like
the Neu-zeit of the German enthusiasts at the beginning of our own
century, might perhaps be discerned, awaiting one just a single step
onward--the perfected new manner, in the consummation of time, alike as
regards the things of the imagination and the actual conduct of life.
Only, while the pursuit of an ideal like this demanded entire liberty
of heart and brain, that old, staid, conservative religion of his
childhood certainly had its being in a world of somewhat narrow
restrictions.  But then, the one was absolutely real, with nothing less
than the reality of seeing and hearing--the other, how vague, shadowy,
problematical!  Could its so limited probabilities be worth taking into
account in any practical question as to the rejecting or receiving [49]
of what was indeed so real, and, on the face of it, so desirable?

And, dating from the time of his first coming to school, a great
friendship had grown up for him, in that life of so few
attachments--the pure and disinterested friendship of schoolmates.  He
had seen Flavian for the first time the day on which he had come to
Pisa, at the moment when his mind was full of wistful thoughts
regarding the new life to begin for him to-morrow, and he gazed
curiously at the crowd of bustling scholars as they came from their
classes.  There was something in Flavian a shade disdainful, as he
stood isolated from the others for a moment, explained in part by his
stature and the distinction of the low, broad forehead; though there
was pleasantness also for the newcomer in the roving blue eyes which
seemed somehow to take a fuller hold upon things around than is usual
with boys.  Marius knew that those proud glances made kindly note of
him for a moment, and felt something like friendship at first sight.
There was a tone of reserve or gravity there, amid perfectly
disciplined health, which, to his fancy, seemed to carry forward the
expression of the austere sky and the clear song of the blackbird on
that gray March evening.  Flavian indeed was a creature who changed
much with the changes of the passing light and shade about him, and was
brilliant enough under the early sunshine in [50] school next morning.
Of all that little world of more or less gifted youth, surely the
centre was this lad of servile birth.  Prince of the school, he had
gained an easy dominion over the old Greek master by the fascination of
his parts, and over his fellow-scholars by the figure he bore.  He wore
already the manly dress; and standing there in class, as he displayed
his wonderful quickness in reckoning, or his taste in declaiming Homer,
he was like a carved figure in motion, thought Marius, but with that
indescribable gleam upon it which the words of Homer actually
suggested, as perceptible on the visible forms of the gods--hoia theous
epenênothen aien eontas.+

A story hung by him, a story which his comrades acutely connected with
his habitual air of somewhat peevish pride.  Two points were held to be
clear amid its general vagueness--a rich stranger paid his schooling,
and he was himself very poor, though there was an attractive piquancy
in the poverty of Flavian which in a scholar of another figure might
have been despised.  Over Marius too his dominion was entire.  Three
years older than he, Flavian was appointed to help the younger boy in
his studies, and Marius thus became virtually his servant in many
things, taking his humours with a sort of grateful pride in being
noticed at all, and, thinking over all this afterwards, found that the
[51] fascination experienced by him had been a sentimental one,
dependent on the concession to himself of an intimacy, a certain
tolerance of his company, granted to none beside.

That was in the earliest days; and then, as their intimacy grew, the
genius, the intellectual power of Flavian began its sway over him. The
brilliant youth who loved dress, and dainty food, and flowers, and
seemed to have a natural alliance with, and claim upon, everything else
which was physically select and bright, cultivated also that foppery of
words, of choice diction which was common among the élite spirits of
that day; and Marius, early an expert and elegant penman, transcribed
his verses (the euphuism of which, amid a genuine original power, was
then so delightful to him) in beautiful ink, receiving in return the
profit of Flavian's really great intellectual capacities, developed and
accomplished under the ambitious desire to make his way effectively in
life.  Among other things he introduced him to the writings of a
sprightly wit, then very busy with the pen, one Lucian--writings
seeming to overflow with that intellectual light turned upon dim
places, which, at least in seasons of mental fair weather, can make
people laugh where they have been wont, perhaps, to pray.  And, surely,
the sunlight which filled those well-remembered early mornings in
school, had had more than the usual measure of gold in it! [52] Marius,
at least, would lie awake before the time, thinking with delight of the
long coming hours of hard work in the presence of Flavian, as other
boys dream of a holiday.

It was almost by accident at last, so wayward and capricious was he,
that reserve gave way, and Flavian told the story of his father--a
freedman, presented late in life, and almost against his will, with the
liberty so fondly desired in youth, but on condition of the sacrifice
of part of his peculium--the slave's diminutive hoard--amassed by many
a self-denial, in an existence necessarily hard.  The rich man,
interested in the promise of the fair child born on his estate, had
sent him to school.  The meanness and dejection, nevertheless, of that
unoccupied old age defined the leading memory of Flavian, revived
sometimes, after this first confidence, with a burst of angry tears
amid the sunshine.  But nature had had her economy in nursing the
strength of that one natural affection; for, save his half-selfish care
for Marius, it was the single, really generous part, the one piety, in
the lad's character.  In him Marius saw the spirit of unbelief,
achieved as if at one step.  The much-admired freedman's son, as with
the privilege of a natural aristocracy, believed only in himself, in
the brilliant, and mainly sensuous gifts, he had, or meant to acquire.

And then, he had certainly yielded himself, [53] though still with
untouched health, in a world where manhood comes early, to the
seductions of that luxurious town, and Marius wondered sometimes, in
the freer revelation of himself by conversation, at the extent of his
early corruption.  How often, afterwards, did evil things present
themselves in malign association with the memory of that beautiful
head, and with a kind of borrowed sanction and charm in its natural
grace!  To Marius, at a later time, he counted for as it were an
epitome of the whole pagan world, the depth of its corruption, and its
perfection of form.  And still, in his mobility, his animation, in his
eager capacity for various life, he was so real an object, after that
visionary idealism of the villa.  His voice, his glance, were like the
breaking in of the solid world upon one, amid the flimsy fictions of a
dream.  A shadow, handling all things as shadows, had felt a sudden
real and poignant heat in them.

Meantime, under his guidance, Marius was learning quickly and
abundantly, because with a good will.  There was that in the actual
effectiveness of his figure which stimulated the younger lad to make
the most of opportunity; and he had experience already that education
largely increased one's capacity for enjoyment.  He was acquiring what
it is the chief function of all higher education to impart, the art,
namely, of so relieving the ideal or poetic traits, [54] the elements
of distinction, in our everyday life--of so exclusively living in
them--that the unadorned remainder of it, the mere drift or débris of
our days, comes to be as though it were not.  And the consciousness of
this aim came with the reading of one particular book, then fresh in
the world, with which he fell in about this time--a book which awakened
the poetic or romantic capacity as perhaps some other book might have
done, but was peculiar in giving it a direction emphatically sensuous.
It made him, in that visionary reception of every-day life, the seer,
more especially, of a revelation in colour and form.  If our modern
education, in its better efforts, really conveys to any of us that kind
of idealising power, it does so (though dealing mainly, as its
professed instruments, with the most select and ideal remains of
ancient literature) oftenest by truant reading; and thus it happened
also, long ago, with Marius and his friend.

NOTES

43. +Transliteration: Mouseion.  The word means "seat of the muses."
Translation: "O sea! O shore! my own Helicon, / How many things have
you uncovered to me, how many things suggested!"  Pliny, Letters, Book
I, ix, to Minicius Fundanus.

50. +Transliteration: hoia theous epenênothen aien eontas. Translation:
"such as the gods are endowed with."  Homer, Odyssey, 8.365.



CHAPTER V: THE GOLDEN BOOK

[55] THE two lads were lounging together over a book, half-buried in a
heap of dry corn, in an old granary--the quiet corner to which they had
climbed out of the way of their noisier companions on one of their
blandest holiday afternoons.  They looked round: the western sun smote
through the broad chinks of the shutters.  How like a picture! and it
was precisely the scene described in what they were reading, with just
that added poetic touch in the book which made it delightful and
select, and, in the actual place, the ray of sunlight transforming the
rough grain among the cool brown shadows into heaps of gold.  What they
were intent on was, indeed, the book of books, the "golden" book of
that day, a gift to Flavian, as was shown by the purple writing on the
handsome yellow wrapper, following the title Flaviane!--it said,

     Flaviane! lege Felicitur!
     Flaviane!  Vivas!  Fioreas!
     Flaviane!  Vivas!  Gaudeas!

[56] It was perfumed with oil of sandal-wood, and decorated with carved
and gilt ivory bosses at the ends of the roller.

And the inside was something not less dainty and fine, full of the
archaisms and curious felicities in which that generation delighted,
quaint terms and images picked fresh from the early dramatists, the
lifelike phrases of some lost poet preserved by an old grammarian, racy
morsels of the vernacular and studied prettinesses:--all alike, mere
playthings for the genuine power and natural eloquence of the erudite
artist, unsuppressed by his erudition, which, however, made some people
angry, chiefly less well "got-up" people, and especially those who were
untidy from indolence.

No! it was certainly not that old-fashioned, unconscious ease of the
early literature, which could never come again; which, after all, had
had more in common with the "infinite patience" of Apuleius than with
the hack-work readiness of his detractors, who might so well have been
"self-conscious" of going slip-shod.  And at least his success was
unmistakable as to the precise literary effect he had intended,
including a certain tincture of "neology" in expression--nonnihil
interdum elocutione novella parum signatum--in the language of
Cornelius Fronto, the contemporary prince of rhetoricians.  What words
he had found for conveying, with a single touch, the sense of textures,
colours, [57] incidents!  "Like jewellers' work!  Like a myrrhine
vase!"--admirers said of his writing.  "The golden fibre in the hair,
the gold thread-work in the gown marked her as the mistress"--aurum in
comis et in tunicis, ibi inflexum hic intextum, matronam profecto
confitebatur--he writes, with his "curious felicity," of one of his
heroines.  Aurum intextum: gold fibre:--well! there was something of
that kind in his own work.  And then, in an age when people, from the
emperor Aurelius downwards, prided themselves unwisely on writing in
Greek, he had written for Latin people in their own tongue; though
still, in truth, with all the care of a learned language.  Not less
happily inventive were the incidents recorded--story within
story--stories with the sudden, unlooked-for changes of dreams.  He had
his humorous touches also.  And what went to the ordinary boyish taste,
in those somewhat peculiar readers, what would have charmed boys more
purely boyish, was the adventure:--the bear loose in the house at
night, the wolves storming the farms in winter, the exploits of the
robbers, their charming caves, the delightful thrill one had at the
question--"Don't you know that these roads are infested by robbers?"

The scene of the romance was laid in Thessaly, the original land of
witchcraft, and took one up and down its mountains, and into its old
weird towns, haunts of magic and [58] incantation, where all the more
genuine appliances of the black art, left behind her by Medea when she
fled through that country, were still in use.  In the city of Hypata,
indeed, nothing seemed to be its true self--"You might think that
through the murmuring of some cadaverous spell, all things had been
changed into forms not their own; that there was humanity in the
hardness of the stones you stumbled on; that the birds you heard
singing were feathered men; that the trees around the walls drew their
leaves from a like source.  The statues seemed about to move, the walls
to speak, the dumb cattle to break out in prophecy; nay! the very sky
and the sunbeams, as if they might suddenly cry out." Witches are there
who can draw down the moon, or at least the lunar virus--that white
fluid she sheds, to be found, so rarely, "on high, heathy places: which
is a poison.  A touch of it will drive men mad."

And in one very remote village lives the sorceress Pamphile, who turns
her neighbours into various animals.  What true humour in the scene
where, after mounting the rickety stairs, Lucius, peeping curiously
through a chink in the door, is a spectator of the transformation of
the old witch herself into a bird, that she may take flight to the
object of her affections--into an owl!  "First she stripped off every
rag she had.  Then opening a certain chest she took from it many small
boxes, and removing the lid [59] of one of them, rubbed herself over
for a long time, from head to foot, with an ointment it contained, and
after much low muttering to her lamp, began to jerk at last and shake
her limbs.  And as her limbs moved to and fro, out burst the soft
feathers: stout wings came forth to view: the nose grew hard and
hooked: her nails were crooked into claws; and Pamphile was an owl. She
uttered a queasy screech; and, leaping little by little from the
ground, making trial of herself, fled presently, on full wing, out of
doors."

By clumsy imitation of this process, Lucius, the hero of the romance,
transforms himself, not as he had intended into a showy winged
creature, but into the animal which has given name to the book; for
throughout it there runs a vein of racy, homely satire on the love of
magic then prevalent, curiosity concerning which had led Lucius to
meddle with the old woman's appliances.  "Be you my Venus," he says to
the pretty maid-servant who has introduced him to the view of Pamphile,
"and let me stand by you a winged Cupid!" and, freely applying the
magic ointment, sees himself transformed, "not into a bird, but into an
ass!"

Well! the proper remedy for his distress is a supper of roses, could
such be found, and many are his quaintly picturesque attempts to come
by them at that adverse season; as he contrives to do at last, when,
the grotesque procession of Isis [60] passing by with a bear and other
strange animals in its train, the ass following along with the rest
suddenly crunches the chaplet of roses carried in the High-priest's
hand.

Meantime, however, he must wait for the spring, with more than the
outside of an ass; "though I was not so much a fool, nor so truly an
ass," he tells us, when he happens to be left alone with a daintily
spread table, "as to neglect this most delicious fare, and feed upon
coarse hay."  For, in truth, all through the book, there is an
unmistakably real feeling for asses, with bold touches like Swift's,
and a genuine animal breadth.  Lucius was the original ass, who peeping
slily from the window of his hiding-place forgot all about the big
shade he cast just above him, and gave occasion to the joke or proverb
about "the peeping ass and his shadow."

But the marvellous, delight in which is one of the really serious
elements in most boys, passed at times, those young readers still
feeling its fascination, into what French writers call the
macabre--that species of almost insane pre-occupation with the
materialities of our mouldering flesh, that luxury of disgust in gazing
on corruption, which was connected, in this writer at least, with not a
little obvious coarseness.  It was a strange notion of the gross lust
of the actual world, that Marius took from some of these episodes. "I
am told," they read, "that [61] when foreigners are interred, the old
witches are in the habit of out-racing the funeral procession, to
ravage the corpse"--in order to obtain certain cuttings and remnants
from it, with which to injure the living--"especially if the witch has
happened to cast her eye upon some goodly young man."  And the scene of
the night-watching of a dead body lest the witches should come to tear
off the flesh with their teeth, is worthy of Théophile Gautier.

But set as one of the episodes in the main narrative, a true gem amid
its mockeries, its coarse though genuine humanity, its burlesque
horrors, came the tale of Cupid and Psyche, full of brilliant,
life-like situations, speciosa locis, and abounding in lovely visible
imagery (one seemed to see and handle the golden hair, the fresh
flowers, the precious works of art in it!) yet full also of a gentle
idealism, so that you might take it, if you chose, for an allegory.
With a concentration of all his finer literary gifts, Apuleius had
gathered into it the floating star-matter of many a delightful old
story.--

The Story of Cupid and Psyche.

In a certain city lived a king and queen who had three daughters
exceeding fair.  But the beauty of the elder sisters, though pleasant
to behold, yet passed not the measure of human praise, while such was
the loveliness of the [62] youngest that men's speech was too poor to
commend it worthily and could express it not at all.  Many of the
citizens and of strangers, whom the fame of this excellent vision had
gathered thither, confounded by that matchless beauty, could but kiss
the finger-tips of their right hands at sight of her, as in adoration
to the goddess Venus herself.  And soon a rumour passed through the
country that she whom the blue deep had borne, forbearing her divine
dignity, was even then moving among men, or that by some fresh
germination from the stars, not the sea now, but the earth, had put
forth a new Venus, endued with the flower of virginity.

This belief, with the fame of the maiden's loveliness, went daily
further into distant lands, so that many people were drawn together to
behold that glorious model of the age.  Men sailed no longer to Paphos,
to Cnidus or Cythera, to the presence of the goddess Venus: her sacred
rites were neglected, her images stood uncrowned, the cold ashes were
left to disfigure her forsaken altars.  It was to a maiden that men's
prayers were offered, to a human countenance they looked, in
propitiating so great a godhead: when the girl went forth in the
morning they strewed flowers on her way, and the victims proper to that
unseen goddess were presented as she passed along.  This conveyance of
divine worship to a mortal kindled meantime the anger of the true
Venus.  "Lo! now, the ancient [63] parent of nature," she cried, "the
fountain of all elements!  Behold me, Venus, benign mother of the
world, sharing my honours with a mortal maiden, while my name, built up
in heaven, is profaned by the mean things of earth!  Shall a perishable
woman bear my image about with her?  In vain did the shepherd of Ida
prefer me!  Yet shall she have little joy, whosoever she be, of her
usurped and unlawful loveliness!" Thereupon she called to her that
winged, bold boy, of evil ways, who wanders armed by night through
men's houses, spoiling their marriages; and stirring yet more by her
speech his inborn wantonness, she led him to the city, and showed him
Psyche as she walked.

"I pray thee," she said, "give thy mother a full revenge.  Let this
maid become the slave of an unworthy love."  Then, embracing him
closely, she departed to the shore and took her throne upon the crest
of the wave.  And lo! at her unuttered will, her ocean-servants are in
waiting: the daughters of Nereus are there singing their song, and
Portunus, and Salacia, and the tiny charioteer of the dolphin, with a
host of Tritons leaping through the billows.  And one blows softly
through his sounding sea-shell, another spreads a silken web against
the sun, a third presents the mirror to the eyes of his mistress, while
the others swim side by side below, drawing her chariot.  Such was the
escort of Venus as she went upon the sea.

[64] Psyche meantime, aware of her loveliness, had no fruit thereof.
All people regarded and admired, but none sought her in marriage.  It
was but as on the finished work of the craftsman that they gazed upon
that divine likeness.  Her sisters, less fair than she, were happily
wedded.  She, even as a widow, sitting at home, wept over her
desolation, hating in her heart the beauty in which all men were
pleased.

And the king, supposing the gods were angry, inquired of the oracle of
Apollo, and Apollo answered him thus: "Let the damsel be placed on the
top of a certain mountain, adorned as for the bed of marriage and of
death.  Look not for a son-in-law of mortal birth; but for that evil
serpent-thing, by reason of whom even the gods tremble and the shadows
of Styx are afraid."

So the king returned home and made known the oracle to his wife.  For
many days she lamented, but at last the fulfilment of the divine
precept is urgent upon her, and the company make ready to conduct the
maiden to her deadly bridal.  And now the nuptial torch gathers dark
smoke and ashes: the pleasant sound of the pipe is changed into a cry:
the marriage hymn concludes in a sorrowful wailing: below her yellow
wedding-veil the bride shook away her tears; insomuch that the whole
city was afflicted together at the ill-luck of the stricken house.

But the mandate of the god impelled the hapless Psyche to her fate,
and, these solemnities [65] being ended, the funeral of the living soul
goes forth, all the people following.  Psyche, bitterly weeping,
assists not at her marriage but at her own obsequies, and while the
parents hesitate to accomplish a thing so unholy the daughter cries to
them: "Wherefore torment your luckless age by long weeping?  This was
the prize of my extraordinary beauty!  When all people celebrated us
with divine honours, and in one voice named the New Venus, it was then
ye should have wept for me as one dead.  Now at last I understand that
that one name of Venus has been my ruin.  Lead me and set me upon the
appointed place.  I am in haste to submit to that well-omened marriage,
to behold that goodly spouse.  Why delay the coming of him who was born
for the destruction of the whole world?"

She was silent, and with firm step went on the way.  And they proceeded
to the appointed place on a steep mountain, and left there the maiden
alone, and took their way homewards dejectedly.  The wretched parents,
in their close-shut house, yielded themselves to perpetual night; while
to Psyche, fearful and trembling and weeping sore upon the
mountain-top, comes the gentle Zephyrus.  He lifts her mildly, and,
with vesture afloat on either side, bears her by his own soft breathing
over the windings of the hills, and sets her lightly among the flowers
in the bosom of a valley below.

Psyche, in those delicate grassy places, lying [66] sweetly on her dewy
bed, rested from the agitation of her soul and arose in peace. And lo!
a grove of mighty trees, with a fount of water, clear as glass, in the
midst; and hard by the water, a dwelling-place, built not by human
hands but by some divine cunning.  One recognised, even at the
entering, the delightful hostelry of a god.  Golden pillars sustained
the roof, arched most curiously in cedar-wood and ivory. The walls were
hidden under wrought silver:--all tame and woodland creatures leaping
forward to the visitor's gaze.  Wonderful indeed was the craftsman,
divine or half-divine, who by the subtlety of his art had breathed so
wild a soul into the silver!  The very pavement was distinct with
pictures in goodly stones.  In the glow of its precious metal the house
is its own daylight, having no need of the sun.  Well might it seem a
place fashioned for the conversation of gods with men!

Psyche, drawn forward by the delight of it, came near, and, her courage
growing, stood within the doorway.  One by one, she admired the
beautiful things she saw; and, most wonderful of all! no lock, no
chain, nor living guardian protected that great treasure house.  But as
she gazed there came a voice--a voice, as it were unclothed of bodily
vesture--"Mistress!" it said, "all these things are thine. Lie down,
and relieve thy weariness, and rise again for the bath when thou wilt.
We thy servants, whose [67] voice thou hearest, will be beforehand with
our service, and a royal feast shall be ready."

And Psyche understood that some divine care was providing, and,
refreshed with sleep and the Bath, sat down to the feast.  Still she
saw no one: only she heard words falling here and there, and had voices
alone to serve her.  And the feast being ended, one entered the chamber
and sang to her unseen, while another struck the chords of a harp,
invisible with him who played on it.  Afterwards the sound of a company
singing together came to her, but still so that none were present to
sight; yet it appeared that a great multitude of singers was there.

And the hour of evening inviting her, she climbed into the bed; and as
the night was far advanced, behold a sound of a certain clemency
approaches her.  Then, fearing for her maidenhood in so great solitude,
she trembled, and more than any evil she knew dreaded that she knew
not.  And now the husband, that unknown husband, drew near, and
ascended the couch, and made her his wife; and lo! before the rise of
dawn he had departed hastily.  And the attendant voices ministered to
the needs of the newly married.  And so it happened with her for a long
season.  And as nature has willed, this new thing, by continual use,
became a delight to her: the sound of the voice grew to be her solace
in that condition of loneliness and uncertainty.

[68] One night the bridegroom spoke thus to his beloved, "O Psyche,
most pleasant bride!  Fortune is grown stern with us, and threatens
thee with mortal peril.  Thy sisters, troubled at the report of thy
death and seeking some trace of thee, will come to the mountain's top.
But if by chance their cries reach thee, answer not, neither look forth
at all, lest thou bring sorrow upon me and destruction upon thyself."
Then Psyche promised that she would do according to his will.  But the
bridegroom was fled away again with the night. And all that day she
spent in tears, repeating that she was now dead indeed, shut up in that
golden prison, powerless to console her sisters sorrowing after her, or
to see their faces; and so went to rest weeping.

And after a while came the bridegroom again, and lay down beside her,
and embracing her as she wept, complained, "Was this thy promise, my
Psyche?  What have I to hope from thee?  Even in the arms of thy
husband thou ceasest not from pain.  Do now as thou wilt.  Indulge
thine own desire, though it seeks what will ruin thee.  Yet wilt thou
remember my warning, repentant too late."  Then, protesting that she is
like to die, she obtains from him that he suffer her to see her
sisters, and present to them moreover what gifts she would of golden
ornaments; but therewith he ofttimes advised her never at any time,
yielding to pernicious counsel, to enquire concerning his bodily form,
lest she fall, [69] through unholy curiosity, from so great a height of
fortune, nor feel ever his embrace again.  "I would die a hundred
times," she said, cheerful at last, "rather than be deprived of thy
most sweet usage.  I love thee as my own soul, beyond comparison even
with Love himself.  Only bid thy servant Zephyrus bring hither my
sisters, as he brought me.  My honeycomb!  My husband!  Thy Psyche's
breath of life!"  So he promised; and after the embraces of the night,
ere the light appeared, vanished from the hands of his bride.

And the sisters, coming to the place where Psyche was abandoned, wept
loudly among the rocks, and called upon her by name, so that the sound
came down to her, and running out of the palace distraught, she cried,
"Wherefore afflict your souls with lamentation?  I whom you mourn am
here."  Then, summoning Zephyrus, she reminded him of her husband's
bidding; and he bare them down with a gentle blast.  "Enter now," she
said, "into my house, and relieve your sorrow in the company of Psyche
your sister."

And Psyche displayed to them all the treasures of the golden house, and
its great family of ministering voices, nursing in them the malice
which was already at their hearts.  And at last one of them asks
curiously who the lord of that celestial array may be, and what manner
of man her husband?  And Psyche [70] answered dissemblingly, "A young
man, handsome and mannerly, with a goodly beard.  For the most part he
hunts upon the mountains."  And lest the secret should slip from her in
the way of further speech, loading her sisters with gold and gems, she
commanded Zephyrus to bear them away.

And they returned home, on fire with envy.  "See now the injustice of
fortune!" cried one.  "We, the elder children, are given like servants
to be the wives of strangers, while the youngest is possessed of so
great riches, who scarcely knows how to use them. You saw, Sister! what
a hoard of wealth lies in the house; what glittering gowns; what
splendour of precious gems, besides all that gold trodden under foot.
If she indeed hath, as she said, a bridegroom so goodly, then no one in
all the world is happier.  And it may be that this husband, being of
divine nature, will make her too a goddess.  Nay! so in truth it is. It
was even thus she bore herself.  Already she looks aloft and breathes
divinity, who, though but a woman, has voices for her handmaidens, and
can command the winds."  "Think," answered the other, "how arrogantly
she dealt with us, grudging us these trifling gifts out of all that
store, and when our company became a burden, causing us to be hissed
and driven away from her through the air!  But I am no woman if she
keep her hold on this great fortune; and if the insult done us has
touched [71] thee too, take we counsel together.  Meanwhile let us hold
our peace, and know naught of her, alive or dead.  For they are not
truly happy of whose happiness other folk are unaware."

And the bridegroom, whom still she knows not, warns her thus a second
time, as he talks with her by night: "Seest thou what peril besets
thee?  Those cunning wolves have made ready for thee their snares, of
which the sum is that they persuade thee to search into the fashion of
my countenance, the seeing of which, as I have told thee often, will be
the seeing of it no more for ever.  But do thou neither listen nor make
answer to aught regarding thy husband.  Besides, we have sown also the
seed of our race.  Even now this bosom grows with a child to be born to
us, a child, if thou but keep our secret, of divine quality; if thou
profane it, subject to death."  And Psyche was glad at the tidings,
rejoicing in that solace of a divine seed, and in the glory of that
pledge of love to be, and the dignity of the name of mother.  Anxiously
she notes the increase of the days, the waning months.  And again, as
he tarries briefly beside her, the bridegroom repeats his warning:

"Even now the sword is drawn with which thy sisters seek thy life. Have
pity on thyself, sweet wife, and upon our child, and see not those evil
women again."  But the sisters make their way into the palace once
more, crying to her in [72] wily tones, "O Psyche! and thou too wilt be
a mother!  How great will be the joy at home!  Happy indeed shall we be
to have the nursing of the golden child.  Truly if he be answerable to
the beauty of his parents, it will be a birth of Cupid himself."

So, little by little, they stole upon the heart of their sister. She,
meanwhile, bids the lyre to sound for their delight, and the playing is
heard: she bids the pipes to move, the quire to sing, and the music and
the singing come invisibly, soothing the mind of the listener with
sweetest modulation.  Yet not even thereby was their malice put to
sleep: once more they seek to know what manner of husband she has, and
whence that seed.  And Psyche, simple over-much, forgetful of her first
story, answers, "My husband comes from a far country, trading for great
sums.  He is already of middle age, with whitening locks."  And
therewith she dismisses them again.

And returning home upon the soft breath of Zephyrus one cried to the
other, "What shall be said of so ugly a lie?  He who was a young man
with goodly beard is now in middle life.  It must be that she told a
false tale: else is she in very truth ignorant what manner of man he
is.  Howsoever it be, let us destroy her quickly.  For if she indeed
knows not, be sure that her bridegroom is one of the gods: it is a god
she bears in her womb.  And let [73] that be far from us!  If she be
called mother of a god, then will life be more than I can bear."

So, full of rage against her, they returned to Psyche, and said to her
craftily, "Thou livest in an ignorant bliss, all incurious of thy real
danger.  It is a deadly serpent, as we certainly know, that comes to
sleep at thy side.  Remember the words of the oracle, which declared
thee destined to a cruel beast.  There are those who have seen it at
nightfall, coming back from its feeding.  In no long time, they say, it
will end its blandishments.  It but waits for the babe to be formed in
thee, that it may devour thee by so much the richer. If indeed the
solitude of this musical place, or it may be the loathsome commerce of
a hidden love, delight thee, we at least in sisterly piety have done
our part."  And at last the unhappy Psyche, simple and frail of soul,
carried away by the terror of their words, losing memory of her
husband's precepts and her own promise, brought upon herself a great
calamity.  Trembling and turning pale, she answers them, "And they who
tell those things, it may be, speak the truth.  For in very deed never
have I seen the face of my husband, nor know I at all what manner of
man he is.  Always he frights me diligently from the sight of him,
threatening some great evil should I too curiously look upon his face.
Do ye, if ye can help your sister in her great peril, stand by her now."

[74] Her sisters answered her, "The way of safety we have well
considered, and will teach thee.  Take a sharp knife, and hide it in
that part of the couch where thou art wont to lie: take also a lamp
filled with oil, and set it Privily behind the curtain.  And when he
shall have drawn up his coils into the accustomed place, and thou
hearest him breathe in sleep, slip then from his side and discover the
lamp, and, knife in hand, put forth thy strength, and strike off the
serpent's head."  And so they departed in haste.

And Psyche left alone (alone but for the furies which beset her) is
tossed up and down in her distress, like a wave of the sea; and though
her will is firm, yet, in the moment of putting hand to the deed, she
falters, and is torn asunder by various apprehension of the great
calamity upon her.  She hastens and anon delays, now full of distrust,
and now of angry courage: under one bodily form she loathes the monster
and loves the bridegroom.  But twilight ushers in the night; and at
length in haste she makes ready for the terrible deed. Darkness came,
and the bridegroom; and he first, after some faint essay of love, falls
into a deep sleep.

And she, erewhile of no strength, the hard purpose of destiny assisting
her, is confirmed in force.  With lamp plucked forth, knife in hand,
she put by her sex; and lo! as the secrets of the bed became manifest,
the sweetest and most gentle of all creatures, Love himself, reclined
[75] there, in his own proper loveliness!  At sight of him the very
flame of the lamp kindled more gladly!  But Psyche was afraid at the
vision, and, faint of soul, trembled back upon her knees, and would
have hidden the steel in her own bosom.  But the knife slipped from her
hand; and now, undone, yet ofttimes looking upon the beauty of that
divine countenance, she lives again.  She sees the locks of that golden
head, pleasant with the unction of the gods, shed down in graceful
entanglement behind and before, about the ruddy cheeks and white
throat.  The pinions of the winged god, yet fresh with the dew, are
spotless upon his shoulders, the delicate plumage wavering over them as
they lie at rest.  Smooth he was, and, touched with light, worthy of
Venus his mother.  At the foot of the couch lay his bow and arrows, the
instruments of his power, propitious to men.

And Psyche, gazing hungrily thereon, draws an arrow from the quiver,
and trying the point upon her thumb, tremulous still, drave in the
barb, so that a drop of blood came forth.  Thus fell she, by her own
act, and unaware, into the love of Love.  Falling upon the bridegroom,
with indrawn breath, in a hurry of kisses from eager and open lips, she
shuddered as she thought how brief that sleep might be.  And it chanced
that a drop of burning oil fell from the lamp upon the god's shoulder.
Ah! maladroit minister of love, thus to wound him from whom [76] all
fire comes; though 'twas a lover, I trow, first devised thee, to have
the fruit of his desire even in the darkness!  At the touch of the fire
the god started up, and beholding the overthrow of her faith, quietly
took flight from her embraces.

And Psyche, as he rose upon the wing, laid hold on him with her two
hands, hanging upon him in his passage through the air, till she sinks
to the earth through weariness.  And as she lay there, the divine
lover, tarrying still, lighted upon a cypress tree which grew near,
and, from the top of it, spake thus to her, in great emotion. "Foolish
one! unmindful of the command of Venus, my mother, who had devoted thee
to one of base degree, I fled to thee in his stead.  Now know I that
this was vainly done.  Into mine own flesh pierced mine arrow, and I
made thee my wife, only that I might seem a monster beside thee--that
thou shouldst seek to wound the head wherein lay the eyes so full of
love to thee!  Again and again, I thought to put thee on thy guard
concerning these things, and warned thee in loving-kindness.  Now I
would but punish thee by my flight hence."  And therewith he winged his
way into the deep sky.

Psyche, prostrate upon the earth, and following far as sight might
reach the flight of the bridegroom, wept and lamented; and when the
breadth of space had parted him wholly from her, cast herself down from
the bank of a river [77] which was nigh.  But the stream, turning
gentle in honour of the god, put her forth again unhurt upon its
margin.  And as it happened, Pan, the rustic god, was sitting just then
by the waterside, embracing, in the body of a reed, the goddess Canna;
teaching her to respond to him in all varieties of slender sound.  Hard
by, his flock of goats browsed at will.  And the shaggy god called her,
wounded and outworn, kindly to him and said, "I am but a rustic
herdsman, pretty maiden, yet wise, by favour of my great age and long
experience; and if I guess truly by those faltering steps, by thy
sorrowful eyes and continual sighing, thou labourest with excess of
love.  Listen then to me, and seek not death again, in the stream or
otherwise.  Put aside thy woe, and turn thy prayers to Cupid.  He is in
truth a delicate youth: win him by the delicacy of thy service."

So the shepherd-god spoke, and Psyche, answering nothing, but with a
reverence to his serviceable deity, went on her way.  And while she, in
her search after Cupid, wandered through many lands, he was lying in
the chamber of his mother, heart-sick.  And the white bird which floats
over the waves plunged in haste into the sea, and approaching Venus, as
she bathed, made known to her that her son lies afflicted with some
grievous hurt, doubtful of life.  And Venus cried, angrily, "My son,
then, has a mistress!  And it is Psyche, who witched away [78] my
beauty and was the rival of my godhead, whom he loves!"

Therewith she issued from the sea, and returning to her golden chamber,
found there the lad, sick, as she had heard, and cried from the
doorway, "Well done, truly! to trample thy mother's precepts under
foot, to spare my enemy that cross of an unworthy love; nay, unite her
to thyself, child as thou art, that I might have a daughter-in-law who
hates me!  I will make thee repent of thy sport, and the savour of thy
marriage bitter.  There is one who shall chasten this body of thine,
put out thy torch and unstring thy bow. Not till she has plucked forth
that hair, into which so oft these hands have smoothed the golden
light, and sheared away thy wings, shall I feel the injury done me
avenged."  And with this she hastened in anger from the doors.

And Ceres and Juno met her, and sought to know the meaning of her
troubled countenance.  "Ye come in season," she cried; "I pray you,
find for me Psyche.  It must needs be that ye have heard the disgrace
of my house."  And they, ignorant of what was done, would have soothed
her anger, saying, "What fault, Mistress, hath thy son committed, that
thou wouldst destroy the girl he loves?  Knowest thou not that he is
now of age?  Because he wears his years so lightly must he seem to thee
ever but a child?  Wilt thou for ever thus pry into the [79] pastimes
of thy son, always accusing his wantonness, and blaming in him those
delicate wiles which are all thine own?" Thus, in secret fear of the
boy's bow, did they seek to please him with their gracious patronage.
But Venus, angry at their light taking of her wrongs, turned her back
upon them, and with hasty steps made her way once more to the sea.

Meanwhile Psyche, tost in soul, wandering hither and thither, rested
not night or day in the pursuit of her husband, desiring, if she might
not sooth his anger by the endearments of a wife, at the least to
propitiate him with the prayers of a handmaid.  And seeing a certain
temple on the top of a high mountain, she said, "Who knows whether
yonder place be not the abode of my lord?"  Thither, therefore, she
turned her steps, hastening now the more because desire and hope
pressed her on, weary as she was with the labours of the way, and so,
painfully measuring out the highest ridges of the mountain, drew near
to the sacred couches.  She sees ears of wheat, in heaps or twisted
into chaplets; ears of barley also, with sickles and all the
instruments of harvest, lying there in disorder, thrown at random from
the hands of the labourers in the great heat.  These she curiously sets
apart, one by one, duly ordering them; for she said within herself, "I
may not neglect the shrines, nor the holy service, of any god there be,
but must rather [80] win by supplication the kindly mercy of them all."

And Ceres found her bending sadly upon her task, and cried aloud,
"Alas, Psyche!  Venus, in the furiousness of her anger, tracks thy
footsteps through the world, seeking for thee to pay her the utmost
penalty; and thou, thinking of anything rather than thine own safety,
hast taken on thee the care of what belongs to me!"  Then Psyche fell
down at her feet, and sweeping the floor with her hair, washing the
footsteps of the goddess in her tears, besought her mercy, with many
prayers:--"By the gladdening rites of harvest, by the lighted lamps and
mystic marches of the Marriage and mysterious Invention of thy daughter
Proserpine, and by all beside that the holy place of Attica veils in
silence, minister, I pray thee, to the sorrowful heart of Psyche!
Suffer me to hide myself but for a few days among the heaps of corn,
till time have softened the anger of the goddess, and my strength,
out-worn in my long travail, be recovered by a little rest."

But Ceres answered her, "Truly thy tears move me, and I would fain help
thee; only I dare not incur the ill-will of my kinswoman. Depart hence
as quickly as may be."  And Psyche, repelled against hope, afflicted
now with twofold sorrow, making her way back again, beheld among the
half-lighted woods of the valley below a sanctuary builded with cunning
[81] art.  And that she might lose no way of hope, howsoever doubtful,
she drew near to the sacred doors.  She sees there gifts of price, and
garments fixed upon the door-posts and to the branches of the trees,
wrought with letters of gold which told the name of the goddess to whom
they were dedicated, with thanksgiving for that she had done.  So, with
bent knee and hands laid about the glowing altar, she prayed saying,
"Sister and spouse of Jupiter! be thou to these my desperate fortune's
Juno the Auspicious!  I know that thou dost willingly help those in
travail with child; deliver me from the peril that is upon me."  And as
she prayed thus, Juno in the majesty of her godhead, was straightway
present, and answered, "Would that I might incline favourably to thee;
but against the will of Venus, whom I have ever loved as a daughter, I
may not, for very shame, grant thy prayer."

And Psyche, dismayed by this new shipwreck of her hope, communed thus
with herself, "Whither, from the midst of the snares that beset me,
shall I take my way once more?  In what dark solitude shall I hide me
from the all-seeing eye of Venus?  What if I put on at length a man's
courage, and yielding myself unto her as my mistress, soften by a
humility not yet too late the fierceness of her purpose?  Who knows but
that I may find him also whom my soul seeketh after, in the abode of
his mother?"

[82] And Venus, renouncing all earthly aid in her search, prepared to
return to heaven.  She ordered the chariot to be made ready, wrought
for her by Vulcan as a marriage-gift, with a cunning of hand which had
left his work so much the richer by the weight of gold it lost under
his tool.  From the multitude which housed about the bed-chamber of
their mistress, white doves came forth, and with joyful motions bent
their painted necks beneath the yoke.  Behind it, with playful riot,
the sparrows sped onward, and other birds sweet of song, making known
by their soft notes the approach of the goddess. Eagle and cruel hawk
alarmed not the quireful family of Venus.  And the clouds broke away,
as the uttermost ether opened to receive her, daughter and goddess,
with great joy.

And Venus passed straightway to the house of Jupiter to beg from him
the service of Mercury, the god of speech.  And Jupiter refused not her
prayer.  And Venus and Mercury descended from heaven together; and as
they went, the former said to the latter, "Thou knowest, my brother of
Arcady, that never at any time have I done anything without thy help;
for how long time, moreover, I have sought a certain maiden in vain.
And now naught remains but that, by thy heraldry, I proclaim a reward
for whomsoever shall find her.  Do thou my bidding quickly."  And
therewith [83] she conveyed to him a little scrip, in the which was
written the name of Psyche, with other things; and so returned home.

And Mercury failed not in his office; but departing into all lands,
proclaimed that whosoever delivered up to Venus the fugitive girl,
should receive from herself seven kisses--one thereof full of the
inmost honey of her throat.  With that the doubt of Psyche was ended.
And now, as she came near to the doors of Venus, one of the household,
whose name was Use-and-Wont, ran out to her, crying, "Hast thou
learned, Wicked Maid! now at last! that thou hast a mistress?" And
seizing her roughly by the hair, drew her into the presence of Venus.
And when Venus saw her, she cried out, saying, "Thou hast deigned then
to make thy salutations to thy mother-in-law.  Now will I in turn treat
thee as becometh a dutiful daughter-in-law!"

And she took barley and millet and poppy-seed, every kind of grain and
seed, and mixed them together, and laughed, and said to her: "Methinks
so plain a maiden can earn lovers only by industrious ministry: now
will I also make trial of thy service.  Sort me this heap of seed, the
one kind from the others, grain by grain; and get thy task done before
the evening."  And Psyche, stunned by the cruelty of her bidding, was
silent, and moved not her hand to the inextricable heap.  And there
came [84] forth a little ant, which had understanding of the difficulty
of her task, and took pity upon the consort of the god of Love; and he
ran deftly hither and thither, and called together the whole army of
his fellows.  "Have pity," he cried, "nimble scholars of the Earth,
Mother of all things!--have pity upon the wife of Love, and hasten to
help her in her perilous effort."  Then, one upon the other, the hosts
of the insect people hurried together; and they sorted asunder the
whole heap of seed, separating every grain after its kind, and so
departed quickly out of sight.

And at nightfall Venus returned, and seeing that task finished with so
wonderful diligence, she cried, "The work is not thine, thou naughty
maid, but his in whose eyes thou hast found favour."  And calling her
again in the morning, "See now the grove," she said, "beyond yonder
torrent.  Certain sheep feed there, whose fleeces shine with gold.
Fetch me straightway a lock of that precious stuff, having gotten it as
thou mayst."

And Psyche went forth willingly, not to obey the command of Venus, but
even to seek a rest from her labour in the depths of the river. But
from the river, the green reed, lowly mother of music, spake to her: "O
Psyche! pollute not these waters by self-destruction, nor approach that
terrible flock; for, as the heat groweth, they wax fierce.  Lie down
under yon plane-tree, till the [85] quiet of the river's breath have
soothed them.  Thereafter thou mayst shake down the fleecy gold from
the trees of the grove, for it holdeth by the leaves."

And Psyche, instructed thus by the simple reed, in the humanity of its
heart, filled her bosom with the soft golden stuff, and returned to
Venus.  But the goddess smiled bitterly, and said to her, "Well know I
who was the author of this thing also.  I will make further trial of
thy discretion, and the boldness of thy heart.  Seest thou the utmost
peak of yonder steep mountain?  The dark stream which flows down thence
waters the Stygian fields, and swells the flood of Cocytus.  Bring me
now, in this little urn, a draught from its innermost source."  And
therewith she put into her hands a vessel of wrought crystal.

And Psyche set forth in haste on her way to the mountain, looking there
at last to find the end of her hapless life.  But when she came to the
region which borders on the cliff that was showed to her, she
understood the deadly nature of her task.  From a great rock, steep and
slippery, a horrible river of water poured forth, falling straightway
by a channel exceeding narrow into the unseen gulf below. And lo!
creeping from the rocks on either hand, angry serpents, with their long
necks and sleepless eyes.  The very waters found a voice and bade her
depart, in smothered cries of, Depart hence! and [86] What doest thou
here?  Look around thee! and Destruction is upon thee!  And then sense
left her, in the immensity of her peril, as one changed to stone.

Yet not even then did the distress of this innocent soul escape the
steady eye of a gentle providence.  For the bird of Jupiter spread his
wings and took flight to her, and asked her, "Didst thou think, simple
one, even thou! that thou couldst steal one drop of that relentless
stream, the holy river of Styx, terrible even to the gods? But give me
thine urn."  And the bird took the urn, and filled it at the source,
and returned to her quickly from among the teeth of the serpents,
bringing with him of the waters, all unwilling--nay! warning him to
depart away and not molest them.

And she, receiving the urn with great joy, ran back quickly that she
might deliver it to Venus, and yet again satisfied not the angry
goddess.  "My child!" she said, "in this one thing further must thou
serve me.  Take now this tiny casket, and get thee down even unto hell,
and deliver it to Proserpine.  Tell her that Venus would have of her
beauty so much at least as may suffice for but one day's use, that
beauty she possessed erewhile being foreworn and spoiled, through her
tendance upon the sick-bed of her son; and be not slow in returning."

And Psyche perceived there the last ebbing of her fortune--that she was
now thrust openly [87] upon death, who must go down, of her own motion,
to Hades and the Shades.  And straightway she climbed to the top of an
exceeding high tower, thinking within herself, "I will cast myself down
thence: so shall I descend most quickly into the kingdom of the dead."
And the tower again, broke forth into speech: "Wretched Maid!  Wretched
Maid!  Wilt thou destroy thyself?  If the breath quit thy body, then
wilt thou indeed go down into Hades, but by no means return hither.
Listen to me.  Among the pathless wilds not far from this place lies a
certain mountain, and therein one of hell's vent-holes.  Through the
breach a rough way lies open, following which thou wilt come, by
straight course, to the castle of Orcus.  And thou must not go
empty-handed.  Take in each hand a morsel of barley-bread, soaked in
hydromel; and in thy mouth two pieces of money.  And when thou shalt be
now well onward in the way of death, then wilt thou overtake a lame ass
laden with wood, and a lame driver, who will pray thee reach him
certain cords to fasten the burden which is falling from the ass: but
be thou cautious to pass on in silence.  And soon as thou comest to the
river of the dead, Charon, in that crazy bark he hath, will put thee
over upon the further side.  There is greed even among the dead: and
thou shalt deliver to him, for the ferrying, one of those two pieces of
money, in such wise that he take [88] it with his hand from between thy
lips.  And as thou passest over the stream, a dead old man, rising on
the water, will put up to thee his mouldering hands, and pray thee draw
him into the ferry-boat.  But beware thou yield not to unlawful pity.

"When thou shalt be come over, and art upon the causeway, certain aged
women, spinning, will cry to thee to lend thy hand to their work; and
beware again that thou take no part therein; for this also is the snare
of Venus, whereby she would cause thee to cast away one at least of
those cakes thou bearest in thy hands.  And think not that a slight
matter; for the loss of either one of them will be to thee the losing
of the light of day.  For a watch-dog exceeding fierce lies ever before
the threshold of that lonely house of Proserpine.  Close his mouth with
one of thy cakes; so shalt thou pass by him, and enter straightway into
the presence of Proserpine herself.  Then do thou deliver thy message,
and taking what she shall give thee, return back again; offering to the
watch-dog the other cake, and to the ferryman that other piece of money
thou hast in thy mouth.  After this manner mayst thou return again
beneath the stars. But withal, I charge thee, think not to look into,
nor open, the casket thou bearest, with that treasure of the beauty of
the divine countenance hidden therein."

So spake the stones of the tower; and Psyche [89] delayed not, but
proceeding diligently after the manner enjoined, entered into the house
of Proserpine, at whose feet she sat down humbly, and would neither the
delicate couch nor that divine food the goddess offered her, but did
straightway the business of Venus.  And Proserpine filled the casket
secretly and shut the lid, and delivered it to Psyche, who fled
therewith from Hades with new strength.  But coming back into the light
of day, even as she hasted now to the ending of her service, she was
seized by a rash curiosity.  "Lo! now," she said within herself, "my
simpleness! who bearing in my hands the divine loveliness, heed not to
touch myself with a particle at least therefrom, that I may please the
more, by the favour of it, my fair one, my beloved."  Even as she
spoke, she lifted the lid; and behold! within, neither beauty, nor
anything beside, save sleep only, the sleep of the dead, which took
hold upon her, filling all her members with its drowsy vapour, so that
she lay down in the way and moved not, as in the slumber of death.

And Cupid being healed of his wound, because he would endure no longer
the absence of her he loved, gliding through the narrow window of the
chamber wherein he was holden, his pinions being now repaired by a
little rest, fled forth swiftly upon them, and coming to the place
where Psyche was, shook that sleep away from her, and set him in his
prison again, awaking her with the [90] innocent point of his arrow.
"Lo! thine old error again," he said, "which had like once more to have
destroyed thee!  But do thou now what is lacking of the command of my
mother: the rest shall be my care."  With these words, the lover rose
upon the air; and being consumed inwardly with the greatness of his
love, penetrated with vehement wing into the highest place of heaven,
to lay his cause before the father of the gods.  And the father of gods
took his hand in his, and kissed his face and said to him, "At no time,
my son, hast thou regarded me with due honour. Often hast thou vexed my
bosom, wherein lies the disposition of the stars, with those busy darts
of thine.  Nevertheless, because thou hast grown up between these mine
hands, I will accomplish thy desire."  And straightway he bade Mercury
call the gods together; and, the council-chamber being filled, sitting
upon a high throne, "Ye gods," he said, "all ye whose names are in the
white book of the Muses, ye know yonder lad.  It seems good to me that
his youthful heats should by some means be restrained.  And that all
occasion may be taken from him, I would even confine him in the bonds
of marriage. He has chosen and embraced a mortal maiden.  Let him have
fruit of his love, and possess her for ever."

Thereupon he bade Mercury produce Psyche in heaven; and holding out to
her his ambrosial cup, "Take it," he said, "and live for ever; [91] nor
shall Cupid ever depart from thee."  And the gods sat down together to
the marriage-feast.

On the first couch lay the bridegroom, and Psyche in his bosom.  His
rustic serving-boy bare the wine to Jupiter; and Bacchus to the rest.
The Seasons crimsoned all things with their roses.  Apollo sang to the
lyre, while a little Pan prattled on his reeds, and Venus danced very
sweetly to the soft music.  Thus, with due rites, did Psyche pass into
the power of Cupid; and from them was born the daughter whom men call
Voluptas.



CHAPTER VI: EUPHUISM

[92] So the famous story composed itself in the memory of Marius, with
an expression changed in some ways from the original and on the whole
graver.  The petulant, boyish Cupid of Apuleius was become more like
that "Lord, of terrible aspect," who stood at Dante's bedside and wept,
or had at least grown to the manly earnestness of the Erôs of
Praxiteles.  Set in relief amid the coarser matter of the book, this
episode of Cupid and Psyche served to combine many lines of meditation,
already familiar to Marius, into the ideal of a perfect imaginative
love, centered upon a type of beauty entirely flawless and clean--an
ideal which never wholly faded from his thoughts, though he valued it
at various times in different degrees.  The human body in its beauty,
as the highest potency of all the beauty of material objects, seemed to
him just then to be matter no longer, but, having taken celestial fire,
to assert itself as indeed the true, though visible, [93] soul or
spirit in things.  In contrast with that ideal, in all the pure
brilliancy, and as it were in the happy light, of youth and morning and
the springtide, men's actual loves, with which at many points the book
brings one into close contact, might appear to him, like the general
tenor of their lives, to be somewhat mean and sordid.  The hiddenness
of perfect things: a shrinking mysticism, a sentiment of diffidence
like that expressed in Psyche's so tremulous hope concerning the child
to be born of the husband she had never yet seen--"in the face of this
little child, at the least, shall I apprehend thine"--in hoc saltem
parvulo cognoscam faciem tuam: the fatality which seems to haunt any
signal+ beauty, whether moral or physical, as if it were in itself
something illicit and isolating: the suspicion and hatred it so often
excites in the vulgar:--these were some of the impressions, forming, as
they do, a constant tradition of somewhat cynical pagan experience,
from Medusa and Helen downwards, which the old story enforced on him. A
book, like a person, has its fortunes with one; is lucky or unlucky in
the precise moment of its falling in our way, and often by some happy
accident counts with us for something more than its independent value.
The Metamorphoses of Apuleius, coming to Marius just then, figured for
him as indeed The Golden Book: he felt a sort of personal gratitude to
its writer, and saw in it doubtless [94] far more than was really there
for any other reader.  It occupied always a peculiar place in his
remembrance, never quite losing its power in frequent return to it for
the revival of that first glowing impression.

Its effect upon the elder youth was a more practical one: it stimulated
the literary ambition, already so strong a motive with him, by a signal
example of success, and made him more than ever an ardent,
indefatigable student of words, of the means or instrument of the
literary art.  The secrets of utterance, of expression itself, of that
through which alone any intellectual or spiritual power within one can
actually take effect upon others, to over-awe or charm them to one's
side, presented themselves to this ambitious lad in immediate connexion
with that desire for predominance, for the satisfaction of which
another might have relied on the acquisition and display of brilliant
military qualities.  In him, a fine instinctive sentiment of the exact
value and power of words was connate with the eager longing for sway
over his fellows.  He saw himself already a gallant and effective
leader, innovating or conservative as occasion might require, in the
rehabilitation of the mother-tongue, then fallen so tarnished and
languid; yet the sole object, as he mused within himself, of the only
sort of patriotic feeling proper, or possible, for one born of slaves.
The popular speech was gradually departing from the form [95] and rule
of literary language, a language always and increasingly artificial.
While the learned dialect was yearly becoming more and more barbarously
pedantic, the colloquial idiom, on the other hand, offered a thousand
chance-tost gems of racy or picturesque expression, rejected or at
least ungathered by what claimed to be classical Latin.  The time was
coming when neither the pedants nor the people would really understand
Cicero; though there were some indeed, like this new writer, Apuleius,
who, departing from the custom of writing in Greek, which had been a
fashionable affectation among the sprightlier wits since the days of
Hadrian, had written in the vernacular.

The literary programme which Flavian had already designed for himself
would be a work, then, partly conservative or reactionary, in its
dealing with the instrument of the literary art; partly popular and
revolutionary, asserting, so to term them, the rights of the
proletariate of speech.  More than fifty years before, the younger
Pliny, himself an effective witness for the delicate power of the Latin
tongue, had said,--"I am one of those who admire the ancients, yet I do
not, like some others, underrate certain instances of genius which our
own times afford.  For it is not true that nature, as if weary and
effete, no longer produces what is admirable."  And he, Flavian, would
prove himself the true master of the opportunity thus indicated.  In
[96] his eagerness for a not too distant fame, he dreamed over all
that, as the young Caesar may have dreamed of campaigns.  Others might
brutalise or neglect the native speech, that true "open field" for
charm and sway over men.  He would make of it a serious study, weighing
the precise power of every phrase and word, as though it were precious
metal, disentangling the later associations and going back to the
original and native sense of each,--restoring to full significance all
its wealth of latent figurative expression, reviving or replacing its
outworn or tarnished images.  Latin literature and the Latin tongue
were dying of routine and languor; and what was necessary, first of
all, was to re-establish the natural and direct relationship between
thought and expression, between the sensation and the term, and restore
to words their primitive power.

For words, after all, words manipulated with all his delicate force,
were to be the apparatus of a war for himself.  To be forcibly
impressed, in the first place; and in the next, to find the means of
making visible to others that which was vividly apparent, delightful,
of lively interest to himself, to the exclusion of all that was but
middling, tame, or only half-true even to him--this scrupulousness of
literary art actually awoke in Flavian, for the first time, a sort of
chivalrous conscience.  What care for style! what patience of
execution! what research for the significant [97] tones of ancient
idiom--sonantia verba et antiqua!  What stately and regular
word-building--gravis et decora constructio!  He felt the whole meaning
of the sceptical Pliny's somewhat melancholy advice to one of his
friends, that he should seek in literature deliverance from
mortality--ut studiis se literarum a mortalitate vindicet.  And there
was everything in the nature and the training of Marius to make him a
full participator in the hopes of such a new literary school, with
Flavian for its leader.  In the refinements of that curious spirit, in
its horror of profanities, its fastidious sense of a correctness in
external form, there was something which ministered to the old ritual
interest, still surviving in him; as if here indeed were involved a
kind of sacred service to the mother-tongue.

Here, then, was the theory of Euphuism, as manifested in every age in
which the literary conscience has been awakened to forgotten duties
towards language, towards the instrument of expression: in fact it does
but modify a little the principles of all effective expression at all
times.  'Tis art's function to conceal itself: ars est celare
artem:--is a saying, which, exaggerated by inexact quotation, has
perhaps been oftenest and most confidently quoted by those who have had
little literary or other art to conceal; and from the very beginning of
professional literature, the "labour of the file"--a labour in the case
of Plato, for instance, or Virgil, like [98] that of the oldest of
goldsmiths as described by Apuleius, enriching the work by far more
than the weight of precious metal it removed--has always had its
function.  Sometimes, doubtless, as in later examples of it, this Roman
Euphuism, determined at any cost to attain beauty in writing--es kallos
graphein+--might lapse into its characteristic fopperies or mannerisms,
into the "defects of its qualities," in truth, not wholly unpleasing
perhaps, or at least excusable, when looked at as but the toys (so
Cicero calls them), the strictly congenial and appropriate toys, of an
assiduously cultivated age, which could not help being polite,
critical, self-conscious.  The mere love of novelty also had, of
course, its part there: as with the Euphuism of the Elizabethan age,
and of the modern French romanticists, its neologies were the ground of
one of the favourite charges against it; though indeed, as regards
these tricks of taste also, there is nothing new, but a quaint family
likeness rather, between the Euphuists of successive ages.  Here, as
elsewhere, the power of "fashion," as it is called, is but one minor
form, slight enough, it may be, yet distinctly symptomatic, of that
deeper yearning of human nature towards ideal perfection, which is a
continuous force in it; and since in this direction too human nature is
limited, such fashions must necessarily reproduce themselves. Among
other resemblances to later growths of Euphuism, its archaisms on the
one hand, and [99]  its neologies on the other, the Euphuism of the
days of Marcus Aurelius had, in the composition of verse, its fancy for
the refrain.  It was a snatch from a popular chorus, something he had
heard sounding all over the town of Pisa one April night, one of the
first bland and summer-like nights of the year, that Flavian had chosen
for the refrain of a poem he was then pondering--the Pervigilium
Veneris--the vigil, or "nocturn," of Venus.

Certain elderly counsellors, filling what may be thought a constant
part in the little tragi-comedy which literature and its votaries are
playing in all ages, would ask, suspecting some affectation or
unreality in that minute culture of form:--Cannot those who have a
thing to say, say it directly?  Why not be simple and broad, like the
old writers of Greece?  And this challenge had at least the effect of
setting his thoughts at work on the intellectual situation as it lay
between the children of the present and those earliest masters.
Certainly, the most wonderful, the unique, point, about the Greek
genius, in literature as in everything else, was the entire absence of
imitation in its productions.  How had the burden of precedent, laid
upon every artist, increased since then!  It was all around one:--that
smoothly built world of old classical taste, an accomplished fact, with
overwhelming authority on every detail of the conduct of one's [100]
work.  With no fardel on its own back, yet so imperious towards those
who came labouring after it, Hellas, in its early freshness, looked as
distant from him even then as it does from ourselves.  There might seem
to be no place left for novelty or originality,--place only for a
patient, an infinite, faultlessness. On this question too Flavian
passed through a world of curious art-casuistries, of self-tormenting,
at the threshold of his work.  Was poetic beauty a thing ever one and
the same, a type absolute; or, changing always with the soul of time
itself, did it depend upon the taste, the peculiar trick of
apprehension, the fashion, as we say, of each successive age?  Might
one recover that old, earlier sense of it, that earlier manner, in a
masterly effort to recall all the complexities of the life, moral and
intellectual, of the earlier age to which it had belonged?  Had there
been really bad ages in art or literature?  Were all ages, even those
earliest, adventurous, matutinal days, in themselves equally poetical
or unpoetical; and poetry, the literary beauty, the poetic ideal,
always but a borrowed light upon men's actual life?

Homer had said--

     Hoi d' hote dê limenos polybentheos entos hikonto,
     Histia men steilanto, thesan d' en nêi melainê...
     Ek de kai autoi bainon epi phêgmini thalassês.+

And how poetic the simple incident seemed, told just thus!  Homer was
always telling [101] things after this manner.  And one might think
there had been no effort in it: that here was but the almost mechanical
transcript of a time, naturally, intrinsically, poetic, a time in which
one could hardly have spoken at all without ideal effect, or, the
sailors pulled down their boat without making a picture in "the great
style," against a sky charged with marvels. Must not the mere prose of
an age, itself thus ideal, have counted for more than half of Homer's
poetry?  Or might the closer student discover even here, even in Homer,
the really mediatorial function of the poet, as between the reader and
the actual matter of his experience; the poet waiting, so to speak, in
an age which had felt itself trite and commonplace enough, on his
opportunity for the touch of "golden alchemy," or at least for the
pleasantly lighted side of things themselves?  Might not another, in
one's own prosaic and used-up time, so uneventful as it had been
through the long reign of these quiet Antonines, in like manner,
discover his ideal, by a due waiting upon it?  Would not a future
generation, looking back upon this, under the power of the
enchanted-distance fallacy, find it ideal to view, in contrast with its
own languor--the languor that for some reason (concerning which
Augustine will one day have his view) seemed to haunt men always?  Had
Homer, even, appeared unreal and affected in his poetic flight, to some
of the people of his own age, [102] as seemed to happen with every new
literature in turn?  In any case, the intellectual conditions of early
Greece had been--how different from these!  And a true literary tact
would accept that difference in forming the primary conception of the
literary function at a later time.  Perhaps the utmost one could get by
conscious effort, in the way of a reaction or return to the conditions
of an earlier and fresher age, would be but novitas, artificial
artlessness, naïveté; and this quality too might have its measure of
euphuistic charm, direct and sensible enough, though it must count, in
comparison with that genuine early Greek newness at the beginning, not
as the freshness of the open fields, but only of a bunch of
field-flowers in a heated room.

There was, meantime, all this:--on one side, the old pagan culture, for
us but a fragment, for him an accomplished yet present fact, still a
living, united, organic whole, in the entirety of its art, its thought,
its religions, its sagacious forms of polity, that so weighty authority
it exercised on every point, being in reality only the measure of its
charm for every one: on the other side, the actual world in all its
eager self-assertion, with Flavian himself, in his boundless animation,
there, at the centre of the situation.  From the natural defects, from
the pettiness, of his euphuism, his assiduous cultivation of manner, he
was saved by the consciousness that he had a matter to present, very
real, [103] at least to him.  That preoccupation of the dilettante with
what might seem mere details of form, after all, did but serve the
purpose of bringing to the surface, sincerely and in their integrity,
certain strong personal intuitions, a certain vision or apprehension of
things as really being, with important results, thus, rather than
thus,--intuitions which the artistic or literary faculty was called
upon to follow, with the exactness of wax or clay, clothing the model
within. Flavian too, with his fine clear mastery of the practically
effective, had early laid hold of the principle, as axiomatic in
literature: that to know when one's self is interested, is the first
condition of interesting other people.  It was a principle, the
forcible apprehension of which made him jealous and fastidious in the
selection of his intellectual food; often listless while others read or
gazed diligently; never pretending to be moved out of mere complaisance
to people's emotions: it served to foster in him a very scrupulous
literary sincerity with himself.  And it was this uncompromising demand
for a matter, in all art, derived immediately from lively personal
intuition, this constant appeal to individual judgment, which saved his
euphuism, even at its weakest, from lapsing into mere artifice.

Was the magnificent exordium of Lucretius, addressed to the goddess
Venus, the work of [104]  his earlier manhood, and designed originally
to open an argument less persistently sombre than that protest against
the whole pagan heaven which actually follows it?  It is certainly the
most typical expression of a mood, still incident to the young poet, as
a thing peculiar to his youth, when he feels the sentimental current
setting forcibly along his veins, and so much as a matter of purely
physical excitement, that he can hardly distinguish it from the
animation of external nature, the upswelling of the seed in the earth,
and of the sap through the trees.  Flavian, to whom, again, as to his
later euphuistic kinsmen, old mythology seemed as full of untried,
unexpressed motives and interest as human life itself, had long been
occupied with a kind of mystic hymn to the vernal principle of life in
things; a composition shaping itself, little by little, out of a
thousand dim perceptions, into singularly definite form (definite and
firm as fine-art in metal, thought Marius) for which, as I said, he had
caught his "refrain," from the lips of the young men, singing because
they could not help it, in the streets of Pisa.  And as oftenest
happens also, with natures of genuinely poetic quality, those piecemeal
beginnings came suddenly to harmonious completeness among the fortunate
incidents, the physical heat and light, of one singularly happy day.

It was one of the first hot days of March--"the sacred day"--on which,
from Pisa, as from [105] many another harbour on the Mediterranean, the
Ship of Isis went to sea, and every one walked down to the shore-side
to witness the freighting of the vessel, its launching and final
abandonment among the waves, as an object really devoted to the Great
Goddess, that new rival, or "double," of ancient Venus, and like her a
favourite patroness of sailors.  On the evening next before, all the
world had been abroad to view the illumination of the river; the
stately lines of building being wreathed with hundreds of many-coloured
lamps.  The young men had poured forth their chorus--

     Cras amet qui nunquam amavit,
     Quique amavit cras amet--

as they bore their torches through the yielding crowd, or rowed their
lanterned boats up and down the stream, till far into the night, when
heavy rain-drops had driven the last lingerers home.  Morning broke,
however, smiling and serene; and the long procession started betimes.
The river, curving slightly, with the smoothly paved streets on either
side, between its low marble parapet and the fair dwelling-houses,
formed the main highway of the city; and the pageant, accompanied
throughout by innumerable lanterns and wax tapers, took its course up
one of these streets, crossing the water by a bridge up-stream, and
down the other, to the haven, every possible standing-place, out of
doors [106] and within, being crowded with sight-seers, of whom Marius
was one of the most eager, deeply interested in finding the spectacle
much as Apuleius had described it in his famous book.

At the head of the procession, the master of ceremonies, quietly waving
back the assistants, made way for a number of women, scattering
perfumes.  They were succeeded by a company of musicians, piping and
twanging, on instruments the strangest Marius had ever beheld, the
notes of a hymn, narrating the first origin of this votive rite to a
choir of youths, who marched behind them singing it. The tire-women and
other personal attendants of the great goddess came next, bearing the
instruments of their ministry, and various articles from the sacred
wardrobe, wrought of the most precious material; some of them with long
ivory combs, plying their hands in wild yet graceful concert of
movement as they went, in devout mimicry of the toilet.  Placed in
their rear were the mirror-bearers of the goddess, carrying large
mirrors of beaten brass or silver, turned in such a way as to reflect
to the great body of worshippers who followed, the face of the
mysterious image, as it moved on its way, and their faces to it, as
though they were in fact advancing to meet the heavenly visitor.  They
comprehended a multitude of both sexes and of all ages, already
initiated into the divine secret, clad in fair linen, the females
veiled, the males with shining [107] tonsures, and every one carrying a
sistrum--the richer sort of silver, a few very dainty persons of fine
gold--rattling the reeds, with a noise like the jargon of innumerable
birds and insects awakened from torpor and abroad in the spring sun.
Then, borne upon a kind of platform, came the goddess herself,
undulating above the heads of the multitude as the bearers walked, in
mystic robe embroidered with the moon and stars, bordered gracefully
with a fringe of real fruit and flowers, and with a glittering crown
upon the head.  The train of the procession consisted of the priests in
long white vestments, close from head to foot, distributed into various
groups, each bearing, exposed aloft, one of the sacred symbols of
Isis--the corn-fan, the golden asp, the ivory hand of equity, and among
them the votive ship itself, carved and gilt, and adorned bravely with
flags flying.  Last of all walked the high priest; the people kneeling
as he passed to kiss his hand, in which were those well-remembered
roses.

Marius followed with the rest to the harbour, where the mystic ship,
lowered from the shoulders of the priests, was loaded with as much as
it could carry of the rich spices and other costly gifts, offered in
great profusion by the worshippers, and thus, launched at last upon the
water, left the shore, crossing the harbour-bar in the wake of a much
stouter vessel than itself with a crew of white-robed mariners, whose
[108] function it was, at the appointed moment, finally to desert it on
the open sea.

The remainder of the day was spent by most in parties on the water.
Flavian and Marius sailed further than they had ever done before to a
wild spot on the bay, the traditional site of a little Greek colony,
which, having had its eager, stirring life at the time when Etruria was
still a power in Italy, had perished in the age of the civil wars.  In
the absolute transparency of the air on this gracious day, an
infinitude of detail from sea and shore reached the eye with sparkling
clearness, as the two lads sped rapidly over the waves--Flavian at work
suddenly, from time to time, with his tablets.  They reached land at
last.  The coral fishers had spread their nets on the sands, with a
tumble-down of quaint, many-hued treasures, below a little shrine of
Venus, fluttering and gay with the scarves and napkins and gilded
shells which these people had offered to the image.  Flavian and Marius
sat down under the shadow of a mass of gray rock or ruin, where the
sea-gate of the Greek town had been, and talked of life in those old
Greek colonies.  Of this place, all that remained, besides those rude
stones, was--a handful of silver coins, each with a head of pure and
archaic beauty, though a little cruel perhaps, supposed to represent
the Siren Ligeia, whose tomb was formerly shown here--only these, and
an ancient song, the very strain which Flavian [109] had recovered in
those last months.  They were records which spoke, certainly, of the
charm of life within those walls.  How strong must have been the tide
of men's existence in that little republican town, so small that this
circle of gray stones, of service now only by the moisture they
gathered for the blue-flowering gentians among them, had been the line
of its rampart!  An epitome of all that was liveliest, most animated
and adventurous, in the old Greek people of which it was an offshoot,
it had enhanced the effect of these gifts by concentration within
narrow limits.  The band of "devoted youth,"--hiera neotês.+--of the
younger brothers, devoted to the gods and whatever luck the gods might
afford, because there was no room for them at home--went forth, bearing
the sacred flame from the mother hearth; itself a flame, of power to
consume the whole material of existence in clear light and heat, with
no smouldering residue. The life of those vanished townsmen, so
brilliant and revolutionary, applying so abundantly the personal
qualities which alone just then Marius seemed to value, associated
itself with the actual figure of his companion, standing there before
him, his face enthusiastic with the sudden thought of all that; and
struck him vividly as precisely the fitting opportunity for a nature
like his, so hungry for control, for ascendency over men.

Marius noticed also, however, as high spirits [110] flagged at last, on
the way home through the heavy dew of the evening, more than physical
fatigue in Flavian, who seemed to find no refreshment in the coolness.
There had been something feverish, perhaps, and like the beginning of
sickness, about his almost forced gaiety, in this sudden spasm of
spring; and by the evening of the next day he was lying with a burning
spot on his forehead, stricken, as was thought from the first, by the
terrible new disease.

NOTES

93. +Corrected from the Macmillan edition misprint "singal."

98. +Transliteration: es kallos graphein.  Translation: "To write
beautifully."

100. +Iliad 1.432-33, 437.  Transliteration:

     Hoi d' hote dê limenos polybentheos entos hikonto,
     Histia men steilanto, thesan d' en nêi melainê...
     Ek de kai autoi bainon epi phêgmini thalassês.