CHAPTER XVI.



  Scenery of Antigua--Pilgrimage to "Tom Moore's Spring"--The
  Goddess Mnemosyne--Fig-Tree Hill--The "Bower of Bliss"--"Old
  Road"--The Strand--The cross sexton--The parochial school--Old
  Road Church--Tomb of Col. Williams--Moravian settlement--Salt
  ponds--Copses--"Crab Hill"--Sandy Valley--The Valley Church--
  The rising moon--Arrival in town--Night, and night dreams.

With respect to the scenery of Antigua, it is said to be neither
"grand nor magnificent," that "its mountains are too much like
mole-hills,"[62] and in many other ways has it been depreciated;
yet there are some spots of real beauty, which would strike the
eye of even a painter or a poet. To see some of these to the
greatest advantage, I would advise all such readers as have it in
their power to take a drive or a ride (whichever they prefer)
some fine morning to "Fig Tree Hill," and return by "Crab Hill."
They will then meet with spots of such transcendent loveliness,
as will cause the most unpoetic to exclaim, "Beautiful!
beautiful!" But as some of my readers, perhaps, may never have
the chance of taking such a tour, in pity to them, I will attempt
to describe what I saw in my pilgrimage to "Tom Moore's Spring."

It was a lovely morning (as most West India mornings are) when we
started upon our journey. The sun shone bright and clear; indeed,
far too clear for actual comfort, had we gone as "pilgrims grey,"
with "scalloped hat," and "sandled shoon," and resting on our
"staves;" but we preferred the less romantic, but more pleasant
way of taking it quietly in our carriage. Quickly we passed
through the town of St. John's, leaving its busy inmates, its
shops and stores, its "Scotch row" and Scotchmen, and all its
noise and bustle, for the quietness and freshness of the country.
Upon gaining "Otto's Hill," at the outskirts of the town, I
looked back upon the beautiful harbour of St. John's, its blue
waves just rippling the surface, its barques and brigs, schooners
and sloops, bowing their heads as if in graceful homage to some
sea-god from old King Neptune's court; and its sloping shores
displaying a carpet of luxuriant green, for a little rain which
had fallen not long before had clothed the fields in a garb of
lovely verdure. While thinking upon all these beauties, and the
images they called up, my poetic fancies were crushed by the
horrible noise of a long string of "cattle carts" and their sable
drivers, coming into town with a load of molasses for "Brother
Jonathan," or some other worthy. This brought me down from the
seventh heaven, and made me just then find out that it was very
_hot_, and the road disagreeably dusty. However, in our
pilgrimage through life, we meet with many crosses, and many
_dusty spots_; and therefore, in our pilgrimage to "Tom Moore's
Spring," we could but expect the same.

The country certainly looked very pretty upon this eventful day,
for every spot was green, and as we passed the numerous estates,
an air of gladness seemed to be abroad. The breeze blew soft from
off the mountains we were approaching, and greeted our olfactory
nerves with the odour of the yellow acacia, which grew along the
side of the road in vast profusion. In a short time, we reached
the banks of a small rivulet, the only real stream Antigua can
boast of, for the few others we passed owed their source more to
the late rains than anything else. This rivulet was bordered by
bamboos, and other species of wild cane, while larger trees, in
many parts, shewed their gnarled roots, and bent their long
boughs to kiss the swift gliding waters. Various aquatic plants
grew along its margin, while in the stream itself sported my own
country's water-lily, bright nymphaea. Near to the spot stands a
rural little temple of worship, with its plain white walls, and a
little cross upon its roof, and across the rivulet is thrown a
rustic bridge. This is a favourite resort for country
washerwomen, and as we passed, many of them were busily engaged
in their very necessary avocations; but as none of them presented
the appearance of a nymph or a naiad, I will not introduce them
to my readers.

We had heard of the bad state of the roads before we left our
home, of the hills we had to mount, and the dingles we had to go
down; of the terrible ravines on one side, and the bare rocks on
the other, and of places where the least swerve of the carriage
would send us over, and then, according to our informant, "it
would be no use to go look for you." At every turn of the road,
then, we looked for some trial, and "screwed up our courage to
the sticking-point," that we might be enabled to overcome them;
but after travelling for some time, and meeting with nothing very
terrific, we began to console ourselves, and remark, that the
difficulties appeared to lie in the imagination. At length, we
came to a pretty steep hill, which we surmounted in due time, and
again sped on our way joyfully, thinking that all was very fair,
when lo! up rose before us, if not a _mountain_, at least, a
_giant hill_. Here would be the "tug of war," so we called a
council. "What is to be done?" was the first query. "Why, either
_go on_ or _go back_" was the answer. The old adage of "out of
two evils, choose the least," came into our thoughts. There was
the hill behind, and the hill before, so we agreed to lay the
various "for's" and "against's" before us in a very orthodox
manner.

To commence then: if we go on, we must mount this hill, but when
we have accomplished that, we shall have no other of great
consequence; we were near half way, so we should have almost as
far to go back as to go on; on the other side, if we returned, we
should still have a hill before us, and not have the consolation
of visiting the celebrated "fig-tree." Having come to the
conclusion of our arguments, the word was given "forward," and
forward we attempted to go; but there were some of our party
whose opinions had not been asked, but who, no doubt, felt as
great concern in the decision as any one else; I mean those very
noble animals ycleped "horses," and for reasons my readers may
easily conceive they appeared resolved not to proceed. After a
few words of encouragement, however, and a few caresses, they
agreed to lend us their aid, and once more we started.

During the period that all this momentous business was going on,
we had totally neglected the appearance of the weather, and had
not a drop or two of rain fallen, and the sound of a distant clap
of thunder echoed round us, I dare say we should not have thought
upon such a subject. Here, then, was romance; a thunder-storm,
and "Sawcolt Hill"--it only wanted an old castle and a horde of
banditti to make it a scene worthy the pen of a "Radcliffe." The
lambent lightning played for awhile, and the thunder bellowed
through the boundless sky, and then passed slowly away to the
west, very much to my satisfaction. "Sawcolt Hill" was ascended,
and descended, and the road became more beautiful at every turn,
until at length we stood by the side of the noted freshwater
spring. And what then were my reflections? I thought it was
lovely in everything but its name--"Tom Moore's Spring!" Who, in
the name of all that's romantic, could call such a spring by such
a name? Had it been the "fairy's spring," or the "spring of the
mountain sylph," or something of the kind, it would have sounded
as it ought, and some charming legend might have been attached.
But who could ever inquire after "Tom Moore?" Why, the name of
such a being puts all fancies to the flight!

Thus far had my thoughts wandered, when suddenly, an ideal form
passed before me; her sweet and classic countenance--her eyes
which mocked the heavens in their dye--her long and silken lashes
which drank the dew of her vermilion cheeks, all conspired to
render me entranced. A blue mantle floated from her shoulders,
and a thousand graces hovered round her steps. As she glided
away, she placed one of her taper fingers upon her ruby lips,
and, in a voice of liquid sweetness, uttered the word,
"Remember!" I knew her for the goddess "Mnemosyne," and I tried
to follow her behest. My beautiful goddess assisted me, and
brought to my recollection that "Bulbul of a thousand songs,"
that sweet rhymer who charms us with his "bower of roses by
Bendameer's stream," as with his melodies of the "Emerald Isle,"
he who bears the well-known appellation of "Tom Moore." I
remembered all this to my shame, and determined in future never
to utter one word against it, did all the springs in Antigua bear
that name. After making this resolution, I turned once more to
inspect "Tom Moore's Spring." The water is as clear as crystal,
and of a refreshing coolness; and as it trickles from beneath the
roots of a large bamboo growing by, each drop looks like liquid
pearl. It has never been known to be dry, let the season be what
it will, and consequently must be of inexpressible value to the
adjoining estates. It was formerly built round with a stone wall,
but that has long ago fallen to ruin, and no one has troubled
himself to erect it again. I blame none, however, upon this
score, for, in my opinion, it looks more romantic as it is;
nature has done much for it, and art would only spoil her work.

After leaving the spring, another height presented itself,
clothed with luxuriant woods. This was "Fig-tree Hill," and no
description I have ever heard of it has sufficiently set forth
its beauty. Upon one side of the road is a deep ravine, whose
irregular descent is hidden by trees of every description, which
cover it to the bottom, and again ascend upon the opposite bank,
until they reach the top of the neighbouring mountain; on the
other side are sloping hills, carpeted with the gayest emerald.
This beautiful hill takes its name from several large fig-trees
which grow around; and from its highest point can be distinctly
seen, upon a clear day, the four islands of Guadaloupe,
Monserrat, Nevis, and St. Kitts.

After remaining upon the height for some time, and enjoying the
extensive prospect, we prepared to descend; but how to describe
the loveliness of the path, I know not. We alighted and walked
down, that nothing might escape our observation. Trees of all
species abound, and--

   "With confessed magnificence deride
    Our vile attire, and impotence of pride."

The lofty "red cedar," the beautiful "white-wood," the
glossy-green "loblolly," the treacherous "manchineel," which
invites your approach by its beautiful fruit, while it infects
you with its poisonous odours; the enormous "ceibar," (or silk
cotton,) the native "walnut," (which in every tree presents such
varying shades of green,) and the splendid "tamarind," shade each
side of the road, and cover the surrounding hills.

In many places, huge masses of fantastic rocks rear their bare
fronts to the heavens; some taking the form of old castles, with
their frowning battlements and strong ramparts; and others
looking as if about to fall into the valleys beneath.

Just at the termination of the first descent is one of the
sweetest spots in Antigua. It is one of tranquillity and repose.
The fierce beams of the sun are excluded by the umbrageous
foliage of the trees, around whose trunks various creepers
entwine themselves, and throw their slender limbs from one to the
other of these

   "Green-robed senators of mighty woods,"

forming many beauteous alcoves, carpeted with the lowlier
flowers; whilst the "purple wreath" hangs its tasseled blossoms
on all sides, and gives an air of lightness to the whole. A
little silver stream (one of those the offspring of the balmy
showers before mentioned) crossed the road in this part; and
after leaping over roots of trees, or any other slight impediment
which fell in its way, and thereby causing a thousand translucent
waterfalls, at length lost itself in the impending woods. Oh! it
was a lovely scene, and put me very much in mind of Spenser's
"Bower of Bliss;" particularly when

   "Was heard a most melodious sound
    Of all that could delight a curious ear;
    Such as might not upon terrestrial ground,
    Save in this paradise, be heard elsewhere.
    Full hard it was for him, who did it hear,
    To guess what sort of music this might be;
    For all that pleasing is to living ear
    Were there soft mingled in one harmony:
    Birds, voices, instruments, winds, waters, all agree."

This was a true delineation; for although most tropical birds are
devoid of song, the "painted warblers" might here be said to hop
"from spray to spray." The pretty little humming-bird fluttered
among the flowers, extracting from them, with its long and
slender beak, the liquid honey; and the doves courted each other
with soft, but melancholy cooing, from many a leafy brake. Upon
my remarking I never before heard birds _sing_ in the West
Indies, our negro-servant joined the conversation with--"Oh,
missis! if you was to come here early in the moring, before the
sun high, you would hear the birds singing in such a manner, that
it would make you feel quite dismal all de day." The first time I
ever heard of the song of a bird producing such an effect.

But to return to my description of this sweetest of all sweet
spots. Did we live in "days of yore," when fairies were wont to
visit our world, and astonish the benighted swains with their
glittering processions, we could fancy this one of their
favourite retreats; but, alas! those harmless goblins have long
disappeared, and with them all moonlight revels. The negroes,
however, are determined it shall not be without some aerial
visitants, so have peopled it with a tribe of _jumbies_, who,
according to their account, are very different in behaviour and
appearance to the pretty little elves.

After carving our names upon the trunk of a noble tree, which
appears to grow out of a rock, we proceeded on our journey
through the same lovely scenes, which now became interspersed
with palm-trees, until we entered upon a plain, on one side
studded over with ruined Carib houses, and on the other, laid out
in luxuriant cane-pieces, belonging to the Hon. Rowland E.
Williams, the descendant of a long line of noble ancestors, and
whose paternal domain extends throughout the lovely scenes I have
been endeavouring to describe. A few minutes' drive brought us to
"Old Road," so called because it was the first high-road made in
Antigua.

This town, if town it can be called, is, as regards architective
arrangement, a perfect nondescript; for streets there are none,
but here and there a straggling house. There is the _beach_,
indeed, which may justly be termed "_the strand_;" but, unlike
that far-famed street in London, boasts no splendid shops--no
arcades or bazaars, with their "euterpeons"--no brilliant lines
of lamps, or crowds of well-dressed and busy passengers. A
plentiful supply of bushes and "rock-stones" (as the Creoles call
all descriptions of stones) make up for those deficiencies; and
the murmur of old Father Ocean is the only music heard. Of the
houses which are to be found, a few of them are in repair; but
the greater part are falling to ruin, and have become a
receptacle for hordes of green lizards. One of these buildings
struck me as rather peculiar in appearance. Nothing remained of
it, it is true, but the walls of rough masonry, with huge
gable-ends pointing to the skies; but still it seemed as the work
of another race of beings. Upon making inquiries about it, an
inhabitant informed us her grandmother (who had died several
years before, at the advanced age of 116) remembered it in the
same ruinous state from her earliest years; but we could learn no
further particulars.

Our principal object for visiting "Old Road," was to see a
tombstone in the church, laid down to the memory of Col. Rowland
Williams; and consequently, as soon as we arrived, our first
inquiry was for the person who kept the keys of the church, and
who acts in the capacity of sexton. While waiting for this
official, we walked down to the beach. The harbour is a very fine
one, and forms a complete rotund, except in the opening, where
the sea stretches out beyond ken. A line of smooth silver sand
borders the sea, diversified with clumps of mangrove, manchineel,
and sea-side grapes; while here and there a cocoa-nut tree rears
aloft its proud head, as if scorning to herd with the lowlier of
its kind. For some time we amused ourselves with picking up
various small shells, matted sea-weed, and corallines, which were
scattered about the beach in profusion; but the heat,
notwithstanding the fresh sea-breeze, was beginning to be felt
oppressive; when turning the angle of one of the old buildings, a
man with a bunch of keys in his hand appeared in sight.

Although not always the case, still very generally, the face is
the index to the mind; and when I first saw that man, I felt
prejudiced against him. He came forward with a slovenly gait, and
downcast looks, and to our inquiries for the keys of the church,
he returned for answer, "Yes, but I can't let you in." On asking
the reason, the rejoinder was, "Because the parson told me not to
let any one go into the church." This was by no means cheering
news for us; it was far from satisfactory after riding fifteen
miles, to be turned away without seeing the very object we came
to look at. Every kind of persuasion was used to induce him to
comply. I joined in urging him to "ope' the door, and bid us
enter," but alas! I found him as insensible to the voice of
woman, as to everything else. "Can we go into the churchyard?"
was then inquired. "Yes," was the surly answer; and following his
steps, we soon reached that quiet spot.

Even here he apparently viewed us with suspicion, thinking,
perhaps, we not only looked capable of _sacrilege_, but of
carrying away the church also; for although he still had the keys
in his hand, and the rain began to fall, he not only remained
inexorable, but looked as if he should be quite as well pleased
if we quitted the place altogether. "The rain was falling fast,"
and obliged us to retire to the shelter of a large white-wood
tree, which no doubt was coeval with the first settlers, and
beneath its spreading branches we remained for some time, until
one of our party determined to try some other expedient, to gain
the wished-for admittance, and for that purpose left myself and
attendant in our shady retreat.

After the lapse of about a quarter of an hour, a well-known voice
was heard; and at an opening in the leafy covert, the person it
proceeded from appeared, accompanied by a female. This was the
parochial school-mistress; and a kind-hearted creature she
appeared to be. She immediately sent in search of the cross
sexton, and promised to take upon herself the responsibility of
letting our party into the church; but the man was not to be
found--he had left the town, and carried the keys with him. With
native politeness, Miss Austin (as the worthy school-mistress was
called) invited us to rest in her house until she could make
further inquiries after the "keys;" and following our
conductress, we shortly arrived at her residence, where (with a
very warrantable kind of pride) she informed us, her mother was
born, and married, and had reared eight children. Long before we
gained the house, the hum of little voices was heard; and upon
approaching the open door, about forty children, who formed the
school, rose up, and commenced singing, "We make our obeisance to
you, ma'am," to the tune of "L--a--w, Law;" while a parrot,
suspended from a beam, if she did not _sing_, at least
_screeched_ in chorus. After looking at these little negroes for
some time, and inspecting the simple decorations of their
school-room, we were ushered up stairs, and introduced to Miss
Austin's two sisters.

I cannot help speaking more fully of the polite behaviour of this
trio. I came among them a perfect stranger, my name even being
unknown, and in all probability never again to meet in this
world; but every little attention possible was lavished upon me,
the choicest produce of their garden tendered, and without the
least parade. I have mixed with society in a far higher grade,
where courtly manners prevail, and every art is tried to invest
each action with a polished grace; but often, very often, has
less native good-breeding, fewer sterling qualities of the mind
been displayed than I found in the sisters of "Old Road." They
are not like the generality of persons in their line of life;
hospitality indeed is, I believe, a virtue which most of them
possess; but there was no aping of their betters, as is too
frequently the case with this class of people; no flying away,
when we came so suddenly upon them, to put on a brass chain, or a
string of glass beads; or to take off an untidy wrapper, to
enrobe themselves in a smart gown; their neat dresses and
snow-white collars, like beauty, needed not "the foreign aid of
ornament."

Many a beautiful tree grew around their humble dwelling, and many
a sweet-scented flower almost entered the open windows. When we
had rested for a short time, we proceeded to the garden, to see a
lime-tree. Knowing as I did the blighted state of these trees in
Antigua, I expected to see a diminutive shrub; what, then, was my
surprise, upon entering the little paddock, (for it had more the
appearance of that than a garden,) to see a noble tree, covering
the space of about fifty square feet, loaded with its fragrant
fruit to the very ground. Well worthy was it to be looked at!
well worthy to be praised by an abler pen than mine!--no
indefinite article could be used to this shrub; it must be called
_the_ lime tree, and nothing else. While looking, again and
again, at this beautiful tree--pressing its odorous leaves, and
inhaling the scent of its golden fruit, the youngest sister
remarked, "The archdeacon was here the other day, to catechise
the children, and upon seeing this tree, said it looked as if the
blessing of God was upon it." And in truth it does appear so, for
it flourishes on in its beauty in the midst of a burning sand,
whilst most of its species are blighted and seared.

After leaving the lime-tree, we returned to the house and heard
the children read a chapter in the Bible, and repeat the gospel,
which they did very correctly, although some of them had not
numbered their fifth year, thus proving the pains their tutoress
takes with them; and then, putting up with our disappointment,
left for home. As we were passing the church, Mr. Sexton appeared
to have altered his mind in some degree, for (but with a very
indifferent grace, it must be owned) he condescended to open the
church door, and allow us entrance. The church, which is composed
of hewn stone, is built in the form of a cross, and is noted for
being the first place of public worship erected in Antigua. There
is nothing very remarkable in the interior; the walls are plain
white, and the floor paved with brick; but it is a quiet little
church, where the good people of that neighbourhood may worship
their God in peace. Over the altar is an old painting of Moses
and Aaron in their robes; and under the communion table reposes
the ashes of him who may be called the founder of the church; for
he gave the land, and liberally contributed towards its erection.
This was Col. Rowland Williams, who, as before-mentioned, was
celebrated for his various good qualities, as well as humanity,
in a period when the West Indies were generally enveloped in
moral darkness. The epitaph upon his tomb-stone is inscribed in
Latin; but as many of my readers no doubt prefer the English
translation, I will insert it, which I am enabled to do through
the kindness of the Rev. H. G. Hall.

                Here safely lie in Mother Earth
            The mortal remains of Rowland Williams.
                   We are but dust and ashes!
      He was the first male infant of European extraction
                 Lawfully born in this island.
       When he attained to manhood, he conducted himself
                           As a man,
     Being equally in military, as in civil life, an honour
           As well to himself, as to his connexions.
             In the field, he was a bold commander;
            In the senate, he was a wise councillor:
              What avails strength without wisdom?
       He was a loyal subject of his king, a protector of
                          His country,
    A true father to his children, hospitable to his guests,
              A friend to his friends. In a word,
                 He was all things to all men.
            Throughout his whole life he displayed,
            With health of body, soundness of mind.
       Possessing the strictest honesty and much wealth.
                He fell a tardy victim to death,
              Having survived about eighty years.
        He was buried the twentieth day of ------ 1713.
             Since it is certain that we must die,
        We should without delay take warning against it.

Near the altar is an elegant and chastely ornamented white marble
tablet, erected to the memory of Mrs. Williams, daughter of Sir
Patrick Ross, K. C. B., and wife of the Hon. Rowland E. Williams,
the great-great-grandson of the above Col. Williams. This
exemplary lady died at the early age of 32; respected by all
classes, and deeply regretted by those who were honoured with her
friendship. The following lines are engraved on the tablet:--

   "Death, ere thou canst claim another,
    Fair, and good, and wise as she,
    Time shall hurl his dart at _thee_."[63]

After copying these inscriptions, and casting one more glance
round this rustic church, we returned to our carriage, and
proceeded on our journey to "Crab Hill." Before relating the rest
of our adventures, I must remark, that the line of conduct
pursued by the sexton of "Old Road" is not common in Antigua,
such officials being generally very obliging.

Near to "Old Road" is a pond, which is formed by the hand of
nature into a complete bason. It is surrounded with some fine and
noble trees, which form a screen, and is embellished with a
variety of odoriferous flowers, which bloom and die unknown and
uncared for, illustrating those beautiful lines of Gray's--

   "Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
    And waste its sweetness on the desert air."

Near to this spot is a natural excavation, called the "Devil's
Punch Bowl," which, although I had often heard it spoken of as
something very grand, did not cause me much pleasure or
astonishment, being, in fact, nothing more than a deep hole, with
a little turbid water at the bottom.

About a stone's throw from "Old Road," on the top of the hill,
stands a Moravian settlement, with its neat white house and
chapel; there is always an air of comfort around these
settlements, which speaks to an English heart; and the Moravians
themselves are a quiet, well-meaning people, diligent in the
discharge of their ministerial duties, and earnestly desiring
their people's welfare. May they meet their reward!

After passing the fort of "Old Road," the next place which
attracted our notice was the salt ponds, with their fringe of
mangrove trees and little islands. Innumerable soldier crabs were
hurrying to and fro,--some looking out for a new coat of mail, in
the form of a new shell, and others hunting for their prey, which
is very frequently the weak and small of their own class. The sea
now burst upon our sight, and added to the beauty of the scene;
its surface was as smooth and clear as a mirror, except where the
breakers played over a long reef, which runs far out from shore,
and threw up their lovely but dangerous spray in measured
showers,--no wonder the ancients fabled their goddess of beauty
to have sprung from this sparkling object.

After passing the rectory of St. Mary's, our road lay through
copses, whose overhanging boughs formed a beautiful and verdant
arch. The sunbeams, penetrating through them, danced in sportive
glee upon the chequered ground, while between the boles we caught
picturesque glimpses of the ocean. I could not help noticing one
peculiarity in passing through these woods, that almost every
tree is decorated with that species of parasite called wild
pines;[64] the great varieties of cactus was also remarkable.

After journeying along the road for about a mile, we came in view
of "Crab Hill," noted for the dangers it presents to travellers,
should their horses prove restive, or night overtake them. Here
again we alighted, determined that nothing should escape our
gaze. The road rises about 180 feet from the sea, in an abrupt
precipice clothed with the dwarf acacia and "milk-bush"--those
ever-to-be-found productions of Antigua. A low wall of stones,
loosely piled, borders the edge of the road, which would prove
but a sorry guard against any accident. In the steepest part of
the hill, we looked over, and watched in silence the beautiful
but treacherous waves, as they laved the rocky base of the
precipice. Here and there a blasted parasite clung to it, and
feebly strove to hide its ugliness; and one or two sea-birds sat
watching for their prey, and pluming their rumpled feathers. At
the sound of our voices they started, and after turning upon us
their bright quick eyes for a moment, as if to ask why we
obtruded upon their solitude, flapped their wings and soared
screaming away through the vaulted ether.

We enjoyed the scene for some time longer, and then remembering
we were still many miles from the capital, and the sun had almost
completed his daily journey, we resumed our seats and set our
faces towards home. A ride of a few more minutes brought us to a
place called "Sandy Valley," which proved not to be, like some
places, a _misnomer_, for there is sand enough for any one's
taste, and fine glittering sand it is too. The sea bounds one
side of the valley, and a stagnant marsh the other.

Leaving this, we passed by the valley church and school,
cultivated cane-pieces and neat-looking "great houses," negro
huts and provision grounds, and an open country, for we were
rapidly leaving the mountains behind us. On our right, we passed
a methodist settlement, and another belonging to the Moravians,
and hard by a fresh-water spring; but I began to feel very tired,
and consequently did not find out beauties which otherwise might
have attracted my attention. A pretty sloping hill lay before us,
and as we passed, the "full-orb'd moon" rose above it, and

   "O'er the night her silver mantle threw."

A sudden turn in the road placed her lovely face behind us, and
languidly reclining in a snug corner, I mused in silence upon the
beautiful scenes I had passed through in our pilgrimage, until
roused by a bustle in the road, just at the entrance of the
capital, where men and boys, long poles and ropes, and that very
respectable quadruped, dignified by Antiguans with cognomination
of "a cattle," formed the _figurantes_. The poor creature had
been landed from an American vessel that morning, at a
neighbouring bay, and exhausted, I suppose, with the discomfits
of its voyage, had fallen down on its way to the butcher's. I
don't think its sufferings were of long continuance, for the next
morning I heard the black bellman announcing to the public, that
"A fine fat 'merican ox was slaughtered at the shambles of
'Seizar' James."[65]

But to conclude our adventures; we rapidly passed through the
grass-market and the town, heard the jingle of many a piano and
the squeak of many a flute, (I mean no disparagement to the
performers,) almost ran over a pig or two, who, spite of a late
prohibition, were walking out to enjoy the cool of the evening;
and at length safely alighted at our residence in "Spring
Gardens."

In the course of an hour or two, I willingly resigned myself to
the dominion of sleep, and dreamt of mountains and
thunder-storms, springs and fairies, precipices and lime-trees.




[62] "The highest mountains are not more than 1500 feet above the
level of the sea."

[63] The above lines are taken from an epitaph written upon the
Dowager Countess of Pembroke, sister to the celebrated Sir Philip
Sidney one of the favourite courtiers of Queen Elizabeth, and
author of a romance entitled "Arcadia," which he dedicated to his
sister the Countess. On this account it is frequently called "the
Countess of Pembroke's Arcadia." This lady was noted for her
great learning, in an age when classical knowledge was the common
accomplishments of the court ladies. Her principal work was a
translation of "Antonius," a French tragedy.

   "Underneath this marble hearse,
    Lies the subject of all verse.
    Sidney's sister, Pembroke's mother.
    Death, ere thou hast kill'd another,
    Fair, and learn'd, and good as she,
    Time shall throw a dart at thee."

[64] There is one great peculiarity in this plant which deserves
notice. The leaves are cellular, and so formed as to make sure
reservoirs for the drops of rain, which fall into them from the
top, through small openings. The seeds are furnished with a downy
substance, by which means they float through the air, and take
root upon any part of a tree or shrub upon which they chance to
fall. The leaves always grow erect, by which means they safely
hold the rain water. Dampier mentions piercing these plants with
his knife, and catching the water in his hat when suffering from
thirst.

[65] It may be proper to note, that such events are not of
everyday occurrence in Antigua. Not more than two "cattle" are
slaughtered in the capital in a week, and when such deed is
committed the bellman announces it to the public.




                         CHAPTER XVII.



  The seasons at Antigua--Heavy rains--Long droughts--The
  water-merchant--A fortunate shower--Drought in 1837--Desolate
  appearance of the country--Famishing cattle--Definition of
  "_fine rains_"--Anecdote--Heavy shower--Joy--Earthquakes--1835
  --Meteors--Dressing for the ball--The alarm--The ball-room--
  Hurricanes--Devastations.

The seasons at Antigua may be divided into the _wet_ and _dry_.
The wet season generally commences in July, and continues, with
intermissions, until October; and in February we look for it
again. The rains in England are but summer dews, comparatively
speaking, to the torrents which the overcharged clouds pour down
upon these "Isles of the West." No one but an actual observer can
form any idea of the violence of these storms. In a moment the
streets are inundated, and the falling of the large drops upon
the shingled roofs of the houses is quite deafening.

But at the same time these rains constitute the Antiguan's
greatest blessing, for not only do they revive the parched and
thirsty earth, cool the atmosphere, promote the growth of the
sugar cane, and dress nature in her loveliest garb; but from
having (as before mentioned) only two or three fresh-water
springs in the island, and those far inland, their chief supplies
of that necessary fluid are derived from these showers. Large
cisterns are dug and carefully lined with some kind of plaster,
either terrace, brought from Monserrat or St. Christopher's, or
Roman cement, to contain it; and as rain water has the property
of purifying itself, it is generally translucent and wholesome.

Antigua has, however, at various times, suffered long and
dreadfully from drought. In 1779, the long want of rain was
painfully felt; and in 1789 it occurred again, but with redoubled
severity. Famine, it was supposed, would be the result. As many
as five thousand head of horned cattle are said to have died; and
men and women fell down in the streets from exhaustion. I have
felt what it is to suffer from this cause in a small degree; the
water we have been obliged to drink when the cisterns were dried
up was nauseous in the extreme--only stern necessity would have
induced persons to partake of it.

Sometimes, when nearly all the ponds in the island are dry, (as
was the case in 1833,) it becomes necessary to despatch vessels
to the nearest islands for a supply of water. This season of
general distress proves, at times, a rich harvest to those
adventurers who possess, or can hire, a small vessel, and load it
with water, for which they charge very high.

A circumstance occurred in the above-mentioned year, in relation
to this practice, which it may be worth while to relate. During a
long succession of dry weather, and when there was but very
little water to be found in Antigua, one of these
_water-merchants_, if I may be allowed to use that expression,
went to Monserrat (a small island a few hours' sail from Antigua)
for a cargo of this useful beverage. Upon his return he asked an
extravagant price for it; the poor people murmured; but what was
to be done? Water must be had; and in the end the hard-earned
wages of many a one found their way into the pockets of this
"Aquarius."

Finding his profits so great this time, and the dry weather
continuing, he determined to make another trip, and if possible,
add a little more of the "Honey of Hybla" to his stock. He
arrived at Antigua with his elementary cargo in the evening, and
immediately commenced his traffic. But in this instance he
outwitted himself; for raising his demands as the necessity of
water appeared the greater, the people were unable to comply, and
determined to wait until morning, in hopes of procuring some at a
cheaper rate.

In the meantime the clouds began to darken, and appeared to rest
upon the top of the mountains. The wind whistled mournfully among
the trees--the air became chill--the mercury fell, and in a few
moments the windows of heaven were opened, and the long-looked
and wished-for rain descended, not in measured drops, "soft and
slow," but in torrents. Now was the season of exultation; every
vessel capable of containing fluids was put in requisition, and
the mortified _water-merchant_ was obliged to get rid of his
cargo the best way he could. Near to our residence is a kennel,
which in dry weather is totally devoid of moisture, but during
these heavy rains it becomes a small rivulet. To this stream then
rushed a motley group; men, women, and children, dogs and poultry
--all participating in the general joy; even the swinish
multitude grunted forth their approbation, and ran to lave their
snouts in its cool waters.

It was laughable to see the little black children as they
scampered about, shaking their hands, and screaming with delight
as they enjoyed their natural "shower bath," which proved a more
effective one than even Mrs. O'Flinn's. Talking of "shower baths"
brings to my recollection an anecdote related of a late merchant
of St. John's.

Mr. B------, the merchant in question, had been for some time
suffering from indisposition, and his medical attendant advised
him to try the renovating influence of a shower-bath.
Accordingly, such a machine was duly procured, and the next
morning put into requisition. In the course of the day the
physician called to ascertain the state of his patient after his
ablution, and with winning voice, inquired how he liked his
"shower-bath." "Oh, doctor!" replied the sick man, with rueful
look and lengthened visage, "I verily thought I should have
fainted, the shock was so great." "Indeed," said Dr. M------, in
his usual bland manner, "I am sorry it had such an effect; why
did you not follow the Irishman's plan, and take your umbrella?"
The next forenoon brought with it the customary medical visitor,
who again inquired into the merits of the bath. "Why," quoth the
invalid, "I cannot say the shock was so great, but I do not think
I shall derive any benefit from it; in fact, only my feet
received a wetting this time, for I followed your advice _and
carried my umbrella!_"

But to return to the subject of droughts. Severe as the drought
was in 1833, it was nothing compared to what we suffered in 1837,
from the same cause; and, indeed, for the greater part of the
preceding year. The old people remarked that they never
remembered its being so dry since 1789, (which was particularly
distinguished as "the year of the drought.") What miseries the
Antiguans then suffered, I am of course from experience unable to
say; but if they exceeded those endured in that eventful year,
1837, they must have been terrible indeed.

Almost every pond and cistern in the island was dried up,
scarcely a blade of grass was to be seen; and when walking over
pasture land, it crackled beneath the feet as if it had been
baked. The poor cattle presented a most deplorable appearance,
wandering about as they did in search of food and water, and
expressing their urgent wants, by faint, melancholy lowings.

The poorer class of inhabitants, also, felt it very much, obliged
as they were to drink the spring water, which is but very little
better than salt. The little fresh water they were able to
procure occasioned them great labour, for after toiling hard all
the day, they were obliged to devote the greater part of the
night to fetching it from distant parts of the islands, carrying
it in tubs upon their heads.

It was a pitiful sight to see the country, it presented such a
scene of barrenness. The cane-pieces looked burnt up; nothing was
to be seen but dry and withered leaves, in place of their
accustomed rich green; the provision grounds became mere wastes,
and all agricultural employments were at a stand.

Days and weeks thus rolled on, and still the same blue cloudless
sky--the same burning sun. Or if a cloud did arise, and skim the
vast concave, and the hopes of men grew strong, it passed away
without giving the long-looked-for blessing. Again, and the scene
changed. Huge dense clouds might be seen, piled one upon another,
and slowly extending themselves over the sky until they reached
the zenith; the upper ones looking as if crowned with snowflakes,
while those nearer the earth were black and heavy like a
"funereal pall," and appeared as if about to discharge their
burdens. "Now we shall have it!" was the cry; "at last, we shall
have rain!" Delusive hopes! doomed to be overthrown; these again
passed away, and left no boon.

Every day presented appearances more and more alarming, the
little supply of water was rapidly diminishing, and men and
brutes were becoming exhausted by thirst. Days were set apart by
the legislature for public prayers and fasts, and a sum of money
granted for the purpose of hiring vessels to go to Monserrat for
water. This water was sold by the pail, but from being brought
over in molasses' casks, it tasted extremely disagreeable.

The late Sir Evan Murray McGregor, then governor of Barbados,
hearing of the necessities of the Antiguans, (over whom he had
formerly held sway in the character of commander-in-chief of the
Leeward Islands,) sent a man-of-war with a cargo of this precious
element from that island; but under some pretence or the other,
it was refused by the legislature. The cause of this
extraordinary line of conduct was said to be this. Sir Evan was
not generally a favourite governor with the aristocratic party:
he was a man of strict principles, and one who poised the scales
of justice with an impartial hand between rich and poor, white
and coloured. He would not herd with the _great people_--go to
their houses, eat their corn-fed mutton and turtle, drink their
_Chateau Margeau_ and Champagne, and then wink at their
proceedings, and gloss over their errors, like some of his
predecessors. Upon this account he was not liked, and when in the
kindness of his heart he sent the present of water, it was
refused in a very cold manner. Some of the members of the
assembly were against this arrangement, and said, for the honour
of Antigua, that they would rather have lost double the amount
than it should have been returned.

But to return more particularly to the drought. Not only did the
inhabitants suffer from want of water to drink, and for general
use, but the country provisions, such as yams, potatoes, &c.,
upon which the negroes principally depend, unavoidably failed;
and as all importations were raised so much in price, the lower
classes were almost starved.

The planters endured great inconvenience, not only from the
dryness of the soil, which ruined the sugar-canes, but also from
having to pay the same number of labourers their regular wages,
without having anything for them to do, yet at the same time
being obliged to retain them, lest when the wet season did come,
and their assistance was really required, they might not be
procurable.

I heard a circumstance related which occasioned a smile, even in
this time of distress. A certain good lady of St. John's sent one
of her domestics to the sea side for a pail of salt water. It
happened to be ebb-tide,[66] and upon the servant returning, she
exclaimed to her mistress, the greatest astonishment being
depicted upon her countenance, "Why missis, war you tink? It dry
so till sea himself dry now. War eber we go do, me no no."

Oh! how anxiously did we watch the barometer day after day, in
hopes of its indicating rain. The inhabitants of the different
parts of the island meeting one another, the first question asked
was, "What weather have you had? do you think we are likely to
get any rain?"

A proprietor of a large estate in a distant part of the island,
but who resided in the capital, met one morning a labourer of his
coming from the country, and of course asked what news there was,
and how they were coming on. "So, so, massa," returned the negro
--"we hab fine rain last night." "Say you so, my fine fellow?"
quoth his master, his heart enlarged at the prospect of his canes
flourishing, "well, here's a quarter-dollar for you, as a reward
for your good news."

In the course of the same day, the manager of the estate arrived
in town, and upon seeing the proprietor, was congratulated by him
upon the "fine rains" he had so fortunately experienced in the
country. "_Fine rains!_" said the manager, in surprise, "do I
hear you aright, or are you joking? (although I think you'll find
it no joke in the end;) we have had no rain at all, and I came
into town this morning to consult with you upon the subject; for
from the excessive drought, the canes are all burnt up, the
cattle dying in all directions, and the labourers themselves are
dropping down exhausted from want of water."

The proprietor stormed and raved--that fellow Cato told me you
had had fine rains last night; and I was so pleased to hear it,
that--that--I actually gave the black rascal a quarter-dollar for
his information. "Here, John! go and call that fellow back,"
turning to a domestic, "and tell him to make haste--do you hear?"
In the course of a short time Cato returned, rolling up his eyes
until only the whites (or rather yellows) were visible, holding
his little flannel cap in one hand, and in the other, what was
once designated as a _pipe_, and uttering a mysterious noise,
which was intended as half interrogative, half conciliatory,
waited until his master, who was puffing and blowing, and looking
"unutterable things," should speak.

At length the storm burst--the torrent descended. "How dare you
tell me such a story this morning, sirrah? How dare you, sir?
answer me!" "War 'tory, massa," inquired the self-convicted, but
waggish negro, the left foot at the same time performing
countless evolutions, and the flannel cap twirled round the thumb
with increased velocity. "What story? you arrant rogue! why, the
story you told me this morning about having fine rains in the
country." "Me no tell no 'tory, massa," retorted the negro,
determined to stand his master's ire undaunted, and, like many
other guilty ones, striving to have the last word. "Me no tell no
'tory; war for me go tell 'tory? me no 'peak de trute." "You
speak the truth, indeed! Here's the manager, who tells me there
has been no rain at all, but, on the contrary, that my stock are
all dying from want of water; and yet you dared to tell me you
had fine rains last night." "Yes, massa, and so we _hab fine
rain_; me tell de trute. An more den dat, de rain _fine so_ till
--t-i-ll (prolonging the word) me hardly able to see him, he so
fine!" Both owner and manager found it difficult to maintain
their gravity at this definition of _fine rains_; while Cato,
with a grin of self-congratulation at having so adroitly got
himself out of a bad scrape; and grasping more firmly his
quarter-dollar, which he imagined to be in some danger, set off
for his own residence.

"Hope deferred, maketh the heart sick;" and so indeed it was with
us, when day after day passed, and still no appearance of rain.
But One, who does not "willingly grieve the children of men,"
remembered us in our great affliction, and when we least thought
of it, sent us the needful blessing. I never saw such a fall of
rain before; and many of the oldest inhabitants said the same
thing. In about an hour from the time it first commenced, the
streets were streaming with water; indeed, the one in which we
reside looked more like a small river than anything else, for not
a vestige of dry ground appeared.

Report said two or three children were carried into the sea by
the violence of the stream which rushed through the streets; but
upon further inquiry, I found, as is generally the case, report
did not speak truth. It originated from an old woman, seeing some
chickens (which had been brought to market for sail, with their
legs tied together) floating down the stream, when she exclaimed,
"Eh! eh! look de fowl pic'nee;[67] he sure he go get drowned!"
This travelled, and lost nothing by its peregrinations, until at
length it became magnified into the loss of several children.

In a very short time, all the ponds and cisterns in the island,
which for so long a time had been perfectly dry, were filled to
overflowing, and care and distress gave way to joy and
thankfulness.

About June, July, and August, Antigua is liable to be visited by
storms of thunder, and lightning, and earthquakes. The lightning
in this part of the globe is very vivid; and the thunder bellows
through the air in terrific peals, every hill and mountain
reverberating the sound. Often have I seen the lightning playing
down the spiral branches of the cocoa-nut trees, presenting a
sublime but awful appearance.

But although these storms are so violent, and consequently so
harrowing to the feelings, they are nothing in comparison to the
earthquakes with which we are sometimes visited. Every nerve is
shaken by these terrible convulsions of nature; the very brute
creation seem to feel their influence.

In April, 1690, Antigua suffered very severely from this cause.
Nearly the whole town of St. John's was destroyed; and the
sugar-works upon the various plantations in the country almost
all overthrown. In many parts of the island, the solid earth was
rent open; rocks were hurled from their places, and the very
mountains defaced. The line of hills which skirts the harbour
suffered from the concussion in a remarkable manner: one of them
was rent completely in twain; and now, after the lapse of so many
years, presents the appearance of two heights, with a deep dingle
running between them. Soon after this awful occurrence, two
comets made their appearance.

The first time I felt an earthquake, I took it to be the approach
of a heavy carriage; but by the increased, rumbling and tremour
of the earth, was quickly undeceived. It was but a slight shock,
however, and I began to think an earthquake was not so dreadful
as my fancy had depicted it to be.

It was reserved for the year 1833 to prove to me what an
earthquake really was, and make me fully aware of its terrifying
powers; and although nearly nine years have rolled by since that
period, and consequently the remembrance of it has lost some part
of its vividness, yet the occurrences of that night has left so
deep an impression upon my mind, that it will never be wholly
obliterated.

Between eight and nine in the evening, a shock of an earthquake
was felt; but as it did not continue long, no particular
attention was paid to it. We had retired to-bed, and were in our
first sleep, when we were suddenly awakened by that peculiar
hollow noise which is always the forerunner of one of these
convulsions. The noise became louder and louder; the earth heaved
to and fro; the house shook from its very foundation; and books,
glasses, and other light articles fell from their resting-places.
This lasted with undiminished force: but a few minutes elapsed
before another violent shock was felt. In the midst of this, the
church-bell commenced ringing, and drums beating an alarm, while
the whole face of the heavens, glowing with a fiery red, soon
informed us that a conflagration augmented the horrors of the
night.

There were twenty-one distinct shocks felt between twelve at
night and five in the morning, but the earth continued in a
tremour for twenty-four hours afterwards. Thus it was we passed
through that wearisome night; but when morning broke in the east,
and the bright sun arose, and chased away the clouds of darkness,
how many hearts swelled with gratitude towards Him who had so
mercifully protected us through its dangers.

The fire broke out at an estate called Otto's, situated in the
suburbs of St. John's. It was supposed by many to have been
occasioned by a meteor striking a wooden building, which
supposition acquires more credence from the following fact. An
elderly female, of the name of Moore, who had acquired some
notoriety from her preaching, both in England (particularly in
Cateaton street, London) and the West Indies, was sitting up
late, on the night in question, employed in writing her
"Memoirs." She mentions having seen a particular appearance in
the heavens, which she described as looking like a bright scarf
of fire gradually gliding down the sky in the direction of the
estate, until, upon apparently gaining the earth, it vanished.

The attorney of the above-mentioned estate also witnessed a
similar phenomenon a few weeks afterwards. In this instance, the
meteor descended upon the branch of a cocoa-nut tree, which grew
near his house, and set it on fire; and had it not been for the
courage and activity of a negro who was present, and who
succeeded in felling the tree, great danger might have resulted
from it.

Most of the Leeward Islands suffered from earthquakes the same
night; but at St. Kitts, (about sixty miles to the west of
Antigua,) they appear to have felt them more severely than in the
other islands. A ball was held that evening at the Court House,
and the company were dressing for the occasion when the first
shock was felt.

Two young ladies, the daughters of a respectable merchant of
Bassterre, (the capital of St. Kitts,) met with so great a
fright, that they were obliged to forego paying their court to
the "dancing muse." The duties of the toilet were scarcely
finished, when, as before observed, the earthquake commenced. In
a moment the ceiling of the apartment was rent, and, as they
supposed, a heavy fall of rain penetrated through the aperture,
and extinguished the lights.

The youngest of the ladies, terrified at the concussion, and not
knowing the extent of their danger, threw herself upon the
ground, calling loudly for help. The trembling domestics quickly
came with a lamp, when, horror of horrors! they found the
delicate white satin in which their young mistress was enrobed,
completely saturated with _blood_! The other members of the
family, alarmed by the screams of the servants, assembled in the
room, and with eagerness inquired where the wound was. This was
not to be discovered; and, accordingly, another elucidation of
the mystery was sought for, and no long period elapsed before it
was found. Their father, as before observed, was a merchant, and
the attic over the room the young ladies occupied had been
converted into a temporary wine-store. From the severe shock of
the earthquake, a cask of port wine got staved; and what had the
appearance of _blood_, was nothing less than its contents which
so liberally bedewed the ball-dress of the fair sufferer.

But the first shock did not intimidate many, however, and
consequently the ball-room was crowded with visitants. "Nods and
becks, and wreathed smiles," flew around; innumerable lamps
illumined the room, but their blaze was eclipsed by the radiance
emitted from the dark brilliant eyes of the Houris, who, on the
"light fantastic toe," glided through the mazes of a quadrille.
All was joy fulness, and every heart responded to the genial
influence of the scene, when another shock more violent, and of
longer continuance, converted this feeling of pleasure into the
opposite one of woe. Instead of the lively scene described, all
was now tumult and distress. Some of the ladies fainted, others
threw themselves upon their knees, while the greater number
rushed out of the apartment, which now looked hateful to them,
and hastened to the beach.

Shock followed shock in rapid succession, and the poor
"Kittefonians" thought their little island was doomed to
destruction. Nor was it from the quaking of the earth that all
their terror proceeded; the sea rose so high, and the waves
rolled in such a tumultuous manner, that an inundation was
feared. In such a situation the inhabitants were almost paralyzed
with fear; some went on board the different ships in the harbour,
while others remained all night upon the beach, exposed to the
"pitiless pelting" of the storm.

I chanced to visit St. Kitts a short time after this awful
occurrence. The inhabitants were still trembling from
apprehension; and upon the slightest motion of the floor, the
colour fled from the lips of many of the fair sex, and left them
of a pallid white. I was present, upon one occasion, when a
gentleman requested a young lady to favour him with a song. "Oh,
no, sir! you must excuse me," said she, lengthening her very
pretty face, and throwing an air of gravity into her countenance;
"we never sing since the earthquake." If no other good was
effected, it had the power of alienating her mind (for a season
at least) from some of the vanities of the world, if a simple
song can be called one.

Another dreadful visitation of elementary strife, to which
Antigua, as well as the other West Indian islands, is liable in
the months of August, September, and October, are the hurricanes,
or _tornadoes_. When they come, they are armed with every terror
--rain, thunder, lightning, and sometimes earthquakes, attend
their progress. The sea feels their influence, and, by its
swelling and roaring, expresses it--

   "The waves behind impel the waves before,
    Wide-rolling, foaming high, they tumble to the shore."

The years 1670, 1681, 1707, 1740, 1772, 1780, and 1792, are those
in which the severest hurricanes have occurred at Antigua. The
hurricane of 1670 was most memorable. It raged with intense
severity for four hours, and in that short space of time
destroyed the new town of St. John's, which had been rebuilt
since the French invasion, and levelled almost every house with
the ground. The ships lost in the harbour were the "Robert," of
Ireland, William Cocks, master; the "Merchants' Adventure," of
the same place; the "Margaret Pink," from Tangiers, and another
large ship called the "Five Islands," besides several smaller
vessels which had come there for shelter. A wreck was also driven
ashore, in which was found the corpse of a boy, some palm oil,
and elephants' teeth, supposed to be from Guinea. That of 1707
was also very severe, being considered one of the most violent
ever experienced in the Leeward West India Islands, although
Antigua suffered more than any of the neighbouring colonies. It
blew down houses and entire sugar-works, tore up the largest
trees by the roots, and devastated whole fields of sugar-canes;
indeed, so tremendous was the hurricane, that it caused an almost
general destruction. The oldest inhabitants of the present day
unite, however, in saying that they never experienced one so
awful as that of 1835.

About four in the afternoon it commenced to look very wild,
although the wind was moderate; the sky was of a deep saffron
colour, and the sun shone with a fiery red. Between five and six
in the evening the wind rose, and continued increasing until
about seven, when the havoc began.

Houses were levelled in an instant with the ground; many of the
small dwellings were completely lifted from off their slight
foundations, and carried by the wind to some distance. One old
woman in particular had a narrow escape of her life. The house in
which she resided was raised about five feet from the ground by
the violence of the wind, hurried along with the greatest
velocity for about the space of twenty feet across the road, and
then placed in what was once a pond. Luckily, however, for the
good old dame, the pond had been filled up, or, in all
probability, her aerial flight would have finished her course of
existence in this transitory sphere.

The hurricane raged with unabated force until a little before
nine, tearing up large trees by the roots, and snapping asunder
others as if they had been twigs; when, suddenly, in a moment,
the wind dropped. Not a sound was to be heard--not a single
breeze was abroad: A deep, solemn silence reigned around--a
silence which harrowed up every feeling of the soul, for it spoke
of dire mishaps.

This continued for some time, when again the wind returned with
redoubled fury, as if its strength was recruited by the short
respite it had gained, and shook the very earth. The hurricane
raged until the sun got up, and then slowly and sullenly it sank
to rest; until towards evening, nothing was to be heard but its
sobs and sighs.

A great many small vessels belonging to Antigua were sunk during
the gale, and many poor mortals that night found--

   "Their death in the rushing blast,
    Their grave in the yawning sea."




[66] Although in Antigua the tide does not ebb and flow more than
from six to twelve inches in ordinary instances.

[67] "Pic'nee" is the negro term for children.




                         CHAPTER XVIII.



  Description of the town of St. John's, the capital of Antigua--
  Situation--Arrangement of the streets--Hucksters--Houses--
  Springs--Small shops--Stores of the retail dealers--Grog-shops
  --Merchants' stores and lumber yards--Definition of lumber--
  Auction sales--Scotch Row and Scotchmen--Incongruous display of
  goods--Fire in 1797--Ruins--Fire in 1841--Its devastations.

St. John's, the capital of Antigua, is situated on the west side
of the island, and contains about 979 houses. It is built upon a
slight declivity, and commands a beautiful view of the harbour,
which is one of the prettiest in the West Indies.

The town, which is well arranged, covers a space of about 150
acres of land; most of the streets are wide and well-kept, and
intersect each other at right angles--the principal ones running
in a straight line down to the sea. There is one peculiarity
attending the construction of these streets, which is, that there
are no causeways; and consequently, the pedestrian traveller has
to elbow his way amid trucks and handbarrows, gigs, carriages,
and horsemen, droves of cattle, or cargoes of mules, just landed
from other countries, cattle-carts, or moving houses.

At the corners of the different streets are seated hucksters,
(black or coloured women;)[68] some with their shallow trays,
containing cakes of all descriptions, parched ground nuts, (the
_arachis hypogoea_,) sugar-cakes, and other confections, and
varieties of fruits and vegetables; others have piles of cottons,
coloured calicoes, bright-tinted handkerchiefs, &c., placed by
them, or carefully spread along the sides of the most frequented
streets, to attract the eye of the passer-by. As most of the
Antiguan houses are raised a few feet from the ground, which
necessarily requires the use of a step or two, the hucksters are
very fond of monopolizing such appurtenances; and it is no
uncommon thing to be obliged to wait until they remove their
different wares, before you can enter the house, or else take the
chance of breaking your neck over heaps of potatoes, or come in
closer contact than is advisable with bottles of ginger-drink, or
pots and pans of gorgeous colours, from the well-known English
potteries.

The houses are generally built of wood, painted of a white or
light stone colour, with bright green _jalousies_, or glass
windows and green Venetian blinds. The greater number have
covered galleries running along the sides or fronts of them, in
which the good people love to assemble in the cool of evening,
and while away the hours in converse sweet, or scan over the
island newspapers--two of which issue weekly from respective
presses, to enlighten the worthy inhabitants as to what is
passing in their little colony.

Some of these dwellings are very commodious, and make a good
appearance, particularly when shaded by a few beautiful trees, or
standing, as many of them do, in a small garden, embellished with
Flora's splendid children. But as for following any of the _five
orders_ in their architectural adornments, that is quite out of
the question; or at least, it is an order of their own invention
they prefer, and which may be called the Antiguan.

Within these last few years, a few houses have been erected, with
low roofs and parapet walls; the usual plan is to have that
necessary part of the dwelling raised in the fashion of an
English barn, or an Egyptian pyramid. One peculiarity which
strikes the eye of a stranger in these dwellings, is the absence
of chimneys--the kitchens being, in most instances, detached from
the house; and the heat of the climate, as a matter of course,
renders all grates or stoves, and their accompanying flues,
unnecessary.

Since the serious droughts in 1833, springs or wells have been
dug in various parts of the town, which, although the water is
brackish, are of great use for many domestic purposes,
particularly to the lower classes, who do not possess a cistern.
These springs have been lately modified by having water-engines
attached to them, and enclosed by a low wall and wooden
palisadings, painted of a bright sky-colour. Methinks, however,
that Master Sol will soon spoil their flaunting beauty. It is a
pity the directors of these improvements did not choose green
instead of the other colour; for, from the whiteness of the
streets, and the extreme glare of the sunbeams, we require
something to relieve and cool the eye; and much as we admire the
lovely tint of the heavens, light blue palings do not equally
fascinate our gaze.

In different parts of the town are numbers of small shops, of
about six or eight feet square, in which varieties of trades are
carried on. In one may be seen a cobbler--no! I beg their pardon
--a _cordwainer_; himself shoeless, busily employed in forming,
from his not very fragrant materials, a pair of creaking
high-heeled boots, for the use of some black exquisite. A bunch
of human hair attached to the end of a long stick, and moving
with every breeze, bespeaks the abode of a barber and
hair-dresser; while a multiplicity of shreds of cloth,
half-finished vests, a goose, and other _et ceteras_, with a
group of mortals seated _a la Turque_, proves beyond doubt that
the inmates are of that particular class of beings, nine
individuals of which are required to form one ordinary man.
Others, again, of the receptacles of trade, are stocked with
provisions, such as small quantities of salt pork, corn, flour,
candles, butter, (of the consistence of honey,) a few dried peas,
or horse-beans, and any other little matters; while some contain
_dry goods_, as it is customary, in this island, to term all
articles of drapery. Small as these tenements are, many of them
are divided by a lathed partition, forming on one side a
butcher's shamble, where an array of sheep's heads, miserable
specimens of legs of mutton, and saffron-coloured pork, may be
met with, which, carnivorous as it must be allowed we all are,
few like their eyes to dwell upon; while, on the other side,
gown-pieces, and "blue checks," with other "odds and ends," claim
the frequenters' attention.

Next to these small shops, come the stores of the retail
provision dealers, which are upon a larger scale, and of course
better supplied with goods. Then there are the _grog shops_, as
they are termed, where to the heterogeneous mass of eatables,
crockery, and tin-ware, is added the more exciting articles of
brandy, rum, gin, porter, wine, &c.; and where of an evening,
amid fumes of every description, (from Yanky cheese to Virginia
tobacco,) and dim smoky oil lamps, parties of soldiers, sailors,
dingy-looking blacks, and unfortunate females--ay! and men of
better rank of life, who ought to blush to be found in such
places--love to congregate, and barter health and money, for
dirty goblets of those fiery liquids.

When passing, in an evening, these _store-houses for crime_, they
forcibly bring to my mind thoughts of Pandemonium. The dusky
lamps, at one moment sending forth their long flaming tongues,
the next, only serving to make darkness visible; the crowds of
negroes, with their gleaming eyes and glittering teeth,
presenting the appearance of so many attending demons; the groups
of white soldiers or sailors, looking more pallid in the
flickering lamp-light, and greedily quaffing the deleterious
fluid, which, sooner or later, preys upon their very vitals--and
then the various sounds of cursing and quarrelling, idiotic
laughter, discordant singing, and incoherent talking, as the
miserable frequenters arrive at the different stages of
intoxication,--conspire to render it more like a council-chamber
of tormented spirits, than the self-chosen place of amusement of
rational creatures.

The next grade of these places of merchandise are, the merchants'
stores or warehouses, with their attached lumber-yards. These
are, in most instances, large, dismal-looking buildings, whose
unwashed rafters afford safe protection to innumerable spiders of
every size, or present a desirable spot for the freemasons (the
ichneumon bee) to erect their clayey dwellings upon. One corner
of these vast emporiums is latticed off, forming a
counting-house, decorated with a coat of white, green, or yellow
paint, and shewing its chequers of red tape, for the purpose of
sticking orders, letters, or bank-notices for payments, due at
the Colonial or West India Bank. Here, on a high-legged stool, of
dingy look, sits the merchant, dressed in his round, white
jacket, snowy pantaloons, Panama or Paget hat; and, with pen in
hand, and a pinch of _Lundy-foot_ between his fingers, (to assist
his ideas, I suppose,) calculates the probabilities of his
_'specs_, which in other days afforded such golden harvests as to
give rise to the belief, that the streets in the West Indies were
paved with doubloons and dollars.

But let it not be imagined that this worthy and numerous class
employ all their business-hours in calculating their gains and
losses, poring over the leaves of a dusty ledger, or puzzling
their brains over their "bank accounts." Oh! no, no--the Antiguan
merchants are far too wise for that--many a bowl of
"pepper-punch" is brewed; many a long cork of approved brand is
drawn, and the "rosy red" _Vin de Bordeaux_ is poured into the
tendered crystal; and many a bottle of champagne, or "Tennent's
pale ale," is unwired, uncorked, and its creamy excellence
effused for them. Nor is the tongue idle; well-seasoned jests and
brilliant repartees abound; news is discussed, wit flies like
arrows, and many a rosy face grows more roseate, and many a
laughing eye becomes dewy before they part.

But I must say something more about the stores--what a scene of
confusion they present to the unaccustomed eye!--what varied and
multiplied articles do they display! In one part are hogsheads of
salt cod, herrings, and other salted fish; bins of Indian corn,
rice, peas, and salt; flour, tobacco, barrels of blacking, and
kegs of lard. In another part may be found barrels of beef and
mess-pork; hogsheads of prime Cumberland hams, kits of ox
tongues, and barrels of biscuits; sparkling Moselle, hock,
seltzer-water, and lamp-oil; preserved meats and soups, and kegs
of crackers; pitch, tar, rosin, and oats; block-tin tureens,
spirits of turpentine, and Cognac brandy; crates of earthenware,
rose nails, and hogsheads of tin-ware; with London pickles,
agricultural implements, and hair-brooms. On another side of the
store lie huddled together hogsheads of Barclay's brown stout,
boxes of soap, bundles of wood-hoops, and cases of gilded
cornices; boxes of raisins and currants, paving flags, and masts
and oars; firkins of Cork butter, hogsheads of lime, and patent
corkscrews; Hyson teas, Durham mustard, loaf-sugar, and Havannah
cigars; potatoes, onions, Bologna sausage, and blacksmiths'
coals; artificers' tools, anti-corrosion paint, currycombs, and
_gold watches_; the whole wound up with Rowland's Macassar oil,
floating soap, and quack medicines, consisting of Morrison's
pills, and Swain's Panacea, which, if we believe the labels, are
to cure every ill "that flesh is heir to;" while from the ceiling
dangle in graceful negligence, coils of rope, and horses'
halters.

To prove to any of my readers who may be sceptical of the truth
of such a _various_ assemblage of goods, as I have stated the
merchant's stores contain, I will give a _correct copy_ of a
cargo handed about to the different merchants, as brought by an
American vessel arrived to-day:--

       CARGO ON BOARD BRIG "RANDOLPH," FROM PHILADELPHIA.

   12 barrels pitch             1 box fine beaver hats
  118 covered hams            100 boxes cheese
    2 casks of shoulders        3 doz. Windsor chairs
   30 barrels pilot bread      16 nurses' rocking chairs
   10 do. navy do.              8 ladies' cane do.
  30-3 do. sugar biscuits       1 doz. children's do.
  20-3 do. soda                49 barrels potatoes
  20-3 crackers            18-1/4 gross lucifer matches
   50 kegs lard                 1 mahogany spring-seat sofa
   30 blls. mess pork           1 do. wash-stand, marble top
  100 kegs butter               3 boxes stationery
   13 boxes lump tobacco        4 backgammon boards
   20 do. champagne cider      12 bridles
   20 doz. buckets         22-1/2 doz. black ink in boxes
   50 boxes soap, 24 lbs.       1 mahogany spring-seat, rocking chair
  700  do.    16 lbs.           2 wooden arm chairs
   50 do. mould candles
   17 do.  do.

        Offers in cash, or negotiable notes, 1 o'clock.

From the store we will take a walk into the lumber yard. But
before I proceed to describe it, it will be necessary for me to
make another digression, and let those of my readers who may be
yet ignorant of the real meaning of the term know what "lumber"
is. Upon my first acquaintance with West Indians, I was
particularly surprised to hear them talk so much about _lumber_,
and of Mr. This and Mr. That dealing in such commodity. As my
mind has ever been apt to roam far and wide, I no sooner heard
the merits of this peculiar article (if I may so call it)
discussed, than my schooldays' tasks presented themselves to my
recollection, and I mentally murmured with Dr. Johnson, "lum-ber,
lumber, old useless furniture."

Having arrived at this definition, again I fancied myself amid
broken chairs and tables, sofas minus a leg, shattered
looking-glasses, musty, dusty, rusty, grates, antique bottles,
and similar chattels, where in one of my hoyden days I had
scrambled to look for a bird-cage in which to imprison a poor
half-fledged skylark, captured for me by a little ragged
_protege_ of mine, known by the true English name of "Bill."

Yet still I was not satisfied; for what, thought I, can West
Indian merchants find so particularly valuable in all these
divers specimens of mutilation, as to induce them to deal so
largely in them? I could only answer mine own query by exclaiming
"'tis strange! 'tis passing strange!" Time wore on, however, and
I arrived at Antigua; then my wonder soon ceased, and I found out
that in fact a _lumber merchant_ signifies nothing less than a
dealer in _timber_.

Having endeavoured to give the Antiguan definition of lumber, I
will now proceed to describe "the yard." It is generally entered
by passing through the store, at the hazard of putting your foot
into pools of rosin or varnish, slipping over stray peas, or
half-breaking your neck over heaps of brickbats. At length the
yard is gained, and drawing a long breath, as much from heat as
exercise, I look around. On each side of the door are huge stacks
of staves, piled up in a very uniform manner, used for making
hogsheads or tierces for packing sugar, or puncheons for the
conveyance of rum. In other parts of the yard are bundles of
cypress or cedar shingles,[69] white and pitch pine boards,
planks and scantlings, all packed in appropriate order; that is,
when they are not landing cargoes, and the master has an eye to
tidy appearances; but if this is not the case, the different
species of lumber are tumbling about in all directions.

Then there are large sheds erected in various parts of the yard,
for the purpose of securing "hard-wood" (as mahogany,
mill-timber, &c.) from the effects of the weather. There is also
very generally a pigeon-house or two to be met with, and their
pretty inmates may be seen gliding about, picking up the
scattered grain, or, perched upon one of the lumber stacks, watch
your every movement with their bright round eyes, while their
variegated breasts glitter in the sun-beams like so many gems. At
the bottom of the yard large gates open to the sea, furnished
with a huge crane; and here it is that all those incongruous
articles which fill their stores, and bring wealth to their
coffers, are landed.

When the merchants are visited by certain fears and twitchings,
relative to the fact of their not being able to dispose of their
diversified merchandise, they "call an auction;" and under the
auspices of the red flag,[70] and with the assistance of the
auctioneer's lungs and hammer, instead of harlequin's magic wand,
turn all these "creature's comforts" into pounds, shillings, and
pence.

In some parts of the town are auction rooms, where, with the same
laudable zeal for "charming variety," things as distinct from
each other as the nadir is from the zenith, are put up, the
mysterious words "going, going, _gone_" uttered, and finally
knocked down to the attendants--whites, blacks, and coloured.

Having mentioned the stores of those philanthropists, who, for
the mere consideration of a little dirty _pelf_, undertake to
provide so liberally for the inner man, it will be necessary to
take a look at those temples of fashion, fancy, and fascination,
commonly known in this island as "Scotch shops," or in other
words, Antiguan haberdashery stores.

In a particular part of St. John's, running north and south, lies
a well-made broad street, which, from being inhabited principally
by Scotchmen, is known by the appropriated name of "Scotch Row."
Capital stores (when I _am_ at Rome, I like to do as Rome does,
and give everything its approved title) flank each side of the
street, and display their glittering wares to the admiration of
passers-by; and from whence (with but few exceptions) emanate
those dresses and ribbons of a thousand dyes, with which the
_fair sex_ of _every colour_ delight to enrobe their lovely
forms.

Here, as in the merchants' stores, may be found articles of the
most opposite natures. In one part lies a delicate white satin
bonnet, with its bunches of "orange flowers," to grace the head
of some blushing bride, or decorated with the snowy plumes torn
by the swarthy African from some swift-footed ostrich; while by
its side reposes a broken ewer, or an iron pot.

You may, in truth, buy anything and everything in these "Scotch
shops," from three farthings' worth of tape to the most costly
articles. Dresses of all kinds; ribbons, laces, flowers, and
bonnets; coats, vests, pantaloons, umbrellas, and shoes; blondes,
scarfs, mantelets, perfumery, and _tenpenny nails_; paint,
frying-pans, and carpets; jewellery of every description,
dripping-pans, and Seidlitz powders; Epsom salts, ginger-beer,
and white lead; horses' halters, cherry-tree chairs, and
preserved fruits; children's dresses, lanterns, horse-whips, and
coffee; sugar-loaves, saddles, bonnet-shapes, and white-handled
knives; ladies' corsets, Valenciennes edging, and Westphalia
hams; pigs' tongues, truckle cheese, and bird-seed; dish-covers,
bottle-baskets, hooks-and-eyes, and brimstone; harness, cattle
medicines, and lozenges; "Mechian" razor strops, and Metcalf's
toothbrushes; with brandy, champagne, Madeira, sherry, port,
sauterne, Rhenish wines, bottled stout, pale ale, glasses to
drink all these good articles out of, and I know not what
besides. Loaves of sugar dangling by the side of zephyr scarfs,
or candle-boxes _vis-a-vis_ with ostrich feathers.

Oh! ye tradesmen of Regent-street, so polite and perfumed, and
such _calibre_, who stand behind your glossy counters with the
air of "my lord duke," or glide with noiseless steps and mincing
airs over your Persian carpeted floor,--what, _what_ would you
think of our Antiguan shops? Or how would those over-fashionable
gentlemen at Storr and Mortimer's be astounded, when tendering
for approval to "beauty bright" those costly gems which carry us
back to the days of the Arabian nights, if they came in contact
with a brass kettle or an iron pot!

I often wonder how the pale-faced, straight-haired clerks (for
they are not termed _shopmen_ in this part of the world) manage
to get on among such a multiplicity of dissimilar articles; or
that from being asked for so many contrary goods during the day,
they do not make many and greater mistakes. A lady drives up in
her carriage to the door of one of these labyrinthan _depots_ of
vanity, and in that "low soft voice so sweet in woman," asks to
be shewn some orange flower chaplets, and essence of
_Frangipanier_. The poor clerk, his brains turning round like a
revolving light, flies to obey her commands; but lo! in his hurry
and confusion, he catches up a _frying-pan_, and with streaming
brow, presents the inelegant article to the lady's astounded and
horrified gaze, instead of the delicate perfume.

The master of these gay and changeful stores, is as diversiformed
as his goods are various. In the morning he stands behind his
counter, and "bows to" and "ma'am's" any black member of the
_canaille_ that condescends to purchase a few yards of
"half-a-bit" (2d. sterling) ribbon to sandal her mill-post ankle;
while in the evening, in all the glories of white pantaloons, new
coat, smart buttons and embroidered stock, he figures away at an
aristocratic dinner party.

Times are indeed altered with these Scotchmen. In former years,
when Sawney left his mountain home, his trouty lochs, and oaten
bannocks, for the hot suns and debilitating climate of these
"Isles of the West;" he did it for the sake alone of _siller_. As
to ambition--faugh! he hated the very name, or else, like the
cock in Esop's fable, he spurned the glittering bauble, of which
he knew not the worth. They plodded on from year to year,
increased their stock of goods, and added many a round dollar to
their worldly wealth, and then sat down contentedly to enjoy the
smoky flavour of their usquebaugh, forming no greater
acquaintance with the governor, than as they saw him proceed to
the court-house in discharge of his high office, or knowing no
more of government-house than the outer appearance.

But the Scotchmen of the present day scorn the lowly ideas of
their predecessors. They ape the man of fashion, call their
haberdashery store a merchant's warehouse, and foregoing the
vulgar title of draper, take to themselves the loftier name of
_merchant_. Nor is this all. They attend the governor's _levees_,
play the amiable at a quadrille party, frequent the billiard
table, or perchance take wine with his excellency, and grin and
bow with approved precision. Their shops prove an agreeable
morning lounge for the superiors of the island, and in a glass of
_sangaree_, or a flowing bowl of _pepper-punch_, the difference
of grade between the entertainer and the entertained is
overlooked.

That "there is no rule without an exception," is a true
apophthegm; and among the many emigrants from the "land o'
cakes," some very respectable individuals are to be met with.

I believe it a correct statement to assert, that "Scotch Row"
begins with one of this superior class, and ends with him who has
been called "The father of the Scotchmen," not from his age, but
from his high conduct.

Mr. H------ is a man in whom great urbanity is blended with
strong determination of character. He possesses varied talents,
and is no mean disciple of St. Cecilia's; and although, perhaps,
not altogether ranking among the _literati_ in the fuller sense
of that term, yet he

   "----laughing can instruct Much has he read,
    Much more has seen: he studied from the life,
    And in the original perused mankind."

Philosophy to him, however, is no gloomy subject; no solemn
stalking about wrapt up in his own stately ideas, and scorning,
with cynic's eye, any harmless mirth. In the words of one of
Britain's poets, I may say of him--

   "----nor purpose gay,
    Amusement, dance or song, he sternly scorns."

Nature seems to have intended him for a higher occupation, than
to stand behind a counter and sell a few yards of tape, or a
paper of pins.

The streets of the capital have all their proper appellations,
although no painted board announces such a fact to the traveller.
The east and west streets, beginning southerly, are--
South-street, Tanner, Nevis, Ratcliff, St. Mary's, High, Long,
Church, Newgate, Wapping, North, Bishopsgate, St. John's, St.
George's; north and south streets, beginning easterly, are--
East-street, Cross, Church-lane, Temple, Steeple-street, Corn,
Market, Friendly-alley, Gutter-lane, Newgate-lane, Popeshead,
Thames, Coney-Warren-lane, Subscription-alley, Craw-lane,
Wilkinson's-street, and Mariner's-lane. Some of these lanes and
alleys are famous for their _grog-shops_, particularly that
establishment known by the appropriate name of "The
Hole-in-the-Wall," for the only entrance is a low arched door-way
scooped out of its massy walls.

One part of the town bears the somewhat lofty title of "The
Parade." In former years it answered as a kind of exchange, where
the merchants congregated together during "'Change hours," and
discussed the business of the commercial world. Cargoes of all
descriptions were here disposed of; dollars and doubloons in one
moment changed owners, and human flesh and blood was openly
bartered. For a long period, however, the Parade visibly declined
in importance, and became but the shadow of itself; but within
these last few years, it has, phoenix like, sprung up with
renewed vigour, and presents to the passenger's eye many good and
bustling stores.

St. John's has, at various times, suffered severely from
conflagrations--a circumstance not to be wondered at, when we
consider the great number of wooden buildings, and the
carelessness of persons in throwing about particles of fire. In
1769, an accident of this nature occurred, which was most direful
in its consequence. It arose from the negligence of a woman who
was employed in ironing, and who omitted to extinguish the fire
in a coal-pot, after finishing her labours.

It may be necessary, perhaps, for the comprehension of some of my
readers who may not be conversant with West Indian domestic
subjects, to mention more fully the construction of a coal-pot.
In some of the islands these utensils are composed of clay,
moulded into the form of buckets, and baked in a moderate fire;
but the Antiguan coal-pot is nothing more nor less than a deal
box, clamped with iron or tin, and lined with bricks plastered
over. A few pieces of old iron hoop are placed horizontally
across the box at stated intervals about halfway from the bottom,
and upon these is placed a layer of charcoal. The irons are
arranged upon the top, and the coals ignited; no bellows are
used, except what Nature has afforded in the owners' own lungs;
or when their breath fails, and the fuel still proves refractory,
their large straw hat is displaced from their heads, and
brandished before the mouths of their little stoves, with sundry
ejaculations of "Eh! eh! war do de co-als to-day, me b'lieve dem
no want to burney."

But to return to the fire in 1769; it burnt with fearful
rapidity. The gaol, custom-house, indeed nearly the whole town,
fell a prey to the destructive element, 260 houses being levelled
with the ground, and some of the finest stores and richest
merchandise destroyed. Government granted 1000l. for the relief
of the sufferers; and their kind friends in Liverpool collected,
during the following year, the sum of 346l. 2s. 6d., which was
thankfully and gratefully received.

Many other fires have occurred since then, the vestiges of which
remain to this day; one in particular, known by the appropriate
name of the burnt wall, is still pointed out to the notice of the
stranger. Part of this land has been lately purchased by the
Wesleyans, who have erected a small chapel upon it, which answers
also for a school-room, and where preaching is held on Friday
evenings.

But the conflagration which happened on the 2nd April, 1841, has
effaced the memory of all other events of the same nature. It
broke out in the house of a person carrying on the business of a
straw bonnet-maker, after the family had retired to rest, and it
was only discovered in time for the inmates to make their escape
by jumping from the upper windows.

A few moments after it was first perceived, the walls fell, and
the flames burst forth with a fearful rapidity, curling and
twisting themselves in all directions; seizing upon every thing
within their reach, and illuminating the heavens with their
awfully grand lustre. The church bell tolled forth its solemn
warning; drums beat an alarm; and, in the words of an old writer,
when describing the fire in London in 1666, "dreadful screams
disturbed the midnight quiet, and raised the affrighted people
from their beds, who, scarce awake, all seemed to be a dream.
Each one appeared but as a moving statue, as once Lot's wife,
viewing her flaming Sodom, was transformed into a pillar."

So saith "Samuel Wiseman," and his graphic description answers
equally for the fire of Antigua, as it did in yore, for that of
London.

House after house, store after store, fell beneath the raging
element; or, when built of stone, only their bare and blackened
walls were left standing. No sooner was one house on fire, than
the flames were pouring into the windows of the next; scathing
the trees as they passed, dismantling them of their verdure, and
leaving them only a seared and withered trunk. Again the Custom
House fell a victim, and to this cause many deficiencies in the
statistical part of this work may be attributed; for, from the
suddenness and violence of the fire, many valuable records were
lost.

Still the fiery deluge rolled on,--at one moment the sky was
almost hidden by the dense masses of smoke; at another, bright
spiral lines of flame shot up into the air, and cast a lurid
light on all around. I am sorry to record it, but the negro-men
behaved very ill, refusing to lend assistance, (in most
instances,) but employing their time in plundering from the
sufferers. To the glory of the women, be it spoken, _they_ did
not follow the example of their kinsmen, but cheerfully and
firmly laboured through that awful night. The crew of two French
ships of war, which chanced to be lying in the harbour, also
assisted, aided by the sailors from the English and island
vessels; and the gentlemen of the town, headed by the
lieutenant-governor, Major McPhail, (who flew to the scene of
danger stockingless and almost slipperless,) worked with
undaunted courage and good-will; and by dint of energy, and
pulling down several small houses, so as to make room for the
flames in their gyral evolutions, at length succeeded in gaining
the mastery over their formidable enemy.

But, alas! when morning came, and threw a steady light upon the
picture, what a melancholy sight was presented to the view. A
long line of building, including the best and finest houses,
entirely destroyed; lumber-yards and warehouses despoiled of
their goods, and the very streets strewed ankle-deep with burnt
salt-fish, peas, rice, flour, and similar articles! In some parts
might be seen groups of negroes carousing around some gutted
dwelling, tearing out the burning provisions, and, amid all this
desolation and the mournful feelings of men, who, in one short
night, had lost that for which they had toiled for years,
shouting forth from their stentorian lungs snatches of some
bacchanalian song, or allowing their vacant heartless laugh to
vibrate painfully upon the silent morning air.

Ever and anon, the smouldering fire sent up some fitful glare; or
a brilliant coruscation of sparks, shot forth from some still
burning log of pitch-pine, gilded the surrounding scene with
their beautiful but dangerous showers. The fire burnt down to the
sea-side; seizing upon the very timber of the wharfs and cranes,
and destroying them to the water's edge. The amount of damage has
been estimated at 250,000l. sterling; but the loss is more than
can be calculated, for it has despoiled and depopulated one of
the finest and busiest streets in the town, and which, from the
depressed state of trade, will be long, very long, before it is
again rebuilt.

More than eight months have silently rolled by since that awful
cry of "Fire" awoke the Antiguans from their tranquil slumbers,
and sent a thrill of dismay through the hearts of all. And there
stand the ruins, blackened and cracked by the intense heat which
caused the very glass to pour down in streams, which, when
congealed, appeared like icicles; or else, only shewing by the
open space, where the ill-fated dwellings stood--where the voice
of happy infancy once uttered many a jocund shout--or where the
soft full tone of riper years carolled many a light and gladsome
lay. Long grass and luxuriant weeds have already grown up in the
spot once dedicated to business or pleasure, and the bat and the
lizard have made it their own.




[68] The whites, or Buckra's, as they are called in the West
Indies, however indigent in circumstances, pride prohibits them
from engaging in such industrious pursuits.

[69] Used for covering the tops of houses, as tiles or slates are
in England.

[70] A flag is always hoisted upon places where a sale is held.




                          CHAPTER XIX.



  Description of the church of St John's--Period of its erection
  --Present site--Panoramic views--Form of structure--Length and
  breadth--Interior--Decorations--Monuments--Organ--Tower--Bells
  --Clock--Churchyard--Tombs and sepulchral inscriptions--An
  acrostic--"Adam and Eve!"

The first place of public worship erected in St. John's was the
parochial church, commenced in 1683-4. It was a small wooden
building, standing about sixty yards further to the south than
the present church; and, if we are to believe an old writer,
totally destitute of beauty or comfort. During the administration
of Gen. Walter Hamilton, it was found to be in such a dilapidated
state, that in 1716 the necessity of erecting a new church was
submitted to the legislature; and with the concurrence of the
members of that body, an act was passed the same year, granting a
provision for building a new place of worship, (to be dedicated
to St. John,) and imposing a yearly tax for the purpose of
keeping the said church in repair. It was not, however, until
between the years 1721 and 1723, during the period that John Hart
was administrating the government of these islands, that the
erection of the church was commenced. Mr. Robert Cullen was the
architect, and by his suggestions, its site was laid to the north
of the old building; thus occupying the very spot where the
militia were stationed in 1710, when ordered to fire upon
Governor Park, in that unhappy difference between him and the
country, and which ended so fatally to himself.

The present parochial church is pleasantly situated upon an
ascent, at the head of the town, and commands from every side a
wide and beautiful view of the surrounding country. From the west
door, the eye ranges over the bustling town, with its motley
groups of passengers--dwells for a time upon the long line of
ruined buildings destroyed by the fire already described--scans
the lovely harbour, with its graceful shipping, the interesting
bay of the Five Islands on the one side, and, on the other, a
long line of cocoa-nut trees and brilliant sand, bespeaking the
situation of Dickenson's Bay--and then roves on to the offing,
where a large extent of ocean of the sweetest blue stretches out;
and where, perhaps, a far-off sail may be seen, which looks in
the distance like the white wing of some passing gull.

From the south door, another beautiful and panoramic view may be
obtained, particularly towards the close of the day, when the sun
has almost completed his daily journey, and, shorn of his fervent
beams, throws on every cloud his myriad dyes. The part of the
town then presented to the gaze of the beholder slopes by a
gradual descent towards the suburbs, bounded by Otto's Hill (an
estate belonging to the representatives of Bastien Baijer) and
the surrounding country. At the extent of the horizon runs a long
range of mountains--the more distant ones presenting a greyish,
gloomy colour, while others have their tops irradiated with a
brilliant fringe of gold or purple, as the different clouds
appear to rest upon them. Of this chain, the declivities of which
afford every species of beauty, and every gradation of varying
green, the lower ones are generally in a state of cultivation;
and their undulating surface presents in some places groups of
lovely trees, or breaks into patches of sugar-canes, clusters of
negro-huts, and sugar-mills.

The church itself, which is built of brick, washed of a light
yellow, is cruciform; the north and south vestibules forming the
arms of the cross. The extreme length, from the inner west door
to the altar-piece, is 130 feet; and the breadth, exclusive of
the vestibules, (or porches,) is 50 feet. In the interior,
eighteen plain wooden pillars divide the nave from the north and
south aisles; the sixteen lower ones forming the support to the
north and south galleries. The roof of the nave is a semicircular
vault, painted to represent the heavens, with all their drapery
of light and fleecy clouds; and when viewed from the west door,
has a very pretty effect.

The chancel roof is of the same pitch, but of a pyramidal form;
it is painted in the same manner as the nave, and is supported by
four square fluted columns.

The altar is very beautifully devised. In the centre are the
tables of the ten commandments, gold-lettered upon a black
ground. On each side are full-length paintings of Moses, and of
Aaron, in his "holy garments." That of Aaron is very finely
executed; the face is such as we can imagine that of the great
"high-priest" to have been, majestic, but beautiful; and the
"robes," the "breast-plate," the "ephod," the "curious girdle,"
and the "golden censer," are very correctly painted. The outer
tables of "The Belief" and "Lord's Prayer" are handsomely gilded
--the inscription being executed in letters of black; and over
the commandments, in the centre of the altar, is a medallion
painting of cherubs. The several compartments are divided by
gilded pilasters; the cornices, architraves, and friezes, are
very pretty and tasteful; and in the inter-columniations are one
or two triglyphs.

The communion-table is covered with dark purple velvet, fringed
deeply with gold; and on either end lie cushions to match. The
communion-service plate is very handsome; the large salver,
measuring eighteen inches in diameter, was presented to the
church by John Otto Baijer, Esq., about the year 1724. It
displays a representation of the "Lord's Supper," the figures in
beautiful _basso-relievo_, and bears the following inscription:--

               Donum Domini Johannis Otto Baijer
               Ad Templum Divi Johannis Antigua.

The two smaller salvers and the cup are inscribed as follows:--

            In usum Templi Divi Johannis in Antigua
         Gulielmus Jones Parochialis hujus olim Rector
                          Donum Dedit.

Besides the communion-plate, the table supports a pair of tall
silver lamps, with ground-glass burners, bearing the
inscription--

             Donum Domini Petre Lee ad Templum Divi
                      Johannis in Antigua.

And on each side of the table stand quaint-looking chairs, for
the accommodation of the bishop and archdeacon, which have been
used for that purpose since the dismantling of the "Bishop's
Pew."

The pulpit and desk are of dark oak, as also the railings to the
stairs; and, like the communion-table, have each their drapery
and cushions of dark purple, with deep gold fringe and tassels,
and the "I. H. S." encircled with its golden rays. Formerly the
pulpit, surmounted by a sounding-board, stood further down the
nave; but after being removed once or twice, the desk has been
separated from the pulpit, and they are placed at the entrance of
the chancel, on each side the aisle.

About the centre of the church is suspended a brass chandelier,
consisting of ten branches, which have been lately fitted up with
ground-glass burners; it was a gift (by will, 2nd May, 1740) to
the church, from Phillip Darby, an old inhabitant of Antigua, and
rector of St. John's.

At the entrance of the church from the north vestibule stands a
small marble font, of a semi-spherical form, ornamented with four
heads of cherubs, and supported by a corniform pedestal. It is
intended to be placed at the extreme end of the middle aisle,
immediately before the west entrance, and opposite the altar--a
site far more applicable for it than where it now stands.

The church is lighted by fourteen windows: six in the north
aisle, six in the south aisle, and two in the east end of the
building. Formerly they were all fitted up with _jalousies_; but
within these last few years, the eight nearest the altar have
been reglazed with ground glass, arranged in a Gothic pattern.
These windows are divided into six compartments; and are so
contrived, that, by aid of a turnscrew, they can be opened to a
certain height. They certainly add to the _beauty_ of the
edifice, but deteriorate from its _comfort_ by rendering it
warmer than it otherwise would be: a circumstance not desirable
in this fervid climate.

Several fine monuments grace the walls of this sacred building;
but the oldest sepulchral inscription is upon a stone slab, in
the chancel, to the memory of Mrs. Gilbert, wife of Mr. Gilbert,
who introduced methodism[71] in Antigua, and who died in 1747.

In the south aisle are the following monuments:--

An elegant mural monument of white marble upon a black ground,
erected to the memory of Mrs. Elizabeth Ottley, wife of Richard
Ottley, Esq., and daughter of Ashton Warner, speaker of the house
of assembly in 1716. The ornamental part of this monument
consists of the figure of a seraph with outspread wings, leaning
upon a sepulchral urn, bearing a coronal of undying laurel leaves
in its right hand; and in its left an inverted torch, partly
extinguished, emblematical of the uncertainty of human life. The
inscription is as follows:--

"Near to this place is laid, with the remains of her honoured
parents, the body of Elizabeth, the pious, amiable, and
much-beloved wife of Richard Ottley; who departed this life, in
the Island of St Vincent, on Thursday, 28th August, in the year
of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and sixty-six, in the
thirty-second year of her age.

"She was the daughter of Ashton Warner, Esq.,[72]
Attorney-General of Antigua, by Elizabeth, his wife, and was born
the 7th June, 1735, O.S.; married 25th October, in the year 1753,
and left issue surviving her, one son and three daughters--viz.,
Drewry, Elizabeth, Mary Trant, and Alice.

"She possessed a graceful person, an excellent understanding, and
a sweetness of disposition that engaged the esteem of all that
knew her, and performed with so much complacency the several
duties in her family, and those of a good friend and neighbour,
that it may be truly said she died universally lamented, and a
real loss to that infant colony. Her inconsolable husband (in
whose arms she expired, after bearing with admirable fortitude
and resignation the excruciating pains of a long and difficult
labour) caused this monument to be erected to her memory.

"The son with whom she died reclines upon that breast which would
have nourished him had the Almighty so permitted."

A very chaste and elegant white marble tablet, forming a Gothic
arch, erected to the memory of the Honourable Sam. Otto Baijer, a
descendant of Bastien Baijer, who signed the capitulation in
1666, bearing the following inscription:--

             As a last mournful token of affection,
                   This Tablet is erected by
                  Elizabeth Mary Otto Baijer,
              To the memory of her beloved Father,
               The Honourable Samuel Otto Baijer,
                Of Pares Estate, in this Island;
                    Who died at Philadelphia
                 On the 20th of December, 1835,
                         Aged 54 years.

               Also to the memory of her Mother,
                  Elizabeth Mary Otto Baijer,
                Who died in 1813, at Dove Hall,
                   In the Island of Jamaica,
                  In the 27th year of her age.

               Also to the memory of her Brother,
                 Rowland Archibald Otto Baijer,
                     Son of the above-named
        Samuel Otto Baijer and Mary Elizabeth his Wife,
           Who died at Pares Estate, in this Island,
                 On the 24th of November, 1837,
                  Aged 25 years and 8 months,
            And whose remains repose near this spot.

A small, unpretending marble tablet:--

                             Sacred
                        To the Memory of
                     Elizabeth Jane Harman,
             Who died on the 16th April, A.D. 1828,
                         Aged 21 years.
          "We have this treasure in earthen vessels."

A pyramidal monument, supported by fluted pillars, and bearing a
small sarcophagus, surmounted by two figures of children or
cherubs, holding in their hands a scroll, on which is written
texts from Scripture. The inscription is as follows:--

"Supported only by a meek obedience to the decrees of Eternal
Wisdom, and a firm trust in the Atonement of a gracious Redeemer,
William and Ruth Atkinson, once inhabitants of Antigua, and now
of Dominica, as an inadequate evidence of their intense and
aggravated anguish for the poignant and crushing trial they have
undergone in the loss of both their children, pay this melancholy
tribute, when advancing into manly, lively virtue, such as fills
the parents' soul with solid comfort.

"George Atkinson, their first and last spared hope, had nearly
reached his twelfth year. This blooming prop of their declining
age--when, by a mild and artless truth, joined to innate goodness
and suavity of temper, he had irresistibly won the esteem and
love of all--quitted this life without a struggle on Sunday, 5th
Dec. 1779.

"William Atkinson, their youngest, died in infancy.

    What poets paint, what marbles feebly tell,
    Defective far are all;
    Such woes are only to be known
    To real feeling souls.
    Where equal growing filial worth's bewail'd,
    The name of Son thus lost, all consolation fail'd.
    1782."[73]

A small tablet, representing a white scroll upon a black ground,
surmounted by a laurel chaplet, bearing inscription:

                          In memory of
                         Auther Teagle,
                     Who departed this life
                  On the 20th November, 1839,
                         Aged 43 years.
                      "Thy will be done."

In the north aisle are four monuments; the first, beginning from
the east, erected to a late curate of St. John's. It consists of
a white marble tablet, and above, the figure of an angel soaring
upwards, and encompassed with clouds. The tablet bears the
following inscription:--

                        To the memory of
             The Rev. William Thomas Bernard, A.B.,
                  Of Trinity College, Dublin,
                  Late curate of this parish,
         Where, after a short residence of four months,
         In the faithful exercise of his ministry, and
            The manifestation of much private worth,
               He died of fever, Nov. 2nd, 1835,
                  In the 26th year of his age,
              Most deeply and generally regretted,
              This tribute of esteem and affection
                          Is erected,
              Partly by his much afflicted Sister,
                        Ellen M. Baily,
   And partly by the Right Rev. William Hart Coleridge, D.D.,
                  Lord Bishop of this diocese,
        The clergy of Antigua, and other friends in the
               Island, who mourn his early loss.

Beneath the tablet are his coat of arms, with the motto--

                      "Bear and Forbear."

A white marble monument, with a deep border of variegated brown
marble, to the memory of a descendant of Sir Thomas Warner. The
ornamental part consists of a female figure enveloped in
widow-like drapery, and leaning upon an urn. The inscription is
as follows:--

                         This monument
                  Is erected to the memory of
              The Honourable William Warner, Esq.,
           Who was a member of His Majesty's Council,
                 And Treasurer of this Island.
            Honourable by his office of Counsellor,
                              But
                   More honourable as a man:
                             For if
                 Virtue alone is true nobility,
       And if justice, moderation, temperance, meekness,
          Consummate honesty, charity, generosity, and
Conjugal affection, are virtues that are held in any estimation
                           Among men,
                           This man,
             Who lived in the exercise of them all
                     Was truly honourable.
He died on Friday, 11 October, 1771, in the forty-third year of
his age,
Universally regretted, and lamented by all orders and degrees
among
                              Us.
    To commemorate her anguish for his loss, and as a public
  Testimony of her love and duty, his disconsolate widow hath
               Caused this memorial to be raised.
                    Gloria in excelsis Deo!

A very elegantly designed white pyramidal monument erected to the
memory of an only child. A chastely sculptured female figure
leans upon a "storied urn," with a beautifully chiselled wreath
of flowers thrown around her. This monument has been
unfortunately injured, one of the hands and part of the arm of
the figure being broken off.

          In memory of her only and beloved daughter,
                         Sarah Kelsick,
         Wife of Mr. John Kelsick, merchant in Antigua,
              Who died on 20th day of March, 1785,
                  In the 19th year of her age.
     This monument was erected by her disconsolate mother,
                        Sarah Eccleston,
                 Wife of Isaac Eccleston, Esq.,
                             1792.
           From the parent, the husband, the friend,
                 Her social and amiable virtues
                Claim the tribute of affliction,
                   And though early cut off,
           She must ever live in the memory of those
           Who had the happiness of her acquaintance.
                   Vivit post funera virtus.

The next is an elaborate and splendid monument, erected by the
country to the memory of Ralph Lord Lavington; and however
peculiar the taste which dictated the design, the execution, at
least, possesses merit. The top figure represents his lordship in
a sitting posture, habited in the old court dress, and his plumed
hat lying at his feet. The inscription is traced upon a light
grey marble, hollowed out so as to allow of the insertion of a
small sarcophagus, bearing his coat of arms, with a
beautifully-executed branch of oak-leaves thrown across it.

Two female figures recline on each side; the one on the left
hand, representing Astrea with her scales by her side, and the
hilt of the sword of justice, very minutely and beautifully
sculptured, protruding from behind the sarcophagus; her
finely-formed and classic face is up-turned towards the old lord.
In the other figure we behold the genius of the island, mourning
for the loss of a favourite governor. She holds in her right hand
a scroll, upon which is inscribed--"Resolved, that a monument be
erected to his memory," while with her left hand she shades her
features as if in deep grief. At the feet of these figures rolls
the sea, the waves, surmounted with their foam, very well
executed. This costly monument bears the following inscription:--

                             Sacred
                        To the memory of
                  Ralph Payne Lord Lavington,
                   Of the kingdom of Ireland,
      One of His Majesty's most honourable Privy Council,
        Knight of the most honourable Order of the Bath,
         and Captain-general, and Commander-in-chief of
                      The Leeward Islands.

Upon the base of the monument is the following brief biographical
inscription:--

"He was born in the Island of St. Christopher's, of an English
family, distinguished for its loyalty and public spirit. His
education he received in England, and it prepared him for the
distinctions which awaited his return to his native isle, when he
was elected a member of the House of Assembly, and on its first
meeting unanimously called to the chair of the House, in which
high situation he gave an early display of those superior talents
and eminent qualifications which afterwards secured him the
confidence of his king, and the esteem of his country. On his
return to England in 1762, he was elected a member of the House
of Commons for the borough of Plympton, Devonshire; and from his
perfect knowledge of colonial affairs, he was appointed in 1771--
a period of national interest--to be captain-general and
commander-in-chief of the Leeward Islands, at which time he was
also invested with the most honourable Order of the Bath. He
remained in the exercise of his government until 1774, when he
returned to England, and was appointed a member of the Board of
Green Cloth. During the period of his residence in England, he
sat in five parliaments, and in 1795, his Majesty was graciously
pleased to raise him to the dignity of a peer in Ireland, by the
style and title of Baron Lavington of Lavington. In 1799, he was
sworn one of his Majesty's most honourable Privy Council, and
again appointed to the chief command of the Leeward Islands, in
the wise and able administration of which important trust he
passed his latter years

                 And closed his venerable life.
                         This nobleman
             Was revered for his public qualities,
           As he was beloved for his private virtues.
He blended the dignity of his high office with the affability of
his     disposition and the gracefulness of his manners,
And at once commanded the respect, and conciliated the affections
of all              ranks of people
              Within the circle of his government
As a sincere and lasting testimony of their veneration and
regret,
                   The Legislature of Antigua
                   Have erected this monument
He died at the Government House of this Island, on the 3rd day of
Aug. 1807, aged 68; and was interred at his own estate, called
Carlisles."

The whole of this very handsome monument is enclosed in an arch
of plain black marble. I should have mentioned that the
ornamental parts of this tomb are all in pure _white_ marble.

The remaining monument is erected to the memory of Mrs. Musgrave,
who was unfortunately thrown out of her carriage (the horse
becoming restive and breaking the shafts) and killed upon the
spot. This unhappy catastrophe occurred in one of the streets of
St. John's, and a representation of the event, absurd as it may
seem, is sculptured upon the monument (which is of white marble)
in basso-relievo. In the background is the animal, apparently of
the cart-horse breed, scampering away with the broken shafts and
traces hanging around him; in the foreground, is the figure of a
man, kneeling and supporting in his arms a female, whose listless
posture portrays the dire event. The face of the female is well
executed, the features expressing acute suffering, while they
tell the hand of death is upon them; but the figure is execrable
in its proportions, the hand and arm being quite as large as the
leg and foot of the man, if not larger. The inscription is as
follows:--

             "No warning given! unceremonious fate!
            A sudden rush from life's meridian joys!
               A wrench from all she loved."[74]
                      Sacred to the memory
                               of
                        Eliza Musgrave,
                Wife of William Musgrave, Esq.,
             Of the Inner Temple, barrister-at-law.
                     She departed this life
             On the morning of the 12th Feb., 1815,
                         Aged 24 years,
           Beloved and lamented by all who knew her.
                    Her God she reverenced;
      Towards her neighbours she never wilfully offended;
               To her husband she was everything
          His fondest wishes could picture or embrace.
                He idolized her while she lived,
             And his respect for her exalted worth
                   Survives beyond the grave.
              The remembrance of her many virtues
                  Remains indelibly inscribed
                     In his dejected bosom.

   "Friends, our chief treasure, how they drop!
    How the world falls to pieces round about us!
    And leaves us in the ruin of our joy!
    What says this transportation of my friends?
    It bids me love the place where now they dwell,
    And scorn this wretched spot it leaves so poor."[75]

The aisles of the church are paved with a coarse species of
marble, laid down in alternate diamonds of black and white. The
chancel is raised by two steps, and has a stone pavement. The
body of the church contains 152 pews, but with the assistance of
the galleries, of which there are three, affords about 1800
sittings. The governor's pew is very neatly fitted up with
crimson damask, and contains some gaily coloured ottomans; over
the pew are the royal arms of England. Service is performed in
the church on Sundays, Wednesdays, and Fridays; and our exemplary
rector, with true Christian indefatigability, administers the
sacrament monthly, at eight in the morning, and after the usual
morning service.

The organ with which the church is furnished, was erected (partly
by subscription) in 1760, at the cost of 450l. sterling, the
vestry making up what was wanting. It is still a very fine
instrument, and our talented and respected organist, G. Hart,
Esq., fully recompenses us for any defects it may labour under by
his inimitable execution.[76]

At the west end of the nave rises a plain quadrangular tower,
surmounted by an octagonal cupola. The elevation to the apex of
the cupola is sixty-five feet; the altitude of the tower itself
is fifty feet. This tower was not erected until 1789, some years
after the parent church, but from being constructed of the same
materials, presents a uniform appearance; the cupola is built of
wood, the perpendicular compartments being _jalousied_. John
Delap Halliday, Esq. gave 500l. towards its erection.[77]

Within these last few months, two windows have been pierced at
the east side of the tower, in the small chamber where the works
of the clock are placed. These were made at the suggestion of Mr.
Jones, the keeper of the clock, and which prove very beneficial
to him when inspecting and cleaning that necessary appurtenance.
Before that period this chamber was perfectly dark, which not
only rendered the air within it extremely damp, but presented an
obstacle to the due regulation of the instrument contained in it;
for candles are but a sorry substitute for the clear light of day
when employed in such delicate business as rectifying the
machinery of a horologe. Under the care of Mr. Jones the works
are kept beautifully clean, which of course will produce a good
effect. This instrument was the gift of John Delap Halliday, (as
may be seen by the inscription upon the works,) of Antigua, and
the maker of it Charles Penton, London, 1788. The windows are
glazed, and present exactly the same appearance as those to be
found in the suburban dwelling-houses around that mighty
metropolis, London.

The tower contains two bells; the tenor one inscribed--"Edmund
Powell, Golden Grove, 1684," and was kept for the use of the
coloured classes in other days. The large bell was presented to
the church by John Delap, (before he assumed the name of
Halliday,) Esq., 1788. It bore the following inscription:--"The
gift of John Delap, Esq. The Rev. James Lindsey, rector; Thomas
Hanson Halloran, and Daniel Hill, churchwardens. Charles Penton,
London, fecit. John Warner, founder, of London, 1788." It was
taken down the 11th of February, 1840, on account of a serious
injury beyond repair, shipped for London on board the "Antigua
Packet," and exchanged for a new one of the same size, which now
serves to call the people to church, and to speak the demise of
the inhabitants; but it is silent at a wedding, for in this
country no merry peal of bells announces that event which
elsewhere is ever the signal for joy and festivity.

Having attempted the description of the church, I will now
proceed to mention the churchyard, which lies upon a gentle
slope, and contains numerous tombs, with their iron or wooden
railings. The most beautiful tomb in the ground was erected to
the memory of the Honourable Otto Baijer, by his widow, who
afterwards died on her passage to England in 1726. Her remains
were brought back to Antigua, and now repose by the side of her
loved husband. It is of pure white marble, although stained by
exposure to the weather, and is elegantly ornamented with various
fruits and flowers in basso-relievo.

The oldest sepulchral monuments, of which I could make out the
inscriptions, are to the memory of Troughton, 1704; Col. Philip
Lee. 1704;[78] Capt. Bastien Baijer, 1715; Thos. Oasterman, Esq.,
1724; Frederic Cope, 1739; and Mrs. Warner, the wife of Ashton
Warner, Esq., 1748.

The inscription upon the tomb of Frederic Cope demands, however,
further mention. It is an acrostic; the _poetry_ I leave to the
judgment of my readers.

                        THE INSCRIPTION.

   "F ar removed from every human eye he is,
    R egardless now of earth, partakes of heaven's bliss;
    E xalted was his lively soul whilst here below,
    D elighted ever tender friendships for to show;
    E asy and cheerful through every scene of Life;
    R eady to forgive all; but unto me, his wife,
    I ndulgent to the last degree, for ever kind--
    C alm was his spirit, virtuous was his mind.

    C areful he ever was to take no bribe in Law;
    O h! full, full well the abject hate of mortals saw.
    P artial he never was, just to each man's fame,
    E ach initial letter will now declare his name."

He was born in London, of honest parents, on the 21st day of May,
1711, and died, in Antigua, on the 8th ------, 1739.

A fine large marble tomb, to the memory of the Honourable Ashton
Warner, who died 11th of February, 1762, stands near to this very
original sepulchral acrostic; and at no great distance a single
stone to the memory of some admiral (the inscription obliterated)
with its anchors and flags, and escutcheons.

On the east side of the north vestibule stands the tomb of
Major-general George W. Ramsey, governor-in-chief of Antigua,
Monserrat, and Barbados, in 1816, who departed this life,
November 1st, 1819, in the 58th year of his age. The iron railing
has become rusted and bent,[79] and the tomb bears many a
blackened mark.

Near to the last resting-place of governor Ramsey, stands another
very handsome tomb of white marble, erected to that well-known
and eccentric character, Patrick Kirwan. He was a native of
Galway, and as true an Irishman as ever handled a shillelah, or
vowed devotion to "the shamrock so green." Mr. Kirwan resided in
Antigua for many years, as a planter and proprietor of estates,
where his "bulls and blunders" are still remembered and repeated
with delight. Upon one occasion he sent for a sun-dial from
England, which he intended to have erected near his dwelling; but
upon its arrival, it looked so smart with its golden rays and
gnomen, that "Pat" pronounced it the very height of profanation
to have such a pretty "cratur" exposed to the relentless shafts
of master Sol; and so to preserve its beauty, and keep all
secure, he had a tight snug shed built over it, which eventually
forbid the entrance of any straggling sunbeam which might feel
inclined to call upon it, to learn the hour. Poor Mr. Kirwan! his
Irish blood was always leading him to commit blunders, which were
sure to raise a laugh at his expense. During a partial rebellion
of the negroes, at a period when he was manager of an estate, a
few miles from the capital, he one morning presented himself
before the proprietor with a very flushed face, and excited mien
--"Good morning, Mr. Kirwan," said his employer. "What brings you
to town so suddenly--you look alarmed, I hope nothing is the
matter?" "Faith, an there is though!" retorted the Irishman, "and
if the blessed St. Patrick himself had been here, he would have
looked alarmed too. Why, there's a perfect _resurrection_ of the
negroes upon your estate!" "A what?" inquired the surprised
proprietor. "A perfect _resurrection_," repeated Pat, "and I have
come to ask you what I must do?" His employer could scarcely
repress a smile at this strange intelligence. At length, however,
he summoned gravity enough to reply, "If that's the case, Mr.
Kirwan, the best advice I can give you is, to put a _hoe_ into
their hands as fast as they rise, and set them to work
immediately."

But with all his "_bulls and blunders_," Mr. Kirwan was
deservedly respected, and his death universally regretted. He
died in 1819, in the 66th year of his age. The inscription upon
his monument informs us "By his direction this tomb was erected."

At the entrance of the east gate is a mural stone monument,
erected to the memory of James Cullen, by his brother Robert
Cullen. This monument is pointed out to strangers on account of
the peculiarity of its form, with the assertion that the person
who built the church is buried there, and that the coffin is
obliged to stand in a perpendicular position. This, however, is
not correct; the monument certainly stands there, but the place
where the body is entombed is 23 feet further to the west; and
instead of being raised to the memory of the architect of the
church, that individual erected it to perpetuate the memory of
his brother. This fact is engraven upon the monument; but so
unexploring are the Antiguans in general, that I think but few of
the inhabitants are aware of the real truth, but still think the
coffin stands upright.

This strange practice of putting up the grave-stone at a distance
from the grave is not the only instance of the kind to be met in
the churchyard of St. John's. At one of the west gates lies a
stone slab, to the memory of the late organist; and upon reading
the inscription, I supposed that the body reposed beneath. But
not so: that lies far away, with "not a stone to mark the place."
Upon asking a pew-opener the reason for placing the slab in that
situation, his reply was, "It does so nicely, you know, for the
people to walk on, and looks well."

The churchyard is entered by five iron gates, of handsome
patterns. At the north, a flight of stone steps leads up to the
church, while from the south gate, the building is approached by
an easy and gradual ascent, paved with brick. The pillars of the
south gate are surmounted by stone figures, representing St. John
the Baptist, and St. John the Evangelist. These figures were
intended to receive the vows of the good catholics at Dominica;
but as it happened to be war time, when they took their departure
from "_la belle France_," on their passage they fell in with an
English man-of-war, who most unceremoniously took them into
keeping, and brought them to Antigua; where, by universal
consent, they were placed as sentinels in their present position,
instead of being decked out in gold and silver leaf, and mock
jewels. The negroes, however, refuse to recognise them by their
own titles, but have unanimously dubbed them "Adam and Eve"--the
Baptist, I suppose, playing the part of the lady, as his garments
are longer and more voluminous than those of his companion.




[71] See Chapter XX.

[72] A descendant of Sir Thomas Warner, who planted the first
English colony in Antigua.

[73] This strangely-worded inscription is copied verbatim.

[74] Slightly altered from Young's "Night Thoughts."

[75] Young's "Night Thoughts," Night 7th.

[76] To the organ is attached a choir, composed of the boys and
girls from the parochial school.

[77] From this John Delap Halliday descends the present Admiral
Tollemache--viz.--

Lionel Tollemache, 3rd Earl of Dysert, born June, 1708; married
Grace, eldest daughter of John Earl of Granville, by whom he had
(among other issue) a daughter, Jane, married, 1770, John Delap
Halliday, of the Leasowes, county of Salop, and of Antigua, Esq.,
by whom she had issue, I. John Halliday, Admiral R.N., and who
has assumed the name of Tollemache, and who married Elizabeth,
second daughter of John, 3rd Earl of Aldborough, by whom he has,
among other children, Elizabeth, the present Countess of
Cardigan; and II. Charlotte, married Henry, fourth son of 6th Sir
William Wolseley, of Wolseley, county Stafford.

[78] The gentleman who presented the pair of silver candlesticks
for the communion table. He was an Irishman by birth and
education; but after having served in the wars in Flanders, he
emigrated to Antigua, and became Speaker of the House of Assembly
in that island in 1702.

[79] It is said to have been done by lightning.




                          CHAPTER XX.



  Court-house--Bazaar--Arsenal--Police-office--Government-house--
  Barracks--House of correction--Gaol--Methodist chapel--
  Methodism, its rise and progress in Antigua--Moravian chapel--
  Rise and progress of the Society of United Brethren--Scotch
  kirk.

After the church and churchyard of St. John's, the next public
building which calls for attention is the court house. This, as
before stated, was erected in 1747, William Lowry being the
mason, and Duncan Grant the carpenter. Who these worthies were I
know not; but a glance at the court house proves they were
efficient workmen. In order to raise funds to defray the expenses
of its erection, the legislature obtained a loan of 746l. 12s.
4-1/2d. currency, from the executors of Samuel and Thomas
Watkins; and Jonas Langford (a proprietor of Antigua, and whose
estates still go by his name) lent 1253l. 7s. 7-3/4d. currency,
which debts were to be paid off by levying a tax of 2s. 6d. per
head upon all slaves in the island for six years.

The place where it stands was originally the market; but that
site being the one most approved of for the erection of a public
building, the market was removed to a street nearly facing it,
where it has since been held.

The court house is a very noble-looking pile for a West India
colony, and indeed would not disgrace the boasted streets of
London. The plan of the structure is very uniform and neat. It is
built of a fine-grained freestone, the produce of some of the
small islands already described, which was furnished by contract
for the purpose by Mr. Robert Bannister, a former planter of
Antigua.

The principal entrance (to the south) is approached by iron
gates; and after crossing a small court-yard paved with large
flag-stones, you enter a small corridor, supported by circular
stone columns, with plain capitals. At each end of this corridor,
a flight of stairs leads to the upper apartments in the east and
west wings, the one appropriated to the use of his excellency the
governor, when he retires for the purpose of preparing his
speech; the other to the clerk of the assembly; below are the
marshal's office, and the office of the colonial secretary.

The ground-floor of the main building comprises one large room,
extending the whole length and breadth of the edifice. The east
end being fitted up for the sittings of all courts of justice,
has its bench for the judges, covered with crimson, and a chair
for the governor (when present), over which are the national
arms, where the "lion" grins with approved ferocity, and the
"unicorn" shews its golden hoofs. Around a huge circular table,
which might have feasted "king Arthur" and his gallant "knights,"
even better than the stone one which is shewn as having answered
for that purpose, are placed the sittings for the barristers,
attorney-general, solicitor-general, and benches for the grand
and petty juries. Exactly opposite the seat of the
solicitor-general, a ready pen has scrawled upon the table a
striking likeness of "his satanic majesty." I hope his aid was
not necessary in that part of Astrea's court, at the time his
lineaments were portrayed! This part of the interior is enclosed
within a semi-circular mahogany railing. At the lower or west end
of the apartment are congregated all the _canaille_--the very
riff-raff of the town--who flock to hear speeches they understand
as much as a Greek syllogism; the respectable spectators are
admitted within the enclosure. The barristers plead in gowns, but
not in wigs, very much to their comfort I should apprehend, in
this warm climate.

The upper floor of the court house is divided into two apartments
by wooden partitions, leaving a lobby between; but these can be
removed at pleasure, making the whole one room, as on the
ground-floor. The east apartment is appropriated to the governor
and council, when sitting; at other times for the use of the
grand jury, or petty juries in criminal causes. A long table
covered with "green cloth" runs across the room, and around which
are placed very handsome chairs, of unique patterns, (oak, with
cane backs, and green morocco seats and elbows,) the one destined
for the use of the governor being of larger dimensions, and
having the arms of England painted upon it.

The west room is used for the meeting of the house of assembly,
and is furnished in the same manner as the other apartment, only
that under the royal arms (which are attached to the north side
of the room) is a kind of rostrum, furnished with its proper
seat, and intended for the accommodation of the speaker of the
house of assembly.

On returning by the west flight of stairs, my eyes were directed
to a padlock in the wall, which formerly secured the ladder made
use of at executions; but happy am I to say, such scenes are now
of very rare occurrence in this island.

I should have observed, that balls and dinners are sometimes held
at the court house; as well as Bible and missionary meetings; and
also fancy sales for charitable purposes. The last fancy fair, or
rather bazaar, held there by the Church-of-England Association,
was a very crowded affair. It took place on the day after
Christmas-day, a day of all others devoted by the Antiguans to a
display of dress. Not only all kinds of fancy and ornamental
articles, fabricated by the fair hands of the Antiguan ladies
were to be found there, but what pleased some part of the company
much better, a well-filled lunch-table was spread, when pullets
and guinea-birds, turkeys and ham, were joined to a whole army of
tarts and puffs, fruits and confections. It was a motley group
that frequented the court house that day: Iris would have found
herself outvied in colours, and Fancy might have taken a new
lesson. In one part of the room might be seen a member of the
council, with his lady hanging upon his arm, and next to him a
black labourer _with his lady_, in the same position; the latter
couple making, in many instances, a far greater show than their
aristocratic neighbours.[80] The military band was stationed in
the lower apartment, and played during the day the most
fashionable and favourite airs. The profits arising from this
sale were appropriated to the purposes of assisting to defray the
expenses of the new public cistern lately erected.

Opposite the north side of the court house is the arsenal,
erected in 1757 or 1758. It is, as might be supposed, a strong
building, and stands in a court yard, enclosed with iron
railings. To the east of the arsenal is the old guard-house,
erected in 1754, during the administration of Sir George Thomas.
It is a plain building, with two projecting wings; but it is now
very much out of repair, not being used for any purpose.
Adjoining the guard-house is a long stone building, with its
grated windows, formerly used as the gaol of the island, but
within these last few years turned into the police office,--the
goal being removed to the suburbs of St. John's. This is a very
great improvement; for this building, standing in one of the
greatest thoroughfares of this populous town, and directly facing
the market, the culprits who were immured for petty crimes, and
kept in that part of the gaol, could look through their grated
windows, hold converse with the passers-by, and thus disseminate
their evil counsels among the idle and profligate of both sexes,
who were always lounging about that spot. The dungeons where the
felons used to be confined were gloomy dens indeed, and ran along
the outer walls of the prison. One of these dungeons has been
lately made into an engine-house, a door being broken through its
massy walls facing the street. Upon passing this vault during its
transformation, a sigh broke from my lips as memory carried me
back to those fearful days when so many miserable creatures, who
bore the name without the freedom of man, used to inhabit them,
and often, it is said, from very trivial causes. Like Sterne, I
fancied I could behold them in all their misery,--their bodies,
perhaps, wasted with disease,--their eyes blood-shot and wild
with despair,--their features sharpened by anguish of mind:--no
one to soothe their grief,--no one to hear their complaint,--and
without the _hope_, but not perhaps without the _fear_, of an
hereafter, they left those cheerless vaults to be launched into
eternity by the hangman's hands! The picture was too dreadful;
but sounds of laughter and gladness were abroad, our carriage
rolled on amid crowds of blacks of every sex and age; and
although at times I suffer, as many others do, from their
impudence of manners and behaviour, yet I felt in my heart a
pleasure at their being _free_. The present building was erected
in 1772, the former gaol having been burnt to the ground in the
great fire of 1769.

The next edifice worthy of notice is government house. It is
situated in a pleasant and open space in the suburbs, and
embraces a wide extent of prospect, while from its open windows
as pure a breeze may be inhaled as attainable from any dwelling
in the capital. Although possessing nothing very grand in its
exterior, or internal arrangements, no marble pillars or lofty
arches, yet it is a pleasant, genteel West Indian residence,
possessing some good apartments, and having its stabling and
other out-buildings upon a respectable scale. During the period
his excellency is residing in the capital, the "Union Jack"
floats from the top of the flag-staff, opposite government house;
and then all loyal subjects pay their respects to their young and
beautiful queen's representative.

The custom house, as has already been mentioned, was destroyed in
the fire of 1841. It was a very respectable edifice, and well
suited to the purpose. The building now used in its stead is
hired at the annual rent of 100l. sterling. The treasurer's and
registrar's offices are also private property, for which a
moderate rent is given.[81]

From the custom house, I proceed to mention the barracks, very
delightfully situated in a kind of open heath, to the east of the
town. These consisted of two distinct buildings a few paces from
each other; but the north wing of the lower one becoming
dismantled and ruinous, it was resolved in 1831 to repair it, and
appropriate it to the use of a gaol, instead of the building
already described in the vicinity of the court house.

In this gaol, far greater attention is paid to the unfortunate
inmates than was formerly the case. The prisoners are furnished
with two wholesome and sufficient meals a day, but no clothing or
bedding is allowed, unless by order of the medical man attending
them. The females are separated from the men, and the debtors
from the felons; although in former years they all used to herd
together.

Since the year 1829, the Rev. Robert Holberton, the excellent
rector of St. John's, has voluntarily visited the prison every
Sunday between the hours of seven and eight a.m., to read
prayers, and deliver a religious discourse to the inmates; and in
all cases where an unhappy being has so outraged the laws of
humanity and justice as to forfeit his life to pay the penalty of
his crimes, that divine has ever stepped in with his message of
mercy, prayed with them, and sought to soften their stony hearts;
to lead them to that only fountain capable of washing away their
deadly sins, and finally accompanied them to the last sad scene
of their mortal career.

One part of the gaol is converted into a house of correction, and
the prisoners confined there are employed in breaking stones, or,
under the surveillance of an officer, in working in the roads, or
assisting in any other public works. A treadmill was sent for
from England some time ago, but after costing the country a large
sum, strange to say, no use is made of it. A shed is built over
it, and there it remains quietly in the gaol-yard, and is likely
to do so to the end of its existence. The reason for not using
this machine, however, is said to be on account of the power
required to work it, which necessarily calls for the exertions of
a large gang; and although the house of correction is generally
crowded with occupants, yet there has seldom been a sufficient
number of culprits at one time condemned to that peculiar
punishment, to set the treadmill going.

The north end of the building is appropriated to the use of the
officers of her majesty's troops, stationed for the time in the
island; and notwithstanding its near proximity to a prison, must,
I should think, be a very pleasant domicile. The privates are
quartered at the other barracks, further to the east; and beneath
the shade of a large tree growing near, their red-faced wives may
be seen busily employed in washing their habiliments, while their
sun-burnt children scramble about and chase the butterflies, who,
gorgeous in colours, sport about the margin of a neighbouring
pond.

The next building to be mentioned is, the new Ebenezer Chapel,
belonging to the Methodist society. The corner-stone of this
edifice was laid by the Honourable Nicholas Nugent (then speaker
of the house of assembly, but who now resides in England as the
colonial agent) in 1837. A religious service was first held in
the old chapel, and then, forming into a procession, consisting
of ministers of the different sects in Antigua, some of the
aristocrats of the island, the leading members of the Methodists,
and the scholars of their Sunday-schools, they marched to the
spot appointed for the erection of their new place of worship. A
bottle containing the customary inscription was placed in the
cavity the stone lowered to its proper situation, the three blows
of the mallet struck, addresses delivered, and the ceremony was
over.

It is a spacious building, the front being constructed of
free-stone, the gift of the Honourable and Rev. Nathaniel
Gilbert. It is pierced with two tiers of windows; the upper ones
arched and of larger size than the lower tier, which are very
disproportioned to the extent of the edifice--a circumstance
which tends to render it warmer than it otherwise would be. The
ground-floor is appropriated to the use of the infant and Sunday
schools, as also their "tea-parties," held for charitable
purposes; above is the chapel, which is approached by an outward
flight of stone steps. The interior is fitted up in the usual
plain style; but boasts a smart display of blue and white paint.

The pulpit, painted to represent oak, is an irregular octagon,
supported by four fluted columns, and covered with purple
drapery, bordered with yellow fringe, instead of gold; below is
the reading desk. The pulpit is so lofty, which renders it
inconvenient for such of the congregation as occupy the body of
the chapel to follow the movements of the officiating minister.
The galleries run round all sides, and are supported by plain
cast-iron pillars, bearing each its neat-looking lamp. The last
gallery is exclusively appropriated to the use of the children of
the Females' Friend Society and the Sunday-school scholars; and
here, also, is placed the seraphine belonging to the chapel,
which serves to lead the vocal part of the service. Altogether,
the chapel is an excellent building, superior to anything of the
kind I have seen in the West Indies, and makes a good and
commanding outward appearance, particularly when lighted up of an
evening; but to my eye it looks more like reading rooms, or a
philosophical institution, than a place of worship.

Methodism was first established in Antigua in 1760, by the
Honourable Nathaniel Gilbert, speaker of the house of assembly.
In 1758, Mr. Gilbert visited England, carrying with him some of
his negro servants; and during his stay there, he formed an
acquaintance with the Rev. John Wesley, the venerable founder of
Methodism, who baptized two of the negroes. Upon Mr. Gilbert's
return to Antigua, he signified to those individuals who resided
near him, that he should feel happy in meeting them at his house
on certain evenings, when he would expound the word of God to
them, and endeavour to enlighten their minds upon religious
subjects. This invitation was eagerly accepted by many of the
negroes and coloured people, and Mr. Gilbert was led to increase
his views, and form a regular organized society, which in a short
time amounted to two hundred members.

This proceeding of Mr. Gilbert produced the greatest astonishment
among the inhabitants of Antigua. A man in his rank of life to
herd with negro slaves, and their coloured offspring, who,
although perhaps they might be free, bore about with them the
marks of their despised race!--oh! wondrous! incomprehensible!--
the man must be mad, thought they. But when he, unmindful of
their censure, proceeded in his acts of love towards these poor
outcasts from the pale of society, their wonder knew no bounds;
their feelings took another turn, and what at first was surprise,
gave way to reproach and contempt. Mr. Gilbert, however, was not
to be moved by what mankind said of him; he knew the consequence
before he commenced his labours; and reckless of scorn or
reprehension, he steadily pursued the path he had chalked out,
knowing full well in whom he trusted. Thus he proceeded, until
death called him from this world, and summoned him to reap his
reward in heaven; when, strong in faith, he left his infant
society without a shepherd to watch over its welfare.

Mr. Gilbert derived his origin from a family of considerable
distinction in the west of England, where one of its members--Sir
Humphrey Gilbert--associating himself with his kinsman, the
celebrated Sir Walter Raleigh, became one of the most eminent
circumnavigators of the reign of Queen Elizabeth. Dying, he left
a son, Raleigh Gilbert, Esq., who, among other individuals,
obtained from King James I. a large grant, in what was then
termed Plymouth--the foundation of the afterwards glorious colony
of Virginia, in North America--and where, in 1606, he emigrated,
along with the Lord Chief Justice Popham; George Popham, Esq.
(his son); William Parker, Esq.; and Thomas Stanham, Esq. Soon
after this period, we find Raleigh Gilbert, under the title of
Captain Gilbert, in command of a vessel manned with 100 men, and
provided with ordnance, stores, and provisions, sufficient for
the establishment of a plantation, which he (in conjunction with
Captain Popham, a joint patentee, and in command of another
vessel, similarly provided) began on the banks of the river
"Sagadock," in the year 1608, and where they erected a fort,
called Sir George's. Captain Popham, his zealous coadjutor,
having died in this place, Captain Gilbert returned to England,
where he took possession of an estate, fallen to him by the death
of his elder brother, Sir John Gilbert, President of the
Virginian Company. Another member of this family, we find, about
the same time, leader of an abortive expedition to form a
settlement upon the shores of the Bay of Chesapeake, in Virginia,
and who, it appears, was well acquainted with those several
islands which now form the Leeward Caribbee government. The
following extract is taken from a work published in 1741 (second
edition):--

"In the same year, Captain Gilbert, in the 'Elizabeth,' of
London, made a voyage to Virginia, but not with the like success.
He traded with the savages in the Charibbe Islands--viz., St
Lucia, Dominica, Nevis, St Christopher's, &c., and thence
proceeded to the Bay of Chesapeake, in Virginia, being the first
that sailed up it, and landed there. The Indians set upon him and
his company in the woods, and Captain Gilbert and four or five of
his men were killed by their arrows, upon which his crew returned
home."

We cannot undertake to say from which particular member of this
distinguished family the Gilberts of Antigua sprang, but they
were among its earliest settlers, and constituted some of the
greatest ornaments of the colony, in which for so many years they
have been proprietors. The present  most noble Marquis of
Northampton, President of the Royal Society, descends, in a
female line, from this family. His mother, the late marchioness,
(married, August 18, 1787, to Charles, late Earl and Marquis of
Northampton, and died, March, 1843,) being the daughter of a Miss
Gilbert, (daughter of Nathaniel Gilbert, of Gilberts, Antigua,
Esq., grandfather of the present Honourable and Reverend N.
Gilbert,) by her husband, Joshua Smith, of East Stoke Park, co.
of Wilts, Esq.

But to return to Methodism. Unpromising as the state of this
little society might seem, the good seed already sown was not
destined to perish. The Great Shepherd cared for it; and when
least expected, raised another pastor in the person of a Mr. John
Baxter, a native of England. Mr. Baxter was a man who moved in
humble life, and who worked in the capacity of shipwright, in
Chatham Dockyard; but he was justly esteemed by all who knew him,
a pattern to the society to which he belonged, and a
highly-respected leader among Mr. Wesley's sect. In 1777, a
proposal was made him by some of the directors of the Chatham
Dockyard, to sail for Antigua, and work as foreman of the calkers
in the naval establishment of that island. To this Mr. Baxter
assented; but not so his friends: they made use of every argument
in their power to make him forego his purpose--representing, in
the most glowing colours, the distance he would be from all he
loved; the dangers of the ocean, over which he must pass; and the
difference, perhaps insalubrity, of climate he would have to
contend with. But all without avail; he felt an unconquerable
desire to visit that portion of the globe, and accordingly,
bidding his friends farewell, he left England, and arrived in
Antigua on the 2nd of April, 1778.

As might be expected, he found the infant Methodist Society in a
very languishing state. Upon hearing of his arrival, and of his
being a member of the same sect as their beloved benefactor, the
little band waited upon him, and after welcoming him to their
shores, begged him to tell Mr. Wesley he had many children in
Antigua whom he had never seen, but who were earnestly desirous
of his aid. On the following Sabbath, Mr. Baxter met them in the
services of religion, and from that day constituted himself their
pastor; which office he performed until his death, assembling
them together on Sundays, and performing the full service, as in
England, and on the other week-days, after his labours in the
dockyard were over, visiting the different estates, and teaching
the poor slaves the road to salvation.

His exertions were greatly blessed; and by the following year,
1779, six hundred negroes were joined to the congregation. He now
contemplated the erection of a chapel, and for that purpose
instituted collections among his people, and adopted every other
consistent method to acquire funds to carry out his plans.

Mr. Baxter's situation was productive of great discomfort to
himself; his duties to be performed in the naval-yard were very
laborious; and after a long day's work, his evenings were spent
in travelling from plantation to plantation, the harbinger of
Gospel news. He had no one to assist him in his self-appointed
task, but for some years laboured on alone. In 1782, he mentions
in a letter to a friend, "There is no white person in the
congregation but myself. At St. John's, thirty coloured persons
receive the Lord's Supper."

Assistance, however, was not so far off as he supposed. About
this time an Irish family (who were all members of Mr. Wesley's
sect) were persuaded by an unprincipled captain of a trading
vessel, to sell all their little property, and emigrate with him
to America. Deceived by his plausible manners and fair speeches,
they acquiesced in his proposals; and turning all their goods
into money, the whole family, consisting of an elderly father and
mother, a son, and some daughters, embarked on board his vessel,
and sought with him their better fortune in a far-off land. But
their false friend having inveigled them into his power, under
various pretences, robbed them of their little all, and then
deserted them, in a strange country. After suffering many and
bitter privations, they found their way to Antigua, where they
eventually became valuable assistants to Mr. Baxter.

In the meantime, Mr. Baxter's great object, the erection of a
Methodist chapel in St. John's, was rapidly being accomplished;
and on the 8th of November, 1783, that worthy man, with an
overflowing heart, had the happiness of preaching his first
sermon in it, to a full and serious audience. In the space of the
three following years, the society increased to 2000 persons.

In 1786, Dr. Coke, the Wesleyan missionary and historian, left
England, for the purpose of spreading gospel tidings in America.
Meeting, however, with violent gales, the ship in which he took
passage was unable to make her destined port; and after
encountering a series of disasters, as a last and only resort,
was obliged to put into Antigua, in distress. Dr. Coke was
delighted to find the Wesleyan society in that island in so
satisfactory a state--a circumstance he was unprepared for; and
in his letters to England, expresses in warm terms his pleasure
upon the subject.

The first conference was held at Antigua, in the year 1787; but
the annual conferences, or district meetings, were not
established until 1793, when, on the returns being made, the
society was found to consist of 6570 members; out of which there
were 36 white, and 105 coloured persons. Although the Methodist
society had progressed so far, and embraced so many members, yet
its proceedings were reviled and insulted by the greater part of
the white inhabitants. All kinds of petty insults were heaped
upon its pastors; while their place of worship was made the scene
of vulgar waggeries and ribald jests. One favourite amusement
with many of the young men of that period was, to procure a live
goat, and after hampering its legs, fling it into the midst of
the assembly, while engaged at their devotion at the Methodist
chapel. At other times, in order to vary the sport, the goat was
secured against the chapel door; and as the minister pronounced
the amen, or the members raised their hymns of praise to God, the
poor animal was beat and kicked until it joined in chorus with
its deep and unharmonious cries, which were received with bursts
of applauding laughter by its foolish captors.

Mr. Baxter, although a very _good_ man, was not, I have
understood, possessed of very superior talents; and accordingly,
many of his discourses produced much merriment among that class
of persons who frequented his chapel for the sake of passing
criticisms, as well as killing time. He had a favourite servant
living with him, whose name was John Bott, and who attended to
the lighting up of the chapel, as well as performing his home
duties. Upon one occasion, John neglected to snuff the candles;
an omission which caused his master so much uneasiness, that,
after endeavouring in vain to read the portion of Scripture
selected, he was fain to interrupt himself in the midst of a
passage--"And Nathan said unto David--John Bott, snuff the
candles!" This intervention, as may be supposed, caused a tumult
of laughter; nor (said an ear-witness) could his own people
restrain their risible faculties. But to return. About 1793, Dr.
Coke paid Antigua another visit, and preached upon many
plantations; one of which was Sir George Thomas's, at North
Sound. The old chapel at Parham was erected in 1802; the returns
of the society made that year were, 4000 persons.

The year 1805 was marked by the Methodists as that in which their
friend and pastor, Mr. John Baxter, closed his mortal career,
after a well-spent life--twenty-seven years of which he passed in
Antigua.[82] He died November the 13th, 1805, and was interred in
the churchyard of St. John's; but if any stone marked the place
of burial, time has obliterated the inscription, or else
shattered the tomb. The visitor may look in vain for such a
memento. It appears strange to me, that the Wesleyans of Antigua
have never erected monuments to the memories of Mr. Gilbert and
Mr. Baxter. I am sure there are members enough to do this; and it
would be but paying a proper tribute of respect to the memories
of those excellent men, and founders of that sect in this island.
Perhaps, they may take the hint, and allow the walls of their
handsome chapel to be graced with two neat marble tablets devoted
to that purpose.

But to proceed. Since Mr. Baxter's death, the Wesleyan society
has been rapidly progressing, not only in Antigua, but in all the
other West India Islands, although Antigua is still looked upon
as the parent church; and in 1842, the society in that island
consisted of about 2700 members. Beside the chapel in St. John's,
they have places of worship at Parham, English Harbour,
Willoughby Bay, and elsewhere.

Thus, from a small beginning--from a few black slaves gathered
together by night beneath the roof of a white man--this society
has spread far and wide, like some huge wave, until now it boasts
a vast increase of number, of every variety of shade, from the
ruddy son of Britain, down to the jetty offspring of Afric's
soil. Great success has attended the preaching of this sect; and
although an episcopalian myself, and consequently more attached
to that form of worship, I cannot let the opportunity pass me
without offering my mite of praise to the character of their
undaunted and fervent ministers, tendering my hearty wishes for
their further progress, and, at the same time, expressing my firm
belief that they have, through God, been the means of preventing
much crime, and saving many, very many, from the fearful
retribution, the inevitable attendant on a misspent life.

From this view of the Methodist Chapel and Methodism, I proceed
to mention the Moravian settlement. The Moravians, or rather,
"United Brethren," as many of my readers may be aware, revived
under the celebrated Count Zinzendorf, a native of Germany, who,
with some of his followers, visited England in the reign of
George II., and formed several settlements of their sect in
different parts of that kingdom. They also established colonies
in Greenland, Labrador, and other parts of North America, and in
South America.

In 1731, Count Zinzendorf visited Denmark, for the purpose of
attending the coronation of Christian VI., who, by the death of
his father, was called to the throne of that kingdom. During his
residence at that court, some of his domestics became acquainted
with a negro, named Anthony, from one of the Danish islands. This
man related many instances of the moral darkness in which the
West Indies were enveloped, and of the distressed state of the
negroes; which being repeated to the count, he felt an invincible
desire to send missionaries to that part of the world, to
proclaim the "tidings of great joy" to those poor benighted
negroes.

In 1732, this desire was carried into effect; and two
missionaries were despatched from "Herrnhutt," (the principal
Moravian station, in Lusatia, Germany,) to St. Thomas. Other
missionaries followed them; and in 1733, they planted their
standard in St. Croix. In 1754, the society in London sent
missionaries to Jamaica, who were followed by some of the
brethren from America; and in 1756, Samuel Isles, a true and
exemplary Christian, came from St. Thomas, where he had been
residing as missionary for eight years, and established the first
Moravian settlement in Antigua.

Their labour of love was at first very slow in its progress; but
they succeeded, in 1761, in raising a chapel, for the
accommodation of the negroes, on a spot of land, purchased for
the purpose, in St. John's. Still their society rather decreased
than flourished, until, about 1768, there were only fourteen
members in the church at St. John's. Disheartening as these
circumstances were, like true soldiers of the Cross, they would
not lay down their arms; and at length, their faith and patience
met with their reward. A wonderful revival took place, and in
1775 "the number of their stated hearers amounted to 2000; and
never a month elapsed without an addition to the church of ten or
twenty by baptism."

By the year 1787, 5465 negroes were admitted into the church.
Their first settlement was situated at St. John's; but in 1782,
they had formed another at Grace Hill, or, as it was first
termed, Bailey Hill; a delightful spot, about ten miles from the
capital. The number baptized at St. John's, in 1789, was 507;
while at Grace Hill, 217 were admitted into the church by that
ceremony. By this time, five preachers were settled in Antigua;
and in the course of the two following years, the society
enrolled 7400 members. At the present period, 1842, the number
may be estimated at 11,000.

Their settlement at St. John's is situated in Spring Gardens, at
the extreme north end of the town, and looks the very picture of
neatness and domestic comfort. The present chapel, erected in
1773, is a plain building--devoid of any great architectural
beauty, it is true, but interesting from its very simplicity, and
from being built by the negroes in times of slavery. The rapid
increase of their numbers, already mentioned, rendered it
necessary to provide a larger place of worship; which fact being
mentioned to their negro converts, they immediately commenced
procuring some of the materials, by each bringing a few stones
with them, when they came to their evening meetings in the week.
Those of them who were masons and carpenters worked with the
greatest energy "in their free hours, after their daily tasks
were done; and those who could not assist in the labour provided
victuals for the workmen." Since that period, the chapel has had
many enlargements and alterations made to it. The dwellings of
the preachers are gathered around it; and their neat,
cheerful-looking burying-ground, in which grows many a beautiful
tree, bounds the settlement to the east. Everything about them
looks green, and fresh, and lovely; and their wives, in their
neat caps, and Quaker-like style of dress, and the often very
pretty, but quiet contour of their features, appear in perfect
harmony with the other parts of the picture. I must say, I like
the Moravians: they seem to have so much open-heartedness about
them--such patriarchal simplicity of manners. Among themselves
they are ever kind and courteous, forming, as it were, one large
family of affectionate brothers and sisters. They have done much
good among the black race, for whose welfare the mission was
particularly intended; and many happy deaths among them attest
the truth. Besides their settlement in St. John's, they have
several in other parts of the island; namely, at Grace Hill,
Grace Bay, Newfield, Cedar Hall, Lebanon, Gracefield, and Five
Islands.

Among their ministers, men of learning and talent may be found.
Their superintendent, the Rev. Mr. H------, is a great biblical
scholar, possessed of superior faculties, and a good nervous
preacher; but some of their missionaries, although far from
deficient in erudition, from being natives of Germany, and not
thoroughly acquainted with the English language, are almost
unintelligible to English ears. I cannot say I admire the singing
part of their service; at a given signal they all seem to dart
off at the highest pitch of their voices, and keep on without
regard to time or melody. However, I understand they have also a
seraphine for the use of their chapel, which may tend to modulate
the discordant voices of their congregation.[83] I hope these
last few remarks may not be understood as unkind or sarcastic.
Far be it from me to scoff at _any sect_. True it is I note their
peculiarities; but if founded on the conscientious belief of the
propriety of their own form of worship, I would not raise a laugh
at the fantastic movements of even the "Jumpers" or the "Shakers"
by any animadversions of mine.

The last and remaining edifice I have to mention, is the
half-finished kirk of the Scotchmen. The foundation-stone of this
place of worship was laid with the usual ceremonies by Sir Wm.
Colebrooke, the late governor, on the 9th of April, 1839. It is
situated upon an ascent on the eastern outskirts of the town, and
from it may be seen many a lovely landscape, which Claude
Lorraine would not have scorned to imitate. It progresses but
slowly; but still it has been known for the tortoise to outrun
the hare, and win the race, and therefore the Scotch kirk may yet
exceed some of its contemporaries. In its present form I can say
but little about it, except that the same fault cannot be found
with it as there has been with the Methodist chapel--the small
size of the windows--for the Scotch kirk appears to be all
windows and doors. If, however, the Scotchman will make haste and
finish the building, I will promise to write all about it; in the
meantime, as I have already made this chapter of leviathan
dimensions, I will make my courtesy, and--exit for the night.




[80] This social assemblage of "white" and "black" is one of the
good effects of emancipation. Some years ago this dark-skinned
race would have been kept from within the precincts of the walls
by the point of a bayonet, as it was the custom on similar
occasions to have a guard.

[81] The dates of papers in most of these offices commence from
1668, after Antigua was restored by the French, and Lord W.
Willoughby settled in the government by his majesty Charles the
Second.

[82] Mr. Baxter gave up his situation in the dock-yard after the
erection of the chapel in St. John's, and removed to a small
house erected in the chapel-yard, and continued to fill the
office of the established minister until his death.

[83] This is a misinformation. There is no seraphine in the
chapel, but a small but very sweet-toned organ in the
school-room. Upon a late visit to the chapel, however, I find
that the congregation is very much improved in their style of
singing.




                          CHAPTER XXI.



  Morning--Institutions--Daily Meal Society--Its rise and
  progress--Lazaretto--Destitute Females' Friend Society--Its
  origin and purpose--Friendly societies--Bible Society--
  Missionary associations--Temperance Society--Juvenile
  Association--Ladies' Clothing Society &c.--Banks--Library
  Society.

Another morning is come--a bright glorious morning: the sky is as
deeply blue as the breast of the kingfisher, except where here
and there a snowy pyramid of clouds mounts slowly up the heavens.
Through the open windows of my apartments, a rich flood of
sunshine pours in, and plays upon the floor in many a fanciful
chequer. The bright red flowers of the "Scarlet Cordia" hang in
tasteful branches from among their broad green leaves, and
attract the attention of the little humming-bird, who, in their
changeful plumage, flit around, and rob the flowers of their
liquid sweets. The breeze is as gentle as an infant's sigh, a
dreamy stillness is abroad, and--but what was that?--rain, I
declare! A gloom has silently and suddenly overspread the sky;
the late white-robed clouds have become covered with a darkened
hue; the wind has raised its pipe; the rain comes pouring down,
and chases away my feathered favourites. I can write no more of
bright skies and glowing sunbeams, and therefore I must proceed
in my task, which the beauty of the morning drove from my
thoughts; and having already attempted a description of the
buildings of St. John's, I shall now endeavour to give some
account of its institutions.

The first to be placed upon the list, not from the number of
years it has been established, but from its extent, is the Daily
Meal Society, for information respecting which I am indebted to
the Rev. Robert Holberton. This society, intended for the purpose
of "supplying the sick and needy, of St. John's and its
neighbourhood with a daily meal," was established in the year
1828, the management of its affairs being "undertaken by a
committee of seven gentlemen in the town, (the present Speaker of
the House of Assembly being the treasurer;) three of the clergy,
(the Rev. Robt. Holberton being the secretary;) and five of the
medical gentlemen." They hold their meetings in the
churchwarden's office, and on the 18th of June, 1828, a female
superintendent was appointed at a salary of 50l. currency per
annum. A "soup-house" was erected in the yard attached to the
superintendent's dwelling to the east of the church, the land
being allowed to the society, free of rent, for the space of
seven years by the heirs of "Donovan's Estate." A ship's boiler
having been presented to the society, it was immediately put into
requisition, and the first meal distributed the 2nd of August,
1828, to thirty-six persons.

Up to that time there was no parochial relief for any black or
coloured person; and consequently, when the establishment of such
a society became known, the sick and aged among those classes
eagerly sought for shelter, and an alleviation of their
distresses. The medical gentlemen of St. John's having offered to
attend gratuitously, in monthly rotation, the cry of these
unfortunate people was responded to; and five small houses,
adjoining the "soup-house," having been first rented, and
afterwards purchased by the society, fourteen of these afflicted
ones were received and succoured. Many a poor outcast found his
throbbing heart at rest when possessed of these humble
accommodations; many a sufferer had his pains alleviated, and the
oil of mercy poured into his wounds. Five or six successful
amputations were also performed there during that early period.

The rise and progress of this institution is so interesting, that
I think I cannot do better than follow up the account of it, in
the words of the Rev. Mr. Holberton, published in a "Brief
Review:" "After the destructive hurricane of 1835, (when this
society was found signally useful in furnishing a comfortable
meal daily to the houseless poor,) the unappropriated residue of
a grant from the legislature, for restoring some of the damaged
houses of the poor of St. John's, was handed over to the
committee of the Daily Meal Society, with the understanding that
shelter should be given to those whose houses were considered
past repairing. This testimony of public confidence, together
with a handsome private donation of 90l. sterling, occurring at
the very time when the land on which the institution had stood
for seven years was required by the owner, stimulated the
committee to attempt to re-establish it on a more extensive
scale."

Mr. Holberton proceeds to pass some high encomiums upon the Very
Rev. the Archdeacon Parry (late of Antigua) for the great
interest felt by him in the success of the society--encomiums, no
doubt, richly his due; but the rector was necessitated to forego
mentioning what it is in my power to do, that it was principally
through his own kind heart, and from his deep Christian
principles, which led him to exert every energy in its behalf,
that the Daily Meal Society had its origin, and is in its present
flourishing condition.

Mr. H. proceeds: "Chiefly at his" (the archdeacon's) "instance, a
successful application was made to the legislature for a piece of
land near the rectory, 300 feet long by 100 feet wide. This was
enclosed with strong palisades, and within were erected a
kitchen, or 'soup-house,' of stone, 30 feet long and 15 wide, a
wooden house, 60 feet by 20 feet, divided into six apartments,
capable of accommodating four persons in each. A well was also
dug 24 feet deep, and four of the wooden houses which stood on
the old site were transported to the new one. The expense of
effecting these objects amounted to 1300l. currency, of which
about 1000l. currency was raised by subscriptions. This
establishment was opened on 8th March, 1837, under the name of
the _Asylum_, and has been providentially raised up to meet, in
the most satisfactory manner, the various cases of distress that
have occurred since the general emancipation in 1834, and has
effectually done away with begging in the streets of St. John's."

As leprosy is a frequent disease among the negroes, and, from its
contagious character, doubts had arisen upon the propriety of
admitting persons suffering from that dreadful complaint into the
asylum, it was determined in 1836 to open a subscription list for
the purpose of erecting another building for their reception.
That they might have the benefit of sea-air and sea-bathing, the
site chosen for it was by the sea-side. This building was
commenced in 1837, and "although, from want of funds, scarcely
one of the two wings could be completed, admission was given to
five leprous persons on the 25th of April in that year." The
society, however, "was compelled to declare that, without
parochial allowances, the institution must fall to the ground.
The claim to such help was at once seen to be most reasonable and
highly needful, and the desired combination of _parochial_ with
_voluntary_ relief was speedily effected. The legislature
granting 600l. currency the following year, the debts were paid
off, and the building finished and publicly opened under the
title of the Lazaretto, on the 20th June, 1838."

The Lazaretto consists of "six rooms for females and six for
males, capable of accommodating three in each, besides one small
room for one person only. The enclosed yard has been, for the
most part, converted into plots for provisions, and for keeping
poultry in. Some bamboos have been planted, which will in time
afford materials for making baskets, about which one of the men
is industriously employed, and by the sale of his work contrives
to purchase clothes for himself, at half-price, from the Ladies
Clothing Society. All the inmates appear thankful and contented,
and some have shewn a readiness to receive scriptural instruction
that is very pleasing." Poor creatures! some of them are, indeed,
objects for the deepest commiseration, but their sufferings are
alleviated as far as possible. Their residence is a delightful
situation; the sea-breeze comes so pure from off the bosom of the
ocean, that one would suppose disease must fly before it. From
the farthest point of the land runs a causeway over to Rat
Island, (the promontory already mentioned as being the site of
one of the forts,) made about the year 1748, and which is
passable at ebb-tide. Upon this promontory, which rises in the
form of a steep mount, a lunatic asylum has been built during the
past year, (1841,) the legislature having voted a sum for that
purpose, for the use of such inmates of the institution as have
shewn symptoms of aberration of mind.

In 1838, the legislature gave a further grant of 500l. currency
to the society, for the purpose of erecting "a separate ward for
the male patients, with ten apartments capable of accommodating
four persons in each," in that part of the establishment situated
near the rectory, which was finished and opened on the 15th July,
1839. An iron tank, capable of holding 7000 gallons of water, has
been imported from England, and placed in the yard of the same
portion of the institution. In 1840, the title of the society was
changed from that of "The Asylum" to "The Daily Meal Society's
Infirmary and Lazaretto," by which latter designation it is now
distinguished.

This establishment is, indeed, the only infirmary and hospital in
the island, (with the exception of the cast-iron hospital at the
Ridge, near English Harbour, for the use of the troops;) and not
only the destitute poor of St. John's, but the poor from all the
other parishes are admitted into it, as well as distressed and
destitute sailors. The best medical attendance is procured for
them; wine and other strengthening nourishment administered to
the sick; and three wholesome meals allowed to each individual
per day. Bedsteads and bedding are also supplied, there being "in
the female ward six, and in the male ward ten furnished
apartments, ready for the reception of patients at the shortest
notice."

Nor are these the _only_ accommodations this inestimable charity
affords to the poor and distressed of our species, there being
seven detached houses on the opposite side of the inclosure,
capable of containing two, three, or four persons in each. "In
these separate dwellings infirm persons are distributed, whose
complaints, habits, or tempers, render it expedient that they
should be kept by themselves. One house, fronting the
burial-ground, is reserved for the reception of the dead previous
to interment, and is used for a dissecting room when required.
Eighty inmates can be comfortably accommodated at the infirmary."
The income for the last year, (1841,) including subscriptions,
donations, legacies, and parochial relief, was 1361l. 0s. 4-1/2d.
currency, the expenditure, 1225l. 4s. 4d.; the latter sum would
have been of greater extent was it not from the kindness of many
of the Antiguan proprietors, in presenting each a barrel or two
of sugar.

Thus have I gone with Mr. Holberton through the "rise and
progress of the Daily Meal Society." Perhaps some of the truly
charitable inhabitants of dear old England may be induced to send
their mite across the waters in aid of this society, of whose
existence they may probably not have been hitherto aware; and as
I knew it was out of my power to use more cogent language--
language which speaks to the heart--nor advocate the cause so
well as our excellent rector, I have therefore quoted so largely
from his "brief review," feeling assured he will pardon me, and
hoping my readers will bear with me. In conclusion, I will once
more use his words and say--"It is undeniable that the hand of
God has been over it to sustain it in its small beginning, to
uphold it in every difficulty, and to raise it to its present
prosperity. To God, then, be all the praise; and may the success
with which He has been pleased to crown the exertions of the
society provoke every member and friend of it to increasing
diligence in these works of charity, for which there will still
be a continual call."

The next charitable institution to be mentioned is "the Destitute
Females' Friend Society," or, as it is now termed, "the Female
Orphan Society." This latter title is, however, a misnomer, for
but few of the inmates are orphans in the true sense of the word,
they being, but with few exceptions, the illegitimate children of
black or coloured women, (by white or coloured persons,) whose
parents, still alive, are, from penury, incompetent to maintain
them, or are living in a state of concubinage, and consequently
not proper guides to youth.

This society, which is invaluable, and is well known in England
by its first name, although, perhaps, lost sight of in its
modernized title, was established about the year 1816. The origin
of it was as follows:--

"The attention of a few pious and benevolent individuals of the
female sex was called to the situation of an indigent class of
coloured children of their own sex, (for whom there was then no
parochial relief;) and witnessing with feelings of poignant
regret their moral and religious degradation still more than
their bodily necessities, they were impelled to exert, in
connexion with a few other friends, all their united energies for
the amelioration of the condition of these unhappy children, and
thereby lessen the evils resulting to the community in general
from a generation growing up without religious or moral
cultivation. To effect these desirable objects, it was resolved
to make an immediate and bold attempt.

"The attempt was bold, because it could not be carried into
execution by persons circumscribed in their means of doing it
without the concurrence and aid of others like-minded, and of
whose co-operation they were not assured. Encouraged, however, by
one whose heart devised liberal things, though possessing himself
little power to accomplish them from his own resources, but
favoured with influence over some who considered themselves as
stewards appointed by God to benefit their fellow creatures, and
assured by him of competent aid from England, if it could not be
obtained in Antigua, a commencement was made by a few
subscribers, chiefly respectable coloured persons; and several
children were immediately taken to be clothed, fed, and
instructed; and when the plan was made known to the community at
large, and to other benevolent individuals in England and
Scotland, the society, by their generous assistance, grew into
its present state of maturity. Such was its origin, and we cannot
but observe in it the benefit resulting from a social compact to
do good to our fellow creatures--the design to rescue from the
paths of the destroyer, and to train in those of piety, industry,
and useful occupation, the objects of their care. The success,
though not in every instance unfailing, has been considerable. A
few, there is reason to hope, are where sin and sorrow cannot
enter. Others, as useful domestics, or conductors of their own
households, testify to the truth of the fact.

"Three of the elder girls have been sent into creditable
situations, with a prospect of comfort to themselves and
usefulness to their employers. Four more have been admitted to
fill their places. Seventeen are now in the house. The committee
would not arrogate to themselves any undue merit; but they
gratefully receive the meed of approbation awarded to them by the
frequent application they have for the admittance of children,
and for girls to fill the place of servants."

I have quoted so largely from the reports of the society (1841)
for two reasons--first, because the committee are, and of course
ought to be, better acquainted with its proceedings than myself;
and secondly, because its details are related with a striking
simplicity of style, which must speak to every breast not devoid
of the "milk of human kindness," and I am sure no words of mine
would be able to influence further the minds of those benevolent
persons who, through the medium of these pages, may become
acquainted with its existence, and feel wishful of adding a
trifle to the funds of this invaluable society.

That it is an invaluable charity none can deny, for it strikes to
the root of all West Indian misery--_illicit love_; and what can
be more acceptable to "the community at large" than the
endeavouring to inculcate into the minds of its youthful members
the doctrines of chastity and diligence in well-doing? The
twenty-sixth anniversary of this society was held on the 31st
December, 1841. The children, inmates of the house, are taught
reading, writing, and arithmetic, and are instructed in all the
arts of female plain-work,--straw-bonnet sewing and cleaning
forming one branch of their employment. Their earnings for the
last year were 107l. 0s. 7-1/2d. currency, out of which, 5l. 13s.
10-1/2d. had to be deducted for materials to carry on their
different works. The matron receives a salary of 60l. currency
per annum, and the children are clothed and boarded, and have
medical attendance found them; and when death sends forth its
summons, and any of the inmates fall a prey to its inevitable
shafts, their last resting-place is provided, and the funeral
expenses paid.

The next institutions worthy of mention are the town and country
"Friendly Societies." They are formed upon a similar plan to some
of the "poor men's clubs" in England, and prove of great
assistance to the members in times of sickness and trial. The St.
John's Friendly Society was established in 1829, under the
auspices of that zealous minister, the Rev. R. Holberton, and was
intended to promote good feelings among the lower classes, to
assist them in procuring articles of mourning, aid them in times
of deep distress, help those incapable of helping themselves, and
encourage sobriety and industry among them.

After the abolition of slavery, in 1834, many of the negroes
removing from the estates to which they formerly belonged, and
other estates not finding medical advice for their labourers, as
in times of slavery, it was found necessary to enlarge the rules
of the society; and by increasing the amount subscribed by every
member, provide them with a doctor when ill, a certain sum per
week during indisposition, and upon demise twelve dollars for the
funeral expenses.

The first country Friendly Society was established in 1832; but
since that period they have rapidly increased. "In 1834," remarks
Mr. Holberton, "there were eleven societies, with 1602 members;
in 1835, 4197 members; in 1836, 4560 members." The Moravians and
Wesleyans have each their Friendly Societies, formed and
conducted upon a similar plan.

On the first of January, 1842, I visited St. John's church, to
hear the anniversary sermon preached to the society. The members
met at the parochial school-room, where they formed into a
procession, the women first, and the men following behind, and
marched to the church, headed by the Very Rev. the Archdeacon,
the Rev. Mr. Holberton, the rector, the Rev. Mr. Piggott, and the
Rev. Mr. Saulez. The morning service having been performed, and a
very suitable and excellent sermon preached by the Rev. Mr.
Piggott, the members again formed into ranks, and marched back to
the school-room, where the report of the society was read, short
addresses made, and refreshments handed round, when the whole
party dispersed. I could not help remarking the smart appearance
of the members--such rainbow ribbons, and stylish bonnets--such
parasols and sandals--such blue coats and white trowsers!--as
made their appearance on that day would surprise any one.

The next society, which by-the-bye ought to have been mentioned
first, as being the oldest in the island, is the Bible Society,
organized in 1815. It is comprised of every sect and shade in the
island, and its interests are managed by an efficient committee.
After the abolition of slavery in 1834, the parent society sent a
"munificent grant, by which a choice portion of the Holy
Scriptures was gratuitously circulated to about one-third of the
inhabitants of this colony. Nine thousand seven hundred copies of
the New Testament, bound together with the Book of Psalms, were
thus placed at the disposal of the committee."

The remaining societies are the "Missionary Associations"
connected with the Wesleyan mission, established in 1820, and
intended for the purpose of raising funds for the parent society
in England. The "Temperance Society," introduced into Antigua in
the year 1836; the "Juvenile Association," established 1815; the
"Ladies Clothing Society," (or Dorcas Society,) and two other
associations belonging to the established church, and known as
the "Society for the Promotion of Christian Knowledge," and the
"Branch Association of the Society for the advancing the
Christian Faith in the British West Indies, &c." The Moravians
have also a Missionary society, established in 1839.

Having now gone through the charitable institutions, I must
proceed to mention the "Banks," of which there are two in the
island--the "Colonial Bank," incorporated by royal charter, 1836;
and the "West Indian Bank," in 1840. The first of these banks
issues a very neat note, (from five dollars [1l. sterling] and
upwards,) bearing a lithographed representation of the royal
arms, and encircled with a very prettily designed border; but the
"West Indian" disseminates the most frightful "paper money" I
ever witnessed. Some of their notes are _red_, and others _blue_;
who was the designer of the "arms" which grace the head of them I
know not, but they appear to be in direct opposition to all laws
of heraldry. The shield (of an oblong figure) is divided into
_three_ quarterings: 1st, or, an eagle (apparently) sable,
beaked, rising from the sea; 2nd, gules, a ship full-rigged,
argent; 3rd, azure, a castle, argent, battled. The supporters are
two dwarfish cocoa-nut trees, (palm?) apparently springing from
the same root as their companions, two gigantic pine-apples; the
whole surmounted by the crown of England. With regard to the
benefit which the establishment of these banks has rendered the
country, various opinions have been formed.

After the "Banks," the only remaining institution to be mentioned
is the "Antigua Library Society," which according to its "rules
and regulations," is devoted to "the gradual formation of a
permanent library of general literature, and the establishment,
in connexion with the library, of a reading-room, to be furnished
with newspapers, journals, pamphlets, periodicals, and other new
publications."

Now it is well known that we live in an age of puffing, as well
as steaming, and it may be imagined by some, that these caterers
for intellectual sweets have fallen short of their promises. Not
so, kind readers; take my word for it there are few better
organized societies of the kind to be met with, or whose
well-filled shelves bear a richer burden. Books to suit every
taste (and every _age_ I might say--for our friend "Peter Parley"
displays there the hidden treasures of the "earth, the sea, and
skies," to the delight of the youthful reader,) may be found in
this Library Society. Theological, metaphysical, biographical,
historical, and lighter works, abound. Poetry is not excluded;
our own sweet bards, from good old Chaucer, that "father of
English poetry," down to the soft strains of Mrs. Hemans, or L.
E. L., rank among its selections.

Of modern works there are no end. There, the irresistible charms
of that "Wizard of the North," the late Sir Walter Scott, with
his "Jenny Deans;" his high-minded "Flora McIvor;" his
unfortunate "Bride of Lammermoor," and all his other "gentle
dames" and "lordly knights," are displayed before the enraptured
reader. There Marryat amuses with his _naivete_, and those
stirring incidents of a sailor's life, he knows so well to
picture. There, "Boz" carries you perforce from the hut to the
castle, and makes you weep or laugh in each. There are Bulwer and
Ainsworth, who draw their gentlemen-ruffians in such a guise as
to lead one to admire even a housebreaker or highwayman; Cooper,
who makes us long to lead the life of a backwood's-man; James,
with his darling peeps at "by-gone days;" the dear Miss Mitford
and Mary Howitt, whose simple annals and sylvan scenes almost
bring before us the lovely fields and sweet flowers of England;
Mrs. Gore, with all her pageantries; Mrs. Trollope, with her
playful but keen sarcasms; the Countess of Blessington, with her
elegant diction and pure imagery, as lovely as her own sweet
form; with many other authors of note, are equally at the command
of the subscribers to this Antiguan bibliotheca.

This society has been established for many years, but it was not
incorporated by an act of the legislature until 1839, during the
government of Sir Wm. Colebrooke. The members are elected by
ballot, and after subscribing for ten years, they become free of
the library, retaining all the privileges without being called
upon for payment.

The library is kept in the upper part of a large house, well
adapted for the purpose, consisting as it does of two good sized
apartments, with library tables, covered with respectable green
cloth, and pamphlets of all sorts and sizes; the sides of the
room are lined with bookcases. Altogether it is an admirable
society, and I strenuously advise all inhabitants of Antigua,
whose ideas are not absolutely tied down to "profit and loss," to
become members; they cannot spend their spare money more
agreeably, nor while away their leisure to better purpose.




                         CHAPTER XXII.



  Early rising and "Jamie Thomson"--Journey to English Harbour--
  Windmills and Don Quixote--Groups of negroes and their
  equipages--All Saints' chapel of ease--The "Hamlet"--Village of
  Liberta--Grace Hill--Patterson's and Prince William--English
  Harbour market--Streets and dwellings--Commissariat's store and
  government tank--Dockyard--The superintendent--Stores and
  storehouses--Engineer's workshop--Blacksmith's shop and blowing
  machine--Limes and roses--Recollections of England--Lieutenant
  Peterson and Lord Camelford--His lordship's pranks--The
  ordnance--Clarence House and Dows Hill--The Ridge and "Shirley
  heights"--Fort Charlotte and Fort Berkeley--Bats Cave--The
  Savannah and its tombs--Indian Creek--Return to town.

The church clock proclaimed the hour of five, as a gentle rap
came at my chamber door. Awakened from a pleasant dream, I
started from my couch, and heard with something like vexation,
that it was time to dress, in order to prosecute our intended
journey to English Harbour.

Beautiful as is the breath of "early morn," still there is
something very disagreeable in leaving your comfortable bed, and
it may be, your gorgeous dreams, for the dull realities of life,
and the necessary, but irksome duties of the toilet. I know I
shall be cried down by all lovers of Nature for my unsentimental
remarks. Thomson, enraptured with his subject "of early rising,"
exclaims with all a poet's fervour--

    Falsely luxurious, will not man awake,
    And, springing from the bed of sloth, enjoy
    The cool, the fragrant, and the silent hour,
    To meditation due and sacred song?
    For is there aught in sleep can charm the wise?
    To lie in dead oblivion, losing half
    The fleeting moments of too short a life--
    Total extinction of th' enlighten'd soul!
    Or else to feverish vanity alive,
    Wilder'd, and tossing through distemper'd dreams,
    Who would in such a gloomy state remain
    Longer than nature craves--when every muse
    And every blooming pleasure wait without,
    To bless the wildly devious morning walk."

Now, all this sounds very pretty--very romantic indeed; and we
begin to fancy the poet amid some "bosky dell," or upland lawn,
his shoes liberally bedewed with those glittering gems, which
"hang in every cowslip's bell," and his unpowdered locks
streaming behind him in the morning gale. But stay, gentle
reader! hast thou not heard that Thomson was himself a very
sluggard, and loved his warm bed far better than any sylvan scene
he could so well describe? And in truth, many and many a poet,
even to "Joanna Bailey," the morning rhymester, has been of the
same mind. Then, why should I not tell the truth, and own my
sloth--although at the same time, when once abroad, no one feels
the nameless "melodies of morn" more than I do.

But to resume my subject: the incidents of a day's journey to
English Harbour. After partaking of a light breakfast, and
quaffing of that cup "which cheers, but not inebriates," we
stepped into the phaeton, and drove through the town, leaving our
friends in "Scotch-row" busily employed in arranging their
incongruous goods to the best advantage.

The day was very favourable to our undertaking, for it was fine,
but overcast. The sun was robbed of his extreme lustre by the
intervention of various clouds, which passed along the sky in
many beautiful forms. Some dark as ebon night; others of a
silverish grey; the eastern ones tinged with gold and purple;
while some again looked so white and fleecy, that you could fancy
them so many snow-wreaths spread out upon an ocean of blue. The
lights and shadows, too, of the far mountains, with all their
blended tints, were beautiful objects in the landscape; and the
occasional sight of a herd or two of cattle, standing in their
usual dreamy posture, completed the picture. We passed several
windmills (used in grinding the sugar-cane) with their sails
unfurled, and going round merrily in the breeze; but unlike Don
Quixote, I took them not for so many giants, nor wished myself a
knight-errant, that I might rescue the "beautiful and high-born
damsels" from their clutches.

The road to English Harbour is, however, for the most part dull
and uninteresting; only here and there a pretty prospect attracts
the eye. But on this day (Monday[84]) it was rendered more
cheerful by the groups of negroes, who, of every age and sex,
were coming into town to purchase their weekly stores. Baskets,
trays, and boxes--all kinds of vessels, indeed--were placed in
critical positions upon their heads; but this appeared to cause
no impediment to their ambling gait, while the chatter and song
among themselves, and the smile and courtesy as they passed us,
with the accustomed "How d'ye, massa?" "How d'ye, missis?" shewed
that they considered their errand as one of pleasure rather than
of toil. Carts were also put into requisition by the more
extensive purchasers; some drawn by a ragged Canadian pony,
similar to the little Sheltie breed; others by a tall
grim-looking American horse, with its bones sticking out as bare
as "Rozinante's;" and others again dragged along by a slight-made
Creole, its mane and tail the colour of flax. Cattle carts were
also bringing in loads of sugar, drawn by six miserable-looking
oxen two abreast, their poor necks weighed down by the heavy
wooden yokes.

In one part of the road we passed All Saints' chapel of ease,
belonging to the parish of St. John's. It is a very plain
building, surmounted by a gothic pinnacle, answering the purpose
of a steeple, with an aperture in the middle, intended, I
suppose, for the admission of a bell.

After passing a ruined estate, where the long grass grew upon the
walls of a roofless building, once used as a boiling house, and
accomplishing a steep descent, and one or two abrupt turnings in
the road, we came to a cluster of houses, known by the title of
"the hamlet." Many of these rural dwellings are very neatly built
of native stone; and their little gardens appear to be well
stocked with the country produce, such as potatoes, peas, eddoes,
arrowroot, &c. A short distance from the hamlet is another
similar collection of dwellings, bearing the name of "the village
of Liberta," (as a painted board informed us,) and equally
abundant in its bright green patches of edibles. The emancipation
of the negroes, and their desire to possess a portion of the soil
in perpetuity, gave rise to these villages, of which there are
many in different parts of the island. Here they erect small
houses, and plant ground provisions. Some of these little
dwellings are very neatly constructed, being raised a little
distance from the ground, and the front door graced with a flight
of steps and a small portico, while the open windows are
furnished with white curtains.

Adjoining the "village of Liberta," lies the Moravian settlement
of Grace Hill, snugly ensconced in its leafy fence, and, like
other settlements of the kind in this island, breathing an air of
happy tranquillity.

Leaving Grace Hill, and travelling on some distance, we arrived
at an estate called Patterson's, belonging to the Hon. John
Athill, and celebrated in Antiguan history, as being the spot
where the murder of the governor's child was perpetrated,
(already narrated in the legend of Ding a Ding Nook,) on the
occasion of the abduction of his lady in 1640. The "great house"
upon this estate was honoured by a visit from our late lamented
monarch, William IV., who in 1798 passed a night there.

We here once again came within sight of the sea, which greatly
added to the attractions of the scene, while on our left hand
rose Monk's Hill, surmounted by its fortifications, and strewed
in some parts with ruined Carib's houses. Passing through the
town of Falmouth, we gained a kind of marsh, dotted over with
clumps of aquatic shrubs, and here and there opening to the sea,
and in a few moments entered the village of "English Harbour."
The market is just at its entrance, and consisted, upon the day
we visited it, of about ten or twelve persons, squatting on the
ground, and having before them shallow wooden trays, containing a
few country vegetables, a miserable-looking chicken or two, a few
strings of strong-scented fish, a store of sun-burnt bread, and
other similar luxuries!

The houses are in general of very mean construction, and
destitute of paint. There are, however, some very pleasant
residences belonging to the crown, from which beautiful sea-views
may be obtained; for the village is built along the margin of the
sea, and in some parts the waves come rippling up to the very
street, and wet the feet of the passengers. Dogs and ducks were
enjoying themselves in the water,--the former dashing in and out,
and rolling in the sand, while the latter, with their eyes almost
closed, were resting upon their glassy couch, in all the luxury
of idleness.

Before entering the dockyard, we passed the commissariat stores;
and on the opposite side of the road, a large tank, capable of
containing 240 tons of water, built by the legislature for the
use of the shipping, but from which the inhabitants of the
village are allowed to draw water, the dockyard being so well
supplied with those necessary reservoirs. This tank bears many a
sculptured name; among the rest, that of "Nelson," that
laurel-crowned hero, who visited Antigua in 1784.[85]

A pair of strong, well-secured gates guard the entrance to the
dockyard; which being thrown open, we drove in, and alighted at
the office of the superintendant of the establishment,
preparatory to inspecting the accommodations of the place.

The dockyard consists of two separate departments. The first,
since entitled St. Helena, was commenced in 1726, during the
administration of John Hart, Esq., and at the suggestion of Capt.
Francis Cooper, commander of H. M. S. "Lynn," and Capt. Arthur
Del Garno, commander of H. M. S. "South Sea Castle." These
experienced and clever naval officers saw the advantage of having
proper wharfs, &c. for careening ships in Antigua, instead of
being obliged to despatch the vessels appointed to this station,
to the northern colonies, when any repairs were necessary, as
they had before been in the practice of doing. The land chosen,
as being most applicable to the purpose, consisted of two
portions, of ten acres each, which in 1718 had been granted to
Joseph Green, and William Greatrix, privates in H.M. troops,
disbanded in consequence of the cessation of war. These lands
were, however, forfeited to the crown by the non-settlement of
them, by the grantees; and they were consequently appropriated to
the purpose of establishing a dockyard, which is now not to be
equalled in this part of the globe.

This establishment having proved of such advantage to Antigua,
and the rest of the Leeward Islands, his majesty, George II.,
ordered that another wharf, with magazines, stores, and other
appendages, should be constructed. Accordingly, in 1743, a tract
of land was purchased from Thomas Bodkin; five acres of which was
to be appropriated for the site of the new naval buildings; and
the remainder to be allotted to poor white settlers, at the
discretion of the commander-in-chief, the council, and assembly
of Antigua. Such was the origin of the village of English
Harbour, which, on account of being principally crown property,
is disfranchised.

The dockyard presents a fine and noble appearance; and under the
able superintendence of Joseph Hart, Esq., everything seems to be
conducted in the best possible manner; while the yard itself is
kept so beautifully clean, that a walk through it affords real
pleasure. The exertions of Mr. Hart may perhaps be better
appreciated when it is considered that only six labourers are
allowed him to perform all necessary duties; and that these men
are also liable to be called upon by the pilot, at a moment's
notice, whenever that officer is employed in piloting vessels of
war in or out of the harbour.

The storehouses upon St. Helena are principally used for storing
coals, and in consequence, her majesty's steam-vessels frequent
more that side of the dock. The largest ships of war (that visit
these seas) can go alongside this wharf when necessary.

On the south of St. Helena lies "Freeman's Bay," where such of H.
M. vessels as are intended to remain but a short time generally
anchor; the offing being more readily gained from thence than
when further in.

The last-erected part of this naval establishment, or "the
dockyard," as it is more generally called, is separated from St.
Helena by the blue waters of the dock, and contains various
buildings, of which I shall first mention the commissioner's
room, and pay offices, (under one roof,) as that was the first
place I visited. The commissioner's room is a very pleasant
apartment, with windows to the east and west, and folding-doors
to the south opening upon a small stone terrace, with a flight of
steps leading to the wharf beneath. From this terrace a
delightful view may be obtained. St. Helena lies exactly
opposite, its warehouses reflected in the clear, blue sea, which
flows at your feet; on your left, Clarence House, and the
adjacent country; while, on your right, the mouth of the harbour,
guarded with its forts, and the blue ocean, with its snowy
crested waves, blends with the sky in the distance. In the
apartment itself are considerable quantities of Psalters and New
Testaments, designed, I suppose, for the use of the naval seamen;
but those annoying pests, the cock-roaches, have made sad work
with the bindings. Leaving this room, we walked into the pay
offices, divided by blue railings, into the commissioner's
office, master shipwright's office, master attendant's office,
and storekeeper's office; as the several white-lettered
inscriptions informed me. These paying offices are all contained
in one apartment, measuring about 8 feet by 4 feet. They must not
be corpulent persons who occupy them, or they will be less at
their ease than poor "Hudibras" was in the "Wooden Bastile."

Descending another flight of stone steps, we crossed part of the
yard, and arrived at the naval officers' quarters, a very
pleasant and handsome building, along which runs a pretty
verandah, commanding a similar view to that obtained from the
terrace of the commissioner's room. Underneath these quarters, is
the principal tank, divided into twelve compartments, and capable
of containing 1000 tuns of water. From this tank pipes pass
under-ground, to the edge of the wharf, (a distance of a hundred
feet,) which being furnished with a cock, the water can be turned
into the casks at pleasure; or, when in great haste, another pipe
is fixed from thence into the hold of the ship, which in this
manner receives its proper allowance of water, at a distance of
100 feet from shore.

A few paces from the officers' quarters, stands a large building,
100 feet by 90 feet, used as a copper, steamer's, and lumber
store; attached to which are four semi-circular tanks, capable of
holding ten tuns of water each. Passing from this, we came to the
cordage, sail, canvass, and clothing store, of a similar size;
and opposite to which, at the distance of about ten feet, is the
working mast-house, (100 feet square,) and joiners' loft above.
In this building a party of men were busily employed in making a
new mast for H. M. schooner, "Fair Rosamond," which, having met
with an accident, a few days before, had put into Antigua to
repair. Parallel with this building is another working
mast-house, and joiners' loft above, of similar dimensions to the
former, used also for the accommodation of the yard engines.

Peeping into a snug little box, called the porter's lodge, and
passing the guard house, store for condemned articles, and paint
store, we entered the boat-house. By this time the sun had gained
its meridian height, and poured a blaze of light over the whole
yard, which, reflected from the white, sandy ground, dazzled my
eyes with its powerful radiance, and oppressed me with its
excessive heat. As I entered then this building, how delightful
did its cooling air strike upon me!--how sweet was the breeze
which passed over my brow, and allayed its throbbing! while the
gentle plash of the water sounded most musically to the ear. One
part of the boat-house is floored; the other has a channel cut in
it to the depth of 18 feet, for the admission of the water. The
roof is supported by 16 round stone pillars, of 12 feet in
circumference; and above is a loft, where ships'-sails are kept.
Leaving the boat-house, we entered the tar and block stores,
where we found a part of the crew of the "Fair Rosamond" employed
in making _spun-yarn_, used for the purpose of lashing, &c.

About 20 feet distant, is a building containing painter's cabin
for grinding paint, and the engineer's office, beneath is a lead
cellar. We next visited the engineer's workshop, where we were
agreeably entertained with seeing the cutting and punching
machine put into motion. I am not engineer enough to describe
this machine in a technical manner, and must therefore only
remark that, by means of an oblong wheel, if I may be allowed the
expression, worked by two men, it is capable of cutting through
the thickest piece of cold iron, with the same ease and quickness
a person would cut a scrap of paper, and at the same time,
punching holes of about the diameter of a shilling through
another piece of the same metal. We also saw a turning-lathe
capable of turning any description of iron from three inches to
28 in diameter. There were also innumerable machines, of other
forms, and for various purposes, which were put into motion for
our amusement; and a piece of the iron, which had been cut and
punched in divers figures, was tendered to me--a memento of an
engineer's workshop in a West Indian dockyard.

The next place we entered was one more suited to a hyperborean
climate than an Antiguan noonday--a blacksmith's shop. Here, six
forges can be worked; and several Cyclops ply their skill amid
their dingy implements. To these forges, immense bellows "turned
their iron mouths," and, impelled by swarthy hands, sent forth a
shower of glittering sparks. We also saw, two patent blowing
machines, manufactured by "Thomas, late Halley and Co.," which,
by a peculiar arrangement, propels the blast upwards and
downwards at the same time. The master blacksmith worked them for
a few moments, but informed us they had not so much power as the
first pair of bellows we observed upon our entrance, which, from
its magnitude, ought to be called the "King of the Bellows." He
bid us place ourselves before the mouth of this last-mentioned
pair, and we should be convinced of the truth of his assertions;
but as I felt no wish to be blown away in a gale of ashes, I
declined the invitation, humbly subscribing to his superior
knowledge in such matters. I could not help thinking, that had
Eolus known the use of these "blowing-machines," what a far more
powerful wind he might have raised, than (as it is pictured he
did) by employing the sons of Astraeus to blow so painfully with
their distended cheeks amid his mighty caverns.

Leaving the blacksmith's shop, we passed the sawpit shed and
smaller tank, and the shipwright's house, and then turning an
acute angle, came to a very pleasant residence, occupied by the
superintendent of the yard, Mr. Hart. Here I met with some of my
favourite lime-trees, their pearly flowers redolent with perfume.
Mr. Hart kindly plucked for us some of the golden fruit; and
afterwards presented, what was dearer to me, from the
recollections they call up, three beautiful roses.[86] I may be
laughed at for being so fanciful, but I never see a rose, I never
inhale its rich fragrance, without wandering in imagination
through the flowery gardens of my own land. "Oh! England, my own
dear country! never did one of thy children love thee better than
I do! In the midst of sickness, in the midst of suffering--when
the fervour of a tropical sun burns through my very frame, and
the climate throws its languor around me--my mind still reverts
to thy verdant fields, I see again thy hawthorn-hedges with all
their snowy blossoms, thy carpeting of lovely lowly flowers,--I
breathe thy countless odours,--I hear thy sweet-toned birds, or
the soft chime of thy village bells, and feel upon 'my very cheek
thy bland and healthy breeze.'"

But to return to Mr. Hart and his roses. I kept them through the
hot day, bore them in safety to my home, and they now stand
before me. But, alas! their beauty is all gone,--their
discoloured leaves seem to mourn their own dishonour; and only
that "the scent of the roses hangs round it still," I should
scarcely know what the vase contains.

After resting in a cool apartment for some time, and taking a
glass of lemonade which Pomona herself would not have refused,
the carriage was ordered to the door, and we were in the act of
stepping in, when it occurred to us that this was a good
opportunity to visit the spot where Lieut. Peterson received his
death wound.

I have already mentioned, in the historical part of this work,
this unfortunate incident, but, with the permission of my
readers, I must again allude to it. At the time of the
occurrence, Lord Camelford commanded the "Favourite," sloop of
war, and Commodore Fahie the ship "Perdrix," Mr. Peterson holding
the rank of first lieutenant on board the last-named vessel.
Commodore Fahie had left Antigua a short time before, to take
temporary command of the fleet, then anchored before St.
Kitts,[87] and during his absence, Lieutenant Peterson was, of
course, left in command of the "Perdrix."

It was the custom, in those troubled days of warfare, for boats
to row backwards and forwards across the harbour during the hours
of night, the sailors of the different ships in the dock, headed
by one of their officers, taking it by turns to keep this watch;
and the sleeper might often be roused from his dreams as the
deep-toned _all's well_ resounded through the still night air.

Lord Camelford and Lieutenant Peterson were unhappily at
variance; and, perhaps to mortify his rival, Lord Camelford
ordered Mr. Peterson to take the watch upon the very evening that
a gay ball was to be given at Blacks Point to the naval officers.
Unfortunately Lieutenant Peterson entertained the idea that as he
was in command of the _ship_ "Perdrix," in the absence of
Commodore Fahie, he was superior officer to Lord Camelford, who
only commanded a sloop; and, in consequence of this false
impression, he positively refused to obey his lordship's orders.

The disastrous evening approached, and the lieutenant retired to
his quarters above the capstan-house, in order to dress for the
festive party. Arming himself with a pair of loaded pistols, and
telling his boat's crew to attend him, Lord Camelford quitted his
retirement, and stationed himself directly between the capstan
house and the guard house, (now called the commissioner's house,)
and there waited the approach of Mr. Peterson, whom he had
already summoned to attend him.

Upon the unfortunate young officer making his appearance,
accompanied by some of his friends, his lordship again commanded
him to take charge of the watch for the evening--the command was
again refused--when, taking one of the pistols from his bosom,
Lord Camelford immediately fired, and the ball passing through
the breast of the brave, but inconsiderate lieutenant, he fell a
corpse upon the ground, the deadly stream welling from the wound,
and staining, as it flowed, the gay ball-dress which he wore.

No sooner did the well-aimed weapon do its work, than, drawing
the other from its resting-place, his lordship turned to the
second lieutenant of the "Perdrix," and pointing it at him, asked
if he would obey his orders, or meet the same punishment as Mr.
Peterson? Life is sweet! The second in command saw his friend
stretched at his feet with the red blood gurgling around him, and
fearing the same fate, he obeyed Lord Camelford, and took the
watch.

Oh, duty! what a stern goddess thou art! or else how much art
thou belied, for the deed was laid to thy charge. He disobeyed
his superior officer, and in the midst of health, of buoyant
feelings, and without, perhaps, time to think of a _hereafter_,
he was to _die_. I can never more pass those sunken anchors which
mark the tragic spot, without thinking of the mournful fate of
this self-deceived mutineer, poor Lieutenant Peterson, or
fancying I can see him in his death throes, stretched upon that
sandy ground by the hand of him who had been once his friend.

This circumstance was not the only one that caused Lord
Camelford's name to be well known in Antigua. Upon another
occasion he went to Mr. Kitto, then superintendent of the
naval-yard, and informed him he wanted certain alterations made
on board the vessel of war he commanded. Mr. Kitto, in the
mildest terms, acquainted his lordship that he could not oblige
him, as it would be going beyond his warrant. To this refusal the
angry officer made no reply, but immediately going on board his
ship, he summoned his boatswain to his presence, and ordered him
to provide himself with a cat-of-nine-tails, and hold himself in
readiness to accompany him ashore.

In the course of a short time, Lord Camelford, the boatswain, and
his mate, and a few of the crew of the "Favourite," proceeded to
the dockyard, and a message was despatched to Mr. Kitto, desiring
his attendance.

Upon the arrival of the superintendent, Lord Camelford again
demanded to know if he would accede to his wishes, at the same
time giving a pretty broad hint that, in case of refusal, his
back should be visited by the "Cat." Mr. Kitto once more
observed, "It would be going beyond my warrant," when, as he
uttered these words, at a signal from his lordship, the
unfortunate superintendent was seized, and twelve dozen lashes
inflicted with no unsparing hand by the boatswain of the
"Favourite."

This illegal and brutal conduct was not, however, passed over; a
complaint was laid against Lord Camelford, and the case was
investigated at the court house. Upon the day of trial, as may be
supposed, the court was thronged with spectators; the assault was
proved, and bail was about to be demanded, when his lordship
begged permission to retire for a short time. His request was
complied with; but no sooner had he gained the outer gate of the
court house, than, seizing a horse which some gentleman visitant
had fastened to the iron palisading, he mounted, and rode away in
direction of English Harbour as fast as the animal could be
urged.

In a moment all was confusion. "The prisoner's escaped!" was the
universal cry; and as the truth became known within the court
house, various were the individuals who hurried forth, mounted
their horses, and joined in the pursuit. The Honourable Edward
Byam was then president of the island, and with the same high
spirit of equity which has ever marked that family, and unbiassed
by the rank of the offender, he immediately threw up one of the
windows of the court-house, and shouted--"A hundred pounds for
his recapture--a hundred pounds for his head!"

On kept Lord Camelford, (almost overtaken by one of the
constables, a very athletic man, of the name of White,) until at
length the horse he was riding fell down from exhaustion, and
obliged his lordship to take refuge in an adjoining cane-field.
Upon the party who were in pursuit gaining the place of his
retreat, a sudden stand was made. The rabble who had joined the
party, and some of the horsemen, were stationed around the
cane-field; while the constables, with a few attendants, and
several dogs, entered the precincts of the field, and literally
hunted the offending lord through its tangled mazes, until,
overcome with fatigue, and unarmed, he was taken by his pursuers.

In the escape, Lord Camelford's hat had fallen off, and he was
therefore placed upon a horse bareheaded; and in this manner,
surrounded by the officials, and followed by all the riff-raff of
"St. John's and its environs," he was brought back, and once more
placed before the court. Lord Camelford was ordered to find bail
for his appearance at the sessions. The amount of his
recognisances was 5000l.; Walter Colquhoun and Walter Riddle,
Esqs., standing sureties for his forthcoming. Upon his lordship's
return to English Harbour, he drew bills for the amount, (for
which his sureties would have been liable by his departure, had
he not taken this precaution,) and then proceeded on board his
ship "Favourite," made sail, and quitted the shores of Antigua,
with no very enviable feelings, it is to be supposed.

The forfeited money was devoted to the purpose of sinking wells,
(or springs, as they are termed in the West Indian idiom,) for
the accommodation of the inhabitants of St. John's; and
accordingly, a party of negroes were employed to prosecute the
work.

They commenced their labours at the head of the town, opposite to
where the Scotch kirk is now building; but after digging to a
great depth, and still finding no appearance of water, they
became seriously alarmed, and unanimously refused to proceed,
giving as their excuse, "that dey heard all de cocks crowing in
de oder world!"

To return to the incidents of our day's journey to English
Harbour. After leaving the scene of Lieutenant Peterson's death,
we once more walked round by the superintendant's residence,
admiring as we went the neat manner in which the ponderous
anchors and various-sized buoys were arranged; and then bidding
the dockyard farewell, proceeded on our way to the Ridge, which,
as its name implies, is the upper ground of a gentle ascent,
appropriated to the erection of barracks, and other military
establishments, for the accommodation of her majesty's troops.
Before I proceed to describe the rest of the Antigua "_lions_," I
must be allowed to remark, that, although in my life I have
visited many public buildings in England, as well as in other
parts of the globe, I never met with more politeness, from the
lowest to the highest of the officials, than I experienced at
this English Harbour naval establishment.

A few paces from the dockyard, on the road to the Ridge, we
passed the ordnance, consisting of two separate departments,
divided from each other by an arm of the sea--one used as a
store-place for guns and balls, the other for the reception of
powder. These deadly weapons were so neatly arranged, the
different sizes forming different tiers, and the balls were so
prettily packed in the form of pyramids--the day was so fine, the
sea so blue, and the buildings themselves so spruce, in their
uniform of light yellow picked out with black, that I was quite
enraptured with the picture--forgot the _use_ they were intended
for, nor thought how many heart-broken wives and desolate orphans
had wept, with tears like blood, the carnage such instruments had
effected.

The road wound up the ascent, which is continued until the Ridge
is gained. On one side stands a very pretty residence, known as
"Clarence House," belonging to the queen, and one of the
dwellings the superintendent of the naval yard has under his
control; and on the other side of the road rises "Dow's Hill,"
surmounted by the country-seat of the governor. In this part of
the road, a stone, marked with an anchor, points out the boundary
of the naval ground; and on the other side of the stone, the land
appropriated to the military commences.

Still following the ascent, in process of time we gained the
engineers' quarters, the first building which marks the Ridge;
and opposite to it is the victualling office. Passing by the
officers' quarters, the barracks for the privates, the several
storehouses, and the iron hospital, for the reception of invalid
soldiers, we stood upon the utmost verge of the place bearing the
title of _Shirley_ Heights, so named after one of the former
governors, Sir Thomas Shirley, Bart. A very beautiful view may be
obtained from this spot, well worthy of a painter's study. Hills
and dales clothed in tropical luxuriance; rocky precipices and
lonely glens, where nature sits enthroned; steep mountains and
ample solitudes, that look as if the foot of man never disturbed
their primeval silence; and gentle slopes, dotted here and there
with neat-looking dwellings. Below, on your right, lies the
dockyard, with its uniform buildings, and the lovely harbour,
forming a complete basin, encircled with its white sands; while
beyond, the ocean presents one level sheet of burnished gold,
over which the fishing-boats were gaily bounding, and throwing
the shadow of their simple sails and slender masts far before
them. The mouth of English Harbour, which is 113 fathoms across,
was formerly defended in times of warfare by an immense iron
chain. That, however, is now no more; but the staples by which it
was secured still remain in the massive rocks, to prove the truth
of this assertion. It is now protected by two forts placed on
each side of the opening: Fort Charlotte, mounted with four guns,
18 and 24 pounders; Fort Berkley, mounting twenty-four guns. At
the latter fort is a magazine.

After leaving the Ridge, we turned down a slight declivity, by
the victualling offices, on our way to Bat's Cave, and the
Savannah. Our road lay through groves of loblolly, manchineel,
and acacia, which, twining their long arms together, formed
various natural colonnades; while the ground was strewed with
their matted leaves, in all stages of decay. Having alighted, we
walked through the interwoven path, carefully avoiding as we went
the different varieties of cactus, which spring up on all sides,
and guarding our faces from the long sharp thorns of the acacia,
and the boughs of the poisonous manchineel. The ground, rugged
and broken, was plentifully sprinkled with disrupted portions of
spar, which glittered in the sunbeams like so many gems, and put
me in mind of Sinbad's walk in the "Valley of Diamonds." Immense
ground-lizards were trailing their long bodies about, in search
of their daily food, so amply provided for them by the great
Benefactor of all; while others were basking upon these dazzling
fossils, to imbibe the heat of the meridian sun.

After taking many devious routes among the impending bushes, in
order to discover the wished-for cavern, I was well pleased to
hear the cheerful voice of our pioneer shouting forth "Come this
way; I've found the right path." Scrambling, as best we could,
over a huge bed of prickly pear, (one of the cactus family,) we
gained an opening in the copse, and stood before the mouth of the
cave. Two large trees, which grew on each side, extended their
gnarled roots (from which the earth had been washed) across the
opening, forming natural steps, by which we descended, and stood
within the cave.

Huge masses of the rock which forms the cavern have fallen in,
and in great measure blocked it up, so that it now only presents
an arena of about 50 feet in circumference, although in time past
it was of considerable extent. From the main cavern, two passages
branch off in opposite directions. They are perfectly dark, the
only means of exploring them being by the use of flambeaux; but
to what length they extend has never been discovered. Mr. McLane,
a late resident of English Harbour, (now of Canada,) has made
several attempts to that purpose, all of which proved fruitless;
the greatest distance he ever proceeded was to the extent of two
sea-lines, about 120 yards. The only known occupants are bats,
which breed there in immense numbers, and often attain the size
of a common pigeon. A dank unhealthy vapour is emitted from these
openings, proceeding, no doubt, from the carbonic acid gas they
contain. This vapour soon extinguishes the light of a torch,
which is one reason this cavern has never been further
explored.[88] A streak of dark green runs down one side of the
cave, which was pointed out to me as indicating the existence of
copper; but upon examining a portion of the rock I brought away
with me, I found that the colour was occasioned only by a
vegetable substance adhering to the stones.

In former times, Bat's Cave was a great place of concealment for
the tribes of erratic Caribs, when visiting Antigua on their
predatory excursions; and tradition still points it out as the
scene of a barbarous carousal among that wild and savage race, in
one of their attacks upon this island. As, however, I am now
giving the narration of a day's journey, I will proceed to
mention the other spots we visited, and leave the Legend, which
is rather lengthy, for the next chapter.

Emerging from "Bat's Cave," and wending our way amid the same
rugged impediments, in process of time we reached our vehicle,
and stepping into it, proceeded to visit the ruins of the old
government house in the Savannah, the scene of the attack
narrated in the "Legend of Ding a Ding Nook," and of a similar
attempt in 1654. After driving for a short distance over pasture
land, exhibiting a dreary view of brown and withered herbage, the
effects of the late dry weather, (rendered more striking by the
contrast of the deep green of the different trees,) which
crackled under the horses' feet, we arrived at another tangled
maze of shrub and brushwood, where it was again necessary to
proceed on foot, in order to prosecute our intended search.
Forcing our way through this almost impenetrable thicket,
rendered in some places more impervious by the twinings and
intertwinings of the withe, (a native parasite,) stooping to
avoid some straggling branch, or springing over a thorny bank, we
gained an open glade; and walking up the gentle acclivity, stood
by the side of the ruins.

They consist of what appears to have been a cistern, probably the
first built in the island, and a low wall of stone, marking the
foundation of the government house. Within this last-mentioned
ruin stand two tombs, the inscriptions upon which are as
follows:--

                            Antigua.
         Here lieth the body of Mrs. Elizabeth Warner,
                  Late wife of Edward Warner,
                      Of this island, Esq.
              She was a woman of exemplary piety;
                   She was the best of wives,
                   The tenderest of mothers,
                  The faithfulest of friends,
      And of a most charitable, compassionate disposition,
       Whose death was generally and deservedly lamented
               By the good people that knew her.
        She departed this life the thirteenth of August,
                             1723,
                  In the 37th year of her age.

                     Here lies the body of
                       Mr. Henry Warner,
            Who died on the 17th day of Sept, 1731,
                  In the 39th year of his age,
                   Much beloved and lamented
                     By all that knew him.
                     In memory of whom, his
               Affectionate brothers, Edward and
                         Ashton Warner,
                     Erected this Monument.

About these tombs grew many a sweet and fragile flower, and many
a gaily painted butterfly hovered around, and sported in the
blaze of the "great luminary;" while the "Turk's caps" (another
species of cactus) shewed their crimson crests in all directions.
A broken bottle, the relic of some former maroon (_fete
champetre_) lay upon one of the tombs--not more fragile or fickle
in its nature than the mouldering dust which slept beneath, or
those who in the heyday of life stood looking on.

Leaving the tombs and ruins to their usual solitude, we retraced
our steps; but in doing so, I could not help thinking that the
name "_Savannah_" was misapplied, or Dr. Johnson was wrong in his
etymology, for I am sure there is wood in abundance of one kind
or the other. A great number of wild cattle inhabit this part of
the country, deriving, it is said, a plentiful supply of
nutriment from the herbage found there.

On our return to English Harbour, along the same road, we had a
glimpse of "Indian Creek," so famous in "story," which meanders
through verdantly-decked shores in a picturesque manner. It
derives its name from an engagement which took place upon its
banks, between a party of Caribs, (or Indians,) narrated in the
following "Legend."

Once more entering the village of English Harbour, we proceeded
to the house of W. C. Brooks, Esq., where we rested for some
time, experiencing those nameless acts of hospitality for which
the Antiguans are noted; and where I willingly laved my burning
temples with the fragrant "Eau de Cologne." Really, this marching
and counter-marching, beneath a tropical sun, is no slight
matter, let my readers think as they may. "Sol" visits the face
with many a fiery mark, and if he _kisses_, he leaves his _sting_
behind. I felt glad when we once more took our way to town; and
although no lovely moon was abroad,

   "----the floor of Heaven
    Was thick inlaid with patines of bright gold,"

which sufficed to light us gloriously on our way, and bring us in
safety to Spring Gardens.




[84] It may be necessary to remark, for the benefit of my English
readers, that although Saturday is the principal _market-day_,
Monday is more generally used by the labouring class for coming
into the capital to provide their weekly supplies. So much is
this the case, that where you may see fifty labourers employed
upon a plantation upon the other days of the week, on Monday you
will scarcely find twenty.

[85] As it may amuse the reader, we here transcribe an original
letter, written by our great naval hero at this period, which is
carefully preserved by its proprietor as an invaluable relic:--

                               "English Harbour, Aug. 3rd, 1784.

"As the captains of the navy at this port mean to establish a
mess for the hurricane months, by their desire I write to beg
that you will send us round, by the first opportunity, the
undermentioned articles--viz., one hogshead of port, one of the
best white wine that you have, twelve dozen of porter in bottles,
fifty pounds loaf sugar, one firkin of good butter, two baskets
of salt, two pounds black pepper.

         "I have the honour to be, your humble servant,

                                                "Horatio Nelson.

"P.S. As we only wait for these things to begin our mess, the
sooner they arrive the better. Mr. Druce, the agent victualler is
a going to send provisions round for the Fury which will be a
good opportunity.

"Addressed to ------ Kerr, Esq."

[86] It may be necessary to remark, that roses are very choice
flowers in Antigua, the climate not appearing to agree with them.
This is strange, as in the East Indies, where the heat is even
greater, whole fields are planted with this beautiful shrub, in
order to get their leaves to distil the far-fame "Attar."

[87] Of which island he was a native.

[88] It is supposed that these passages extend to the sea-shore,
a distance of about a quarter of a mile.




                         CHAPTER XXIII.



                 ZULMIERA, THE HALF-CARIB GIRL.

                   A Legend of the Savannah.

The sun was rapidly sinking in the west, but its declining beams
only threw upon every object a richer tone of colour, as a party,
consisting of three persons, emerged from a small shrubbery, and
halted upon the brow of a shelving hill.

The foremost of the party was a man who probably verged upon the
mellow age of fifty; but his eagle-eye, and stalwart frame, told
that his years sat light upon him. He was what would have been
termed a handsome man; but a supercilious curl of his upper lip,
and an expression of scornful indifference, which, though
apparently suppressed, lingered in his dark hazel eye, added to a
brow furrowed by deep lines, and compressed by slumbering
passions, which only waited the spur of the moment to be called
into action, detracted from the otherwise agreeable character of
his features, and effectually forbid any approach to familiarity.
A deep and unsightly scar, the effects of a sabre-cut, which,
commencing from the right ear, traversed the jaw, injured yet
further his good looks. He was habited in a complete suit of
black velvet, of the richest texture; the sombreness of which was
in some measure relieved by diamond clasps, and small
knee-buckles of the same costly stones. A small collar of the
finest lawn made its appearance above the doublet; and a
black-sheathed "Andrea Ferrara," with basket hilt, dangling from
his side, and calf-skin boots, completed his costume. This dress,
fitting tight to his shape, shewed to advantage the large but
perfect symmetry of his person; while the dark brown hair,
sprinkled here and there with the grey badge of declining years,
cropt close around his temples; and the steeple-crowned hat
peculiar to his sect and times, bespoke him, what he was, the
friend of Cromwell--the roundhead governor of Antigua.

The next person that gained the open ground was Bridget, the
beautiful daughter of the governor. If ever there was a
personification of extreme loveliness, it was known in Bridget.
Scarcely seventeen, her slight but rounded figure, and her sweet,
mild face, while it struck the beholder with admiration, and
riveted his attention, gave the idea of some embodied sylph. Her
complexion was of that ethereal tint of which the poet says--

   "Oh, call it fair, not pale."

The lily could scarcely outvie it in purity of colour, although
every emanation of her guileless heart called up the latent
rose-tint into her delicate cheek; while the small, pouting lip,
with all the rich glow of the coral, forbid effectually the
supposition of ill health. A slightly aquiline nose, a
classically-formed and dimpled chin, with a fair and open
forehead, in which every azure vein could be traced, were the
prominent features; blended with that mingled sweetness, that
feminine grace, and that inexpressible _something_, which really
and actually constitutes beauty. But her eyes--those soft, lovely
eyes--look at them, as she raises the long lashes, and you can
fancy, that were her features devoid of any pretensions to
comeliness, those liquid orbs would richly compensate for all. Of
the clearest hazel, every glance that fell from them spoke the
inmost feelings of her soul; and whether they beamed forth in
pity, or flashed with animation, they equally bespoke the
benevolence of her nature.

Puritan as her father was, he did not deny his daughter, any more
than himself, the use of a few ornaments; and a bandeau of pearls
fastened around her graceful head vainly endeavoured to restrain
the abundant tresses of her soft, glossy, brown hair, which,
breaking loose, floated upon her shoulders in natural ringlets.
Her dress of dove-coloured satin flowed in rich and ample folds
to her feet, from whence the little slipper peeped forth; and,
gathered around her slender waist by a girdle of pearls, shewed
the admirable proportions of her figure. The stiff puritan ruff
of lawn, in which every plait could be counted, screened her
neck; but around her small white throat was fastened a carcanet
of her favourite gems, not purer in tint than her own fair skin.
A wimple of the same colour as her dress, and lined with pale
rose tiffany, was tied under her little rounded chin, but which,
in the joyousness of her nature, she had unfastened, that she
might more fully enjoy the beauties of the evening.

The remaining individual that formed the trio was in every
respect far different from those already described; yet, as she
stood a few paces behind Bridget--to mark the difference in their
rank, although near enough to join in the conversation--her lofty
and commanding figure called equally for attention and
admiration. The clear olive tinge of her complexion, the large
black eye, which sparkled with dazzling light, and the long
coal-black hair, braided and twined round and round her head,
told that she was not of the same country, or the same people as
her mistress. Servant--slave as she was--she looked born to
command; and daring must that person be who would encounter for
the second time the flash of her offended eye. Formed in a larger
mould than Bridget, her figure still bore the utmost symmetrical
proportions; and the rounded arm and taper fingers might have
served as a model for the Goddess of Beauty: this female was
Zulmiera--the half-Carib girl.

The mother of Zulmiera was a very beautiful Carib woman, who, in
that disgraceful partition of them among the English, (after the
massacre of their male friends at St. Kitts during Sir Thomas
Warner's government of that island,) fell to the share of a young
Englishman, a follower of Sir Thomas Warner's son, in his after
colonization of Antigua. Xamba accompanied her master to his new
residence, and there bore him a daughter; but dying soon after,
the infant was brought up in the governor's family. After the
reduction of Antigua by Sir George Ayscue, and the establishment
of a republican governor, in place of the opposer of Cromwell's
power, Zulmiera, who was rapidly attaining the full burst of
womanhood, was, at the earnest entreaties of Bridget Everard, who
was charmed with the untutored graces of the beautiful Indian
maiden, promoted to the office of her companion. It must be
allowed, that this appointment met not with the full approval of
the governor. Violently attached to Cromwell, and bearing bitter
hatred to the royalist party, and all malignants, he thought the
girl had been too long nurtured in their principles to make a
faithful attendant to the daughter of a republican. But Bridget
was his only child,--a motherless girl; and stern and unbending
as he was to others, his iron mood gave way before her playful
caresses.

Still there was another and deep cause of dislike he had against
Zulmiera. Upon further acquaintance with this Indian girl, he
found her too haughty for his own arrogant spirit to deal with.
Too high-minded and forgetful of her real rank as a servant, and
apparently under the impression that, while attending upon her
mistress, she was in fact her equal, if not her superior.

Zulmiera was, in truth, fully alive to this sentiment. She looked
upon herself as the descendant (on her mother's side) of a long
line of chiefs--of those who had once been rulers in the land,
and who had received from their swarthy subjects the homage that
monarchs of a more civilized nation were wont to receive.

Thinking thus of Zulmiera, no wonder that the governor distrusted
her. Nor was the girl ignorant of his opinion of her; and
consequently their feelings of dislike were mutual. She knew he
hated her; and he felt that in her heart she despised him. Still,
she loved Bridget--for who could not love that mild, fair girl?--
loved her with an intensity of fervour, unknown to the
inhabitants of colder climes--and would have shed for her her
heart's best blood; for love and hatred were to Zulmiera
all-absorbing passions. Yet there was another who held the
_first_ place in Zulmiera's heart,--one that was to the
half-instructed, half-Indian girl--her "idol god."

But to return to the movements of the trio. Having left the
concealment of the shrubbery, the whole party paused, and with
different feelings gazed upon the landscape stretched before
them. The slight declivity upon the brow of which they were
standing, had been cleared, and was now planted with tobacco,
whose broad green leaves, and delicate trumpet flowers, attracted
the attention of numerous gorgeous insects. This plantation
stretched to the end of a wild copse, where every native shrub
and brushwood grew together with the loftier trees, and formed an
almost impervious thicket. Beyond this copse, the waters of a
beautiful creek, which ran a short way inland, glittered like
gold in the beams of the setting sun; while on every side rose
undulating hills, begirt with many an infant plantation,
belonging to some of the earlier settlers. Further off, the broad
ocean stretched its interminable waves, its billows sleeping in
calmness; except in one part, where a long ridge of shelving
rocks fretted them into motion, and caused them to send forth
their angry roar.[89]

At the bottom of the hill upon which they were standing ran a
bridle-path, which, winding in and out, branched off in two
directions; one passing through the populous town of Falmouth,
the other extending to the shores of a beautiful harbour,[90]
where some industrious settlers were cultivating the adjoining
country. Along this path a single horseman was seen slowly
advancing, in the direction of the harbour. As he gained the
skirts of the hill, he reined up for a moment his prancing steed,
and, looking towards the party, raised his plumed hat and bent
forward in graceful obeisance. The dark eyes of Zulmiera sparkled
with delight, and standing, as she did, behind the governor and
his daughter, unseen by them, she raised her hand and waved a
return, while, at the same instant, the rosiest blush sprang to
the cheeks of Bridget, and crimsoned her very throat. The
horseman again bent his head, and then, replacing his hat, shook
the broidered reins and galloped off in the direction he had
chosen for his equestrian amusement.

Following with his eye the plumed stranger until he was lost in
the intervening copse, the governor turned to his daughter, and
fixing a steady, penetrating glance upon her, exclaimed, "Ha!
then the young malignant's designs appear to be more open than
they were. But, mark me, daughter Bridget," and his eye became
sterner and darker as the pupil dilated with his awakening
passion, and his haughty lip curled with increased scorn--"mark
me, Bridget, sooner than I'd see thee mated with one of his
malignant race, mine own hand should stretch thee at my feet a
breathless corpse!--yea, as Jephtha slew his daughter, so would I
slay thee!" The agitated and frightened girl threw herself upon
her father's breast, and, amid tears and sobs, stammered out--
"Father--dearest father! think not so. Raphe de Merefield is
naught to me; he never spoke to me but with the most studied
politeness, and, indeed, he shuns rather than seeks my presence."
--"'Tis well, then, maiden--my suspicions are unfounded; the wolf
has not entered the sheepfold to steal the tender lamb; but I
have observed him lately wandering about these grounds, and I
feared my daughter was the object. But listen!" and again his eye
flashed, his lip trembled--"verily, I know that young man well--
ay, better than he knows me--for his father was my neighbour and
my deadliest foe!--and what was more, the foe of Cromwell! He it
was that assisted that tyrannical man, Charles Stuart, in his
escape from Hampton Court, and after aided him in his long
struggles to maintain possession of a crown which had long been
doomed to destruction. He it was that beggared his brother to
obtain money to carry out that well-slain tyrant's nefarious
designs! And he it was that, at the battle of Naseby, gave me
this ugly sign of recognition," pointing to the scar which
disfigured his cheek. "But was he not discomfited? Yea, as the
dry leaf he fell. Lo! as David girded up his strength in the day
of battle, so girded I up mine; and as he smote his enemies with
the edge of the sword, so my trusty weapon stretched the haughty
Philistine upon the ground, never to rise again! Guess, then, if
thou canst, how much I love yon cavalier, who hath sucked in with
his very milk the taint of papistry--for did not that Babylonish
woman whom men call the Queen of England rear him up from his
cradle? yea, and taught him all her sorceries. Had my honoured
friend and master, the protector, followed my advice, this young
traitor to the commonwealth would never have escaped from England
to disseminate his malignant poison abroad. Cromwell should have
crushed the egg before it was hatched. But verily I wax hot and
am impatient, not considering the time approacheth when rebels
and arch-rebels shall melt away as the hoar frost melteth before
the sun. Despatches have reached me that it is Cromwell's
intention to send, in the course of a few months, a squadron
against St. Domingo, and my instructions are to see that a proper
troop be raised in this island to join the expedition. I am
resolved that Master Raphe de Merefield be one of the gallants
who shall serve in that affair; a goodly bullet-shot or, albeit,
a well-applied stroke from the rapier of a Spaniard, may relieve
me from his machinations; or should he refuse to fight under the
banner of the commonwealth, verily, I know the malignancy of his
father cleaves so closely to him, that it will only be
maintaining Cromwell's interest to have him properly secured, or
we may see another revolt when we least expect it." Thus saying,
the governor walked forward a few paces, and shading his eyes
from the lingering sunbeams, scanned for a few moments the scene
before him.

What passed in the mind of Bridget during the foregoing
conversation it is unnecessary to relate, but the emotions called
up in the heart of the Carib girl while hearing her lover thus
traduced were violent and various. Hate, scorn, and revenge,
fired her eye, and sent a torrent of hot blood through her veins,
which, rushing to her face, turned the clear olive to a fiery
crimson. Yet so well was she accustomed to master her feelings,
that before her young mistress was sufficiently recovered to
commence another dialogue, she stood the same apparently calm
being, her hands folded across her breast; and only that her eye
was more dilated, and her cheek still slightly tinged, none could
tell that aught had moved her.

An exclamation from the governor, who had, for the last few
minutes, been intently gazing in one direction, arrested his
daughter's attention, and, gliding to his elbow, she inquired if
he addressed her. "Look, Bridget," replied her father, in a still
stern, but not unmusical voice--"look o'er yonder grove--dost
thou see aught moving?"--"Nothing, dearest father," answered the
maiden, in her own sweet tones--"nothing but the bland zephyr
sporting amid the young green leaves, and playing its fairy music
upon them." "Foolish enthusiast! But haste, girl!--fetch me the
wondrous instrument the lord-general gave me, and let me give yon
grove a sharper look--methinks it contains more inmates than we
wot of. I have heard of wild Indians and their deeds."

Roused by his remarks, Zulmiera started forward, and in an
agitated voice which she in vain tried to stifle, exclaimed, "Oh,
no, your excellency, naught is there, save, as the Lady Bridget
saith, the whispering wind or the fly-birds as they seek their
leafy bower." "Back, girl!" fiercely retorted the governor--"back
to thy place; who taught thee to hazard thy remarks? Methinks thy
cavalier masters might have made thee know thy station better."

Again the blood rushed to the cheek and temples of Zulmiera--
again the eye flashed fire--but again she mastered her emotions;
exclaiming, however, as she did so, but in a voice too subdued to
reach her companion's ear, "Rest till to-morrow's night, proud
man, then wilt thou learn who governs here!"

At this moment, Bridget placed in her father's hand the lately
invented telescope,[91] when, raising it to his eye, he narrowly
observed the whole breadth of the copse; the distant creek and
the farther ocean; but nothing met his eye--nothing, save the
wavy green, or the wing of a weary sea-fowl as it sought its
nest. Slowly dropping the instrument, the governor once more
gazed with his naked eye in that direction. The sun had set some
minutes before, and as the last of his golden beams faded in the
west, he turned upon his heel, and, followed by the females, was
once more lost in the verdant shrubbery.




[89] Now called the Memora's.

[90] Now called English Harbour.

[91] Telescopes were said to have been invented during the reign
of James I., although some attribute the invention to Roger
Bacon, 1292.




                         CHAPTER XXIV.



                  CONTINUATION OF THE LEGEND.

It was a calm, delicious, West Indian night. The moon shone in
all her glory, bathing lawn and lea, upland and woodland, in her
silvery light. The waters of the creek we have already noticed
were rife with beauty; and the waves of the far-off ocean, as
they dashed in measured cadence on the beach, broke musically
upon the listener's ear.

A stately figure, enveloped in a dark mantle, glided from behind
a screen of lime and coffee trees; and gaining the open ground,
looked cautiously around. As if assured its movements were
unobserved, the figure darted off at a rapid pace in the
direction of a magnificent grove; but with steps so light, that
it would scarcely have crushed the lowliest flower. Upon reaching
the verge of the grove, it stopped; and placing a finger upon a
small gittern,[92] carried beneath the ample cloak, struck a
single note. The crushing of the younger twigs and leaves told
that the signal was heard; and springing from the covert, a young
man bounded forward, exclaiming--"Zulmiera! dearest Zulmiera! how
long thou hast stayed to-night!"

The moon still shone with a clear and fervent light, displaying
every object in a distinct manner, and shewing the picturesque
dress of the impassioned stranger to the best advantage. His
figure was slight but perfectly formed, while his fair skin and
glowing cheeks bespoke his Saxon origin. His eyes were of the
clearest blue, and his long auburn locks, parted in the middle of
his forehead, flowed over his shoulders, in length and profusion
equalling a woman's. A slight moustache shaded his upper lip,
which, slightly curved, displayed a set of teeth faultless in
size and colour. His dress, fashioned in that superb style which
the followers of Charles loved to indulge in, consisted of a
doublet of three-piled murrey-colour velvet, pinked and slashed
with white satin, and ornamented with elaborate embroidery, his
falling band, or collar, of the richest point lace, and his
nether garments to match with the doublet, were finished at the
knees with white satin roses and diamond studs. A small but
admirably tempered Toledo, the hilt of solid gold, and sparkling
with diamonds, was strapped to his side by an embroidered belt;
while a Flemish beaver hat, looped with a diamond button, and
surrounded by a snowy plume, shaded his somewhat boyish features.
A dark short cloak, lined with white tafiety, which he had flung
aside when springing to meet Zulmiera, floated from behind his
right shoulder, and served to give him still more an air of
graceful elegance.

"Dearest Zulmiera," said the young stranger, when seated upon the
trunk of a large tree, which, uprooted by a former hurricane, and
slightly covered by a little alluvial earth, had shot forth a few
sickly branches--"dearest Zulmiera, how long I have waited for
you--how much I have to tell you! I have watched each star as it
peeped forth from the heavens--heard the shrill pipe of the
curlew as it flew to its nest--but listened in vain for your
light footstep; say, dearest, what kept you from the
trysting-tree?" "I was in attendance upon my mistress until this
late hour," replied Zulmiera, speaking in an ironical tone, and
laying a strong emphasis upon the word _mistress_, while a slight
look of scorn passed over her animated features; "or else doubt
not I would have met you long before; for where, Raphe, would the
bird with weary wing seek for rest but by the side of its own
fond mate? or why should yon white flower," pointing to a
night-jasmine which was growing in all its wild luxuriance near
the spot, and loading the air with sweet and powerful perfume--
"why should yon white flower haste to open its pretty leaves, as
soon as the day melts away, were it not to seek the fond love of
those beautiful stars which are twinkling above us? Raphe, you
are my mate, and your eyes are my stars, in which I read my
destiny."

To this fond but fanciful rhapsody, Raphe de Merefield made no
answer, except by pressing the beautiful hand which rested in
his; and the half-Carib continued: "But it was not to tell you
this, Raphe, that brought me here so late to-night. Come with
me." And suffering himself to be led by her, they quitted the
deep recess in which they had been seated, and walked into the
open ground already mentioned.

Looking up the ascent above the tops of the trees, which grew in
vast profusion, forming a complete barrier around, the moon-beams
fell upon the roof of an irregular but commodious building. This
was government house, and through an opening in the leafy
enclosure, the light of a taper was seen brightly shining from a
small diamond-pane casement, in one of the gable ends of the
edifice. "In that room," said the romantic girl, directing
Raphe's attention to it, "sleeps one, who, next to yourself, I
love most on earth; and scornfully, harshly as her father has
treated me, she must and shall be saved! Mark me, Raphe, an' thou
lovest me, guard the Lady Bridget as thou wouldst a sister. Wild
spirits will be abroad ere the glad sun shall set and rise again,
or yon pretty stars be peeping at us; and though I think they
will care for mine as they would me, still, Raphe, I would have
thee prepared. When all is over--when you and I--but I need say
no more, except that Bridget shall not then be ashamed to love
the despised, the scorned Zulmiera," and as she spoke, she threw
back her graceful head with the air of a Cleopatra, while the
bright crimson mantled in her cheeks, and increased the lustre of
her eyes.

"What mean you, Zulmiera?" inquired the young cavalier, as soon
as he could make himself heard; for her utterance during the
preceding speech had been so rapid, and her manner so excited,
that all his former attempts to interrupt her had been useless.
"What mean you, dearest Zulmiera? Why this flashing eye--this
agitated mien? Is it because yon king-killing, canting Puritan,
called you _servant_, that these wild dreams (for I know not what
else to term them) are floating through your brain? Never heed
him, dearest; you will soon be my bride, my acknowledged wife;
and then let me see who dare call you servant, or taunt you with
your birth! Know that I love one tress of this black hair"--and
he drew her fondly towards him--"better than all the fair
ringlets and fairer skins of England's boasted daughters. But
draw your mantle closer round you, and let us to our former seat,
where I will relate to you all my plans.--You know," resumed
Raphe, as they gained their resting-place upon the old tree,
"that after the unfortunate battle of Naseby, upon which bloody
field my brave father fell, fighting for his lawful sovereign
against those long-eared Roundheads, (to which sect our notable
governor belongs!) my widowed mother, seized with an
irrepressible panic, fled from England, carrying me, then a
stripling of about fourteen, along with her. Our first place of
refuge was Holland, where the queen, whose godson I have the
honour to be, had sought safety some time before. But my mother,
disliking the country, and having received letters from her
husband's brother, my revered uncle, whose namesake I am,
offering her an asylum in Antigua, she determined to avail
herself of his kindness. Thus it was I became a resident in this
island; and during my frequent visits at government house, when
loyalty ruled there, I met my dearest Zulmiera. You are aware, I
believe, that my uncle, who was formerly a merchant of the city
of London, was joined with Sir Thomas Warner in a grant of land
situated in this island, the grantor of which was the martyr
Charles. Upon part of that land the brother of young Phillip
Warner is erecting a new dwelling, and cultivating the
surrounding country. It will be a fine place when it is finished;
and Warner deserves it should be, for he made a gallant defence
in 1651, when old Noll sent Sir George Ayscue to reduce this
island, because, forsooth, it stood out for its lawful sovereign.
But to resume my story, which the brave actions of Mr. Warner
drove from my head. To-day, I confided to my mother our mutual
engagement ; she has listened to the voice of her only, her
beloved son, and is prepared to receive you as a daughter.
To-morrow, I will call upon the governor--although I hate the
sight of him, from his high-crowned hat down to his ugly looking
calf-skins--and make my proposals in form. If he consents with a
good grace, well; if not, I feel assured my dear Zulmiera will
not fear to leave his house and protection for the home and
hearth of one who loves her as I do. I still hope that our own
King Charles (God bless him!) may overcome his enemies, and be
seated upon the throne of his fathers; then will we visit old
England, and in my own paternal mansion, I've no doubt I shall
get my handsome Zulmiera to forget her native island and all her
wild dreams." So saying, with a look of strong affection and with
gallant bearing, he raised her hand to his lips.

"Oh, Raphe!" said the agitated girl, as her lover concluded his
relation, to which she had listened with breathless attention;
"oh, Raphe! had I known this but even ten days agone, how much
might I, how much might we all have been spared. But I thought
your mother would never have consented that the governor's
servant should mate with her noble son--and my own high spirit,
goaded on as it has been by the scornful usage I have met, has
led me to do a deed which may, perhaps, dash the cup of happiness
from my lips. But, then," she murmured, as if more in communion
with herself than in reply to her companion, "but then to be a
queen, and Raphe (they promised that, or I would never have
consented) to be a king. No, it must be: I have gone too far to
turn back;" and she raised her head, and looke steadfastly, but
apparently half-unconsciously at the young man, who, surprised at
her behaviour and language, was gazing intently upon her. At
length, slightly shaking her hand to arrest her attention, he
inquired again the cause of her extreme emotion. Receiving no
reply from Zulmiera, whose large dark eyes were still fixed upon
his face, he became seriously alarmed, and, in an anxious tone,
entreated her to quit directly the night air, and seek that
repose she appeared to need so much, within the precincts of
government house. Allowing herself to be led in that direction,
they in silence gained the shrubbery; when, after asking in vain
for an explanation, and hearing her again and again express her
assurance that she was not seriously indisposed, Raphe de
Merefield bade her good even. As he turned to leave the spot,
Zulmiera appeared to recover herself, and drawing a long breath,
exclaimed "To-morrow, dear Raphe, to-morrow thou shalt know all--
till then, farewell!"

For some moments after the departure of the young cavalier,
Zulmiera remained standing in the same posture; and then,
suddenly rousing herself, she gazed once more earnestly around,
and finding all still, stepped without the bounds of the
shrubbery, and retracing her steps, once more gained the border
of the copse. She was about to make use of an arranged signal,
when a dark figure came bounding over a natural mound, formed by
wild plants and brushwood, and in another instant stood before
her.

Near seven feet in height, and of corresponding breadth of
shoulder, the stranger looked able to compete with a dozen men of
ordinary growth, while his whole appearance was such as to strike
terror into the heart of the beholder. Attired in a garment of
dark red cloth, which only covered his person from his waist to
his knees, the remainder of his body was painted in a most
hideous manner. A black leathern belt, passing over his brawny
shoulders, supported a huge naked broad-sword, doubtless obtained
in some predatory exploit, whose edge was blunted and hacked by
many a rough encounter, dangled by his side, or struck harmlessly
against his naked legs. His face, the features of which were
naturally good, was disfigured by grotesque colourings, and
horrible scars; while his long black hair, to which was fastened
small pieces of copper, brass buttons, and tufts of parrot
feathers, floated behind him in matted locks, and gave him the
appearance of a wandering gnome. An old regimental coat, from
which part of the lace had been cut, and which was another of his
war spoils, was tied around his neck by the two sleeves, serving
the purpose of a cloak; and upon his breast reposed--a silent but
melancholy memento of his habits--a string of human teeth, their
dead white contrasting vividly with his dark skin. This stranger
was Cuanaboa, the dreaded Carib chief.

Rendering to Zulmiera his simple obeisance, he commenced the
conversation by remarking in a barbarous kind of dialect, "the
Boyez[93] gave the time to meet when the big star," pointing to
the moon, "rose above the hill, and the lady promised to obey;
but now it's shining o'er our heads, and the charm may be broken
--the bow may indeed be bent, and the arrow speed on its way, and
yet fall to the ground wide of the mark. We meet to-night, 'tis
true; but the time the Boyez appointed is long past, and now
perhaps our purpose may fail, and our enemies escape." "Oh, no!
Cuanaboa, believe not so," replied Zulmiera; "listen not to the
wild words of the old Boyez; thinkest thou _I_ care for what he
saith?" "Ay, lady, but thou art fallen from the faith of thy
fathers--thou hast lived too long with the Christians; but it
matters not now, let us talk of our plans. Myself and comrades
have agreed to lead the attack upon yonder house about this time
to-morrow night, and we look to you to draw from their weapons
those little round stones which kill so many of us, we know not
how. Guacanagari has joined me with twice so many men, (holding
up his hand, and spreading out his fingers,) and as fine a canoe
as ever was paddled along these seas. He landed with his party
just as the sun touched the waters; an hour badly chosen by him,
for too many eyes are then abroad. I hope, though, none saw them
but their red brothers, for they skulked along by the thickest
part of the woods; and now their canoe lies high and dry, beneath
the shelter of yon high banks, while they repose in safety in the
cave,[94] attended by old Quiba. Now, lady, as, when the white
men are subdued, and, falling beneath our clubs, or transfixed by
our arrows, serve us as sacrifices to Mayboya,[95] we are to look
upon you as our Queen----"

"And Raphe as your _king_" interrupted Zulmiera, in hurried
accents. "You promised that, or I would never have agreed to what
I have; and had I known Cuanaboa as much as I do to-night, even
that scheme of grandeur would not have tempted me to turn
traitor, to promise, as I have, to open the doors, where I have
lived so long, to give entrance to the enemy, and to lull their
fears, while the worse than blood-hounds were upon their steps.
Oh, Cuanaboa! I might have been so very happy, had I only waited
in patience for a little time--happier as plain Mistress de
Merefield, than I shall be, perhaps, as queen of the Caribbees;
but it is no use repining now; I have given my word, and, right
or wrong, Zulmiera will stand by it."

The long eyelashes fell over her burning eyes, and the beating of
her heart sounded audibly, and shook her very frame; but
recovering herself, she continued--"There is another subject to
be discussed, Cuanaboa; the daughter of the governor is my
dearest friend, and therefore she must be preserved unharmed
throughout the fray, guarded with the most scrupulous care, and I
look to you to place her in safety. Dost thou comprehend what I
say?"

"Yes, lady; and I was going to remark, when you interrupted me,
that as you wish certain of the enemy saved alive, particularly
the fair youth you mentioned just now, it would be well for you
to give your orders to Guacanagari; and for that purpose I would
advise you to visit the cave to-morrow evening, when we intend
holding a serious assembly and dance, previous to commencing the
attack. Guacanagari will be rejoiced to meet you, and he will be
as fond of the maiden and the youth as I am;" and a very sinister
expression, but unobserved by Zulmiera, passed over the face of
the Carib chief. "Besides, lady, it is but right that Guacanagari
should know his queen--never Carib had one before."

"I will attend," replied Zulmiera. "And now, as it is past
midnight, 'tis time we parted;" so saying, she bowed to the
Carib, and drawing her mantle around her, walked away with all
the dignity of a sovereign.

Keeping his dark eye fixed upon her as long as she continued in
sight, no sooner had the intervening shrubs screened her from his
view, than, throwing himself upon the ground, the Carib broke
into a shrill laugh. "And so the haughty beauty thinks that a
people who have scarcely known control, will bend their shoulders
to the dominion of a girl and a white-faced boy!--ha! ha! If the
wild kites chose a king, would it be a colibri?[96] No! Should
the Caribs follow the custom of the strangers who have come among
us, and torn away our most fruitful countries, and own a king,
who should it be but Cuanaboa? for who has slain so many enemies
and drunk their blood as I have? or who can shew a longer string
of teeth than I have here?" and he played with the one which
ornamented his neck. "If Zulmiera will be queen, it must be as my
wife; and truly she would serve to swell a richer triumph than I
even expect to have. But as for the youth, his race is almost
run; before this time to-morrow, I think he will give me but
little further trouble. 'Tis well I came so soon to-night, and
thus was witness of the meeting. I wish I could have understood
what he said; but these pale-faced people speak so vilely, that
it is hard to know what they mean. However, it matters not, I saw
enough; and as I intend Zulmiera to be my prize, I will very
shortly get rid of the youngster; he'll make a capital sacrifice
to Old Mayboya. White men eat better than red people, it can't be
denied;" and as he finished his soliloquy, he arose from the
ground, and springing over the brush-wood, was lost to sight in
the impending copse.




[92] A kind of small guitar, in use about the 16th and 17th
centuries.

[93] A priest, or magician, among the Caribs.

[94] Now called Bat's Cave.

[95] Supreme deity among the Caribs.

[96] The Indian name for the humming bird.




                          CHAPTER XXV.



                   CONCLUSION OF THE LEGEND.

The morning after this eventful meeting rose fair and bright.
Bridget and Zulmiera, seated at an open window, inhaled the sweet
breeze, while they bent over their embroidery frames; and the
fair Englishwoman was giving a description of her own far-off
land, when, gazing in the direction of the before-named copse,
Zulmiera espied a white feather glancing for a moment above the
tops of the trees, a well-known signal indicating the presence of
Raphe de Merefield.

Framing an excuse, she shortly left the apartment; and taking a
circuitous route to escape observation, in a few moments gained
the old tree, where, as expected, she found her lover.

"Zulmiera," said the young man, after the first greetings were
passed, "I have suffered deeply in mind since we parted, on
account of the strange words you let fall last evening; and I now
seek your presence to demand, as your affianced husband, their
signification. Tell me, Zulmiera, thine whole heart, or as Willy
Shakspeare saith--

   "----If thou dost love me,
    Shew me thy thought?"

Accosted in this sudden manner, and surprised by his serious
demeanour, Zulmiera's caution forsook her, and bursting into
tears, confessed to her lover, as best she could, the following
facts. Having been treated with great scorn and harshness by the
governor, and looking upon herself as the descendant of a line of
chieftains, and consequently entitled to respect, a deep and
irresistible feeling of revenge sprang up in her breast, and
absorbed her every thought. Roaming, as she had ever been wont,
amid the romantic dells and leafy labyrinths of her native
islands, she came one evening upon a curious cavern; her love of
novelty led her to inspect it, but in the act of doing so, she
was driven back in alarm by the sight of a flashing pair of eyes.

Unable to suppress her fears, yet too much overcome by the
encounter to fly, she leant against the rocky opening of the
cave; when, rushing from his concealment, a powerful man, whom
she immediately recognised as a Carib, darted upon her, and
placing his hand upon her mouth to prevent her screams from being
heard, was about to bear her away as his captive.

Terrified as she was, she still had the presence of mind to
declare her origin, and claim his forbearance, on the score of
their allied blood. To such a plea, a Carib's heart is never
deaf; the grasp upon the shoulder was relaxed; the armed warrior
stood quietly by her side; and a conversation in the Carib tongue
(which Zulmiera had acquired from her mother) was carried on
between them.

The stranger declared himself to be a Carib chief, named
Cuanaboa, and with the openness for which that people were noted
among their friends, acquainted Zulmiera with the cause of his
appearance in that lone cave. Following the example of his
fathers, Cuanaboa said he had resolved to make an attack upon
Antigua, accompanied by a neighbouring chief and their several
tribes; but in a war-council held by them, it had been arranged
for him to pay a secret visit to the island, in order to inspect
it, and endeavour to find out its weakest parts. Accordingly,
leaving his mountain home in Dominica, he had paddled himself
over in a slight canoe, and easily discovering the cave, which
had been well-known to the tribe in their former predatory
visits, he took up his abode there.

Zulmiera listened eagerly to this communication; and excited as
she was, thought it a good opportunity for effectually procuring
her revenge. After arranging for the safety of Raphe de
Merefield, to whom she had been long engaged, she finally
promised, that upon an appointed night, she would open the doors
of government house, and admit the band of Caribs. Ignorant of
the real force of Antigua, and led away by her own turbulent and
romantic passions, the Indian girl wrongly supposed that a few
half-armed Caribs would be able to strike terror into the breasts
and compete with the well-arranged ranks of the English. In
consequence of this wild fancy, Zulmiera further proposed, as her
reward, that when the battle was gained, and the English
defeated, she should be immediately elected queen, and Raphe king
of the Caribbees. Many other meetings had taken place between
herself and the Carib chief; and she concluded her relation, by
informing Raphe of the arrival of the whole band of Caribs, and
that the hour of midnight was the time proposed for the intended
assault upon government house.

The surprise, the consternation of the young man, as she unfolded
this tale to him, was overpowering, and for some moments he
remained as if rooted to the ground. At length, striking his hand
upon his forehead, he exclaimed, in a tone of extreme bitterness
--"Oh! Zulmiera--Zulmiera! what hast thou done! Surely it is some
horrible dream; and yet it is too true; thou couldst not have
distressed me so, an' it had not been. To-night, sayest thou?
Unhappy girl, thou hast indeed dashed the cup of happiness from
thy lips! Now I understand thy visible emotion--thy
half-smothered expressions! But I must away--the lives of
hundreds, perhaps, hang upon my steps;" and darting from her, he
left her to the deepest feelings of despair.

Leaning against the tree for the support her own limbs denied
her, the unfortunate Zulmiera remained with her face buried in
her hands, until aroused by the sound of footsteps. Hastily
looking up, Raphe again stood before her. "Dearest Zulmiera,"
said the pitying young man--"rouse thyself; I cannot leave thee
thus; all may yet be well. I will immediately to the governor,
and without implicating you as my author, inform him of the
inpending attack. Much as I dislike the man, it is my proper plan
--so now dry your eyes," for the warm tears were again gushing
down the cheeks of the repentant girl; "return to the house, keep
yourself quiet, and trust the matter to me." So saying, he
imprinted a fond kiss upon her brow, and turning away, hastened
with a quick step in the opposite direction.

Mastering her emotions, Zulmiera returned to her home,
determined, when the evening fell, to seek the cave, and if
possible, persuade Cuanaboa of the impracticability of his
schemes, and by that means, prevent the effusion of blood, which
a meeting of the Caribs and English was sure to produce.

In the meantime, Raphe sought the presence of the governor, and
without bringing forward Zulmiera's name, contrived to give him
the necessary information, and then departed, taking upon himself
the office of scout. Preparations were immediately made for the
intended attack--ambuscades arranged, and fire-arms cleaned; and
with anxiety the party awaited the rising of the moon.

As the day grew to a close, Zulmiera became more and more
restless, until at length, unable to bear the conflict of her
feelings, she left the house, and, unperceived by the family,
sought the promised meeting in the cave. The sun had sunk behind
the waves, and the stars began to peep forth, as the half-Carib
gained the entrance of the wood. Carefully threading her way
through its tangled bushes, and avoiding as she went the numerous
impediments, she gradually progressed deeper and deeper in its
thickening gloom. The air was calm, and nothing disturbed the
almost pristine stillness but the whisperings of the soft breeze,
or the shrill cry of some of the aquatic fowls who made that
lonely grove their home. In some parts the foliage was less
thick, and the beams of the now rising moon forced their way
through and snorted upon the ground, forming many a fantastic
shadow. Uprooted and sapless trees lay in various directions,
around which parasites wound in luxuriant beauty, and hid the
whitened wood in wreaths of green. In other parts, the larger
trees and shrubs made way for dense thickets of thorny underwood,
over which the active girl was obliged to leap.

Onward she sped, stopping only now and then to recover her
breath, and then darting forward at increased speed, until,
gaining a little knoll, where pointed crystals strewed the
ground, and the manchineel showered its poisonous apples,
beautiful and treacherous as "Dead Sea fruits," a mark in one of
the trees told her she was near the place of her destination; and
winding round another thicket, Zulmiera stood before the mouth of
the cave.

The interior was lighted by a few torches of some resinous wood,
stuck in the fissures of the rock; and their flickering light
shone upon the dark countenances and wild costume of the inmates.
Branches of trees roughly plaited together were placed partly
before the opening, and served to screen the light of the torches
from the view of any wandering stranger; while the ground before
the entrance to the cave had been cleared away, forming a kind of
rustic amphitheatre.

As soon as the maiden was perceived, Cuanaboa came forward, and
introduced her to Guacanagari, and a few of their principal
followers, who only appeared to be waiting for her presence, to
commence their solemn dance, as was ever the custom of the
Caribs, before undertaking any warfare.

Darting from the cavern, about twenty of these wild warriors
arranged themselves in a circle around an old woman, known among
them by the name of Quiba, who, squatting upon the ground,
chanted, in a monotonous voice, the burden of a war-song: the men
moving slowly, and joining in the chorus--"_Avenge the bones of
your fathers, which lie whitening upon the plain!_" Continuing
this revolving motion for some time, but gradually increasing in
celerity, they at length appeared as if worked up to the highest
pitch of their passions; and releasing each other's hands, and
twirling round and round with the greatest rapidity, tearing
their hair, and gnashing their teeth, at length threw themselves
upon the ground, foaming with rage.

Zulmiera, terrified at their frantic movements and horrid
contortions, tremblingly leant against the trunk of a tree,
until, aroused by an exclamation from the old woman, she
perceived another party of savages, apparently of meaner grade,
bringing in large calabashes and baskets, huge pieces pf baked
meats, and bowls of some kind of liquids. Placing them upon the
ground, they retreated; and old Quiba, quitting her recumbent
posture, seized upon one of the pieces of meat, and throwing it
among the prostrate warriors, exclaimed, in a cracked voice--
"_Eat of the flesh of your enemies, and avenge your fathers'
bones!_"

As she uttered these words, the men sprang from the ground, and
rushing upon the viands, devoured them with savage greediness;
while Cuanaboa, lifting up one of the smaller pieces of meat,
approached Zulmiera, and, with harshness, requested her to eat
it. Alarmed at his ferocious manner, but not daring to shew it,
the trembling girl essayed to obey; and putting a portion of it
into her mouth, by a strong effort swallowed it. No sooner was
this effected, than, breaking into a horrid laugh, and with his
eyes gleaming like the hyaena's, Cuanaboa shouted to the old
woman, who had just before entered the cave--"Bring forth our
present for our queen; surely, she deserves it, now she is one of
us!"

Startled by his evident irony, Zulmiera turned round, at the
moment that Quiba emerged from a natural passage in the interior
of the cave, bearing in her hand a small bundle, which, with a
sardonic grin, she laid at the feet of the observant girl.
"There, lady; that is our first present," croaked forth the old
hag. "Ay, lift it up, and search it well; Mayboya will stand your
friend, and send you many more, I hope." So saying, she hobbled
up to one of the torches, and taking it from its resting-place,
held it before the face of Zulmiera.

Impelled by an irresistible desire to know the worst, Zulmiera
stooped and undid the folds of red cloth wound around their
proffered gift. After untwining it for some time, the wrapping
felt damp to the touch; and dreading she knew not what, she
loosed the last fold, _and a human head rolled upon the ground_.

Uttering a cry of horror, but forced on by her unconquerable
emotions, she turned the gory object round; and as the torches
flashed with further glare, her eye fell upon the pallid
features. The blue eye, glassed by the hand of death, and over
which the starting eyelids refused to droop--the parted lips,
parted with the last throe of agony, and shewing the pearly teeth
--the finely-moulded cheeks, but disfigured by a deep gash--and
the long auburn hair, dabbled with the blood that still oozed
from the severed veins, bespoke it Raphe de Merefield's! Her own
blood congealed around her heart like ice--her pulse quivered and
stopped--and with one unearthly, prolonged shriek, the
unfortunate Zulmiera sank senseless upon the ground.

Recovered by the means of some pungent herb applied to her
nostrils, by the hands of Quiba, she awoke to all her misery. Her
eyes fell again upon the mutilated head of her lover; while the
demoniac voice of Cuanaboa whispered in her ear--"The food you
partook of just now _was part of the body of your minion!_ I met
him wandering in the copse a time agone; and I thought he would
make a fine sacrifice to Mayboya." This last horrible information
completely altered her nature, and changed the fond loving girl
to the disposition of a fiend. Lifting up the head, and
imprinting upon the blood-stained lips one long fervent kiss, she
enveloped it again in the wrappings of red cloth, and carefully
binding it around her waist, was in the act of quitting the cave,
when arrested by the powerful grasp of Cuanaboa.

"Not so fast, lady!" exclaimed the Carib chief; "remember your
oath to Mayboya! We still stand in need of your assistance to
guide us to the house of yon white chief. Remember that was part
of your bargain: let us in; and when we have vanquished the
enemy, we shall still be willing to receive you as our queen;
that is, if you will agree to take _me_ for your king instead of
the pale-faced boy, whose body has served to regale us and our
people." With eyes that flashed fire, Zulmiera was about to
reply, when suddenly constraining herself, she simply muttered--
"My oath to Mayboya!--follow me, then!" and with determined
purpose, left the cavern.

The whole party of Caribs, consisting of about eighty, were by
this time gathered around the spot, armed with bows and arrows,
clubs, darts, spears, and all the other rude implements of
warfare. As the two chiefs made their appearance, they pointed to
the moon--then rapidly ascending the heavens--and uttering a
suppressed war-whoop, they commenced their march in the direction
of government house, preceded by the half-Carib.

Unconscious of pain, Zulmiera darted through the thorniest
thickets, turned not aside for any impediment; but borne up by
the hopes of revenge, she outstripped the most active of the
party. Knowing, as she did, that the inmates of government house
were prepared for the attack, she felt assured that few, if any,
of the Caribs would escape; but completely altered in
disposition, from the effects of the horrible scenes she had gone
through, she experienced no compunctious feelings for the event.
Her only wish, her fixed purpose, was to possess herself of a
dagger--stab Cuanaboa to the heart--_drink his warm blood as it
gushed forth_--and after bathing the head of her lover with it,
kill herself upon the spot. To deceive Cuanaboa, she pretended
that her fear of Mayboya led her to conduct the party, an
assurance which his own blind zeal for that dreaded deity caused
him to believe.

In furtherance of her dreadful scheme, she carefully avoided
those spots where she supposed an ambuscade of English might be
stationed; fearing lest some other hand should take the life of
the chief. In this manner she was gradually progressing towards
the house, thinking it more probable a weapon could be there
procured, when in passing a clump of trees, one of the governor's
scouts, who was stationed behind it, and who was unable to bear
the sight of the Carib chief so near him without endeavouring to
take his life, sprang from his concealment, and rushing upon
Cuanaboa, was in the act of stabbing him with a dirk, when, with
the cry of some infuriated wild animal robbed of its prey,
Zulmiera was upon him. Wresting the weapon from the astonished
Englishman, the maddened girl fled after the Caribs, who, abashed
by this encounter, and the sudden appearance of a troop of
soldiers, were flying in the greatest confusion, and at their
utmost speed, in direction of the before-named creek, where they
had left their canoes.

Many of the Caribs fell wounded by the way, from the fire of
their pursuers' muskets; but Cuanaboa, closely attended by
Zulmiera, still kept on, until after passing over the same
undulating ground, forcing their way through thickets, leaping
over natural barriers, and creeping through leafy arcades, they
gained upon the creek. But woe to the Caribs! a party of English,
in hot pursuit, were, in fact, driving them into a trap, at the
point of their weapons. Throughout this irregular and hurried
retreat, Zulmiera had never dropped her dirk, or her gory burden;
neither had she lost sight of Cuanaboa; while the chief, seeing
her dash the weapon from his uncovered breast, when one stroke of
the Englishman's hand would have caused his death, thought she
had forgiven his horrid barbarity, and was well pleased to see
her nigh him.

As they emerged from the deeper glades of the wood, a volume of
smoke rose above the trees; and upon gaining the open ground, the
whole extent of their danger was revealed to the Caribs. There
lay their canoes, a burning mass; while the foreground was
occupied by another band of Englishmen, ready prepared for
battle. Hemmed in on all sides, the Caribs fought with the fury
of uncaged beasts, and sold their lives dearly. Many of the
English were stretched upon the ground, a flattened mass, from
the blows of their heavy clubs; while others, wounded by their
poisoned arrows, only lived to endure further torments. Still
Cuanaboa remained unhurt; and standing upon a gentle knoll,
brandished his club, and dealt destruction upon the foremost of
his enemies. His friends were rapidly falling around him; and as
he turned to seek for refuge, Zulmiera approached him
unperceived, and with one blow, drove the dirk into his very
heart.

Without a groan, the Carib chief sank dead upon the earth; and
Zulmiera, kneeling by him, plucked the weapon from the wound, and
applying her lips, _drank the warm blood as it gurgled forth!_
Unbinding the head of the unfortunate Raphe de Merefield from her
waist, where she had carried it throughout the fray, she gazed
ardently at it; tenderly parted the still bright hair, imprinted
a last kiss upon the cold lips, and then taking up in her hand
some of the vital stream, which was still flowing from the wound
of Cuanaboa, and forming a pool around him, she bathed the head
with it, exclaiming as she did so, "Raphe, thou art avenged!
thine enemy lies dead before thee, slain by my hand; and thy
bride, faithful in life and death, comes to share thy gory bed."

These actions completed, she looked up. The dying and the dead
lay stretched around her,--the conquering English were looking to
their captives,--the last gleam of the fire was shooting upwards
to the sky,--the moon had gained her zenith,--while, as if in
contrast to that bloody field, the waters of the creek rolled on
like molten silver, beneath her lovely beams. For one moment the
wild but beautiful girl gazed upon the scene; old remembrances
sprang up in her mind, and brought the tear into her eye. But
dashing them away, she regained her former implacable mood; and
as a party of the governor's servants came forward to arrest her,
placing one hand upon her lover's head, she raised with the other
the dirk--its bright steel glittered for a moment in the moonbeam
--in the next it was ensheathed in her heart; and she fell a
corpse upon that dire chief, to whom she owed all her misery.

The scene of this Antiguan tragedy may still be viewed; the creek
bears the name of "Indian Creek," while the cavern in which they
held their barbaric meeting is called "Bat's cave." The governor
retained his office until 1660, when Charles II. was restored to
the vacant crown; but refusing to acknowledge his sovereign, he
was superseded, and the vacant post was filled by Major-General
Poyntz, a royalist, who continued to act as governor until 1663,
when Lord Francis Willoughby obtained a grant of the island.

The name of Raphe de Merefield (the uncle of the young cavalier)
appears with that of Sir Thomas Warner in the original grant
signed by Charles I. It is still to be seen at "Stoney Hill,"--an
estate belonging to the late Samuel Warner, president of Antigua,
and a descendent of the old family. This property was willed by
him to his god-son, ------ Shand, Esq., of the house of Messrs.
Shand, Liverpool.




                         CHAPTER XXVI.



  Towns: Falmouth--Church and churchyard--Mangroves and acacias--
  Black's Point--Bridgetown--Willoughby Bay--Its site and
  decoration--The superintendent of the Wesleyan schools--
  School-room--Methodist chapel--The Memoras--St Philip's church
  --Beautiful views--Parham--Its derivation and site--St Peter's
  church--Churchyard--The new church--Methodist chapel and
  school-room.

In the year 1675, six towns were appointed in Antigua as places
of trade--viz., St. John's, Falmouth, Old Road, (or Carlisle
Road,) Bridgetown, Willoughby Bay, Bermudian Valley, and Parham.

St. John's, as the _capital_ of the island, has already been
noticed in a chapter by itself, and it now devolves upon me to
endeavour to describe, what is almost indescribable, the
arrangement of the other towns, which, with the exception of
Bermudian Valley, are still in a state of existence.

To commence with Falmouth. As it lies just before the traveller
gains English Harbour, the road to it is the same already
mentioned in our journey to that place; and consequently another
description would be tiresome and superfluous. I must, however,
remark that near the entrance of the town a pretty turn in the
road leaves the blank-looking country, which so generally
predominates between Falmouth and the capital, and leads you into
a kind of defile; on one side, bordered by rugged banks thickly
covered with the yellow acacia, and its sweet-scented blossoms;
and on the other, by the picturesque ascent of Monk's Hill,
surmounted by all its frowning battlements.[97]

The town of Falmouth is noted for being the first part of the
island settled upon by the English, who, under the command of Mr.
Warner, son of Sir Thomas Warner, emigrated from St.
Christopher's in 1632, and laid out the surrounding country in
fields of tobacco, cotton, and ginger, which were for some years
after the staple commodities of Antigua.

Humble as might have been the architectural ornaments of this
town in those early days, it seems almost an impossibility to
suppose them less then than they are at present; for if strangers
(from some of our bustling maritime cities in Europe, for
instance) were suddenly and unconsciously landed in the streets
of Falmouth, they would to all certainty believe them to be so
many pathways to the "castle of indolence;" and the irregular and
dismal-looking buildings to be the habitations of some lawless,
vagrant tribe. A few four-cornered houses, in shape like a
pigeon-coop, and of dimensions to suit a dweller of _Lilliput_,
are elevated a short distance from the ground by being placed
upon empty boxes or barrels, or four pillars of rudely-piled
stones, which arrangement forms a snug retreat for the pigs or
poultry of the inmate, or serves as a reservoir for sundry
discarded pots and pans, or other "household gods." These
habitations are as variously placed as the taste of their owners
may chance to dictate. Some present an acute angle, others a
_broadside_ to the eye of passengers. Some stand in what I
suppose is intended to represent a garden, whose rank weeds and
straggling vegetables are guarded from the steps of the unwelcome
marauder only by a _gate_, made from empty candle-boxes or
barrel-heads, flanked by a thinly sprinkled row of some dwarf
shrub, over which the gallant "Xit" (whom Mr. Ainsworth has so
cleverly called into existence in his admirable "Tower of
London") could have stepped with the greatest ease; letting alone
the frequent lapses in the enclosure, through which a bulky man
might readily pass. To make all secure, however, these rustic
gates are generally garnished with a huge padlock, which is of
course _carefully_ locked whenever the owner is absent; while the
key, with admirable precaution, is tucked into some little
peep-hole near, that it may be ready for the use of any stray
visitants.

A few of these dwellings are, however, of superior form and
fabric; and one stands forth in all the glories of palisading,
and if I mistake not, bright green verandahs. It looks, by the
side of its pigmy neighbours, like the Colossus of Rhodes, to the
mandarin figures in our English grocers' shops.

The present church, dedicated to St. Paul, is a plain,
uninteresting-looking building, standing at the outskirts of the
town, and capable of affording about 400 sittings.

The churchyard might be made as picturesque, and looks as quiet,
as some of those pretty rural burial-places we oftentimes alight
upon in dear old England's sequestered nooks. Some fine trees,
and a few handsome monuments, are to be met with; and if the rank
grass was cleared away a little, and some of the various
beautiful flowers, which are to be found in all parts of the
island, planted there, it would present a spot equalling in
appearance many of our modern cemeteries.

It may by some be thought folly thus to beautify the place of
death--to garnish that spot where the worm revels upon the once
animated clay!--to plant the gladsome, gaily-tinted flowers where
all is mouldering beneath! Be it so--yet would I see the flowers
blooming over the grave of those I have loved, and while seated
near, feel that the bitterness of death is past, and that their
happy disembodied spirits range, free from all sorrows, amid the
amaranthine bowers of heaven! Like the late talented and
oft-lamented "L. E. L.," I love to frequent the scene of our last
resting-place--like her, to--

   "Stand beneath the haunted yew,
    And watch each quiet tomb;
    And in the ancient churchyard feel
    Solemnity, not gloom.

    The place is purified with hope--
    The hope that is of prayer;
    And human love, and heavenward thought,
    And pious faith are there.

    The golden cord which binds us all
    Is loosed, not rent in twain;
    And love, and hope, and fear unite,
    To bring the past again."

The parochial school is held in a small house near the church. It
is conducted upon the same plan as the other schools of the kind
in Antigua; the instruction consisting of lessons in reading,
writing, arithmetic, repetition of catechism and hymns, and
plain-work for the girls.

St. Paul's has a chapel-of-ease in English Harbour; which was, in
truth, a private dwelling-house, but now, disencumbered of its
partitions, serves as a chapel, and is capable, it is said, of
affording accommodation for 350 persons; during the week, it is
appropriated to the use of an infant school.

The whole of Falmouth is thickly studded with clumps of acacia,
privet, and prickly pear; all of which are of the _thorny
family_, and if report be true, serve the inhabitants instead of
pins. Between Falmouth and English Harbour lies a marshy thickly
covered with sand, and dotted about with groups of
mangrove-trees, in all their glittering, green foliage, forming
so many _oases_ in the midst of a burning desert. The sea
overflows this spot at times, and leaves its tribute in the shape
of small shells and bunches of sea-weed.

Opposite to Falmouth, looking across the waters of the harbour, a
bold promontory stretches out into the ocean, to which has been
given the name of "Black's Point." As it belongs to a gentleman
of that name, it is generally supposed in Antigua, to derive its
cognomen from that cause. Such supposition is, however,
incorrect, for it is laid down in an old chart of the island as
"Black's Point" long before its present possessor came into
existence. The real origin of its bearing that appellation is
from the fact of its having been the place where it was customary
to land the cargoes of newly-imported negroes, prior to the
abolition of the slave trade; and from this circumstance the name
it now bears was given to it.

Falmouth Harbour is considered one of the best in Antigua, and is
capable of affording safe anchorage for ships in those times of
danger to which the West Indies are exposed. The shores of the
bay boast their silver fringe of sand, which is often selected by
the parent turtle, as a place of safety, in which to deposit her
two or three hundred eggs; and when the sun has performed the
duties of incubation, which the lethargic mother refuses to
perform, numbers of these little creatures may be seen, crawling
towards their favourite element, where they feast and fatten,
until, perhaps, in after-years, they are doomed to increase the
table store of some Antiguan _gourmand_, or, perchance, find
their way to England, and tickle the palate of "the lord mayor,
and the other city authorities" within the sound of Bow bells.

Old Road (or Carlisle Road, as it was once called) and St. Mary's
church having been already described, in our "pilgrimage to Tom
Moore's Spring," it remains for me, in the next place, to mention
Bridgetown, or Willoughby Bay, as it is more frequently termed.
Here, again, I have the task of describing, what is almost _a
nondescript_, for no stranger would ever discover that it was a
town unless the fact were pointed out to him. If the man who
painted a lion was obliged to write under it, "This is a lion," I
am sure the person who huddled the three or four houses together,
which constitutes Bridgetown, had need to have put upon a
giant-like placard, "This is a town!" unless, indeed, a rather
good-looking Methodist chapel, a small mission-house, a stone
dwelling-house, with school-room attached, and a few of my
_four-cornered_ friends, stuck in here and there, like the dots
in a landscape of some country painter, to represent _crows_, be
sufficient to merit for it that lofty title, which Dr. Johnson,
or some other lexicographer of equal renown, leads us to suppose
signifies "a large collection of houses."

As regards the population of this _town_, (I like to give places
their proper names,) I can give but little information. With the
exception of the very kind-hearted superintendant of the Wesleyan
schools, Mr. Charles Thwaites, and his equally amiable wife,
their very pretty little boy, one or two domestics, and their
scholars of every shade, the only inhabitants I saw were flocks
of black-headed gulls, busily employed in following their
piscatory avocations; a few half-starved looking sheep, vainly
endeavouring to screen themselves from the fiery beams of the sun
beneath the leafless branches of some blighted shrubs; and three
or four long-necked, screaming birds, known in this part of the
world as gorlings, and which derive their subsistence from the
same source as their neighbours, the gulls.

After resting for a short time at the superintendant's dwelling,
we proceeded to the school-room, a most commodious apartment,
measuring 50ft. by 48ft., and capable of containing 500 persons.
The whole of this establishment, including the superintendant's
house, which is detached, was erected by the Church Missionary
Society; but after being used by them for a short time, it was
turned over to the "Ladies' Society," to whom it still belongs,
although the Wesleyan Mission holds its school there.

The school-room was but thinly attended upon the day of our
visit, there not being more than 40 children--the usual number is
about 100. Upon our entrance, they all rose up with "We'll make
our obeisance together, as children ought to do," and then,
quitting their raised seats, formed into double lines, their
teacher at their head, and marched round the apartment to the
tune of one of their infant rhymes. After performing many
martial-like evolutions, they finally arranged themselves into a
deep phalanx, and thus sang another of their little songs. Many
of them are proficients in reading the scriptures, and are well
versed in the historical parts of them. I hope and trust the
education so liberally bestowed upon them, and above all, the
religious instruction which they receive, may benefit their
after-conduct, and lead them to do their duty in that sphere of
life in which it has pleased their Creator to place them. I was
much pleased to learn from Mr. Thwaites that, in almost every
instance, the pupils who have left the schools under his charge
have followed agricultural employments. To a country whose grand
resource, and, indeed, entire dependence, is placed upon the
cultivation of the sugar-cane, this conduct upon the part of its
rising generation must be very important; and if the lower
classes continue to do so, and not, because they are free,
despise the hoe, Antigua may stand forth as pre-eminently
flourishing among the other West Indian colonies.

Mr. Thwaites is the paid superintendant of all the Wesleyan
country schools. His salary is 150l. sterling per annum, a small
recompence (although quite as liberal as the mission can afford)
for the constant care his responsible situation calls for, and
which he performs with untiring zeal. For about twenty-nine years
has this good man been employed in providing for the mental wants
of the black population, and in endeavouring to lead their young
minds to the only fount of real knowledge. Unmindful of passing
events he has kept on his irksome task, (for irksome it must be
to drive knowledge into the brains of some of these little
negroes,) buoyed up by his feelings of deep philanthropy.

The first few years of his employment were passed without
receiving any reward, but the approval of his own conscience. As,
however, his laudable exertions became known, he was engaged by
the "Church Missionary Society," whose interests he faithfully
served for near ten years. Since that period he has been in the
employ of the Wesleyan mission. Although from being such a
valuable auxiliary in rearing "the infant mind," and teaching
"the young idea how to shoot," the bishop would gladly have
retained his services, provided he gave up all connexion with the
Methodists.

Mr. Thwaites has under his charge eleven day-schools, with about
800 scholars; and three Sunday-schools, with about 900 scholars.
Besides attending these several schools, Mr. Thwaites visits the
neighbouring estates in the evenings, for the purpose of giving
the labourers religious instruction, and guarding his elder
pupils, or those who have left his schools, for the purpose of
engaging in the avocations customary to their province in life,
against those temptations to which their age and sex are most
subject.

It has been remarked in a late publication, (in commenting upon
events in Antigua) that "after ransacking the whole freed
population for a dozen suitable teachers of children, Mr.
Thwaites could not find even that number who could read well."
Now, this is a great error, _and altogether contradicted by Mr.
Thwaites himself_. The blacks certainly had not the means of
improving themselves in former years, as the more fortunate
generation have had since emancipation; but that the _whole_
class were so totally ignorant as not to be able to _read_, is
entirely incorrect. In proof of this, the superintendant pointed
out to our notice several teachers who were well adapted for
their employment; one in particular, who, Mr. T. remarked,
conducted a school consisting of 120 scholars, which he
instructed in reading, writing, and arithmetic, in which last
branch of education many of his pupils had attained to "Practice"
and "Vulgar Fractions."

The salaries of these paid teachers (of which there are
seventeen, the remainder giving their services without any
recompence) are very small--not more than from three to four
dollars (12s. and 16s. sterling) per month. They are paid by the
"Ladies' Negro Education Society," and other benevolent societies
in England, who also defray the other expenses of the schools,
with the exception of the superintendent's salary, which is
provided by the Wesleyan mission. The children, who receive
instruction in writing, cyphering, and needlework, pay a small
pittance, which is placed in the school fund.

There is a very neat and excellent little library attached to the
Willoughby-Bay school, where the works of "Abbott," "Sherwood,"
"Pike," and various other pious authors, are open to the use of
all, besides treatises upon geography, history, and experimental
philosophy. The lighter works, such as Mrs. Sherwood's pretty,
and often affecting, little narratives, are read, Mrs. Thwaites
informed me, with avidity by the negroes, to which intelligence
their well-thumbed covers gave a tacit assent. Around the
schoolroom were hung various cards, with texts of scripture
printed upon them in large characters, that "such who run may
read"--a practice I greatly admire, for turn whichever way you
will, some goodly sentence meets your eye.

In the neat little yard attached to Mr. Thwaites' dwelling, we
met with some old friends of mine--a small wooden hive of "busy
bees." A pane of glass inserted into the box gave us a view of
the industrious little creatures building their waxen cells, in
which to store their fragrant food; but the weather was against
them--the long drought had withered the flowers, and thus
curtailed their stock of honey. There are very few bee-hives to
be met with in Antigua. This is rather strange, as all Creoles
are noted for having a "sweet tooth," and consequently honey is
reckoned a luxury. It cannot be from want of proper food, that
the labours of these little insects are discountenanced, for
Nature has been most prodigal of her stores to Antigua, and
clothed her every hill and dale with melliferous blossoms.

I have heard of one gentleman, however, who was very anxious to
establish an apiary upon his property in Antigua, and accordingly
he obtained some choice hives, which in due time were safely
deposited in his well-stocked garden. Soon after their arrival,
however, business called him from the island, and he committed
his valued bees to the care of his overseer, a true son of
Hibernia, with an expressed hope, "that they would not wander
from home." The day after his departure, the overseer, wishful of
obliging his employer, stole from his multitudinous duties a
sufficient time to watch the movements of his buzzing charge. The
bright sun drew them from their hives, and jocund in their little
hearts, away they bounded on the balmy zephyr. Innumerable
flowers dazzled their eyes, and courted their attention. Here the
gorgeous _hybiscus_ spread out its glowing bosom--there the
blushing _frangipanne_ loaded the air with its rich fragrance. At
one moment they inserted their trunks into the sweet-scented cup
of the jasmine; at the next, and they brushed the pearly dew from
the brilliant radii of the passion-flower. Onward they flew,
allured by flowerets of every colour, each one as

   "Fair as the fabulous Asphodels;"

until at length, to the dismay of the overseer, they were lost to
sight! He was no naturalist: he had never studied "Reaumur" upon
the "habits of bees," and as the last straggler disappeared, he
thought "Well! Mr. ------ hoped they would not wander from home,
but by St. Patrick they're all gone, and if they ever come back
is a query." However, as nothing could be done, he was obliged to
leave them to their fate; and in a rather disconsolate mood, "he
turned and left the spot."

Hours wore away,

   "The evening came, the sun descended,"

and the truant insects returned to their hive, to the great joy
of the observant overseer. "Ah! ah!" said he, as they alighted,
heavily laden with their luscious store, "a pretty trick you have
played me to-day; but by my patron saint, I will take care of you
to-morrow." He watched until they were all safe housed; and then
with hurried steps, and self-congratulatory hitches of the
shoulders, he sought the spot where masons had been lately
working. Providing himself with some of the soft mortar, he again
visited the apiary; and with ready will, and determined purpose,
applied to the opening of each hive a sufficient quantum of the
cement, so as to effectually forbid the egress of any bee. It is
almost needless to mention, that upon the return of the
gentleman, whose absence had been protracted, he found his
favourite insects defunct; nor need I animadvert upon the
vexation his overseer's management of an apiary caused him.

To resume my subject--which the bees, and their untimely fate,
drove from my head: after inspecting the school, and expressing
our gratification, we proceeded to visit the Methodist chapel, a
stone's throw from the school-room. It is a plain wooden
building, measuring 45 feet by 60 feet, and capable of containing
900 sittings. The burying-ground is attached, and serves as the
place of interment for the whole town, and some part of the
adjoining country. Adjacent to the chapel is the mission-house, a
neat little domicile for such an extraordinary-looking place as
Bridgetown.

There is nothing interesting about Willoughby Bay. No glittering
white sand, or clear blue water with its dazzling surf to be
seen. A line of blighted, sickly-looking bushes shuts out the
sight of the beach; and the part of the bay which greets our eyes
looks gloomy and discoloured, as if from lurking reefs and
shoals. Upon the opposite side of the bay, looking across the
water, lies the Memoras, a long ridge of rocks, over which the
sea rushes with tremendous force, and with a deafening noise,
which may be heard at a considerable distance. Upon a still day,
the angry moan of the waves can be clearly distinguished at
Bridgetown. Willoughby Bay derives its name from Francis Lord
Willoughby, who in 1663 was made Lord Proprietor of the whole
island, by a grant from Charles II.[98]

St. Philip's, the parish church, is situated upon an ascent, at
some distance from Bridgetown, and commands one of the finest
views to be met with in any part of the country. The eye ranges
with delight over sloping hills and open glades; wood-crowned
mountains, and silent valleys. Sugar plantations, in all the
beauty of high cultivation, spread out their fields of rich and
wavy green beneath our feet, interspersed with groups of simple
negro huts, almost hid in their leafy enclosures; while on all
sides, the ocean stretched out its interminable blue waters. It
was a lovely day when we visited the spot,--

   "The whispering winds were half asleep,
    The clouds were gone to play,
    And on the woods, and on the deep,
    The smiles of heaven lay.

    It seem'd as if the day was one
    Sent from beyond the skies,
    Which shed to earth above the sun,
    A light of paradise."

Of the first church dedicated to St. Philip no account can be
given; but most probably it was built about the year 1690. The
second church to that saint was erected about 1717. It was a
wooden building, and no doubt possessed but little claim to
architectural beauty. The present church is one of the prettiest
I have seen in the West Indies. It is built of the smooth
freestone, so generally found in Antiguan quarries; the only
fault is, that they are cut too small, which, at a distance,
gives them more the appearance of white bricks.

The plan, like many of the other Antiguan churches, is cruciform;
but there is so much chasteness displayed in the simple
arrangement of the interior, that it must please every eye. The
large oriel window is furnished with ground-glass, of the most
elegant, yet simple devices; and the neat pulpit and desk,--the
altar, gallery, and pulpit rails,--the wooden columns which
support the roof,--the pews and doors, painted in excellent
representation of rich-grained oak, please by their uniformity.
They are in the gothic style. The decorations of the altar are
very plain, merely consisting of the tables of the Commandments,
the Lord's Prayer, and the Creed.

Leaving the town of Bermudian Valley (of which I think there is
scarcely a relic) "alone in its glory," we come to Parham, the
remaining place of trade appointed during the time Col. Rowland
Williams held the deputy-governorship of Antigua. Parham takes
its name from the title of Lord William Willoughby of Parham. In
1697, after the decease of Christopher Codrington, Esq., (the
elder,) Parham appears to have been the residence of the
lieutenant-governor, in preference to St. John's; and this
circumstance gives rise to the statement of some authors, that
Parham was once the capital of the island. It is another of those
strangely straggling places whose streets are in many parts
bordered with dagger (_aloe vulgaris_) instead of houses; but
still it is far superior to Bridgetown, for some of its edifices
boast of covered galleries, or balconies, flights of stone steps,
and many other decorations.

The parish church of St. Peter's, the second of the name, is an
old dismal looking building, whose outward appearance is enough
to give the observer a fit of that fashionable complaint,
dyspepsia. It was erected in 1754, and affords 300 sittings. St.
Peter's has a chapel-of-ease, the private property of the Rev.
Nat. Gilbert, a descendant of the "founder of Methodism" in
Antigua, who was speaker of the house of assembly in 1764.

From some strange freak, or else from dire necessity, Parham
churchyard is situated at about two miles distance from the
church and town. It was formerly surrounded by a brick wall, but
that is all falling to ruin. A more desolate-looking
burying-ground I never saw--not a tree or flower near it; the
very birds in their aerial wanderings seem to shun the spot.

At a short distance from St. Peter's is fast rising into
existence what will prove, when finished, a very neat and pretty
church. It is an irregular octagonal--that is, the sides are not
of equal dimensions. It is built of the same kind of stone as St.
Philip's; but has a better effect, from the blocks being cut of
larger size. The base of the tower is constructed from the
interior; but in its present unfinished state, (1842) with all
its multiplicity of scaffolding and frame work, it is impossible
to say what will be the effect; except, as I have before
remarked, it will no doubt make a pretty appearance when
completed. The architect is an Englishman, and the head mason (a
black man) appears to be well-versed in the mysteries of his
trade, to judge from the excellent smoothness in the joints of
the walls, and from a very neat key-stone which he has
sculptured. This church is intended to take the name and service
from the old one, which will then be dismantled.

Besides the episcopal church, Parham boasts a very neat little
chapel belonging to the Wesleyans, with a good stone
mission-house and school-room adjoining. The general number of
scholars at this school is seventy, including girls and boys;
although upon our visit to it, there were not more than
thirty-five. The school-room is a very airy and commodious
building, capable of containing 600 or 700 persons. The children
which compose the school are of every age, from three to
fourteen. The instruction given them is plain, but good--
scriptural knowledge, reading, spelling, writing, and arithmetic,
with needlework for the girls. There are no pictorial
embellishments in this school-room, merely a few selections from
the Scriptures, cards of multiplication, and some black-painted
boards upon which the children practise their little sums with a
piece of chalk.

The Wesleyan missionary stationed at Parham, the Rev. Mr.
Keatley, (who appears to be a very amiable man,) mentioned as a
well-known fact, that the schools in the country were always
better attended the three first days in the week, and that after
that period very few children made their appearance. Probably
this is owing to their parents employing them in some domestic
business which is more necessary at the close than at the
beginning of the week.

Parham harbour, although it affords safe anchorage when gained,
is dangerous to the inexperienced navigator from the number of
shoals and reefs which encumber its approach. It also contains
some few islands, of which Bethel's Island is the largest. This
harbour is protected from the inroads of the enemy by Port Byam,
erected upon Barnacle Point, and which derives its name from
Colonel Edward Byam, some-time governor of Antigua. It is said
that within the precincts of this fort, Colonel Byam had a small
room erected, where he was in the habit of receiving and
entertaining a party of Caribs, who came yearly from some of the
neighbouring islands, in order to smoke their calumets of peace
with that gentleman.

To the southward of Parham rises a curious hill, which is
supposed to be the work of art, and to have answered for the
burying-place of the ancient inhabitants, the Caribs. An old
writer speaking of this tumulus, describes it as "in form a long
square, very regular in all its parts, lessening gradually from
its base to the top, which is flat, and may be from five to six
hundred feet long, and from forty to fifty feet high."




[97] From the summit of Monk's Hill, the eye can range over the
whole island of Antigua, with the exception of one part, where
the mountains intervene. The principal work, named Fort George,
is mounted with pieces of cannon, said to have been taken in the
"Foudroyant" man-of-war, in one of the many conflicts between the
French and English.

[98] For the genealogy, and a general account of this family, see
Appendix.




                         CHAPTER XXVII.



  Forts and fortifications--Temporary ones--The present forts--
  Fort James--Its situation and approach--Rat Island Battery, its
  appellation, lunatic asylum, and flag-staff--Goat Hill--Steep
  ascent--Schools in St. John's.

It might be imagined that where nature has done so much for her
favourite isle in the way of barricading it, by giving to Antigua
a bold rocky coast, _art_, in the shape of forts and batteries,
would be less called for. This, however, is not the case; the
island coaster meets with many an embattled point, and many a
sea-girt cliff supports the frowning walls of a battery.

The forts in Antigua are Fort James, Rat Island Battery, Goat
Hill or Fort Barrington, Old Fort, Johnston's Point Fort, Old
Road Fort, Falmouth Fort, Fort Black's Point, Fort Charlotte and
Fort Berkley at the entrance of English Harbour, Fort Christian,
Fort Isaac, Fort William, Fort Harman, Flat Point Fort, Old Fort,
and Fort Byam; Parham Harbour, Dickenson's Point Battery,
Corbison's Fort, and Fort Hamilton. Of these, the greater part
were merely temporary fortifications erected in those days of
warfare when the French and Caribs, in their shallops and
perrigoas, used to make such frequent attacks upon the island.
Still, dismantled as many of these forts became in after-years,
when peace spread her soft pinions over the lovely group of the
Antilles, they retained their _names_, and served as sinecures to
those persons who, from favouritism or superannuation, were
exempted from militia duty, prior to the abolition of that body
during the administration of Sir W. Colebrooke.[99]

The fortifications at present in use are, Fort James, Rat Island
Battery, Goat Hill, Fort George, Fort Johnston's Point, Old Road
Fort, Monk's Hill, and the forts at English Harbour.

Fort James was erected about the year 1704-5, on a spot of ground
known as St. John's Point, which was given to his majesty Charles
II., by Col. James Vaughan, in 1680. It is situated at the
entrance of St. John's Harbour, and commands at once a beautiful
and extensive view, while, from its frowning battlements, a
deadly and raking fire could be poured upon the adventurous enemy
who dared its anger. The rock upon which it is built appears to
overhang the sea; and the waves, from constantly fretting and
foaming around its base, have completely undermined it. If all
proper precautions be not taken, the fort and its accompaniments
will, some day, probably make a rapid descent into the yawning
gulf beneath, and its avenging weapons no longer vomit forth
their flaming breath upon the dauntless vessel who dares to pass
it, without tendering to its captain his expected dole.[100]

Fort James mounts but few guns, the rest are making themselves
beds deep in the earth. This is one of the happy results of
peace. Those murderous weapons repose in quietness, and that they
may ever do so is my fervent prayer. A gun, however, is fired at
sunrise and sunset; and her majesty's ships, as well as vessels
of war belonging to other nations, are complimented with a grand
discharge. The arrival and departure of the governor, members of
council, &c., also call for a similar mark of honour. Serious
accidents sometimes occur at such periods. A few months ago one
of the matrosses had his arm so severely shattered by overloading
the instrument when saluting a French man-of-war, that it became
necessary to amputate the limb immediately. He has now happily
regained his former health, and is employed upon the fort as a
schoolmaster.

The captain of Fort James receives 150l. sterling per annum, and
the residence is one that many would gladly inhabit. Under him
are stationed twelve matrosses, who receive very good pay. For
the use of these last-mentioned persons, a temporary chapel has
been established within these last few years, through the
instrumentality of the Rev. John Horsford, Wesleyan missionary,
son to the former governor of the fort, by which happy means they
are enabled to attend Divine service once on the Lord's day.

The road from the capital to Fort James, a distance of about four
miles, is not very noted for the interest it displays. As the
traveller nears the fort, an arm of the sea runs far inland,
twisting and twining its rippling waters amid the clumps of
aquatic shrubs in a most snake-like manner. Through this,
equestrians and pedestrians, the emblazoned carriage, and the
more humble gig, alike have to pass, while shoals of fairy-like
fish dart from their parent waters in all directions; and as the
sunbeams catch their silvery scales, almost blind the looker-on
with their dazzling coruscations.

Rat Island Battery is of itself a most picturesque object, as the
stranger approaches Antigua. It lies within the harbour of St.
John's, and takes its name from some fancied resemblance to that
most destructive little quadruped, a rat. I cannot say this
isapparent to my eyes, but the believers in such a similitude say
that the rock personates the body of the animal, while the
causeway which connects it to the main land plays the part of a
tail. I have already mentioned the lunatic asylum lately erected
upon this rock, whose whitened walls look cheerfully down upon
the waters beneath, and little tells the observer how many
darkened minds wander within them. The flag-staff upon Rat Island
is often gaily decorated with various flags, and with a beating
heart my eyes have often sought it, for there I learn the tidings
that another packet has arrived from my native land, and, as I
hope, brought me one of those little packages traced with "a grey
goose-quill," and telling that those who are so dear to me are
enjoying health and happiness in Old England.

Goat Hill crowns the summit of a lofty hill upon the opposite
side of the harbour to Fort James. When passing it by sea, our
surprise is excited when we consider how it is possible to
transport the heavy artillery and stores up the steep ascent; but
the road is winding, and the difficulty is much sooner overcome
than would be supposed. It was on the site of this fort that the
French landed, in that memorable attack upon, and reduction of,
the island in 1666. Near the base of Goat Hill, two peculiar
shaped and blackened rocks rear their bare heads above the sea,
around which the waves dash their lustrous foam with loud and
angry moanings. The remaining forts, with the salaries of their
several captains, and the means by which they are paid, will be
found in the statistical portion of this work.

From the forts, I proceed to mention the "Mico Charity" School at
St. John's, where instruction is given in various branches of
knowledge. Upon my visit to this school, I must say I was
surprised to find among the dirty ragged little negroes, which
comprised it generally, a herd of geographers, historians, and
grammarians. The head-master happened to be absent, but a
messenger was immediately despatched to call him; and, upon his
arrival, the examination commenced, which I left entirely to
themselves, wishing to see their own mode of tuition.

The room, or rather rooms, were hung round with various pictorial
embellishments, consisting of some very beautiful lithographed
designs, representing the most interesting and affecting scenes
in the Old and New Testament--birds and animals, fruits and
flowers, steam apparatuses, machinery of all descriptions, modes
of every branch of agriculture, and some excellent maps.

A stand was placed in the middle of the apartment, and a boy of
about twelve or thirteen took his station by the side of it, with
the "wand of office" in his hand. It was now announced by the
master--"Those boys who wish to ask questions, please hold up
their hands," when immediately about eight or ten, of the same
age as the one stationed in the middle of the room, replied by
the motion required, while an air of animation sprang to their
eyes, and lightened the dusky hue of their complexions. The first
question was proposed by a boy, black as the late member of
parliament's celebrated blacking, but whose scanty habiliments
bore many a mark from the finger of time, and many a stain upon
their once fair colour. "Who was Hannibal?" Answer, from the boy
near the stand--"A Carthaginian general, who defeated the Romans
in two engagements."

It was now his turn to propound--"How is the true situation of
any place upon the globe shewn?" Answer, from an
intelligent-looking little mongrel boy, who was in such haste to
reply, that it called for the aid of the master to render his
rapid utterance understood--"By the intersection of that
imaginary circle, which we call a parallel of latitude, with the
meridian of the place in question." Having replied to this query,
he asked the boy at the stand--"Who was the first Roman emperor
that visited England, then called Britain, and in what year?"

This was a puzzler. He could not answer to it; so he lost his
conspicuous station, which was occupied by the more fortunate
querist.

Various other questions were then proposed in history and
chronology; after which, an examination in the Old and New
Testaments commenced--the interrogatories being still propounded
by the boy: "Who was the man that climbed up into the tree, to
see Jesus pass?" "Zaccheus."--"Where did Moses die?" inquired a
pretty little girl. "On Mount Pisgah," was the answer. A tall,
rather grim-looking boy, started up, and, in a sepulchral-toned
voice, asked--"What is the difference between Pisgah and Nebo?"--
"Nebo appears to have been a point, or pinnacle, of Mount
Pisgah," replied a shrimpish boy by his side.

An excellent map of the world was then brought, and attached to
the stand in the middle of the apartment, so that the eyes of the
whole school could rest upon it. The greater and lesser circles
were then pointed out, the meaning of longitude and latitude
defined, the form and divisions of the earth mentioned and
descanted upon, and the sun's path through the ecliptic
described.

The question was then proposed to the school--"Would you like to
sing?"--"Yes," from every lip. "You must promise to sing very
soft and sweet," quoth the master. "Soft and sweet," reverberated
from the whole of the scholars, like the tongue of an echo. Then
came the "soft and sweet," as they termed it; and if the _burden_
of a song could give _melody_ to the lips, it would have been
more sweet than "the breath of the south wind upon a bed of
violets," as Avon's favoured bard once sang; for it was all about
our dear little Queen Victoria. To the tune of this loyal ditty
they marched round the room, each class divided by their several
teachers, carrying a pile of books, and then formed into
semicircles, to be exercised in reading, writing, arithmetic,
spelling, and grammar. Their spelling was very fair; many of them
wrote a good hand; they all appeared conversant with the four
first rules of arithmetic; and as for grammar, they talked about
present tenses, and perfect participles, nouns, adverbs, and
conjunctions, definites and indefinites, until I began to think
they must have been born with a "Lindley Murray" in their mouths.
I wish I could speak as well of their reading; but I suppose boys
who talk about Hannibal and Artaxerxes, ecliptics and globular
projections, and descant upon the merit of tenses, esteem it too
common-place to read correctly words of two or three syllables.

The average number of boys and girls attending this school is
from 140 to 160; although, from the prevalence of the measles
upon my visit, there were not more than half that number there.
Young men are also received in this establishment as candidates
for teachers; 100 of whom have, within these last four years,
been disseminated throughout the schools in Antigua, and some of
the other West India Islands, as fully qualified for instructing
the rising generation in all the necessary branches of education.

After experiencing the erudition of these advanced scholars, we
passed into another part of the establishment appropriated to the
use of the infant school. Here we found about sixty little
creatures, two or three, to eight or ten years of age, seated
upon their benches, raised one above the other--the elder ones
occupying the upper tier.

This apartment was also garnished with its pretty prints and
Brobdignagian alphabets, and possessed its coloured maps and
stands. The exercises were conducted in a similar manner as those
in the other part of the seminary: an intelligent-looking little
black boy taking his place by the centre stand, beside the map of
Palestine, and answering very fluently the various questions
proposed to him by the other children, at the same time pointing
out the places. "Where did Jesus turn water into wine?" asked one
of the little girls. "Cana, in Galilee."--"Who got his cedars
from Lebanon?"--"Solomon," &c. They then sang one of their pretty
little songs, to the tune of which they marched round the room,
and, formed into classes, read, from a selection of pieces, "Dr.
Franklin's Whistle." It was too difficult for them, and they
bungled sadly through it; for although, like the elder pupils,
they were geographers and historians, they had not made much
progress in the art of reading. Their lessons over, they sang an
anthem; and then, after a short prayer offered up by the master,
the school broke up, and away they started with whoop and song,
leaving me to ponder in my brain how far their manifold knowledge
would benefit their after progress through life.

Besides the Wesleyan and Mico schools, Antigua is further
supplied with "repositories of learning," belonging to the
established church and the Moravians. Our worthy rector, zealous
in every good work, has a pleasing little infant-school near the
rectory, besides schools in various other parts of the town and
country. The Moravians have large schools at their different
settlements; and a boys' and girls' school, with infant-school
attached, adjoining their chapel in St. John's. I visited this
last-mentioned school twice; but I am unable to speak of the
acquirements of the scholars--they having been dismissed soon
after my entrance, upon both occasions. They appear to cultivate
the art of singing; for I heard them join in Mrs. Hemans' "Better
Land," to the accompaniment of a small, but very sweet-toned
organ, played by their superintendent. If I may be allowed to
judge of the manners of the children, (which, I own, would not be
quite right,) by those of the female teacher, I should be
inclined to say, they were far behind any of the other schools I
have visited in the island; for she appeared totally deficient in
politeness or agreeable behaviour.

I have thus endeavoured to shew that Antigua abounds in schools--
the exact number of which will be found in the chapter on
statistics. I sincerely hope that the benefits arising from them
may be permanently felt by the lower classes, and that the
patrons of these schools may reap the reward of their
philanthropy. There are some sad examples: (sorry am I to be
compelled to say so!) where, instead of improving, education has
but tended to lead further into the paths of error; for the very
passages of Scripture that have been taught them--the doctrines
of salvation which have been inculcated, these unhappy creatures
pervert to raise their ungodly mirth. Oh, how do our ears become
shocked at every turn of the street, at every hour of the day, by
the language of this class of persons! while that great and holy
name, "at which every knee shall bow," is bandied about as a
common interjection.

There are some to be met with among the negroes whose display of
learning is very ludicrous. We have a servant now living with us
who often calls up from me an involuntary smile. I heard her
speaking the other evening to a fellow-servant, whose name is
Diana. "Diana, my goddess! come here. Let me see, Diana was the
goddess of _truth_, and Junus the goddess of _sleep_, and so you
must not tell me a story, or go to sleep!" Diana did not appear
to comprehend this burst of eloquence, and so her friend went on
to explain to her, that as "_Airy_ was the ram, and _Callus_ the
bull, Virgo was a lion, and Quaris was a water-pot;" she must bow
to her superior knowledge in everything. To this, Diana humbly
assented with "Ees, Miss Charlotte!" accompanied by a stare of
amazement. I don't wonder, however, at poor Diana's surprise at
her friend's knowledge; I am sure she often startles me. Another
evening, I saw her standing in the yard, with outstretched arms,
and upturned eyes, gazing upon a bright star, which twinkled
above, while in a very lackadaisical tone, she exclaimed, "Oh,
Mars! _invoke_ me by thy rays!"

I hope, however, what I have said in this last page will not
discountenance those worthy characters who are employed in
opening the book of knowledge to the eyes of the ignorant. In the
words of a much-admired writer, "the delightful hope may be
cherished by him who shall bring his mite for the promotion of
the Lancastrian system of instruction for giving knowledge to the
ignorant--the hope that he is providing for the display of a
genius in works of the highest utility, which might otherwise
have expended itself in a career of infamous contrivance, long
operating as a pest to society, terminating in the ignominious
destruction of the victim of the want of education. And when the
intimate connexion between _ignorance_ and vice is considered,
surely all who wish to lessen the sum of the latter will assist
the endeavours that are now making to plant the tree of knowledge
amid the desert and deformed waste;--to convert that which is now
cheerless and blank into a field of profuse beauty teeming with
the real wealth and strength of nations."




[99] Several of these forts were sold by the legislature, after
the conclusion of the war with America.

[100] It has been the custom, although the _law_ does not command
it, to pay to the captain of this fort 18s. currency, for every
vessel, no matter what her tonnage, passing from the harbour. As
there are many owners of small crafts in Antigua, whose pockets
are not so well provided with this world's wealth, as to enable
them to fling it abroad upon every occasion, they are glad to
take advantage of the absence of necessity, and retain for their
own use the two dollars, which custom or caprice has reserved for
the commandant, and pass the fort without paying the tribute.
This conduct is generally resented by despatching after the
offending vessel an angry message, in the shape of a cannon-shot.
It appears extraordinary, that such a monstrous and illegal
proceeding as firing upon the vessels should be permitted, or at
least tacitly sanctioned by the government.




                        CHAPTER XXVIII.



  Remarks upon the aboriginal Americans--Suppositions of various
  authors--Caribs--Arrowawks--Ferocity of the Carib--Complexion--
  Dress--Ornaments--Dreadful revenge--Wars-Chiefs--Severities
  practised--Feasts--Remarks upon paganism--Anthropophagi--A
  traveller's tale--The Carib's opinion of death--Religious
  tenets--Altars--The burning Carib.

It may perhaps be proper to remark, that although this work has
been entitled, "Antigua and Antiguans," still, as I have
commenced its history from the period of its first discovery, it
will be necessary to say something about its ancient inhabitants,
the Caribs. As it is impossible at this lapse of time, to give
the history of the individual tribe who peopled this island, I
have been obliged to gather my information from what the early
writers have transmitted to posterity, of the habit and customs
of the entire nation. Consequently, while I am writing of the
Carib of Antigua, or, as the island was called at that period,
"Xamayca," I must at the same time allude to those of the other
islands; only remarking, that ferocious as they all were, the
Carib of this country seems to have borne the pre-eminence in
hardy daring and relentless animosity toward their conquerors. In
the same manner, I have thought proper to give a short account of
the discovery of America, as antecedent to that of this island;
and as, in furtherance of my plan, I have introduced Columbus to
my readers, from his boyhood, it is but right I should trace the
Caribbean nation from their source. With this apology for trying
the patience of my readers, while I write of a people whose
existence is no more, I will proceed with my subject, which I
hope may neither prove foreign nor unpleasant.

To enter into minute inquiries how America and its contiguous
islands were _first peopled_, would fill many volumes, the
opinions of the learned upon this subject being so various. Some
authors suppose the Americans do not derive their existence from
the same common parent as the rest of mankind. Others, that they
are descended from a remnant of the antediluvian world which
survived the deluge; but this must be erroneous, or how are we to
understand the sacred historian, when, speaking of that momentous
circumstance, he says--"And all flesh died that moved upon the
earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of beast, and of every
creeping thing that creepeth upon the face of the earth, and
every man. _All_ in whose nostrils was the breath of life, _of
all that was in the dry land, died!_"--Gen. vii. 21, 22. Again,
many authors assert that their ancestors came from the north-east
of Asia, after the dispersion of the people for their impious
attempt to build the Tower of Babel; and to establish this
doctrine upon a firmer basis, endeavour to point out the great
similitude between the Asiatics and the Southern Americans, in
their manners, customs, and general appearance. Another, and
perhaps the most probable idea, is, that the _southern_ parts of
North America, and the islands which lie in the Gulf of Mexico,
and the Caribbean Sea, were originally peopled by Africans. This
idea is maintained by various speculations:--as the trade-winds
blow direct from east to west, a canoe of these savages might
have been driven by bad weather across the Atlantic; and this
position may be further proved by the statement of the Indians of
Florida, who, when asked about their origin, reply, "that their
ancestors came from the east, and that at the time they
discovered America, they were nearly dead from want of
provisions." These Africans, uniting with the different tribes
with which the other parts of America were peopled, must have
produced the various degrees of colour and character which
astonished so much the first discoverers of this extensive
quarter of the world.

The Caribs, from whom Antigua and the adjoining islands took
their names, were a very different race of beings from the gentle
and hospitable inhabitants of Cuba, Jamaica, Hayti, &c., who were
called Arrowawks, and with whom the Caribs were ever at war. From
the martial and ferocious spirit of the Caribs, and from their
repasts upon human flesh, historians agree in supposing they were
descended from the Africans; while, on the contrary, the
peacefulness and indolence of the Arrowawks evidently bespeak
them of an Asiatic origin.

When Columbus visited these islands for the first time, he found
the inhabitants so very savage, that he was for a while fearful
of landing; but upon despatching small presents to them, they
afterwards appeared more friendly, and desirous of an
acquaintance. In nearly all of their huts were found relics of
their horrid feasts upon the bodies of their slaughtered enemies;
and in one of them, a man's arm was roasting for the intended
meal of the inmates.

The character of the Caribs presents little of what is
interesting to the imagination; ferocious, superstitious, and
revengeful, they looked upon all strangers as enemies; and, in
return, were dreaded as such by the inhabitants of the other
islands; still they are represented as being, generally,
peaceable and friendly to one another. They ever retained a high
sense of equality and independence. Accustomed to be absolute
masters of their own conduct, they scorned to follow the orders
of others; and having never known control, they would not submit
to correction. Many, when they found they were treated as slaves
by the Spaniards, and that resistance or escape was impossible,
sought refuge from calamity in the arms of death. While the Carib
roamed in his native wilds, his reason was but little exercised,
and consequently, his intellectual powers were very limited. His
ideas never extended beyond the narrow sphere in which he moved,
and everything but his present preservation and enjoyment was
perfectly indifferent to him. When disposed to sleep, no
consideration on earth would tempt him to sell his bed; but in
the morning, when satisfied with slumber, and prepared to set out
on the usual business or recreation of the day, the Carib has
been known to dispose of it for the smallest trifle which caught
his fancy. The only thing they deemed of _real_ value, was their
weapons--consequently, when they found, by sad experience, the
superiority of fire-arms over the bow and arrows of their own
country, they viewed them with unbounded admiration; but the
inventions and improvements of civilized life, with all the arts
and manufactures of the Spaniards, they regarded with apathy, or
paid them the same attention as we do the toys of childhood.

Columbus noticed two distinct races of Caribs. One was quite
black, with hair approaching to woolly; the other, of a deep
copper colour complexion, with long, straight hair; the latter
inhabited Antigua and the adjoining islands, while the blacks
predominated more in the islands further south. In appearance,
the Caribs were robust and muscular; their limbs flexible and
active. They ornamented their hair with shells and grease; and
some of them had it turned up like women, and decorated with thin
plates of gold, which they procured from the Arrowawks. Their
garments were composed of cotton cloth, fabricated by their
females, and which they had the art of staining red, their
favourite colour; but many of them were in a state of nudity. The
cartilage of the nostril was perforated, and in it they stuck a
piece of tortoise-shell, the bone of a fish highly polished, or a
parrot's feather. They adorned their arms, neck, and ankles, with
the teeth of their enemies which they had slain in battle, or
devoured at home. Their bodies were painted in the most hideous
manner, which appears to have been intended to make them look
more formidable in the eyes of their enemies than pleasing in the
sight of their friends. The favourite style of doing this, was
first to smear a quantity of red paint all over them; they then
encircled one eye with a streak of white, and the other with one
of black; they also disfigured their cheeks with deep incisions
and horrible scars, which they stained with various colours; and
the greater number and depth of these disfigurations constituted
their idea of manly beauty, and martial appearance.

Their revenge was deep and implacable--it resembled rather the
wild fury of a lion than the passion of a man. When anger took
possession of a Carib's heart, he vented it against everything,
whether animate or inanimate, which chanced to fall in his way.
Although in general calm and apparently insensible to pain, if
struck by an arrow in these moments of rage, like the North
American Indian, he would tear it from the wound, bite it, spit
upon it, and, dashing it to the ground, trample it to atoms
beneath his feet. He never pitied--never forgave--never spared!
To fall upon an enemy unarmed, knock him down, capture him, and
finally eat him, was the boast of a Carib warrior! For this they
were bred up from their youth. To bear with an unflinching spirit
the most excruciating torments, inflicted by the hands of his own
father and nearest kin--to suffer all the severities and
unnatural cruelties which the savage breast was capable of
imagining without betraying one symptom of weakness--to rise
superior to pain, and baffle the rage of his persecutors by
calmness and tranquillity, was the test by which the courage of
the young Carib was tried. If he succeeded in this, he was looked
upon as one of the warriors of his country, and pronounced "a man
like themselves;" while, on the contrary, should one cry escape
his lips, one supplication for mercy break from him, he was
despised as a coward, and driven from society.

When an expedition against the Arrowawks was intended, a chief
was elected, with solemn ceremonies. During the time of peace,
however, the Caribs appear to have owned no head; they paid,
indeed, some little veneration to the old men, but this appears
to have been merely from respect to their age,--at any rate, they
were not able, by their influence, to protect the weak or the
stranger. The man who aspired to lead his countrymen to war was
obliged to undergo the most severe sufferings before he was
accounted worthy of that honour. If he was successful, upon his
return he was treated with a grand feast, and was allowed to take
as many captives for his own share as he liked, and alter his
name a second time to that of the most formidable Arrowawk who
had fallen by his hand, while his own people presented for his
choice the most beautiful of their daughters. Their mode of
warfare was very different to that of the present day,--they
thought it no honour to fall fighting for their country. Their
plan was, not to wait for a drawing up of their forces, but to
capture all their foes they found unprepared, whom, at the end of
the war, they carried home, and either slaughtered them for the
grand feast, or kept them until they became sufficiently plump
for eating. They preserved the fat of these poor creatures to
anoint the bodies of their children, in hopes of making them as
martial as themselves.

Happy for us is it that we live in an age when Paganism, with all
its accompanying horrors, has given place to the mild doctrines
of Christianity--when this land, so beautified by the hand of
Nature, is freed from those barbarous wars, those soul-sickening
feasts of human flesh, which once polluted it! That man can
actually devour his fellow-creatures is almost incredible--
indeed, some persons of philosophical minds have doubted the
truth of anthropophagy; yet, shocking as it is to the
imagination, it has been too fully proved to be denied; indeed,
some of the Caribs, when, in later years, they have been asked
about this revolting practice, have unhesitatingly answered in
the affirmative, and even gone so far as to say that Frenchmen
eat better than Englishmen, and Englishmen better than
natives.[101] Although, within these last years, so much has been
effected by the laudable zeal of Christian missionaries, yet,
even now, there are "dark corners of the earth" where human flesh
is not only eaten from feelings of revenge, but partook of as a
luxury.[102]

I read in a periodical, some time ago, a circumstance which may
be termed a romance of real life. I pretend not to give it in its
original words, but the tenour of the case is as follows: A
gentleman was once travelling through the interior of Grenada, or
Trinidad, I am not certain which, and after riding for some time
through rocky defiles and umbrageous woods, he at length came to
an open plain, on which was erected about half a dozen Carib
huts. Riding up to the door of the principal one, an old man was
seen reclining upon a rustic seat, who at the approach of the
stranger arose, and, with much native politeness, invited him to
alight, and spend the day at his hut. The gentleman, being one
who was travelling in pursuit of knowledge as well as amusement,
was well pleased to have the opportunity of becoming a little
acquainted with the domestic manners of this ancient people.
After walking about for some time, and making sketches of the
various beautiful scenes which surrounded the hut, his attention
was arrested by the plaintive cry of a female. Having a good
supply of the "milk of human kindness" within his breast, and a
heart open to the distresses of his species, the traveller
determined to go in quest of the afflicted fair. Directing his
steps by the sound of the voice, which appeared to issue from a
magnificent grove of trees near the spot, he soon came in sight
of the object of his commiseration, whom he found to be, not a
fair, but a dark beauty, of sixteen or seventeen years of age.
Her long black hair floated down her naked shoulders; the tears
were rolling over her smooth brown cheeks; while her languishing
dark eyes were turned with mournful looks upon the face of a man,
who, with knitted brow, was employed in fastening her slender
wrists to one of the trees. Supposing she had committed some
fault for which she was about to receive corporal punishment, the
gentleman begged very earnestly for her pardon; and from the
smile which passed over the harsh features of the man, he thought
his request was complied with.

The day passed very rapidly, and our traveller was delighted with
all he saw. His host was all attention, pointing out to his
notice whatever he thought would amuse; and when dinner was
announced, ushered him into his hut with the air of a French
_petit-maitre_. The dinner table was laid out in the English
style, in compliment to his guest; and the calabashes which
contained the water &c. were beautifully carved and stained. The
first refreshment introduced was soup, which was contained in an
English tin tureen, that shone like silver; and from the keen air
of the mountain, and the exercise he had taken, our traveller
made a very hearty repast upon it. After its removal, and while
waiting for the other viands, the host asked--"How he liked Carib
soup?" "Excellent!" said the gentleman--"very delicious--I must
beg a few receipts from your _cookery book_." "O, it's very
simple," replied the old Carib, "if you have the proper articles
to make it of: what you have been eating was made from the hands
and feet of the girl you were begging for this morning!" What
were the feelings of the traveller at this horrible information
can be better imagined than described. The repast he had _shared
in_, the fate of the poor girl, and his own situation amid a race
of cannibals, filled him with horror, and almost drove reason
from her throne. It is almost unnecessary to state that he left
the scene of bloodshed as soon as possible; and never, never more
did he think of visiting a Carib, or partaking of _Carib soup_. I
have given the story as I received it; as to its _authenticity_,
I will not take upon myself to vouch for it.

With regard to the religious rites and tenets of the Caribs but
little can be said, for but little is known with any degree of
truth. They appear to have an idea that death was not a final
extinction of being; but that the soul (or rather souls, for it
was the general opinion among them that every pulse that beat in
their bodies was a _separate_ soul) went to another world, where
they enjoyed themselves very much after the manner they did in
this, and that their bows and arrows were as necessary there as
here. For this reason they buried the weapons in the graves of
their friends, and inhumed several captives with them, that they
might have attendants in "the land of spirits." Some authors
assert that they acknowledged one great universal Cause, to whom
they gave the name of "Mayboya," who was invisible to them, but
who watched their actions, and heard their words; that this being
possessed an irresistible power; and that subordinate to him were
many other gods. Other writers, however, maintain that the Caribs
had not even a name for a deity; and that after death they
believed they decayed away like the animals they were acquainted
with. Which was the fact is a matter of surmise; but Columbus
mentions that in several of their huts were seen little altars
composed of banana leaves and rushes, and that upon these were
laid offerings of fruit, fish, flowers, &c. It seems probable
that their religious principles were like those of other savages,
suggested rather by the dread of impending evils, than gratitude
for favours received. "We can all forget benefits, although we
implore mercy," was their motto.

Some of the Caribs pretended to be magicians, and worshipped
demons with rites and ceremonies of the darkest superstition:
these people were termed Boyez, and in them was placed implicit
faith. Upon the discovery of these islands, the Spaniards
endeavoured to convert the natives to Christianity; but the means
used to accomplish this were diametrically opposite to what they
ought to have been. Instead of setting it forth as a doctrine of
love and mercy, and inculcating its precepts with mildness and
humanity, they shewed at once the bloody tenets of the church of
Rome, and condemned those to the stake who did not immediately
subscribe to their opinions.

This manner of proceeding, instead of converting the Caribs, only
fixed firmer in their minds their dislike to the intruders; they
witnessed their quarrels among themselves, their ferocious and
implacable resentments, their insatiable thirst after gold, and
the cruelties they perpetrated in searching after that metal. Can
it be wondered at, then, that they did not believe the
superiority of the Christian religion, as taught by the
Spaniards, over their own? or that the rites of baptism, which
they could not understand or appreciate, were despised by them?

One of these unhappy people being condemned to be burnt for his
attempts to save his country from the encroachments of its
conquerors, was promised, by a Roman-catholic priest, admittance
into heaven if he would only embrace the Christian faith before
he died. "Are there any Spaniards in that region of bliss you
tell me of?" inquired the unhappy victim. "Yes," replied the
priest; "but only such as are good."--"Then I will never go
there, where I may meet with one of that accursed race; for the
_best_ of _them_ have neither worth nor goodness." And from the
cruel treatment these islanders met with, there was but too much
reason in this exclamation.




[101] Some authors assert that this is only vanity in the French;
that they think so highly of themselves, that even in the
_interesting_ point of being eaten, they will not allow the
pre-eminence to other nations.

[102] "The New Zealanders are perpetually carrying on war with
each other, to which they are stimulated, not by thirst of
conquest, but by the desire of eating the flesh of their
antagonists!"--See Prichard's "Researches."

                         END OF VOL. I.

         T. C. Savill, Printer, 107, St. Martin's Lane.