XIX.

THE FAMOUS JUBILEE SINGERS

OF

FISK UNIVERSITY.

     "The air he chose was wild and sad:...
     Now one shrill voice the notes prolong;
     Now a wild chorus swells the song.
     Oft have I listened and stood still
     As it came softened up the hill."

     SIR WALTER SCOTT.

     "If, in brief, we might give a faint idea of what it is
     utterly impossible to depict, we would adopt three
     words,--_soft, sweet, simple_."

     _"The Jubilee Singers:" London Rock._


The dark cloud of human slavery, which for over two hundred weary
years had hung, incubus-like, over the American nation, had happily
passed away. The bright sunshine of emancipation's glorious day shone
over a race at last providentially rescued from the worst fate
recorded in all the world's dark history. Up out of the house of
bondage, where had reigned the most terrible wrongs, where had been
stifled the higher aspirations of manhood, where genius had been
crushed, nay, more, where attempts had been made to annihilate even
all human instincts,--from this accursing region, this charnel-house
of human woe, came the latter-day children of Israel, the American
freedmen.

How much like the ancient story was their history! The American
nation, Pharaoh-like, had long and steadily refused to obey the voice
of Him who said, between every returning plague, "Let my people go;"
and, after long waiting, he sent the avenging scourge of civil strife
to _compel_ obedience. The great war of the Rebellion (it should be
called the war of retribution), with its stream of human blood, became
the Red Sea through which these long-suffering ones, with aching,
trembling limbs, with hearts possessed half with fear and half with
hope hitherto so long deferred, passed into the "promised land" of
blessed liberty.

Slavery, then, ended, the first duty was to repair as far as possible
its immense devastations made upon the minds of those who had so long
been its victims. The freedmen were to be educated, and fitted for the
enjoyment of their new positions.

In this place I may not do more than merely touch upon the beneficent
work of those noble men and women who at the close of the late war
quickly sped to the South, and there, as teachers of the freedmen,
suffered the greatest hardships, and risked imminent death from the
hands of those who opposed the new order of things; nay, many of them
actually met violent death while carrying through that long-benighted
land the torch of learning. Not now can we more than half appreciate
the grandeur of their Heaven-inspired work. In after-times the
historian, the orator, and the poet shall find in their heroic deeds
themes for the most elevated discourse, while the then generally
cultured survivors of a race for whose elevation these true-hearted
educators did so much will gratefully hallow their memories.

Among the organizations (I cannot mention individual names: their
number is too great) that early sought to build up the waste places of
the South, and to carry there a higher religion and a much-needed
education, was the American Missionary Association. This society has
led all others in this greatly benevolent work, having reared no less
than seven colleges and normal schools in various centres of the
South. The work of education to be done there is vast, certainly; but
what a very flood of light will these institutions throw over that
land so long involved in moral and intellectual darkness!

The principal one of these schools is Fisk University, located at
Nashville, Tenn.; the mention of which brings us to the immediate
consideration of the famous "_Jubilee Singers_," and to perhaps the
most picturesque achievement in all our history since the war. Indeed,
I do not believe that anywhere in the history of the world can there
be found an achievement like that made by these singers; for the
institution just named, which has cost thus far nearly a hundred
thousand dollars, has been built by the money which these former
bond-people have earned since 1871 in an American and European
campaign of song.

But what was the germ from which grew this remarkable concert-tour,
and its splendid sequence, the noble Fisk University?

Shortly after the close of the war, a number of philanthropic persons
from the North gathered into an old government-building that had been
used for storage purposes, a number of freed children and some grown
persons living in and near Nashville, and formed a school. This
school, at first under the direction of Professor Ogden, was ere long
taken under the care of the American Missionary Association. The
number of pupils rapidly increasing, it was soon found that better
facilities for instruction were required. It was therefore decided to
take steps to erect a better, a more permanent building than the one
then occupied. Just how this was to be done, was, for a while, quite a
knotty problem with this enterprising little band of teachers. Its
solution was attempted finally by one of their number, Mr. George L.
White, in this wise: He had often been struck with the charming melody
of the "slave songs" that he had heard sung by the children of the
school; had, moreover, been the director of several concerts given by
them with much musical and financial success at Nashville and
vicinity. Believing that these songs, so peculiarly beautiful and
heart-touching, sung as they were by these scholars with such
naturalness of manner and sweetness of voice, would fall with
delightful novelty upon Northern ears, Mr. White conceived the idea of
taking a company of the students on a concert-tour over the country,
in order to thus obtain sufficient funds to build a college. This was
a bold idea, seemingly visionary; but the sequel proved that it was a
most practical one.

All arrangements were completed; and the Jubilee Singers, as they were
called, left Nashville in the fall of 1871 for a concert-tour of the
Northern States, to accomplish the worthy object just mentioned.
Professor White, who was an educated and skilful musician, accompanied
them as musical director. Mr. Theodore F. Seward, also of fine
musical ability, was, after a while, associated in like capacity with
the singers. The following are the names of those who at one time and
another, since the date of organization, have been members of the
Jubilee choir:--

MISS ELLA SHEPARD, PIANIST.
MR. THOMAS RUTLING,
MR. H. ALEXANDER,
MR. F.J. LOUDIN,
MR. G.H. OUSLEY,
MR. BENJAMIN M. HOLMES,
MR. ISAAC P. DICKERSON,
MR. GREENE EVANS,
MR. EDMUND WATKINS,
MISS MAGGIE PORTER,
MISS JENNIE JACKSON,
MISS GEORGIE GORDON,
MISS MAGGIE CARNES,
MISS JULIA JACKSON,
MISS ELIZA WALKER,
MISS MINNIE TATE,
MISS JOSEPHINE MOORE,
MISS MABEL LEWIS, AND MISS A.W. ROBINSON.

This list might well be called the _Roll of Honor_.

I have not space to follow in detail this ambitious band of singers in
their remarkable career throughout this country and in Great Britain.
The wonderful story of their journey of song is fully and graphically
told in a book (which I advise all to read) written by Mr. G.D. Pike,
and published in 1873. A brief survey of this journey must here
suffice.

The songs they sang were generally of a religious character,--"slave
_spirituals_,"--and such as have been sung by the American bondmen in
the cruel days of the past. These had originated with the slave; had
sprung spontaneously, so to speak, from souls naturally musical; and
formed, as one eminent writer puts it, "_the only native American
music_."

The strange, weird melody of these songs, which burst upon the
Northern States, and parts of Europe, as a revelation in vocal music,
as a music most thrillingly sweet and soul-touching, sprang then,
strange to say, from a state of slavery; and the habitually minor
character of its tones may well be ascribed to the depression of
feeling, the anguish, that must ever fill the hearts of those who are
forced to lead a life so fraught with woe. This is clearly
exemplified, and the sad story of this musical race is comprehensively
told, in Ps. cxxxvii.:--

     "By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept,
     when we remembered Zion.

     "We hanged our harps upon the willows in the midst thereof.

     "For there they that carried us away captive required of us
     a song; and they that wasted us required of us mirth,
     saying, Sing us one of the songs of Zion.

     "How shall we sing the Lord's song in a strange land?"

And yet, ever patient, ever hopeful of final deliverance, they did
sing on and on, until at last the joyful day of freedom dawned upon
them.

To render these songs essentially as they had been rendered in
slave-land came the Jubilee Singers. They visited most of the cities
and large towns of the North, everywhere drawing large and often
overwhelming audiences, creating an enthusiasm among the people rarely
ever before equalled. The cultured and the uncultured were alike
charmed and melted to tears as they listened with a new enthusiasm to
what was a wonderfully new exhibition of the greatness of song-power.
Many persons, it is true, were at first attracted to the concert-hall
by motives of mere curiosity, hardly believing, as they went, that
there could be much to enjoy. These, however, once under the influence
of the singers, soon found themselves yielding fully to the enchanting
beauty of the music; and they would come away saying the half had not
been told. The musical critics, like all others in the audiences,
were so lost in admiration, that they forgot to criticise; and, after
recovering from what seemed a trance of delight, they could only say
that this "music of the heart" was beyond the touch of criticism.

I have spoken of the origin and the character of these songs. Those
who so charmingly interpreted them deserve most particular notice. The
rendering of the Jubilee Singers, it is true, was not always strictly
in accordance with artistic forms. The songs did not require this; for
they possessed in themselves a peculiar power, a plaintive, emotional
beauty, and other characteristics which seemed entirely independent of
artistic embellishment. These characteristics were, with a most
refreshing originality, naturalness, and soulfulness of voice and
method, fully developed by the singers, who sang with all their might,
yet with most pleasing sweetness of tone.

But, as regards the judgment passed upon this "Jubilee melody" from a
high musical stand-point, I quote from a very good authority; viz.,
Theo. F. Seward of Orange, N.J.:--

     "It is certain that the critic stands completely disarmed in
     their presence. He must not only recognize their immense
     power over audiences which include many people of the
     highest culture, but, if he be not entirely incased in
     prejudice, he must yield a tribute of admiration on his own
     part, and acknowledge that these songs touch a chord which
     the most consummate art fails to reach. Something of this
     result is doubtless due to the singers as well as to their
     melodies. The excellent rendering of the Jubilee Band is
     made more effective, and the interest is intensified, by the
     comparison of their former state of slavery and degradation
     with the present prospects and hopes of their race, which
     crowd upon every listener's mind during the singing of their
     songs; yet the power is chiefly in the songs themselves."

It would not do, of course, to assume that to the almost matchless
beauty of the songs and their rendering was due alone the intense
interest that centred in these singers. They were on a _noble
mission_. They sang to build up education in the blighted land in
which they themselves and millions more had so long drearily plodded
in ignorance; and it was a most striking and yet pleasing exhibition
of poetic justice, when many of those who really, in a certain sense,
had been parties to their enslavement, were forced to pay tribute to
the signs of genius found in this native music, and to contribute
money for the cause represented by these delightful musicians.

But I must not give only my own opinion of these singers, as I am
supposed to be a partial witness. Many, many others, among whom are
the most talented and cultured of this country and England, have
spoken of them in terms the most laudatory. Some of these shall now
more than confirm my words of praise.

The Rev. Theodore L. Cuyler of Brooklyn, writing in January, 1872, to
"The New-York Tribune," thus spoke of them:--

     "When the Rev. Mr. Chalmers (the younger) visited this
     country as the delegate of the Scotch Presbyterian General
     Assembly, he went home and reported to his countrymen that
     he had 'found the ideal church in America: it was made up of
     Methodist praying, Presbyterian preaching, and Southern
     negro-singing.' The Scotchman would have been confirmed in
     his opinion if he had been in Lafayette-avenue Church last
     night, and heard the Jubilee Singers,--a company of colored
     students, male and female, from Fisk University of Freedmen,
     Nashville, Tenn. In Mr. Beecher's church they delighted a
     vast throng of auditors, and another equally packed audience
     greeted them last evening.

     "I never saw a cultivated Brooklyn assemblage so moved and
     melted under the magnetism of music before. The wild
     melodies of these emancipated slaves touched the fount of
     tears, and gray-haired men wept like children....

     "The harmony of these children of nature, and their musical
     execution, were beyond the reach of art. Their wonderful
     skill was put to the severest test when they attempted
     'Home, Sweet Home,' before auditors who had heard these same
     household words from the lips of Jenny Lind and Parepa; yet
     these emancipated bondwomen, now that they knew what the
     word 'home' signifies, rendered that dear old song with a
     power and pathos never surpassed.

     "Allow me to bespeak through your journal ... a universal
     welcome through the North for these living representatives
     of the only true native school of American music. We have
     long enough had its coarse caricature in corked faces: our
     people can now listen to the genuine soul-music of the
     slave-cabins before the Lord led his 'children out of the
     land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.'"

The welcome thus eloquently bespoken for the singers was
enthusiastically extended to them all over the North. The journals of
the day fairly teemed with praises of them; and often, in the larger
cities, hundreds of persons were turned away from the concert-hall,
unable to obtain admittance, so great was the rush.

After a while they visited England, where they sang before the Queen
and others of the nobility, everywhere repeating the triumphs that had
been theirs in this country. In fact, it was proved that their power
as singers held sway wherever they sang; wherever was found a soul in
unison with melodious sound, a heart capable of human emotion. It was
not so much the words of their songs--these, it is true, were not
without merit in a religious sense--as the strangely pathetic and
delightful melody of their music, and the freshness and heartiness of
the rendering, that gave them their greatest charm. This has since
been most pointedly demonstrated in Holland and Switzerland, where
these singers have drawn crowded and delighted audiences that neither
speak nor understand a word of English: such is the beautiful,
far-reaching power of this, in the truest sense, "music of the heart."

I now present a few of the many tributes of admiration which their
performances drew from cultured English people. Thus spoke Mr. Colin
Brown, Ewing Lecturer on Music, Andersonian University, Glasgow:--

     "As to the manner of their singing, it must be heard before
     it can be realized. Like the Swedish melodies of Jenny Lind,
     it gives a new musical idea. It has been well remarked, that
     in some respects it disarms criticism; in others it may be
     truly said that it almost defies it. It was beautifully
     described by a simple Highland girl: 'It filled my whole
     heart.'

     "Such singing (in which the artistic is lost in the natural)
     can only be the result of the most careful training. The
     richness and purity of tone both in melody and harmony, the
     contrast of light and shade, the varieties and grandeur in
     expression, and the exquisite refinement of the _piano_ as
     contrasted with the power of the _forte_, fill us with
     delight, and at the same time make us feel how strange it is
     that these unpretending singers should come over here to
     teach us what is the true refinement of music; make us feel
     its moral and religious power."

Others spoke as follows:--

     "I never so enjoyed music."--REV. C.H. SPURGEON.

     "They have beautiful voices."--_London Graphic._

     "Their voices are clear, rich, and highly
     cultivated."--_London Daily News._

     "This troupe sing with a pathos, a harmony, and an
     expression, which are quite touching."--_London Journal._

     "There is something inexpressibly touching in their
     wonderfully sweet, round, bell voices."--REV. GEORGE
     MACDONALD.

Mr. Gladstone, while prime-minister of England, honored them with a
complimentary breakfast, and listened to their songs, as Newman Hall
writes, "with rapt, enthusiastic attention, saying, 'Isn't it
wonderful? I never heard any thing like it.'"

     "We never saw an audience more riveted, nor a more thorough
     heart entertainment. Men of hoary hairs, as well as those
     younger in the assembly, were moved even to tears as they
     listened with rapt attention to some of the identical
     slave-songs which these emancipated ones rendered with a
     power and pathos perfectly indescribable."--_London Rock._

I might now, if it were necessary, fill many pages with the comments
made upon these charming singers by the American press both before and
after their trip to England; but these would only be repetitions of
the laudatory notices just given. The following is quoted because it
is descriptive of the improvement made by the singers. Said "The
Boston Journal,"--

     "THE JUBILEE SINGERS.--The students of Fisk University,
     Nashville, Tenn., whose sweet voices made such a popularity
     for the Jubilee Singers in this city two or three years ago,
     and won royal favor on the other side of the Atlantic, gave
     their first concert since their return at Tremont Temple
     last evening. The audience numbered some two thousand
     persons, and manifested an enthusiasm seldom witnessed at a
     concert in this city. From the initial to the finale of the
     programme the singers were applauded and encored, and now
     and then the enthusiasm broke forth in the interludes. So
     many thousands have listened with delight to the full, rich
     voices of the 'Jubilees,' and the sweet undertone which
     disarms criticism while it charms the popular ear, that it
     is needless to speak of them at length. The simple purity of
     the rendering of the Lord's Prayer, which initiated the
     programme, gave evidence that they had lost none of their
     natural grace and simplicity of expression by their tour
     across the water; and this was confirmed by the peculiar and
     plaintive melodies of the South-land in the days of slavery,
     which made up the major part of the programme. A few
     selections of more artistic composition were introduced, for
     the purpose of demonstrating, as they did most fully, that
     the students have been educated to an appreciation of the
     higher grades of vocalization. The great charm of these
     singers will, however, remain in the reproduction of the
     melodies of an era that has gone, happily never to
     return,--melodies which were the natural expression of the
     fancies and sympathies of an emotional race, and which no
     musical culture or refinement can ever render with the sweet
     simplicity and charming grace that flow from the lips of
     those to whom they are the native music."

"In the summer of 1874 they returned to Nashville, having given two
seasons of concerts in this country, and one in Great Britain. The
best evidence of the appreciative and enthusiastic welcome given them
in both countries is the fact that the net result for Fisk University
was over $90,000." The "problem" of the little band of faithful
teachers had been nobly, gloriously solved. The old government-building
in which they began their labors was soon discarded. To-day, on a
beautiful, commanding site of twenty-five acres, with all the
appliances of the best modern colleges, stands a noble building,
forever dedicated to learning and to Christianity.

[Illustration: FISK UNIVERSITY, NASHVILLE, TENN.]

Since the events whose record is just closed, it has been determined
by the faculty of Fisk University to raise by other concert tours
$100,000 as an endowment fund. At the present writing (June, 1877) the
Jubilee Singers are making a tour of the Continent. They are now in
Holland. Thus far their success continues unabated; and undoubtedly
they will succeed in amply endowing the institution which, in a manner
so praiseworthy and remarkable, they have erected. The following
extract from a letter affords a pleasant glimpse at the European life
of the singers:--

     ... "I will tell you something of our summer's experience.
     The company had passed through a hard year's work, and
     were greatly in need of rest. A charming country-seat
     was rented in the suburbs of Geneva at a very reasonable
     rate, and the months of July and August were spent there
     with great benefit to all. The citizens were evidently
     astonished at this introduction of a new shade of humanity;
     and the singers seldom passed along the streets without
     hearing some remark about '_les nègres_,' or '_les noirs_.'
     But they were invariably treated with the greatest respect,
     and, in fact, were never once annoyed by a rabble in the
     streets, as they frequently are elsewhere, gathering around
     with a rude and impertinent curiosity.

     "Among other pleasant experiences, there was an afternoon
     spent with Père Hyacinthe. We found him very genial and
     agreeable, and his American wife no less so. He speaks no
     English at all, but Madame acted as interpreter; and there
     was none of the stiffness or awkwardness that might have
     been expected under the circumstances.

     "... The most notable event of our stay at Geneva was a
     concert given, just before leaving, in the Salle de la
     Réformation. It had been a question of much interest, as to
     whether the slave-songs would retain any thing of their
     power where the words were not understood. The result was a
     new triumph for those mysterious melodies, showing that the
     language of nature is universal, and that emotion is capable
     of expressing itself without the intervention of words. The
     hall was packed to its utmost capacity, and the enthusiasm
     at fever-heat. When asked how they could enjoy the songs so
     much when they knew nothing of the sentiment that was
     conveyed, the reply was, 'We cannot _understand_ them; but
     we can _feel_ them.' Père Hyacinthe presided at the concert
     as chairman, and evidently enjoyed it as keenly as the rest
     of the vast audience."

And now to discriminate; for the writer, while disclaiming all
censorious or pretentious aim, yet, for reasons which may be readily
understood and fully appreciated by the reader, intends this volume to
inculcate the lessons of advancement by always attempting to honestly
distinguish between that which is progressive in music and that which
is the reverse. Have, then, these famous Jubilee Singers, who
everywhere thrilled the hearts of their hearers, and whose charming
melody of voice, and style of rendition, "disarmed the critic,"--have
they established by all this a model for the present and the future?
In some respects they have; in others they have not. And is there to
be no aim beyond the singing of "Jubilee songs"? Professors White and
Seward and all these talented singers will say, I am quite sure, that
there is to be a higher aim. The songs they sang were for the present,
forming a delightful novelty, and serving a noble purpose. Still it
must be sadly remembered that these Jubilee songs sprang from a former
life of enforced degradation; and that, notwithstanding their great
beauty of melody, and occasional words of elevated religious
character, there was often in both melody and words what forcibly
reminded the hearer of the unfortunate state just mentioned; and to
the cultured, sensitive members of the race represented, these
reminders were always of the most painful nature. And yet such persons
could not have the heart to utter words of discouragement to an
enterprise having an object so noble. They, like all others, could not
but enjoy the rich melody and harmony of the wonderful Jubilee voices.
They, too, often listened spell-bound; and when inclined, as at times
they were, to murmur, the inspiriting voice of hope was heard bidding
them to turn from a view of the dark and receding past to that of a
rapidly-dawning day, whose coming should bring for these singers, and
all others of their race, increase of opportunities, and therefore
increase of culture.

On the foregoing pages but little has been said of the secular songs
with which at times the troupe indulged their audiences. Even in music
of this kind they were exceedingly pleasing; and it is very
gratifying to reflect that the members of the company constantly
aimed to obtain a scientific knowledge of general music. No fears need
be entertained that the students of Fisk University will ever lack for
instruction in music of the highest order, as ample provision is there
made for the same. Of course the model of slave "spirituals" will in a
short while give place to such music as befits the new order of
things. The students themselves will wish to aim higher, as the spirit
of true progress will demand it. Nevertheless, some of the
characteristics displayed by the great Jubilee choir it will be well
for them to ever retain, and for all other singers to imitate: I mean
the heartiness, the soulfulness, of their style of rendition. Indeed,
in their striking exhibitions of these latter qualities, I think they
may justly claim the honor of standing quite peerless and alone, and
of having presented a model for the present and the future,--a model
founded on that power of the singer, which enables him to melt, to
stir to its innermost recesses, the human heart; that power that
enables him to sing as one inspired.

And here let me conclude by venturing a brief prediction. My mind goes
a few years into the future. I attend a concert given by students or
by graduates of Fisk University; I listen to music of the most
classical order rendered in a manner that would satisfy the most
exacting critic of the art; and at the same time I am pleasantly
reminded of the famous "Jubilee Singers" of days in the past by the
peculiarly thrilling sweetness of voice, and the charming simplicity
and soulfulness of manner, that distinguish and add to the beauty of
the rendering.




XX.

THE GEORGIA MINSTRELS.

     "All the minstrel art I know,
       I the viol well can play;
     I the pipe and syrinx blow;
       Harp and geige my hand obey;
     Psaltery, symphony, and rote
       Help to charm the listening throng;
     And Armonia lends its note
       While I warble forth my song."

     _The Lay of the Minstrel._


The origin of troubadours, or minstrels, dates back to the year 1100
(A.D.) at least. There are accounts, somewhat vague, however, which
make them still more ancient. They were at one time almost the sole
producers of poetry and music, always composing the songs they sang,
accompanying the same generally, at first, with the music of the
dulcet-toned harp, and, at a later period, with that of the guitar.

Their accomplishments, especially in music, secured for them the ready
_entrée_ of the most refined society, particularly that of elegant
ladies, of whom they were great favorites; while the most polished
princes always extended them a warm welcome.

At one time in their history, the fate of letters was in the sole
keeping of the troubadours. Had it not been for the frequent
presentations and allusions made to literature in their songs, its
chain, connecting past and present, would have been broken.

An elegant French writer, speaking of the ancient troubadours,
observes, "They banished scholastic quarrels and ill-breeding,
polished the manners, established rules of politeness, enlivened
conversation, and purified gallantry. That urbanity that distinguishes
us (the French) from other peoples is the fruit of their songs; and,
if it is not from them that we derive our virtues, they at least
taught us how to render them amiable."

I have thus briefly alluded to the early history and characteristics
of the minstrel, because I consider such a course as just towards the
present profession, and in order to show how sadly (in this country
certainly) have its members deviated from the refined, the brilliant
practices of their predecessors. Besides, in doing this, I am not
without a hope that I may be contributing in some slight degree
towards elevating a profession, the archetypes of which discoursed the
finest music of their times, and whose courtliness of demeanor and
varied acquirements were such as to render them the fit associates of
persons of the highest culture. For, in this instance, why may not
what has been be again?

It is unnecessary to dwell at length upon the fact so sadly apparent,
that the American minstrel has had for his principal "stock in trade"
the coarse, the often vulgar, jest and song; a disgusting (to the
refined) buffoonery, attended with painfully displeasing contortions
of the body; and, worst of all, the often malicious caricaturing of an
unfortunate race.

It is, however, cause for gratulation, that American minstrelsy has of
late been divested of much of its former coarseness; that its
entertainments have become so much diversified and elevated in
character--the musical portions of which at times so nearly approach
the classical--as to render the same entirely different from the
minstrel performances so common a few years ago. It is found that a
public rapidly becoming enlightened, and freed from the influences of
an unreasoning and cruel race-hatred, no longer enjoys with its former
relish the "plantation act," so called, with all its extravagant and
offensive accompaniments. Compelled to recognize this change of
sentiment and taste, the best troupes now frequently give, instead of
the "act" just mentioned, some other one, which, while comical enough,
is yet free from features distasteful to people of refinement.

In view of all this, may we not ask, Is the minstrel guild going back
to the standards of its ancient and more noble days? Let us hope that
it is.

And to the attention of those who have regarded with aversion (often
with good cause too) the modern race of "troubadours" I commend the
cheering tendencies just noted, since these may be held as indicating
the dawn of a brighter day for all concerned.

I next invite the reader to the perusal of a sketch of the famous
"Georgia Minstrels," who not only in this country, but in some parts
of Europe, have become justly celebrated as the finest troupe of
minstrels extant. Being all _real_ colored men, and therefore not
dependent upon "burnt cork,"--being, as some have put it, "the genuine
article,"--they in this respect possess an advantage over their
naturally fairer-skinned brethren in the profession. Still, as will be
seen hereafter, this complexional advantage (?) is not by any means
the most important cause of their unprecedented success.

But the reader is first requested to pardon what may be thought a
digression: the writer considers it a necessary one.

He is aware, that, in presenting in this book the following account of
the Georgia Minstrels,--an account which, on the whole, must be
regarded as highly complimentary to the latter,--he may be incurring
the displeasure of some very excellent people who belong to the same
race as that of the members of the troupe mentioned. This he very much
regrets; for although he considers these persons as perhaps
unnecessarily sensitive, and certainly mistaken in some of the
opinions which they hold regarding _this_ company of minstrels (whose
performances, by the way, most of said persons have never witnessed),
he yet entertains the fullest respect for the honorable _motives_ that
inspire their disfavor.

The main grounds of their opposition to minstrel performances in
general, and to those of the Georgia Minstrels in particular, may be
stated briefly, but fairly, as follows: That these performances
consist, for the most part, in a disgusting caricaturing ostensibly of
the speech and action of the more unfortunate members of the colored
race, but which are really made to reflect against the whole; that
these public performances do much to belittle their race generally,
arouse and keep alive in the breasts of other races a feeling of
contempt for it; and that these effects are greatly enhanced when
colored men themselves engage in such performances, as they thus give
"aid and comfort to the enemy." I shall not attempt to refute these
statements. They may be true; but, whether they are or not, it is not
within the province of this book to discuss. They are placed here in
order that both sides may be heard. Against their severe and somewhat
sweeping character I place the fine _musical_ achievements of the
subjects of this sketch. Of these, assuredly, we can _all_ be proud;
and therefore the recounting of these shall serve as a full
justification of the course I have taken in presenting the sketch.

The author well remembers, that, when only a boy of fourteen years, he
was so much opposed to seeing colored men appear as minstrels, that he
indignantly refused to comply when requested to post and otherwise
distribute play-bills for a company of colored minstrels who were to
appear in the town in which he lived; for he considered it alike
disgraceful for them to thus appear, and himself to give aid to such
appearance. He fully retained this feeling of aversion up to a year or
two ago, when, contemplating the preparation of this book (which, by
the way, was for the sake of consistency, as a work on music, to trace
the footsteps of the remarkable colored musician wherever they might
lead), he had to force himself, so to say, into the hall, to witness
the performances of the Georgia Minstrels. He resolved as he entered,
however, that he would give his particular attention to the _musical_
part of the programme, and try to discover in that such evidences of
talent and fine attainments as would justify him in sketching the
troupe. He was not pleased, of course, with that portion of the
performance (a part of which he was compelled to witness) devoted to
burlesque. Nevertheless, he found in the vocal and instrumental part
much that was in the highest degree gratifying; for during the evening
he listened to some of the most pleasing music of the time, sung and
played in a manner evincing on the part of the troupe not only fine
natural talent, but much of high musical culture. And so he came away,
thinking, on the whole, that there were, to say the least, two sides
to the minstrel question; feeling that the Georgia Minstrels had
presented so much that was really charming in a musical way as to
almost compensate the sensitive auditor for what he was ready to
confess he suffered while witnessing that part of the performance
devoted to caricature.

Commencing about twelve years ago, composed of men some of whom had
been slaves in Georgia, all possessed of much natural musical talent,
without (except in one or two instances) scientific training, the
Georgia Minstrels began their career under the leadership of Mr.
George B. Hicks. Although from the first attracting by their
performances no little attention, their fortune was for some time only
a varying one; nor did they attain to a firm position before the
public until after Mr. George B. Callender assumed the directorship.
By studious application, most of the original "Georgias" became fairly
versed in music. The places of those who left were from time to time
filled by adding to the company educated musicians and performers of
high merit; the skilful director "pressing into the service," so to
speak, as he passed through the country, the best talent obtainable.
At present, only two or three of the original members are with the
company.

The troupe is now composed of twenty-one performers; and each
possesses either rare vocal or instrumental (most of them both)
natural talents and acquirements; and, when these qualities are
combined, a performance of such delightful beauty and finish is
presented, as to elicit from their audiences the most enthusiastic
applause. From the instrumentalists of this company either a fine
orchestra or brass band can at any time, as occasion requires, be
formed; while they present solo, single and double quartet, and
_ensemble_ singing, of most charming power and sweetness. At least
four of their number have been in the past accomplished teachers of
music; one has played in some of the best orchestras of England; one
is a superior performer upon at least four instruments, while he is a
fair player of twelve; several are excellent performers on two or
three instruments; and three of the troupe arrange and write music.

The following-named persons are members of the troupe at this writing
(May, 1877):--

     GEORGE B. CALLENDER        _Manager._
     GEORGE A. SKILLINGS        _Musical Director._
     RICHARD G. LITTLE          _Stage Manager._
     WILLIAM W. MORRIS          _Interlocutor._

     F.E. LEWIS,
     SAMUEL JONES,
     WILLIAM ELMER LYLE,
     WILLIAM KERSANDS,
     JAS. EMIDY,
     PETER DEVONEAR,
     GEORGE COOPER,
     ROBERT MACK,
     DAVID SCUDDER,
     JNO. T. DOUGLASS,
     JAS. GRACE,
     OCT. MOORE,
     R. EMIDY,
     ROBERT HIGHT,
     CHARLES ANDERSON,
     JAS. FERNAND,
     AND MESSRS. THOMPSON AND GAINES.

As showing the estimation in which the vocalism of their quartet is
held by persons of culture, I may state, that a year or two ago, while
the company remained over Sunday in a Western city in which they had
performed during the previous week, this quartet was invited to sing
(as its choir) in one of the most fashionable churches there. The
invitation was accepted; and it may be remarked, that although these
fine singers did full justice to the proprieties of the occasion, and
thus justified the bestowment of a marked honor upon them,--it may be
remarked, I say, that they thus enjoyed a distinction rarely if ever
before conferred upon members of a minstrel troupe.

While in Boston in 1876, the company were invited to a "camp-fire" of
Grand Army Post 115, composed for the most part of ex-officers of high
rank, and all gentlemen of education and good social position. On this
occasion, their own classical quartet and that of the "Georgias"
united in presenting some of the most exquisite music, while other
pleasing incidents of the evening rendered it one long to be
remembered. In the same city, at another time, they were entertained
at the residence of one of the most accomplished of its musicians. I
mention these pleasant occurrences simply to show the character and
extent of the popularity which this excellent troupe everywhere wins:
for to please a miscellaneous throng in public halls and theatres,
and, after the curtain falls at the close of the performance, to be
almost forgotten by the same, is the experience of most all minstrel
companies; but to be sought after when off the stage by people of the
best character, and invited to contribute with their fine musical
attainments and social qualities to the enjoyments of select private
circles, is a distinction, in the constant winning of which the
Georgia Minstrels stand almost if not entirely alone.

And now, as proofs of the great popularity of this company on the
stage, I shall present a few from among the many press notices,
regarding their performances, in my possession. These, while fully in
harmony with what I have said respecting the merits of these famous
performers, add some points of interesting description.

Says "The New-York Sun,"--

     "Every song was encored some two or three times."

"The New-York Herald,"--

     "The new melodies find in them the fittest interpretations."

"The Memphis Appeal,"--

     "We might write a column of praise, and even then there
     would be something unsaid of their merit. They are good in
     every thing they attempt."

"The Indianapolis Journal,"--

     "We doubt if a more successful entertainment of this kind
     has ever been given in this city. We no longer wonder that
     Boston sent forty thousand to hear them at the Hub."

"The Petersburg (Va.) Index,"--

     "We do not hesitate to pronounce Callender's Minstrels the
     superiors in this line to any we have ever seen. They far
     outreach the usual small range of excellence, and leave
     their rivals far behind."

"The Philadelphia Inquirer,"--

     "So great was the rush to see them, that the sale of tickets
     at the box-office had to be stopped half an hour before the
     performance. They are unquestionably excellent."

"The Philadelphia Record,"--

     "It is estimated that at least one thousand people were
     turned away from the box-office last night, unable to obtain
     tickets or entrance, so great was the rush."

"The Cincinnati Commercial" says,--

     "They have drawn better houses in Cincinnati than any white
     troupe."

"The Brooklyn Eagle" says,--

     "From first to last, all are absorbed in admiration."

"The Cincinnati Inquirer" says,--

     "It is an unusually fine company, and superior to any that
     visit here."

"The Baltimore News" says,--

     "There is no approach to vulgarity. Their audiences are the
     most fashionable. No minstrel company can compare with
     Callender's."

"The Brooklyn Union" says,--

     "They are superlatively excellent."

"The Memphis Appeal" says,--

     "They are masters of minstrelsy."

"The Baltimore American" says,--

     "All other companies are tame in comparison with these."

William Lloyd Garrison writes,--

     "It is gratifying to see that no imputation is brought
     against them of presenting any thing offensive to the eye or
     ear."

Mr. P.T. Barnum says,--

     "They are extraordinary, and the best I ever saw. They fully
     deserve their large patronage."

Said Dexter Smith, the eminent song-writer,--

     "Boston has unconditionally yielded to the Georgia
     Minstrels. If you wish to see the brains, beauty, and
     fashion of the musical metropolis, a peep into Beethoven
     Hall will give you an insight of it. Never has a minstrel
     troupe created such enthusiasm in any American city as the
     Georgia Minstrels have done in Boston."

And the Boston "Folio," that excellent journal of music,--

     "The Georgia Minstrels, who are nightly appearing before
     crowded houses at Beethoven Hall, deserve more than a
     passing notice, on account of their excellence, and the
     utter absence of aught that could offend the most
     fastidious. 'The Traveller' expresses our sentiments so
     exactly, that we cannot indorse them better than by
     quoting:--

     "'There is a freshness and a completeness about the whole
     performance which entitle it to the fullest praise. As for
     the whole evening's enjoyment, it may be characterized as
     novel from the fact that it is native and not imitative,
     commendable because it is wholly refined, and most pleasant
     because it is always artistic. The comedians are very
     numerous, and all unite in giving a perfection to the
     rendering of the whole bill.'"

"The Boston Herald" said,--

     "Beethoven Hall was well filled last evening by admirers of
     Ethiopian delineations, assembled to see and hear the
     original Georgia Minstrels, who have returned from a very
     successful tour in Europe, and are now located at the
     above-named hall for a short season. The company is a
     novelty from the fact that all the members are colored, and
     their performances possess a genuineness which no burnt-cork
     artists can fully imitate. Their music, both vocal and
     instrumental, is excellent. Each performer seems to be not
     only a natural, but a cultured artist; and all have the
     faculty of being exceedingly mirthful, without overstepping
     the bounds of refinement. In fact, each performer seems
     perfect in his _rôle_; and all appear to be masters of
     minstrelsy."

Again the same paper said,--

     "The Georgia Minstrels have burst upon us like an avalanche.
     All the reserved seats were sold last evening before the
     performance commenced; and the house was filled by a
     fashionable audience,--one rarely seen at a minstrel
     entertainment. The troupe have made a decided hit, and their
     performances last night were received with great enthusiasm.
     Their songs and choruses are excellent; their puns, jokes,
     and stories, fresh and laughable; and their special acts
     new, and of a superior order. The performances of the troupe
     have happily filled a void which existed in the amusement
     field.

     "This troupe of native artists has won the very highest
     praise from every one wherever it has appeared. In England
     and America over three thousand performances have been
     given. The troupe has appeared before the Queen of England,
     and bears the highest testimonials of the press from across
     the water."

"The Boston Advertiser" said,--

     "They (the Georgia Minstrels) are at the head of the
     minstrel business in this country."

The "Chicago Post,"--

     "The company merits all the praise which has been bestowed
     upon them."

I need only further mention, in conclusion, that several members of
this troupe possess musical and histrionic abilities of an order so
high as to fit them to grace stages of a more elevated character than
the one upon which they now perform. Indeed, one formerly attached to
it is now a valuable member of the "Hyers Opera Company." On the
minstrel boards his talents as a singer and actor were developed. It
is to be hoped (and here I crave the pardon of Mr. Callender, their
gentlemanly director, who is requested to try to appreciate the good
_motive_, at least, that prompts a suggestion which seems to aim at
the disintegration of his famous company) that others of the
"Georgias" will follow his example. Their motto should constantly be,
"Excelsior!"

I have been informed that in the city of Boston, at a certain time,
not many years ago, the then directors of the three principal theatre
orchestras were persons who had previously been members of minstrel
troupes. It is also known that several of the finest operatic singers
in this country learned their first lessons at this same school,--the
minstrel stage. In their new, higher, and of course far more
desirable positions, these persons have achieved artistic results
which reflect upon them the highest credit, and which show also that
the minstrel profession has some beneficial, elevating uses,
notwithstanding all that may be truly said against it.




PART SECOND.




OTHER REMARKABLE MUSICIANS,

AND

THE MUSIC-LOVING SPIRIT OF VARIOUS LOCALITIES.




I.

     "They are the abstracts and brief chronicles of the time."

     SHAKSPEARE.


On the following pages I shall make mention in collective form, and
somewhat briefly, of a number of artists whose histories, although not
less important than those by which they are preceded, could not, owing
to various causes, be placed in the first part of this book.

The true value of musical proficiency does not consist alone in the
power it gives one to win the applause of great audiences, and thereby
to attain to celebrity: it consists also in its being a source of
refinement and pleasure to the possessor himself, and by which he may
add to the tranquillity, the joys, of his own and the home life of his
neighbors and friends. And here will be found, therefore, a brief
mention of those, who, although they are not public performers, are
yet sincere devotees of the art of music, who possess decided talent,
and who in their attainments present instances of a character so
noticeable as to render the same well worthy of record.

It is considered proper to say, also,--a caution which perhaps may not
be necessary,--that I shall here make mention by name of none but
persons of scientific musical culture; of none but those who read the
printed music page, and can give its contents life and expression,
generally, too, with a fine degree of excellence, either with voice or
instrument; and who evince by their studies and performances the true
artistic spirit. The singer or player "by ear" merely, however well
favored by nature, will not be mentioned. This course will be
followed, not because persons of the latter class are regarded
contemptuously,--not by any means; but because it is intended that the
list here given shall be, as far as it goes, a true record of what
pertains to the higher reach and progress of a race, which, always
considered as _naturally_ musical, has yet, owing to the blighting
influences of the foul system of slavery, been hitherto prevented from
obtaining, as generally as might be, a _scientific_ knowledge of
music.

Nor must the list of names furnished be understood as an exhaustive
one. Had the author the time in which to collect more names, or had he
here the space for printing the same, he assures the reader of this
only partial chronicle that one could be furnished which would be many
times larger. And moreover, if any meritorious musician shall complain
because his name does not here appear, I ask him to pardon the
omission, made not from choice, nor with the purpose of giving
personal offence.

If the first edition of this book shall be received with such favor as
to warrant the issuing of a second one, I shall, if it be found
necessary, take the time and pains to supply in it such omissions as
appear to be made in this one. If it be found necessary, I say; for I
am inclined to opine that ere long,--judging from a "view of the
field" that I have lately taken, and after witnessing there the many
delightful evidences of musical love and culture,--that ere long
neither such lists as this, nor just such books as this, will be
considered as necessary.

Nevertheless, the writer requests all who are interested in the more
general cultivation of music by the people to send him such names as
have been here left out, together with all facts that may additionally
illustrate the subject treated in these pages; all names and
statements to be accompanied by as strong confirmation as can possibly
be procured. These will be published in case other editions of the
book are issued.

It is hoped that the persons here mentioned, on seeing that their
present achievements in art are regarded as of so much value in
indicating the æsthetic taste and musical capacity of their race, may
be impelled thereby to put forth even greater efforts, and to thus
attain to that still higher state of usefulness and distinction,
which, it is believed, their talents and present accomplishments show
is quite possible.

In the city of Boston, which is the acknowledged great art centre of
this country, the amplest facilities for the study of music are
afforded. There the doors of conservatories and other music schools,
among the finest of any in the world, are thrown open to _all_; the
cost of admission being, considering the many advantages afforded,
quite moderate. A love of the "divine art" pervades all classes in
Boston; and there the earnest student and the skilful in music, of
whatever race he may be, receives ready recognition and full
encouragement. It is, in fact, almost impossible for one to live in
that city of melody, and not become either a practical musician, or at
least a lover of music.

It need not, then, be a matter of surprise that so many of the most
finely-educated artists mentioned in this book are found to have been
residents of the city mentioned. Affected by its all-pervading, its
infectious, so to say, musical spirit, they eagerly embraced the many
opportunities offered for culture; and their noble achievements are
only such as would have been made by others of the same race residing
in other sections of the country, had the latter enjoyed there (as,
alas! mostly on account of the depressing, the vile spirit of caste
that prevailed, they did not) the same advantages as the former.



Commencing with Boston, then, I first mention _Miss Rachel M.
Washington_, a lady of fine artistic qualities, thoroughly educated in
music, performing in finished, classical style on the piano-forte and
organ, and who is a most accomplished teacher of those instruments and
of harmony. In the last-mentioned department of music she a few years
ago graduated, receiving the valuable diploma of the New-England
Conservatory at Boston. Many of the most pleasing amateurs of Boston
and vicinity received their first instructions in music from Miss
Washington. Hers is a musical family, as her two sisters and brother
are each possessed of nice musical taste and education. The subject of
this notice early awakened their interest, and directed their studies.
It is gratefully acknowledged, too, that to Miss Washington's earnest
efforts, more than to those of any other person in Boston, is due
that love for and proficiency in musical art so noticeable in certain
circles of that city. From what I have learned of this artist's
history from my own observation and otherwise, I am convinced that its
full recital here would add much to the interest and value of this
book. But I am prevented from doing this by her own earnest request,
conveyed in language which, although, as I think, a trifle too gloomy,
yet shows that she is animated by the most elevated ideas concerning
the beautiful art of which she is so noble an exponent. I cannot
forbear quoting a part of her excellent letter, in which she says,--

     "Now a word about my own musical life.... Perhaps I have had
     much success, and, like many others, many failures. My life
     has been one of persevering struggle to attain to a high
     degree of musical knowledge, and, through this, to assist in
     the elevation of my race. If I have been successful in any
     degree in helping to lay the foundation of future or present
     success, in awakening a love for the beautiful in musical
     art, or in kindling an ardent desire and aspiration for that
     which elevates and ennobles, removes the harshness of and
     dignifies our natures, then I am glad that I have not sown
     in vain, though another shall reap the harvest.

     "A part of the reward for all these years of arduous toil
     has been the recognition of talent by those of the more
     favored race, as well as the appreciation and kindness shown
     me by those with whom I am identified....

     "As I read the lives of the great composers, and think of
     their sacred devotion to the art dearer to them than their
     own lives, I feel anxious for the time to come in our
     history when a child like Mozart shall be born with soul
     full of bright melodies; or a Beethoven, with his depth and
     tenderness of feeling; or a Handel, lifting us above this
     earth until we shall hear the multitude of voices joining in
     one vast song,--'Alleluia! for the Lord God omnipotent
     reigneth.' _Nor is this impossible._ Our history, it seems
     to me, has but just begun. All the past is but sorrow and
     gloom, with here and there a bright ray to bid us hope.... I
     hope they [the colored youth of the country] will early
     develop a love and taste for the beautiful in musical art;
     that soon we shall be proud to mention those whose names
     through their works shall be immortal."

Miss Washington has long been the organist of the Twelfth Baptist
Church, Boston, as well as the directress of its choir. She is a lady
of fine general culture and Christian character, and has many times
been the recipient of public testimonials, and of complimentary
notices from the New-England press.

_Mrs. Dr. C.N. Miller_ (_née_ Ariana Cooley) was for a long time the
leading soprano-singer of Rev. L.A. Grimes's church. She has been long
and favorably known in Boston musical circles as a very pleasing
vocalist, possessing a pure, rich voice of great range, and highly
cultivated. She renders with fine expression the best music. Her
_repertoire_ of songs is quite extensive, and she has often been
complimented by the press. "The Boston Globe" of March 31, 1876,
alluding to her singing at a public concert, said, "She is the
possessor of a well-cultivated voice of natural sweetness." Mrs.
Miller was until recently a valued member of the Tremont-Temple choir,
so noticeable for excellent singing. She is now a member of the
Berkeley-street Church quartet.

_Mrs. P.A. Glover_ and _Mrs. Hester Jeffreys_, who will be better
known by their maiden names,--Phebe A. and Hester Whitehouse,--possess
voices of rare natural beauty considerably cultivated. These sisters,
had they so chosen, could have long since become public singers of
much prominence; since their rich vocal gifts are supplemented by a
fine knowledge of music, to which are added also very graceful,
winning manners. As it is, they have often delighted their hearers in
private circles by their rendering of some of the choicest music of
the day. They have occasionally appeared in public, always to the
acceptance of large audiences. These ladies inherit their musical
talents from their mother, who possessed a voice of more than ordinary
range and sweetness.

_Mrs. Dr. G.F. Grant_ (_née_ Georgina Smith), formerly the efficient
organist of the North Russell-street Church, has been regarded as a
most pleasing vocalist, possessing a very pure, sweet soprano-voice.
She was for some time a pupil of the New-England Conservatory of
Music; and on more than one occasion was chosen to represent at its
quarterly concerts, before large and cultivated audiences in Music
Hall, the system taught and fine progress made by the attendants of
that institution. On such occasions, her _naïveté_, her graceful,
handsome stage-appearance, and expressive rendering, with voice of
bird-like purity, of some of the best _cavatina_ music, always
elicited the most enthusiastic plaudits and recalls. The writer was
fortunately present on one of these occasions, and remembers with much
satisfaction the delight he felt, not only in hearing this lady's
melodious voice himself, but in witnessing its charming effect on an
audience of nearly four thousand people, representing generally
Boston's best culture. Her reception really amounted to an ovation.
The event was a most remarkable one, and, exhibiting as it so fully
did the power of art to scatter all the prejudices of race or caste,
was most instructive and re-assuring.

Of her appearance at one of the concerts just mentioned "The Boston
Globe" thus spoke:--

     ... "Miss Smith, a fine-looking young lady, achieved a like
     success in all her numbers and in fine presence on the
     stage, and in her simple, unobtrusive manner, winning the
     sympathies of the audience."

And "The Boston Journal" said,--

     "An immense audience, in spite of the storm and the wretched
     condition of the streets, assembled in Music Hall yesterday
     evening to listen to the quarterly concert of the
     New-England Conservatory of Music. The spacious hall was
     packed in every part. The most marked success during the
     evening was that won by Miss Georgina Smith, who has a fine
     soprano-voice, and who sang in a manner which could but
     receive the warmest plaudits."

Miss Smith was a member of the chorus, composed of selected singers,
that sang at the memorable "International Peace Jubilee Concert," and,
although still quite young, has had an experience as a vocalist of
which she may well be proud.

_Miss Louisa Brown_, now deceased, was a pianist of ambitious aim and
much promise. She had been instructed by some of the best teachers of
Boston; but never appeared as a performer in public, being of a
retired disposition. She, however, often by her musical performances,
as well as by her general acquirements and knowledge in art-matters,
afforded pleasing entertainment and instruction for the members of her
family and their visitors. In her piano-studies she evinced a taste
for only the highest kind of compositions, and, in her rendition of
the same, exhibited evidence of most faithful application, and no
little proficiency. She was a graduate of the Girls' High and Normal
School of Boston, was fairly skilled in drawing, and had added much to
her store of general knowledge by a visit to Europe. While in almost
the flower of youth, and a state of highest usefulness, she was
stricken down by death. All that has here been said, and much more,
was expressed in some of the public journals by admiring friends
shortly after her decease.

Among those whose musical abilities have thus far attracted much
attention, and given promise that their possessor will attain to still
higher distinction in the future, I mention _Mr. B.J. Janey_, whose
fine tenor-voice has often won for him the praises of private and
public audiences. He has studied privately under one of the professors
at the New-England Conservatory of Music; is a pleasing performer on
the flute; and, as a singer, has more than once been favorably
mentioned by the press.

_Miss Fannie A. Washington_ has for some time afforded much pleasure
to public audiences as a contralto-singer. She was for a while a pupil
of the Conservatory previously mentioned. She has been complimented by
the press.

_Miss Ellen Sawyer_ possesses a soprano-voice which is quite elastic,
of great range, and strong and clear in the upper register. She has
been favorably received on several occasions by public audiences.

_Mr. W.H. Copeland_ and _Mr. E.M. Allen_ deserve mention for their
fine rendering of choice music; the former singing tenor, and the
latter bass. They are conscientious lovers and students of music, ever
seeking to attain to the highest positions as artists. Mr. Copeland's
studies are directed at the New-England Conservatory. The ambitious
spirit displayed by Mr. Allen is very praiseworthy, he having
contended very perseveringly and with much success against great
obstacles. He sang in the bass division at one of the great Jubilee
concerts.

_Mrs. Cecelia Boston_, who will be better known by her maiden
name,--Cecelia Thompson,--has long been much remarked for clever
abilities as organist, pianist, and contralto-vocalist.

_Miss Rachel Thompson_ is a ready reader of music, and a good
soprano-singer.

_Mrs. Phebe Reddick_, possessing a clear, ringing soprano-voice, adds
much to the singing of the Twelfth Baptist Church choir.

_Mr. Francis P. Cleary_, _Mr. James L. Edwards_, and _Mr. George W.
Sharper_, all band-directors, deserve mention here for their efforts
while connected with such organizations.

Of the musical bodies who play upon instruments of

     "Sonorous metal, blowing martial sounds,"

I mention the "_Excelsior Brass Band_;" an ambitious title, it is
true, but one which the future may show to be well taken. This band
contains a number of young men who seem to be in earnest, and
studious; and some of them possess noticeable talent. Their leader,
Mr. George W. Sharper, is painstaking, and ambitious to have the band
succeed.

Whenever in filling engagements it is necessary to add to the regular
force of the "Excelsiors," no difficulty is experienced in securing
the services of a number of fine musicians of the other race,--a fact
which shows the power of music to destroy the distinctions of caste.

_Mr. Joseph W. Hendricks_ has exhibited a commendable ambition in his
efforts to acquire a knowledge of music, devoting several hours each
day to practice on the piano-forte.

_Mr. Joseph Thompson_ is an assiduous student of, and fair performer
on, the [B-flat]-tenor and the flute. He is a member of the "Excelsior
Brass Band."

I have thus mentioned briefly the best-known artists of Boston. As I
have indicated, most of them have musical abilities of a high order,
entitling them to a much fuller notice than can here be given. There
are, of course, others of fine musical attainments who adorn private
circles.

Boston contains two or three musical societies, and several vocal
quartets. _The Auber Quartet_ have attracted much attention by their
very pleasing rendering of some of the best popular music of the day.
The names of its members appear hereafter.

_The Progressive Musical Union_ is the name of one of the societies
above mentioned. It is well organized. Elijah W. Smith, the poet, is
president. The noble purposes of this society are eloquently stated in
the following lines, composed by the gentleman just mentioned, and
which prefaced the programme of the first public concert given by this
society, March 9, 1875:--

     "Progressive: ay, we hope to climb
       With patient steps fair Music's height,
     And at her altar's sacred flame
       Our care-extinguished torches light;
     And, while their soft and cheering rays
       Life's rugged path with joys illume,
     May Harmony's enchanted wand
       Bring sunshine where before was gloom!

     And though we may not walk apace
       With Mendelssohn or Haydn grand,
     Nor view with undimmed eyes the mount
       Where Mozart's shining angels stand;
     Yet in the outer courts we wait
       Till Knowledge shall the curtain draw,
     And to our wondering eyes disclose
       The mysteries the masters saw."

The following are the numbers performed on the occasion mentioned:--

[Illustration:

PROGRAMME.


=Part First=

1. TRIO FOR TWO VIOLINS AND PIANO                             _Rhizia_
    DAVID OSWELL, MADALINE TALBOT, AND MRS. WILSON.

2. QUARTET.--"Sighing for Thee."
    AUBER QUARTET,--MESSRS. SMITH, HILL, RUFFIN, AND HENRY.

3. SONG.--"Down by the Sea" (Bass)                          _Knowlton_
    JAMES HENRY, Jun.

4. DUET.--"On Mossy Banks"                                   _Gilbert_
    MISS P.E. ALLEN AND E.M. PINKNEY.

5. SONG.--"Thou everywhere"                                  _Lachner_
    MRS. WILSON.

6. ROMANCE.--"Alice, where art Thou?"                         _Ascher_
    JAMES M. SCOTTRON.

7. QUINTET.--"The Image of the Rose"                       _Reichardt_
    MISS P.E. ALLEN AND QUARTET.


=Part Second.=

1. THEMA WITH VARIATIONS.--Violin and Piano                     _Rode_
    DAVID T. OSWELL.

2. DUET.--"Take now this Ring"                         _La Sonnambula_
    MRS. WILSON AND JAMES M. SCOTTRON.

3. QUARTET.--"Soldier's Farewell"                             _Kinkel_
    MESSRS. SMITH, HILL, RUFFIN, AND HENRY.

4. SONG.--"Waiting," with Violin Obligato                    _Millard_
    MISS P.E. ALLEN, MRS. D. WILSON, AND DAVID T. OSWELL.

5. MARCH.--Vocal                                              _Becker_
    MESSRS. SMITH, PINKNEY, RUFFIN, AND HENRY.

6. QUARTET.--"Man the Life-Boat" (by request).

7. CHORUS.--"Angel of Peace"                                  _Keller_
    WITH ORGAN AND PIANO ACCOMPANIMENT.]

This concert gave delight to a large audience, and was very much
praised by the public journals.

I close the list of Boston musical people by presenting the following
programme of a hastily-arranged concert given by a number of artists
on the evening of April 15, 1874. It is given simply as a specimen of
the numbers often performed at concerts by those whose names appear,
and by others mentioned heretofore, with but little rehearsal.
Although the music is of a fine order, it is by no means as difficult
as that frequently rendered by these persons at other concerts, the
programmes of which I have not now at hand.

[Illustration:

PROGRAMME.


=Part First.=

1. QUARTET.--"Alpine Echoes."
    MISS BROWN, MISS F. WASHINGTON, MR. JANEY, MR. FISHER.

2. PIANO SOLO.--"Fantasia Impromptu"                          _Chopin_
    MR. S. JAMIESON.

3. SOLO.--"La Primavera"                                       _Torry_
    MISS BROWN.

4. DUET.--"Vien Mio Edgardo"                                 _Millard_
    MISS F. WASHINGTON, MR. JANEY.

5. ARIA.--"Infélice"                                        _"Ernani"_
    MR. FISHER.

6. DUET.--"While thus around"                          _"La Favorita"_
    MISS BROWN, MR. JANEY.

7. SOLO with Cello Obligato.--"Peacefully Slumber"         _Randegger_
    MISS F. WASHINGTON.

8. SONG.--"Didst Thou but know"                                _Balfe_
    MR. JANEY.


=Part Second.=

1. QUARTET.--"Sweet and Low"                                  _Barnby_
    MISS BROWN, MISS WASHINGTON, MR. JANEY, MR. FISHER.

2. PIANO SOLO.--"Le Courrier"                                 _Ritter_
    MR. S. JAMIESON.

3. SONG.--"Queen of the Night"                                _Thomas_
    MISS BROWN.

4. SONG.--"To the Storm Wind"                                  _Evers_
    MR. FISHER.

5. DUET.--"Land of the Swallows"                             _Massini_
    MISS BROWN, MISS WASHINGTON.

6. SOLO.--For Violin.
    MR. F.E. LEWIS.

7. SONG.
    MISS F. WASHINGTON.

8. SONG.--"Love's Delight"                                       _Abt_
    MR. B.J. JANEY.

9. DUET.--"I Pescatori"                                       _Gabusi_
    MISS BROWN, MR. FISHER.

10. QUARTET.--"What Phrase Sad and Soft"                      _Bishop_
    MISS BROWN, MISS WASHINGTON, MR. JANEY, MR. FISHER.]

_Mr. David T. Oswald_, residing at Worcester, Mass., is an artistic
violinist, performing in a finished style the most classical and
difficult music for the violin. He has, besides, become deservedly
popular as an organizer of musical entertainments, and as a promoter
of a regard for good music by the people. He is quite well known in
St. John, N.B., Portland, Me., and in Boston, in which places he has
frequently appeared at public concerts; and has been often
complimented by the press.

_James Caseras_, who was for a long time the organist of a Catholic
church in Springfield, Mass., deserves, on account of his great skill
as a performer on the organ and piano-forte, particular mention here.
He came to this country some years ago from England, where he had
attracted much notice for his fine musical qualities. In Scotland he
had frequently played before the nobility. A few years ago, shortly
after his arrival in this country, he was tendered a reception by some
of the first musicians of Boston. This occurred at Mercantile Hall.
Here he rendered with most remarkable skill, on the piano-forte, some
of the more difficult music of the great masters, receiving the
warmest praises of the best judges of art.

_Mr. T.M. Fisher_ of Portland, Me., is noticeable as a fairly good
baritone-singer. He has appeared occasionally at concerts in his own
city and in Boston, and has been favorably mentioned by the press.

In another place the violin has been recommended as a proper
instrument for study and practice by ladies. Among the latter who have
given attention to it, I am pleased to mention _Madam Adaline Talbot_
of Portland, Me. She has not yet become a great player, but now shows
sufficient proficiency to warrant the belief, that, if she continues
her studies of this delightful instrument, she may in time become an
excellent performer.

The city of New York has some very excellent musicians.

_John T. Douglass_ is very justly ranked with the best musicians of
this country. His fame is by no means confined to New-York City or
State, as he has travelled quite extensively, and has been engaged in
many musical enterprises. He is a skilful, artistic performer on
several instruments, chief of which are the violin and guitar. As a
performer on the last-mentioned instrument he has few equals, while
for it he has arranged and composed a great deal of music. He has also
composed many fine pieces for orchestras and for the piano. When only
about twenty years of age, he composed a grand overture called "The
Pilgrim." He enjoys an enviable reputation in New York as a teacher of
music, and is very remarkable for the enthusiastic, devoted attention
he gives to the study of the art. As Mr. Douglass is but thirty years
old,--having been born in New York in 1847,--it will be seen that he
has made most wonderful progress, and that he has before him a very
brilliant future.

_Mr. David S. Scudder_ has fine natural talents, and has made very
commendable progress in music. He is a fair performer on the flute,
piano, and double-bass; playing quite well Mendelssohn's music, of
which he is very fond. He deserves special mention for his successful
endeavors to promote a love of good music among his acquaintances.

_Mr. Walter F. Craig_, although quite young, has already attracted
much attention, and received the praises of the critics, as a
performer on the violin. He is a close student, very ambitious and
enthusiastic, and without doubt will ere long be ranked with the first
violinists of the day. He has lately composed a march.

_William Appo_ is a veteran musician, having had a long and varied
experience, beginning his career when there were but very few persons
of his race in this country that could compare with him in scientific
acquaintance with music. He was for a long time one of the principal
performers in the once famous "Frank Johnson's Band" of Philadelphia.
He taught music for several years in New York. Quite advanced in years
that have been filled with incidents well worth recording for the
instruction of those who follow him, he now leads a retired life on
his farm in New-York State.

These pioneer musicians of ours should ever be gratefully remembered.
But few, if any, of the large number of musical students of these
better times, can realize the vast difficulties that on every hand met
the colored musician at the time when Mr. Appo and some others
elsewhere mentioned began their ambitious, toilsome careers.

     First in loving art with all their might,
     They steadily strove in the unequal fight,
     Till Prejudice, convinced at last,
     Retired, ashamed of the cruel past.
     Now _all_ who prize fair Music's ways
     Pursue their journey with far brighter days.
     The laurel crown, then, give the _pioneer_,
     Whom ever in our memories hold we dear.

_Mr. William Brady_, although numbered with those who have passed
away, should not be forgotten whenever the noble deeds of colored men
are to be mentioned. He was an artist of the finest natural talent,
and of varied musical acquirements of a high order of excellence. Mr.
Brady was very much esteemed as a composer, being the author of many
fine pieces of music, such as quadrilles, polkas, waltzes, marches,
and songs. He also essayed more elevated work with fine success,
having been the composer of a musical service for the Episcopal
Church, and a beautiful Christmas anthem. He died in March, 1854.

Among those of the gentler sex in New York who have won much praise
for their fine rendering of vocal music are _Miss Mary Williams_ and
_Miss Blanche D. Washington_. They have occasionally sung in other
cities at concerts, and have been favorably mentioned by the public
journals.

_Mrs. V.A. Montgomery_ and _Miss Emma B. Magnon_ should have prominent
mention here on account of their fine abilities displayed in
piano-forte and organ performance. They both read music readily,--or
"at sight," as we say,--and at present are engaged as organists in
New-York churches.

_Miss J. Imogene Howard_, formerly of Boston, but now an esteemed
teacher in one of the public schools of New-York City, deserves to be
mentioned in this list. When in Boston this lady exhibited commendable
zeal in the study of music, and at an early age was quite noticeable
for good piano-forte performance. Miss Howard is a graduate of the
Girls' High and Normal School of the city last mentioned.

A most encouraging indication of musical progress in the metropolis is
the existence there of the _Philharmonic Society_, which was organized
somewhat over two years ago. Two or three of its members are fine
soloists, while others possess fair abilities. The music practised is
instrumental, and all of a high order. The society is divided into two
classes, called the one junior, and the other senior. The juniors are
the newer and less skilful members: these are required to take lessons
of a competent teacher, and are not allowed to play with the senior
class until they attain to a certain degree of proficiency. At public
performances, of course, only the seniors represent the society. The
conductor (who is also president) is _Mr. P.H. Loveridge_; first
violin, _Walter F. Craig_; solo cornet, _Elmore Bartelle_; flute, _Ph.
Williams_; _William Lewis_, violoncello. At present the society
numbers about twenty members, all young men of intelligence and moral
character; and it has an excellent library of music, and a fund in
bank.

It is entirely unnecessary for the writer to say a word in praise of
this enterprise, for its present and prospective good results will be
readily perceived by all; nor need he, it is hoped, for the same
reason, urge upon the young men of other cities the great importance
of organizing similar societies.

_Miss Celestine O. Browne_ of Jamestown, N.Y., possesses fine ability
as a pianist. She is thus mentioned by "The Folio" of Boston, in the
number for December, 1876: "She is a fine pianist, very brilliant and
showy as soloist and accompanist." Again: the same journal, in the
number for February, 1877, said of Miss Browne, "A pianist of great
merit. Her natural abilities have been well trained. She has a clear
touch, and plays with a great deal of expression." This lady has for
more than a year been a valued member of the Hyers Sisters
concert-troupe.

_Mr. Peter P. O'Fake_ is considered one of the most noticeable of the
musicians of Newark, N.J.; which is no slight distinction, since in
that city are to be found some of the first musicians of the country.
He was born there in 1820. His parents were also natives of Newark.
Mr. O'Fake is what is termed "self-taught," and has cultivated most
industriously, against many disadvantages, the talents with which he
was naturally endowed. He is a skilful, expressive performer on the
violin (his specialty) and the flute. He has, of course, often
performed in public. In 1847 he took a prominent part at a concert
given by the notable Jullien Society of New York, playing on the
violin _De Beriot's Sixth and Seventh Airs with Variations_. In 1848
he took position on one occasion as leader in the Newark-Theatre
orchestra,--a rare distinction for one of his race, on account of the
prevailing color-prejudice. In 1850 he performed in Connor's Band at
Saratoga, playing at times the cornet and flute. These are some of the
most notable of his public appearances. He is occasionally called upon
to take part in concerts given by the various musical organizations of
Newark, the accident of complexional difference but seldom serving to
counteract the effects produced by his well-known musical abilities.
He often furnishes the music for receptions given at the homes of the
_élite_ of Newark. Mr. O'Fake has composed, and his orchestra often
performs to the great delight of all who hear it, a most bewitching
piece of quadrille-music called "The Sleigh-Ride," in which he most
ingeniously and naturally introduces the crack of the whip and the
merry jingle of the sleigh-bells. At such times the dancers are
excited to a high state of joyousness by the bewitching music, the
latter being of a character so suggestive as to cause them to almost
imagine themselves in the enjoyment of a veritable sleigh-ride. This
composition has greatly added to the fame of the author.

Mr. O'Fake is also a fair vocalist,--singing baritone,--and has been
director of the choir of one of the Episcopal churches in Newark since
1856. This choir frequently renders Dudley Buck's music, and that of
others among the best composers, eliciting most favorable comments
from the press.

_Misses Rosa and Malvina D. Sears_ are musical people of Newark, N.J.,
who deserve mention here.

_Philadelphia_ has, of course, many fine musicians. The most prominent
vocalists are _Madam Brown_, _Mr. John Mills_, and _Mrs. Lucy Adger_;
and the most prominent instrumentalists are _Miss M. Inez Cassey_,
pianist, _F.J.R. Jones_, violinist, and _Edward Johnson_, violinist.

This city enjoys the honor of having been the home of _Mr. Frank
Johnson_, and the place of organization of the celebrated brass band
that bore his name. It has been the intention of the writer to give a
somewhat extended sketch in this book of this famous impressario and
his talented body of performers; but as yet he has not succeeded in
obtaining the necessary materials. He will mention, however, briefly,
that Mr. Johnson was a well-educated musician, very talented and
enthusiastic, with fine powers for organization and leadership. He was
exceedingly skilful as a performer on the bugle. In his hand this
instrument

     "Became a trumpet, whence he blew
     Soul-animating strains: alas! too few."

Besides, he played well several other instruments. He was very much
esteemed, and was foremost in promoting in many ways the musical
spirit: he was, in fact, the P.S. Gilmore of his day. His band
attracted much attention all over the country for fine martial music.

Some time between the years 1839 and 1841 Mr. Johnson organized a
select orchestra, with which he visited several of the principal
cities of the country, "astonishing the natives" by a fine rendering
of the best music in vogue at that time. Indeed, the novelty formed by
such an organization,--all colored men,--its excellent playing, and
the boldness of the enterprise, all combined to create a decided
sensation wherever these sable troubadours appeared. It is said that
sometimes, while the band was on this tour, many persons would doubt
the ability of its members to read the music they were playing,
believing that they performed "by ear," as it is called; nor could
such persons be convinced of their error until a new piece of music--a
piece not previously seen by them--was placed before the band, and by
the same readily rendered from the printed page.

Mr. Johnson at one time visited England with his band, and gave
concerts in all the principal cities, being received everywhere with
the most demonstrative marks of favor. They were invited to play
before Queen Victoria and her court. This noble-hearted sovereign was
so highly pleased with the musical ability displayed by Mr. Johnson
and the other members of the band, that she caused a handsome silver
bugle to be presented to him in her name. Returning to this country
with such a nobly-won mark of honor, he became the centre of
attraction, and thereafter, as a musician, easily maintained before
the country a position of great popularity. At his funeral, which
occurred in 1846, the bugle just alluded to was placed upon the
coffin, and so borne to the grave, as a fitting emblem of one of the
important victories he had won, as well as of the music-loving life he
had led.

The memory of this gifted musician and indefatigable worker should
long be kept green in the hearts of all the members of his race, and
in those of his countrymen in general. For the former he of course
performed a specially noble service in demonstrating so powerfully its
capability for musical comprehension and for the scientific
performance of music,--points which, strange to say, were much in
dispute when he began his career; while in his well-nigh matchless
ability as a musician, displayed in no selfish manner, but in a way
that promoted in a high degree a general love for the elevating art of
music, Frank Johnson proved himself an honor to the whole country, and
one who should be long and gratefully remembered by all.

The band continued in existence, and was much in demand, for many
years after the great leader died, retaining its old and honorable
name, "Frank Johnson's Band." _Mr. Joseph G. Anderson_ next became
director. This gentleman was a musician of most remarkable powers,
both natural and acquired. He performed in a very skilful manner upon
almost every instrument that was in use, reading music like one reads
a book. In short, it has been said of him, that "what he did not know
of music was not worth knowing." He, too, was a great organizer; and
he showed himself, in many important respects, a fit successor of
Johnson.

When, during the late war, the State of Pennsylvania was forming
regiments, Mr. Anderson was kept busily employed for a long period
organizing and instructing brass bands for many of these regiments.
With his great musical skill and experience, he proved to be
indispensable at this time to the State, and won the brightest of
laurels.

Under Mr. Anderson's leadership, the band was occasionally engaged to
go to distant parts of the country to play for gatherings of one kind
and another. The writer well remembers when in 1852, on "St. John's
Day," this fine corps of musicians came to Cincinnati. With ranks so
deployed as to almost extend across Broadway Street, they moved in
most soldierly manner up the same at the head of a Masonic order,
playing indeed most "soul-animating strains," and winning the while
the warm admiration of a vast throng of people that lined the
sidewalks. Ah! we were very, very proud of them; so elated with their
triumphal entry, and so inspirited by the noble music, that it seemed
as though we could have followed them for days without yielding to
fatigue.

Mr. Anderson died at Philadelphia in 1874.

The successor of "Frank Johnson's Band" is called "The Excelsior." I
am informed that the latter consists of a number of superior
musicians.

"Madam Brown" was long regarded as the finest vocalist of her race in
this country, while only a few of the other race could equal her.
Although now no longer young, she still sings artistically and
beautifully. Her _repertoire_ comprises the gems of the standard
operas; and these she has sung, and does now sing, in a style that
would reflect honor on those far more pretentious than herself.

The other day, while looking over the "scrap-book" of a friend, I met
with another of those pleasant surprises that have occasionally
cheered me since I began this volume. In this "scrap-book" I found a
large number of cuttings from Philadelphia, New York, and other
papers, that related to the concerts given in the year 1856, and
later, by _Miss Sarah Sedgewick Bowers_. By these comments, I find
that this lady possessed a voice of most charming power and sweetness,
and that in her interpretations of operatic and music of a classical
character she was well-nigh, if not quite, equal to the finest
cantatrices then before the public. These papers styled Miss
Sedgewick--this was her professional name--the "Colored Nightingale."

It would perhaps be interesting to here append a number of these very
complimentary comments. A single and representative one must, however,
suffice. It is from "The Daily Pennsylvanian" of May 3, 1856.

     "We have never been called upon to record a more brilliant
     and instantaneous success than has thus far attended this
     talented young aspirant to musical honors. From obscurity
     she has risen to popularity. She has not been through the
     regular routine of advancement; but, as it were in a moment,
     endowed by nature with the wonderful power of song, she
     delighted the circle in which she moved, and is now
     enchanting the public. Last evening the hall was thronged at
     an early hour. In every song she was unanimously encored."

Miss Bowers now lives quietly at her home in Philadelphia, singing in
public only on special occasions. She is, of course, still a devoted
lover of the art of which she has been so fine an exponent; while she
yet possesses, through voice and method, the power to charm an
audience.

The name of _Mr. John Moore_ should be mentioned here. He was a born
musician, so to speak, and was ever "full of music." I remember him as
the leader of the band of the Fifty-fifth Massachusetts Regiment
during the late war. Although in this position he generally played
upon the [E-flat]-cornet, he could also play most of the other
instruments used in the band; and was, besides, a good performer on
the violin and flute. Very pleasant recollections of "our band," as we
soldiers fondly termed it, remain, I am quite sure, with all the
surviving members of the Fifty-fifth Regiment. In camp-life it often
enlivened the dull hours, and gave, by sweetest music, a certain
refinement to what would have been without it but a life of much
coarseness; while upon the wearisome march we often forgot our fatigue
as we briskly marched, keeping step to the animating music. To Mr.
Moore, the leader, much praise is due for the great benefits afforded
the members of the regiment by good music; nor do we forget the skill
displayed by the other members of the band, which enjoyed the
reputation of being the best in the Department of the South. Mr. Moore
died at Philadelphia in 1871.

_Professor Lott_ of Pittsburgh, Penn., has attracted attention as one
of the very first violoncellists of the country. He has travelled
quite extensively in the United States with a concert-troupe.

_Mr. Z.A. Coleman_ is a good singer of bass.

_Mr. E. Minor Holland_ of Cleveland, O., is a good performer on the
[B-flat]-cornet, violin, and double-bass. He is quite a young man,
and, possessing much talent, may become a musician of great merit if
he continues his studies.

_Miss Mary F. Morris_ performs upon the piano-forte with fine skill
and taste, and is a vocalist of excellent powers. She has pursued her
musical studies in the Cleveland Convent, the teachers of which enjoy
a high reputation; and also under Professor Alfred Arthur, one of the
finest instructors of Cleveland.

_I.A.D. Mitchell_, playing the [E-flat]-cornet, is the very efficient
leader of a band.

_Miss Annie Henderson_ is a very pleasing vocalist. She also studied
at the convent previously mentioned, and under Professor Arthur.

_Miss Clara Monteith Holland_, a young daughter of Justin Holland, the
celebrated guitar virtuoso, gives much promise of becoming a brilliant
pianist.

Washington, O., enjoys the honor of being the home of _Mr. Samuel
Lucas_, a fine baritone character-singer, the author of a book of
songs. He, besides, has but few equals as an actor in comedy; has
travelled throughout the country as a performer, receiving everywhere
the warmest praises of the press.

While on a visit to his home last summer, Mr. Lucas was the recipient
of a complimentary benefit tendered by the admiring citizens. The
offer of this flattering testimonial was signed by over fifty of his
most respectable townsmen, and the affair was in all respects a
successful one. Mr. Lucas was assisted in the performances by the
following young ladies: Misses S. Logan, Dora Chester, Laura Reed,
Delia Lamon, S. Melvin, and Fannie Chester. Mr. Lucas is at present a
valued member of the Hyers Sisters opera-troupe, who are performing in
"Out of Bondage" throughout the West.

"The Milwaukee Sentinel" of a late date thus alludes to his
performances with this troupe:--

     "As an actor he takes high rank; but it was in his singing
     that he made an already-delighted audience more pleased than
     ever. His rendition of 'Grandfather's Clock,' with distant
     chorus and refrain, was the sweetest music we ever listened
     to. The audience was breathless; the lowest whisper could be
     heard distinctly all over the house; and, as the last tones
     died away in the seeming distance, a hush as of death came
     over the audience, followed by thunders of applause."

The writer would be very remiss did he fail to mention here the very
remarkable music-loving spirit which has been exhibited by the colored
people of Chillicothe, O. This very forcibly arrested his attention,
when, several years ago, he visited that somewhat ancient city, once
the capital of the State. It was then found that among the class of
persons just mentioned--who formed, by the way, only a small portion
of the city's entire population--there existed two or three singing
societies, two brass bands (the latter the only organizations of the
kind then in existence there), and two church-choirs, one of the same
being composed of very good vocalists indeed.

In 1857 _Rev. John R. Bowles_ organized in Chillicothe a choir for his
church, under the leadership of _Jas. D. Hackley_. This choir was
considered one of the very best in Southern Ohio. Its leader possessed
a tenor-voice of rare sweetness and power, and was quite proficient in
rendering church-music, and in directing the singing of the same by
his choir. But a few persons in the State equalled Mr. Hackley in the
possession of these qualities. Of the two bands, the one called the
"_Scioto-Valley Brass Band_" was organized in 1855 under the
leadership of _Richard Chancellor_ and _John Jones_. The other was
called the "_Roberts Band_," and was organized in 1857, the directors
being _Thomas Harris_ and _William Davis_. In 1859 these two
organizations were united under the name of the "Union-Valley Brass
Band," _Thomas Harris_ and _A.J. Vaughn_ leaders. This consolidation,
composed of the best musicians of the two bands previously in
existence, made a corps of performers that was unequalled in Ross and
the adjacent counties, while it was one of the finest in the State.
They owned a handsome bandwagon, and furnished the music for all such
gatherings--irrespective of the color of the attendants--as county
fairs, picnics, celebrations, political meetings, &c., throughout Ross
County. This band contained several performers of such excellent
natural and acquired abilities as would render them prominent among
the best musicians of any section of the country.

Besides those already mentioned as leaders, I would now refer to _Mr.
William H. Starr_, one of the finest musicians of Ohio. He has been
for a long time the leading spirit in all matters musical among the
people. A good reader of all kinds of music, Mr. Starr easily gives it
beautiful expression on any one of the many instruments used in a
brass band of ordinary size. On several of these he is a pleasing
soloist. His favorite is the [E-flat]-alto, while he is also a skilful
arranger of music for them all. Mr. Starr has also composed a number
of pieces for his own and other bands; besides others, a quickstep, a
march, and a polka. As a teacher Mr. Starr has been quite successful.
One of his former pupils is now the leader of a band.

_Mr. Thomas Harris_ should also have special mention here. He was a
superior [E-flat]-cornet player, a good bugler, and a very good
performer on the clarinet; a good reader of music for each of these
important instruments.

_Mr. William H. Dupree_, at one time the very efficient manager of the
Union-Valley Brass Band, in which he was also a performer on the
[B-flat]-baritone, is a gentleman whose history is such as to warrant
particular mention here, not only on account of his having always
possessed an ardent music-loving spirit, but also from his general
intelligence, and the fine progress he has made in attaining to
several high stations of honor and usefulness. Mr. Dupree remained a
member of the band in Chillicothe until 1863, when, on the first call
for colored troops for the late war, he went to Massachusetts, and
enlisted in the Fifty-fifth Regiment. He became first sergeant of
Company H; in which position he won golden opinions from those in
command for his strict attention to duty, his steady and rapid
acquirement of military knowledge (becoming one of the very best
drill-masters and disciplinarians of his regiment), and for his
generally fine, officer-like bearing. At one time Sergeant Dupree was
manager of the regimental band, in which position he rendered
important service. In 1864 he was promoted to the grade of a
commissioned officer,--a rare distinction for one of his race, owing
to causes so well understood that they need not be mentioned here. In
this new place of honor he so discharged his duties as to prove the
wisdom of those who tendered the appointment; for he was always
distinguished for an increased display, if possible, of those
excellent qualities, the possession of which caused his promotion.

Mr. Dupree is now the very capable and popular superintendent of
Station A Post Office in Boston, Mass. This office is situated in a
district that comprises nearly forty thousand inhabitants, composed,
for the greater part, of those among Boston's most intelligent and
wealthy citizens. He was formerly connected with a musical
organization in Boston. Although prevented by his other occupations
from devoting much attention to music, Mr. Dupree has lost none of his
old-time love for it; nor has he forgotten the pleasant days of yore
when he was connected with the brass band at Chillicothe, of whose
members he now speaks in terms of the most friendly regard.

Cincinnati now claims to be (very justly too) a decidedly musical
city; and Boston and other older places, which have all along enjoyed
the reputation of leading in matters pertaining to general
art-culture, have been warned to look well to their laurels if they
would not lose them through the advancement made by this their younger
sister, so long considered the "Queen of the West." It is true that
this distinguishing title has within a few years been claimed by
Chicago, and even St. Louis. These latter, however, base their right
to the name mostly on the results of the census-returns. In all that
relates to the substantial greatness of a city,--viz., the general
intelligence, solidity of character, and proportionate wealth of its
inhabitants,--Cincinnati, I think, may still be considered as
approaching nearer to the Eastern cities than either of the others
mentioned. This is certainly true as regards the musical devotion of
its people; and this characteristic is the one, perhaps, which most
threatens the supremacy so long held in the East.

Having said this much of Cincinnati's residents in general, it will of
course be expected that a very promising and brilliant addition is now
to be made to these records. The reader, however, must be reasonable,
and not expect _too_ much; for the same depressing causes (these have
already been sufficiently particularized in other parts of this book)
which have operated in other sections of the country against the
subjects of these sketches have been also always fully in force in
Cincinnati. It is thought that all candid observers will agree with
the writer when he confidently avows his belief, that no other people,
while laboring under so many disadvantages, would have or could have
done better than these have done. But, judging from the facts at hand,
there is really no need to beg the question; and therefore, without
offering further excuses, I shall proceed with the record.

The colored children attending the public schools of Cincinnati are
regularly taught to read music. They are frequently complimented for
their good singing by their music-teachers.

The mention of the Cincinnati schools, by the way, brings to the
writer's mind very pleasant recollections of his boyhood's home, and
of the times when he attended school there. Twenty-five years ago, the
colored school-children of Cincinnati were much remarked for excellent
singing. They were not then, as they are now, taught to read music in
the schools, but readily "caught" the pieces to be sung from the
teacher, who sang them over a few times. I remember that at one time
our favorite school-song was one called "The Captive." But only
detached portions of it come to me now. It was a piece descriptive of
the fortunes of war. A soldier of the defeated army is left behind a
prisoner. The song describes his longings for freedom, and desire to
rejoin his now-distant comrades.

I think the chorus ran in this wise:--

     "Sound again, clarion,--clarion loud and shrill!
     Sound! Let them hear the captive's voice.
             Be still, be still!"

No answer being made to this signal, the prisoner thus laments his
cruel fate:--

     "They have gone; they have all passed by,--
       They in whose wars I have borne my part,
       They whom I loved with a brother's heart:
     They have left me here to die."

The melody was quite pretty, and the solo of the captive was of music
so appropriate and pathetic as to bring tears to the eyes of both
singer and auditory. Some of my former schoolmates, now grown to
womanhood and manhood, will probably remember better than myself this
song and others that with "glad hearts and free" we used to sing so
earnestly in the schoolroom and at our school-exhibitions. From what I
learn from credible sources, it may be stated, that a visit now to the
schoolrooms of Cincinnati would reveal a scientific acquaintance with
music so great as to almost prevent the making of a comparison between
the two periods under consideration.

The Mozart Circle, under the direction of _Mr. William H. Parham_, is
a vocal organization of twenty-five members, established about three
years ago. In July, 1875, this society gave a public performance, in
costume, of the cantata of "Daniel." No attempt was made to notify the
press that the cantata was to be rendered; but a gentleman of fine
taste, and one who is generally on the lookout for all signs of
art-advancement made by the colored people, was present on the
occasion referred to. His impressions of the performance were
recorded the next day in the Cincinnati "Gazette" and "Commercial,"
and were as follows:--

     CONCEALED MUSICAL TALENT.

     MR. EDITOR,--Permit me the use of a small space in your next
     issue to speak in deserved praise of a musical entertainment
     enjoyed by a portion of our citizens last Monday night.

     It was the cantata of "Daniel," rendered in full costume by
     the recently organized Mozart Circle, which, embracing about
     twenty members, has in the short space of six months
     developed a capacity which gave them success in this
     enterprise. It is a pity that their excessive modesty
     prevented their seeking the service of the press; for they
     have thereby kept themselves in an obscurity which it is my
     hope that this article will serve to draw them from. The
     preparation made for this entertainment should not have its
     service limited to a single occasion. It deserves
     repetition, and an appreciative public deserves the
     opportunity to enjoy it.

     Louisville, Columbus, Toledo, Cleveland, and other cities
     more or less remote, would give themselves a treat, could
     they prevail on the Circle to render the cantata in their
     midst. Not having consulted any one connected with it, it is
     a voluntary suggestion from me, that parties craving the
     enjoyment of a refined musical entertainment open
     communication with Mr. William H. Parham, its musical
     director.

     W.P.W.

     CINCINNATI, July 7, 1875.

The _Rev. Thomas H. Jackson_, pastor of Allen Temple, himself an
excellent singer, a few weeks ago organized a select choir for the
purpose of rendering the cantata just mentioned. _Mr. William H.
Morgan_, who sings in the principal _rôle_, is a young gentleman quite
worthy of the high praise which his performances have elicited. All
the members of the choir sing well; but among them no one gives more
marked promise than does a young schoolgirl of only thirteen years,
named _Elnora Johnson_. The compass and sweetness of her voice are
considered marvellous. This society promises to give the cantata
"Esther."

From the foregoing it will be seen that much attention is being given
to a study of some of the higher forms of composition,--a very
encouraging sign indeed.

Another vocal society is called the Arion Quartet Club. _Messrs.
Andrew D. Hart_ and _John Lewis_ are two of its members: the names of
the others I have not learned.

There are at present no instrumental societies except one or two very
good quadrille bands.

_Mrs. Ann S. Baltimore_ is an accomplished pianist, and possesses,
besides, a melodious voice. She has been favorably noticed by the
press.

_Professor Moore_ plays skilfully the parlor-organ and piano-forte. He
teaches the playing of these instruments, and also teaches vocal
music.

_Mr. D.W. Hamilton_ is the very popular leader of a string-orchestra.

The private circles of Cincinnati are ornamented by several classical
singers of both sexes.

First among the ladies is _Miss Fannie Adams_. She is welcomed as a
member of the Cincinnati Choral Society; and is a skilled pianist,
giving lessons on that instrument.

_Misses Ernestine and Consuelo_, daughters of Peter H. Clark, Esq.,
are sweet and scientific singers. They are pianists also.

_Misses Mary and Fannie Cole_, members of the Mozart Circle, are
distinguished for the beauty of their voices, the last-mentioned
particularly.

_Miss Sarah Werles_ has a voice which is much appreciated, and under
her fingers the cabinet-organ itself seems to sing.

_Misses Ella Smith_ and _Ella Buckner_ must not be forgotten as
valuable aids on public musical occasions.

Among the males, _James P. Ferguson_ is distinguished as a bass, and
_Thomas Monroe_ as a tenor singer.

_Joseph Henson's_ voice always has in it music of an inspiring
character.

_Fountain Lewis, jun._, was diligently prepared during his boyhood for
an organist, and in that direction is proving quite worthy of his
father's care.

By reference to a programme of a combined dramatic and musical
entertainment given in Cincinnati in May, 1876, under the direction of
the popular elocutionist, Powhatan Beaty, I find the names of the
following musical people not previously mentioned:--

Mr. Charles Hawkins performed "Streamlets" and "A Summer's Reverie" on
the piano; Mrs. Emma E. Clark sang the solo, "Brightest Eyes;" Mr.
Charles Singer sang a baritone solo; Mr. Edwin de Leon sang "Poor Old
Joe;" and Mr. William H. Jones sang "My Soul is Dark."

I am not informed as to the extent of proficiency displayed on this
occasion by these performers; but relying, as I ought, upon the good
judgment of Mr. Beaty, presume that he called none to his aid except
those at least fairly skilled in the rendering of music. The above
names are, therefore, recorded here.

The city of Chicago contains quite a large number of very excellent
musicians belonging to the race whose acquirements are here recorded.
Besides several very fine church-choirs, there is a large organization
of well-trained vocalists, the performances of which have been highly
spoken of by the journals of Chicago and those of other cities in the
State of Illinois.

_Mrs. Frances A. Powell_, the founder and directress of this society,
is also the leading soprano of the Olivet Baptist Church choir. She
was educated at Buffalo, N.Y.; and her superior powers as a vocalist
have been made the occasion of very flattering testimonials by the
press of Chicago and of the States of Illinois and Wisconsin.

_Mrs. Harriett E. Freeman_, an excellent mezzo-soprano, leading the
singing of Quinn-Chapel choir, has been complimented by the press. She
was educated at New Bedford, Mass.

_Mrs. Charlotte M. Alexander_, leading soprano of Bethel-Church choir,
was educated at Cincinnati.

_Mrs. Bessie Warwick_, soprano and brilliant pianist, was formerly a
pupil of Professor Baumback of Chicago.

_Mrs. Hettie Reed_ possesses a contralto-voice of remarkable purity
and sweetness. She is one of the principal singers of the society
first mentioned, and has been highly complimented by the critics of
Illinois and Wisconsin.

_Miss Eliza J. Cowan_, educated at Chicago, a member of the
Olivet-Church choir, is a very promising contralto-singer.

_Miss Flora Cooper_ has a voice of such great depth, that it really
may be styled baritone. She was educated in Chicago, and is a teacher
in one of the public schools of that city.

_Mrs. Esther Washington_ (_née_ Miss E. Fry) is a finished performer
on the organ and piano-forte. This lady is a graduate in thorough-bass
and harmony from Warren's Conservatory of Chicago.

_Miss Frankie Buckner_, an accomplished organist and pianist, received
her training at Detroit. She has been praised by the papers of
Madison, Wis.; was at one time pianist to a large singing society: and
is a contralto vocalist.

_Mr. William D. Berry_ is a finely-cultured tenor, a ready reader of
music, and excellent in oratorio performance. Mr. Berry formerly lived
in Hamilton, Ont.

_Miss Ida Platt_ is a brilliant pianist.

_Mr. Elias Perry_ is a young tenor-singer with a very pleasing voice.
He is a member of Olivet-Church choir.

_Mr. John F. Ransom_, baritone and organist, is a musician of
excellent culture, possessing one of the finest male voices in
Chicago. He was educated at Columbus, O. Is organist of Olivet Church.

_Mr. George W. Mead_ is leading basso of the singing society
heretofore mentioned, and of Olivet-Church choir. Mr. Mead renders his
music with correct and very pleasing expression. He has been favorably
mentioned, in connection with others with whom he has performed, by
the papers of Chicago.

All of the persons whose names are included in the list just closed
read music at sight, and are entitled to be ranked as artists.




II.

SOME MUSICAL PEOPLE OF THE SOUTH.

     "Songs from the sunny South-land."--A.K. SPENCE.


The colored people of the South are proverbially musical. They might
well be called, in that section of the country, a race of troubadours,
so great has ever been their devotion to and skill in the delightful
art of music. Besides, it is now seen, and generally acknowledged,
that in certain of their forms of melodic expression is to be found
our only distinctively _American_ music; all other kinds in use being
merely the echo, more or less perfect, of music that originated in the
Old World. All who have listened to the beautiful melody and harmony
of the songs sung by those wonderful minstrels, the "Jubilee Singers,"
will readily admit that scarcely ever before the coming of the latter
had they been so melted, so swayed, so entirely held captive, by a
rendering of music; nor will they fail to admit that in these
"slave-songs" of the South was to be found a new musical idea,
forming, as some are wont to term it, a "_revelation_."

And if it were necessary to prove that music is a language by which,
in an elevated manner, is expressed our thoughts and emotions, what
stronger evidence is needed than that found in this same native music
of the South? for surely by its tones of alternate moaning and
joyousness--tones always weird, but always full of a ravishing
sweetness, and ever replete with the expression of deepest pathos--may
be plainly read the story of a race once generally languishing in
bondage, yet hoping at times for the coming of freedom.

Of the character of this music, and of its effect upon those who hear
it, no one speaks more clearly than does Longfellow in the following
lines from his poem, "The Slave singing at Midnight:"--

     "And the voice of his devotion
     Filled my soul with strange emotion;
     For its tones by turns were glad,
     Sweetly solemn, wildly sad."

Mrs. Kemble, in writing of life on a Southern plantation, tells how on
many an occasion she listened as one entranced to the strangely-pleasing
songs of the bond-people. Often she wished that some great musician
might be present to catch the bewitching melodies, and weave them into
a beautiful opera; for she thought them well worthy of such treatment.

It is often said that the colored race is naturally musical. Certainly
it is as much so as other races. More than this need not be, nor do I
think can be, claimed. It is, however, very remarkable, that a people
who have for more than two hundred years been subjected, as they have,
to a system of bondage so well calculated, as it would seem, to
utterly quench the fire of musical genius, and to debase the mind
generally, should yet have originated and practised continually
certain forms of melody which those skilled in the science consider
the very soul of music. Moreover, one is made to wonder how a race
subjected to such cruelties could have had the heart to sing at all;
much more that they could have sung so sweetly throughout all the dark
and dismal night of slavery. Here is seen, it must be admitted, what
appears very much like genius in the melody-making power. Something it
is, undoubtedly, that shows an innate comprehension, power in
expression, and love of harmony, in a degree that is simply intense.
The history of the colored race in this country establishes the fact,
too, that no system of cruelty, however great or long inflicted, can
destroy that sympathy with musical sounds that is born with the soul.
Only death itself can end it here on earth, while we are taught that
for ever and ever heaven shall be rich in harmony formed by the songs
of the redeemed. Perhaps other races, under the same terribly trying
circumstances, would have shown a power to resist the mind-destroying
influences of those circumstances equal to that which has been so
fully shown by the colored race. But, be that as it may, the latter
has actually been subjected to the awful test; and the sequel has
proved, that, to say the least, it may be considered as the equal
naturally of any of the other "musical" races composing the human
family.

But the music of which I have been speaking was never cradled, so to
say, in the lap of science; although, in its strangely-fascinating
sweetness, soulfulness, and perfect rhythmic flow, it has often quite
disarmed the scientific critic. It is a kind of natural music. Until
quite recently no attempt was made to write it out, and place its
melodies upon the printed music-page. Slavery, of course, prevented
that. And this vile system, although it could not stamp out the
"vocal spark," the germ of great musical ideas, could still prevent
such growth of the same, such elaboration, as would have been secured
by education in a state of freedom. Yet, since the war, many of the
religious slave-songs of the South, words and music, have been
printed. It has been found that they are as subject to the laws of
science as are others; that they were not, as many persons have
supposed, merely a barbarous confusion of sounds, each warring, as it
were, against the other. For a proof of this (if there be those who
doubt), the reader is referred to the "History of the Jubilee Singers
of Fisk University," in which he will find printed the music of many
songs like those to which I have alluded.

Thus have we considered, in part, the native minstrelsy of the South.

Notwithstanding their lack of a scientific knowledge of music, colored
men, as instrumentalists, have long furnished most of the best music
that has been produced in nearly all of the Southern States. At the
watering-places, orchestras composed of colored musicians were always
to be found; in fact, at such places their services were considered
indispensable. Many of them could not read music; but they seemed
naturally full of it, and possessed a most remarkable faculty for
"catching" a tune from those of their associates who learned it from
the written or printed notes: in truth, the facility of all in
executing some of the most pleasing music in vogue was so great, that,
when these little orchestras played, it was almost impossible to
discover the slightest variation from the music as found on the
printed page.

"A good many years ago," writes a correspondent from the White Sulphur
Springs of Virginia, "the statesman Henry Clay was here, enjoying a
respite from his arduous government duties. Being present at a grand
reception where dancing was in progress, Mr. Clay wished to have
played the music for a 'Virginia Reel;' but, to his great surprise, he
learned that the colored musicians present did not know the necessary
tune. Not to be cheated out of an indulgence in this, his favorite
dance, Mr. Clay took the band over to a corner of the room, and
_whistled_ the music to them. In a very few minutes they 'caught' it
perfectly; and, returning to their places, the enterprising statesman
and his friends enjoyed themselves in dancing the 'Virginia Reel' just
as though nothing unusual had occurred." At levees, at other public
festive gatherings, and at the receptions given in the homes of the
wealthy, these orchestras were nearly always present, adding to the
enjoyments of the hour by discoursing the most delightful music. In
short, they were to be found everywhere, always receiving that warm
welcome with which a music-loving people ever greet the talented
musician.

But, besides the associations of which I have just been
speaking,--associations composed in part of those who understood music
as a science, and in part of those who did not,--there has always been
a goodly number of other persons of the same race, who, in spite of
obstacles that would seem to be insurmountable, have obtained a fair
musical education, and who have exhibited an artistic skill and
general æsthetic love and taste that would be creditable to many of
those who have enjoyed far greater advantages for culture.

I shall now proceed to mention the names of only a few of such persons
residing in some of the principal towns and cities of the South. The
list could be largely extended did time and space permit.

Baltimore, Md., has quite a number of musical people well worthy of
mention in this connection. The following are members of the choir of
St. Mary's Episcopal Church, of which the Rev. C.B. Perry is rector:--

_Mr. H.C. Bishop_, general director; _Mr. W.H. Bishop_, precentor; _J.
Hopkins Johns_ (who has a very pleasing voice); _Mr. J. Taylor_ (a
fine basso, who has been a member of a meritorious concert-troupe);
_Mr. C.A. Johnson_, organist; and _Mr. George Barrett_, tenor. Mr.
Johnson has on several occasions been the director of excellent public
concerts in Baltimore and its vicinity, and is deserving of much
praise for his activity in promoting the music-loving spirit. The same
may be said of Mr. George Barrett.

_Mr. Joseph Ockmey_ is organist of the Bethel (Methodist) Church.

The following are members of the Sharp-street Church choir:--

_Mr. Simpson_, leader; _Mr. Dongee_, organist; _Miss Mary F. Kelly_,
soprano; _Miss Emma Burgess_, soprano.

Baltimore has an association of musicians called "The Monumental
Cornet Band," of which Mr. C.A. Johnson is the efficient leader.

Some time ago I found in the musical column of "The Boston Herald" of
Sunday, July 9, 1876, the following notice of another "Blind Tom:"--

     "A rival of 'Blind Tom' has been found at Blount Springs,
     Ala., in the person of James Harden, a colored boy from
     Baltimore. He plays the guitar, and sings the most difficult
     music, exceptionally well; and is also something of a
     composer. He has received no instruction, but is most
     emphatically a natural-born musician."

Louisville, Ky., shows its appreciation of music by organizing a
society devoted to the latter, numbering over a hundred persons. This
fact has attracted the attention of Brainard's "Musical World," which
journal, in the number for October, 1877, alludes to it as a bright
evidence of the dawn of better times in the South.

In St. Louis[17] live _Mrs. Georgetta Cox_ and _Miss Nellie
Banks_,--two ladies who have won golden opinions for their exhibition
of fine musical qualities. They are both excellent vocalists and
pianists.

[Footnote 17: St. Louis is placed in this section of the record
because the latter is devoted to such localities as before the war
were within slave territory.]

_Mr. L.W. Henderson_ as a vocalist, _Mr. Alfred White_ and _Mr. Samuel
Butler_ as vocalists and instrumentalists, all possess artistic
abilities of a fine order.

_Miss Johnson_ has attracted the attention and won the high praise of
competent judges for her proficiency in piano-forte performance.

_Mr. James P. Thomas_ is a finished violinist.

With such artists as the above mentioned, and others whose names I
have not learned, it will be seen that the city of St. Louis is not
behind in musical culture.

Helena, Ark., is fortunate in numbering among its citizens _George
H.W. Stewart_,--a gentleman of rare musical and general culture. He
was, I think, educated in Indiana, and received a diploma as a
graduate from a college of music located at Indianapolis. Mr.
Stewart's specialty as a performer is the piano, with which instrument
he finely interprets the best music of the masters. He has also a
soft yet powerful baritone-voice; and, as a singer, he has often
delighted private and public audiences.

_Miss Annie S. Wright_ of Memphis, Tenn., has few equals in that State
as a ready reader of music, or in the feeling and expression with
which she awakes the echoes of the piano-forte.

In Memphis there are several others possessing good ability as
instrumentalists.

No fears need be entertained that Nashville, Tenn., will not keep pace
with the advance of other cities in musical culture. The famous
Jubilee Singers of Fisk University, located near Nashville, may well
be mentioned here as noble representatives of that city, and as those
whose splendid example and achievements as singers will always serve
as a stimulus to the cultivation of music by their towns-people.

I mention here with much pleasure the _Lord family_ of Charleston,
S.C. The father was a musician of good ability, a pleasing performer
on the cornet and (I think) one or two other instruments, and was
leader of an orchestra. He early gave his two daughters instruction in
music.

I recall with much interest a visit I made this accomplished family
early in 1865, when the regiment with which I was connected lay
encamped near Charleston. On this occasion, after our indulgence in
conversation touching the war, &c., I begged that I might be favored
with some music. The request was readily complied with, the father and
daughters uniting in a performance of several very pleasing
selections.

Other members of my regiment, I know, also retain very pleasant
recollections of the Lord family, not only on account of the charming
musical qualities of the latter, but also on account of their winning
courtesy to the Union soldiers. One of these was so far captivated (it
could not have been by the music alone) by the elder daughter, as to
invite her to adorn as his bride a home of his own. Our gallant
Sergeant White was accepted; and the lady has since shared with him
the enjoyment of many honors which his fine abilities have won for him
in the "sunny South."

Mr. Lord died a few years ago. His example in inculcating in his
children a love for the elevating art of music cannot be too strongly
recommended for the imitation of all heads of families who desire to
form at their firesides such sources of interest, refinement, and
pleasure, as will cause their children to prefer them, as they ever
should, to all places not comprised in the sacred name of "home."

In making this brief survey, another locality of the South is now
approached, which is so rich in musical culture as to occasion (at
least to the writer) delightful surprise, and warrant special mention
of the circumstances connected with the same. I refer to the city of
New Orleans, which will be treated in the next chapter.




III.

NEW ORLEANS.

THE MUSICAL AND GENERAL CULTURE OF ITS COLORED CITIZENS.

     "Though last, not least."

     SHAKSPEARE.


Before the late war, the city of New Orleans was often styled "the
Paris of America." The Province of Louisiana, originally settled by
the French, and until 1812, when it became a State of the American
Union, contained a population naturally distinguished by the same
general characteristics as those which marked the people of France.
The Frenchman has for a long time been proverbially a devotee of the
fine arts; and of these that gay and brilliant city Paris--which has
ever been to its enamoured citizens not only all France, but all the
world--became for France the centre.

Here, then, a love of that beautiful art, music, since the days,
hundreds of years ago, of the courtly _ménestrels_, has been a
conspicuous trait in the character of the people. Of course, in
leaving Paris and France, and crossing the seas,--first to Canada, and
then to Louisiana,--the Frenchman carried with him that same love of
the arts, particularly that of music, that he felt in fatherland. And
so New Orleans, which in time grew to be the metropolis of Louisiana,
became also to these French settlers the new Paris. In fact, even for
years after the State was admitted into the Union, and although
meanwhile immigration had set in from other parts of the country, New
Orleans remained of the French "Frenchy." The great wealth of many of
its citizens, their gayety, their elegant and luxurious mode of
living, their quick susceptibility to the charms of music, their
generous patronage of general art, together with certain forms of
divine worship observed by a large number of them,--all this served
for a long time to remind one of the magnificent capital of France.

The opera, with its ravishing music, its romance of sentiment and
incident, its resplendent scenery, and the rich costumes and brilliant
delineations of its actors,--all so well calculated to charm a people
of luxurious tastes,--has always been generously patronized in New
Orleans; and so, too, have been the other forms of musical
presentation. Amateur musicians have never been scarce there: such
persons, pursuing their studies, not with a pecuniary view (being in
easy circumstances), but simply from a love of music, have ever found
congenial association in the city's many cultured circles; while many
others, who, although ardently loving music for its own sake, were yet
forced by less fortunate circumstances to seek support in discoursing
it to others,--these have always found ready and substantial
recognition in this music-loving city.

But does all I have been saying apply to the colored people of New
Orleans as well, almost, as to the others? Strange to say, it does.
Natural lovers of the "art divine," and naturally capable of musical
expression,--they too, although with far less of advantages for
culture than the others, have with voice and instrument, and even as
composers, helped to form the throng of harmonists, playing no mean
part in the same. The colored people of New Orleans have long been
remarked for their love of and proficiency in music and other of the
elegant arts. Forty years ago "The New-Orleans Picayune" testified to
their superior taste for and appreciation of the drama, especially
Shakspeare's plays. A certain portion of these people, never having
been subjected to the depressing cruelties of _abject_ servitude,
although, of course, suffering much from the caste spirit that
followed and presented great obstacles to even such as they, were
_allowed_ to acquire the means for defraying the expenses of private
instruction, or for sending their children to Northern or European
schools. Indeed, as regards the exhibition of this ambitious musical
spirit, this yearning for a higher education and a higher life, these
people often exceeded those of fairer complexions; many of their sons
and daughters attaining to a surpassing degree of proficiency in
music, while they became noticeable for that ease and polish of
manners, and that real refinement of living, which ever mark the true
lady or gentleman.

Again: there was another portion of this same race, who, in the
circumstances of their situation, were far less fortunate than even
those of whom I have just been speaking: I mean those who were
directly under the "iron heel of oppression." Nevertheless, many of
these were so moved by a spirit of art-love, and were so ardent and
determined, as to have acquired a scientific knowledge of music, and
to have even excelled, strange to say, in its creation and
performance, in spite of all difficulties. As to just how a thing so
remarkable, nay, I may say wonderful, was accomplished, would form
many a story of most intense and romantic interest. But with present
limits I may not narrate the many instances of heroic struggle against
the foul spirit of caste prejudice, and the many noble triumphs over
the same, that belong to the lives of nearly if not quite all of the
artists of whom I shall presently briefly speak.

And here it is utterly impossible to resist the depressing effects of
that deep feeling of gloom which settles upon one as thoughts like the
following crowd into the mind. How much, how very much, has been lost
to art in this country through that fell spirit which for more than
two hundred years has animated the majority of its people against a
struggling and an unoffending minority,--a spirit which ever sought to
crush out talent, to quench the sacred fire of genius, and to crowd
down all noble aspirations, whenever these evidences of a high manhood
were shown by those whose skins were black! Ah! we may never know how
much of grandeur of achievement, the results of which the country
might now be enjoying, had not those restless, aspiring minds been
fettered by all that was the echo of a terrible voice, which, putting
to an ignoble use the holy words of Divinity, cried up and down the
land unceasingly, "_Hitherto shalt thou come, but no farther!_" For to
judge as to what "might have been," and what yet may be, despite the
cruelties of the past (since, even in this instance, "the best prophet
of the future is the past"), we have only to look at what is. But from
those bitter days of a barbarous time, when hearts were oft bowed in
anguish, when tears of blood were wept, and when often attempts were
made to dwarf yearning intellect to a beastly level,--let us turn
quickly our weeping eyes from those terrible days, now gone, we hope
never again to return, towards that brighter prospect which opens
before our delighted vision: let us joyfully look upon what is, and
think of what may be. For

     "The world is cold to him who pleads;
     The world bows low to knightly deeds."

Returning, then, directly to the subject in hand (viz., the colored
musical artists of New Orleans), I first quote from a paper prepared
by a cultured gentleman of that city, himself a fine musician, the
following retrospective comment on some of the former residents
there:--

"For want of avenues in which to work their way in life, and for many
reasons which are easily understood, our best artists [colored]
removed to other countries in search of their rights, and of proper
channels in which to achieve success in the world. Among these were
Eugène Warburg, since distinguished in Italy as a sculptor; Victor
Séjour, in Paris, as a poet, and composer of tragedy; Caraby, in
France, as a lawyer; Dubuclet, in Bordeaux, as a physician and
musician; and many others." All these were forced to leave New
Orleans, their native city, because of the prejudice that prevailed
against them on account of their color. In other countries, which
Americans have been wont to style, forsooth, "despotic," these
aspiring men found ready recognition, and arose, as has been seen, to
high distinction in their chosen callings.

Of a few others who for these same reasons left their native city and
went abroad, as well as of a large number of talented, educated
musical people who remained in New Orleans, I shall now speak.

_The Lambert family_, consisting of seven persons, presents the
remarkable instance of each of its members possessing great musical
talent, supplemented by most careful cultivation.

_Richard Lambert_, the father, has long been highly esteemed as a
teacher of music. Many of his pupils have attained to a fine degree of
proficiency as performers of music, and some of them are to-day
composers.

_Lucien Lambert_, very early in life, attracted attention by his
ardent devotion to the study of music. He used to give six hours of
each day to practice, and became a pianist of rare ability. With a
style of performance really exquisite, he has always excited the
admiration, and sometimes the wonder, of his auditors, by easy
triumphs over all piano difficulties. But his genius and ambition were
such, that mere performance of the music of others did not long
satisfy him. He became a composer of great merit. A man of high soul,
he also, ere long, grew restive under the restraints, that, on account
of his complexion, were thrown around him in New Orleans. He longed to
breathe the air of a free country, where he might have an equal chance
with all others to develop his powers: and so, after a while, he went
to France; and, continuing his studies in Paris under the best masters
of the art, he rapidly attained to great skill in performance and in
composition. He finally went to Brazil, where he now resides, being
engaged in the manufacture of pianos. He is about fifty years of age,
a gentleman of imposing appearance. Lucien Lambert has written much
music. Below is given the titles of only a very small number of his
compositions:--

"La Juive;" "Le Départ du Conscrit" (fantasie march); "Les Ombres
Aimées;" "La Brésiliana;" "Paris Vienne;" "Le Niagara;" "Au Clair de
la Lune," with variations; "Ah! vous disais-je, Maman;"
"L'Américaine;" "La Rose et le Bengali;" "Pluie de Corails;" "Cloches
et Clochettes;" "Étude Mazurka."[18]

[Footnote 18: Only to those who have not read the introduction to
these sketches will it seem strange that the titles of these, and of
the works hereafter mentioned, although they are the creations of
Americans, are yet given in the French language. For the information
of such persons, I repeat in substance what has already been said,
that these authors, in adopting the course just referred to, have only
followed a custom which is most generally observed in the highest
art-circles of New Orleans, "the Paris of America,"--a custom, too,
which, no doubt, is in harmony with the tastes, as it is with the
acquirements, of the authors themselves, all of whom speak and write
the French language quite perfectly. It may be well to here say also,
that all of the above-mentioned works, and all others (not otherwise
specified) mentioned hereafter, bear the imprint of some one of the
principal music-publishers of the day, from whom, of course, copies
may be ordered, if desired.]

_Sidney Lambert_, stimulated by the instruction and good fame of his
father and the high reputation gained by his brother Lucien, and
himself possessing rich natural powers, soon became conspicuous for
brilliant execution on the piano-forte, and as a composer of music for
that and other instruments. He has also written a method for the
piano, the merits of which are such as to cause him to be lately
decorated for the same by the King of Portugal. He is now a professor
of music in Paris, France. Here is a partial list of pieces composed
and arranged by him:--

"Si j'étais Roi;" "Murmures du Soir;" "L'Africaine;" "Anna Bolena;"
"La Sonnambula;" "L'Élisire;" "Transports Joyeux;" "Les Cloches."