IV.

THE MARCH OF THE BATTALION FROM FORT LEAVENWORTH.


At Fort Leavenworth the Battalion received its equipment of 100 tents,
one for every 6 privates; also their arms and camp accoutrements. When
drawing the checks for clothing, the paymaster expressed great surprise
to find that every man was able to sign his own name to the pay roll.

=Death of Col. Allen. Question of a Successor.=--At Fort Leavenworth Col.
Allen was taken ill; but on the 12th of August he ordered the Battalion
to start on its western march, while he would remain a few days,
recuperate and overtake them. He died on the 23rd, much lamented by the
Battalion, which had become warmly attached to him. Commenting upon his
demise the author of the "Doniphan Expedition," William E. Connelly,
says:

"Thus died Lieutenant-Colonel Allen, of the first U. S. dragoons, in the
midst of a career of usefulness under the favoring smiles of fortune,
beloved while living, regretted after death by all who knew him, both
among the volunteers and the troops."

On the death of Col. Allen the question of succession in command was
considered. It appears that this subject was mooted at the time the
companies of the Battalion were enlisted; and "Col. Allen repeatedly
stated to us," says Brigham Young, "that there would be no officer in
the Battalion, except himself, only from among our people; that if he
fell in battle, or was sick, or disabled by any means, the command would
devolve on the ranking officer, which would be the Captain of Company
'A' and 'B', and so on according to letter." The Battalion appears to
have had the same understanding, for at a council meeting of the
officers it was agreed by them that Captain Jefferson Hunt, of Company
"A", should assume command, which decision was afterwards sustained by
the unanimous vote of the men. Meantime, however, Major Horton, in
command at Fort Leavenworth, sent Lieutenant A. J. Smith, of the regular
army, to take command of the Battalion. This led to a threatened
complication; for an appeal to such written military authorities as were
available to the officers of the Battalion, left them hopelessly divided
in their conclusions. On the arrival of Lieutenant Smith a council of
officers was held in which the Battalion officers demanded to know what
reasons existed for their acceptance of him as commander rather than
Captain Hunt. To which it was answered that the government property in
possession of the Battalion was not yet receipted for, but that
Lieutenant Smith could receipt for it, and being a commissioned officer
of the regular army, he would be known at Washington, and his actions
and orders recognized; whereas the officers of the Battalion had not yet
received their commissions, and it would be doubtful if their selection
of a commander would be approved. After this discussion Captain Hunt
submitted the matter to the officers, and all but three voted in favor
of accepting Lieutenant Smith as the commander of the Battalion.

=Complaints of the Volunteers.=--With Lieutenant Smith had come Dr. George
B. Sanderson, whom Col. Allen, at Leavenworth, had appointed a surgeon
in the U. S. army, to serve with the Mormon Battalion. According to the
historian of the Battalion,[29:a] the volunteers suffered much because
of the "arrogance, inefficiency and petty oppressions" of these two
officers. This view of these officers, however, is to be accounted for
by the Volunteers being suddenly brought under the enforced discipline
of the U. S. army regulations. The heat of the season was excessive, the
men had been already much exhausted by the strenuous labor and exposure
during the journey through Iowa with their people earlier in the season,
and as a result many of them fell a prey to the malaria prevalent in the
country and at this season of the year. For this Dr. Sanderson
prescribed calomel and arsenic, and as the men were averse to taking
medicine, pleading even religious scruples against the drugs, the matter
gave rise to much unpleasantness between the Battalion physician and the
command, involving therein Lieutenant Smith, who, in the interest of
what he no doubt regarded as discipline, sided with the physician.

=The Line of March.=--The Battalion's line of march, from Fort
Leavenworth, after crossing the Kaw or Kansas river, followed that of
the first Missouri Dragoons, led over the route that same year by Col.
Doniphan, via Council Grove, thence some distance up the Arkansas River
to a little beyond Fort Mann, where they crossed that river in order to
take what was known as the "Cimmeron Route"--because it crossed Cimmeron
river and followed some distance up the south branch of the stream,
called Cimmeron Creek. The last crossing of the Arkansas they reached on
the 16th of September, and here the commanding officer insisted that
most of the families--about twelve or fifteen in number, which had so
far accompanied the Battalion--should be detached and sent under a guard
of ten men up the Arkansas to Pueblo, which nestles at the east base of
the Rocky mountain range. There were stout protests against this
"division of the Battalion;" as it was held to be a violation of the
promise that the Battalion would not be divided, also that these
families should be permitted to travel with the Battalion to California.
Unquestionably, however, the arrangement was in the best interests both
of the families and of the Battalion, and accordingly the detachment was
made up as proposed, and marched to Pueblo under command of Captain
Nelson Higgins.

=Arrival at Santa Fe; Condition of the Command.=--The main body of the
command continued its march south-westward to San Miguel, thence turning
the point of a mountain range marched north westward to Santa Fe, where
they arrived in two detachments on the 9th and 12th of October,
respectively. Upon the arrival of the first detachment the Battalion was
received by a salute of one hundred guns by order of Col.
Doniphan,[30:b] then in command both as civil and military head of the
department of New Mexico; but making ready for what was to be his great
and historic march upon Chihuahua.

On the arrival of the Battalion at Santa Fe it was learned that General
Kearny, previous to his departure for the west, had designated Col. P.
St. George Cooke[31:c] to take command of the Battalion and to follow on
his trail with wagons to California.

Speaking of the condition of the Battalion, on its arrival in Santa Fe,
and remarking on its physical unfitness to undertake the march to
California, Col. Cooke, in his "Conquest of New Mexico," says:

"Everything conspired to discourage the extraordinary undertaking of
marching this Battalion eleven hundred miles, for the much greater part
through an unknown wilderness, without road or trail, and with a wagon
train.

"It was enlisted too much by families; some were too old and feeble, and
some too young; it was embarrassed by many women; it was undisciplined;
it was much worn by traveling on foot, and marching from Nauvoo,
Illinois; their clothing was very scant; there was no money to pay them,
or clothing to issue; their mules were utterly broken down; the
quartermaster department was without funds, and its credit bad; and
animals were scarce. Those procured were very inferior, and were
deteriorating every hour for lack of forage or grazing."[31:d] "So every
preparation must be pushed--hurried. A small party with families had
been sent from Arkansas crossing up the river, to winter at a small
settlement close to the mountains, called Pueblo. The Battalion was now
inspected, and eighty-six men found inefficient were ordered, under two
officers, with nearly all the women, to go to the same point; five wives
of officers were reluctantly allowed to accompany the march, but
furnished their own transportation. By special arrangement and consent,
the Battalion was paid in checks--not very available at Santa Fe (i. e.
negotiable).

"With every effort, the quartermaster could only undertake to furnish
rations for sixty days; and, in fact, full rations, of only flour,
sugar, coffee and salt; salt pork only for thirty days, and soap for
twenty. To venture without pack-saddles would be grossly imprudent, and
so that burden was added."[32:e]

=Invalided Detachment Sent to Pueblo.=--It was understood that the men
invalided and their escort, together with the women and children
belonging to the Battalion, would have the privilege in the spring of
intercepting the main body of their people moving to the west, and going
with them "at government expense."[32:f] The above arrangement was the
result of a council of the officers of the Battalion with Colonel
Doniphan of Missouri, then in charge of military and civil affairs at
Santa Fe, and with Col. Cooke who had been designated by Gen. Kearny to
take command of the Battalion in its march to the Pacific, on his own
departure from Santa Fe to California. Captain James Brown, of Company
C., and St. Elam Luddington, of Company B, were the two officers above
referred to as being placed in charge of the detachment. This company
arrived at Pueblo on the 17th of November, and went into winter quarters
near the encampment of Captain Higgins, who had preceded them to that
point; and the next spring, according to the above arrangement, joined
in the westward movement of their people, following so closely the
pioneer company led by Brigham Young, that they entered Salt Lake Valley
on the 29th of July, five days after the arrival of the first pioneer
company. To the wife of one of the members of the Battalion, Mrs.
Catherine Campbell Steele, wife of John Steele, Company D, was born the
first white child in "Utah," August 9th, 1847.


FOOTNOTES:

[29:a] This is Sergeant Daniel Tyler, author of "A Concise History of
the Mormon Battalion in the Mexican War." The work was published in
1881. H. H. Bancroft speaks very highly of this work in his History of
California, Vol. V, p. 477, note.

[30:b] Col. Doniphan had come to Santa Fe with Kearny, commanding the
first Missouri regiment; and after the departure of the General for
California, he was left in command at Santa Fe until the arrival of Col.
Sterling Price, who when he arrived, was to take command at Santa Fe
(Doniphan's expedition, Connelley, 1907, pp. 250-1-3). The historian of
the Mormon Battalion notes that the command of Col. Price, numbering
about 1,200 men, received no such marked honor on their arrival in Santa
Fe as was accorded to the Battalion. (Tyler's Battalion, p. 164.)

[31:c] The Colonel was born in Virginia in 1809. Graduated from West
Point in 1827; was in the Black Hawk war in Illinois--1832, and at the
Battle of Bad Ax, fought in July of that year. In 1833 he was made a
Lieutenant; saw service on the plains, principally in what is now
Kansas, before the Mexican war; in this war he took a prominent part in
the affairs at Santa Fe and marched the Mormon Battalion to California.
"During the fifties, in the border troubles in Kansas he saw much
service; in the Civil War he was for the Union. He was retired in 1873,
having served in the army continuously for forty-six years. He died
March 20, 1895." "Doniphan's Expedition," p. 264.

[31:d] Later, Col. Cooke again complains of his teams, in the following
passage: "I have brought road tools and have determined to take through
my wagons; but the experiment is not a fair one, as the mules are broken
down at the outset. The only good ones, about twenty, which I bought
near Albuquerque, were taken for the express for Fremont's mail--the
General's order requiring the twenty-one best in Santa Fe." (Cooke's
Conquest, p. 93). To this Sergeant Tyler adds: "It is but justice to the
Colonel to state here that with few exceptions, the mule and ox teams
used from Santa Fe to California were the same worn out and broken down
animals that we had driven all the way from Council Bluffs and Fort
Leavenworth; indeed, some of them had been driven all the way from
Nauvoo, the same season." (Tyler's Battalion, p. 175).

[32:e] Conquest of New Mexico and California. An Historical and Personal
Narrative by P. St. George Cooke, G. P. Putnam and Sons, N. Y. 1878: pp.
91-2.

[32:f] See History of the Mormon Church, Americana, (Roberts), April No.
p. 3776--note.




V.

THE MARCH OF THE BATTALION FROM SANTA FE TO THE MOUTH OF THE GILA.


The Battalion began its march from Santa Fe on the 19th of October,
Colonel Cooke in command, Lieutenant A. J. Smith, who had led the
Battalion to Santa Fe, became the acting commissary of subsistence; and
Lieutenant George Stoneman, acting quartermaster, instead of Lieutenant
Samuel E. Gully, who had resigned. Both Smith and Stoneman were of the
regular army. Dr. Sanderson was continued as Physician-surgeon to the
command. The guides to the expedition--appointed by Gen. Kearny--were
Weaver, Charbonneau, and Leroux; and Stephen C. Foster, called "Doctor,"
in all the narratives, was employed as interpreter.

=More Invaliding.=--The course of the march for some time was southward
down the valley of the Rio Grande. On the 10th of November, fifty-five
more men were declared physically unable through sickness to continue
the march, and accordingly were detached, and under Lieutenant W. W.
Willis were ordered back to Pueblo to join the other detachments that
had been sent there. After much suffering from the hardships of the
journey--weak teams, scant supplies of food, illy clad, general sickness
among the men, the fall of December snows in the mountain ranges north
of Santa Fe, excessive cold, and several deaths occurring, this
detachment finally arrived at Pueblo between the 20th and 24th of
December, in a most pitiable condition; but they were warmly received
by members of the Battalion already quartered there,[35:a] numbering,
now, all told, about one hundred and fifty.

=Hardship of Excessive Toil.=--One cause of so many men breaking down in
health was the excessive toil at the wagons through the sand stretches
of the road, began early in the march from Santa Fe--while yet in the
valley of the Rio del Norte, in fact, and continuing along the whole
route to and through the California desert lying between the Colorado
and the coast range of mountains. "Our course now lay down the Rio del
Norte [The Rio Grande]," says Sergeant Tyler. "We found the roads
extremely sandy in many places, and the men while carrying blankets,
knapsacks, cartridge boxes (each containing thirty-six rounds of
ammunition), and muskets on their backs, and living on short rations,
had to pull at long ropes to aid the teams. The deep sand alone, without
any load was enough to wear out both man and beast." Later he remarks:
"We had to leave the river for a time, and have twenty men to each wagon
with long ropes to help the teams pull the wagons over the sand hills.
The commander perched himself on one of the hills, like a hawk on a
fence post, sending down his orders with the sharpness of--well, to the
Battalion, it is enough to say--Colonel Cooke."

One of the Battalion celebrates this incident of the march in doggerel
verse of which two stanzas follow:

     "Our hardships reach their rough extremes,
     When valiant men are roped with teams,
     Hour after hour, and day by day,
     To wear our strength and lives away.



     "We see some twenty men or more
     With empty stomachs and foot sore,
     Bound to one wagon plodding on
     Through sand, beneath a burning sun."[36:b]

In the trackless part of the Battalion's march through the sand
stretches, in addition to pulling at the wagons, companies marched in
double-single file, in each other's footsteps, to make tracks for the
wagon wheels.

=Irrigation in New Mexico.=--It was while at Santa Fe, and while passing
down the Rio del Norte, that the Battalion saw, for the first time,
irrigation in operation. Tyler thus describes it: "Canals for irrigation
purposes were found all along the banks of the river. Some of them
several miles in length. They conveyed water to the farms, or as they
were called in that country, ranchos. There being little or no rain
during the growing season, the water was made to flow over the ground
until it was sufficiently saturated, and then shut off until needed
again for the same purpose."

=March Down the Rio Grande.=--As the command in its southward movement
down the Rio Grande reached the point where General Kearny left the
valley for a direct march westward--228 miles south of Santa Fe--and
where, too, Kearny had abandoned his wagons; the guides declared it
impossible to follow the Gila route proper with the wagons; and hence a
circuit to the south through Sonora via Janos and Fronteras was proposed
and determined upon at a council of officers.

In the first stages of this changed course, however, the road bore to
the southeast, and this was not to the liking of Col. Cooke, because it
would carry his command within hailing distance of General Wool, who
might incorporate it in the "Army of the Centre,"--as the General's
division of the invading forces against Mexico was called--to operate
against Chihuahua. In that event, as the Colonel himself expressed it,
he would lose his trip to California. To bear to the southeast was not
to the liking of the Battalion, as that was not in the direction of
California, but one which might lead them within the sphere of the "Army
of the Centre," and they would find themselves discharged in Old Mexico
instead of California, at the end of their term of enlistment. The
entire command was thrown into gloom by this change in the line of
march: "All of our hopes, conversations and songs," says the historian
of the Battalion--Tyler--"were centered on California. Somewhere on that
broad domain we expected to join our families and friends."

="Blow the Right!" The Westward Turn.=--"On the morning of the 21st," says
Tyler, "the command resumed its journey, marching in a southern
direction for about two miles, when it was found that the road began to
bear southeast instead of southwest, as stated by the guides. The
Colonel looked in the direction of the road, then to the southwest, then
to the west, saying, 'I don't want to get under General Wool, and lose
my trip to California.' He arose in his saddle and ordered a halt. He
then said with firmness: 'This is not my course. I was ordered to
California,' 'and,' he added with an oath, 'I will go there or die in
the attempt.' Then turning to the bugler, he said, 'Blow the right!'

"Turning westward at this point, 32 deg. 41' north latitude, and but
a short distance--some thirty miles--north of the present city of El
Paso--the course of march was westward to San Bernardino rancho, thence
to Yanos and so to the San Pedro river where the command arrived on the
9th of December.

"=The Fight with Wild Bulls.=--Here occurred the only fighting the
Battalion engaged in on its expedition, a battle with wild bulls. This
section of the country seemed to abound with herds of wild cattle, and
the males among them were much more bold and ferocious than among the
buffalos. Attracted by curiosity these herds gathered along the line of
march, alternately scampering away and approaching; and some of the
bolder ones, as if in resentment of the Battalion's invasion, attacked
the column. Several mules were gored to death by them, both in the teams
and among the pack animals; and Colonel Cooke records how some of the
wagons were thrown about by the mad charge of these furious beasts. The
troops had been ordered to march with guns unloaded, but in the presence
of such a danger the men loaded their muskets without waiting for an
order to that effect, and when attacked would fire upon the charging
beasts, so that the rattle of musketry was for once heard all along the
line. The bulls were very tenacious of life, however, and more desperate
and dangerous when wounded than before."

Tyler speaks of one fight between Dr. William Spencer and a bull which
was shot five times, twice through the lungs, twice through the heart,
and once through the head, and yet would alternately rise and fall and
rush upon the doctor until a sixth ball between the eyes, and near the
curl of the pate, proved fatal.[38:c] Colonel Cooke confirms Tyler's
narrative about the bull continuing to rush on after being twice shot
through the heart, and adds: "I have seen the heart." Cooke also relates
the feat of Corporal Frost in bringing down one of these ferocious
animals: "I was very near Corporal Frost, when an immense coal-black
bull came charging upon us, a hundred yards distant. Frost aimed his
musket, a flintlock, very deliberately and only fired when the beast was
within six paces; it fell headlong, almost at our feet."[39:d] Tyler
adds: "The Corporal was on foot while, of course, the Colonel and staff
were mounted. On the first appearance of the bull, the Colonel, with his
usual firm manner of speech, ordered the corporal to load his gun,
supposing, of course, that he had observed the previous order of
prohibition. To this command he (the corporal) paid no attention.
Thinking him either stupified or, dumbfounded, with much warmth and a
foul epithet he next ordered him to run, but this mandate was as little
heeded as the other. Doubtless Cooke thought one man's 'ignorance with
some stubborness' was about to receive a terrible retribution, but when
he saw the monster lifeless at his feet, through the well-directed aim
of the brave and fearless corporal, how changed must have been his
feelings!"[39:e] The number of the wild bovine enemy killed in the
engagement is variously reported as from twenty to sixty, and by one
writer as high as eighty-one.

=Mexican Opposition at Tucson.=--Leaving the San Pedro the command marched
northeasterly to Tucson, a Mexican town of between four and five hundred
inhabitants. It was garrisoned at the time by a Mexican force two
hundred strong, according to Cooke, commanded by Captain Comaduran, who
was under order from the Governor of Sonora, Don Manuel Gandara, not to
allow an armed force to pass through the town without resistance. The
guides furnished the Battalion by General Kearny, however, declared it
was for the command either to march through Tucson, or make a detour
which would mean a hundred miles out of the way over a trackless
wilderness and mountains. Cooke determined to march through Tucson.
Foster, the interpreter, went into the town in advance and was put under
guard; a corporal, son of the Mexican commander, with three Mexican
soldiers was met by the command and questioned about Foster, and on
admitting that he was under guard, the corporal and his escort were
immediately placed under arrest by Cooke, to be held as hostages for the
safety of the interpreter. One Mexican, however, was released, who, with
two of the Battalion guides, carried a note demanding Foster's release.
This was complied with, and about midnight Foster was brought to camp,
attended by two officers authorized "to make a special armistice." Cooke
proposed that the Mexican command deliver up a few arms as a guarantee
of surrender, and a token that the inhabitants of Tucson would not fight
against the United States unless they were exchanged as prisoners of
war; the Mexican prisoners were also released.[40:f] These events
occurred while the Battalion was about sixteen miles from Tucson.

The next day, when on the march, Cooke received a message from Captain
Comaduran declining the proposition to surrender. The Battalion were
ordered to load their guns with ball. Before reaching the town, however,
another message was received saying that the garrison had retreated
taking two brass cannons and forcing most of the inhabitants to
accompany them. About a dozen armed Mexicans met the American force to
escort them into the town. Before passing through the gates, the
commander of the Battalion addressed the soldiers saying, in effect,
that the garrison and citizens had fled leaving their property behind;
but they had not come to make war upon Sonora, and there must be no
interference with the private property of the citizens.[41:g] The
Battalion marched through Tucson and went into camp about half a mile
beyond on a small stream.

Before leaving the vicinity Cooke with a party of fifty reconnoitered
the country above the town towards a village and church, where, it was
supposed, the garrison and main body of the people had taken refuge. As
the nature of the country, however, afforded excellent opportunities for
ambush, if the Mexicans should choose to make resistance, the company of
fifty returned. However the movement was not without its value since,
according to Col. Cooke, and as was afterwards ascertained, it caused
the Mexicans who had fled to the aforesaid village to still further
retreat, and the reinforcements which had come from the presidios of
Fronteras, Santa Cruz and Tubac, to return to their posts.[42:h]

=Junction With Kearny's Trail.=--Renewing its journey the command in the
course of three days, by hard marching, reached the Gila river and
intersected the route followed by General Kearny, four hundred and
seventy-four miles from the point at which they left it in the valley of
the Rio Grande.

The Southern Pacific Railroad traverses practically the route of the
Battalion between these two points. Colonel Cooke made a map of this
part of the Battalion's journey--published in his book, (see map fold)
and referring to it, in connection with the Southern Pacific Railroad,
he says: "A new administration, in which Southern interests prevailed,
with the great problem of the practicability and best location of a
Pacific Railroad under investigation, had the map of this wagon route
before them with its continuance to the west, and perceived that it gave
exactly the solution of its unknown element, that a southern route would
avoid both the Rocky Mountains and Sierra Nevada, with their snows, and
would meet no obstacle in this great interval. The new 'Gadsden Treaty'
was the result; it was signed, December 30, 1853."[42:i]

=The March Down the Gila.=--Following more or less the windings of the
Gila, the way made difficult from alternating stretches of deep sand and
miry clay, the command arrived at the junction of the Gila with the
Colorado on the 8th of January.

An attempt at the shipment of part of the command's provisions down the
river on a flat boat proved a sad failure, and ended in considerable
loss. The scheme was Col. Cooke's. The "boat" was constructed by placing
two wagon beds end to end and lashing them to two dry cottonwood logs.
On this improvised boat two thousand five hundred pounds of provision
and corn were placed. At places the river spread out over sand bars with
but three or four inches of water covering them; the boat was repeatedly
lodged on these, and the precious stores of food had to be landed in
several places. The most of it was never recovered, though repeated
efforts were made to regain it.

=At the Mouth of the Gila.=--Speaking of the Gila at its junction with the
Colorado, and of the conditions obtaining in the command at that stage
of the march, Col. Cooke writes: "A vast bottom; the country about the
two rivers is a picture of desolation; nothing like vegetation beyond
the alluvium of the two rivers; bleak mountains, wild looking peaks,
stony hills and plains, fill the view. We are encamped in the midst of
wild hemp. The mules are in mezquit thickets, with a little bunch grass,
a half a mile off. The mules are weak, and their failing, or flagging
to-day in ten miles, is very unpromising for the hundred mile stretch,
dry and barren, before them. There is no grass, and only scanty
cottonwood boughs for them to-night, but I sent out forty men to gather
the fruit, called tornia, a variety of the mezquit. They have gathered
twelve or fifteen bushels, which has been spread out to be eaten on a
hard part of the sand-bar.

"Francisco was sent across the river to fire the thickets beyond--this
to clear the way for the pioneer party in the morning. He says the river
is deeper than usual; it is wider than the Missouri, and of the same
muddy color. * * * It is said to be sixty miles to the mouth of the
river."--the Colorado.[44:j]


FOOTNOTES:

[35:a] See Tyler's Battalion Ch. XX. Lieutenant Willis gives the date of
arrival 24th of December. Captains Brown and Higgins, stationed at
Pueblo, give the 20th. The latter kept a daily journal.

[36:b] Tyler's History of The Mormon Battalion, pp. 180-183.

[38:c] Tyler's Battalion, pp. 219, 220.

[39:d] Cooke's Conquest, pp. 145, 6.

[39:e] Tyler's Battalion, p. 219.

[40:f] Cooke's Conquest, p. 149.

[41:g] Previous to this the Colonel had issued the following order:

                                 "Head Quarters Mormon Battalion,
                                     "Camp on the San Pedro,
                                         "December 13th, 1846.

     "Thus far on our course we have followed the guides furnished
     us by the General [Kearny]. These guides now point to Tucson,
     a garrison town, as our road, and assert that any other course
     is a hundred miles out of the way and over a trackless
     wilderness of mountains, rivers and hills. We will march,
     then, to Tucson. We came not to make war on Sonora, and less
     still to destroy an important outpost of defense against
     Indians: but we will take the straight road before us, and
     overcome all resistance. But shall I remind you that the
     American soldier ever shows justice and kindness to the
     unarmed and unresisting? The property of individuals you will
     hold sacred. The people of Sonora are not our enemies.

                                 "By order of "Lieut.-Col. Cooke,
                                     "(Signed) P. C. Merrill,
                                                      "Adjutant."

[42:h] See Cooke's Conquest, p. 151; also Tyler's Battalion, pp.
228-230.

[42:i] Cooke's Conquest, p. 159.

[44:j] Conquest, pp. 170-1.




VI.

THE MARCH OF THE BATTALION FROM THE COLORADO TO THE PACIFIC OCEAN.


This part of the march led through what is now marked on the maps of
southern California as the "Colorado Desert," "nature's exhausted region
lying between the Colorado river and the eastern base of the coast
range"--some of it being below the sea level. Much of the dreary way lay
through stretches of sand, and the men were compelled to aid the teams
by pulling on ropes, fifteen to twenty men to a wagon. No water was to
be had but by the digging of deep wells in the desert sands. These often
yielded but little, and at that a poor quality, of water. The suffering
of both men and beasts was terrible. "The march of the last five
days"--the time it took to cross the desert to the little running stream
called "Carriso Creek,"--was "the most trying of any we had made on both
men and animals," writes Col. Cooke.

=Destitution and Suffering of the Men en March.=--"We here found the
heaviest sand, hottest days, and coldest nights," says Tyler, "with no
water and but little food." "At this time," he continues, "the men were
nearly bare-footed; some used, instead of shoes, rawhide wrapped around
their feet, while others improvised a novel style of boots by stripping
the skin from the leg of an ox. To do this, a ring was cut around the
hide above and below the gambrel joint, and then the skin taken off
without cutting it lengthwise. After this, the lower end was sewed up
with sinews, when it was ready for the wearer, the natural crook of the
hide adapting it somewhat to the shape of the foot. Others wrapped
cast-off clothing around their feet, to shield them from the burning
sand during the day and the cold at night.

"Before we arrived at the Carriso many of the men were so nearly used up
from thirst, hunger and fatigue, that they were unable to speak until
they reached the water or had it brought to them. Those who were
strongest reported, when they arrived, that they had passed many lying
exhausted by the way-side."[46:a]

Col. Cooke refers to these conditions in his "Conquest of New
Mexico:"[46:b] "A great many of my men are wholly without shoes, and
used every expedient, such as rawhide moccasins and sandals, and even
wrapping their feet in pieces of woolen and cotton cloth." Of the march
on the 16th of January the Colonel remarks: "Near eleven, [A. M.] I
reached, with the foremost wagon, the first water of the Carriso
[Cooke's spelling is 'Cariza']; a clear running stream gladdened the
eyes, after the anxious dependence on muddy wells for five or six days.
I found the march [i. e. of the day] to be nineteen miles; thus without
water for near three days, (for the working animals) and camping two
nights in succession, without water, the battalion made in forty-eight
hours, four marches, of eighteen, eight, eleven and nineteen miles,
suffering from frost, and from summer heat."[46:c]

Of the march of the 17th, he said: "The men arrived here, [Carriso Creek
camp] completely worn down; they staggered as they marched, as they did
yesterday, [the 18th:] Some of the men did not find strength to reach
the camp before daylight this morning. * * * I went through the
companies this morning; they were eating their last four ounces of
flour; of sugar and coffee there has been none for weeks. I have
remaining only five public wagons, there are three private property."
Yet, as showing the spirit of these Battalion men in such plight he
writes of the evening in camp of that same day--"The men, who this
morning were prostrate, worn out, hungry, heartless, have recovered
their spirits to-night, and are singing and playing the fiddle."[47:d]

=From Carriso Creek to San Phillips.=--The march from Carriso Creek was to
San Phillips, an Indian village on a small stream of the same name. It
was on approaching San Phillips that the rugged heart of the coast
mountains was encountered, "which seemed to defy aught save the wild
goat," according to Col. Cooke's description; over which "with crow bar
and pick and axe in hand," he continues, "the Battalion worked its way."
Here also the "chasm of living rock, more narrow than their wagons," was
encountered, through which they hewed a passage for the wagons, the
Colonel himself taking a hand in the hewing. "I came to the canyon,"
says the Colonel, "and found it much worse than I had been led to expect
[i. e. by the report of the guides]; there were many rocks to surmount,
but the worst was the narrow pass. Setting the example myself, there was
much work done on it before the wagons came; the rock was hewn with axes
to increase the opening. I thought it wide enough, and going on, found a
hill to be ascended, to avoid a still narrower pass, a great rock had to
be broken, before it could be crossed. But when a trial was made, at the
first pass, it was found too narrow by a foot of solid rock. More work
was done, and several trials made. The sun was now only an hour high,
and it was about seven miles to the first water. I had a wagon taken to
pieces, and carried through. Meanwhile, we still hewed and hammered at
the mountain side; but the best road tools had been lost. * * * The next
wagon body was lifted through, and then the running gear, by lifting one
side; then I rode on again, and saw a wagon up the very steep hill, and
down again to the canyon. The work on the pass was perseveringly
continued, and the last two wagons were pulled through by the mules,
with loads undisturbed."

The confused information respecting the state of hostilities, the
likelihood of meeting retreating bands of Californians, en route for the
Mexican state of Sonora, led the Colonel to renew his march on the 19th
in a more strictly military order than he had hitherto followed, and the
Battalion, while waiting for the wagons to come up, was exercised on a
prairie in military tactics.

The Battalion was under orders to march to San Diego and there join Gen.
Kearny. "But communication with that officer was now cut off," writes
Colonel Cooke. "By the best information the enemy were concentrated at
Los Angeles. The General was marching on it from the south, and
Lieutenant-Colonel Fremont approaching from the north; so that a direct
march on Los Angeles from the east was evidently the proper course; and
especially so, as Captain Montgomery, [from San Diego] had written,
January 15th, that it was generally believed that parties of
Californians, headed by leaders who had broken their paroles, would
endeavor to effect a retreat to Sonora, rather than submit to our arms.
* * * It was determined to take the direct road to Los Angeles; and the
guides were sent to Warner's, to collect mules, etc."

=At Warner's Rancho.=--Warner's Ranch was reached on the 21st, the
Battalion being again drilled enroute. It was found necessary to rest at
Warner's on the 22nd. "This is a beautiful valley, shut in by mountains
or high hills on every side," writes Col. Cooke, "The name, Agua
Caliente, comes from a bold stream, issuing from rock fissures at the
temperature of 170 deg.; it now sends up little clouds of steam for half a
mile below. The valley, a mile long, is elliptical, and its green smooth
surface really oval; at its centre stands a wonderful evergreen oak, its
boughs reaching a circle, five feet above the ground, and ninety feet in
diameter; the hot stream runs round one side, a cold one around the
other. The Indians, of cold nights, select spots below the spring, of
agreeable temperature to sleep, lying in the stream, with sod bank for a
pillow."[49:e]

=The March Directed to San Diego.=--On the 23rd of January a march of
eighteen miles was made over the hills from Warner's Rancho. It rained
several hours in the afternoon, and again at night, then continued for
twenty-four hours. "The Battalion had fallen upon the rainy season. All
tents were blown down in the night," writes Col. Cooke, speaking of the
night of the 23rd. "The ill-clad Battalion," he continues, "were
drenched and suffered much." A twelve mile march over the hills from
Warner's, on the 25th of January, brought the Battalion into the
Temecala valley. There an official dispatch brought to Col. Cooke the
announcement that Gen. Kearny had returned to San Diego, and that the
Battalion was expected there as originally ordered. Accordingly the next
morning the march was directed southward, toward the San Diego mission.
The San Luis valley and river was crossed on the 26th, and encampment
made near a rancho.

=In Sight of the Pacific.=--About noon the next day the deserted Catholic
mission of San Luis Rey was passed. "One mile below the mission," writes
Tyler, "we ascended a bluff, when the long-long-looked-for great Pacific
Ocean appeared plain to our view, only about three miles distant. The
joy, the cheer that filled our souls, none but worn-out pilgrims nearing
a haven of rest can imagine. Prior to leaving Nauvoo, we had talked
about and sung of 'the great Pacific sea,' and we were now upon its very
borders, and its beauty far exceeded our most sanguine expectations."

Of this event Col. Cooke says: "The road wound through smooth green
valleys, and over very lofty hills, equally smooth and green. From the
top of one of these hills, was caught the first and a magnificent view
of the great ocean; and by rare chance, perhaps, it was so calm that it
shone as a mirror."

Further describing what must have been to the desert and mountain-worn
Battalion a wonderful scene, the Colonel adds: "The charming and
startling effect, under our circumstances, of this first view of the
ocean could not be expressed; but in an old diary--once sunk and lost in
a river--I find what follows:

"I caught my first sight of the ocean, as smooth as a mirror, and
reflecting the full blaze of the declining sun; from these sparkling
green hill-tops it seemed that the lower world had turned to impalpable
dazzling light, while by contrast, the clear sky looked dim.

"We rode on into a valley which was near, but out of view of the sea;
its smooth sod was in sunlight and shade; a gentle brook wound through
it; the joyous lark, the gay blackbird, the musical bluebird even the
household wren, warbled together the evening song; it seemed a sweet
domestic scene which must have touched the hearts of my rude, far
wanderers. But coming to us so suddenly, there was a marvelous
accompaniment;--the fitful roar of tide and surf upon a rock-bound
shore; while now and then some great troller burst upon the rocks with a
booming thunder. It was not a discord."[51:f]

From this point the march was down the coast, for the most part in sight
of the ocean, in "clear bright sunlight." The Battalion no longer
suffered from "the monotonous hardships of the deserts and cold
atmosphere of the snow-capped mountains." January there, seemed as
pleasant as May in the northern states.

=San Diego Mission.=--On the 29th of January the Battalion passed into the
Solidad Valley, thence by cross roads over high hills, miry from recent
rains, "into a firm, regular road" to the Mission of San Diego,
encampment being made on the flat about a mile below the old mission
buildings, and about four or five miles from the seaport of San Diego.
In the evening Col. Cooke rode down to San Diego and reported the
arrival of his command on the Pacific. The march of the Mormon Battalion
was completed.

=Col. Cooke's Bulletin on the Battalion's March.=--On the 30th of January
the following Bulletin was written by the Lieutenant-Colonel commanding,
though not read to the Battalion until the 4th of February. It tells in
studied military brevity the achievements and faithfulness of the
Battalion, its service to the country, and is an imperishable monument
in the literature of the nation.


BULLETIN.

                                  "Headquarters Mormon Battalion,
                                      "Mission of San Diego,
                                          "January 30, 1847.

     "(Orders No. 1)

     "The Lieutenant-Colonel commanding, congratulates the
     Battalion on their safe arrival on the shore of the Pacific
     Ocean, and the conclusion of their march of over two thousand
     miles.

     "History may be searched in vain for an equal march of
     infantry. Half of it has been through a wilderness, where
     nothing but savages and wild beasts are found, or deserts
     where, for want of water, there is no living creature. There,
     with almost hopeless labor, we have dug deep wells, which the
     future traveler will enjoy. Without a guide who had traversed
     them we have ventured into trackless tablelands where water
     was not found for several marches. With crowbar and pick, and
     axe in hand, we worked our way over mountains, which seemed to
     defy aught save the wild goat, and hewed a pass through a
     chasm of living rock more narrow than our wagons. To bring
     these first wagons to the Pacific, we have preserved the
     strength of our mules by herding them over large tracts, which
     you have laboriously guarded without loss. The garrison of
     four presidios of Sonora concentrated within the walls of
     Tucson, gave us no pause. We drove them out, with their
     artillery, but our intercourse with the citizens was unmarked
     by a single act of injustice. Thus, marching half naked and
     half fed, and living upon wild animals, we have discovered and
     made a road of great value to our country.

     "Arrived at the first settlements of California, after a
     single day's rest, you cheerfully turned off from the route to
     this point of promised repose, to enter upon a campaign, and
     meet, as we supposed, the approach of an enemy; and this, too,
     without even salt to season your sole subsistence of fresh
     meat.

     "Lieutenants A. J. Smith and George Stoneman, of the First
     Dragoons, have shared and given invaluable aid in all these
     labors.

     "Thus volunteers, you have exhibited some high and essential
     qualities of veterans. But much remains undone. Soon, you will
     turn your attention to the drill, to system and order, to
     forms also, which are all necessary to the soldier.

     "By order
          [Signed]           "Lieut.-Colonel P. St. George Cooke,
          [Signed]               "P. C. Merrill, Adjutant."[53:g]

Small wonder, though the reading of this Bulletin to the Battalion was
unaccountably delayed for four days, that the Mormon volunteers received
this official announcement of their achievements with hearty cheers.


FOOTNOTES:

[46:a] Tyler, pp. 244-5.

[46:b] Cooke's Conquest, p. 185.

[46:c] Ibid, p. 184.

[47:d] "Conquest," p. 187.

[49:e] Conquest, p. 193.

[51:f] Conquest, p. 195--note.

[53:g] Cooke's Conquest, p. 197. Subsequently, viz., on the 9th of May,
on the occasion of General Kearny visiting the Battalion at Los Angeles,
he is reported to have said that history would be searched in vain for
an infantry march equal to the Battalion's, and added: "Bonaparte
crossed the Alps, but these men have crossed a continent." Tyler's
Battalion, p. 282.




VII.

THE BATTALION IN CALIFORNIA.


Subsequent movements of the Battalion were as follows:

=At San Luis Rey Mission.=--On the evening of their second day at San
Diego Mission, an order was issued for the Battalion to return to San
Luis Rey Mission, to garrison that station. This Mission was somewhat
midway between Los Angeles and San Diego, and it was doubtless thought
that the Battalion by being stationed there could keep that important
position out of the enemies' hands, should Mexican hostilities again be
resumed, as at the time seemed probable; and they would also be
available there for quicker movement either to Los Angeles or to San
Diego should danger threaten at either point.

Accordingly on February 1st, the return march was begun and ended about
noon of the 3rd.

=Clean Up and Drill.=--Here orders were given for a general clean up of
arms and clothes--such as they had--shaving, cutting hair, and the like.
"Some had not shaved since the march began, and would have preferred not
to do so until they returned to their people," says the Battalion's
historian. But the order was imperative. "It prescribed that no beard be
allowed to grow below the tip of the ear, hence the mustache only could
be saved. The hair also must be clipped even with the tip of the ear,"
hence the long and tangled locks and shocks of hair of a year's growth
had to be sacrificed.

By the 6th of February the men had finished cleaning up and repairing
their quarters, which in some respects even then "were not the most
pleasant," writes Tyler, "as we were over-run with fleas, as well as the
more filthy vermin, and no person, however cleanly he aimed to be, could
escape from them."

On the 8th of February, according to Tyler, "Colonel Cooke and
Lieutenant Stoneman commenced the squad drill with officers which,
continued and extended to companies and thence to the Battalion, and
lasted altogether for twenty days, when the Battalion was supposed to
have learned the drill, and all the officers were considered capable of
teaching it."

=Company B at San Diego.=--On the 15th of February Company B was ordered
to be detached from the Battalion and directed to march to the port of
San Diego to perform garrison duty at that place, though the order,
apparently, for the removal of the company was not given until the 15th
of March.

=Los Angeles Garrisoned by Companies A. C. D. E.=--On the 18th of the same
month nine privates of Company A., eight from C., five from D., and
eight from E., were designated as a detachment, under command of
Lieutenant Oman and Sergeant Brown, to garrison the Mission of San Luis
Rey, while the remainder of companies A. C. D. and E. were designated to
go to Los Angeles for garrison duty. These companies began their march
on the 19th, and arrived at Los Angeles on the 23rd. The chief
activities here were maintaining by successive details from the command
an out-post at Cajon Pass,--fifty miles north east of Los Angeles--as a
protection against hostile bands of Indians; and the erection of a fort
on an eminence commanding the city of Los Angeles. The San Luis Rey
detachment remained at that post until the 6th of April, when under
orders the station was abandoned and the detachment marched to Los
Angeles. The companies thus grouped so remained until near the
expiration of the term of their enlistment.

=The Conquest of California.=--The conquest of California was easily
achieved. Fremont in the north with a company of but sixty Americans,
with whom he had been sent to explore portions of New Mexico and
California, was opposed in the vicinity of Monterey by a force under
General Castro, in June, 1846. With the aid of American settlers in the
vicinity of San Francisco, Fremont defeated the Mexicans in two
engagements and on the 5th of July, the American Californians declared
themselves independent, and placed Fremont at the head of their affairs.
On the 7th of the same month Commodore Sloat, then in the command of the
U. S. squadron in the Pacific, bombarded and captured Monterey. On the
9th Commodore Montgomery took possession of San Francisco. Commodore
Stockton arrived on the 15th of July and in co-operation with Colonel
Fremont took possession of the city of Los Angeles, on the 17th of
August. There was, however, a subsequent uprising in the south, an
attempt of the Mexicans to regain possession of the country. The
attempt, however, proved abortive, and was chiefly noteworthy as
occurring at such a time as to allow General Kearny's troop of one
hundred soldiers, who had marched from Santa Fe, to participate in some
of the last engagements--December 16th, 1846, and Jan. 8th, 1847--these
ended in the conquest, and brought to pass the pacification of
California.

=The Kearny-Fremont Controversy.=--A question of authority arose between
Col. Fremont and General Kearny. The former had acted in the self
appointed capacity of "Military Commandant of California." General
Kearny refused to recognize him in that capacity, since in addition to
being Fremont's superior military officer, Kearny also had been
instructed himself to establish civil government in California.[57:a]
Fremont refused to obey the orders of his superior, and was ordered home
to be tried for his disobedience. He was deprived of his commission; but
in consideration of previous service, it was offered to him again, but
refused; and Fremont "went again to the wilderness and engaged in
exploration."[57:b]


FOOTNOTES:

[57:a] See Letter of Secretary of War to Kearny, Executive Document No.
60, of June 3rd, 1846, delivered to Kearny by Col. Kane.

[57:b] Lossing's Hist. U. S. p. 487. Bancroft's Hist. of Cal., Vol. V.,
passim, but especially pp. 411-468.




VIII.

RECORD OF THE BATTALION IN CALIFORNIA.


The Battalion had opened a wagon road to the Pacific, but had arrived
too late to participate actively in the conquest of California. It was
useful, however, in the performance of garrison duty at San Diego, San
Luis Rey, and Los Angeles; and, in connection with the New York
volunteers, recently arrived under command of Col. Jonathan D.
Stevenson, via Cape Horn to San Francisco Bay, also in connection with
the constantly increasing naval forces along the coast, they assisted in
making secure the conquest achieved.

While performing garrison duty many members of the Battalion at San
Diego obtained permission to accept employment of the inhabitants of the
town, such as making adobes, digging wells, building houses, and making
bricks. The first bricks in San Diego, and for matter of that in
California, were made and burned by members of the Mormon
Battalion.[58:a] They made an enviable reputation for industry and
frugality.

=Efforts to Re-Enlist the Battalion.=--As the expiration of the term of
the Battalion's enlistment drew near, strong efforts were made for their
re-enlistment by General Kearny, before departing for the east in May.

"On the 4th of May," writes Tyler, "an order was read from Col. Cooke,
giving the Battalion the privilege of being discharged on condition of
being re-enlisted for three years as U. S. Dragoons; but under the
circumstances the generous proposition could not consistently be
accepted." General Kearny addressed the Battalion on the 10th of May:
"He sympathized with us in the unsettled condition of our people," says
Tyler, "but thought, as their final destination was not definitely
settled, [in this of course the General's information was defective] we
had better re-enlist for another year, by which time the war would
doubtless be ended, and our families settled in some permanent location.
In conclusion he said he would take pleasure in representing our
patriotism to the President, and in the halls of congress, and give us
the justice our praiseworthy conduct had merited." It was on this
occasion, according to Tyler, that Gen. Kearny in praising the Battalion
said: "Bonaparte crossed the Alps, but these men have crossed a
continent."[59:b]

Col. Jonathan D. Stevenson of the New York volunteers, who succeeded
Col. Cooke in command of the Battalion by being given command of the
southern district of California--Col. Cooke having been detailed to
accompany Kearny on his return to the east--made an effort to induce the
Battalion to re-enlist. Stevenson's effort was prompted by Governor
Richard B. Mason's instructions. Stevenson represented among the
advantages of the Battalion's re-enlistment, the privilege of choosing
their own officers, "and the fact that the Mormon commander would be the
third in rank among the officers of California, and might become first."

The Battalion's officers quite generally favored re-enlistment, but not
so the men, who, under the leadership of "Father" Pettegrew, William
Hyde, and Sergeant Tyler, were in favor of returning to their families
and the body of their people.

The result of the effort at re-enlistment was, that a company of
eighty-one, officers and men, re-enlisted for six months, and performed
garrison service at San Diego.

=Homeward Bound.=--The rest of the Battalion, on being mustered out of
service, in July, began their march for the Great Basin of the Rocky
Mountains, going via Sutter's Fort, at the juncture of the American and
Sacramento rivers, north-eastward from San Francisco about seventy-five
miles, and now the site of Sacramento, capital of the state. About
one-half of these returning volunteers arrived in Salt Lake Valley on
the first of October. The reason for not more than one-half of this
number reaching Salt Lake Valley that fall--they numbered about 240 when
leaving Los Angeles--arose from the following circumstances: Arriving at
Sutter's Fort, and finding opportunity for employment at good wages, a
number desired to take advantage of that opportunity, and accordingly,
with the consent and approval of their associates, "a few" remained. On
the sixth of September, when the returning volunteers were leaving the
basin of Lake Tahoe, they met Samuel Brannan,--leader of the "Brooklyn
Colony" of Mormons to San Francisco Bay via Cape Horn, in 1846. Brannan
was returning to California from his visit to Brigham Young, whom he had
met at the Green River Crossing, and accompanied to Salt Lake Valley. He
gave the Battalion members a doleful account of the semi-desert region
where the Mormon people were settling, and predicted their final removal
to California. He urged all, except those known to have families in Salt
Lake Valley, to return to California and work until spring. This without
avail. The next day, however, the volunteers met Captain James Brown,
ranking officer of the Pueblo detachment of the Battalion, and a small
party enroute for California. He brought with him letters from many of
the families of the Battalion; also an epistle from the Mormon leaders
advising those who had no means of subsistence to remain in California
and labor during the winter, and make their way to Salt Lake valley in
the spring, bringing their earnings with them. About one-half of the
volunteers accepted this suggestion and returned to Sutter's Fort where
they found employment.

The rest of the company continued their journey to Salt Lake valley
where they arrived at the time already stated.

=The Discharge and Payment of the Pueblo Detachment.=--Captain Brown took
with him to California the muster rolls of the Pueblo detachment of the
Battalion, and also had a power of attorney from all its members to draw
their pay. The Pueblo detachment had drawn its pay per Captain Brown up
to May at Santa Fe, at which time he received orders to resume the march
to California, via Fort Laramie. The detachment arrived in Salt Lake
valley on the 29th of July, where they were disbanded, since the term of
their enlistment had expired on the 16th of that month. On the
presentation of the claims for the three months' pay still due to this
detachment to Governor Mason of California, they were allowed.
"Paymaster Rich," says the Governor, "paid to Captain Brown the money
due to the (Pueblo) detachment up to that date, according to the rank
they bore upon the muster rolls, upon which the Battalion had been
mustered out of the service."

=The Purchase of Ogden Site with Battalion Money.=--Sometime early in 1848
the Goodyear claim to a tract of land at the mouth of Weber Canyon, said
to be twenty miles square, was purchased by Captain James Brown out of
the Battalion money collected by him, and "by the advice of the
Council," meaning the high council at Salt Lake City. The sum paid was
$1,950.00, cash down. In this statement I follow the Journal History of
Brigham Young, which under date of March 6th, 1848, contains a letter
from "Father" John Smith, President of the Salt Lake high council,
giving to the Mormon leader,--absent at the time in Winter Quarters--the
above information.[62:c]

The Goodyear tract is specifically described as commencing at the mouth
of Weber Canyon, thence following the Wasatch Mountains north to the Hot
Springs; thence westward to the shores of the Salt Lake; along the
shores southward to a point opposite Weber Canyon; thence eastward to
the point of beginning.[62:d] Goodyear was supposed to have held this
tract of land on which Ogden City now stands by virtue of a Mexican
grant. This, however, it was subsequently discovered, was not the case.
Goodyear's title amounted to no more than a squatter's claim, as there
were evidently no Mexican grants of land in the eastern and northern
parts of the territory ceded to the United States by Mexico that rested
upon any clearly valid evidence of title from Mexico; and the government
of the United States, in subsequent years, refused to recognize the
so-called Mexican grant of Goodyear's, and held that title inhered in
the government of the United States alone, and that by virtue of the
cession of the territory to the United States.

Such title, however, as Goodyear claimed, was purchased, as above
related, and by Battalion money. And while the title of Goodyear was not
valid, the purchase quit-claimed his title, such as it was, and gave a
sense of security to the colonists who first settled upon one of the
most desirable tracts of land in the Salt Lake Valley.

=The Battalion's Contribution of Seeds to Utah Colonies.=--These returning
members of the Battalion brought to Utah various kinds of garden and
fruit seeds, as well as grain from California, all which were found to
be very useful in the new colonies where both variety and quantity of
seeds were limited. Lieutenant James Pace introduced the club-head
wheat, which proved to be hardy and of thrifty growth in Utah soil.
Daniel Tyler brought the California pea which in the early years grew so
prolific as the field pea of Utah. The detached members of the Battalion
who wintered at Pueblo brought with them to Salt Lake Valley the variety
of wheat known as "taos," which, mixed with the club-head, became for
many years the staple seed wheat sown in Utah fields.

=The Battalion's Part in the Discovery of Gold in California.=--As already
stated a number of the Mormon Battalion members found employment at
Sutter's Fort, with Mr. John Sutter himself, in fact, who was a rather
enterprising Swiss; one "who had houses and land, flocks and herds,
mills and machinery. He counted his skilled artisans by the score," says
the account I am following, "and his savage retainers by the hundred. He
was, moreover, a man of progress." Among his pressing needs and the
needs of the country at large, was a saw mill. The flour mills he then
had in course of construction needed timbers, and there would be large
profit in shipping lumber to San Francisco. Accordingly his foreman, a
Mr. James W. Marshall, a native of New Jersey, and then about
thirty-three years of age, and a carpenter, took in hand the task of
building a saw mill. After considerable exploration the requisite
combination of water power, timber, and the possibility of easy access
to the Fort, was found in the Coloma valley, on the south fork of the
American River, and about forty-five miles due east of the Fort.

In the latter part of August, or the first of September, Mr. Marshall
with a party of about a dozen white men, nine of whom were discharged
members of the Mormon Battalion,[64:e] and about as many Indians, went
to Coloma valley and began the construction of the proposed mill. A
brush dam was built in the river and a mill race constructed along a
dry channel, to economize labor. The largest stones were thrown out of
this and during the night the water would be turned in to carry off the
dirt and sand. On the 24th of January while sauntering along the tail
race inspecting the work, Mr. Marshall noticed yellow particles mingled
with the excavated earth, which had been washed by late rains. Sending
an Indian to his cabin for a tin plate Marshall washed out some of the
soil and obtained a small quantity of yellow metal. During the evening
he remarked to his associates of the camp that he believed he had found
gold, which was received with some doubts, the expressions being "I
reckon not;" and, "no such luck." But Henry W. Bigler, one of the
Battalion members, made the following entry in his journal that day:

"Monday 24 (January): This day some kind of metal was found in the tail
race that looks like gold."

"Jan. 30th: Clear, and has been all the last week. Our metal has been
tried and proves to be gold. It is thought to be rich. We have picked up
more than a hundred dollars' worth this week."

=The Date of the Discovery of Gold.=--Thus it is the journal of a member
of the Mormon Battalion which determines the date of the event which
startled the world. Usually the 19th of January is given as the date,
but in his History of California, Bancroft discusses the subject as
follows:

"The 19th of January is the date usually given; but I am satisfied it is
incorrect. There are but two authorities to choose between, Marshall,
the discoverer, and one Henry W. Bigler, a Mormon engaged upon the work
at the time. Besides confusion of mind in other respects, Marshall
admits that he does not know the date. On or about the 19th of
January," he says (Hutchings' Magazine, II, 200); "I am not quite
certain to a day, but it was between the 18th and 20th." Whereupon the
19th has been generally accepted. Bigler, on the other hand, was a cool,
clear-headed, methodical man; moreover he kept a journal, in which he
entered occurrences on the spot, and it is from this journal I get my
date. If further evidence be wanting, we have it. Marshall states that
four days after the discovery he proceeded to New Helvetta [identical
as to the location with Sutter's Fort] with specimens. Now, by reference
to another journal, New Helvetta Diary, we find that Marshall arrived at
the Fort on the evening of the 28th. If we reckon the day of discovery
as one of the four days, allow Marshall one night on the way, which
Parsons gives him, and count the 28th one day, we have the 24th as the
date of discovery trebly proved.

[Illustration: Facsimile of Henry W. Bigler's Journal, from a
photograph]

=The Tide of Western Civilization Started.=--The discovery of gold is the
historical event that turned the eyes of the civilized world to
California. Within a year it started that mighty wave of western
emigration from all parts of the United States, many parts of Europe,
and even from Asia. It was to be a subject of the President's message to
Congress before the close of the year; within two years it would make
California one of the sovereign states of the American Union, with a
population of nearly one hundred thousand; in seven years it would
result in adding nearly five hundred million dollars to the world's
store of gold; and then as the gold from soil and sand was exhausted,
and costly operations upon gold-bearing quartz ledges, and delving into
the earth were required to secure the precious metal, many men who had
come to the mines turned their attention to agriculture and to
horticulture and found in the grain fields, vineyards and orchards of
the Pacific slope, even a greater source of wealth than in the gold
mines.

For a time an effort was made to keep the discovery of gold quiet, but
gradually it became known, and the secret of the Sierras was revealed to
the world, with the result already noted. San Francisco, however, was
indifferent for some time, the final conversion of that town to the
discovery of gold did not take place until Samuel Brannan, the leader
of the Brooklyn Colony of Mormons to California, came down from Sutter's
Fort--where he had a store--to San Francisco, in company with a number
of others who had with them specimens of collected gold in both dust and
nuggets. Brannan, holding in one hand a bottle of yellow dust, and with
the other swinging his hat, rushed down the street shouting, "Gold!
Gold! Gold! from the American River." This in May; and soon afterwards
San Francisco was deserted for the gold-fields.

=The Mormon Battalion "Diggings" on the American River.=--The spare time
of the Mormons at Sutter's saw-mill was devoted to washing out gold in
the millrace and from the deposits of the sand bars along the river.
Henry Bigler on the 21st of February wrote to members of the Battalion
at Sutter's Fort, telling them of the discovery of gold, but cautioned
them to impart the information only to those who could be relied upon to
keep the secret. They entrusted it to three other members of the
Battalion. Six days later three of the number, Sidney Willis, Levi
Fifield, and Wilford Hudson, came up to the saw-mill, and frankly told
Mr. Sutter they had come to search for gold, and he gave them permission
to mine in the tail of the millrace. The next day they began work and
were fairly successful. Hudson picked out one piece of gold worth six
dollars. After a few days, however, these men felt under obligations to
return to the Fort as they had given it out that they were merely going
to the saw-mill on a visit and a few days' shooting. Returning, Willis
and Hudson followed down the stream for the purpose of prospecting.
Fifield, accompanied by Bigler, followed the wagon road. About half way
between the saw-mill and the Fort, Hudson and Willis, on a bar opposite
a little island in the river, found a small quantity of gold, not more
than half a dollar in value; and while the smallness of the find filled
the two prospectors with disgust, the other Battalion members at the
fort insisted upon being taken to the point where the gold had been
found, that "together they might examine the place." "It was with
difficulty that they prevailed upon them to do so," remarks Bancroft;
but finally Willis and Hudson consented, "and the so lately slighted
spot," continues the historian of California, "presently became famous
as the rich 'Mormon Diggins:' the island, 'Mormon Island,' taking its
name from these Battalion boys who had first found gold there."

But notwithstanding this new discovery by these members of the
Battalion, and notwithstanding their development of the discovery of Mr.
Marshall, and the huge excitement which followed, and the fact that
whenever they could get released a day from their duty to their employer
they could usually obtain in gold several times over their day's wages,
history has to record that they were true to their engagement to Mr.
Sutter. "They had promised Sutter," says Bancroft, "to stand by him and
finish the saw mill, this they did, starting it running on the 11th of
March. Henry Bigler was still there. On the 7th of April Bigler,
Stephens and Brown presented themselves at the fort to settle accounts
with Sutter."

=The Call of Duty.=--The call of duty was also pressing upon these
Battalion men from another direction. The instructions from the Mormon
leaders, to the members of the Battalion, as we have seen, was that they
should remain in California during the winter, but make their way to the
Salt Lake Valley in the spring, bringing their earnings with them. Hence
when settling with Sutter on the 7th of April, the preliminaries were
arranged for this prospective journey to the Great Basin of the Rocky
Mountains. The first of June was fixed upon as the time of their
departure. Notice was given to Sutter accordingly, so that by that time
he could replace the Mormon workmen in his employ by others. Horses,
cattle and the seeds they intended taking with them were to be bought of
him; also two brass cannons to be a defense against possible Indian
attacks enroute, and for defensive use against a like foe in Salt Lake
valley. At first a company of eight went into the mountains to explore a
route, but found the snow too deep for passage at that time. The
constantly growing gold excitement, also, in consequence of its general
unsettling of things, delayed their departure a month beyond the time
fixed upon for starting. Meantime many of the Battalion members availed
themselves of the opportunity to search for gold. Bigler and two others
of the Battalion followed up the American river from the Fort about
fifteen miles, finding gold as they went. Arriving at Mormon Island they
came upon the seven members of the Battalion mining there who that day
had taken out two hundred and fifty dollars. Bigler and his associates
mined for two months about one mile below the saw-mill, dividing with
Sutter and Marshall, who furnished tools and provisions. The land owners
demanded one-half the product for a time; this was finally reduced to
one-third.

In the midst of this prosperous mining activity, and the daily growing
gold fever, the mad rush from San Francisco and other parts of
California, the members of the Battalion sought out a rendezvous for
their gathering preparatory to the journey across the mountains. The
place of rendezvous was called by them "Pleasant Valley," near the
present site of Placerville, a short distance up the south fork of the
American river, and not far from the place where gold was first
discovered on that stream. Parties came in one after another until the
3rd of July, when about forty-five men and one woman, the wife of one of
the party, had assembled, bringing with them wagons, horses, cattle, and
other effects. On the 3rd a start was made. "As the wagons rolled up
along the divide between the American river and the Cosumnes, on the
national 4th," writes H. H. Bancroft, "their cannon thundered
independence before the high Sierras." "Thus," as further remarked by
the author here followed, "amidst the scenes now every day becoming more
and more absorbing, bringing to the front the strongest passions in
man's nature, * * * at the call of what they deemed duty, these devotees
of their religion unhesitatingly laid down their wealth-winning
implements, turned their back on what all the world was just then making
ready with hot haste and mustered strength to grasp at, and struggle
for, and marched through new toils and dangers to meet their exiled
brethren in the desert."

The fame of having discovered gold may not be claimed for members of the
Mormon Battalion, that belongs to Mr. Marshall, unquestionably, though
the Mormons in camp when it was found, of white men, were in the
majority; and the shovels in their industrious hands it was which threw
up the gold-laden soil; and they were the first to extend the discovery;
and theirs the honors to first chronicle the date and fact of the event
that was to mean so much to the Pacific coast of America, and to the
world. But while the honor of making the mere discovery of gold may not
be claimed for them, that which is infinitely better may be claimed for
them, the honor of writing into the annals of California and of the
world's history this fine example of fidelity to duty, detailed above;
and which is not over-matched in any of the records written by men.

=Ascent of the Sierras from the Western Side.=--It was a difficult task to
cut a wagon road from the west side through the lofty Sierras that faced
them. A task of infinite toil and in the presence of great danger from
the lurking savages. Three pioneers who had insisted upon going in
advance to blaze the route for the main company had been murdered by the
Indians. These pioneers were named Daniel Browett, Ezra H. Allen, and
Henderson Cox. The main camp came upon their mutilated bodies at a
spring which, because of this event, still bears the name "Tragedy
Spring." What numbers of these savages the main company would encounter,
what their mood would be--murderous or friendly--of course could not be
conjectured, it was of the dangers they must risk. By almost incredible
toil and patience, however, this company of Mormon Battalion men
conquered the ascent of the Sierras from the western side, hewing a
roadway for their seventeen wagons through stony heights, and in like
manner down steep declivities and narrow gorges, until the eastern
sloping deserts beyond were reached, and finally the valley of the Great
Salt Lake,--about the first of October, 1848,--to them, for the time,
the place to which duty had called them.

=Wagon Trail From Los Angeles to Salt Lake.=--The company that re-enlisted
at Los Angeles for six months beyond the Battalion's original term of
enlistment, served eight months and then were mustered out of the
service. Some of these on being disbanded went by way of the coast to
the mines or engaged in other industries in California for a time, but
most of them finally made their way to Salt Lake valley in the course of
one or two years, though a few remained permanently in California. A
squad of twenty-five from this company, however, on being mustered out
of the service, organized at once for the journey to Salt Lake valley,
taking with them one wagon and a band of one hundred and thirty-five
mules. They went by way of what was called the "southern route;"
hitherto, however, traveled only by packers, and the wagon of this
Battalion company was the first to make the journey over the pack trail.
This company reached Salt Lake valley on the 5th of June, 1848.

=Evidence of Appreciation of the Battalion's Services.=--The best evidence
that the service of the Mormon Battalion was honorable and appreciated
by both the people of California and the U. S. government, exists in the
fact of the efforts that were made on the part of both the people and
the government to prolong their service, some of which efforts have
already been noted in these pages. As the time approached for the
company that had re-enlisted to be mustered out of service--known as the
"Company of Mormon Volunteers,"--the people of San Diego drafted a
petition, begging the governor to use his influence to keep the company
in the service. The petition was signed by every citizen in the town,
and Governor Mason tried hard to induce the company to remain in the
service another year; failing in that, then to stay six months longer;
all to no purpose, however; the "Volunteers" were determined to join
their friends and families in Salt Lake valley, and made the journey as
stated above.

=Efforts to Raise a Second Mormon Battalion.=--When the Battalion proper
was mustered out of service in July, 1847, efforts were set on foot at
that time to raise a second "Mormon Battalion," of which Captain
Jefferson Hunt was to be given the command, with the office of
Lieutenant-Colonel, the office held by its first commander Allen, and
later by Col. Cooke. It is learned from a report made by Governor Mason
that the war department, and hence the national administration, also
sought the enlistment of this second Battalion.

In his report to the Adjutant General of September 18th, 1847, Governor
Mason says:

"Of the service of this Battalion, of their patience, subordination, and
general good conduct, you have already heard; and I take great pleasure
in adding that as a body of men they have religiously respected the
rights and feelings of these conquered people, and not a syllable of
complaint has reached my ears of a single insult offered or outrage done
by a Mormon volunteer. So high an opinion did I entertain of the
battalion and of their special fitness for the duties now performed by
the garrisons in this country, that I made strenuous efforts to engage
their service for another year."[74:f]

The month following, after Governor Mason had met Captain Brown of the
Pueblo detachment, and received his report, and paid off that division
of the command; also after Captain Hunt, who had been for some time
acting as Indian agent at Luis del Rey, was well on his way to Salt Lake
valley to raise the proposed 2nd Battalion of Mormon Volunteers,
Governor Mason wrote to Washington:

"Captain Brown (after making his report and receiving the pay of the
Pueblo detachment) started immediately for Fort Hall. * * * He reported
that he had met Captain Hunt, late of the Mormon Battalion, who was on
his way to meet the emigrants and bring into the country this winter, if
possible, a battalion, according to the terms offered in my letter to
him of the 16th of August, a copy of which you will find among the
military correspondence of the department. In my letter I offered
Captain Hunt, the command of the battalion, with the rank of
lieutenant-colonel, with an adjutant; but I find, by the orders lately
received, that a battalion of four companies is only entitled to a major
and acting adjutant. I will notify Captain Hunt of this change at as
early a moment as I can communicate with him. I am pleased to find by
the despatches that in this matter I have anticipated the wish of the
department."[75:g]

When, however, the subject of raising a second Battalion was presented
to Brigham Young, both through Col. Jonathan D. Stevenson, of the New
York regiment of volunteers, prompted by Governor Mason, also through
Captain Hunt in person, the proposition was declined. Regarding the
first enlistment from the standpoint alone of the sacrifices it
involved, President Young saw no occasion to make like sacrifices a
second time, and no effort was made in Utah to raise a second Mormon
Battalion.


FOOTNOTES:

[58:a] Tyler's Battalion, pp. 286-7.

[59:b] Tyler's Battalion, pp. 281-2.

[62:c] Others place the price paid for this tract of land at $3,000.00
(Whitney's History of Utah, Vol. I, p. 375; Bancroft's Utah, p. 307,
note 4). I think the statement in John Smith's letter to Brigham Young
the more reliable, since the high council over which he presided advised
the purchase to be made, and would most likely know the price paid.

There is also some confusion as to the time of the purchase. June 6th,
1848, is the time fixed upon by Jenson's Chronology, 1899 edition, p.
35. Whitney following the Brown family tradition places the time of the
purchase late in December, 1847, or early in January, 1848; and the
return of Captain Brown from California in December, 1847. Whereas
Brigham Young's Journal History--quoting John Smith's letter--referred
to above--places the date of the Captain's return "about the middle of
November, 1847"; and that he brought with him "about $5,000.00, mostly
in gold." Others say $10,000.00 in Mexican doubloons. Brown was gone (i.
e. from Salt Lake Valley) three months and seven days, History of
Brigham Young, Ms. March 6th, 1848, p. 16.

[62:d] Bancroft's History of Utah, p. 307, note 3; he cites Stanford's
"Ogden City," Ms. p. 1, and F. D. Richards' Narrative, Ms. Both are
reliable sources of information.

[64:e] Their names given by Bancroft are as follows--I add the given
names: Henry W. Bigler, Alexander Stephens, James S. Brown, James
Barger, William Johnson, Azariah Smith, William Ira Willis, Sidney
Willis, (Brothers) William Koutze (History of California, Vol. VI., p.
31, note). The brothers Willis and Koutze returned in September to work
on Sutter's flour mill, so they were not in the Coloma valley at the
time of the gold discovery. Israel Evans is given in addition to the
above by James S. Brown in his "California Gold, an Authentic History,"
p. 6. (Hist. Cal., Vol. V., p. 31, note.)

[74:f] Cal. and New Mexico Mess. and Doc. 1850; also quoted by Bancroft
Hist. Cal. Vol. V., p. 492.

[75:g] Cal. and New Mex. Mess. and Doc. 1850, p. 355. Also quoted by
Bancroft, Hist. Cal., Vol. V., p. 494, note.




IX.

THE BATTALION IN THE PERSPECTIVE OF SEVENTY-THREE YEARS.


The story of the Mormon Battalion is now before the reader. The
perspective of seventy-three years corrects many of the misapprehensions
that once obtained respecting the purpose of its being called, and its
mission. And as this perspective corrects the misconceptions of the
past, so also does it enable us to recognize the real importance and
value of the incident and the greatness of the achievements of this
Battalion of the United States' troops, for such they were, and the
matter of their coming from the westward migrating camps of the Mormon
people should not be allowed to obscure that fact.

=The Battalion as Utah Pioneers.=--Also it should be always held in mind
that the members of the Battalion were among the pioneers and founders
of the state of Utah. For though the main body of the Battalion went to
California its members were never for a day separated in thought or
purpose from the main body of their people, whom they had assisted in
their westward-moving pilgrimage by the means sent to them from their
pay; both from Fort Leavenworth and from Santa Fe; the seeds and the
tents and arms equipment they brought with them when returning from
their historic march; and the newly mined gold for currency. All of
which was so helpful in founding the commonwealth to be, to say nothing
of the advantage their service in the army of the west had been to
their people in securing the effective element in the plea for their
right to occupy Indian lands along the Missouri river in Iowa and
Nebraska. Besides one hundred and fifty of their number with their
tents, arms, teams, wagons and other equipment, quartered at Pueblo
during the winter of 1846-7, followed so closely upon the heels of the
first company of pioneers led by Brigham Young, that they arrived in the
Salt Lake Valley only five days after the advent of the first pioneer
company.

=Achievements of the Battalion.=--Four great movements made possible the
development of the west--the great intermountain region and the Pacific
slope. These were:

     1. The opening of the highways;

     2. The conquest of northern Mexico;

     3. The discovery of gold in California;

     4. The adoption of irrigation farming by an Anglo-Saxon people.

In all of these movements the Battalion was an important factor.

The part the Battalion took in opening the highways to the Pacific has
already been detailed in the story of their march, and fully recognized
in the military order already quoted in these pages, and which is now on
file as a government document in Washington.

=Territory Added to the United States by the Conquest of Mexico.=--"In
all," says a reliable authority, "more than five hundred and ninety
thousand square miles were added to the territory of the United States
as a result of the [Mexican] war." This included the west half of what
is now the State of New Mexico, the west half of Colorado, all of Utah,
Nevada, Arizona and California. For this territory, which equaled in
extent two-thirds of the territory of the thirteen original states of
the Union, the government paid Mexico $15,000,000. "Including Texas,"
says the authority here followed, "the additions of territory were more
than nine hundred and sixty-five thousand square miles."[78:a] Or, as
another historian states it, "territory equal in area to Germany, France
and Spain added together."[78:b]

=The Gadsden Purchase and the Battalion Route.=--Commenting on the
Battalion's march and the map he made of it, Colonel Cooke says: "A new
administration, (this was the Pierce administration, 1853-1857) in which
southern interests prevailed, with the great problem of the
practicability and best location of a Pacific railroad under
investigation, had the map of this wagon route before them with its
continuance to the west, and perceived that it gave exactly the solution
of its unknown element, that a southern route would avoid both the Rocky
Mountains and Sierra Nevadas, with their snows, and would meet no
obstacle in this great interval. The new 'Gadsden Treaty' was the
result: it was signed December 30, 1853." This purchase added to the
territory of the United States forty-five thousand five hundred and
thirty-five square miles; for which was paid $10,000,000. The purchase
was made by James Gadsden of South Carolina, minister to Mexico, hence
the name Gadsden Purchase.[78:c]

In addition to the wagon road opened westward through southern New
Mexico, Arizona, and California, we have seen that it was a detachment
of twenty-five discharged members of the Battalion which brought the
first wagon through from the coast via Cajon Pass to Salt Lake Valley,
following what is now the general course of the San Pedro, Los Angeles
and Salt Lake railroad, and which became known in the early Utah
California times as the southern California route to the coast. Also, as
we have seen, the Battalion members returning from the gold fields of
the American river region cut a new wagon road, much of the way, for
their seventeen wagons and two cannons from the western side of the
Sierra, across the summit of that lofty range, thence down to the
eastern sloping deserts of Nevada, and so to Salt Lake Valley.

The conquest of Northern Mexico, including, of course, California and