THE

QUEENE-LIKE CLOSET

Or

RICH CABINET


[Illustration]


Printed for Rich: Lownes

White Lion in Duck Layne neare West Smithfield




The Queen-like Closet

OR

RICH CABINET:

Stored with all manner of

RARE RECEIPTS

For

_Preserving, Candying and Cookery_.

Very Pleasant and Beneficial to all Ingenious Persons of the

FEMALE SEX.


BY HANNAH WOLLEY.


The Second EDITION.


LONDON

Printed for _Richard Lowndes_ at the _White Lion_ in _Duck-Lane_, near
_West-Smithfield_, 1672.




TO THE

TRULY VERTUOUS

AND

My much Honoured Friend

Mrs. _GRACE BUZBY_,

Daughter to the Late

_Sr. HENRY CARY_,

Knight Banneret;

And WIFE to

Mr. _ROBERT BUZBY_,

Gentleman, and Wollen Draper of LONDON


_Madam_,

Your Kind and Good Acceptance of my Endeavours in Work for You, and that
Esteem You have for what else I can do, make me bold to present this
Book to You; which by that time You have perused, I doubt not but You
will deem it worthy of the Title it bears; and indeed it was never
opened before: If it may yield You any Delight or Benefit, I shall be
glad; for as You have a true Love and Esteem for me, so I have a very
great Love and Honourable Esteem for You; and shall always be

_Your most Observant

servant_,

_HANNAH WOLLEY._




To all Ladies, Gentlewomen, and to all other of the Female Sex who do
delight in, or be desirous of good Accomplishments.


Ladies and Gentlewomen,

_I Presume those Bookes which have passed from me formerly, have got me
some little credit and esteem amongst you.

But there being so much time past since they were Printed, that
methinks, I hear some of you say_ I wish Mrs. _Wolley_ would put forth
some New Experiments _and to say the Truth, I have been importun'd by
divers of my Friends and Acquaintance to do so._

_I shall not give an Apish Example every Day or Week to follow
ridiculous and foolish Fancies, nor could I be too like the_ Spaniard,
_always to keep in one Dress: I am not ashamed, nor do I disown what I
have already Printed, but some of you being so perfect in your
practises, and I very desirous still to serve you, do now present you
with this_ Queen-like Closet: _I do assure you it is worthy of the
Title it bears, for the very precious things you will find in it._

_Thus beseeching your kind Acceptance of this Book, and of my earnest
Desires to you, I take my Leave, but shall always be to all who have
esteem for me,_

Their Faithful and

Humble Servant,

HANNAH WOLLEY.




    _Ladies, I do here present you (yet)
    That which sure will well content
    A Queen-like Closet rich and brave
    (Such) not many Ladies have:
    Or Cabinet, in which doth set
    Jems richer than in Karkanet;
    (They) only Eies and Fancies please,
    These keep your Bodies in good ease;
    They please the Taste, also the Eye;
    Would I might be a stander by:
    Yet rather I would wish to eat,
    Since 'bout them I my Brains do beat:
    And 'tis but reason you may say,
    If that I come within your way;
    I sit here sad while you are merry,
    Eating Dainties, drinking Perry;
    But I'm content you should so feed,
    So I may have to serve my deed._

_Hannah Wolley._




These things following are sold by _Richard Lowndes_ Book-seller, at the
_White-Lion_ in _Duck-Lane_ near _West-Smithfield_.

A Cordial Powder, which doth infallibly Cure the _Rickets_ in Children,
and causeth an easie production of Teeth.

Dr. _Lionel Lockyer_'s Universal Pill, curing any Disease curable by
Physick; it operates gently and safely, it being very amicable to Nature
in purifying the whole Body throughout, and then subduing all Diseases,
whether internal or external, as hath been experimented by persons of
all sorts and sexes, both young and old, with admirable success.

Mr. _Matthew_ his Diaphoretick and Diuretick Pill, purging by Sweat and
Urine: This Pill being composed of Simples of a very powerful operation,
purged from their churlish and malignant quality by an excellent Balsam
of long preparation, is by it made so amicable to Nature, that it hath
upon ample experience been found effectual for curing all common
Diseases.

Mr. _Edmund Buckworth's_ famous Lozenges, for the Cure of Consumptions,
Catarrhs, Asthma's, Phtisick, and all other Diseases incident to the
Lungs, Colds new and old, Hoarsness, Shortness of Breath, and Stuffings
of the Stomach; also a sovereign Antidote against the Plague, and all
other contagious Diseases.

The famous Spirit of Salt of the World, well known for a sovereign
Remedy against most Diseases; Truly and only prepared by _Constantine
Rhodocanaces_, Grecian, one of His Majesties Chymists.




THE

Queen-like CLOSET,

OR

Rich Cabinet.


1. _To make_ Aqua Mirabilis _a very delicate way._

Take three Pints of Sack, three Pints of White Wine, one quart of the
Spirit of Wine, one quart of the juice of Celandine leaves, of
Melilot-flowers, Cardamum-seeds, Cubebs, Galingale, Nutmegs, Cloves,
Mace, Ginger, two Drams of each; bruise them, and mix them with the Wine
and Spirits, let it stand all night in the Still, not an Alembeck, but
a common Still, close stopped with Rye Paste; the next morning make a
slow fire in the Still, and all the while it is stilling, keep a wet
Cloth about the neck of the Still, and put so much white Sugar Candy as
you think fit into the Glass where it drops.


2. _The Plague-Water which was most esteemed of in the late great
Visitation._

Take three Pints of Muskadine, boil therein one handful of Sage, and one
handful of Rue until a Pint be wasted, then strain it out, and set it
over the Fire again.

Put thereto a Penniworth of Long Pepper, half an Ounce of Ginger, and a
quarter of an Ounce of Nutmegs, all beaten together, boil them together
a little while close covered, then put to it one penniworth of
Mithridate, two penniworth of Venice Treacle, one quarter of a Pint of
hot Angelica Water.

Take one Spoonful at a time, morning and evening always warm, if you be
already diseased; if not, once a day is sufficient all the Plague time.

It is most excellent Medicine, and never faileth, if taken before the
heart be utterly mortified with the Disease, it is also good for the
Small Pox, Measles, or Surfets.


3. _A very Soveraign Water._

Take one Gallon of good Claret Wine, then take Ginger, Galingale,
Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves, Anniseeds, Fennel-seeds,
Caraway-seeds, of each one dram; then take Sage, Mint, Red-Rose leaves,
Thyme, Pellitory of the Wall, Rosemary, Wild Thyme, Camomile, Lavander,
of each one handful, bruise the Spices small and beat the Herbs, and put
them into the Wine, and so let stand twelve hours close covered,
stirring it divers times, then still it in an Alembeck, and keep the
best Water by it self, and so keep every Water by it self; the first you
may use for aged People, the other for younger.

This most excellent Water was from Dr. _Chambers_, which he kept secret
till he had done many Cures therewith; it comforteth the Vital Spirits;
it helpeth the inward Diseases that come of Cold; the shaking of the
Palsie; it helpeth the Conception of Women that are barren; it killeth
the Worms within the Body, helpeth the Stone within the Bladder; it
cureth the Cold, Cough, and Tooth-ach, and comforteth the Stomach; it
cureth the Dropsie, and cleanseth the Reins; it helpeth speedily the
stinking Breath; whosoever useth this Water, it preserveth them in good
health, and maketh seem young very long; for it comforteth Nature very
much; with this water Dr. _Chambers_ preserved his own life till extreme
Age would suffer him neither to go nor stand one whit, and he continued
five years after all Physicians judged he could not live; and he
confessed that when he was sick at any time, he never used any other
Remedy but this Water, and wished his Friends when he lay upon his
Deth-Bed to make use of it for the preservation of their Health.


4. _To Make Spirit of Mints._

Take three Pints of the best white Wine, three handfuls of right Spear
mint picked clean from the stalks, let it steep in the wine one night
covered, in the morning, put it into a Copper Alembeck, and draw it with
a pretty quick fire; and when you have drawn it all, take all your Water
and add as much Wine as before, and put to the Water, and the same
quantity of Mint as before; let it steep two or three hours, then put
all into your Still, and draw it with a soft fire, put into your
Receiver a quantity of Loaf Sugar, and you will find it very excellent;
you may distil it in an ordinary Still if you please; but then it will
not be so strong nor effectual.

Thus you may do with any other Herbs whatsoever.


5. _To make the Cordial Orange-Water._

Take one dozen and a half of the highest coloured and thick rin'd
Oranges, slice them thin, and put them into two Pints of Malago Sack,
and one Pint of the best Brandy, of Cinamon, Nutmegs, Ginger, Cloves,
and Mace, of each one quarter of an Ounce bruised, of Spear-mint and
Balm one handful of each, put them into an ordinary Still all night,
pasted up with Rye Paste; the next day draw them with a slow fire, and
keep a wet Cloth upon the Neck of the Still; put in some Loaf Sugar into
the Glass where it dropeth.


6. _To make Spirit of Oranges or of Limons._

Take of the thickest rin'd Oranges or Limons, and chip off the Rinds
very thin, put these Chips into a Glass-bottle, and put in as many as
the Glass will hold, then put in as much Malago Sack as the Glass will
hold besides; stop the bottle close that no Air get in, and when you
use it, take about half a spoonful in a Glass of Sack; it is very good
for the Wind in the Stomach.


7. _To make Limon Water._

Take twelve of the fairest Limons, slice them, and put them into two
Pints of white Wine, and put to them of Cinamon and Galingale, of each,
one quarter of an Ounce, of Red Rose Leaves, Burrage and Bugloss
Flowers, of each one handful, of yellow Sanders one Dram, steep all
these together 12 hours, then distil them gently in a Glass Still, put
into the Glass where it droppeth, three Ounces of Sugar, and one Grain
of Amber-Greece.


8. _A Water for fainting of the Heart._

Take of Bugloss water and Red Rose Water, of each one Pint, of Red Cows
milk half a Pint, Anni-seed and Cinamon of each half an Ounce bruised,
Maiden hair two handfuls, Harts-tongue one handful, bruise them, and mix
all these together, and distil them in an ordinary Still, drink of it
Morning and Evening with a little Sugar.


9. _To make Rosemary Water._

Take a Quart of Sack or white Wine with as many Rosemary Flowers as will
make it very thick, two Nutmegs, and two Races of Ginger sliced thin
into it; let it infuse all night, then distil it in an ordinary Still as
your other waters.


10. _To make a most precious Water._

Take two Quarts of Brandy, of Balm, of Wood-Betony, of Pellitory of the
Wall, of sweet Marjoram, of Cowslip-Flowers, Rosemary-Flowers,
Sage-Flowers, Marigold-Flowers, of each of these one handful bruised
together; then take one Ounce of Gromwell seeds, one Ounce of sweet
Fennel seeds, one Ounce of Coriander seeds bruised, also half an Ounce
of Aniseeds and half an Ounce of Caraway-seeds, half an Ounce of Juniper
Berries, half an Ounce of Bay Berries, One Ounce of green Licoras, three
Nutmegs, one quarter of an Ounce of large Mace, one quarter of an Ounce
of Cinamon, one quarter of an Ounce of Cloves, half an Ounce of Ginger,
bruise all these well together, then add to them half a pound of Raisons
in the Sun stoned, let all these steep together in the Brandy nine days
close stopped, then strain it out, and two Grains of Musk, two of
Amber-Greece, one pound of refined Sugar; stop the Glass that no Air get
in, and keep it in a warm place.


11. _Doctor_ Butler's _Treacle Water._

Take the roots of Polipody of the Oak bruised, _Lignum Vitæ_ thin
sliced, the inward part thereof, Saxifrage roots thin sliced, of the
shavings of Harts-horn, of each half a pound, of the outward part of
yellow Citron not preserved; one Ounce and half bruised, mix these
together;

Then take

   {Fumitory water}
   {Carduus-water }   Of each one
of {Camomile-water}   Ounce.
   {Succory-water }

of Cedar wood one Ounce, of Cinamon three drams, of Cloves three drams,
bruise all your forenamed things;

Then take of Epithimum two ounces and a half, of Cerratch six ounces, of
Carduus and Balm, of each two handfuls, of Burrage Flowers, Bugloss
Flowers, Gillyflowers, of each four ounces, of Angelica root, Elecampane
root beaten to a Pap, of each four ounces, of Andronichus Treacle and
Mithridate, of each four ounces; mix all these together, and
incorporate them well, and grind them in a Stone Mortar, with part of
the former Liquor, and at last, mix all together, and let them stand
warm 24 hours close stopped, then put them all into a Glass Still, and
sprinkle on the top of _Species Aromatica rosata_ and _Diambre_, of the
Species of _Diarodon abbatis_, _Diatrion Santalon_, of each six drams;
then cover the Still close, and lute it well, and distill the water with
a soft fire, and keep it close.

This will yield five Pints of the best water, the rest will be smaller.


12. _The Cordial Cherry Water._

Take nine pounds of red Cherries, nine pints of Claret Wine, eight
ounces of Cinamon, three ounces of Nutmegs; bruise your Spice, stone
your Cherries, and steep them in the Wine, then add to them half a
handful of Rosemary, half a handful of Balm, one quarter of a handful of
sweet Marjoram, let them steep in an earthen Pot twenty four hours, and
as you put them into the Alembeck, to distil them, bruise them with your
hands, and make a soft fire under them, and distil by degrees; you may
mix the waters at your pleasure when you have drawn them all; when you
have thus done, sweeten it with Loaf-Sugar, then strain it into another
Glass, and stop it close that no Spirits go out; you may (if you please)
hang a Bag with Musk and Amber-greece in it, when you use it, mix it
with Syrrup of Gilly-flowers or of Violets, as you best like it; it is
an excellent Cordial for Fainting fits, or a Woman in travel, or for any
one who is not well.


13. _A most excellent Water for the Stone, or for the Wind-Cholick._

Take two handfuls of Mead-Parsly, otherwise called Saxifrage, one
handful of Mother-Thyme, two handfuls of Perstons, two handfuls of
Philipendula, and as much Pellitory of the Wall, two ounces of sweet
Fennel seeds, the roots of ten Radishes sliced, steep all these in a
Gallon of Milk warm from the Cow, then distil it in an ordinary Still,
and four hours after, slice half an ounce of the wood called Saxifrage,
and put into the Bottle to the water, keep it close stopped, and take
three spoonfuls at a time, and fast both from eating and drinking one
hour after; you must make this water about Midsummer; it is a very
precious water, and ought to be prized.


14. _The Cock water, most delicate and precious for restoring out of
deep Consumptions, and for preventing them, and for curing of Agues,
proved by my self and many others._

Take a Red Cock, pluck him alive, then slit him down the back, and take
out his Intrals, cut him in quarters, and bruise him in a Mortar, with
his Head, Legs, Heart, Liver and Gizard; put him into an ordinary Still
with a Pottle of Sack, and one quart of Milk new from a red Cow, one
pound of blew Currants beaten, one pound of Raisins in the Sun stoned
and beaten, four Ounces of Dates stoned and beaten, two handfuls of
Peniroyal, two handfuls of Pimpernel, or any other cooling Herb, one
handful of Mother-thyme, one handful of Rosemary one handful of Burrage,
one quart of Red Rose water, two ounces of Harts-horn, two ounces of
China root sliced, two ounces of Ivory shaving, four ounces of the
flower of French Barley; put all these into your Still and paste it up
very well, and still it with a soft fire, put into the Glass where it
droppeth one pound of white Sugar Candy beaten very small, twelve
peniworth of Leaf-Gold, seven grains of Musk, eleven grains of
Amber-greece, seven grains of Bezoar stone; when it is all distilled,
mix all the waters together, and every morning fasting, and every
evening when you go to bed, take four or five Spoonfuls of it warm, for
about a Month together, this hath cured many when the Doctors have given
them over.


15. _Walnut water, or the Water of Life._

Take green Walnuts in the beginning of _June_, beat them in a Mortar,
and distil them in an ordinary Still, keep that Water by it self, then
about Midsummer gather some more, and distil them as you did before,
keep that also by it self, then take a quart of each and mix them
together, and distil them in a Glass Still, and keep it for your use;
the Virtues are as followeth; It will help all manner of Dropsies and
Palsies, drank with Wine fasting; it is good for the eyes, if you put
one drop therein; it helpeth Conception in Women if they drink thereof
one spoonful at a time in a Glass of Wine once a day, and it will make
your skin fair if you wash therewith; it is good for all infirmities of
the Body, and driveth out all Corruption, and inward Bruises; if it be
drunk with Wine moderately, it killeth Worms in the Body; whosoever
drinketh much of it, shall live so long as Nature shall continue in him.

Finally, if you have any Wine that is turned, put in a little Viol or
Glass full of it, and keep it close stopped, and within four days it
will come to it self again.


16. _To make Wormwood Water._

Take four ounces of Aniseeds, four ounces of Licoras scraped, bruise
them well with two ounces of Nutmegs, add to them one good handful of
Wormwood, one root of Angelica, steep them in three Gallons of Sack Lees
and strong Ale together twelve hours; then distill them in an Alembeck,
and keep it for your use.


17. _A very rare Cordial Water._

Take one Gallon of white Wine, two ounces of Mithridate, two ounces of
Cinamon, one handful of Balm, a large handful of Cowslips, two handfuls
of Rosemary Flowers, half an ounce of Mace, half an ounce of Cloves,
half an ounce of Nutmegs, all bruised, steep these together four days in
an earthen Pot, and covered very close, distil them in an ordinary
Still well pasted, and do it with a very slow fire; save the first water
by it self, and the small by it self, to give to Children; when you have
occasion to use it, take a spoonful thereof, sweetned with Loaf-Sugar;
this Water is good to drive out any Infection from the heart, and to
comfort the Spirits.


18. _Another most excellent Cordial._

Take Celandine, Sage, Costmary, Rue, Wormwood, Mugwort, Scordium,
Pimpernel, Scabious, Egrimony, Betony, Balm, Carduus, Centory,
Peniroyal, Elecampane roots, Tormentil with the roots, Horehound, Rosa
Solis, Marigold Flowers, Angelica, Dragon, Marjoram, Thyme, Camomile, of
each two good handfuls; Licoras, Zedoary, of each one ounce; slice the
Roots, shred the Herbs, and steep them in four quarts of white Wine, and
let it stand close covered 2 days, then distil it in an ordinary Still
pasted up; when you use it, sweeten it with fine Sugar, and warm it.


19. _To make_ Rosa Solis.

Take a Pottle of _Aqua Composita_, and put it into a Glass, then a good
handful of _Rosa Solis_ clean picked, but not washed, put it to the
_Aqua Composita_, then take a pound of Dates stoned and beaten small,
half a peniworth of Long Pepper, as much of Grains, and of round Pepper,
bruise them small, take also a pound of Loaf-Sugar well beaten, a
quarter of a pound of Powder of Pearl, and six leaves of Book Gold; put
all to the rest, and stir them well together in the Glass, then cover it
very close, and let it stand in the Sun fourteen days, ever taking it in
at night; then strain it, and put it into a close Bottle; you must not
put in the Pearl, Gold or Sugar till it hath been sunned and strained,
neither must you touch the Leaves of the _Rosa Solis_ with your hands
when you pick it; keep it very close.


20. _The Heart Water._

Take five handfuls of Rosemary Flowers, two drams of red Coral, two
drams of Powder of Pearl, two drams of white Amber, two drams of
Cinamon, two pound of the best Prunes stoned, six Pints of Damask Rose
water, two Pints of Sack; put all these into a Pipkin never used, stop
it up with Paste, let them stand upon a soft fire a little while, then
distil it in an ordinary Still pasted up.


21. _The Plague Water._

Take Rosemary, Red Balm, Burrage, Angelica, Carduus, Celandine, Dragon,
Featherfew, Wormwood, Penyroyal, Elecampane roots, Mugwort, Bural,
Tormentil, Egrimony, Sage, Sorrel, of each of these one handful, weighed
weight for weight; put all these in an earthen Pot, with four quarts of
white Wine, cover them close, and let them stand eight or nine days in a
cool Cellar, then distil it in a Glass Still.


22. _The Treacle Water._

Take one pound of old Venice Treacle, of the Roots of Elecampane,
Gentian, Cyprus, Tormentil, of each one ounce, of Carduus and Angelica,
half an ounce, of Burrage, Bugloss, and of Rosemary Flowers one ounce of
each; infuse these in three Pints of white Wine, one Pint of Spring
Water, two Pints of Red Rose water; then distil them in an ordinary
Still pasted up.

This is excellent for Swounding Fits or Convulsions, and expelleth any
venomous Disease; it also cureth any sort of Agues.


23. _The Snail water excellent for Consumptions._

Take a Peck of Snails with the Shells on their Backs, have in a
readiness a good fire of Charcoal well kindled, make a hole in the midst
of the fire, and cast your Snails into the fire, renew your fire till
the Snails are well rosted, then rub them with a clean Cloth, till you
have rubbed off all the green which will come off.

Then bruise them in a Mortar, shells and all, then take Clary,
Celandine, Burrage, Scabious, Bugloss, five leav'd Grass, and if you
find your self hot, put in some Wood-Sorrel, of every one of these one
handful, with five tops of Angelica.

These Herbs being all bruised in a Mortar, put them in a sweet earthen
Pot with five quarts of white Wine, and two quarts of Ale, steep them
all night; then put them into an Alembeck, let the herbs be in the
bottom of the Pot, and the Snails upon the Herbs, and upon the Snails
put a Pint of Earth-worms slit and clean washed in white Wine, and put
upon them four ounces of Anniseeds or Fennel-seeds well bruised, and
five great handfuls of Rosemary Flowers well picked, two or three Races
of Turmerick thin sliced, Harts-horn and Ivory, of each four ounces,
well steeped in a quart of white Wine till it be like a Jelly, then draw
it forth with care.


24. _To make a rare sweet Water._

Take sweet Marjoram, Lavender, Rosemary, Muscovy, Maudlin, Balm, Thyme,
Walnut Leaves, Damask Roses, Pinks, of all a like quantity, enough to
fill your Still, then take of the best Orrice Powder, Damask Rose
Powder, and Storax, of each two ounces; strew one handful or two of your
Powders upon the Herbs, then distil them with a soft fire; tie a little
Musk in a piece of Lawn, and hang it in the Glass wherein it drops, and
when it is all drawn out, take your sweet Cakes and mix them with the
Powders which are left, and lay among your Clothes, or with sweet Oyles,
and burn them for perfume.


25. _A very good Surfet water._

Take what quantity of Brandy you please, steep a good quantity of the
Flowers of Red Poppies therein, which grow amongst the Wheat, having the
black bottoms cut off, when they have been steeped long enough, strain
them out, and put in new, and so do till the Brandy be very red with
them, and let it stand in the Sun all the while they infuse, then put in
Nutmegs, Cloves, Ginger and Cinamon, with some fine Sugar, so much as
you think fit, and keep it close stopped; this is very good for Surfets,
Wind in the Stomach, or any Illness whatever.


26. _An excellent Water for the Stomach, or against Infection._

Take Carduus, Mint and Wormwood, of each a like quantity, shred them
small and put them into new Milk, distil them in an ordinary Still with
a temperate fire; when you take any of it, sweeten it with Sugar, or
with any Syrrup, what pleases you best; it is a very good water, though
the Ingredients are but mean.


27. _The Melancholy Water._

Take of the Flowers of Gilliflowers, four handfuls, Rosemary flowers
three handfuls, Damask Rose leaves, Burrage and Bugloss flowers of each
one handful, of Balm leaves six handfuls, of Marigold flowers one
handful, of Pinks six handfuls, of Cinamon grosly beaten, half an ounce,
two Nutmegs beaten, Anniseeds beaten one ounce, three peniworth of
Saffron; put them all into a Pottle of Sack, and let them stand two
days, stirring them sometimes well together; then distil them in an
ordinary Still, and let it drop into a Glass wherein there is two grains
of Musk, and eight ounces of white Sugar Candy, and some Leaf-Gold; take
of this Water three times a week fasting, two spoonfuls at a time, and
ofter if you find need; distil with soft fire; this is good for Women in
Child-bed if they are faint.


28. _To make the Elder water, or spirit of_ Sambucus.

Take some Rye Leaven, and break it small into some warm Water, let it be
a sowre one, for that is best; about two Ounces or more: then take a
Bushel of Elder Berries beaten small, and put them into an earthen Pot
and mix them very well with the Leaven, and let it stand one day near
the Fire; then put in a little Yest, and stir it well together to make
it rise, so let it stand ten days covered, and sometimes stir it; then
distil it in an Alembeck; keep the first Water by it self, and so the
second, and the third will be good Vinegar, if afterward you colour it
with some of the Berries.

Distil it with a slow fire, and do not fill the Still too full.

This Water is excellent for the Stomach.


29. _To make the Balm water Green._

Take any Wine or Lees of Wine, or good Strong Beer or Ale with the
Grounds, and stir them all together very well, lest the Wine Lees be too
thick, and burn the bottom of the Pot; put them into an Alembeck with
good store of Balm unwashed, therein still these till you leave no other
tast but fair water, and draw also some of that, draw two Alembecks full
more as you draw the first, until you have so much as will fill your
Alembeck, then put this distilled water into your Alembeck again, and
some more Balm, if you draw a Wine Gallon, put to it half a pound of
Coriander seeds bruised, two Ounces of Cloves, one quarter of an Ounce
of Nutmegs, and one quarter of an Ounce of Mace bruised all of them,
then set a Receiver of a Gallon under it, and fill it with fresh and
green Balm unwashed, and your Water will be as green as Grass; put still
more and more of the Herbs fresh, and let it stand a week to make it the
more green.

Take this Green Water, and put to it one quart of the best Damask
Rosewater, and before you mix your Balm-water and Rose-water together,
you must dissolve two pounds of fine Sugar in the first distilled water,
then take Ambergreece and Musk, of each eight Grains, being ground fine,
and put it into the Glass in a piece of Lawn; put also a little Orange
or Limon Pill to it, and keep it cool and from the Air.


30. _To make the very best Surfet-water._

Take one Gallon of the best French Spirits, and a Pint of
Damask-Rose-water, half a Pint of Poppy water, one pound of white Sugar
Candy bruised, then take one pound and half of Raisins in the Sun
stoned, half a pound of Dates stoned and sliced, then take one Ounce of
Mace, one Ounce of Cloves, one Ounce of Cinamon, one Ounce of Aniseeds
rubbed clean from the dust, then take a quarter of an Ounce of Licoras
clean scraped and sliced, and all the Spices grosly beaten, let all
these steep in the Spirits four days; then take a quarter of a peck of
Red Poppy Leaves fresh gathered, and the black part cut off, and put
them in, and when it hath stood four or five days, strain it, and put it
into your Glass, then put in your Sugar-Candy finely beaten, twelve
peniworth of Ambergreece, six peniworth of Musk, keep it close, and
shake it now and then, and when you use it, you may put some kind of
Syrrup to it, what you please.


31. _To make the true Palsie-water, as it was given by that once very
famous Physician Doctor_ Matthias.

Take Lavender Flowers stripped from the stalks, and fill a Gallon-Glass
with them, and pour on them good Spirit of Sack, or perfect _Aqua vitæ_
distilled from all Flegm, let the quantity be five quarts, then
circulate them for six weeks, very close with a Bladder, that nothing
may breath out; let them stand in a warm place, then distil them in an
Alembeck with his Cooler, then put into the said water, of Sage,
Rosemary, and Wood-Betony Flowers; of each half a handful, of Lilly of
the Valley, and Burrage, Bugloss, and Cowslip Flowers, one handful of
each; steep these in Spirit of Wine, Malmsie, or _Aqua vitæ_, every one
in their Season, till all may be had; then put also to them of Balm,
Motherwort, Spike-flowers, Bay leaves, the leaves of Orange trees, with
the Flowers, if they may be had, of each one ounce, put them into the
aforesaid distilled Wine all together, and distil it as before, having
first been steeped six weeks; when you have distilled it, put into it
Citron Pill, dried Piony seeds hull'd, of each five Drams, of Cinamon
half an Ounce, of Nutmegs, Cardamum seeds, Cubebs, and yellow Saunders,
of each half an ounce, of lignum Aloes one dram; make all these into
Powder, and put them into the distilled Wine abovesaid, and put to them
of Cubebs anew, a good half pound of Dates, the stones taken out, and
cut them in small pieces, put all these in, and close your Vessel well
with a double Bladder; let them digest six weeks, then strain it hard
with a Press, and filtrate the Liquor, then put into it of prepared
Pearl, Smaragdus, Musk and Saffron, of each half a Scruple; and of
Ambergreece one Scruple, red Roses dried well, Red and Yellow Saunders,
of each one ounce, hang these in a Sarsenet Bag in the water, being well
sewed that nothing go out.

_The virtues of this Water._

This Water is of exceeding virtue in all Swoundings and Weaknesses of
the heart, and decaying of Spirits in all Apoplexies and Palsies, also
in all pains of the Joints coming of Cold, for all Bruises outwardly
bathed and dipped Clothes laid to; it strengtheneth and comforteth all
animal, natural and viral Spirits, and cheareth the external Senses,
strengtheneth the Memory, restoreth lost Speech, and lost Appetite, all
weakness of the Stomach, being both taken inwardly, and bathed
outwardly; it taketh away the Giddiness of the Head, helpeth lost
Hearing, it maketh a pleasant Breath, helpeth all cold disposition of
the Liver, and a beginning Dropsie; it helpeth all cold Diseases of the
Mother; indeed none can express sufficiently; it is to be taken morning
and evening, about half a Spoonful with Crums of Bread and Sugar.


32. _For a Cough of the Lungs, or any Cough coming of Cold, approved by
many._

Take a good handful of French Barley, boil it in several waters till you
see the water be clear, then take a quart of the last water, and boil in
it sliced Licoras, Aniseeds bruised, of each as much as you can take up
with your four Fingers and your Thumb, Violet Leaves, Strawberry Leaves,
five fingered Grass, Maidenhair, of each half a handful, a few Raisins
in the Sun stoned; boil these together till it come to a Pint, then
strain it, and take twelve or fourteen Jordan Almonds blanched and
beaten, and when your water is almost cold, put in your Almonds, and
stir it together, and strain it; then sweeten it with white Sugar Candy;
drink this at four times, in the morning fasting, and at four of the
Clock in the Afternoon a little warmed; do this nine or ten days
together; if you please, you may take a third draught when you go to
Bed; if you be bound in your body, put in a little Syrrup of Violets,
the best way to take it, is to suck it through a straw, for that conveys
it to the Lungs the better.


33. _To make the best Bisket-Cakes._

Take four new laid Eggs, leave out two of the Whites, beat them very
well, then put in two spoonfuls of Rose-water, and, beat them very well
together, then put in a pound of double refin'd Sugar beaten and
searced, and beat them together one hour, then put to them one pound of
fine Flower, and still beat them together a good while; then put them
upon Plates rubbed over with Butter, and set them into the Oven as fast
as you can, and have care you do not bake them too much.


34. _Perfumed Roses._

Take Damask Rose Buds, and cut off the Whites, then take Rose-water or
Orange-Flower water wherein hath been steeped _Benjamin_, _Storax_,
_Lignum Rhodium_, Civet or Musk, dip some Cloves therein and stick into
every Bud one, you must stick them in where you cut away the Whites; dry
them between white Papers, they will then fall asunder; this Perfume
will last seven years.

Or do thus.

Take your Rose Leaves cut from the Whites, and sprinkle them with the
aforesaid water, and put a little powder of Cloves among them.


35. _To make Tincture of Caraways._

Take one quart of the Spirits of French Wine, put into it one pound of
Caraway Comfits which are purled, and the Pills of two Citron Limons;
let it stand in a warm place to infuse, in a Glass close stopped for a
Month, stirring it every day once.

Then strain it from the seeds, and add to it as much Rosewater as will
make it of a pleasant taste, then hang in your Bottle a little
Ambergreece, and put in some Leaf-Gold; this is a very fine Cordial.


36. _To get away the Signs of the Small Pox._

Quench some Lime in white Rosewater, then shake it very well, and use it
at your pleasure; when you at any time have washed with it, anoint your
face with Pomatum, made with Spermaceti and oyl of sweet Almonds.


37. _To make clouted Cream._

Take Milk that was milked in the morning, and scald it at noon; it must
have a reasonable fire under it, but not too rash, and when it is
scalding hot, that you see little Pimples begin to rise, take away the
greatest part of the Fire, then let it stand and harden a little while,
then take it off, and let it stand until the next day, covered, then
take it off with a Skimmer.


38. _To make a_ Devonshire-_White-pot._

Take two quarts of new Milk, a peny white Loaf sliced very thin, then
make the Milk scalding hot, then put to it the Bread, and break it, and
strain it through a Cullender, then put in four Eggs, a little Spice,
Sugar, Raisins, and Currans, and a little Salt, and so bake it, but not
too much, for then it will whey.


39. _To make the_ Portugal _Eggs._

Take a very large Dish with a broad brim, lay in it some _Naples_ Bisket
in the Form of a Star, then put so much Sack into the Dish as you do
think the Biskets will drink up; then stick them full with thin little
pieces of preserved Orange, and green Citron Pill, and strew store of
French Comfits over them, of divers colours, then butter some Eggs, and
lay them here and there upon the Biskets, then fill up the hollow places
in the Dish, with several coloured Jellies, and round about the Brim
thereof lay Lawrel Leaves guilded with Leaf-Gold; lay them flaunting,
and between the Leaves several coloured Jellies.


40. _To Candy Flowers the best way._

Takes Roses, Violets, Cowslips, or Gilly-flowers, and pick them from the
white bottoms, then have boiled to a Candy height Sugar, and put in so
many Flowers as the Sugar will receive, and continually stir them with
the back of a Spoon, and when you see the Sugar harden on the sides of
the Skillet, and on the Spoon, take them off the Fire, and keep them
with stirring in the warm Skillet, till you see them part, and the Sugar
as it were sifted upon them, then put them upon a paper while they are
warm and rub them gently with your hands; till all the Lumps be broken,
then put them into a Cullender, and sift them as clean as may be, then
pour them upon a clean Cloth, and shake them up and down till there be
hardly any Sugar hanging about them; then if you would have them look as
though they were new gathered, have some help, and open them with your
fingers before they be quite cold, and if any Sugar hang about them, you
may wipe it off with a fine Cloth; to candy Rosemary Flowers, or
Archangel, you must pull out the string that stands up in the middle of
the Blossom, and take them which are not at all faded, and they will
look as though they were new gathered, without opening.


41. _To pickle Cucumbers._

Take the least you can get, and lay a layer of Cucumbers, and then a
layer of beaten Spices, Dill, and Bay Leaves, and so do till you have
filled your Pot, and let the Spices, Dill, and Bay Leaves cover them,
then fill up your Pot with the best Wine Vinegar, and a little Salt,
and so keep them.

Sliced Turneps also very thin, in some Vinegar, Pepper and a little
Salt, do make a very good Sallad, but they will keep but six Weeks.


42. _To make Sugar Cakes._

Take a pound of fine Sugar beaten and searced, with four Ounces of the
finest Flower, put to it one pound of Butter well washed with
Rose-water, and work them well together, then take the Yolks of four
Eggs, and beat them with four Spoonfuls of Rosewater, in which hath been
steeped two or three days before Nutmeg and Cinamon, then put thereto so
much Cream as will make it knead to a stiff Paste, rowl it into thin
Cakes, and prick them, and lay them on Plates, and bake them; you shall
not need to butter your Plates, for they will slip off of themselves,
when they are cold.


43. _To make a very fine Cream._

Take a quart of Cream, and put to it some Rosewater and Sugar, some
large Mace, Cinamon and Cloves; boil it together for a quarter of an
hour, then take the yolks of eight Eggs, beat them together with some
of your Cream, then put them into the Cream which is boiling, keep it
stirring lest it curdle, take it from the fire, and keep it stirring
till it be a little cold, then run it through a Strainer, dish it up,
and let it stand one night, the next day it will be as stiff as a
Custard, then stick it with blanched Almonds, Citron Pill and Eringo
roots, and so serve it in.


44. _To make Syrup of Turneps for a Consumption._

Take half a peck of Turneps washed and pared clean, cut them thin, put
to them one pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned, one quarter of a pound
of Figs cut small, one Ounce of Anniseeds bruised, half an Ounce of
Licoras sliced, one Ounce of Cloves bruised, two handfuls of Burrage
Flowers, and so much water as will cover all, and two fingers breadth
above them, then boil it on a great fire in an earthen Vessel covered,
untill the roots be soft and tender, then strain out the Liquor, and to
every Pint of it put a pound of fine Sugar, the whites of two Eggs
beaten, boil it to a Syrrop, and use it often, two or three spoonfuls at
a time.


45. _For a Consumption._

Take a Pint of Red Cows milk, then take the Yolk of a new laid Egg
potched very rare, then stir it into the Milk over a soft fire, but do
not let it boil, sweeten it with a little Sugar Candy, and drink it in
the morning fasting, and when you go to bed.


46. _To make Bottle Ale for a Consumption._

Take a quart of Ale, and a Pint of strong _Aqua vitæ_, Mace and Cinamon,
of each one quarter of an Ounce, two Spoonfuls of the powder Elecampane
root, one quarter of a pound of Loaf Sugar, one quarter of a pound of
Raisins of the Sun stoned, four spoonfuls of Aniseeds beaten to Powder,
then put all together into a Bottle and stop it close.

Take three spoonfuls of this in a morning fasting, and again one hour
before Supper and shake the Bottle when you pour it out.


47. _To make Cakes of Quinces._

Take the best you can get, and pare them, and slice them thin from the
Core, then put them into a Gallipot close stopped, and tie it down with
a Cloth, and put it into a Kettle of boiling water, so that it may stand
steddy about five hours, and as your water boils away in the Kettle,
fill it up with more warm water, then pour your Quinces into a fine hair
sieve, and let it drain all the Liquor into a Bason, then take this
Liquor and weigh it, and to every pound take a pound of double refin'd
Sugar, boil this Sugar to a Candy height, then put in your Liquor, and
set them over a slow fire, and stir them continually till you see it
will Jelly, but do not let it boil; then put it into Glasses, and set
them in a Stove till you see them with a Candy on the top, then turn
them out with a wet Knife on the other side upon a white Paper, sleeked
over with a sleek-stone, and set them in the Stove again till the other
side be dry, and then keep them in a dry place.


48. _To make Marmalade of Apricocks._

Take Apricocks, pare them and cut them in quarters, and to every pound
of Apricocks put a pound of fine Sugar, then put your Apricocks into a
Skillet with half of the Sugar, and let them boil very tender and
gently, and bruise them with the back of a Spoon, till they be like
Pap, then take the other part of the Sugar, and boil it to a Candy
height, then put your Apricocks into that Sugar, and keep it stirring
over the fire, till all the Sugar be melted, but do not let it boil,
then take it from the fire, and stir it till it be almost cold; then put
it in Glasses, and let it have the Air of the fire to dry it.


49. _To make Limon Cakes._

Take half a pound of refin'd sugar, put to it two spoonfuls of
Rosewater, as much Orange Flower water, and as much of fair water, boil
it to a Candy height, then put in the Rind of a Limon grated, and a
little Juice, stir it well on the fire, and drop it on Plates or sleeked
Paper.


50. _To make Wafers._

Take a quart of Flower heaped and put to it the yolks of four Eggs, and
two or three spoonfuls of Rosewater, mingle this well together, then
make it like Batter with Cream and a little Sugar, and bake it on Irons
very thin poured on.


51. _To make Marmalade of Cherries with Currans._

Take four pounds of Cherries when they are stoned, and boil them alone
in their Liquor for half an hour very fast, then pour away the Liquor
from them, and put to them half a Pint and little more of the juice of
Currans, then boil a pound of double refin'd Sugar to a Candy height,
and put your Cherries and Juice of Currans in that, and boil them again
very fast till you find it to jelly very well.


52. _To preserve Rasberries._

Take the weight of your Rasberries in fine Sugar, and take some
Rasberries and bruise them a little; then take the clearest of the
bruised Rasberries, I mean the Juice and the weight of it in Sugar, and
your other Sugar named before, and boil it, and scum it, then put in
your whole Rasberries, and boil them up once, then let them stand over
the fire without boiling till you see it will Jelly, and that it look
clear, then take up your Rasberries one by one, and put them into
Glasses, then boil your Syrrop, and put it over them.


53. _To make Syrrop of Ale, good for weak People to take inwardly, or to
heal old Sores, applied thereto._

Take two Gallons of Ale Wort, the strongest you can get, so soon as it
is run from the Grounds, set it on the fire in a Pipkin, and let it boil
gently and that you do perceive it to be as though it were full of Rags;
run it through a strainer, and set it on the fire again, and let it boil
until it be thick, and scum it clean, and when it is much wasted, put it
into a lesser Pan to boil, or else it will burn; when it is thick
enough, take it off, and when it is cold, put it into Gallipots, take as
much as a Walnut fasting; and as much when you go to bed.


54. _To make whipt Sillibub._

Take half a Pint of Rhenish Wine or white Wine, put it into a Pint of
Cream, with the Whites of three Eggs, season it with Sugar, and beat it
as you do Snow-Cream, with Birchen Rods, and take off the Froth as it
ariseth, and put it into your Pot, so do till it be beaten to a Froth,
let it stand two or three hours till it do settle, and then it will eat
finely.


55. _To make Raisin Wine or Stepony._

Take four Gallons of Spring-water, four pounds of Raisins of the Sun
stoned, the juice of four good Limons, and the Rind of two cut thin,
boil the Raisins, and Pill in the Water for half an hour or more, then
put in the juice of Limon, and a little Spice, Sugar and Rosewater, and
let it stand but a little more over the fire; then put it into an
earthen pot, and beat it together till it be cold, then bottle it up, it
will keep but a few days.

_Memorandum_, Two pounds of Sugar to one pound of Cowslips is enough for
Conserve.


56. _To boil Samphire._

Take Water and Salt so strong as will bear an Egg, boil it, and when it
boils, put in your Samphire unwashed, and let it scald a little, then
take it off, and cover it so close that no Air can get in, and set the
Pot upon a cold Wisp of Hay, and so let it stand all night, and it will
be very green, then put it up for your use.


57. _To make Cabbage Cream._

Take twenty five Quarts of new Milk, set it on the fire till it be ready
to boil, stir it all the while that it creams not, then pour it into
twenty several Platters so fast as you can, when it is cold, take off
the Cream with a Skimmer, and lay it on a Pie Plate in the fashion of a
Cabbage, crumpled one upon another, do thus three times, and between
every Layer you must mingle Rosewater and Sugar mingled thick, and laid
on with a Feather; some use to take a little Cream and boil it with
Ginger, then take it from the fire and season it with Rosewater and
Sugar, and the Juice of Jordan Almonds blanched and beaten, then stir it
till it be cold, that it cream not; then take Toasts of Manchet cut
thin, not too hard, nor brown, lay them in the bottom of the Dish, and
pour the Cream upon them, and lay the Cabbage over.


58. _To make a Trifle._

Take sweet Cream, season it with Rosewater and Sugar, and a little whole
Mace, let it boil a while, then take it off, and let it cool, and when
it is lukewarm put it into such little Dishes or Bowls as you mean to
serve it in; then put in a little Runnet, and stir it together; when
you serve it in, strew on some French Comfits.


59. _To make thick Cream._

Take sweet Cream, a little Flower finely searced, large Mace, a stick of
Cinamon, Sugar and Rosewater, let all these boil together till it be
thick, then put into it thick Cream, the yolks of Eggs beaten, then let
it seeth but a little while for fear of turning, then pour it out, and
when it is cold serve it in.


60. _To pickle Purslan to keep all the Year._

Take the Leaves from the stalks, then take the Pot you mean to keep them
in, and strew Salt over the bottom, then lay in a good row of the
Leaves, and strew on more Salt, then lay in a row of the stalks, and put
in more Salt, then a row of the Leaves, so keep it close covered.


61. _To Stretch Sheeps Guts._

After they are clean scowred, lay them in water nine days, shifting them
once a day, and they will be very easie to fill, and when they are
filled, they will come to their wonted bigness.


62. _To make Cream of Pastes and Jellies._

Put Eggs into the Cream as you do for Fool, and slice your Sweet-meats
very thin and boil with them, then sweeten it, and put it into a Dish.


63. _To make a rare Medicine for the Chine-Cough._

Make a Syrrop of Hysop-water and white Sugar Candy, then take the Powder
of Gum Dragon, and as much of white Sugar Candy mixed together, and eat
of it several times of the day, or take the above-named Syrrop, either
of them will do the Cure.


64. _For a Consumption._

Take of Syrrop of Violets, Syrrop of Horehound, Syrrop of Maidenhair and
Conserve of Fox Lungs, of each one ounce, mix them well together, and
take it often upon a Liquoras stick in the day time, and at night.


65. _To make very rare Ale._

When your Ale is tunned into a Vessel that will hold eight or nine
Gallons, and that hath done working, ready to be stopped up, then take
a Pound and half of Raisins of the Sun stoned and cut in pieces, and two
great Oranges, Meat and Rind, and sliced thin, with the Rind of one
Limon, and a few Cloves, one Ounce of Coriander seeds bruised, put all
these in a Bag, and hang them in the Vessel, and stop it up close; when
it hath stood four days, bottle it up, fill the Bottles but a little
above the Neck, and put into every one a Lump of fine Sugar, and stop
them close, and let it be three Weeks or a month before you drink it.


66. _To make Ale to drink within a Week._

Tun it into a Vessel which will hold eight Gallons, and when it hath
done working, ready to bottle, put in some Ginger sliced, and an Orange
stuck with Cloves, and cut here and there with a Knife, and a pound and
half of Sugar, and with a stick stir it well together, and it will work
afresh; when it hath done working, stop it close, and let it stand till
it be clear, then bottle it up and put a Lump of Sugar into every
Bottle, and then stop it close, and knock down the Corks, and turn the
Bottles the Bottoms upwards, and it will be fit to drink in a Weeks
time.


67. _For the Griping in the Guts._

Take a peniworth of Brandy, and a peniworth of Mithridate mixed
together, and drink it three nights together when you go to rest, or
take a little Oil of Aniseeds in a Glass of Sack three times.


68. _To make a Sack Posset._

Take twelve Eggs beaten very well, and put to them a Pint of Sack, stir
them well that they curd not, then put to them three Pints of Cream,
half a Pound of white Sugar, stirring them well together, when they are
hot over the fire, put them into a Bason, and set the Bason over a
boiling pot of water, until the Posset be like a Custard, then take it
off, and when it is cool enough to eat, serve it in with beaten Spice
strewed over it very thick.


69. _To make Pennado._

Take Oatmeal clean picked and well beaten, steep it in water all night,
then strain it and boil it in a Pipkin with some Currans, and a Blade or
two of Mace, and a little Salt; when it is well boiled, take it off, and
put in the Yolks of two or three new laid Eggs beaten with Rosewater,
then set it on a soft fire, and stir it that it curd not, then sweeten
it with Sugar, and put in a little Nutmeg.


70. _To make Cakes without Fruit._

Take four pounds of fine Flower, rub into it one pound of Butter very
well, then take warmed Cream, and temper it with Ale yest, so mix them
together, and make them into a Paste, put in a little Rosewater, and
several Spices well beaten, let it lie by the fire till the Oven heat,
and when you make it up, knead into it half a pound of Caraway Comfits,
and three quarters of a pound of Bisket-Comfits, make it up as fast as
you can, not too thick, nor cut it too deep, put it into a hoop well
butter'd, and wash it over with the White of an Egg, Rosewater, and
Sugar, and strew it with some Comfits; do not bake it too much.


71. _A Sack Posset without Milk._

Take thirteen Eggs and beat them very well, and while they are beating,
take a quart of Sack, half a pound of fine Sugar, and a Pint of Ale, and
let them boil a very little while, then put these Eggs to them, and stir
them till they be hot, then take it from the fire, and keep it stirring
a while, then put it into a fit Bason, and cover it close with a Dish,
then set it over the fire again till it arise to a Curd; then serve it
in with some beaten spice.


72. _A very fine Cordial._

One Ounce of Syrrop of Gilly-flowers, one dram of Confection of
Alkermes, one Ounce and a half of Burrage-water, the like of Mint-water,
one Ounce of Dr. _Mountsford's_ water, as much of Cinamon water mixed
together.


73. _The best way to preserve Goosberries green and whole._

Pick them clean and put them into water as warm as milk, so let them
stand close covered half an hour, then put them into another warm water
and let them stand as long, and so the third time, till you find them
very green; then take their weight in fine Sugar, and make a Syrrop,
then put them in, and let them boil softly one hour; then set them by
till the next day, then heat them again, so do twice, then take them
from that Syrrop and make a new Syrrop and boil them therein, till you
find they be enough.


74. _To make the Orange Pudding._

Take the rind of a small one pared very thin, and boiled in several
waters, and beaten very fine in a Mortar, then put to it four Ounces of
fine Sugar, and four Ounces of fresh Butter, and the Yolks of six Eggs,
and a little Salt, beat it together in the Mortar till the Oven heats,
and so butter a dish and bake it, but not too much; strew Sugar on it
and serve it to the Table, Bake it in Puff-past.


75. _To make French Bread._

Take half a Bushel of fine Flower, ten Eggs, one pound and a half of
fresh Butter, then put in as much Yest as you do into Manchet, temper it
with new milk pretty hot, and let it lie half an hour to rise, then make
it into Loaves or Rolls, and wash it over with an Egg beaten with Milk;
let not your Oven be too hot.


76. _To make a made dish._

Take four Ounces of sweet Almonds blanched, and beaten with Rosewater,
strain them into some Cream, then take Artichoke bottoms boiled tender,
and some boiled Marrow, then boil a quart of Cream with some Rosewater
and Sugar to some thickness, then take it off, and lay your Artichokes
into a Dish, and lay the Marrow on them, then mix your Almond Cream, and
the other together, and poure it over them, and set it on Coals till you
serve it in.


77. _To make a Cake with Almonds._

Take one pound and half of fine Flower, of Sugar twelve Ounces beaten
very fine, mingle them well together, then take half a pound of Almonds
blanched, and beaten with Rosewater, mingle all these with as much Sack
as will work it into a Paste, put in some Spice, some Yest, and some
plumped Currans with some Butter, and a little salt, to make it into a
Cake and bake it.


78. _To make a Sillibub._

Take a Limon pared and sliced very thin, then cover the bottom of your
Sillibub Pot with it, then strew it thick with fine Sugar, then take
Sack or white Wine, and make a Curd with some Milk or Cream, and lay it
on the Limon with a Spoon, then whip some Cream and Whites of Eggs
together, sweetened a little, and cast the Froth thereof upon your
Sillibub, when you lay in your Curd, you must lay Sugar between every
Lay.


79. _To make fine Water-Gruel._

Take the best Oatmeal beaten, and steep it in water all night, the next
day strain it, and boil it with a Blade of Mace, and when it is enough,
put in some Raisins and Currans which have been infused in a Pot (in a
Pot of seething Water) and a little Wine, a little Salt, a little Sugar,
and so eat it.


80. _To make Limon Cream._

Take a quart of Cream, keep it stirring on the fire until it be blood
warm, then take the Meat of three Limons sweetened well with Sugar, and
a little Orange Flower water, sweeten them so well that they may not
turn the Cream, then stir them into the Cream, on the fire with some
yolks of Eggs, and serve it cold; Limon Posset thickned with yolks of
Eggs, makes a fine Cawdle for a sick body.


81. _To make rare Cakes with Almonds._

Take two Pounds and an half of blanched Almonds beaten fine with
Rosewater, mix them with a Pound and three quarters of fine Sugar and
some Musk, and Ambergreece, six Whites of Eggs beaten to a Froth, let
them stand a little, then set them on a Chafing-dish of Coals, and dry
them a little, stirring them all the while, then take half a Peck of
Flower, put into it a little salt, three Pints of Ale-Yest, have in
readiness your Cream lukewarm, strain your Yest, and put into it six
spoonfuls of Sack, put in Spice into your Flower, and make all these
into a stiff Paste with the Cream, work it well and lay it by the fire
to rise one hour, then work into your Paste two pounds and a quarter of
fresh Butter; pull your Paste in pieces three times, then strew in a
pound of Caraway Comfits, and make this Paste into five Cakes, lay them
upon buttered Plates or double Papers, then strew Caraway Comfits on the
top and double refined Sugar; one hour will bake them sufficiently.


82. _To make_ Shrewsbury _Cakes._

Take four pounds of Flower, two pounds of Butter, one pound and an half
of fine Sugar, four Eggs, a little beaten Cinamon, a little Rosewater,
make a hole in the Flower, and put the Eggs into it when they are
beaten, then mix the Butter, Sugar, Cinamon, and Rosewater together, and
then mix them with the Eggs and Flower, then make them into thin round
Cakes, and put them into an Oven after the Houshold Bread is drawn; this
quantity will make three dozen of Cakes.


83. _To make Goosberry Wine._

Bruise ripe Goosberries with an Apple-Beater, but do not beat them too
small, then strain them through a hair strainer, and put your Juice into
an earthen Pot, keep it covered four or five days till it be clear, then
draw it out into another Vessel, letting it run into a hair sieve, stop
it close, and let it stand one fortnight, then draw it out into quart
Bottles, putting one Pound of Sugar into eight Bottles, stop them up
close, and in a week or fortnights time you may drink them.


84. _To make Damson Wine._

Take four Gallons of Water and put to every Gallon of Water four Pounds
of Malaga Raisins, and half a Peck of Damsons.

Put the Raisins and Damsons into a Vessel without a head, cover the
Vessel and let them steep six days, stirring them twice every day; then
let them stand as long without stirring, then draw the Wine out of the
Vessel, and colour it with the infused juice of Damsons sweetened with
Sugar, till it be like Claret Wine, then put it into a Wine-vessel for a
fortnight, and then bottle it up.


85. _To pickle Cucumbers the very best way._

Take those you mean to pickle, and lay them in water and salt three or
four days, then take a good many great Cucumbers, and cut the outsides
of them into water, for the insides will be too pappy, boil them in that
Water, with Dill seeds and Fennel seeds, and when it is cold, put to it
some salt, and as much of Vinegar as will make it a strong Pickle, then
take them out of the Water and Salt, and pour this Liquor over them, so
let them stand close covered for a fortnight or three weeks.

Then pour the Pickle from them and boil it, and when it is cold add to
it some more Vinegar, and put it to them again, so let them stand one
Month longer, and now and then when you see occasion, boil it again, and
when it is cold, put it to them, and every time you boil it, put some
Vinegar thereto, and lay the seeds and pieces of Cucumbers on the top,
and after the first fortnight when you boil it, put in some whole
Pepper and some whole Cloves and Mace, and always put the Liquor cold
over them.


86. _To make the best Orange Marmalade._

Take the Rinds of the deepest coloured Oranges, boil them in several
Waters till they are very tender, then mince them small, and to one
pound of Oranges, take a Pound of Pippins cut small, one Pound of the
finest Sugar, and one Pint of Spring-water, melt your Sugar in the Water
over the fire, and scum it, then put in your Pippins, and boil them till
they are very clear, then put in the Orange Rind, and boil them
together, till you find by cooling a little of it, that it will jelly
very well, then put in the Juice of two Oranges, and one Limmon, and
boil it a little longer; and then put it up in Gally-pots.


87. _To preserve White Quinces._

Take the fairest you can get, and coddle them very tender, so that a
straw may go through to the Core, then core them with a scoop or small
knife, then pare them neatly, and weigh them, to every pound of
Quinces, take one pound of double refined Sugar, and a Pint of the
Water wherein thin slices of Pippins have been boiled; for that is of a
Jellying quality, put your Sugar to the Pippin water, and make a Sirrup,
and scum it, then put in your Quinces, and boil them very quick, and
that will keep them whole and white, take them from the fire sometimes
and shake them gently, keep them clean scummed, when you perceive them
to be very clear, put them into Gally-pots or Glasses, then warm the
Jelly and put it to them.


88. _To make Conserve of Red Roses._

Take their Buds and clip off the Whites, then take three times their
weight in Sugar double refin'd; beat the Roses well in a Mortar, then
put in the Sugar by little and little, and when you find it well
incorporated, put it into Gally-pots, and cover it with Sugar, and so it
will keep seven years.


89. _To make plain Bisket-Cakes._

Take a Pottle of Flower, and put to it half a pound of fine Sugar, half
an Ounce of Caraway seeds, half an Ounce of Anniseeds, six spoonfuls of
Yest, then boil a Pint of Water or little more, put into it a quarter
of a Pound of Butter or a little more, let it stand till it be cold,
then temper them together till it be as thick as Manchet, then let it
lie a while to rise, so roul them out very thin, and prick them, and
bake them in an Oven not too hot.


90. _To make Green Paste of Pippins._

Take your Pippins while they be green, and coddle them tender, then peel
them, and put them into a fresh warm Water, and cover them close, till
they are as green as you desire. Then take the Pulp from the Core, and
beat it very fine in a Mortar, then take the weight in Sugar, and wet it
with Water, and boil it to a Candy height, then put in your Pulp, and
boil them together till it will come from the bottom of the Skillet,
then make it into what form you please, and keep them in a stove.


91. _To make Paste of any Plumbs._

Take your Plumbs, and put them into a Pot, cover them close, and set
them into a Pot of seething Water, and so let them be till they be
tender, then pour forth their Liquor, and strain the Pulp through a
Canvas strainer, then take to half a Pound of the Pulp of Plumbs half a
Pound of the Pulp of Pippins, beat them together, and take their weight
in fine Sugar, with as much Water as will wet it, and boil it to a Candy
height; then put in your Pulp, and boil them together till it will come
from the bottom of the Posnet, then dust your Plates with searced Sugar,
and so keep them in a Stove to dry.


92. _To make Almond Ginger-Bread._

Take a little Gum-Dragon and lay it in steep in Rosewater all night,
then take half a Pound of Jordan Almonds blanched and beaten with some
of that Rosewater, then take half a pound of fine Sugar beaten and
searced, of Ginger and Cinamon finely searced, so much as by your taste
you may judge to be fit; beat all these together into a Paste, and dry
it in a warm Oven or Stove.


93. _To make Snow Cream._

Take a Pint of Cream, and the Whites of three Eggs, one spoonful or two
of Rosewater, whip it to a Froth with a Birchen Rod, then cast it off
the Rod into a Dish, in the which you have first fastened half a Manchet
with some Butter on the bottom, and a long Rosemary sprig in the
middle; when you have all cast the Snow on the dish, then garnish it
with several sorts of sweet-meats.


94. _To preserve Oranges and Limons that they shall have a Rock Candy on
them in the Syrrup._

Take the fairest and cut them in halves, or if you will do them whole,
then cut a little hole in the bottom, so that you may take out all the
meat, lay them in water nine days, shifting them twice every day, then
boil them in several Waters, till a straw will run through them, then
take to every Pound of Orange or Limon one Pound of fine Sugar, and one
quart of Water, make your Syrrup, and let your Oranges or Limons boil a
while in it, then let them stand five or six days in that Syrrup, then
to every Pound, put one Pound more of Sugar into your Syrrup, and boil
your Oranges till they be very clear, then take your Oranges out, and
boil your Syrrup almost to Candy, and put to them.


95. _To make Sugar Plate._

Take a little Gum-Dragon laid in steep in Rosewater till it be like
Starch, then beat it in a Mortar with some searced Sugar till it come
to a perfect Paste, then mould it with Sugar, and make it into what form
you please, and colour some of them, lay them in a warm place, and they
will dry of themselves.


96. _To make Artificial Walnuts._

Take some of your Sugar Plate, print it in a Mould fit for a Walnut
Kernel, yellow it over with a little Saffron, then take searced Cinamon
and Sugar, as much of the one as the other, work it in Paste with some
Rosewater, wherein Gum Dragon hath been steeped, and print it in a Mould
for a Walnut shell, and when they are dry, close them together over the
shell with a little of the Gum water.


97. _To make short Cakes._

Take a Pint of Ale Yest, and a Pound and half of fresh Butter, melt your
Butter, and let it cool a little, then take as much fine Flower as you
think will serve, mingle it with the Butter and Yest, and as much
Rosewater and Sugar as you think fit, and if you please, some Caraway
Comfits, so bake it in little Cakes; they will last good half a year.


98. _To preserve red Roses, which is as good and effectual as any
Conserve, and made with less trouble._

Take Red Rose Buds clipped clean from their Whites one pound, put them
into a Skillet with four Quarts of Water, Wine measure, then let them
boil very fast till three Quarts be boiled away, then put in three
pounds of fine Sugar, and let it boil till it begins to be thick, then
put in the Juice of a Limon, and boil it a little longer, and when it is
almost cold, put it into Gally-Pots, and strew them over with searced
Sugar, and so keep them so long as you please, the longer the better.


99. _A fine Cordial Infusion._

Take the flesh of a Cock Chick cut in small pieces, and put into a Glass
with a wide Mouth, put to it one Ounce of Harts-horn, half an Ounce of
Red Coral prepared, with a little large Mace, and a slice or two of
Limon, and two Ounces of White Sugar-Candy, stop the Glass close with a
Cork, and set it into a Vessel of seething Water, and stuff it round
with Hay that it jog not; when you find it to be enough, give the sick
Party two spoonfuls at a time.



100. _For a Cough of the Lungs._

Take two Ounces of Oil of sweet Almonds newly drawn, three spoonfuls of
Colts-foot Water, two spoonfuls of Red Rose-Water, two Ounces of white
Sugar-Candy finely beaten; mingle all these together, and beat it one
hour with a spoon, till it be very white; then take it often upon a
Licoras stick. This is very good.


101. _To preserve Grapes._

Take your fairest white Grapes and pick them from the stalks, then stone
them carefully, and save the Juice, then take a pound of Grapes, a pound
of fine Sugar, and a pint of water wherein sliced Pippins have been
boiled, strain that water, and with your Sugar and that make a Syrup,
when it is well scummed put in your Grapes, and boil them very fast, and
when you see they are as clear as glass, and that the Syrup will jelly,
put them into Glasses.


102. _To make Collops of Bacon in Sweet-meats._

Take some Marchpane Paste, and the weight thereof in fine Sugar beaten
and searsed, boil them on the fire, and keep them stirring for fear
they burn, so do till you find it will come from the bottom of the
Posnet, then mould it with fine Sugar like a Paste, and colour some of
it with beaten Cinnamon, and put in a little Ginger, then roll it broad
and thin, and lay one upon another till you think it be of a fit
thickness and cut it in Collops and dry it in an Oven.


103. _To make Violet Cakes._

Take them clipped clean from the whites and their weight in fine Sugar,
wet your Sugar in fair water, and boil it to a Candy height, then put in
your Violets, and stir them well together, with a few drops of a Limon,
then pour them upon a wet Pye-Plate, or on a slicked paper, and cut them
in what form you please; do not let them boil, for that will spoil the
colour: Thus you may do with any Herb or Flower, or with any Orange or
Limon Pill, and, if you like it, put in a little Musk or Ambergreece.


104. _To preserve white Damsons._

Take to every pound one pound of fine Sugar and a quarter of a pint of
fair water, make your Syrup and scum it well, then take it from the
fire, and when it is almost cold put in your Damsons, and let them
scald a little, then take them off a while, and then set them on again;
when you perceive them to be very clear, put them into Pots or Glasses.


105. _To make a very good Cake._

Take a peck of Flower, four pound of Currans well washed, dryed and
picked, four pounds of Butter, one pound of Sugar, one ounce of
Cinnamon, one ounce of Nutmegs, beat the Spice and lay it all night in
Rosewater, the next day strain it out, then take one pint and an half of
good Ale-Yest the Yolks of 4 Eggs, a pint of Cream, put a pound of the
butter into the warmed Cream, put the rest into the Flower in pieces,
then wet your Flower with your Cream, and put in your Currans, and a
little Salt, and four or five spoonfuls of Caraway-Comfits and your
Spice, mix them all and the Yest well together, and let it lie one hour
to rise, then make it up and Bake it in a Pan buttered: It may stand two
hours.


106. _To make Paste Royal._

Take Quince Marmalade almost cold, and mould it up with searced Sugar to
a Paste, them make it into what form you please and dry them in a Stove.



107. _To make Paste of Pippins coloured with Barberries._

Take the Pulp of Codled Pippins, and as much of the Juice of Barberries
as will colour it, then take the weight of it in fine Sugar, boil it to
a Candy height, with a little water, then put in your Pulp beaten very
well in a mortar, boil it till it come from the bottom of the Posnet,
then dust your Plate with Sugar, and drop them thereon, and dry them in
a Stove or warm Oven.


108. _To preserve Barberries._

Take one Pound of stoned Barberries and twice their weight in fine
Sugar, then strip two or three handfuls of Barberries from their stalks,
and put them into a Dish with as much Sugar as Barberries, over a
Chafing dish of Coals, when you see they are well plumped, strain them,
then wet your other Sugar with this, and no Water, boil it and scum it,
and then put in your stoned Barberries, and boil them till they are very
clear.


109. _To make Jelly of Currans or of any other Fruit._

Take your Fruit clean picked from the stalks, and put them into a long
Gally-pot, and set it into a Kettle of Water close covered; keep the
Water boiling till you find the Fruit be well infused, then pour out the
clearest, and take the weight of it in fine Sugar, wet your Sugar with
Water, and boil it to a Candy height, then put in your clear Liquor, and
keep it stirring over a slow fire till you see it will jelly, but do not
let it boil; the Pulp which is left of the Liquor, you may make Paste of
if you please, as you do the Pippin Paste before named.


110. _To make a Goosberry Fool._

Take a Pint and an half of Goosberries clean picked from the stalks, put
them into a Skillet with a Pint and half of fair Water, scald them till
they be very tender, then bruise them well in the Water, and boil them
with a Pound and half of fine Sugar till it be of a good thickness, then
put to it the Yolks of six Eggs and a Pint of Cream, with a Nutmeg
quartered, stir these well together till you think they be enough, over
a slow fire, and put it into a Dish, and when it is cold, eat it.


111. _To make perfumed Lozenges._

Take twelve Grains of Ambergreece, and six grains of Musk, and beat it
with some Sugar plate spoken of before, then roule it out in thin Cakes,
and make them into what form you please, you may make them round like a
Sugar Plumb, and put a Coriander seed in each of them, and so they will
be fine Comfits, and you may make them into Lozenges to perfume Wine
with.


112. _To Candy Eryngo Roots._

Take the Roots new gathered, without Knots or Joints, wash them clean,
and boil them in several Waters till they are very tender, then wash
them well, and dry them in a Cloth, slit them, and take out the Pith,
and braid them in Braids as you would a Womans Hair, or else twist them,
then take twice their weight in fine Sugar, take half that Sugar, and to
every Pound of Sugar, one quarter of a pint of Rosewater and as much
fair water, make a syrup of it, and put in your roots and boil them, and
when they are very clear, wet the rest of the Sugar with Rosewater, and
boil it to a Candy height, then put in the Roots and boil them, and
shake them, and when they be enough, take them off, and shake them till
they are cold and dry, then lay them upon Dishes or Plates till they are
throughly dry, and then put them up; thus you may do Orange or Limon, or
Citron Pill, or Potato Roots.


113. _To preserve Goosberries._

Take your Gooseberries, and stone them, then take a little more than
their weight in fine Sugar, then with as much Water as will melt the
Sugar, boil it and scum it, then put in your Goosberries, and boil them
apace till they be clear, then take up your Goosberries, and put them
into Glasses, and boil the Syrup a little more, and put over them.


114. _To make Leach and to colour it._

Take one Ounce of Isinglass and lay it in Water four and twenty hours,
changing the Water three or four times, then take a quart of new Milk,
boiled with a little sliced Ginger and a stick of Cinamon, one spoonful
of Rosewater, and a quarter of a Pound of Sugar, when it hath boiled a
while, put in the Isinglass, and boil it till it be thick, keeping it
always stirring, then strain it, and keep it stirring, and when it is
cold, you may slice it out, and serve it upon Plates; you may colour it
with Saffron, and some with Turnsole, and lay the White and that one
upon another, and cut it, and it will look like Bacon; it is good for
weak people, and Children that have the Rickets.


115. _To take away the Signs of the Small Pox._

Take some Spercma-ceti, and twice so much Virgins Wax, melt them
together and spread it upon Kids Leather, in the shape of Mask, then lay
it upon the Face, and keep it on night and day, it is a very fine
Remedy.


116. _For Morphew, or Freckles, and to clear the Skin._

Take the Blood of any Fowl or Beast, and wipe your Face all over with it
every night when you go to bed for a fortnight together, and the next
day wash it all off with White Wine, and white Sugar Candy, and
sometimes hold your face over the smoke of Brimstone for a while, and
shut your eyes, if you add the Juice of a Limon to the white Wine, it
will be the better.


117. _To make Almond Butter to look white._

Take about two Quarts of Water, the bottom of a Manchet, and a Blade of
large Mace, boil it half an hour, and let it stand till it be cold, then
take a Pound of sweet Almonds blanched, and beaten with Rosewater very
fine, so strain them with this Water many times, till you think the
virtue is out of them, and that it be a thick Almond Milk, then put it
into a Skillet, and make it boiling hot, that it simper, then take a
spoonful of the Juice of a Limon, and put into it, stirring of it in,
and when you perceive it ready to turn, then take it from the fire, and
take a large fine Cloth, and cast your Liquor all over the Cloth with a
Ladle, then scrape it altogether into the middle with a Spoon, then tie
it hard with a Packthred, so let it hang till the next morning, then put
in a Dish, and sweeten it with Rosewater and Sugar, put a little
Ambergreece if you please.


118. _For the Ptisick._

Take a Pottle of small Ale, one Pound of Raisins of the Sun stoned, with
a little handful of Peniroyal, boil these together, and add a little
Sugar-candy to it, and take five or six spoonfuls at a time four or five
times in a day for a good while.


119. _Marmalade of Apricocks._

Take the ripest and stone them and pare them, and beat them in a Mortar,
then boil the Pulp in a Dish over a Chafing-dish of Coals, till it be
somewhat dry, then take the weight in fine Sugar, and boil it to a Candy
height, with some Rosewater, then put in your Pulp, and boil them
together till it will come from the bottom of the Skillet, and always
keep it stirring, for fear it burn, then put it into Glasses.


120. _Syrup of Turneps._

Take of the best and pare them, and bake them in a Pot, then take the
clear Juice from them, and with the like weight in fine Sugar make it
into a Syrup, and a little Licoras to it, and take it often.


121. _To make a good Jelly._

Take a lean Pig, dress it clean, and boil it in a sufficient quantity of
Fair Water, with four Ounces of green Licoras scraped and bruised,
Maidenhair two handfuls, Colts-foot one handful, Currans half a Pound,
Dates two Ounces stoned and sliced, Ivory one Ounce, Hartshorn one
Ounce, boil these to a strong Jelly, and strain it, and take off the
Fat, then put to it half a Pound of Sugar, and half a Pint of white
Wine, and so eat it at your pleasure.


122. _A most excellent Cordial proved by very many._

Take three Grains of East Indian Bezoar, as much of Ambergreece, powder
them very fine with a little Sugar, and mingle it with a spoonful and
half of the Syrup of the juice of Citrons, one Spoonful of Syrup of
Clovegilliflowers, and one spoonful of Cinamon Water, so take it warmed.


123. _To make the black Juice of Licoras._

Take two Gallons of running Water, three handfuls of unset Hysop, three
pounds and half of Licoras scraped, and dried in the Sun and beaten,
then cover it close, and boil it almost a whole day in the Water, when
it is enough, it will be as thick as Cream, then let it stand all night,
the next morning strain it, and put it in several Pans in the Sun to
dry, till it work like wax, then mould it with White Sugar Candy beaten
and searced, then print it in little Cakes, and print them with Seals,
and dry them.


124. _To make Marchpane._

Take two Pounds of Jordan Almonds, blanch and beat them in a Mortar with
Rosewater, then take one Pound and half of Sugar finely searced, when
the Almonds are beaten to a fine Paste with the Sugar, then, take it out
of the Mortar, and mould it with searced Sugar, and let it stand one
hour to cool, then roll it as thin as you would do for a Tart, and cut
it round by the Plate, then set an edge about it, and pinch it, then set
it on a bottom of Wafers, and bake it a little, then Ice it with
Rosewater and Sugar, and the White of an Egg beaten together, and put it
into the Oven again, and when you see the Ice rise white and high, take
it out, and set up a long piece of Marchpane first baked in the middle
of the Marchpane, stick it with several sorts of Comfits, then lay on
Leaf-gold with a Feather and the White of an Egg beaten.


125. _To preserve Green Pippins._

Scald some green Pippins carefully, then peel them, and put them into
warm water, and cover them, and let them stand over a slow fire till
they are as green as you would have them, and so tender as that a straw
may run through them, then to every pound of Apples, take one pound of
fine Sugar, and half a pint of water, of which make a Syrup, and when
you have scumm'd it clean, put in your Apples, and let them boil a
while, then set them by till the next day, then boil them throughly, and
put them up.


126. _To preserve Peaches._

Take your Peaches when you may prick a hole through them, scald them in
fair water and rub the Fur off from them with your Thumb, then put them
in another warm water over a slow fire, and cover them till they be
green, then take their weight in fine Sugar and a little water, boil it
and scum it, then put in your Peaches, and boil them till they are
clear, so you may do green Plumbs or green Apricocks.


127. _Marmalade of Damsons._

Take two Pounds of Damsons, and one Pound of Pippins pared and cut in
pieces, bake them in an Oven with a little sliced Ginger, when they are
tender, poure them into a Cullender, and let the Syrup drop from them,
then strain them, and take as much sugar as the Pulp doth weigh, boil it
to a Candy height with a little water, then put in your Pulp, and boil
it till it will come from the bottom of the Skillet, and so put it up.


128. _Marmalade of Wardens._

Bake them in an earthen pot, then cut them from the Core and beat them
in a Mortar, then take their weight in fine Sugar, and boil it to a
Candy height with a little beaten Ginger, and boil it till it comes from
the bottom of the Posnet; and so do with Quinces if you please.


129. _Marmalade of green Pippins to look green._

Scald them as you do to preserve, then stamp them in a Mortar, and take
their weight in fine Sugar, boil it to a Candy height with a little
water, then boil it and the Pulp together, till it will come from the
bottom of Posnet.


130. _To preserve green Walnuts._

Take them and steep them all night in water, in the morning pare them
and boil them in fair water till they be tender, and then stick a Clove
into the head of each of them, then take one Pound and half of Sugar to
every pound of Walnuts, and to every pound of Sugar one Pint of
Rosewater, make a Syrup of it, and scum it, then put in your Walnuts,
and boil them very leasurely till they are enough; then put in a little
Musk or Ambergreece with a little Rosewater, and boil them a little
more, and put them up; it is a very good Cordial, and will keep seven
years or more.


131. _To dry old Pippins._

Pare them, and bore a hole through them with a little Knife or Piercer,
and cut some of them in halves, take out the Cores of them as you cut
them, then put them into a Syrup of Sugar and water, as much as will
cover them in a broad preserving Pan, let them boil so fast as may be;
taking them sometimes from the fire, scumming them clean; when you
perceive your Apples clear, and Syrup thick, then take them up, and set
them into a warm Oven from the Syrup, all night, the next morning turn
them, and put them in again, so do till they are dry; if you please to
glister some of them, put them into your Candy-pot but one night, and
lay them to dry the next day, and they will look like Crystal.


132. _To preserve Bullace as green as grass._

Take them fresh gathered, and prick them in several places, scald them
as you do your green Peaches, then take their weight in fine sugar, and
make a Syrup with a little water, then put in your Bullace, and boil
them till they be very clear, and the Syrup very thick.


133. _To preserve Medlars._

Take them at their full growth, pare them as thin as you can, prick them
with your Knife, and parboil them reasonable tender, then dry them with
a Cloth, and put to them as much clarified sugar as will cover them; let
them boil leisurely, turning them often, till they have well taken the
sugar, then put them into an earthen Pot, and let them stand till the
next day, then warm them again half an hour; then take them up and lay
them to drain, then put into that Syrup half a pint of water wherein
Pippins have been boiled in slices, and a quarter of a Pound of fresh
sugar, boil it, and when it will jelly, put it to the Medlars in
Gallipots or Glasses.


134. _To make Conserve of Violets._

Take a pound clean cut from the whites, stamp them well in a Mortar, and
put to them two or three Ounces of white Sugar-Candy, then take it out
and lay it upon a sleeked Paper, then take their weight in fine sugar,
and boil it to a Candy height with a little water, then put in your
Violets, and a little Juice of Limon, and then let them have but one
walm or two over the fire, stirring it well; then take it off; and when
it is between hot and cold, put it up, and keep it.


135. _To cast all kinds of shapes, what you please, and to colour them._

Take half a pound of refined Sugar, boil it to a Candy height with as
much Rosewater as will melt it, then take moulds made of Alabaster, and
lay them in water one hour before you put in the hot Sugar, then when
you have put in your Sugar turn the mould about in your hand till it be
cool, then take it out of the mould, and colour it according to the
nature of the Fruit you would have it resemble.


136. _To dry Pears without Sugar._

Pare them, and leave the stalks and pipps on them, then bake them in an
earthen pot with a little Claret Wine, covered, then drain them from the
Syrup, and dry them upon Sieves in a warm Oven, turning them morning and
evening, every time you turn them hold them by the stalk and dip them in
the Liquor wherein they were baked and flat them every time a little.

If you do them carefully they will look very red and clear and eat
moist, when they are dry put them up.


137. _To make Rasberry Wine._

Take Rasberries and bruise them with the back of a spoon, and strain
them, and fill a bottle with the juyce, stop it, but not very close, let
it stand four or five days, then pour it from the Grounds into a Bason,
and put as much White-wine or Rhenish as your juyce will well colour,
then sweeten it with Loaf Sugar, then bottle it and keep it, and when
you drink it you may perfume some of it with one of the Lozenges spoken
of before.


138. _To preserve Oranges in jelly._

Take the thickest rind Oranges, chipped very thin, lay them in water
three or four days, shifting them twice every day, then boil them in
several waters, till you may run a straw through them, then let them lye
in a Pan of water all night, then dry them gently in a Cloth, then take
to every Pound of Oranges one Pound and an half of Sugar, and a Pint of
water, make thereof a syrup; then put in your Oranges, and boil them a
little, then set them by till the next day, and boil them again a
little, and so do for four or five days together, then boil them till
they are very clear, then drain them in a sieve, then take to every
Pound of Oranges one quarter of a Pint of water wherein sliced Pippins
have been boiled into your syrup, and to every quarter of a Pint of that
water, add a quarter of a Pound of fresh Sugar, boil it till it will
jelly, then put your Oranges into a Pot or a Glass, and put the jelly
over them; you may if you please, take all the Meat out of some of your
Oranges at one end, and fill it with preserved Pippin, and if you put in
a little Juice of Orange and Limon into your Syrup when it is almost
boiled, it will be very fine tasted.