Whatever personal effects a father left, which were not offered up
in sacrifice at the ceremonies of his funeral, they were distributed
among his male offsprings, and if there were none, they went to his
brothers. Females held nothing whatever, beyond their wearing
apparel and some few ornaments for personal use.

[Footnote: Motolinia (Trat. II, cap. V, p. 120). Torquemada (Lib.
XIII, cap. XLII to XLVIII, pp. 515 to 529). Acosta (Lib. V, cap. VIII,
pp. 320, 321, and 322). Gomara (pp. 436 and 437, Vedra, I). Mendieta
(Lib. II, cap. XL, pp. 162 and 163). Clavigero (Lib. VI, cap. XXXIX).
"They burnt the clothes, arrows, and a portion of household
utensils ... "]

The 'tlalmilli' itself, at the demise of a father, went to his
oldest son, with the obligation to improve it for the benefit of the
entire family until the other children had been disposed of by
marriage.

[Footnote: Gomara ("Conq. de Mejico", p. 434): "It is customary
among tributary classes that the oldest son shall inherit the
father's property, real and personal, and shall maintain and support
all the brothers and nephews, provided they do what he commands
them. The reason why they do not partition the estates is in order
not to decrease it through such a partition...." Simancas M. S. S.
("Recueil," etc., etc., p. 224): "Relative to the calpulalli ... the
sons mostly inherited."]

But the other males could apply to the chief of the calpulli for a
'tlalmilli' of their own; the females went with their husbands.
Single blessedness, among the Mexicans, appears to have occurred
only in case of religious vows, and in which case they fell back for
subsistence upon the part allotted to worship, or in case of great
infirmities, for which the calpulli provided.

[Footnote: Zurita (p. 55): "He who has no land applies to the chief
of the tribe (calpulli), who, upon the advice of the other old men,
assigns to him a tract suitable for his wants, and corresponding to
his abilities and to his strength." Herrera (Dec. III, Lib. IV, cap.
XV, p. 135).]

[Footnote: Such unmarried females were the "nuns" frequently
mentioned by the old writers. We shall have occasion to investigate
the point in our paper on "The ancient Mexican priesthood." As
attendants to worship, they participated in the tributes furnished
towards it by each calpulli, of which we have spoken.]

No mention is made of the widow participating in the products of the
'tlalmilli,' still it is presumable that she was one of those whom
the oldest son had to support. There are indications that the widow
could remarry, in which case her husband, of course, provided for her.

"The customs of Inheritance, as above reported, were the same with
chiefs as well as with the ordinary members of the tribe. Of the
personal effects very little remained, since the higher the office
was which the deceased had held, the more display was made at his
cremation, and consequently the more of his dresses, weapons, and
ornaments were burnt with the body. Of lands, the chiefs only held
each their 'tlalmilli' in the usual way, as members of their kin,
whereas the other 'official' lots went to the new incumbents of the
offices. It should always be borne in mind that none of these
offices were hereditary themselves. Still, a certain 'right of
succession' is generally admitted as having existed. Thus, with the
Tezcucans, the office of head war-chief might pass from father to son,
at Mexico from brother to brother, and from uncle to nephew."
[Footnote: Zurita (p. 12). Gomara (Vedia I, p. 434). Torquemada
(Lib. IX, cap. IV, p. 177; Lib. XI, cap. 27, p. 356, etc. etc.).]

[Footnote: This fact is too amply proven to need special references.
We reserve it for final discussion in our proposed paper on the
chiefs of the Mexicans, and the duties, powers and functions of
their office.]

This might, eventually, have tended to perpetuate the office in the
family, and with it also the possession of certain lands, attached
to that officer's functions and duties. But it is quite certain too
that this stage of development had not yet been reached by any of
the tribes of Mexico at the time of its conquest by the Spaniards.
The principal idea had not yet been developed, namely, that of the
domain, which, in eastern countries at least, gradually segregated
into individually hereditary tenures and ownerships.

"Out of the scanty remains thus left of certain features of
aboriginal life in ancient Mexico, as well as out of the conflicting
statements about that country's early history, we have now attempted
to reconstruct the conceptions of the Mexican aborigines about
tenure of lands, as well as their manner of distribution thereof.
Our inquiries seem to justify the following conclusions:

"1. The notion of abstract ownership of the soil, either by a nation
or state, or by the head of its government, or by individuals, was
unknown to the ancient Mexicans.

"2. Definite possessory right was vested in the kinships composing
the tribe; but the idea of sale, barter, or conveyance or alienation
of such by the kin had not been conceived.

"3. Individuals, whatever might be their position or office, without
any exception, held but the right to use certain defined lots for
their sustenance, which right, although hereditary in the male line,
was nevertheless limited to the conditions of residence within the
area held by the kin, and of cultivation either by or in the name of
him to whom the said lots were assigned.

"4. No possessory rights to land were attached to any office or
chieftaincy. As members of a kin, each chief had the use of a
certain lot, which he could rent or farm to others, for his benefit.

"5. For the requirements of tribal business, and of the governmental
features of the kinships (public hospitality included), certain
tracts were set apart as official lands, out of which the official
households were supplied and sustained; but these lands and their
products were totally independent from the persons or families of
the chiefs themselves.

"6. Conquest of any tribe by the Mexicans was not followed by an
annexation of that tribe's territory, nor by an apportionment of its
soil among the conquerors. Tribute was exacted, and, for the purpose
of raising that tribute (in part), special tracts were set off; the
crops of which were gathered for the storehouses of Mexico.

"7. Consequently, as our previous investigations (of the warlike
institutions and customs of the ancient Mexicans) have disproved the
generally received notion of a military despotism prevailing among
them, so the results of his review of Tenure and distribution of
lands tend to establish 'that the principle and institution of
feudality did not exist in aboriginal Mexico.'"

Among the Peruvians their land system was probably much the same as
among the ancient Mexicans. But according to Garcilapo de la Vega,
they had carried their system with respect to lands a little farther.
Their lands, he remarks, were "divided into three parts and applied
to different uses. The first was for the Sun, his priests and
ministers; the second was for the King, and for the support and
maintenance of his governors and officers.... And the third was for
the natives and sojourners of the provinces, which was divided
equally according to the needs which each family required."
[Footnote: Royal Commentaries of Peru, Lond. ed., 1688. Rycaut,
trans., p. 154.]

While these several statements may not present the exact case in all
respects in Peru, Mexico, or among the Northern Indian tribes, they
sufficiently indicate the ownership of land by communities of persons,
larger or smaller, with a system of tillage that points to large
households. Neither the Peruvians, nor the Aztecs, nor any Indian
tribe had attained to a knowledge of the ownership of land in
severalty in fee simple at the period of their discovery. This
knowledge belongs to the period of civilization. There is not the
slightest probability that any Indian, whether Iroquois, Mexican, or
Peruvian, owned a foot of land that he could call his own, with
power to sell and convey the same in fee simple to whomsoever he
pleased.

THE CUSTOM OF HAVING BUT ONE PREPARED MEAL EACH DAY--A DINNER--AND
THEIR SEPARATION AT MEALS, THE MEN EATING FIRST AND THE WOMEN AND
CHILDREN AFTERWARDS.

This was the usage among the Indian tribes in the Lower Status of
barbarism. In the Middle Status there seems to have been more method
and regularity of life, but no change in their customs with respect
to food, so marked in character that we are forced to recognize a
new plan of domestic life among them. The Iroquois had but one
cooked meal each day. It was as much as their resources and
organization for housekeeping could furnish, and was as much as they
needed. It was prepared and served usually before the noon-day hour,
ten or eleven o'clock, and may be called a dinner. At this time the
principal cooking for the day was done. After its division at the
kettle, among the members of the household, it was served warm to
each person in earthen or wooden bowls. They had neither tables, nor
chairs, nor plates, in our sense, nor any room in the nature of a
kitchen or a dining room, but ate each by himself, sitting or
standing, and where most convenient to the person. They also
separated as to the time of eating, the men eating first and by
themselves, and the women and children afterwards and by themselves.
That which remained was reserved for any member of the household
when hungry. Towards evening the women cooked hominy, the maize
having been pounded into bits the size of a kernel of rice, which
was boiled and put aside to be used cold as a lunch in the morning
or evening, and for the entertainment of visitors. They had neither
a formal breakfast nor a supper. Each person, when hungry, ate of
whatever food the house contained. They were moderate eaters. This
is a fair picture of Indian life in general in America, when
discovered. After intercourse commenced with whites, the Iroquois
gradually began to adopt our mode of life but very slowly. One of
the difficulties was to change the old usage and accustom themselves
to eat together. It came in by degrees, first with the breaking up
of the old plan of living together in numbers in the old long-houses,
and with the substitution of single houses for each family, which
ended communism and living in the large household, and substituted
the subsistence of a single family through individual effort. After
many years came the use of the table and chairs among the more
advanced families of the Iroquois tribes. There are still upon the
Iroquois reservations in this State many log homes or cabins with
but a single room on the ground floor and a loft above, with neither
a table or chair in their scanty furniture. A portion of them still
live very much in the old style, with perhaps two regular meals
daily instead of one. That they have made this much of change in the
course of two centuries must be accounted remarkable, for they have
been compelled, so to speak, to jump one entire ethnical period,
without the experience or training of so many intervening generations,
and without the brain-growth such a change of the plan of domestic
life implies, when reached through natural individual experience.
There is a tradition still current among the Seneca-Iroquois, if the
memory of so recent an occurrence may be called traditional, that
when the proposition that man and wife should eat together, which
was so contrary to immemorial usage, was first determined in the
affirmative, it was formally agreed that man and wife should sit
down together at the same dish and eat with the same ladle, the man
eating first and then the woman, and so alternately until the meal
was finished.

The testimony of such writers as have noticed the house-life of the
Indian tribes is not uniform in respect to the number of meals a day.
Thus Catlin remarks, "As I have before observed these men (the
Mandans) generally eat but twice a day, and many times not more than
once, and these meals are light and simple.... The North American
Indians, taking them in the aggregate, even when they have an
abundance to subsist on, eat less than any civilized population of
equal numbers that I have ever traveled among." [Footnote: North
American Indians, Philadelphia ed., 1857, i, 203.]

And Heckewelder, speaking of the Delawares and other tribes, says:
"They commonly make two meals every day, which they say is enough.
If any one should feel hungry between meal-times, there is generally
something in the house ready for him."

[Footnote: Indian Nations, 193.] Adair contents himself with stating
of the Chocta and Cherokee tribes that "they have no stated meal time."

[Footnote: History of the American Indian, Lond. ed., 1775, p. 17.]

There was doubtless some variation in different localities, and even
in the same household; but as a general rule, from what is known of
their mode of life, one prepared meal each day expresses very nearly
all the people in this condition of society can do for the
sustenance of mankind.

Although the sedentary Village Indians were one ethnical period in
advance of the Northern Indians, there can be but little doubt that
their mode of life in this respect was substantially the same. Among
the Aztecs or ancient Mexicans a dinner was provided about midday,
but we have no satisfactory account of a breakfast or a supper
habitually and regularly prepared. Civilization, with its
diversified industries, its multiplied products, and its monogamian
family, affords a breakfast and supper in addition to a dinner. It
is doubtful whether they are older than civilization; and even if
they can be definitely traced backward into the older period of
barbarism, there is little probability of their being found in the
Middle period. Clavigero attempts to invest the Aztecs with a
breakfast, but he was unable to find any evidence of a supper.
"After a few hours of labor in the morning," he observes, "they took
their breakfast, which was most commonly atolli, a gruel of maize,
and their dinner after midday; but among all the historians we can
find no mention of their supper." [Footnote: History of Mexico, ii,
262.]

The "gruel of maize" here mentioned as forming usually the Aztec
breakfast suggests the "hominy of the Iroquois," which, like it, was
not unlikely kept constantly prepared in every Mexican house as a
lunch for the hungry. Two meals each day are mentioned by other
Spanish authors, but as the Aztecs, as well as the tribes in Yucatan
and Central America, were ignorant of the use of tables and chairs
in eating their food, divided their food from the kettle, placing
the dinner of each person usually in a separate bowl, and separated
at their meals, the men eating first and by themselves, and the
women and children afterwards, this similarity of usage renders it
probable they were not far removed from the Iroquois in respect to
the time and manner of taking their food. Montezuma's dinner,
witnessed by Bernal-Diaz and others, and elaborately described by a
number of authors, shows that the Aztecs had a smoking hot dinner
each day, prepared regularly, and on a scale adequate to a large
household; that the dinner of each person was placed in one bowl,
and all these bowls to the number of several hundred were brought in
and set down together upon the floor of one room, where they were
taken up one by one by the male members of the household, and the
contents eaten sitting down upon the floor or standing in the open
court, as best suited them. The breakfast that preceded it, and the
supper that follows, are not mentioned, from which we infer that
there was neither a breakfast nor a supper for these inquisitive
observers to see. Neither is the subsequent dinner of the women and
children of the household mentioned, from which it may be inferred
that as the men ate their dinner first in a particular hall by
themselves, the women and children took their dinner later in
another hall, not seen by the Spaniards.

In the accounts of Montezuma's dinner a cook-house or kitchen is
mentioned, in which the dinner for the large household of the
"Tecpan" or "official house," so fully explained above by Mr.
Bandelier, was prepared. This kitchen, and the use of another room,
where the bowls containing the dinner of each person separately were
set down on the floor in a mass by themselves--an incipient
dining-room--make their first appearance in the Middle Status of
barbarism. But, as will be noticed, they are but rude realizations
of the kitchen and dining-room of civilized man. The pueblo houses
in Yucatan and Chiapas, now in ruins, are without chimneys, from
which it may be inferred that no cooking was done within them. At
Uxmal we recognize in the Governor's House, the Tecpan or
official-house, and in the House of the Nuns, and other structures
which formed the pueblo, the joint-tenement houses in which the body
of the tribe resided. If the truth of the matter is ever ascertained,
it will probably be found that the dinner for each household group,
consisting of several families, was prepared in a common cook-house
outside of the main structure, and that it was divided at the kettle
to the individuals of each household.

The separation of the sexes at their meals has been sufficiently
referred to among the Iroquois. Robertson states the usage as general.
"They must approach their lords with reverence; they must regard
them as more exalted beings, and are not permitted to eat in their
presence." [Footnote: History of America, New York ed., 1856, 178.]

Catlin the same: "These women, however, although graceful and civil,
and ever so beautiful, or ever so hungry, are not allowed to sit in
the same group with the men while at their meals. So far as I have
yet traveled in the Indian country, I have never seen an Indian
woman eating with her husband. Men form the first group at the
banquet, and women and children and dogs all come together at the
next." [Footnote: North American Indians, i, 202.] And Adair
"for the men feast by themselves and the women eat the remains."
[Footnote: History of the American Indians, p. 140.]

Herrera remarks that "the woman of Yucatan are rather larger than
the Spanish and generally have good faces ... but they would
formerly be drunk at their festivals, though they did eat apart."
[Footnote: History of America, iv, 175.] And Sahagun, speaking
of the ceremony of baptism among the Aztecs, observes that "to
the women, who ate apart, they did not give cacao to drink."
[Footnote: Historia General, lib. iv, 36]

With these general references to the universality of the practice on
the part of the men of eating first, and leaving the women and
children to come afterwards, according to the manners of barbarism,
we leave the subject.

[Relocated Footnote 1: Torquemada (Lib. II, cap. LXVIII, p. 194)
"Estaba de ordinario, recogido en una grande Sala (el calpul)."
(Lib. III, cap. XXVII, p. 305. Lib. IV, cap. XIX, p. 396) (que asi
llaman las Salas grandes de Comunidad, o de Cabildo). We find, under
the corrupted name of "galpon," the "calpulli" in Nicaragua among
the Niquirans, which speak a dialect of the Mexican (Nahuatl)
language. See E. G. Squier ("Nicaragua," Vol. II, p. 342). "The
council-houses were called grepons, surrounded by broad corridors
called galpons, beneath which the arms were kept, protected by
a guard of young men". Mr. Squier evidently bases upon Oviedo
("Hist. general," Lib. XLII, cap. III, p. 52). "Esta casa de cabildo
llaman galpon...." It is another evidence in favor of our statements,
that the kinship formed the original unit of the tribe, and at the
same time a hint that, as in New Mexico, originally, an entire kin
inhabited a single large house. See Molina's Vocab. (p. 11).]

[Relocated Footnote 2: There is no evidence of any tribute or
prestation due by the quarters to the tribe. The custom always
remained, that the "calpulli" was sovereign within its limits. See
Alonzo de Zunta ("Rapport sur les differentes classes de chefs
de la Nouvelle-Espagne," pp. 51-65). Besides, Ixtlilxochitl says:
("Hist. des Chichim," cap. XXXV, p. 242), "Other fields were called
Calpolalli or Altepetlalli." Now calpulalli (from "calpulli,"
quarter or kinship, and "tlalli," soil), means soil of the kin,
and altepetalli ("altepetl," tribe), soil of the tribe. Clavigero
even says that the lands called "altepetlalli," belonging to the
communities "of the towns and villages, were divided into so many
parts as there were quarters in the town, each quarter having its own,
without the least connection with the other." (Lib. VII, cap. XIV.)
This indicates plainly that the kinships held the soil, whereas the
tribe occupied the territorial expanse. The domain, either as
pertaining to a "lord," or to a "state", was unknown among the
Indians in general. Even among the Peruvians, who were more advanced
than the Mexicans in that respect, there was no domain of the tribe.]

[Relocated Footnote 3: See Torquemada (Lib. II, cap. XI, and Lib. III,
cap. XXII). Duran (cap. V). The quotation is from Herrera (Dec. II,
Lib. VII, cap. XIII, p. 190), and is confirmed by Torquemada (Lib.
III, cap. XXIII, p. 291), and especially by Gomara ("Conquista de
Mejico," p. 443. Vedia, I.) "Many married people ('muchos casados')
live in one house, either on account of the brothers and relations
being together, as they do not divide their grounds ('heredades'),
or on account of the limited space of the pueblos; although the
pueblos are large, and even the houses." Peter Martyr of Angleria
("De Novo Orbe," translated by Richard Eden and Michael Lok, London,
1612, Dec. V, cap. X, p. 228), says: "But the common houses
themselves as high as a mannes Girdle, were also built of stone, by
reason of the swelling of the lake through the flood, or washing
float of the Ryvers falling into it. Upon those greate foundations,
they builded the reste of the house, with Bricke dryed, or burned in
the sunne, intermingled with Beames of Tymber, and the common houses
have but one floore or planchin." We are forcibly reminded here
of the houses of Itza on Lake Peten, which were found in 1695.
("Hist. de la Conq. de los Itzaex," Lib. VIII, cap. XII, p. 494.)
"It was all filled with houses, some with stone walls more than one
rod high, and higher up of wood, and the roofs of straw, and some
only of wood and straw. There lived in them all the Inhabitants of
the Island brutally together, one relationship occupying a single
house." See also the highly valuable Introduction to the second
Dialogue of Cervantes-Salazar ("Mexico in 1554") by my excellent
friend Sr. Icazbalceta (pp. 73 and 74).]

[Relocated Footnote 4: This successive formation of new "calpulli" is
nowhere explicitly stated, but it is implied by the passage of Duran
which we have already quoted (Cap. V, p. 42). It also results from
their military organization as described in the "Art of War" (p. 115).
With the increase of population, the original kinships necessarily
disaggregated further, as we have seen it to have occurred among the
Quiche (see "Popul-Vuh," quoted in our note 7), forming smaller
groups of consanguinei. After the successful war against the
Tecpanecas, of which we shall speak hereafter, we find at least
twenty chiefs, representing as many kins (Duran, cap. XI, p. 97),
besides three more, adopted then from those of Culhuscan (Id., pp.
98 and 99). This indicates an increase.]

[Relocated Footnote 5: Torquemada (Lib. III, cap. XXIV, p. 295):
"I confess it to be truth that this city of Mexico is divided into
four principal quarters, each one of which contains others, smaller
ones, included, and all, in common as well as in particular, have
their commanders and leaders...." Zurita ("Rapport," p. 58-64).
That the smaller subdivisions were those who held the soil, and not
the four original groups, must be inferred from the fact that the
ground was attached to the calpulli. Says Zurita (p. 51), "They
(the lands) do not belong to each inhabitant of the village, but to
the calpulli, which possesses them in common." On the other hand,
Torquemada states (Lib. XIV, cap. VII, p. 545), "That in each pueblo,
according to the number of people, there should be (were) clusters
('parcialidades') of diverse people and families.... These clusters
were distributed by calpules, which are quarters ('barrios'), and it
happened that one of the aforesaid clusters sometimes contained three,
four, and more calpules, according to the population of the place
('pueblo') or tribe." The same author further affirms: "These
quarters and streets were all assorted and leveled with so much
accuracy that those of one quarter or street could not take a palm
of land from those of another, and the same was with the streets,
their lots running (being scattered) all over the pueblo."
Consequently there were no communal lands allotted to the four great
quarters of Mexico as such, but each one of the kinships (calpules)
held its part of the original aggregate. Compare Gomara (Vedia, Vol.
I, "Conq. de Mejico," p. 434: "Among tributaries it is a custom, etc.,
etc." Also p. 440). Clavigero (Lib. VII, cap. XIV): "Each quarter
has its own tract, without the least connection with the others."]

[Relocated Footnote 6: Compare Duran (Cap XI, p. 87). Acosta (Lib.
VII, cap, XXXI, p. 470). It appears as if the "teepan" had not been
constructed previous to the middle of the 14th century, the meetings
of the tribe being previously called together by priests, and
probably in the open space around the main house of worship. The
fact of the priests calling the public meetings is proved by Duran
(Cap. IV, p. 42). Acosta (Lib. VII, cap. VII, p. 468). Veytia
(Lib. II, cap. XVIII, pp. 156,159. Cap. XXI, p. 186). Acosta first
mentions "unos palacios, aunque harto pobres." (Lib. VII, cap. 8,
p. 470), on the occasion of the election of the first regular
"tlacatecuhtli:" Acamapichtli--Torquemada says (Lib. XII, cap. XXII,
p. 290) that they lived in miserable huts of reeds and straw,
erected around the open space where the altar or place of worship
of Huitzilopochtli was built. The public building was certainly
their latest kind of construction.]

[Relocated Footnote 7: "Patronomial Estates" are mentioned
frequently, but the point is, where are they to be found?
Neither the "teepan-tlalli" nor the "tlatoca-tlalli," still
less the "calpulalli," show any trace of individual ownership.
"Eredad" (heirloom) is called indiscriminately "milli" and
"cuemitl" (Molina, Parte Ia, p. 57). The latter is also rendered
as "tierra labrada, o camellon" (Molina, Parte IIa, p. 26). It
thus reminds us of the "chinamitl" or garden-bed (as the name
"camellon" also implies), and reduces it to the proportion of
an ordinary cultivated lot among the others contained within the
area of the calpulli. It is also called "tlalli," but that is
the general name for soil or ground. "Tierras o eredades de
particulares, juntas an alguna vega," is called "tlalmilli".
This decomposes into "tlalli" soil and "milli." But "vega"
signifies a fertile tract or field, and thus we have again
the conception of communal lands, divided into lots improved by
particular families, as the idea of communal tenure necessarily
implies.]

[Relocated Footnote 8: Zurita ("Rapport," etc., etc., p. 50):
"The chiefs of the second class are yet called calpullec in the
singular and chinancallec in the plural." (This is evidently
incorrect, since the words 'calpulli' and 'chinancalli' can easily
be distinguished from each other.) "'Chinancalli', however after
Molina means 'cercado de seto' (Parte IIa, p. 21), or an inclosed
area, and if we connect it with the old original 'chinamitl' we are
forcibly carried back to the early times, when the Mexicans but
dwelt on a few flakes of more or less solid ground. This is an
additional evidence in favor of the views we have taken of the
growth of landed tenure among the Mexican tribe. We must never
forget that the term is 'Nahuatl,' and as such recognized by all the
other tribes, outside of the Mexicans proper. The interpretation as
'family' in the Quiche tongue of Guatemala, which we have already
mentioned, turns up here as of further importance; that is: chiefs
of an old race or family, from the word calpulli or chinancalli,
which is the same, and signifies a quarter (barrio), inhabited by a
family known, or of old origin, which possesses since long time a
territory whose limits are known, and whose members are of the same
lineage."

"The calpullis, families or quarters, are very common in each
province. Among the lands which were given to the chefs of the
second class there were also calpullis. These lands are the property
of the people in general ('de la masse du peuple') from the time the
Indians reached this land. Each family or tribe received a portion
of the soil for perpetual enjoyment. They also had the name of
calpulli, and until now this property has been respected. They do
not belong to each inhabitant of the village in particular, but to
the calpulli, which possesses them in common." Don Ramirez de
Fuenleal, letter dated Mexico, 3 Nov., 1532 ("Recueil de pieces,"
etc, Ternaux-Compans, p. 253): "There are very few people in the
villages which have lands of their own ... the lands are held in
common and cultivated in common." Herrera (Dec. III, Lib. IV, cap. XV,
p. 135) confirms, in a condensed form, the statement of Zurita,
"and they are not private lands of each one, but held in common."
Torquemada (Lib. XIV, cap. VII, p. 545.) Veytia (Lib. III, cap. VI,
p. 196). "Finally, there were other tracts of lands in each tribe,
called calpulalli, which is land of the calpules (barrios), which
also were worked in common." Oviedo (Lib. XXXII, cap. LI, pp. 536 and
537). Clavigero (Lib. VII, cap. XIV). Bustamante ("Tezcoco," etc.,
Parte IIIa, cap. V. p. 232).]

[Relocated Footnote 9: Zurita (p. 52): "He who obtained them from the
sovereign has not the right to dispose of them." Herrera (Dec. III,
Lib. IV, cap. XV, p. 135): "He who possessed them could not alienate
them, although he enjoyed their use for his lifetime." Torquemada
(Lib. XIV, cap. VII, p. 545): "Disputes about lands are frequently
mentioned, but they refer to the enjoyment and possession, and not
the transfer of the land." Baron Humboldt ("Unes des Cordilleres et
monuments indigenes des peuples de l'Amerique", Vol. I, Tab. V)
reproduces a Mexican painting representing a litigation about land.
But this painting was made subsequent to the Conquest, as the fact
that the parties contending are Indians and Spaniards sufficiently
asserts. Occasional mention is made that certain lands "could be sold."
All such tracts, however, like the "pallali", have been shown by us
to be held in communal tenure of the soil, there enjoyment alone
being given to individuals and their families.]

[Relocated Footnote 10: Zurita (p. 60): "The calpulli have a chief
taken necessarily from among the tribe; he must be one of the
principal inhabitants, an able man who can assist and defend the
people. The election takes place among them.... The office of this
chief is not hereditary; when any one dies, they elect in his place
the most respected old man.... If the deceased has left a son who is
able the choice falls upon him, and a relative of the former
incumbent is always preferred." (Id., pp. 50 and 222). Simancas
M. S. S. ("De l'ordre de succession," etc., "Recucil," p. 225): As
to the mode of regulating the jurisdiction and election of the
alcaldes and regidors of the villages, "they nominated men of note
who had the title of achcatanlitin.... There were no other elections
of officers...." ('Art of War,' etc. pp. 119 and 120).]

[Relocated Footnote 11: Zurita (pp. 61 and 62): "This chief has
charge of the lands of the calpulli. It is his duty to defend their
possession. He keeps paintings showing the tracts, the names of
their holders, the situation, the limits, the number of men tilling
them, the wealth of private individuals, the designations of each as
are vacant, of others that belong to the Spaniards, the date of
donation, to whom and by whom they were given. These paintings he
constantly renews, according to the changes occurring, and in this
they are very skillful." It is singular that Motolinia, in his
"Epistola proemial" ("Col. de Doc."; Icazbalceta, Vol. I, p. 5),
among the five "books of paintings" which he says the Mexicans had,
makes no mention of the above. Neither does he notice it in his
letter dated Cholala, 27 Aug., 1554 ("Recueil de pieces," etc.,
Teruaux-Compans).]

[Relocated Footnote 12: Each family, represented by its male head,
obtained a certain tract or lot for cultivation and use, Zurita
(p. 55). "The party (member of the calpulli, because no member of
another one had the right to settle within the area of it--see Id.,
p. 53), who has no lands applies to the chief of the calpulli, who,
upon the advice of the other old men, assigns to him such as
corresponds to his ability and wants. These lands go to his
heirs...." (id., p. 56). "The proprietor who did not cultivate
during two years, either through his own fault or through
negligence, without just cause ... he was called upon to improve
them, and if he failed to do so they were given to another the
following year." Bustamante (Tezcoco, etc., Parte IIIa, p. 190,
cap I): "The fact that any holder of a 'tlalmilli' might rent out
his share, if he himself was occupied in a line precluding him from
actual work on it, results from the lands of the 'calpulli' being
represented alternately treated as communal and again as private
lands. Besides, it is said of the traders who, from the nature of
their occupation, were mostly absent, that they were also members
and participants of a 'calpulli'" (Zurita, p. 223. Sahagun, Lib.
VIII, cap. III, p. 349). Now, as every Mexican belonged to a kinship,
which held lands after the plan exposed above, it follows that such
as were not able to work themselves, on account of their performing
other duties subservient to the interests of the community still
preserved their tracts by having others to work them for their
benefit. It was not the right of tenancy which authorizes the
improvement, but the fact of improvement for a certain purpose and
benefit, which secured the possession or tenancy.]

[Relocated Footnote 13: From "tlalli" soil, and "maitl" hand. Hands
of the soil. Molma (Parte IIa, p. 124) has: "tlalmaitl"--"labrador, y
ganyan." This name is given in distinction of the "macehuales" or
people working the soil in general. The tlalmaites are identical
with the "mayeques." (See Zurita, p. 224): "tlalmaites or mayeques,
which signifies tillers of the soil of others...." He distinguishes
them plainly from the 'teccallec,' which are the 'tecpanpouhque' or
"tecpantlaca" formerly mentioned as attending to a class official
lands (p. 221, Zurita). Herrera (Dec. III, Lib. IV, cap. XVII, p. 138):
"These mayeques could not go from one tract to another, neither
leave those which they cultivated, and raised. They paid tribute to
nobody else but the master of the land." This tends to show that
there existed not an established obligation, a serfdom, but a
voluntary contract, that the "tlalmaites" were not serfs, but simply
renters.]

[Relocated Footnote 14: Motolinia (Tratado II, cap. V, p. 120):
"But they left their houses and lands to their children" ... Gomara
(p. 434): "Es costumbre de pecheros que el hijo mayor herede al
padre en toda la hacienda raiz y mueble, y que tenga y mantenga
todos los hermanos y sobrinos, con tal que haganellos lo que el les
mandare." Clavigero (Lib. VII, cap. XIII): "In Mexico, and nearly
the entire realm, the royal family excepted as already told, the
sons succeeded to the father's rights; and if there were no sons,
then the brothers, and the brothers' sons inherited." Bustamante
("Tezcoco," etc., p. 219): In all these cases, Bustamante only
speaks of chiefs; but the quotations from Motolinia and Gomara
directly apply to the people in general.]

[Relocated Footnote 15: Mr. L. H. Morgan has investigated the custom
of inheritance, not only among the northern Indians, but also among
the pueblo Indians of New Mexico. He establishes the fact, that the
"kinship" or "gens," which we may justly consider as the unit of
organization in American aboriginal society, participated in the
property of the deceased. He proves it among the Iroquois ("Ancient
Society," Part II, cap. II, pp. 75 and 76). Wyandottes, Id., cap. VII,
p. 153. Missouri-tribes, p. 155. Winnebagoes, p 157. Mandans, p 158.
Minnitarees, p. 159. Creeks, p. 161. Choctas, p. 162. Chickasas, p.
163. Ojibwas, p. 167; also Potowattomies and Crees, Miamis, p. 168.
Shawnees, p. 169. Sauks, Foxes and Menominies, p. 170. Delawares, p.
172. Munsees and Mohegans, p. 173. Finally, the pueblo Indians of
New Mexico are shown to have, if not the identical at least a
similar mode of inheritance. It would be easy to secure further
evidence, from South America also.]

[Relocated Footnote 16: Letter of Motolinia and Diego d'Olarte, to
Don Luis de Velasco, Cholula, 27 Aug., 1554 ("Recueil," etc., etc., p.
407): "The daughters did not inherit; it was the principal, wife's
son" ... "Besides, nearly every author designates but a son, or sons,
as the heirs. There is no mention made of daughters at all. In
Tlaxcallan, it is also expressly mentioned that the daughters did
not inherit" (Torquemada, Lib. XI, cap. XXII, p. 348). In general,
the position of woman in ancient Mexico was a very inferior one, and
but little above that which it occupies among Indians in general.
(Compare the description of Gomara, p. 440, Vedia I, with those of
Sahagun. Lib. X, cap. I, p. 1; cap. XIII, pp. 30, 31, 32, and 33.
The fact is generally conceded). H. H. Bancroft "Native Races," Vol.
II, cap. VI, p. 224, etc.]




CHAPTER V.

HOUSES OF INDIAN TRIBES NORTH OF NEW MEXICO.


The growth of the idea of house architecture in general is a subject
more comprehensive than the scope of this volume. But there is one
phase of this growth, illustrating as it does the condition of
society and of the family in savagery and in barbarism, to which
attention will be invited. It is found in the domestic architecture
of the American aborigines, considered as a whole, and as parts of
one system. As a system it stands related to the institutions, usages,
and customs presented in the previous chapters. There is not only
abundant evidence in the collective architecture of the Indian
tribes of the gradual development of this great faculty or aptitude
of the human mind among them, through three ethnical periods, but
the structures themselves, or a knowledge of them, remain for
comparison with each other. A comparison will show that they belong
to a common indigenous system of architecture. There is a common
principle running through all this architecture, from the hut of the
savage to the commodious joint-tenement house of the Village Indians
of Mexico and Central America, which will contribute to its
elucidation.

The indigenous architecture of the Village Indians has given to them,
more than aught else, their position in the estimation of mankind.
The facts of their social condition in other respects, which,
unfortunately, are obscure, have been much less instrumental in
fixing their status than existing architectural remains. The Indian
edifices in Mexico and Central America of the period of the Conquest
may well excite surprise and even admiration; from their palatial
extent, from the material used in their construction, and from the
character of their ornamentation, they are highly creditable to
their skill in architecture. But a false interpretation has, from
the first, been put upon this architecture, as I think can be shown,
and inferences with respect to the social condition and the degree
of advancement of these tribes have been constantly drawn from it
both fallacious and deceptive, when the plain truth would have been
more creditable to the aborigines. It will be my object to give an
interpretation of this architecture in harmony with the usages and
customs of the Indian tribes. The houses of the different tribes, in
ground-plan and mechanism, will be considered and compared, in order
to show wherein they represent one system.

A common principle, as before stated, runs through all this
architecture, from the "long-house" of the Iroquois to the "pueblo
houses" of New Mexico, and to the so-called "palace" at Palenqne,
and the "House of the Nuns" at Uxmal. It is the principle of
adaptation to communism in living, restricted in the first instance
to household groups, and extended finally to all the inhabitants of
a village or encampment by the law of hospitality. Hunger and
destitution were not known at one end of an Indian village while
abundance prevailed at the other. Joint-tenement houses, each
occupied by one large household, as among the Iroquois, or by
several household groups, as in Yucatan, were the natural and
inevitable result of their usages and customs. Communism in living
and the law of hospitality, it seems probable, accompanied all the
phases of Indian life in savagery and in barbarism. These and other
facts of their social condition embodied themselves in their
architecture, and will contribute to its elucidation.

The house architecture of the Northern tribes is of little importance,
in itself considered; but, as an outcome of their social condition
and for comparison with that of the Southern Village Indians, it is
highly important. An attempt will be made to show, firstly, that the
known communism in living of the former tribes entered into and
determined the character of their houses, which are communal; and,
secondly, that wherever the structures of the latter class are
obviously communal, the practice of communism in living at the
period of discovery may be inferred from the structures themselves,
although many of them are now in ruins, and the people who
constructed them have disappeared. Some evidence, however, of the
communism of the Village Indians has been presented.


COMMUNAL HOUSES OF TRIBES IN SAVAGERY.

Mr. Stephen Powers, in his recent and instructive work on the
"California Tribes," enumerates seven varieties of the lodge
constructed by these tribes, adapted to the different climates of
the State. One form was adapted to the raw and foggy climate of the
California coast, constructed of redwood poles over an excavated pit,
another to the snow-belt of the Coast Range and of the Sierras;
another to the high ranges of the Sierras; another to the warm coast
valleys; another, limited to a small area, constructed of interlaced
willow poles, the interstices being open; another to the woodless
plains of the Sacramento and the San Joaquin, dome-shaped and
covered with earth; and another to the hot and nearly rainless
region of the Kern and Tulare valleys, made of tule. Four of these
varieties are given below, the illustrations being taken from his
work. [Footnote: Powell's Geographical Survey, &c., of the Rocky
Mountain Region, Contributions to American Ethnology, vol. iii,
Powers' Tribes of California, p. 436.]

"In making a wigwam, they excavated about two feet, banked up the
earth enough to keep out the water, and threw the remainder on the
roof dome-shaped. With the Lolsel the bride often remains in the
father's house, and her husband comes to live with her, whereupon
half the purchase money is returned. Thus there will be two or three
families in one lodge. They are very clannish, especially the
mountain tribes, and family influence is all potent." [Footnote: ib.,
p. 221.]

Elsewhere he remarks upon this form of house as follows: "On the
great woodless plains of the Sacramento and San Joaquin, the savages
naturally had recourse to earth for a material. The round,
domed-shaped, earth-covered lodge is considered the characteristic
one of California; and probably two-thirds of its immense aboriginal
population lived in dwellings of this description. The doorway is
sometimes directly on top, sometimes on the ground, at one side. I
have never been able to ascertain whether the amount of rain-fall of
any given locality had any influence in determining the place of the
door." [Footnote: ib., p. 437.]

This mode of entrance reappears in the more artistic house of the
Pueblo Indians of New Mexico, where the rooms are entered by means
of a trap-door in the roof, the descent being made by a ladder. The
"immense aboriginal population" of California, claimed by Mr. Powers,
is too strong a statement.

"This wigwam is in the shape of the capital letter L, made up of
slats leaning up to a ridge-pole and heavily thatched. All along the
middle of it the different families or generations have their fires,
while they sleep next the walls, lying on the ground, underneath
rabbit-skins and other less elegant robes, and amid a filthy cluster
of baskets, dogs, and all the wretched trumpery dear to the
aboriginal heart. There are three narrow holes for dens, one at
either end and one at the elbow." This is Mr. Powers' fifth variety
of the lodge. [Footnote: Powers' Tribes of Cal., p. 284.]

"In the very highest region of Sierra, where the snow falls to such
an enormous depth that the fire would be blotted out and the whole
open side snowed up, the dwelling retains substantially the same
form and materials, but the fire is taken into the middle of it, and
one side of it (generally the east one) slopes down more nearly
horizontal than the other, and terminates in a curved way about
three feet high and twice as long." Half a dozen such houses make an
Indian village, with the addition of a "dome-shaped assembly or
dance house" in the middle space. "One or more acorn-granaries of
wicker-work stand around each lodge, much like hogsheads in shape
and size, either on the ground or mounted on posts as high as one's
head, full of acorns and capped with thatch." [Footnote: Powers'
Tribes of Cal., p. 284.]

In Southern California, where the climate is both dry and hot, the
natives constructed a wigwam entirely different from those found in
other parts of the State. "In the Yokut nation," Mr. Powers remarks,
"there appears to be more political solidarity, more capacity in the
petty tribes of being grouped into large and coherent masses than is
common in the State. This is particularly true of those living on
the plains, who display in their encampments a military precision
and regularity which are remarkable. Every village consists of a
single row of wigwams, conical or wedge-shaped, generally made of
tule, and just enough hollowed out within so that the inmates may
sleep with the head higher than the feet, all in perfect alignment,
and with a continuous awning of brushwood stretching along in front.
In one end-wigwam lives the village captain; on the other the shaman
of si-se'-ro. In the mountains there is some approach to this martial
array, but it is universal on the plains." [Footnote: Powers' Tribes
of Cal., p. 370.]

As a rule these houses were occupied by more families than one, as
is shown by the same author. In the northern part of the State
"the Tatu wigwams do not differ essentially from those of the vicinal
tribes. They are constructed of stout willow wicker-work, dome-shaped,
and thatched with grass. Sometimes they are very large and oblong,
with sleeping-room for thirty or forty persons." [Footnote: ib., p.
139.]

The Yo-kai'-a inhabit a section of the north-west part of the State.
"Their style of lodge is the same which prevails generally along
Russian River, a huge frame-work of willow poles covered with thatch,
and resembling a large flattish haystack. Though still preserving
the same style and materials, since they have adopted from the
Americans the use of boards they have learned to construct all
around the wall of the wigwam a series of little state rooms, if I
may so call them, which are snugly boarded up and furnished with
bunks inside. This enables every family in these immense patriarchal
lodges to disrobe and retire with some regard to decency, which
could not be done in the one common room of the old style wigwam."
[Footnote: ib., p. 163.]

Again: "The Se-nel, together with three other petty tribes, mere
villages, occupy that broad expanse of Russian River Valley on one
side of which now stands the American village of Senel. Among them
we find unmistakably developed that patriarchal system which appears
to prevail all along Russian River. They construct immense
dome-shaped or oblong lodges of willow poles an inch or two in
diameter, woven in square lattice-work, securely lashed and thatched.
In each one of these live several families, sometimes twenty or
thirty persons, including all who are blood relations. Each wigwam,
therefore, is a pueblo, a law unto itself; and yet these lodges are
grouped in villages, some of which formerly contained hundreds of
inhabitants." [Footnote: ib., p. 168.]

I cannot find that Mr. Powers mentions the practice of communism in
these households, but the fact seems probable. Their usages in the
matter of hospitality are much the same as in the other tribes.
Their principal food was salmon, acorn-flour bread, game, kamas, and
berries. They were, without pottery, cooked in ground ovens, and
also in water-tight baskets by means of heated stones.

A brief reference may be made to the skin lodge of the Kutchin or
Louchoux of the Yukon and Peel Rivers.

[Illustration: Fig. 5.--Kutchin Lodge.]

This simple structure, the ground plan and elevation of which were
taken from the Smithsonian Report, is thus described by Mr.
Strachan Jones: [Footnote: Report for 1866, p. 321.] "Deer-skins are
dressed with the hair on, and sewed together, forming two large rolls,
which are stretched over a frame of bent poles. The lodge is nearly
elliptical, about twelve or thirteen feet in diameter and six feet
high, very similar to a tea-cup turned over. The door is about four
feet high, and is simply a deer-skin fastened above and hanging down.
The hole to allow the smoke to escape is about four feet in diameter.
Snow is heaped up outside the edges of the lodge and pine brush
spread on the ground inside, the snow having been previously
shoveled off with snow-shoes. The fire is made in the middle of the
lodge, and one or more families, as the case may be, live on each
side of the fire, every one having his or her particular place."
[Footnote: ib., p. 322.] He further remarks that "they have no
pottery," and that they boil water "by means of stones heated red
hot and thrown into the kettle." [Footnote: ib., p. 321.]

The principal fact to be noticed is that the lodge is comparted into
stalls open on the central space, in the midst of which is the
fire-pit, evidently for the accommodation of more families than one.
This arrangement of the interior will reappear in numerous other
cases. The Kutchin must be classed as savages, although near the
close of that condition.

The tribes of the valley of the Columbia lived more or less in
villages, but, like the tribes of California, were without
horticulture and without pottery. But they found an abundant
subsistence in the shell-fish of the coast, and in the myriads of
fish in the Columbia and its tributaries. They also subsisted upon
kamash and other bread roots of the prairies, which they cooked in
ground ovens, and upon berries and game. They were expert boatmen
and fishermen, manufactured water-tight baskets, implements of wood,
stone, and bone, and used the bow and arrow. As another quite
remarkable fact, they used plank in their houses, made by splitting
logs with stone and elk-horn chisels. Like the Kutchin, they were in
the Upper Status of savagery.

When Lewis and Clarke visited the Columbia River district (1805-1806)
they found the Indian tribes living in houses of the plainest
communal type, and some of them approaching in ground dimensions and
in the number of their occupants the pueblo houses in New Mexico.
They speak of a house of the Chopunish (Nez Perces) as follows:
"This village of Tumachemootool is in fact only a single house one
hundred and fifty feet long, built after the Chopunish fashion, with
sticks, straw and dried grass. It contains twenty-four fires, about
double that number of families, and might perhaps muster a hundred
fighting men." [Footnote: Travels, etc., l. c., p. 548.]

This would give five hundred people in a single house. The number of
fires probably indicates the number of groups practicing communism
in living among themselves, though for aught we know it may have
been general in the entire household.

[Illustration: Fig. 6--Ground plan of Ncerchokioo.]

Another great house, Ncerchokioo, is thus described: "This large
building is two hundred and twenty-six feet in front, entirely above
ground, and may be considered a single house, because the whole is
under one roof, otherwise it would seem more like a range of
buildings, as it is divided into seven distinct apartments, each
thirty feet square, by means of broad boards set up on end from the
floor to the roof. The apartments are separated from each other by a
passage or alley four feet wide, extending through the whole depth
of the house, and the only entrance is from the alley through a
small hole about twenty inches wide and not more than three feet high.
The roof is formed of rafters and round poles laid on horizontally.
The whole is covered with a double roof of bark of white cedar."
[Footnote: Lewis and Clarke's Travels, p. 503.]

The apartments, as in the previous case of the fires, may be
supposed to indicate the number of groups into which the great
household was subdivided for the practice of communism.

Elsewhere, speaking of the houses of the Clahclellahs, they remark:
"These houses are uncommonly large; one of them measured one hundred
and sixty by forty feet, and the frames are constructed in the usual
manner.... Most of the houses are built of boards and covered with
bark, though some of the more inferior kind are constructed wholly
of cedar bark, kept smooth and flat by small splinters fixed
crosswise through the bark, at the distance of twelve or fourteen
inches apart." [Footnote: ib., p. 515.]

The houses of the coast tribes (Clatsops and Chinooks) are also
described. "The houses in this neighborhood are all large wooden
buildings, ranging in length from twenty to sixty feet, and from
fourteen to twenty in width. They are constructed in the following
manner: two posts of split timber or more, agreeable to the number
of partitions, are sunk in the ground, above which they rise to the
height of fourteen or eighteen feet. They are hollowed at the top,
so as to receive the end of a round beam or pole (ridge-pole)
stretching from one to the other, and forming the upper point of the
roof for the whole extent of the building. On each side of this
range is placed another, which forms the eaves of the house, and is
about five feet high; and as the building is often sunk to the depth
of four or five feet, the eaves come very near the surface of the
earth. Smaller pieces of timber are now extended by pairs, in the
form of rafters, from the lower to the upper beams, where they are
attached at both ends with cords of cedar bark. On these rafters two
or three ranges of small poles are placed horizontally, and secured
in the same way with strings of cedar bark. The sides are now made,
with a range of white boards, sunk a small distance into the ground,
with upper ends projecting above the poles at the eaves.... The
gable end and partitions are formed in the same way.... The roof is
than covered with a double range of thin boards, except an aperture
of two or three feet in the center, for the smoke to pass through.
The entrance is by a small hole, cut out of the boards, and just
large enough to admit the body. The very largest houses only are
divided by partitions, for though three or four families reside in
the same room, there is quite space enough for all of them. In the
center of each room is a space six or eight feet square, sunk to the
depth of twelve inches below the rest of the floor, and inclosed by
four pieces of square timber. Here they make the fire, for which
purpose pine bark is generally preferred. Around the fireplace mats
are placed, and serve as seats during the day, and very frequently
as beds at night. There is, however, a more permanent bed made by
fixing, in two or sometimes three sides of the room, posts reaching
from the roof to the ground, and at the distance of four feet from
the wall. From these posts to the wall itself, one or two ranges of
boards are placed so as to form shelves, in which they either sleep
or there stow away their various articles of merchandise."
[Footnote: Lewis and Clarke's Travels, p. 431.]

These explorers found the houses of the Indian tribes throughout the
Columbia Valley occupied by several families, the smallest of them
containing from twenty to forty persons, and the largest five hundred.
The presence of large households is fully shown as the rule in their
house-life. The practice of communism by the household, as stated by
these authors, has already (supra, p. 71) been presented. This
tendency to aggregation in groups, for subsistence and for mutual
protection, reveals the weakness of the single family in the
presence of the hardships of life. Communism in living was very
plainly a necessity of their condition.

In a recent description (1869) of the modern houses of the Makah
Indians of Cape Flattery, Washington Territory, by Mr. James G. Swan,
the old usage which led to joint-tenement houses still asserts itself.
Speaking of the manner of building these houses in detail, he
remarks that "they are designed to accommodate several families, and
are of various dimensions; some of them being sixty feet long by
thirty wide, and from ten to fifteen feet high." The houses were
made of split boards on a frame of timber. [Footnote: Smithsonian
Contributions to Knowledge, No. 220, p. 5.]


COMMUNAL HOUSES OF TRIBES IN LOWER STATUS OF BARBARISM.

[Illustration: Fig. 7--Frame of Ojibwa Wig-e-wam.]

Among the Indian tribes in the Lower Status of barbarism some
diversity existed in the plans of the lodge and house. Fig. 7, which
is taken from Schoolcraft's work on the Indian tribes, shows the
frame of an Ojibwa cabin or lodge of the best class, as it may still
be seen on the south shore of Lake Superior. Its mechanism is
sufficiently shown by the frame of elastic poles exhibited by the
figure. It is covered with bark, usually canoe birch, taken off in
large pieces and attached with splints. Its size on the ground
varied from ten to sixteen feet, and its height from six to ten.
Twigs of spruce or hemlock were strewn around the border of the
lodge on the ground floor, upon which blankets and skins were spread
for beds. The fire-pit was in the center of the floor, over which,
in the center of the roof, was an opening for the exit of the smoke.
Such a lodge would accommodate, in the aboriginal plan of living,
two and sometimes three married pairs with their children. Several
such lodges were usually found in a cluster, and the several
households consisted of related families, the principal portion
being of the same gens or clan. I am not able to state whether or
not the households thus united by the bond of kin practiced
communism in living in ancient times, but it seems probable. Carver,
who visited an Ojibwa village in Wisconsin in 1767, makes it appear
that each house was occupied by several families. "This town," he
remarks, "contains about forty houses, and can send out upwards of a
hundred warriors, many of whom are fine young men." This would give,
by the usual rule of computation, five hundred persons, and an
average of twelve persons to a house. [Footnote: Travels, etc., p. 65.]

[Illustration: Fig. 8--Dakota wii-ka-yo, or Skin Tent.]

When first discovered the Dakotas lived in houses constructed with a
frame of poles and covered with bark, each of which was large enough
for several families. They dwelt principally in villages in their
original area on the head-waters of the Mississippi, the present
State of Minnesota. Forced upon the plains by an advancing white
population, but after they had become possessed of horses, they
invented a skin tent eminently adapted to their present nomadic
condition. It is superior to any other in use among the American
aborigines from its roominess, its portable character, and the
facility with which it can be erected and struck. The frame consists
of thirteen poles from fifteen to eighteen feet in length, which,
after being tied together at the small ends, are raised upright with
a twist so as to cross the poles above the fastening. They are then
drawn apart at the large ends and adjusted upon the ground in the
rim of a circle usually ten feet in diameter. A number of untanned
and tanned buffalo skins, stitched together in a form adjustable to
the frame, are drawn around it and lashed together, as shown in the
figure. The lower edges are secured to the ground with tent-pins. At
the top there is an extra skin adjusted as a collar, so as to be
open on the windward side to facilitate the exit of the smoke. A low
opening is left for a doorway, which is covered with an extra skin
used as a drop. The fire-pit and arrangements for beds are the same
as in the Ojibwa lodge, grass being used in the place of spruce or
hemlock twigs. When the tent is struck, the poles are attached to a
horse, half on each side, like thills, secured to the horse's neck
at one end, and the other dragging on the ground. The skin-covering
and other camp-equipage are packed upon other horses and even upon
their dogs, and are thus transported from place to place on the
plains. This tent is so well adapted to their mode of life that it
has spread far and wide among the Indian tribes of the prairie region.
I have seen it in use among seven or eight Dakota sub-tribes, among
the Iowas, Otoes, and Pawnees, and among the Black-feet, Crows,
Assiniboines, and Crees. In 1878 I saw it in use among the Utes of
Colorado. A collection of fifty of these tents, which would
accommodate five hundred persons, make a picturesque appearance.
Under the name of the "Sibley tent" it is now in use, with some
modifications of plan, in the United States Army, for service on the
plains.

[Illustration: Fig. 9--Village of Pomeiock.]

Sir Richard Grenville's expedition in 1585 visited the south part of
the original colony of Virginia, now included in North Carolina.
They landed at Roanoke Island, and also ascended a section of
Albemarle Sound as far as the villages of Pomeiock and Secotan. An
artist, John Wyth, before mentioned, was a member of this expedition,
and we are indebted to him for a number of valuable sketches--the
two villages named among the number, of which copies are given,
together with representations of the people and of their industrial
arts. The description of Pomeiock is as follows: "The towns in
Virginia are very like those of Florida, not, however, so well and
firmly built, and are enclosed by a circular palisade with a narrow
entrance. In the town of Pomeiock, the buildings are mostly those of
the chiefs and men of rank. On one side is the Temple (council-house)
(A) of a circular shape, apart from the rest, and covered with mats
on every side, without windows, and receiving no light except
through the entrance. The residence of their chief (B) is
constructed of poles fixed in the ground, bound together and covered
with mats, which are thrown off at pleasure, to admit as much light
and air as they may require. Some are covered with the boughs of
trees. The natives, as represented in the plate, are indulging in
their sports. When the spring or pond is at a distance from the town,
they dig a ditch from it that supplies them with water." [Footnote:
Wyth's Sketches of Virginia, first published by De Bry, 1690,
Langly's ed., 1841, Plate 21.]

The village consisted of seventeen joint-tenement houses and a
council-house, arranged around a central open space, and surrounded
with a palisade. Here the Algonkin lodge, unlike that of the Ojibwas,
is a long, round-roofed house, apparently from fifty to eighty feet
in length, covered with movable matting in the place of bark, and
large enough to accommodate several families. The suggestion of this
author, that "the buildings were mostly those of chiefs and men of
rank," embodies the precise error which has repeated itself from
first to last with respect to the houses of American aborigines.
Because the houses at Pomeiock were large, they were the residences
of chiefs; and because the House of the Nuns at Uxmal was of
palatial extent, it was the exclusive residence of an Indian
potentate--conclusions opposed to the whole theory of Indian life
and institutions. Indian chiefs, the continent over, were housed
with the people, and no better, as a rule, than the poorest of them.

"Some of their towns," says the same author, "are not enclosed with
a palisade and are much more pleasant; Secotan, for example, here
drawn from nature. The houses are more scattered and a greater
degree of comfort and cultivation is observable, with gardens in
which tobacco (E) is cultivated, woods filled with deer, and fields
of corn. In the fields they erect a stage (F), in which a sentry is
stationed to guard against the depredations of birds and thieves.
Their corn they plant in rows (H), for it grows so large, with thick
stalk and broad leaves, that one plant would stint the other and it
would never arrive at maturity. They have also a curious place
(C) where they convene with their neighbors at their feasts, as more
fully shown on Plate 20, and from which they go to the feast (D). On
the opposite side is their place of prayer (B), and near to it the
sepulchre of their chiefs (A).... They have gardens for melons
(I), and a place (K) where they build their sacred fires. At a
little distance from the town is the pond (L) from which they obtain
their water." [Footnote: Sketches, etc., of Virginia, description of
Plate 22.]

The houses of the Powhatan Indians of Virginia proper, as described
by Captain John Smith, were precisely like those of Pomeiock and
Secotan. A part of the interior of the house in which Smith was
received by Powhatan as a prisoner is engraved upon his map of
Virginia, of which the following is a copy:

[Illustration: Fig. 11.--Interior of House of Virginia Indians.
   With caption:
                   POWHATAN
   Held this state & fashion when Capt. Smith
         was delivered to him prisoner
                     1607]

"Their houses are built," Smith remarks, "like our arbors, of small
young sprigs, bowed and tied, and so close covered with mats, or the
bark of trees, very handsomely, that notwithstanding either wind,
rain, or weather, they are as warm as stoves, but very smoky; yet,
at the top of the house there is a hole made for the smoke to go
into right over the fire. Against the fire they lie on little
hurdles of reeds covered with a mat, borne from the ground a
foot or more by a hurdle of wood. On these, round about the
house, they lie, heads and points, one by the other against
the fire, some covered with mats, some with skins, and some
stark naked lie on the ground, from six to twenty in a house."
[Footnote: History of Virginia, i, 130.]

The engraving is probably an improvement upon the original house in
the symmetry of the structure, but it is doubtless a truthful
representation of its mechanism. It seems likely that a double set
of upright poles were used, one upon the outside and one on the
inside, between which the mattings of canes or willows were secured,
as the houses at Pomeiock and Secotan are ribbed externally at
internals of about eight feet, showing four, five, and six sections.
Each house, on this hypothesis, would be from twenty-four to
forty-eight feet long. A reference (supra, p. 67) has been made to
the size of the houses of the Virginia Indians, from which their
communistic character may be inferred.

In the "Journal of a Voyage to New York," in 1679-1680, by Jasper
Dankers and Peter Sluyter, edited and translated by Hon. Henry C.
Murphy, there is a careful description of a house of the Nyack
Indians of Long Island, an Algonkin tribe, affiliated linguistically
with the Virginia Indians. The Nyack house corresponds very closely
with those last named. "We went from hence to her habitation," these
authors remark, "where we found the whole troop together, consisting
of seven or eight families, and twenty or twenty-two persons, I
should think. Their house was low and long, about sixty feet long
and fourteen or fifteen feet wide. The bottom was earth; the sides
and roof were made of reed and the bark of chestnut trees; the posts
or columns were limbs of trees stuck in the ground, and all fastened
together. The top or ridge of the roof was open about half a foot
wide, from one end to the other, in order to let the smoke escape,
in the place of a chimney. On the sides or walls of the house, the
roof was so low that you could hardly stand under it. The entrance,
or doors, which were at both ends, were so small and low that they
had to stoop down and squeeze themselves to get through them. The
doors were made of reed or flat bark. In the whole building there
was no lime, stone, iron, or lead. They build their fires in the
middle of the floor, according to the number of families which live
in it, so that from one end to the other each of them boils its own
pot, and eats when it likes, not only the families by themselves,
but each Indian alone, according as he is hungry, at all hours,
morning, noon, and night. By each fire are the cooking utensils,
consisting of a pot, a bowl or calabash, and a spoon, also made of a
calabash. These are all that relate to cooking. They lie upon mats
with their feet towards the fire, on each side of it. They do not
sit much upon anything raised up, but, for the most part, sit on the
ground or squat on their ankles. Their other household articles
consist of a calabash of water, out of which they drink, a small
basket in which to carry and keep their maize and small beans, and a
knife.... All who live in one house are generally of one stock or
descent, as father and mother with their offspring. Their bread is
maize pounded on a block by a stone, but not fine. This is mixed
with water and made into a cake, which they bake under the hot ashes.
They gave us a small piece when we entered, and although the grains
were not ripe, and it was half baked and coarse grains, we
nevertheless had to eat it, or, at least, not throw it away before
them, which they would have regarded as a great sin or a great
affront." [Footnote: Journal, etc., p. 124.]

There is nothing in these statements forbidding the supposition that
the household described practiced communism in living. The
composition of the household shows that it was formed on the
principle of gentle kin, while the several families cooked at the
different fires, which was the usual practice in the different tribes;
the stores were probably common, and the household under a matron.
It will be noticed also that they gave him maize bread when he first
entered the house. He little supposed that it was in obedience to a
law or usage universal in the Indian family.

[Illustration: Fig. 12.--Ho-de'-no-sote of the Seneca-Iroquois.]

During the greater part of the year the Iroquois resided in villages.
The size of the village was estimated by the number of the houses,
and the size of the house by the number of fires it contained. One
of the largest of the Seneca-Iroquois villages, situated at Mendon,
near Rochester, N. Y. is thus described by Mr. Greenbalgh, who
visited it in 1677: "Tiotohatton is on the brink or edge of a hill,
has not much cleared ground, is near the river Tiotohatton [outlet
of Honeoye Lake], which signifies bending. It lies to the westward
of Canagora (Canandaigua) about thirty miles, contains about 120
houses, being the largest of all the houses we saw, the ordinary
being fifty to sixty feet long, with twelve and thirteen fires in
one house. They have a good store of corn growing to the northward
of the town". [Footnote: Documentary History of New York, vol i. p 13.]

The "long-house" of the Iroquois, from which they called themselves,
as one confederated people, Ho-de'-no-sau-nee (People of the
Long-House), was from fifty to eighty and sometimes one hundred feet
long. It consisted of a strong frame of upright poles set in the
ground, which were strengthened with horizontal poles attached with
withes, and surmounted with a triangular, and in some cases with a
round roof. It was covered over, both sides and roof, with large
strips of elm bark tied to the frame with strings or splints. An
external frame of poles for the sides and of rafters for the roof
were then adjusted to hold the bark shingles between them, the two
frames being tied together.

[Illustration: Fig. 13.--Ground-plan of Seneca-Iroquois Long-House.]

The interior of the house was comparted at intervals of six or eight
feet, leaving each chamber entirely open like a stall upon the
passage way which passed through the center of the house from end to
end. At each end was a doorway cohered with suspended skins. Between
each four apartments, two on a side, was a fire-pit in the center of
the hall, used in common by their occupants. Thus a house with five
fires would contain twenty apartments and accommodate twenty families,
unless some apartments were reserved for storage. They were warm,
roomy, and tidily-kept habitations. Raised bunks were constructed
around the walls of each apartment for beds. From the roof-poles
were suspended their strings of corn in the ear, braided by the husks,
also strings of dried squashes and pumpkins. Spaces were contrived
here and there to store away their accumulations of provisions. Each
house, as a rule was occupied by related families, the mothers and
their children belonging to the same gens, while their husbands and
the fathers of these children belonged to other gentes; consequently
the gens or clan of the mother largely predominated in the household.
Whatever was taken in the hunt or raised by cultivation by any
member of the household, as has elsewhere been stated, was for the
common benefit. Provisions were made a common stock within the
household.

Here was communism in living carried out in practical life, but
limited to the household, and an expression of the principle in the
plan of the house itself. Having found it in one stock as well
developed as the Iroquois, a presumption of its universality in the
Indian family at once arises, because it was a law of their condition.
Evidence of its general prevalence has elsewhere been presented.

In a previous chapter the usages of the Iroquois in regard to eating
have been given. It came practically to one cooked meal each day.
The separate fires in each house were for convenience in cooking,
all the stores in the house being common. The plan of life within
them was studied and economical. This is shown by the presence of a
matron in each household, who made a division of the food from the
kettle to each family according to their needs, and reserved what
remained for future disposal. It shows system and organization in
their long-houses, with a careful supervision of their stores, and
forethought as well as equity in the management and distribution of
their food. In these households, formed on the principle of kin, was
laid the foundation for that "mother power" which was even more
conspicuous in the tribes of the Old World, and which Professor
Bachofen was the first to discuss under the name of gyneocracy and
mother-right. [Footnote: Das Mutterrecht, Stuttgart, 1861.]

Since the mothers who dwelt together were usually sisters, own or
collateral, and of the same gens, and since their children were also
of the gens of their mother, the preponderating number in the
household would be of gentile kin. The right and the influence of
the mother were protected and strengthened through the maternal as
well as the gentile bond. The husbands were in the minority as to
kindred. In case of separation it was the husband and not the wife
who left the house. But this influence of the woman did not reach
outward to the affairs of the gens phratry, or tribe, but seems to
have commenced and ended with the household. This view is quite
consistent with the life of patient drudgery and of general
subordination to the husband which the Iroquois wife cheerfully
accepted as the portion of her sex. Among the Grecian tribes descent
had been changed to the male line at the commencement of the
historical period. It thus reversed the position of the wife and
mother in the household: she was of a different gens from her
children, as well as her husband; and under monogamy was now
isolated from her gentile kindred, living in the separate and
exclusive house of her husband. Her new condition tended to subvert
and destroy that power and influence which descent in the female
line and the joint-tenement houses had created. It is, therefore,
the more surprising that so many traces of this anterior condition
should have remained in the Grecian and other tribes which Professor
Bachofen has pointed out, since gyneocracy and mother-right, as
discussed by him, must have originated among these tribes when under
the gentile organization, and with descent in the female line.

The "Joint Undivided Family" of the Hindus at the present time,
"joint in food, worship, and estate," brought to our notice by Sir
Henry Maine, [Footnote: Early History of Institutions, Holt's ed., pp.
100 and 106.] is a similar but probably more numerous household
than that of the Iroquois. As soon as special investigation is made,
joint-tenement houses and communism in living are found to be
persistent features of barbarous life in the Old World as well as
the New, but limited to the household. Strabo informs us that the
Gauls lived in great houses, constructed of planks and wicker, with
dome roofs covered with heavy thatch. [Footnote: Lib. iv, c. 4, s. 3.]
Wherever such houses existed there is at least a presumption that
they were occupied by several families, who formed a single
household and practiced communism.

The Iroquois long-houses disappeared before the commencement of the
present century. Very little is now remembered by the Indians
themselves of their form and mechanism, or of the plan of life
within them. Some knowledge of these houses remains among that class
of Indians who are curious about their ancient customs. It has
passed into the traditionary form, and is limited to a few
particulars. A complete understanding of the mode of life in these
long-houses will not, probably, ever be recovered. In 1743 Mr. John
Bartram attended a council at Onondaga, and kept a journal,
afterwards published, in which he inserted a ground plan of the
long-house in which they were quartered. It is the first ground plan
of one of these houses ever published, so far as the author is aware,
and the only one prior to the appearance of Johnson's Cyclopaedia in
1875.

[Illustration: Fig. 14--Bartram's ground-plan and cross-section of
Onondaga Long-House, in 1743.]

It should be noted that in 1696 Count Frontenac invaded Onondaga
with a large French and Indian force, and that the Onondagas
destroyed their principal village and retired. "The cabins of the
Indians," says the relator, "and the triple palisade which encircled
their fort were found entirely burnt." [Footnote: Documentary
History of New York, p. 332.]

The new village visited by Mr. Bartram was probably quite near the
site of the old. He says, "The town in its present state is about
two or three miles long, yet the scattered cabins on both sides of
the water are not above forty in number; many of them hold two
families, but all stand single, so that the whole town is a strange
mixture of cabins, interspersed with great patches of high grass,
bushes and shrubs, some of peas, corn, and squashes.... We alighted
at the council-house, where the chiefs were already assembled to
receive us, which they did with a grave, cheerful complaisance
according to their custom. They showed us where to lay our luggage,
and repose ourselves during our stay with them, which was in the two
end apartments of this large house. The Indians that came with us
were placed over against us. This cabin is about eighty feet long
and seventeen broad, the common passage six feet wide, and the
apartments on each side five feet, raised a foot above the passage
by a long sapling hewed square, and fitted with joists that go from
it to the back of the house. On these joists they lay large pieces
of bark, and on extraordinary occasions spread mats made of rushes,
which favor we had. On these floors they set or lye down every one
as he will. The apartments are divided from each other by boards or
bark six or seven feet long from the lower floor to the upper, on
which they put their lumber. When they have eaten their hominy, as
they set in each apartment before the fire, they can put the bowl
over head, having not above five foot to reach. They set on the
floor sometimes at each end, but mostly at one. They have a shed to
put their wood into in the winter, or in the summer to set, converse
or play, that has a door to the south. All the sides and roof of the
cabin is made of bark, bound fast to poles set in the ground, and
bent round on the top, or set aflat for the roof as we set our
rafters; over each fire-place they leave a hole to let out the smoke,
which in rainy weather they cover with a piece of bark, and this
they can easily reach with a pole to push it on one side or quite
over the hole. After this manner are most of their cabins built."
[Footnote: Observations, etc.; Travels to Onondaga, Lond. ed., 1751,
pp. 40, 41]

The end section shows a round roof, as in the houses of the Virginia
Indians, and the ground plan agrees in all respects with the old
long-houses of the Seneca-Iroquois as described by them to the
author before he had seen Mr. Bartram's plan.

In the Documentary History of New York (vol. iii, p. 14) there is a
remarkable picture of the principal village of the Onondagas which
was visited or rather attacked by Champlain in 1615. The location of
this village was not established until 1877, when General John S.
Clarke, of Auburn, by means of Champlain's map and sketch of the
village, and his relation of the particulars of the expedition,
found the site of the village in the town of Fenner, some miles
northeast of the Onondaga Valley.

It was situated upon the edge of a natural pond, covering ten acres
of land, and between a small brook which emptied into the pond on
the left and the outlet of the pond which passed it on the right.
The space covered by the village site was about six acres of land,
strongly fortified by a series of palisades. Champlain states in his
relation that "their village was enclosed with strong quadruple
palisades of large timber, thirty feet high, interlocked the one
with the other, with an interval of not more than half a foot
between them, with galleries in the form of parapets, defended with
double pieces of timber, proof against our arquebuses, and on one
side they had a pond with a never-failing supply of water, from
which proceeded a number of gutters which they had laid along the
intermediate space, throwing the water without, and rendering it
effectual inside for the purpose of extinguishing the fire. Such was
their mode of fortification and defence, which was much stronger
than the villages of the Attigouatuans (Hurons) and others."
[Footnote: Doc. Hist. New York, iii, 14.]

Although Champlain attacked this place with fire-arms, then first
heard by the Onondagas, and by means of a rude tower of his invention,
and with a considerable force of French and Indians, he was unable
to capture it, and retired. The use of water, with gutters to flood
the ground upon an outer palisade when attacked with fire, as
imperfectly shown in the engraving, was certainly ingenious. General
Clarke has investigated the defensive works of the Iroquois, and it
is to be hoped that he will soon give the results to the public.

Knowing, as we now do, that the space inclosed within the palisades
was about six acres of land, the houses are not only seen to be log
houses, but arranged or constructed side by side in blocks, and the
whole thrown together in the form of a square, with an open space in
the center. The houses seem to be in threes and fours, and even sixes,
side by side, and from sixty to one hundred feet in length; but if
this conclusion is fairly warranted by the engraving, it might well
be that each house was separated from its neighbor by a narrow open
space or lane. It is the only representation I have ever seen of a
palisaded village of the Iroquois of the period of their discovery.
It covered about fifty-four acres of land.

The Mandans and Minnetarees of the Upper Missouri constructed a
timber-framed house, superior in design and in mechanical execution
to those of the Indians north of New Mexico. In 1862 I saw the
remains of the old Mandan village shortly after its abandonment by
the Arickarees, its last occupants. The houses, nearly all of which
were of the same model, were falling into decay--for the village was
then deserted of inhabitants, but some of them were still perfect,
and the plan of their structure easily made out. The above
ground-plan of the village was taken from the work of Prince
Maximilian, and the remaining illustrations are from sketches and
measurements of the author. It was situated upon a bluff on the west
side of the Missouri, and at a bend in the river which formed an
obtuse angle, and covered about six acres of land. The village was
surrounded with a stockade made of timbers set vertically in the
ground, and about ten feet high, but then in a dilapidated state.

[Illustration: Fig. 16.--Mandan Village Plot.]

The houses were circular in external form, the walls being about
five feet high, and sloping inward and upward from the ground, upon
which rested an inclined roof, both the exterior wall and the roof
being plastered over with earth a foot and a half thick. For this
reason they have usually been called "dirt lodges."

[Illustration: Fig. 17.--Ground-plan of a Mandan House.]

These houses are about forty feet in diameter, with the floor sunk a
foot or more below the surface of the ground, six feet high on the
inside at the line of the wall and from twelve to fifteen feet high
at the center. Twelve posts, six or eight inches in diameter, are
set in the ground, at equal distances, in the circumference of a
circle, and rising about six feet above the level of the floor.
String-pieces resting in forks cut in the ends of these posts, form
a polygon at the base and also upon the ground floor. Against these
an equal number of braces are sunk in the ground about four feet
distant, which slanting upward, are adjusted by means of depressions
cut in the ends, so as to hold both the posts and the stringers
firmly in their places. Slabs of wood are then set in the spaces
between the braces at the same inclination, and resting against the
stringers, which when completed surrounded the lodge with a wooden
wall. Four round posts, each six or eight inches in diameter, are
set in the ground near the center of the floor, in the angles of a
square, ten feet apart, and rising from ten to fifteen feet above
the ground floor. These again are connected by stringers resting in
forks at their tops, upon which and the external wall the rafters
rest.

[Illustration: Fig. 18.--Cross-section of House.]

The engraving exhibits a cross-section, as described. Poles three or
four inches in diameter are placed as rafters from the external wall
to the string-pieces above the central parts, and near enough
together to give the requisite strength to support thee earth
covering placed upon the roof. These poles were first covered over
with willow matting, upon which prairie grass was overspread, and
over all a deep covering of earth. An opening was left in the center,
about four feet in diameter, for the exit of the smoke and for the
admission of light. The interior was spacious and tolerably well
lighted, although the opening in the roof and a single doorway were
the only apertures through which light could penetrate. There was
but one entrance, protected by what has been called the Eskimo
doorway; that is, by a passage some five feet wide, ten or twelve
feet long, and about six feet high, constructed with split timbers,
roofed with poles, and covered with earth. Buffalo-robes suspended
at the outer and inner entrances supplied the place of doors. Each
house was comparted by screens of willow matting or unhaired skins
suspended from the rafters, with spaces between for storage. These
slightly-constructed apartments opened towards the central fire like
stalls, thus defining an open central area around the fire-pit,
which was the gathering place of the inmates of the lodge. This
fire-pit was about five feet in diameter, a foot deep, and encircled
with flat stones set up edgewise. A hard, smooth, earthen floor
completed the interior. Such a lodge would accommodate five or six
families, embracing thirty or forty persons. It was a communal house,
in accordance with the usages and institutions of the American
aborigines, and growing naturally out of their mode of life. I
counted forty-eight houses, winch would average forty feet in
diameter, all constructed upon this plan besides several rectangular
log houses of later erection and of the American type.

[Illustration: Fig. 19.--Mandan house.]

These houses, of which a representation is given in Fig. 19, were
thickly studded together to economize the space within the stockade,
so that in walking through the village you passed along some
circular foot-paths. There was no street, and it was impossible to
see in any direction except for short distances. In the center there
was an open space, where their religious rites and festivals were
observed. [Footnote: The war post, which stood in the center, and a
number of stone and bone implements I brought away with me, as
mementoes of the place. They are now in my collection.]

Not the least interesting fact connected with these creditable
structures was the quantity of materials required for their erection
and the amount of labor required for their transportation for long
distances down the river, and to fashion them, with the aid of fire
and stone implements, into such comfortable dwellings. The trees are
here confined to the bottom lands between the banks of the river,
the river being bordered for miles by open prairies, and the trees
growing in patches at long distances apart. To cut the timber
without metallic implements, and to transport it without animal power,
indicate a degree of persevering industry highly creditable to a
people who, at this stage of progress, are averse to labor on the
part of the males. Habitual male industry makes its first appearance
in the next or the Middle Status of barbarism. The men here did the
heavy work.

In the spaces between the lodges were their drying-scaffolds (Fig. 20),
one for each lodge, which were nearly as conspicuous in the distance
as the houses themselves. They were about twenty feet long, twelve
feet wide, and seven feet high to the flooring, made of posts set
upright, with cross-pieces resting in forks. Other poles were then
placed longitudinally, upon which was a flooring of willow mats.
These scaffolds, mounted with ladders (Fig. 21), were used for
drying their skins, and also their maize, meat, and vegetables.

[Illustration: Fig. 20.--Drying scaffold.]

[Illustration: Fig. 21.--Mandan ladder.]

The Indians knew the use of the ladder, and some of them made an
excellent article before the discovery of America. When Coronado
visited and captured the seven so-called cities of Cibola in
1540-1542, he found the people living in seven or eight large
joint-tenement houses, each capable of holding about a thousand
persons. These houses were without entrances from the ground, but
they mounted to the first terrace by means of ladders, and so to
each successive story above. "The ladders which they have for their
houses," Coronado says in his relation, "are all in a manner movable
and portable as ours be." [Footnote: Hakluyt, Coll. of Voyages,
London ed., 1812, vol. 5, p. 498.]

The ladders at the Mandan village were made of two limbs growing
nearly parallel and severed below the junction, as shown in the
figure, and set with the forked end upon the ground, and the ends
against the scaffold. Depressions were sunk in the rails to receive
the rounds, which were secured by rawhide strings. They were usually
from ten to twelve feet long, and one or two at each scaffold.

Situated thus picturesquely on a bluff, at an angle of the river,
with houses of this peculiar model and with such an array of
scaffolds rising up among them, the village was strikingly
conspicuous for some distance both above and below on the river, and
presented a remarkable appearance.

Afterwards, at the present Minnetaree and Mandan village about
sixty-five miles above on the east side of the Missouri, and also at
the new Arickaree village on the west side, and quite near it, I had
an opportunity to see houses precisely similar to those described in
actual occupation by the Indians, with their interior arrangements
and their mode of life.

A reference, at least, should be made to the Maricopas and Mohaves
of the Lower Colorado River, who, although village Indians of the
pueblo type, still live in ordinary communal houses of the northern
type, which are thus described by General Emory: "They (the Maricopas)
occupy thatched cottages thirty or forty feet in diameter, made of
twigs of cottonwood trees, interwoven with straw of wheat, cornstalks,
and cane." [Footnote: Notes, &c., New Mexico, p. 132. See also
Bartlet's Personal Narrative, p. 230.]

Those occupied by the Mohaves, as described by Captain Sitgreave,
are similar in character. [Footnote: Expedition, &c., Zunyi and
Colorado, p. 19.]

The Pimas of the Gila River, on the contrary, claim that their
ancestors erected houses of adobe brick, and cultivated by irrigation.
They point to the remains of ancient structures and of old acequias
in the valley of the Gila, as Captain Crossman informs us, as
the works of their forefathers. But now their condition is very
similar to that of the Mohaves. The last-named writer remarks that
"generally several married couples with their children live in one hut."
[Footnote: Smithsonian Report for 1871, p. 415.]

The first two tribes, although their antecedent history is little
known, seem to be in a transitional stage from the Lower to the
Middle Status of barbarism, having passed into the horticultural and
sedentary condition without being far enough advanced to imitate
their near neighbors in the use of adobe brick and of stone in their
houses. They seem to be existing examples of that ever-recurring
advancement of ruder tribes in past ages, through which the Village
Indians of the pueblo type were constantly replenished from the more
barbarous tribes. The present Taos Indians are another example.

It is made reasonably plain, I think, from the facts stated, that in
the Upper Status of savagery, and also in the Lower Status of
barbarism, the Indian household was formed of a number of families
of gentile kin; that they practiced communism in living in the
household, and that this principle found expression in their house
architecture and predetermined its character.




CHAPTER VI.

HOUSES OF THE SEDENTARY INDIANS OF NEW MEXICO.


We are next to consider the houses and mode of life of the Sedentary
Village Indians, among whom architecture exhibits a higher
development, with the use of durable materials, and with the
defensive principle superadded to that of adaptation to communism in
living. It will not be difficult to discover and follow this latter
principle, as one of the chief characteristics of this architecture
in the pueblo houses in New Mexico, and in the region of the San
Juan River, and afterwards in those of Mexico and Central America.
Throughout all these regions there was one connected system of house
architecture, as there was substantially one mode of life.

In New Mexico, going southward, the Indians, at the epoch of
discovery, were not in a new dress and in an improved condition.
They had advanced out of the Lower and into the Middle Status of
barbarism; the houses in which they dwelt were of adobe brick or of
stone, two, three, four, and sometimes five and six stories in height,
and containing from fifty to five hundred apartments. They
cultivated maize and plants by means of irrigating canals. The water
was drawn from a running stream, taken at a point above the pueblo
and carried down and through a series of garden beds. They wore
mantles of cotton, as well as garments of skin.

[Footnote: "They have no cotton-wool growing, because the country is
cold, yet they wear mantles thereof, as your honor may see by the
show thereof; and true it is, that there was found in their houses
certain yarn made of cotton-wool."--Coronado's Relation, Hakluyt's
Coll. of Voyages, London ed., 1600, iii, p. 377.]

[Footnote: "Their garments were of cotton and deer skins, and the
attire, both of men and women, was after the manner of Indians of
Mexico.... Both men and women wore shoes and boots, with good soles
of neat's leather--a thing never seen in any part of the Indies."--
Voyages to New Mexico, by Friar Augustin Rueyz, a Franciscan, in 1581,
and Antonio de Espejo in 1583. Explorations for Railroad Route, &c.,
Report Indian Tribes, vol. iii, p. 114.]

The present Pueblo Indians of New Mexico are in the main their
descendants. They live, some of them, in the same identical houses
their forefathers occupied at the time of Coronado's expedition to
New Mexico in 1541-1542, as at Acoma, Jemez, and Taos, and although
their plan and mode of life have changed in some respects in the
interval, it is not unlikely that they remain to this day a fair
sample of the life of the Village Indians from Zunyi to Cuzco as it
existed in the sixteenth century.

The Indians north of New Mexico did not construct their houses more
than one story high, or of more durable materials than a frame of
poles or of timber covered with matting or bark, or coated over with
earth. A stockade around their houses was their principal protection.
In New Mexico, going southward, are met for the first time houses
constructed with several stories. Sun-dried brick must have come
into use earlier than stone. The practice of the ceramic art would
suggest the brick sooner or later. At all events, what are supposed
to be the oldest remains of architecture in New Mexico, such as the
Casas Grandes of the Gila and Salinas rivers, are of adobe brick.
They also used cobble-stone with adobe mortar, and finally thin
pieces of tabular sandstone, prepared by fracture, which made a
solid and durable stone wall. Some of the existing pueblo houses in
New Mexico are as old as the expedition of Coronado (1540-1542).
Others, constructed since that event, and now occupied, are of the
aboriginal model. There are at present about twenty of these pueblos
in New Mexico, inhabited by about 7, 000 Village Indians, the
descendants of those found there by Coronado. They are still living
substantially under their ancient organization and usages. Besides
these, there are seven pueblos of the Mokis, near the Little Colorado,
occupied by about 3,000 Indians, who have remained undisturbed to
the present time, except by Roman Catholic missionaries, and among
whom the entire theory of life of the Sedentary Village Indians may
yet be obtained. These Village Indians represent at the present
moment the type of life found from Zunyi to Cuzco at the epoch of
the Discovery, and, while they are not the highest, they are no
unfit representatives of the entire class.

The Yucatan and Central American Indians were, in their architecture,
in advance of the remaining aborigines of North America. Next to them,
probably, were the Aztecs, and some few tribes southward. Holding
the third position, though not far behind, were the Village Indians
of New Mexico. All alike they depended upon horticulture for
subsistence, and cultivated by irrigation; cotton being superadded
to the maize, beans, squashes, and tobacco, cultivated by the
northern tribes. Their houses, with those previously described,
represent together an original indigenous architecture, which, with
its diversities, sprang out of their necessities. Its fundamental
communal type, I repeat, is found not less clearly in the houses
about to be described, and in the so-called palace at Palenque, than
in the long-house of the Iroquois. An examination of the plan of the
structures in Mexico, New Mexico, and Central America will tend to
establish the truth of this proposition.

New Mexico is a poor country for civilized man, but quite well
adapted to Sedentary Indians, who cultivate about one acre out of
every hundred thousand. This region, and the San Juan, immediately
north of it, possessed a number of narrow fertile valleys,
containing together, possibly, 50,000 inhabitants, and it is
occupied now by their descendants (excepting the San Juan) in manner
and form as it was then. Each pueblo consisted either of a single
great house, or of three or four such houses grouped together; and
what is more significant, the New Mexican pueblo is a fair type of
those now found in ruins in Yucatan, Chiapas, Guatemala, and Honduras,
in general plan and in situation. All the people lived together in
these great houses on terms of equality, for their institutions were
essentially democratical. Common tenements for common Indians around
these structures were not found there by Coronado in 1541, neither
have any been found there since. There is not the slightest ground
for supposing that any such tenements ever existed around those in
Yucatan and Central America. Every structure was in the nature of a
fortress, showing the insecurity in which they lived.

Since the year 1846, the date of the conquest of New Mexico, a
number of military reconnaissances, under the direction of the War
Department, have been made in various parts of the Territory. The
army officers in change devoted their chief attention to the
physical geography and resources of the regions traversed; but,
incidentally, they investigated the pueblos in ruins, and the
present condition of the Pueblo Indians. The admirable manner in
which they have executed the work is shown by the series of reports
issued from time to time by the government. More recently, the
Geological and Geographical Survey of the Territories, under Prof. F.
V. Hayden, geologist in charge, and also the Geographical and
Geological Survey of the Rocky Mountain Region, Maj. J. W. Powell,
geologist in charge, have furnished a large amount of additional
information concerning the ruins on the San Juan and its tributaries,
the Cliff Houses on the Mancos River and elsewhere, and the Moki
Pueblos. Valuable as this information is to us, it falls short of a
full exposition of these several subjects.

At the time of Coronado's expedition to capture the Seven Cities of
Cibola, so called in the relations of the period, the aborigines of
New Mexico manufactured earthen vessels of large size and excellent
workmanship, wove cotton fabrics with spun thread, cultivated
irrigated gardens, were armed with the bow, arrow, and shield, wore
deer-skins and buffalo robes and also cotton mantles as external
garments, and had domesticated the wild turkey.

[Footnote: "We found here Guinea cocks [turkeys], but few. The
Indians tell me in all these seven cities that they eat them not,
but that they keep them only for their feathers. I believe them not,
for they are excellent good, and greater than those of Mexico."--
Coronado Rel., Hakluyt, iii, 377.]

"They had hardly provisions enough for themselves," remarks
Jaramillo of the Cibolans, "and what they had consisted of maize,
beans, and squashes." [Footnote: Relation of Capt. Juan Jaramillo,
Coll. Terneaux-Compans, ix, 369.]

"What was true of the Cibolans in this respect was doubtless true of
the Sedentary Indians in general. Each pueblo was an independent
organization under a council of chiefs, except as several contiguous
pueblos, speaking dialects of the same language, were confederated
for mutual protection, of which the seven Cibolan pueblos, situated
probably in the valley of the Rio Chaco, within an extent of twelve
miles, afford a fair example." The degree of their advancement is
more conspicuously shown in their house architecture.

The present Village Indians of New Mexico, or at least some of them,
still manufacture earthen vessels, and spin and weave cotton fabrics
in the aboriginal manner, and live in houses of the ancient model.
Some of them, as the Mokis and Lagunas, are organized in gentes, and
governed by a council of chiefs, each village being independent and
self-governing. They observe the same law of hospitality universally
practiced by the Northern Indians. Upon this subject, Mr. David J.
Miller, of Santa Fe, writes as follows to the author: "A visitor to
one of their houses is invariably tendered its hospitality in the
form of food placed before him. A failure to tender it is deemed a
grave breach of hospitality and an insult; and a declension to
partake of it would be regarded as a breach of etiquette. As among us,
they have their rich and their poor, and the former give to the
latter cheerfully and in due plenty." Here we find a nearly exact
repetition of the Iroquois and Mandan rules of hospitality before
given. Whether or not they formerly practiced communism in household
groups, I am not informed. Their houses are adapted to this mode of
life, as will presently be shown; and upon that fact and their stage
of social advancement, the deduction of the practice must for the
present rest.



JOINT TENEMENT HOUSES OF VILLAGE INDIANS IN NEW MEXICO.

Santo Domingo is composed of several structures of adobe brick
grouped together, as shown in the engraving, Fig 22. Each is about
two hundred feet long, with two parallel rows of apartments on the
ground, of which the front row is carried up one story, and the back
two; the flat roof of the first story forming a terrace in front of
the second. The first story is closed up solid for defensive reasons,
with the exception of small window openings. The first terrace is
reached by means of ladders from the ground; the rooms in the first
story are entered through trap-doors in the floors, and in the
second through doors opening upon the terrace, and also through
trap-doors through the floors which form the roof. These structures
are typical of all the aboriginal houses in New Mexico. They show
two principal features: first, the terraced form of architecture,
common also in Mexico, with the house tops as the social gathering
places of the inmates; and, second, a closed ground story for safety.
Every house, therefore, is a fortress. Lieutenant Abert remarks upon
one of the houses of this pueblo, of which he gives an elevation,
that "the upper story is narrower than the one below, so that there
is a platform or landing along the whole length of the building. To
enter, you ascend to the platform by means of ladders that could
easily be removed; and, as there is a parapet wall extending along
the platform, these houses could be converted into formidable forts."
[Footnote: Ex. Doc. No. 41, 1st session 30th Congress, 1848, p. 462.]

The number of apartments in each house is not stated. The different
houses at that time were inhabited by eight hundred Indians.
Chimneys now appear above the roofs, the fire-place being at the
angle of the chamber in front. These were evidently of later
introduction. The defensive element, so prominent in this
architecture, was not so much to protect the Village Indians from
each other, as from the attacks of migrating bands flowing down upon
them from the North. The pueblos now in ruins throughout the
original area of New Mexico, and for some distance north of it,
testify to the perpetual struggle of the former to maintain their
ground, as well as prove the insecurity in which they lived. It
could be shown that the second and additional stories were suggested
by the defensive principle.

Zunyi, Fig. 23, is the largest occupied pueblo in New Mexico at the
present time. It probably once contained five thousand inhabitants,
but in 1851 the number was reduced to fifteen hundred. The village
consists of several structures, most of them accessible to each from
their roof terraces. They are constructed of adobe brick, and of
stone embedded in adobe mortar, and plastered over.

In the summer of 1879, Mr. James Stevenson, in charge of the field
parties under Major Powell, made an extended visit to Zunyi and the
neighboring pueblos, for the purpose of making collections of their
implements, utensils, etc., during which time the photographs from
which the accompanying illustrations of the pueblos were made. His
wife accompanied him, and she has furnished us the following
description of that pueblo:

"Zunyi is situated in Western New Mexico, being built upon a knoll
covering about fifteen acres, and some forty feet above the right
bank of the river of the same name.

"Their extreme exclusiveness has preserved to the Zunyians their
strong individuality, and kept their language pure. According to
Major Powell's classification, their speech forms one of four
linguistic stocks to which may be traced all the pueblo dialects of
the southwest. In all the large area which was once thickly dotted
with settlements, only thirty-one remain, and these are scattered
hundreds of miles apart from Taos, in Northern New Mexico to Islet,
in Western Texas. Among these remnants of great native tribes, the
Zunyians may claim perhaps the highest position, whether we regard
simply their agricultural and pastoral pursuits, or consider their
whole social and political organization.

"The town of Zunyi is built in the most curious style. It resembles
a great beehive, with the houses piled one upon another in a
succession of terraces, the roof of one forming the floor or yard of
the next above, and so on, until in some cases five tiers of
dwellings are successively erected, though no one of them is over
two stories high. These structures are of stone and 'adobe'. They
are clustered around two plazas, or open squares, with several
streets and three covered ways through the town.

"The upper houses of Zunyi are reached by ladders from the outside.
The lower tiers have doors on the ground plan, while the entrances
to the others are from the terraces. There is a second entrance
through hatchways in the roof, and thence by ladders down into the
rooms below. In many of the pueblos there are no doors whatever on
the ground floor, but the Zunyians assert that their lowermost
houses have always been provided with such openings. In times of
threatened attack the ladders were either drawn up or their rungs
were removed, and the lower doors were securely fastened in some of
the many ingenious ways these people have of barring the entrances
to their dwellings. The houses have small windows, in which mica was
originally used, and is still employed to some extent; but the
Zunyians prize glass highly, and secure it, whenever practicable, at
almost any cost. A dwelling of average capacity has four or five
rooms, though in some there are as many as eight. Some of the larger
apartments are paved with flagging, but the floors are usually
plastered with clay, like the walls. Both are kept in constant
repair by the women, who mix a reddish-brown earth with water to the
proper consistency and then spread it by hand, always laying it in
semicircles. It dries smooth and even, and looks well. In working
this plaster the squaw keeps her mouth filled with water, which is
applied with all the dexterity with which a Chinese laundry-man
sprinkles clothes. The women appear to delight in this work, which
they consider their special prerogative, and would feel that their
rights were infringed upon were men to do it. In building, the men
lay the stone foundations and set in place the huge logs that serve
as beams to support the roof, the spaces between these rafters being
filled with willow-brush; though some of the wealthier Zunyians use
instead shingles made by the carpenters of the village. The women
then finish the structure. The ceilings of all the older houses are
low; but Zunyi architecture has improved and the modern style gives
plenty of room, with doors through which one may pass without
stooping. The inner walls are usually whitened. For this purpose a
kind of white clay is dissolved in boiling water and applied by hand.
A glove of undressed goat-skin is worn, the hand being dipped in the
hot liquid and then passed repeatedly over the wall.

"In Zunyi, as elsewhere, riches and official position confer
importance upon their possessors. The wealthy class live in the
lower houses, those of moderate means next above, while the poorer
families have to be content with the uppermost stories. Naturally
no one will climb into the garret who has the means of securing
more convenient apartments, under the huge system of 'French
flats', which is the way of living in Zunyi. Still there is
little or no social distinction in the rude civilization, the whole
population of the town living almost as one family. The Alcalde, or
Lieutenant-Governor, furnishes an exception to the general rule, as
his official duties require him to occupy the highest house of all,
from the top of which he announces each morning to the people the
orders of the Governor, and makes such other proclamation as may be
required of him.

"Each family has one room, generally the largest in the house, where
they work, eat, and sleep together. In this room the wardrobe of the
family hangs upon a log suspended beneath the rafters, only the more
valued robes, such as those worn in the dance, being wrapped and
carefully stored away in another apartment. Work of all kinds goes
on in this large room, including the cookery, which is done in a
fire-place on the long side, made by a projection at right angles
with the wall, with a mantel-piece on which rests the base of the
chimney. Another fire-place in a second room is from six to eight
feet in width, and above this is a ledge shaped somewhat like a
Chinese awning. A highly-polished slab, fifteen or twenty inches in
size, is raised a foot above the hearth. Coals are heaped beneath
this slab, and upon it the Waiavi is baked. This delicious kind of
bread is made of meal ground finely and spread in a thin batter upon
the stone with the naked hand. It is as thin as a wafer, and these
crisp, gauzy sheets, when cooked, are piled in layers and then
folded or rolled. Light bread, which is made only at feast times, is
baked in adobe ovens outside the house. When not in use for this
purpose the ovens make convenient kennels for the dogs and
play-houses for the children. Neatness is not one of the
characteristics of the Zunyians. In the late autumn and winter
months the women do little else than make bread, often in fanciful
shapes, for the feasts and dances which continually occur. A sweet
drink, not at all intoxicating, is made from the sprouted wheat. The
men use tobacco, procured from white traders, in the form of
cigarettes from corn-husks; but this is a luxury in which the women
do not indulge.

"The Pueblo mills are among the most interesting things about the
town. These mills, which are fastened to the floor a few feet from
the wall, are rectangular in shape, and divided into a number of
compartments, each about twenty inches wide and deep, the whole
series ranging from five to ten feet in length, according to the
number of divisions. The walls are made of sandstone. In each
compartment a flat grinding stone is firmly set, inclining at an
angle of forty-five degrees. These slabs are of different degrees of
smoothness, graduated successively from coarse to fine. The squaws,
who alone work at the mills, kneel before them and bend over them as
a laundress does over the wash-tub, holding in their hands long
stones of volcanic lava, which they rub up and down the slanting
slabs, stopping at intervals to place the grain between the stones.
As the grinding proceeds the grist is passed from one compartment to
the next until, in passing through the series, it becomes of the
desired fineness. This tedious and laborious method has been
practiced without improvement from time immemorial, and in some of
the arts the Zunyians have actually retrograded."

The living-rooms are about twelve by eighteen feet and about nine
feet high, with plastered walls and an earthen floor, and usually a
single window opening for light. To form a durable ceiling round
timbers about six inches in diameter are placed three or four feet
apart from the outer to the inner wall. Upon these, poles are placed
transversely in juxtaposition. A deep covering of adobe mortar is
placed upon them, forming the roof terrace in front, and the floor
of the apartments above in the receding second story. Water-jars of
their own manufacture, of fine workmanship, and holding several
gallons, closely woven osier baskets of their own make, and blankets
of cotton and wool, woven by their own hand-looms, are among the
objects seen in these apartments. They are neatly kept, roomy and
comfortable, and differ in no respect from those in use at the
period of the conquest, as will elsewhere be shown. The mesa
elevation upon which the old town of Zunyi was situated is seen in
the background of the engraving, Fig. 23.

It should be noticed that this architecture, and the necessities
that gave it birth, led to a change in the mode of life from the
open ground to the terraces or flat roofs of these great houses.
When not engaged in tillage, the terraces were the gathering and
living places of the people. During the greater part of the year
they lived practically in the open air, to which the climate was
adapted, and upon their housetops, first for safety and afterwards
from habit.

Elevations of the principal pueblos of New Mexico have from time to
time been published. They agree in general plan, but show
considerable diversity in details. Rude but massive structures, they
accommodated all the people of the village in security within their
walls.

The Moki Pueblos are supposed to be the towns of Tusayan, visited by
a detachment of Coronado's expedition in 1541. Since the acquisition
of New Mexico they have been rarely visited, because of their
isolation and distance from American settlements.

The accompanying illustration of Wolpi, Fig. 25, one of these pueblos,
is from a photograph taken by Major Powell's party.

In 1858 Lieut. Joseph C. Ives, in command of the Colorado Exploring
Expedition, visited the Moki Pueblos, near the Little Colorado. They
are seven in number, situated upon mesa elevations within an extent
of ten miles, difficult of access, and constructed of stone.
Mi-shong'-i-ni'-vi, the first one entered, is thus described. After
ascending the rugged sides of the mesa by a flight of stone steps,
Lieutenant Ives remarks: "We came upon a level summit, and had the
walls of the pueblo on one side and an extensive and beautiful view
upon the other. Without giving us time to admire the scene, the
Indians led us to a ladder planted against the front face of the
pueblo. The town is nearly square, and surrounded by a stone wall
fifteen feet high, the top of which forms a landing extending around
the whole. Flights of stone steps led from the first to a second
landing, upon which the doors of the houses open. Mounting the
stairway opposite to the ladder, the chief crossed to the nearest
door and ushered us into a low apartment, from which two or three
others opened towards the interior of the dwelling. Our host
courteously asked us to be seated upon some skins spread along the
floor against the wall, and presently his wife brought in a vase of
water and a tray filled with a singular substance (tortillas), that
looked more like a sheet of thin blue wrapping paper than anything
else I had ever seen. I learned afterwards that it was made from
corn meal, ground very fine, made into a gruel, and poured over a
heated stone to be baked. When dry it has a surface slightly polished,
like paper. The sheets are folded and rolled together, and form the
staple article of food of the Moki Indians. As the dish was intended
for our entertainment, and looked clean, we all partook of it. It
has a delicate fresh-bread flavor, and was not at all unpalatable,
particularly when eaten with salt.... The room was fifteen feet by
ten; the walls were made of adobes; the partitions of substantial
beams; the floors laid with clay. In one corner were a fire-place
and chimney. Everything was clean and tidy. Skins, bows and arrows,
quivers, antlers, blankets, articles of clothing and ornament were
hanging upon the walls or arranged upon the shelves. At the other
end was a trough divided into compartments, in each of which was a
sloping stone slab, two or three feet square, for grinding corn upon.
In a recess of an inner room was piled a goodly store of corn in the
ear.... Another inner room appeared to be a sleeping apartment, but
this being occupied by females we did not enter, though the Indians
seemed to be pleased rather than otherwise at the curiosity evinced
during the close inspection of their dwelling and furniture.... Then
we went out upon the landing, and by another flight of steps
ascended to the roof, where we beheld a magnificent panorama.... We
learned that there were seven towns.... Each pueblo is built around
a rectangular court, in which we suppose are the springs that
furnish the supply to the reservoirs. The exterior walls, which are
of stone, have no openings, and would have to be scaled or battered
down before access could be gained to the interior. The successive
stories are set back, one behind the other. The lower rooms are
reached through trap-doors from the first landing. The houses are
three rooms deep, and open upon the interior court. The arrangement
is as strong and compact as could well be devised but as the court
is common, and the landings are separated by no partitions, it
involves a certain community of residence." [Footnote: Colorado
Exploring Expedition, p. 121.]

This account leaves a doubt whether the stones receded from the
inclosed court outward or from the exterior inward. Lieutenant Ives
does not state that he passed through the building into the court
and ascended to the first platform from within, and yet the
remainder of the description seems to imply that he did, and that
the structure occupied but three sides of the court, since he states
that "the houses are three rooms deep and open upon the interior
court." The structure was three stories high.

[Illustration: Fig. 26.--Room in Moki House.]

The above engraving was prepared for an article by Maj. Powell, on
these Indians. Two rooms are shown together, apparently by leaving
out the wooden partition which separated them, showing an extent of
at least thirty feet. The large earthen water-jars are interesting
specimens of Moki pottery. At one side is the hand mill for grinding
maize. The walls are ornamented with bows, quivers, and the floor
with water-jars, as described by Lieutenant Ives.

In places on the sides of the bluffs at this and other pueblos,
Lieutenant Ives observed gardens cultivated by irrigation. "Between
the two," he remarks, "the faces of the bluff have been ingeniously
converted into terraces. These were faced with neat masonry, and
contained gardens, each surrounded with a raised edge so as to
retain water upon the surface. Pipes from the reservoirs permitted
them at any time to be irrigated." [Footnote: Colorado Exploring
Expedition, p. 120.]

Fig. 27 shows one of two large adobe structures constituting the
pueblo of Taos, in New Mexico. It is from a photograph taken by the
expedition under Major Powell. It is situated upon Taos Creek, at
the western base of the Sierra Madre Range, which forms the eastern
border of the broad valley of the Rio Grande, into which the Taos
stream runs. It is an old and irregular building, and is supposed to
be the Braba of Coronado's expedition. [Footnote: Relation of
Castenada, Coll. H. Ternaeux-Compans. ix, 138. Trans. of American
Ethnological Society.]

Some ruins still remain, quite near, of a still older pueblo, whose
inhabitants, the Taos Indians affirm, they conquered and dispossessed.
The two structures stand about twenty-five rods apart, on opposite
sides of the stream, and facing each other. That upon the north side,
represented in the above engraving, is about two hundred and fifty
feet long, one hundred and thirty feet deep, and five stories high;
that upon the south side is shorter and deeper, and six stories high.
The present population of the pueblo, about four hundred, are
divided between the two houses, and they are a thrifty, industrious,
and intelligent people. Upon the east side is a long adobe wall,
connecting the two buildings, or rather protecting the open space
between them. A corresponding wall, doubtless, closed the space on
the opposite side, thus forming a large court between the buildings,
but, if so, it has now disappeared. The creek is bordered on both
sides with ample fields or gardens, which are irrigated by canals,
drawing water from the stream. The adobe is of a yellowish-brown
color, and the two structures make a striking appearance as they are
approached. Fire-places and chimneys have been added to the
principal room of each family; but it is evident that they are modern,
and that the suggestion came from Spanish sources. They are
constructed in the corner of the room. The first story is built up
solid, and those above recede in the terraced form. Ladders planted
against the walls show the manner in which the several stories are
reached, and, with a few exceptions, the rooms are entered through
trap-doors by means of ladders. Children and even dogs run up and
down these ladders with great freedom. The lower rooms are used for
storage and granaries, and the upper for living rooms; the families
in the rooms above owning and controlling the rooms below. The
pueblo has its chiefs.

The measurements of the two edifices were furnished to the writer in
1864 by Mr. John Ward, at that time a government Indian agent, by
the procurement of Dr. M. Steck, superintendent of Indian affairs in
New Mexico. Among further particulars given by Mr. Ward are the
following: "The thickness of the walls of these houses depends
entirely upon the size of the adobe and the way in which it is laid
upon the wall; that is, whether lengthwise or crosswise. There is no
particular standard for the size of the adobes. On the buildings in
question the adobes on the upper stories are laid lengthwise, and
will average about ten inches in width, which gives the thickness of
the walls. On the first story or ground rooms the adobes are in most
places laid crosswise, thus making the thickness of these walls just
the length of the adobe, which averages about twenty inches. The
width of an adobe is usually one-half its length, and the thickness
will average about four inches. The floors and roofs are coated with
mud mortar from four to six inches thick, which is laid on and
smoothed over with the hand. This work is usually performed by women.
When the right kind of earth can be obtained the floor can be made
very hard and smooth, and will last a very long time without needing
repairs. The walls both inside and out are coated in the same manner.
On the inside, however, more care is taken to make the walls as even
and smooth as possible, after which they are whitewashed with gesso
or gypsum."

Several rooms on the ground floor were measured by Mr. Ward and
found to be, in feet, 14 by 18, 20 by 22, and 24 by 27, with a
height of ceiling averaging from 7 to 8 feet. In the second story
they measured, in feet, 14 by 23, 12 by 20, and 15 by 20, with a
height of ceiling varying from 7 to 7 1/2 feet. The rooms in the
third, fourth, and fifth stories were found to diminish in size with
each story. There is probably a mistake here, as the main
longitudinal partition walls must have been carried up upon each
other from bottom to top. A few of the doorways were measured and
found to range from 2 1/2 feet wide by 4 1/2 feet high and 2 1/3
feet wide by 4 10/12 feet high. The scuttles or trap-doors in the
floors, through which they descended into these rooms by means of
ladders, were 3 feet by 2 1/2, 3 feet by 2, and 1 feet 10 inches by
2 1/2 feet, and the window openings through the walls were, in
inches, 14 by 14, 8 by 16, 16 by 20, and 18 by 18.

Mr. Ward then proceeds: "No room has more than two windows; very few
have more than one. The back rooms usually have one or more round
holes made through the walls from six to eight inches in diameter
These openings furnish the apartments with a scanty supply of light
and air The first story or the ground rooms are usually without
doors or windows, the only entrance being through the scuttle-holes
or doors in the roof, which are within the rooms comprising the
story immediately above. These basement rooms are used for
store-rooms. Those in the upper stories are the rooms mostly
inhabited. Those located in the front part of the building receive
their light through the doors and windows before described. The back
rooms have no other light than that which goes in through the
scuttle-holes and the partition walls leading from the front rooms,
that is, where a room is so situated as to have both. Others again
have no other light than that which enters through the holes already
described. Such rooms are always gloomy. Some families have as many
as four or five rooms, one of which is set apart for cooking, and is
furnished with a large fire-place for the purpose. Those who have
only two or three rooms usually cook and sleep in the same apartment,
and in such cases they cook in the usual fireplace, which stands in
one corner of the room. No perceptible addition has been made to
either of the buildings for many years, and it is evident that after
the death or removal of their owners they were entirely neglected.
Those in good condition are still occupied. From the best
information attainable the original buildings were not erected all
at one time, but were added to from time to time by additional rooms,
including the second, third, and more stories. There are no regular
terraces, the roof of the rooms below answering that purpose. Thus
it is that no entire circuit can be made around any one of these
stories, the only thing that can be called a terrace being the
narrow space left in front of some of the rooms from the roofs of
the lower rooms."

Mr. Ward seems to object to the word "terrace" in defining the
platform left in front of each story as a means of access to its
apartments and to the successive stories. It was used by the early
Spanish writers to explain the same peculiarity found in many of the
great houses in the pueblo of Mexico and elsewhere over Mexico, the
roofs being flat and the stories receding from each other. While
this platform is not in strictness a terrace, the term expresses
this architectural feature with sufficient clearness. The two
structures at Taos are large enough to accommodate five hundred
persons in each, the inmates living in the Indian fashion. They were
occupied in 1864 by three hundred and sixty-one Taos Indians.

"Each terrace is reached," remarks Mr. Miller before mentioned,
speaking of the pueblos in general, "by a wooden ladder, first from
the ground and afterward from the one below; and ingress and egress
to and from the rooms below is on the inside in the room above
through trap-doors and upon ladders. It is wonderful to see with
what agility the Indian children and the dogs run up and down these
ladders. Nowhere is there any side communication between the rooms
in the great building, and but one family occupy each series of
rooms situated one above the other." This last statement is too
broadly made, as we have seen that Mr. Ward has given the
measurements of doors through partition walls. Such doors will also
be shown in a subsequent engraving. But there is no doubt of the
fact that the number of lateral rooms communicating with each other
was small, and that the families or groups, if such existed, united
in a communal household, were separated from each other by solid
partition walls, a fact which will reappear in the house-architecture
of Yucatan.

In 1877, David J. Miller, esq, of Santa Fe, visited the Taos Pueblo
at my request, to make some further investigations. He reports to me
the following facts: The government is composed of the following
persons, all of whom, except the first, are elected annually. 1. A
cacique or principal sachem. 2. A governor or alcalde. 3. A
lieutenant-governor. 4. A war captain, and a lieutenant war captain.
5. Six fiscals of policemen. "The cacique," Mr. Miller says,
"has the general control of all officers in the performance of their
duties, transacts the business of the pueblo with the surrounding
whites, Indian agents, etc., and imposes reprimands or severer
punishments upon delinquents. He is keeper of the archives of the
pueblo; for example, he has in his keeping the United States patent
for the tract of four square leagues on which the pueblo stands,
which was based upon the Spanish grant of 1689; also deeds of other
purchased lands adjoining the pueblo. He holds his office for life.
At his death, the people elect his successor. The cacique may,
before his death, name his successor, but the nomination must be
ratified by the people represented by their principal men assembled
in the estufa. In this cacique may be recognized the sachem of the
northern tribes, whose duties were purely of a civil character.
Mr. Miller does not define the duties of the governor. They were
probably judicial, and included an oversight of the property rights
of the people in their cultivated lands, and in rooms or sections of
the pueblo houses."

"The lieutenant-governor," he remarks, "is the sheriff to receive
and execute orders. The war captain has twelve subordinates under
his command to police the pueblo, and supervise the public grounds,
such as grazing lands, the cemetery, estufas, &c. The lieutenant war
captain executes the orders of his principal, and officiates for him
during his absence, or in case of his disability. The six fiscals
are a kind of town police. It is their duty to see that the
catechism (Catholic) is taught in the pueblo, and learned by the
children, and generally to keep order and execute the municipal
regulations of the pueblo under the direction of the governor, who
is charged with the duty of seeing to their execution."

"The regular time for meeting in the estufa is the last day of
December, annually, for the election of officers for the ensuing year.
The cacique, governor, and principal men nominate candidates, and
the election decides. There may also be a fourth nomination of
candidates, that is, by the people. In the election, all adult males
vote; the officers first, and then the general public. The officers
elected are at the present time sworn in by the United States
Territorial officials."

In this simple government we have a fair sample, in substance and in
spirit, of the ancient government of the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico.
Some modification of the old system may be detected in the
limitation of officers below the grade of cacique to one year. From
what is known of the other pueblos in New Mexico, that of Taos is a
fair example of all of them in governmental organization at the
present time. They are, and always were, essentially republican,
which is in entire harmony with Indian institutions. I may repeat
here what I have ventured to assert on previous occasions, that the
whole theory of governmental and domestic life among the Village
Indians of America from Zunyi to Cuzco can still be found in New
Mexico.

The representation of a room in this pueblo, Fig. 28, is from a
sketch by Mr. Galbraith, who accompanied Major Powell's party to New
Mexico.

What Mr. Miller refers to as "property rights and titles" and
"ownership in fee" of land, is sufficiently explained by the
possessory right which is found among the northern Indian tribes.
The limitations upon its alienation to an Indian from another pueblo,
or to a white man, not to lay any stress upon the absence of written
titles or conveyances of land which have been made possible by
Spanish and American intercourse, show very plainly that their ideas
respecting the ownership of the absolute title to land, with power
to alienate to whomsoever the person pleased, were entirely above
their conception of property and its uses. All the ends of
individual ownership and of inheritance were obtained through a mere
right of possession, while the ultimate title remained in the tribe.
According to the statement of Mr. Miller, if the father dies, his
land is divided between his widow and children, and if a woman, her
land is divided equally between her sons and daughters. This is an
important statement, because, assuming its correctness, it shows
inheritance of children from both father and mother, a total
departure from the principles of gentile inheritance. In 1878 I
visited the Taos pueblo. I could not find among them the gens or clan,
[Footnote: Mr. Baudelier has since ascertained that they are
organized in gentes.] and from lack of time did not inquire into
their property regulations or rules of inheritance. The dozen large
ovens I saw while there near the ends or in front of the two
buildings, each of which was equal to the wants of more than one
family, were adopted from the Spanish. They not unlikely had some
connection with the old principle of communism.

It will prove a very difficult undertaking to ascertain the old mode
of life three hundred and fifty years ago in New Mexico, Mexico, and
Central America, as it was then in full vitality, a natural
outgrowth of Indian institutions. The experiment to recover this
lost condition of Indian society has not been tried. The people have
been environed with civilization during the latter portion of this
period, and have been more or less affected by it from the beginning.
Their further growth and development was arrested by the advent of
European civilization, which blighted their more feeble culture.
Since their discovery they have steadily declined in numbers, and
they show no signs of recovery from the shock produced by their
subjugation. Among the northern tribes, who were one Ethnical Period
below the Pueblo Indians, their social organization and their mode
of life have changed materially under similar influences since the
period of discovery. The family has fallen more into the strictly
monogamian form, each occupying a separate house; communism in
living in large households has disappeared, the organization into
gentes has in many cases fallen out or been rudely extinguished by
external influences; and their religious usages have yielded. We
must expect to find similar and even greater changes among the
Village Indians of New Mexico. The white race were upon them in
Mexico and New Mexico a hundred years earlier than upon the Indian
tribes of the United States. But, as if to stimulate investigation
into their ancient mode of life, some of these tribes have continued
through all these years to live in the same identical houses
occupied by their forefathers in 1540 at Acoma, Jemez, and Taos.
These pueblos were contemporary with the pueblo of Mexico captured
by Cortez in 1520. The present inhabitants are likely to have
retained some part of the old plan of life, or some traditionary
knowledge of what it was. They must retain some of the usages and
customs with respect to the ownership and inheritance of sections of
these houses, and of the limitations upon the power of sale that
they should not pass out of the kinship. The same also with respect
to sections of the village garden. All the facts with respect to
their ancient usages and mode of life should be ascertained, so far
as it is now possible to do so from the present inhabitants of these
pueblos. The information thus given will serve a useful purpose in
explaining the pueblos in ruins In Yucatan and Central America, as
well as on the San Juan, the Chaco, and the Gila.

At the time of their discovery the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico
generally worshiped the sun as their principal divinity. Although
under constraint they became nominally Roman Catholic, they still
retain, in fact, their old religious beliefs. Mr. Miller has sent me
some information upon this subject concerning the pueblos of Taos,
Jemez, and Zia.

"Before the Spaniards forced their religion upon the people, the
pueblo of Taos had the Sun for their God, and worshiped the Sun as
such. They had periodical assemblages of the authorities and the
people in the estufas for offering prayers to the Sun, to supplicate
him to repeat his diurnal visits, and to continue to make the maize,
beans, and squashes grow for the sustenance of the people. 'The Sun
and God,' said the governor (Mirabal) to me, 'are the same. We
believe really in the Sun as our God, but we profess to believe in
the God and Christ of the Catholic Church and of the Bible. When we
die, we go to God in Heaven. I do not know whether Heaven is in the
Sun, or the Sun is Heaven. The Spaniards required us to believe in
their God, and we were compelled to adopt their God, their church,
and their doctrines, willing or unwilling. We do not know that under
the American Government we may exercise any religion we choose, and
that the National Government and the church government are wholly
disconnected. We have very great respect and reverence for the Sun.
We fear that the Sun will punish us now, or at some future time, if
we do evil. The modern pueblos have the Sun religion really, but
they profess the Christian religion, of which they know nothing but
what the Catholic religion teaches. They always believed that
Montezuma would come again as the messiah of the pueblo. The
Catholic religion has been so long outwardly practiced by the people
that it could not now, they think, be easily laid aside, and the old
Sun religion be established, because it is looked upon as
established by the law of the land, and therefore necessarily
practiced. Nevertheless, the Indians will always follow and practice,
as they do, both religions. If,' said the governor, 'one Indian here
at this pueblo were to declare that he intended to renounce and
abandon the religion of his fathers (the worship of the Sun) and
adopt the Christian religion as his only faith, and another Indian
were to declare that he intended to repudiate the Christian religion
and adopt and practice only the Sun religion, the former would be
expelled the pueblo, and his property would be confiscated, but the
other would be allowed to remain with all his rights.'

"There are three old men in the pueblo whose duty it is to impart
the traditions of the people to the rising generation. These
traditions are communicated to the young men according to their ages
and capacities to receive and appreciate them. The Taos Indians have
a tradition that they came from the north; that they found other
Indians at this place (Taos) living also in a pueblo; that these
they ejected after much fighting, and took and have continued to
occupy their place. How long ago this was they cannot say, but it
must have been a long time ago. The Indians driven away lived here
in a pueblo, as the Taos Indians now do."

Mr. Miller also communicates a conversation had with Juan Jose, a
native of Zia, and Jose Miguel, a native of Pecos, but then (December,
1877) a resident of the pueblo of Jemez, which he wrote down at the
time, as follows: "Before the Spaniards came, the religion of Jemez,
Pecos and Zia, and the other pueblos, was the Montezuma religion. A
principal feature of this religion was the celebration of Dances at
the pueblo. In it, God was the sun. Seh-un-yuh was the land the
Pueblo Indians came from, and to it they went when dead. This
country (Seh-un-yuh) was at Great Salt Lake. They cannot say whether
this lake was the place where the Mormons now live, but it was to
the north. Under this great lake there was a big Indian Pueblo, and
it is there yet. [Footnote: The Iroquois have a similar tradition of
the ancient existence of an Indian village under Otsego Lake in New
York.] The Indian dances were had only when prescribed by the cacique.
The Pueblo Indians now have two religions, that of Montezuma, and
the Roman Catholic. The Sun, Moon, and Stars were Gods, of which the
greatest and most potent was the Sun; but greater than he was
Montezuma. In time of drought, or actual or threatened calamity, the
Pueblo Indians prayed to Montezuma, and also to the Sun, Moon, and
Stars. The old religion (that of Montezuma) is believed in all the
New Mexican pueblos. They practice the Catholic religion ostensibly;
but in their consciences and in reality the old religion is that of
the pueblos. The tenets of the old religion are preserved by
tradition, which the old men communicate to the young in the estufas.
At church worship the Pueblo Indians pray to God, and also to
Montezuma and the Sun; but at the dances they pray to Montezuma and
the Sun only. During an actual or threatened calamity the dances are
called by the cacique. They have two Gods; the God of the Pueblos,
and the God of the Christians. Montezuma is the God of the Pueblo."

This account of the Sun worship of the Taos Indians, in which is
intermingled that of Montezuma, and the further account of the
worship of Montezuma at the pueblos of Zia and Jemez, with the
recognition of the worship of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, are both
interesting and suggestive. It is probable that Sun worship is the
older of the two, while that of Montezuma, as a later growth,
remained concurrent with the other in all the New Mexican pueblos
without superseding it. In this supernatural person, known to them
as Montezuma, who was once among them in bodily human form, and who
left them with a promise that he would return again at a future day,
may be recognized the Hiawatha of Longfellow's poem, the
Ha-yo-went'-ha of the Iroquois. It is in each case a ramification of
a widespread legend in the tribes of the American aborigines, of a
personal human being, with supernatural powers, an instructor of the
arts of life; an example of the highest virtues, beneficent, wise,
and immortal.

"They have," remarks Mr. Miller, "one curious custom which has
always been observed in the pueblo. It is for some one (sometimes
several simultaneously) to seclude themselves entirely from the
outer world, abstaining absolutely from all personal communication
with others, and devoting themselves solely to prayer for the pueblo
and its inhabitants. This seclusion lasts eighteen months, during
which they are furnished daily, by a confidential messenger, with a
little food, just enough to preserve life, and during which time
they may not even inquire about their wives or children or be told
anything of them though the messenger may know that some of them are
sick or have died. The food the recluse is permitted to use is corn,
beans, squashes, and buffalo and deer meat; that is, such food as
was used before the coming of the Spaniards. This religious
seclusion is in honor of the Sun. It is one of the rites of the
ancient religion of the Pueblo, preserved and practiced now. One of
the old men I talked with said that he had himself the previous year
emerged from this hermitage; three others were now in, they having
retired to exile in February, 1877, and will emerge in August, 1878,
then to learn the news of the previous year and a half."




CHAPTER VII.

RUINS OF HOUSES OF THE SEDENTARY INDIANS OF THE SAN JUAN RIVER
AND ITS TRIBUTARIES.


The finest structures of the Village Indians in New Mexico, and
northward of its present boundary line, are found on the San Juan
and its tributaries, unoccupied and in ruins. Even the regions in
which they are principally situated are not now occupied by this
class of Indians, but are roamed over by wild tribes of the Apaches
and the Utes. The most conspicuous cluster of these ruined and
deserted pueblos are in the canyon or valley of the Rio Chaco, which
stream is an affluent of the San Juan, a tributary of the Colorado.
Similar ruins of stone pueblos are also found in the valley of the
Animas River, and also in the region of the Ute Mountain in
Southwestern Colorado. Ruins of clusters of small single houses
built of cobble-stone and adobe mortar, and of large pueblos of the
same material, are to be seen in the La Plata Valley, and in the
Montezuma Valley, west of the Mancos River. On the Mancos River are
a large number of cliff houses of stone, and also round towers of
stone, of which the uses are not at present known. Cliff houses are
also found on the Dolores River. Other ruins are found in the canyon
of the Rio de Chelly.

The supposition is reasonable that the Village Indians north of
Mexico had attained their highest culture and development where
these stone structures are found. They are similar in style and plan
to the present occupied pueblos in New Mexico, but superior in
construction, as stone is superior to adobe or to cobble-stone and
adobe mortar. They are also equal, if not superior, in size and in
the extent of their accommodations, to any Indian pueblos ever
constructed in North America. This fact gives additional interest to
these ruins, which are here to be considered.

Two separate explorations and reports upon the Chaco ruins have been
made. The first was by Lieut. J. H. Simpson, who examined them in
1849 and first brought them to notice, and the second was a
re-examination by William H. Jackson in 1877. He was connected with
Prof. F. V. Hayden's Geological and Geographical Survey of the
Territories, and his report is in that of Professor Hayden,
published in 1878, p. 411.

The canyon of the Chaco, which commences about one hundred and ten
miles northwest from Santo Domingo, on the Rio Grande, is quite
remarkable. It has enough of the characteristics of the canyon to
justify the application of this peculiar term. But it differs from
the great canyons in the lowness of the bordering walls and in the
great breadth of the space between. Neither Simpson nor Jackson
describe the canyon or valley with as much particularity as could be
desired, but Mr. Jackson has furnished a map, Fig. 29, showing the
course of the stream with the walls of the canyon shaded in, and
with the breaks or gullies through these walls reduced to a scale.
This shows that the level plain between the encompassing walls
ranges from half a mile to a mile in places. The walls of the canyon
are composed of friable sandstone, and are usually vertical. Their
height is not given with precision. The engraving also shows the
outline forms and comparative size of the several structures, with
specimens of three varieties of masonry used in the walls. No. 2
shows an alternation of courses of stone from four to six inches
thick and from eight to twelve inches long, with intervening courses
of several thin stones. The same alternation of courses reappears in
the pueblos in ruins on the Animas River, about sixty miles north.
The canyon commences very much like the McElmo Canyon in
Southwestern Colorado, whose vertical walls are at first about three
feet high, with a level space between from three hundred to five
hundred feet in width; its walls rising slowly as you descend.
Without a present running stream, and bordered with open prairie land,
it makes a novel appearance to the eye. Lieutenant Simpson remarks
that after leaving the pueblo Pintado, which is above the
commencement of the canyon, "two miles over a slightly rolling
country, our general course still being to the northwest, brought us
to the commencement of the Canyon de Chaco, its width here being
about two hundred yards. Friable sandstone rocks, massive above,
stratified below, constitute its enclosing walls." [Footnote:
Lieutenant Simpson's Report, p. 77.]

And Mr. Jackson, who entered it from the same point, remarks that
"two miles from the river we descended into the canyon of the Chaco.
It is here only about fifty feet in depth, with vertical walls of
yellowish gray sandstone." [Footnote: Hayden's Report, p. 436.]

At a point twelve miles down, at the Pueblo Una Vida, he remarks
that "the canyon is here about five hundred yards wide, and is
perfectly level from one side to the other."

[Footnote: ib., p. 437.] Farther down the walls of the canyon rise
about a hundred feet, as appears in the restorations of the Pueblo
Bonito and of the Pueblo of Hungo Pavie. Whether the canyon is
accessible or not from the table-land above over against the several
pueblos, by means of the arroyos which break through the walls and
enter the canyon, does not appear from these reports; but it seems
probable, Mr. Jackson says, that near the Pueblo Bonito he ascended
to the top of the bluff by means of a stairway partly cut in the
face of the rock. [Footnote: ib., p. 448.]

Lieutenant Simpson, in his report, has furnished ground plans of
five of these structures with measurements. Mr. Jackson has
furnished eleven ground plans with measurements, two of which are
without the canyon. They agree substantially, but we shall follow
Mr. Jackson, as his are the most complete. The following engravings,
with two or three exceptions, are taken from his report. The
remainder are from Lieutenant Simpson's report.

The great edifices on the Chaco are all constructed of the same
materials, and upon the same general plan, but they differ in ground
dimensions, in the number of rows of apartments, and, consequently,
in the number of stories. They contained from one hundred to six
hundred apartments each, and would severally accommodate from five
hundred to four thousand persons, living in the fashion of Indians.
Speaking of the Pueblo of Pintado, Lieutenant Simpson remarks as
follows: "Forming one structure, and built of tabular pieces of hard,
fine-grained, compact, gray sandstone (a material entirely unknown
in the present architecture of New Mexico), to which the atmosphere
has imparted a reddish tinge, the layers or beds being not thicker
than three inches, and sometimes as thin as one-fourth of an inch,
it discovers in the masonry a combination of science and art which
can only be referred to a higher stage of civilization and
refinement than is discoverable in the works of Mexicans or Pueblos
of the present day. Indeed, so beautifully diminutive and true are
the details of the structure as to cause it at a little distance to
have all the appearance of a magnificent piece of mosaic work."

"In the outer face of the buildings there are no signs of mortar,
the intervals between the beds being chinked with stones of the
minutest thinness. The filling and backing are done in rubble masonry,
the mortar presenting no indications of the presence of lime. The
thickness of the main wall at base is within an inch or two of three
feet; higher up, it is less, diminishing every story by retreating
jogs on the inside, from bottom to top. Its elevation at its present
highest point is between twenty-five and thirty feet, the series of
floor beams indicating that there must have been originally three
stories. The ground plan, including the court, in exterior
development is about 403 feet. On the ground-floor, exclusive of the
out-buildings, are fifty-four apartments, some of them as small as
five feet square, and the largest about twelve by six feet. These
rooms communicate with each other by very small doors, some of them
as contracted as two and a half by two and a half feet; and in the
case of the inner suite, the doors communicating with the interior
court are as small as three and a half by two feet. The principal
rooms, or those most in use, were, on account of their having large
doors and windows, most probably those of the second story. The
system of flooring seems to have been large transverse unhewn beams,
six inches in diameter, laid transversely from wall to wall, and
then a number of smaller ones, about three inches in diameter, laid
longitudinally upon them. What was placed upon these does not appear,
but most probably it was brush, bark, or slabs, covered with a layer
of mud-mortar. The beams show no signs of the saw or axe; on the
contrary, they appear to have been hacked off by means of some very
imperfect instrument. On the west face of the structure, the windows,
which are only in the second story, are three feet two inches by two
feet two inches. On the north side they are only in the second and
third stories, and are as small as fourteen by fourteen inches. At
different points about the premises were three circular apartments
sunk in the ground, the walls being of masonry. These apartments the
Pueblo Indians called estufas, or places where the people held their
political and religions meetings." [Footnote: Simpson's Report, p. 76.]

The main building, Fig. 30, is two hundred and thirty-eight feet long,
and the wing one hundred and seventy-four feet. It seems probable,
from the symmetrical character of most of these structures, that the
original plan contemplated an extension of the main building, the
addition of another wing, to be followed by the connection of the
wings with a wall, thus closing the court. These buildings were not
all completed at once, but were extended and increased in the number
of stories from generation to generation, as the people increased in
numbers and prosperity. The plan upon which these houses were
erected favored such extension. The great size of some of these
structures can only be explained by the hypothesis of growth through
long periods of time. The stone for building this pueblo was found
quite near. Mr. Jackson remarks that "on the side of the bluff
facing the valley is an outcrop of a yellowish-gray sandstone,
showing in some places a seam of from twelve to eighteen inches in
thickness, where the rock breaks into thin slate-like layers. It was
from this stratum that most of the material in the walls was obtained."
[Footnote: Jackson's Report, p. 433.] He further remarks concerning
the estufas: "In the northwest angle of the court are two circular
rooms, or estufas, the best preserved one of which is built into the
main building and forms a portion of it, while the other stands
outside, but in juxtaposition, and is evidently a later and less
perfect addition. They are each twenty-five feet in diameter. The
inside walls are perfectly cylindrical, and in the case of the inner
one are in good preservation for a height of about five feet....
There are no side apertures, so that light and access was probably
obtained through the roof. These estufas, which figure so
prominently in these ruins and in fact in all the ancient ruins
extending southward from the basin of the Rio San Juan, are so
identical in their structure, position, and evident uses with the
similar ones in the pueblos now inhabited, that they indisputably
connect one with the other, and show this region to have been
covered at one time with a numerous population, of which the present
inhabitants of the pueblos of Moki and of New Mexico are either the
remnants or the descendants.... Beneath the ground plan [in Fig. 30]
is a section through a restoration of the pueblo from north to south,
showing the manner in which the stories were probably terraced from
the interior of the court outward. There is no positive evidence in
any of these ruins that they were thus built, but this arrangement
naturally suggests itself as being the only way in which light and
ease of access to the inner rooms could be readily obtained. It is
also quite certain from the character of the standing walls that
they were not terraced symmetrically but irregularly, after the
manner of the present pueblos. There is every reason to believe that
the first story was, in every case, reached from the outside by
ladders, the succeeding stories being also approached from the
outside, either by ladders or by stone stairways, after the manner
of the Moqui pueblos. There is no positive evidence to sustain any
conjecture upon this point, as in every ruin the upper stories are
so entirely dismantled that no indications of any sort of stairway
have ever been found. The ground-floor was divided into smaller
apartments than the second floor, many of the rooms, as shown in the
plan, being in the lower story divided into two or three. It would
be impossible to say how high this story had been, as the floor is
covered to a considerable extent with stones from the fallen walls.
The second floor was ten feet between joists, and the third somewhat
less, about seven feet, as near as we could judge from below. It is
probable that there was a fourth story, but there is now very little
evidence of it. Not a vestige of the vigas or other floor-timbers
now remain. Some of the lintels over the doors or windows, composed
of sticks of wood from one to two inches in thickness, laid close
together, are now in fair preservation." [Footnote: Jackson's Report,
p. 434.]

Twelve miles down the canyon from the Pueblo Pintado, are the ruins
of the Pueblo Wege-gi, Fig. 30. The main building is two hundred and
twenty-four feet, and the length of each wing is one hundred and
twenty feet, measured on the outside, but which would include the
depth of the main building. It is remarkably symmetrical. The rooms,
Mr. Jackson says, are small, the largest being eight by fourteen feet,
and the smallest eight feet square, and the estufas are each thirty
feet in diameter. It is built like the last pueblo "of small tabular
pieces of sandstone, arranged with beautiful effect of regularity
and finish."

The Pueblo of Una Vida, Fig. 31, seems to have been in process of
construction, and designed, when completed, to have been one of the
largest in the valley. The main building is two hundred and fifty
feet in length, and the wing two hundred feet. It requires for its
completion a considerable extension of the main building, and the
addition of another wing. If this supposition is tenable, it serves
to show that these great houses were of slow construction, by the
process of addition and extension from time to time, with the
increase of the people in numbers. Upon this theory of construction,
the first row of the main building on the court side would first be
completed one story high, and covered with a flat roof; after which,
by adding one parallel wall with partition walls at intervals, as
many more apartments would be obtained; and by a third and fourth
parallel wall, with partitions, twice as many more. The second row
was carried up two stories, the third three, and the fourth four;
the successive stories receding from the court side in the form of
great steps or terraces, one above the other. The wings would be
commenced and completed in the same manner. Further than this, it
seems evident, from the present condition of the structure, that the
main building was to be considerably extended, with a second wing
like the first to fill out the original design and produce a
symmetrical edifice. If these inferences are warranted, the
interesting conclusion is reached that these Indian architects
commenced their great houses upon a definite plan, which was to be
realized in its completeness after years and perhaps generations had
passed away. Like the pueblo last named, it is built of tabular
pieces of sandstone, and is two miles and a half lower down in the
canyon.

The highest portions of the wall still standing in this pueblo are
fifteen feet in height, twenty-five feet in Wege-gi, and thirty feet
in Hungo Pavie.

The Pueblo of Hungo Pavie or Crooked Nose, Fig. 31, is situated one
mile further down in the canyon, upon the north side, and quite near
the bordering walls. In exterior development, including the court,
it is eight hundred and seventy-two feet, of which the back wall
measures three hundred, and the side walls or wings one hundred and
forty-four feet each. It is of medium size, but symmetrical, and
larger than any single aboriginal structure in Central America in
ground dimensions. There are seventy-three apartments in the first
story, some of which are unusually large, being about thirteen by
eighteen feet, and with fifty-three rooms in the second story, and
twenty-nine in the third, contain an aggregate of one hundred and
fifty-five rooms. It would accommodate from eight hundred to one
thousand Indians.

To complete the representation of the architectural design of these
"great houses of stone," the annexed elevation is given, Fig. 32. It
is a restoration of the Pueblo of Hungo Pavie, made by Mr. Kern, who
accompanied General Simpson as draughtsman, and copied from his
engraving. The walls of the canyon are seen in the background of
engraving. We may recognize in this edifice, as it seems to the
author, a very satisfactory reproduction of the so-called palaces of
Montezuma, which, like this, were constructed on three sides of a
court which opened on a street or causeway, and in the terraced form.
From the light which this architecture throws upon that of the Aztecs,
which was contemporary, it appears extremely probable that these
famous palaces, considered as exclusive residences of an Indian
potentate, are purely fictitious; and that, on the contrary, they
were neither more nor less than great communal or joint-tenement
houses of the aboriginal American model, and with common Indians
crowding all their apartments. From what is now known of the
necessary constitution of society among the Village Indians, it
scarcely admits of a doubt that the great house in which he lived
was occupied on equal terms by many other families in common with
his own, all the individuals of which were joint proprietors of the
establishment which their own hands had constructed.

Two miles further down, and upon the north side of the canyon, near
the bluff, are the ruins of the Pueblo of Chettro Kettle, or the
Rain Pueblo, Fig. 33. The main building and the wings face the court,
from which alone they are entered, and from which the several
stories recede outward. Including the court, this great edifice has
an exterior development of one thousand three hundred feet. The
exterior wall of the main building measures four hundred and
fifty-two feet in length, and the longest of the wings two hundred
and twenty feet. These measurements are according to General Simpson.

From these measurements some impression may be formed of the extent
of the accommodations such an edifice would afford, especially in
Indian life, where a married pair and their children are found in a
smaller space than one of these apartments supplied. The plan shows
one hundred and seventy-five apartments in the ground story; one
hundred and thirty-four in the second; one hundred and thirteen in
the third; sixty in the fourth, and twenty-four in the fifth--making
an aggregate of five hundred and six apartments. It is not probable
that the several stories were carried up symmetrically, which would
involve a diminution of some of the rooms in the upper stories. This
pueblo is constructed of the same materials as those before named.
"The circular estufas," Lieutenant Simpson remarks, "of which there
are six in number, have a greater depth than any we have seen, and
differ from them also in exhibiting more stories, one of them
certainly showing two, and possibly three, the lowest one appearing
to be almost covered up with debris."

This room, Fig. 34, is described by Lieutenant Simpson, but at the
time of Mr. Jackson's visit he was unable to find it. "In the
northwest corner of the ruins," Lieutenant Simpson remarks,
"we found a room in an almost perfect state of preservation.... This
room is fourteen by seven and a half feet in plan, and ten feet in
elevation. It has an outside doorway, three and a half feet high by
two and a quarter wide, and one at its west end, leading into the
adjoining room, two feet wide, and at present, on account of rubbish,
only two and a half feet high. The stone walls still have their
plaster upon them in a tolerable state of preservation. In the south
wall is a recess or niche, three feet two inches high by four feet
five inches wide by four deep. Its position and size naturally
suggested the idea that it might have been a fire-place, but if so,
the smoke must have returned to the room, as there was no chimney
outlet for it. In addition to this large recess, there were three
smaller ones in the same wall. The ceiling showed two main beams,
laid transversely; on these, longitudinally, were a number of
smaller ones in juxtaposition, the ends being tied together by a
species of wooden fibre, and the interstices chinked in with small
stones; on these, again, transversely, in close contact, was a kind
of lathing of the odor and appearance of cedar, all in a good state
of preservation." [Footnote: Lieutenant Simpson's Report, p. 63.]

When in its original condition, this fine pueblo must have made a
very striking appearance.

Immediately under the walls of the canyon, and about a quarter of a
mile below the last pueblo, are the ruins of the still-greater
Pueblo Bonito, Fig. 35. This edifice is, in some respects, the most
interesting of the series as well as the best preserved in certain
portions. Its exterior development, including the court, is one
thousand three hundred feet. Its corners are rounded, and the east
wing, now the most ruinous part of the structure, appears to have
had row upon row of apartments added, until nearly one-third of the
area of the court was covered. "Its present elevation," General
Simpson observes, "shows that it had at least four stories of
apartments. The number of rooms on the ground floor is one hundred
and thirty-nine. In this enumeration, however, are not included the
apartments which are not distinguishable in the eastern portion of
the pueblo, and which would swell the number to about two hundred.
There, then, having been at least four stories of rooms ... there
must be a reduction ... of one range of rooms for every story after
the first, which would increase the number to six hundred and
forty-one." [Footnote: Simpson's Report, p. 81.]

No single edifice of equal accommodations, it may be here repeated,
has ever been found in any part of North America. It would
accommodate three thousand Indians.

One of the best of its rooms is shown in the engraving, Fig. 36. It
will compare, not unfavorably, with any of equal size to be found at
Palenque or Uxmal, although, from the want of a vaulted ceiling, not
equal in artistic design. The nice mechanical adjustment of the
masonry and the finish of the ceiling are highly creditable to the
taste and skill of the builders. "It is walled up," says Simpson,
"with alternate beds of large and small stones, the regularity of
the combination producing a very pleasant effect. The ceiling of
this room is also more tasteful than any we have seen, the
transverse beams being smaller and more numerous, and the
longitudinal pieces, which rest upon them, only about an inch in
diameter, and beautifully regular These latter have somewhat the
appearance of barked willow. The room has a doorway at each end, and
one at the side, each of them leading into adjacent apartments. The
light is let in by a window two feet by eight inches on the north
side." [Footnote: Simpson's Report, p. 81.]

Mr. Jackson's study of the ruins enabled him to produce a restoration,
which is given in his report, and of whose plate Fig. 37 is a copy.
It is an interesting work, considered as a restoration, which can
only claim to be an approximation. It will be noticed that three
passage-ways were left open into the court, although the ground plan
shows but one. In the Yucatan edifices, as the House of the Nuns at
Uxmal, there is usually an arched gateway through the center of the
building facing the court. The court was also open at each of the
four angles, which, however, might have been protected by palisades
in time of danger. The walls of the canyon are seen in the
background of the engraving.

Of this pueblo, Mr. Jackson remarks that "three hundred yards below
are the ruins of the Pueblo del Arroyo, Fig. 38, so named probably
because it is on the verge of the deep arroyo which traverses the
middle of the canyon." This was given only a passing glance by
Simpson, but it well repays more careful inspection. It is of the
rectangular form, but with the open space or court facing a few
degrees north of east. The west wall is two hundred and sixty-eight
feet long, and the two wings one hundred and twenty-five and one
hundred and thirty-five feet, respectively; their ends connected by
a narrow and low semi-circular wall. The wings are the most
massively-built and best-preserved portion of the whole building,
that portion which lies between them and back of the court being
much more ruinous and dissimilar in many respects. The walls, of the
south wing, which are in the first story, very heavy and massive,
are still standing to the height of the third story. Many, of the
vigas are still in place, and are large and perfectly smooth and
straight undressed logs of pine, averaging ten inches in thickness;
none of the smaller beams or other wood-work now remains. There is
one estufa thirty-seven feet in diameter in this wing. In the north
wing the walls are standing somewhat higher, but do not indicate
more than three stories, though there was probably another. The
vigas of the second floor project through the wall for a distance of
about five feet along its whole northern face, the same as in the
Pueblo Hungo Pavie. There are two estufas; one near the east end of
the wing, which is twenty-seven feet in diameter, was three stories
in height. The floor-beams are removed, but the remains show this
plainly. The interior is nearly filled up, but it was originally
over twenty-five feet in depth. The ruins of the other estufa are
insignificant compared with this, and it probably consisted of but
one low room. Facing the center of the court are remains of what
were three circular rooms. At the end of the wings, outside of the
building, are faint outlines of other circular apartments or
inclosures, shown by dotted lines on the plan. In the central
portion of the ruin, between the two wings, some rooms have been
preserved entire. I crawled down into one of these through a small
hole in the covering, and found its walls to consist of delicate
masonry, thinly plastered and whitewashed. The ceiling was formed in
the usual manner, fine willow brush supporting the earthen floor
above, instead of the lath-like sticks or thin boards that were used
in the exceptional cases noted.

Two miles below the Pueblo del Arroyo are the ruins of the Pueblo of
Penyasca Blanca, Fig. 39. "This is the largest pueblo in plan we
have seen," Lieutenant Simpson remarks, "and differs from others in
the arrangement of the stones composing its walls. The walls of the
other pueblos were all of one uniform character in the several beds
composing it; but in this there is a regular alternation of large
and small stones, which are about one foot in length and one-half a
foot in thickness, form but a single bed, and then, alternating with
these, are three or four beds of very small stones, each about an
inch in thickness. The general plan of the structure also differs
from the others in approximating the form of the circle. The number
of the rooms at present discoverable upon the first floor is one
hundred and twelve: and the existing walls show that there have been
at least three stories of apartments. The number of circular estufas
we counted was seven." [Footnote: Simpson's Report, p. 64.]

"In point of size," Mr. Jackson remarks, "the rooms of this ruin
will average larger than in most of the others; the twenty-eight
rooms, as they appear on the outer circumference, average twenty
feet in length from wall to wall inside. The smallest, which are
only ten feet wide, are at the two ends. The width of the rooms of
each tier appears to have been constant throughout the length of the
whole ruin. The dimensions given in these drawings are, in nearly
every case, of those apartments which constitute the second story,
as it is in those that there is the least obscuration of the walls.

"In most of the ruins the first floor is almost entirely filled up
with debris, but when the ruins can be followed they show that this
floor is generally divided into much smaller apartments, two or
three occurring sometimes in place of each one above them. The
eastern half of the ellipse, as above said, consists of a single
continuous line of small apartments, with a uniform width of
thirteen feet inside and an average length of twenty feet. By a
curious coincidence the same number of rooms are in this row as in
the outer tier of the main building. The walls of the central
portion for a distance of about two hundred feet are in fair
preservation, standing in places six to eight feet in height, the
dividing walls showing apertures leading from one room to another.
They are built of stones uniform in size, averaging six by nine by
three and a half inches. Mortar was used between the stones instead
of the small plates of stone. At both ends, for a distance of some
two hundred feet from the point of juncture with the main building,
the walls are entirely leveled, but enough remains to show the
dimensions of each apartment. Twenty yards from the south end of the
building are the ruins of a great circular room fifty feet in
diameter, with some portions of its interior wall in such
preservation that its character is readily discernible." [Footnote:
Hayden's Tenth Annual Report, 1878, p. 446.]

Without the canyon, upon the mesa, and about half a mile back of the
bluff, upon the north side, are the ruins of the Pueblo Alto,
constructed of stone on three sides of a court, like those before
described. The main building is three hundred feet long, and one
wing is two hundred feet measured externally from the back end of
the main building, the other wing is one hundred and seventy feet
measured the same way. This wing is but two rooms deep, while the
main building and the other wing are each three rooms deep. It has
six estufas, with remains of a convex wall, connecting the two wings,
and inclosing the court. These estufas, like those in the other
pueblos, suggest the probability that they were places for holding
the councils of the gentes and phratries.

This great ruin, with two others of smaller size, shown in Fig. 38
as No. 8 and No. 9, of which the first is one hundred and
thirty-five feet long and one hundred feet deep, and the other
seventy-eight by sixty-three feet, both of stone, complete the list
of ruins in the canyon. The pueblo of Pintado, is, however, at the
upper end, and without the canyon, and the Pueblo Alto, not yet
described, is not in the canyon, but on the bluff. It is a
remarkable display of ancient edifices; the most remarkable in New
Mexico. With the bordering walls of the canyon, rising vertically,
in places, one hundred feet high, it presented long vistas in either
direction, with natural and inclosing walls. Shut in from all view
of the table lands at the summit of these walls, this valley, at the
time its great houses were occupied, must have presented a very
striking picture of human life as it existed in the Middle Period of
Barbarism. The greater part of the valley must have been covered
with garden beds, from which the people derived their principal
support, as the mesa lands without the canyon were too dry for
cultivation. It no doubt presented an interesting picture of
industrious and contented life, with a corresponding advancement in
the arts of this period. There is still some uncertainty concerning
the time when these pueblos were last occupied, and the fate of
their inhabitants. There are a number of circumstances tending to
show that they were the "Seven Cities of Cibola," against which the
expedition of Coronado was directed in 1540-1542. There are seven
pueblos in ruins in the canyon, without reckoning Nos. 8 and 9, the
smallest in the valley. Some of the facts which point to these
pueblos as the Towns of Cibola may here be noted.

In his Relation to the Viceroy, which is dated from the province of
Cibola, August 3, 1540, Coronado describes his conquest and
intimates his disappointment in the following language:

"It remaineth now to certify your Honor of the seven cities, and of
the kingdoms and provinces whereof the Father Provincial made report
unto your Lordship. And, to be brief, I can assure your Honor he
said the truth in nothing that he reported, but all was quite
contrary, saving only the names of the cities, and great houses of
stone, for although they be not wrought with turqueses, nor with lime,
nor bricks, yet they are very excellent good houses, of three, or
four, or five lofts high, wherein are good lodging and fair chambers,
with ladders instead of stairs, and certain cellars under the ground,
very good and paved, which are made for winter,--they are in manner
like stoves; and the ladders which they have for their houses are in
a manner moveable and portable, which are taken away and set down
when they please; and they are made of two pieces of wood, with
their steps, as ours be. The seven cities are seven small towns, all
made with these kind of houses that I speak of; and they stand all
within four leagues together, and they are all called the Kingdom of
Cibola, and every one of them have their particular name, and none
of them is called Cibola, but all together they are called Cibola.
And this town, which I call a city, I have named Granada, as well
because it is somewhat like unto it, as also in remembrance of your
Lordship. In this town where I now remain there may be some two
hundred houses, all compassed with walls; and, I think, that, with
the rest of the houses which are not so walled, they may be together
five hundred. There is another town near this, which is one of the
seven, and it is somewhat bigger than this, and another of the same
bigness that this is of, and the four are somewhat less; and I send
them all painted unto your Lordship with the voyage. And the
parchment wherein the picture is was found here with other parchments.
The people of this town seem unto me of a reasonable stature, and
witty, yet they seem not to be such as they should be, of that
judgment and wit to build these houses in such sort as they are....
They travel eight days' journey unto certain plains lying towards
the North Sea. In this country there are certain skins, well dressed;
and they dress them and paint them where they kill their oxen
[buffalo]; for so they say themselves." [Footnote: Hakluyt, vol iii,
p. 377.]

On the fourth day after the capture of Cibola, Coronado further says:
"They set in order all their goods and substance, their women and
children, and fled to the hills, leaving their towns as it were
abandoned, wherein remained very few of them." [Footnote: ib., vol.
iii, p. 379.]

It will be observed that the phrases "great houses of stone," and
"good houses of three, or four, or five lofts high," not only
describe the pueblo on the Chaco in apt language, but there are no
other pueblos in New Mexico, exclusively of stone, of which we have
knowledge, except those of the Mokis, in the Canyon de Chelly, on
the Animas River, and elsewhere in Southwestern Colorado. There is
an apparent difficulty in the narrative, in the reference made to
the number of houses; but it is evident, I think, that Coronado
meant apartments or sections, treating each great house as a block
of houses, and expressing a doubt of their "judgment and wit to
build these houses in such sort as they are." If any doubt remained,
it is entirely removed by the fact that all the pueblo houses in New
Mexico, whether occupied or in ruins, are great edifices constructed
like these on the communal principle, and that two hundred such
houses grouped in one town were an utter impossibility.

Jaramillo, who wrote his Relation some time after the return of the
expedition, remarks, "that all the water-courses that we fell in with,
whether brook or river, as far as that of Cibola, and I believe for
one or two days' journey beyond, flow in the direction of the South
Sea [the Pacific]; farther on they take the direction of the North
Sea [the Atlantic]". [Footnote: Col. H. Ternaux-Compans, vol. ix, p.
370.]

This tends to show that Cibola was situated on a tributary of the
Colorado, which gathers all the waters of New Mexico west of the Rio
Grande and north of the Gila, and also that it was situated quite
near the dividing ridge. It is but ten miles from the Canyon de
Torrejon, on the Puerco, a tributary of the Rio Grande, to the
commencement of the Rio de Chaco, an affluent of the San Juan, and
but twenty-three miles to the Pueblo Pintado. In this respect the
sites of the ruins on the Chaco are in close agreement with the
description of the situations of the towns of Cibola. Castanyada,
after speaking of the seven villages, and the character of the houses,
remarks that "the valley is very narrow, between precipitous
mountains" ["C'est une vallee tres-etroite entre des montagues
escarpees"], [Footnote: Castenyada Relation, Ternaux-Compans, ix, p.
164.] which, in the light of Coronado's declaration, that "the
country is all plain, and on no side mountains," may perhaps have
reference to the encompassing walls of the canyon. This language,
literally interpreted, does not describe this canyon, neither is
there any valley in New Mexico, occupied by pueblos, which answers
this description.

Upon the evidence contained in these several narratives, and with
our present knowledge of New Mexico, the sites of the seven towns of
Cibola cannot be determined with certainty. It is a question of
probabilities; and those which seem the strongest in favor of the
ruins on the Chaco are the following: Firstly, they are superior,
architecturally, to any pueblos in New Mexico, now existing or in
ruins, and agree in number and in proximity to each other, with the
towns of Cibola as described. Secondly, they are upon an affluent of
the San Juan, and within "one or two days' journey" of the waters
which flow into the Gulf of Mexico; in other words, they are near
the summit of the watershed of the two oceans, where Jaramillo
distinctly states Cibola was situated. Thirdly, they are within
eight days of the buffalo ranges, the nearest of which are upon the
northeastern confines of New Mexico. Cibola was said to be thus
situated. Moreover, the name Cibola implies the buffalo country. We
are also told by Friar Marcos that the Indians south of the Gila
trafficked with the Cibolans for ox-hides, which he found them
wearing. Zunyi, the only known place, showing a probability that it
was one of the seven towns, is too far distant from the buffalo
ranges to answer to this portion of the narrative. Lastly, the
evidence, collectively, favors a far northern as well as far eastern
position for Cibola. The people of Cibola knew nothing of either
ocean. This could hardly have been true of the people of Zunyi with
respect to the Pacific, or at least the Gulf of California. Coronado
himself was in doubt as to which sea was nearest, and seems to have
been conscious of the widening of the continent upon both sides of
him. Assuming that the pueblos on the Chaco were inhabited in 1540,
they were the finest structures then in New Mexico. Coronado
captured all the villages on the Rio Grande, and probably sent a
detachment to the Moki Pueblos, and remained two years in the country.
It seems impossible, therefore, that he should have failed to find
the pueblos on the Chaco; and they answer his description better
than any other pueblos in New Mexico.

With respect to the manner of constructing these houses, it was
probably done, as elsewhere remarked, from time to time, and from
generation to generation. Like a feudal castle, each house was a
growth by additions from small beginnings, made as exigencies
required. When one of these houses, after attaining a sufficient size,
became overcrowded with inhabitants, it is probable that a strong
colony, "like the swarm from the parent hive, moved out, and
commenced a new house, above or below, in the same valley." This
would be repeated, as the people prospered, until several pueblos
grew up within an extent of twelve or fifteen miles, as in the
valley of the Chaco. When the capabilities of the valley were
becoming overtaxed for their joint subsistence, the colonists would
seek more distant homes. At the period of the highest prosperity of
these pueblos, the valley of the Chaco must have possessed
remarkable advantages for subsistence. The plain between the walls
of the canyon was between half a mile and a mile in width near the
several pueblos, but the amount of water now passing through it is
small. In July, according to Lieutenant Simpson, the running stream
was eight feet wide and a foot and a half deep at one of the pueblos;
while Mr. Jackson found no running water and the valley entirely dry
in the month of May, with the exception of pools of water in places
and a reservoir of pure water in the rocks at the top of the bluff.
The condition of the region is shown by these two statements. During
the rainy season in the summer, which is also the season of the
growing crops, there is an abundance of water; while in the dry
season it is confined to springs, pools and reservoirs. From the
number of pueblos in the valley, indicating a population of several
thousand, the gardens within it must have yielded a large amount of
subsistence; the climate being favorable to its growth and ripening.




CHAPTER VIII.

RUINS OF HOUSES OF THE SEDENTARY INDIANS OF THE SAN JUAN RIVER
AND ITS TRIBUTARIES--CONTINUED.


About sixty miles north of the pueblos on the Chaco, and in the
valley of the Animas River, is a cluster of stone pueblos, very
similar to the former. These I visited in 1878. The valley is broad
at this point, and for some miles above and below to its mouth. At
the time of our visit (July 22) the river was a broad stream,
carrying a large volume of water. We followed down the river from
the point of its rise in the dividing range, where it was a mere
brook, nearly the whole distance through Silverton to Animas City.
The constant accession of mountain streams, and the rapid descent of
its bed, soon changed it into a noisy and dashing stream. About
twenty miles above Animas City we were compelled to ascend to the
top of the bordering mountains to avoid the narrow canyon below,
which was impassable; and in descending from Animas City to visit
these pueblos we crossed over to the La Plata Valley, and after
passing through this valley we recrossed to the Animas Valley to
avoid similar canyons also impassable. The supply of water for
irrigation at the pueblo was abundant. [Footnote: The engravings of
Figs. 40, 41 and 41a were kindly loaned by Mr. F. W. Putnam of the
Peabody Museum, Cambridge, Mass.]

The pueblo of which the ground plan is shown, Fig. 40, is one of
four situated within the extent of one mile on the west side of the
Animas River in New Mexico, about twelve miles above its mouth.
Besides these four, there are five other smaller ruins of inferior
structures within the same area. This pueblo was five or perhaps six
stories high, consisting of a main building three hundred and
sixty-eight feet long, and two wings two hundred and seventy feet
long, measured along the external wall on the right and left sides,
and one hundred and ninety-nine feet measured along the inside from
the end back to the main building.

[Illustration: Fig. 40--Ground plan of Pueblo on Animas River, N.
M.]

A fourth structure crosses from the end of one wing to the end of
the other, thus inclosing an open court. It was of the width of one
and perhaps two rows of apartments, and slightly convex outward,
which enlarged somewhat the size of the court. The main building and
the wings were built in the so-called terraced form; that is to say,
the first row of apartments in the main building and in each wing on
the court side were but one story high. The second row back of these
were carried up two stories high, the third row three stories, and
so on to the number of five stories for the main building and four
for each wing. The external wall rose forty or fifty feet where the
structure was five stories high and but ten feet on the court side,
including a low parapet wall, where the structure was but one story
high. There was no entrance to these great structures in the ground
story. After getting admission within the court, they ascended to
the roof of the first row of apartments by means of ladders, and in
the same way, by ladders, to each successive story. As the second
story receded from the first, the third from the second, and so on,
each successive story made a great step ten feet high. The
apartments were entered through trap-doors in the roof of each story,
the descent being by ladders inside. In some places, without doubt,
the upper stories were entered by doorways from the roof of the
story in front.

The two wings are a mass of ruins. Pit-holes along the summit show
the forms of the rooms, with plain traces of the original walls here
and there, and excavations, made by curious settlers, have opened a
number of rooms in the ground story of one of the wings. These we
entered and measured. Some of the rooms were faced with stone, i.e.,
we found a stone wall regularly laid up, like the one in the main
building, as will elsewhere be shown. Some of the walls in these
rooms were of cobblestone and adobe; others were of stone with
natural faces and cobblestone intermixed. We saw no wall of adobe
brick alone. The fallen walls formed a mass about twelve feet deep
over the site of the wings, being the deepest on the outside and
thinning out on the court side.

The mass of material used in the construction of these edifices was
very great and surprises the beholder. It is explained in part by
the thickness of the walls. We measured a number of them. They were
two feet four inches, two feet six inches, two feet nine inches,
three feet, and in rare cases three feet six inches thick. None
measured less than two feet.

The main building was originally the best constructed part of the
edifice, it may be supposed, because a part of it now remains
standing. The walls of the first story, of some part of the second,
and, in some places, of a part of the third story, forming the
second row of apartments from the outside, are still standing, and
rise about twenty five feet from the ground. The measurements of the
second row of apartments, as shown in the diagram were from the
standing walls, and were made in the second story.

The first or basement story is filled up with the rubbish of the
fallen walls, ceilings, and floors, in the second row of apartments
named. In some cases they are full above the line of the original
ceilings; in others nearly up to them. The main ceiling beams were
of yellow cedar from eight to twelve inches in diameter, usually
three and four in number, and were placed across the narrow way of
the room. Stubs of these beams still remain in the walls parallel
with the court. Just above the line of these beams in the other two
walls were the ends of a row of poles about four inches in diameter,
which passed transversely across the cedar beams Stubs of these poles,
broken off short at the line of the walls, still remain in place.
Upon these poles were originally thin pieces of split cedar limbs,
and then the floor of adobe mortar, four or five inches thick. We
thus get the position and height of the floor of the first and
second stories, which were about nine feet six inches for the ground
story, and nine feet for the second story.

The external wall of the main building has fallen the entire length
of the structure. As these ruins are resorted to by the few settlers
in the valley as a stone quarry to obtain stone for foundations to
their houses and barns, and for stoning up their wells, the loose
material is being gradually removed, and when the standing walls are
more convenient to take they will be removed also. One farmer told
me he thought that one quarter of the accessible material of this
and the adjacent stone pueblo had already been removed. It is to be
hoped that the number of these settlers inclined to Vandalism will
not increase.

A part of the partition walls which connected the outside wall with
the next parallel wall is still standing where the wall last named
rises above the second story. They stand out for three or four feet
like buttresses against the wall, and show that the masonry of the
parallel and transverse walls was articulated, that the partition
walls were continuous from front to rear, and that the walls of the
several stories rested upon each other. All this is seen by a bare
inspection of the walls as they now stand.

The masonry itself is the chief matter of interest in these
structures. Every room in the main building was faced with stone on
the four sides, having an adobe floor and a wooden ceiling. Each
room had, as far as walls now remain to show, two doorways through
the walls parallel with the court, and four openings about twelve
inches square, two on the side of each doorway, near the ceiling.
These openings were for light and ventilation. In a limited sense it
may be said that the stones were dressed, and also that they were
laid in courses, but, in the high and strict meaning of these terms,
neither is true. The stones used were small and of different sizes.
Sometimes they were nearly square, from six to eight inches on a side;
sometimes a foot long by six inches wide. The latter is the size of
the stones used at Uxmal and Chichen Itza, according to Norman. In
some cases longer and thicker stones were used without any attempt
to square the ends. In some instances thin pieces of stone were
employed with parallel faces. In all cases the stone was a sandstone,
now of a reddish brown color. It is the prevailing stone in the
bluffs of the Animas River, and of all the rivers parallel with it
running into the San Juan, as far as personal observation enabled me
to judge. It is a soft rather than a hard stone, usually of a buff
color when first quarried, and some of it has decayed in the using.
The wasted and weatherworn appearance of some of these stones would
otherwise indicate a very great age for the structure. With stone of
the size used a good face can be formed by simple fracture, and a
joint sufficiently close may be made by a few strokes with a stone
maul. If finer work was aimed at, it must have been accomplished by
rubbing the stones to a face. But this work is sufficiently
explained by the former processes. In the row of apartments and
stories named, both faces of each wall were of stone, so that all of
the apartments were of stone on the inside. They were fair walls,
both in masonry and workmanship, and creditable to the builders.
There was an attempt to lay up these walls in courses of uniform
thickness, but each course differing from the one above and below it.
The attempt was only partially successful. They did not hesitate to
break in upon the regularity of the courses. Some of the standing
walls are now sprung; but most of them are straight, and fairly
vertical, the adobe mortar being sound and the bond unbroken.

The Indian had a string from time immemorial. With it he could
strike a circle, and lay out the four sides of a quadrangular
structure with tolerable correctness. It is not too much to assume
that with a string and sinker attached the Village Indian had the
plumb-line, and could prove his wall as well as we can. At all events,
the eye still proves the general correctness of their work.

The adobe mortar of the Pueblo Indians is something more than mud
mortar, although far below a mortar of lime and sand. Adobe is a
kind of finely pulverized clay with a bond of considerable strength
by mechanical cohesion. In Southern Colorado, in Arizona, and New
Mexico, there are immense tracts covered with what is called adobe
soil. It varies somewhat in the degree of its excellence. The kind
of which they make their pottery has the largest per cent of alumina,
and its presence is indicated by the salt weed which grows in this
particular soil. This kind also makes the best adobe mortar. The
Indians use it freely in laying their walls, as freely as our masons
use lime mortar; and although it never acquires the hardness of
cement, it disintegrates slowly. The mortar in these walls is still
sound, so that it requires some effort of strength to loosen a stone
from the wall and remove it. But this adobe mortar is adapted only
to the dry climate of Southern Colorado, Arizona, and New Mexico,
where the precipitation is less than five inches per annum. The
rains and frosts of a northern climate would speedily destroy it. To
the presence of this adobe soil, found in such abundance in the
regions named, and to the sandstone of the bluffs, where masses are
often found in fragments, we must attribute the great progress made
by these Indians in house-building.

The exclusive presence of this adobe mortar in all New Mexican
structures of the aboriginal period shows that the tribes of New
Mexico were then ignorant of a mortar of lime and sand. And here a
digression may be allowed to consider whether a cement of this grade
was known to the aborigines. Theoretically, the use of a mortar
composed of quick-lime and sand, which gives a cement chemically
united, would not be expected of the Indian tribes either in North
or South America. There is no sufficient proof that they ever
produced a cement of this high grade. It requires a kiln,
artificially constructed, and a concentrated heat to burn limestone
into lime, supposing they had learned that lime could be thus
obtained, and some knowledge of the properties of quick-lime before
they reached the idea of a true cement. The Spanish writers
generally speak of walls of lime and stone, thus implying a mortar
of lime and sand. Thus, Bernal Diaz speaks of the great temple in
the Pueblo of Mexico as surrounded "with double enclosures built of
stone and lime."

[Footnote: The True History of the Conquest of Mexico, Keatinge's
Translation, Salem ed., 1803, vol. i, p. 208.] Clavigero remarks
that "the houses of lords and people of circumstances were built of
stone and lime." [Footnote: History of Mexico, Cullen's Trans., Phila.
ed., 1817, vol. ii, p. 232.]

Again, "the ignorant Mr. De Pauw denies that the Mexicans had either
the knowledge or made use of lime; but it is evident from the
testimony of all the historians of Mexico, by tribute rolls, and
above all from the ancient buildings still remaining, that all these
nations made the same use of lime as all the Europeans do." [Footnote:
ib., vol. ii, p. 237.]

In like manner, Herrera, speaking of Zempoala, near Vera Cruz,
remarks that the Spaniards, entering the town, found "the houses
[were] built of lime and stone;" [Footnote: History of America,
Stevens' Trans., London ed., 1725, vol ii, p. 266.] and again,
speaking of the houses in Yucatan, he remarks that "at the place
where the encounter happened, there were three houses built of lime
and stone." [Footnote: ib., p. 112.]

These several statements can hardly be said to prove the fact of the
use of a mortar of lime and sand. Mr. John L. Stephens, in speaking
of the ruins at Palenque, is more explicit: "The building was
constructed of stone, with a mortar of lime and sand, and the whole
front was covered with stucco, and painted." [Footnote: Central
America, Chiapas and Yucatan, vol. ii, p. 310.]

The back wall of the governor's house at Uxmal is nine feet thick
through its length of two hundred and seventy feet. In this wall, by
means of crowbars, "the Indians made a hole six and seven feet deep,
but throughout the wall was solid and consisted of large stones
imbedded in mortar, almost as hard as rock." [Footnote: ib., vol. i,
p. 178.]

At the ruins of Zayi, there was one row of ten apartments, two
hundred and twenty feet long, called the Casas Cerrada, or closed
house, because the core over which the triangular ceiling was
constructed had not been removed when the house was abandoned, of
which Stephens says, "We found ourselves in apartments finished with
the walls and ceilings like the others, but filled up (except so far
as they had been emptied by the Indians) with solid masses of mortar
and stones." [Footnote: Central American, Chiapas and Yucatan, vol.
ii, p. 23.]

Norman, speaking of the ruins of the House of the Cacique at Chichen,
remarks, "that the wall is made of large and uniformly square blocks
of limestone set in mortar, which appears to be as durable as the
stone itself." [Footnote: Rambles in Yucatan, p. 120.]

Elsewhere, speaking of the ruins of Yucatan generally, he observes,
"the stones are cut in parallelopipeds of about twelve inches in
length and six in breadth, the interstices filled up of the same
materials of which the terraces are composed." [Footnote: ib. p. 127]

That these tribes used mortar of some kind in their stone walls
cannot be doubted, but these several statements do not prove the use
of quick-lime, which is the main question. Mr. Stephens' statement
satisfied me until I saw the New Mexican pueblos. These show that a
very efficient mortar can be had without the use of lime. The
Indians of Mexico and the coast tribes near Vera Cruz plastered
their houses externally with gypsum, which made them a brilliant
white, and the stucco used upon the inner walls of houses in Chiapas
and Yucatan was not unlikely made of gypsum. This mineral is
abundant as well as easily treated. From it comes plaster of Paris,
and from it may have come in some form the bond which held the
mortar together, to the strength of which Mr. Stephens refers.

The neatness and general correctness of the masonry is now best seen
in the doorways. In the standing walls of the second story, and of
the first, where occasionally uncovered, there are to be seen two
doorways in each room, as before stated, running in all cases across
the building from the court side toward the external wall, and never
in the direction of its length. These doorways measured some three
feet two inches in height by two feet six inches in width, and
others three feet four inches by two feet seven inches.

The stone used in these doorways are rather smaller than those in
other parts of the wall, but prepared in the same manner.

I brought away two of these stones, taken from the standing walls of
the main building, as samples of the character of the work with
respect to size and dressing. Fig. 41 represents one of them,
engraved from a photograph. It measures eight inches in its greatest
length by six inches in its greatest width, and it is two and
three-quarter inches in thickness.

[Illustration: Fig. 41.--Stone from doorway.]

The upper and lower faces of the stone are substantially but not
exactly, parallel. It also shows one angle, which is substantially,
but not exactly a right angle and it was so adjusted that the long
edge was on the doorway and short one in the wall of a chamber or
apartment, with the right angle at the corner between them. This
stone was evidently prepared by fracture, probably with a stone maul,
and the regularity of the breakage was doubtless partly due to skill
and partly to accident. It shows no marks of the chisel or the drove,
or of having been rubbed, and where the square is applied to the
sides or angles the rudeness of the stone is perfectly apparent.

Fig. 41a represents a sandstone cut by American skilled workmen in
the form of a brick, and it is intended to show by comparison the
great difference between the dressed stone of the civilized man and
the ruder stone of the mason in the condition of barbarism. The
comparison shows that no instruments of exactness were used in the
stone work of the pueblo, and that exactness was not attempted. But
the accuracy of a practiced eye and hand, such as their methods
afforded, was reached, and this was all they attempted. With stones
as rude as that shown in the figure, a fair and even respectable
stone wall may be laid. The art of architecture in stone is of slow
and difficult growth. Stone prepared by fracture with a stone hammer
precedes dressed stone, which requires metallic implements. In like
manner mud mortar or adobe mortar precedes a mortar of lime and sand.
The Village Indians of America were working their way experimentally,
and step by step, in the art of house-building, as all mankind have
been obliged to do, each race for itself; and the structures the
Village Indians have raised in various parts of America, imperfect
as they are by contrast, are highly creditable to their intelligence.

Stone lintels were not used for these doorways, as stones three feet
long would have been required. No stones of half that length are to
be seen in any of the walls. They had, however, the idea of a stone
lintel, for they used them in this structure over the foot-square
openings for light and air. We found a stone lintel over an opening
eighteen inches wide in a cliff house on the Mancos River. This was
so firmly imbedded that we found its removal impossible. They used
for a lintel six round cedar cross-pieces, Fig. 42, each about four
inches in diameter and now perfectly sound.

[Illustration: Fig. 42.--Section of Cedar Lintel.]

In some of these doorways we noticed a peculiar feature. On the side
toward the external wall, one and sometimes two of these wooden
lintels were placed, four and sometimes six inches lower than the
remainder, so that on entering from the outside room into the second
room, the top of the doorway rose higher as the room was entered. A
necessity was experienced to save the head from bumps, and the
wonder is that it did not occur to them to raise the doorways to the
height of the body. As the doorways were always open, no doors being
used, it may well be that larger openings would have created
stronger currents of air through the building than they wished. The
ends of these lintels were hacked off by stone implements of some
kind.

The peculiar arrangement of the doorways tends to show that this
great house was divided into sections by the partition walls
extending from the court to the exterior wall; and that the rooms
above were connected with those below by means of trap-doors and
ladders. If this supposition be well founded, the five rooms on the
ground floor; from the court back; communicated with each other by
doorways. The four in the second story communicated with each other
in the same manner, and with those below through trap-doors in the
floors. The three rooms in the third story communicated with each
other by doorways, and with those below as before. The same would be
true of the two rooms of the fourth story. It seems probable that
the connected rooms were occupied by a group of related families.

We afterwards found the same thing nearly exemplified in the present
occupied Pueblo of Taos, in New Mexico. We found that the families
lived in the second and upper stories, and used the rooms below them
for storage and for granaries. Each family had two, four, and six
rooms, and those who held the upper rooms held those below.

In the south wing before mentioned, several rooms on the ground
floor are still perfect, with the ceilings in place upholding the
rubbish above. The openings or trap-doorways of two of these rooms
are still perfect, but the ladders are gone. The rooms had been
opened, us elsewhere stated, by late explorers. One of these
trap-doors measured sixteen by seventeen inches, and the other
sixteen inches square. Each was formed in the floor by pieces of
wood put together. The work was neatly done. These rooms were
smaller than the rooms above. Some were as narrow as four feet six
inches, others six feet, showing that one room had been divided into
two. The basement rooms were probably occupied for storage
exclusively, whence their division. They were dark, except as light
entered through the trap-doorway from above.

The structure connecting the wings and bounding the court was
evidently a single or double row of apartments. This is shown by the
amount of fallen material, which is larger than a wall would require,
and from pits or depressions which plainly marked the outline of
apartments.

There are two circular estufas in the main building, one
twenty-three feet and the other twenty-eight feet in diameter. A
part of the wall of the first estufa is still standing. It is of
stone, mostly of blocks about five inches square, and laid in courses,
with considerable regularity. The work is equal to the best masonry
in the edifice. In the open court, and near the outer structure,
bounding it in front, is another estufa of great size, sixty-three
and a half feet in diameter. These estufas, which are used as places
of council, and for the performance of their religious rites, are
still found at all the present occupied pueblos in New Mexico. There
are six at Taos, three at each house, and they are partly sunk in
the ground by an excavation. They are entered through a trap-doorway
in the roof, the descent being by a ladder.

Outside the front wall closing the court, and about thirty feet
distance therefrom, are the remains of a low wall crossing the
entire front and extending beyond it. The end structures were about
sixty-five feet long by forty feet wide, while at the center was a
smaller structure, fifty-four feet long by eighteen wide. All its
parts were connected. It was evidently erected for defensive purposes;
but it is impossible to make out its character from the remains. One
wing is several feet longer than the other, and the wall on the
court side is about twenty feet longer than the opposite exterior
wall, thus showing that they used no exact measurements.

There were no fire-places with chimneys in this structure. There are
none in the ruins in Yucatan and Central America. It is a fair
inference, therefore, that chimneys were entirely unknown to the
aborigines at the time of their discovery. They have since that time
been adopted into the old pueblo houses from American or Spanish
sources. They are placed in one corner of the room. We saw recently
at Taos two chimneys and two fire-places in one and the same room,
one for cooking and the other for a fire to warm the room; proof
conclusive that they were not to the chimney born. They were in an
apartment of one of the principal chiefs.

In a number of rooms are recesses like niches left in the wall,
about two feet six inches wide and high, and about eighteen inches
deep. These furnished places to set household articles in, in the
place of a mantel or shelf. We afterwards saw niches precisely
similar at Taos, and thus used.

It remains to consider the number of rooms or apartments contained
in this great edifice. It is plain that it was built in the terraced
form, the second story set back from the first, the third from the
second, and so on to the last, which was a single row of apartments,
on the top somewhere, but not necessarily on the back side. Pueblos
were not entirely uniform in this respect The edifice at Taos
recedes in front and rear and even upon the sides. This may have
been built in the same way, but it can neither be proved nor
disproved from the ruins. The number of apartments would not vary
much whether the upper stories were symmetrically or irregularly
formed. If symmetrical, the main building contained two hundred and
sixty apartments, and each wing seventy, making the computation for
the latter by area and from the number of depression still
discernible, thus making an aggregate of four hundred rooms.

The house was a fortress, proving the insecurity in which the people
lived. It was also a joint tenement house of the aboriginal American
model, indicating a plan of life not well understood. It may
indicate an ancient communism in living, practiced by large
households formed on the principle of kin. In such a case the
communism was limited to the household as a part of a kinship.

Those familiar with the remains of Indian Pueblos in ruins will
recognize at once the resemblance between this pueblo and the stone
pueblos in ruins on the Rio Chaco, in New Mexico, about sixty miles
distant from these ruins, particularly the one called Hungo Pavie,
so fully described by General J. H. Simpson. There is one particular
in which the masonry agrees, viz., in the use of courses of thin
stones, about half an inch in thickness, sometimes three together,
and sometimes five and six. These courses are carried along the wall
from one side to the other, but often broken in upon. The effect is
quite pretty. These stones measure six inches in length by one-half
an inch in thickness. General Simpson found the same courses of thin
stones, and even thinner, in the Chaco ruins, and comments upon the
pleasing effect they produced.

This edifice was a credit to the skill and industry of the men among
the Village Indians; for the men, and not the women, were the
architects and the masons, although the women undoubtedly assisted
in doing the work. Women brought stone and adobe and cedar, and made
adobe mortar, without a doubt, as they still do. One of the hopeful
features in their advancement was the beginning of the reversal of
the old usage which put all labor upon the women. It is now the rule
among the Village Indians for the men to assume the heavy work,
which was doubtless the case when this pueblo was constructed. They
cultivated maize, beans, and squashes, in garden beds, and irrigated
them with water drawn from the river by means of a canal, and passed
in several smaller streams through their gardens. The men now engage
in the work of cultivation. This is a sure sign of progress.

Off the south wing of the building, and without it, are the remains
of an additional building, large enough for twenty or thirty rooms
on the ground, some part of which were, doubtless, carried up two or
more stories high; but it is a mass of indistinct ruins, about which
little can be said except that some of the rooms were unusually large.
This may have been the first building constructed, and the one
occupied while the stone pueblo was being built.

[Illustration: Fig. 43.--Outline of a Stone Pueblo on Animus River.]

This outline plan is submitted with some hesitation, because the
sketch from which it is taken was made in haste, and with no
expectation of using it. It is but an approximation. Near the pueblo
last described, and about five hundred feet northeasterly therefrom,
is another pueblo in two sections, Fig. 43, with a space about
fifteen feet wide between them. They may have been, and probably were,
connected and inhabited as one structure. Some of the walls are
still standing, and a number of the rooms in the ground story are
well preserved, the ceilings still remaining in place. Although the
structure is chiefly of stone like the last, some of the walls are
of cobblestone and adobe mortar. The largest section seems to have
had an open court in the center in the form of a parallelogram. This
feature increased the difficulty of understanding the original form
of the house and the arrangement of the rooms. The walls of the first,
of parts of the second, and occasionally of parts of the third story,
are still standing in places. Many of the rooms are small, as the
measurements of the following rooms in the second story of the
smallest building of the two will show:

3 feet 4 inches by 6 feet 6 inches, 4 feet by 8 feet 4 inches, 4 feet
7 inches by 14 feet 2 inches, 6 feet 5 inches by 14 feet 9 inches,
7 feet 3 inches by 16 feet 9 inches, 6 feet 4 inches by 11 feet 7
inches, 7 feet 3 inches by 7 feet 5 inches, 8 feet 7 inches by 15
feet. Height of rooms, 8 feet. The rooms were faced with stone laid
up in the main in courses. They were small, from four to eight
inches square, and the walls from two to three feet in thickness.
Adobe mortar was used abundantly in the inner part of the wall, but
not showing on the face at the joints, the stones being laid
together as closely as the natural surfaces of the stone would permit,
and without mortar near the edge. This feature was also
characteristic of the walls of the pueblo first described.

Mr. Bandelier made to me recently the important suggestion that as
far as any progress or improvement in this architecture, in style or
character, can be discerned, it seems to have been from smaller to
larger rooms, followed by a reduction of the size of the house in
ground dimensions. The last is more particularly illustrated by the
houses in Yucatan, where single rooms are found, in rare cases,
sixty feet long, but where the size of the house in ground
dimensions is much smaller than of those in New Mexico. It was in
consequence of an examination of some very old pueblo ruins in New
Mexico, east of the Rio Grande, near Santo Domingo. There the pueblo
was more like a cluster of cells than of rooms, as many of them were
but four or five feet square, contrasting strongly with the present
inhabited pueblos. The same fact may be seen at Taos. It was
mentioned (p. 144) that the Taos Indians many years ago conquered
and dispossessed the former occupants of a pueblo at this place,
and that some remains of the old pueblo were still standing. In
1878 I visited one of the ground-rooms in the old structure still
standing, and entirely alone. It was about five feet by six in
ground-dimensions, and was then occupied by a solitary Taos Indian,
a sort of hermit, as his place of residence. A bunk across one side
furnished him both a bed and a seat, and the remaining room was
scarcely sufficient to turn around in, but it gave him all the home
he had, and, doubtless, all the room he needed. Another room, a few
feet distant, also a part of the old pueblo, was still standing.
These rooms were of adobe, and were about six feet high. As the
Indian gained in experience and knowledge in the use and
construction of the joint-tenement houses, improvements would
gradually manifest themselves. It is important to find and trace
this progress, as we have every reason to believe that it is one
system of architecture throughout North America at least, with a
connection of all its forms.

Along the curving or westerly side of the first building, and along
the northerly side, there are cedar beams projecting about four feet
from the wall in the second story on the line of the ceiling. They
are about four inches in diameter. Their object is not apparent.

In one of the basement rooms of the second building are a series of
pictographs upon a plastered wall. Our limited time would not permit
a sketch.

Midway between the pueblo, Fig. 40, and the one now being considered
is a circular ruin three hundred and thirty feet in circuit, which
seems to have consisted of two concentric rows of apartments around
an inclosed estufa. It was built of cobblestone and adobe mortar.
Pit-holes indicate the form and plan of the inclosing rooms, but the
ruin is too indistinct to form a clear idea of its structure. A
removal of the loose material would probably disclose the original
ground plan.

A few hundred feet north are the ruins of four other structures of
cobblestone and adobe quite near each other. They were, without doubt,
pueblo houses, but they are now a mass of undistinguishable ruins,
and, from present appearance, were probably ruins, when the stone
pueblos were inhabited. The river here runs nearer the western
border of the valley than the eastern, and quite near the pueblo
last noticed, but from this point it bears toward the east side of
the valley.

About a mile in a direction a little south of east and near the
river are the ruins of two other large pueblos, of which the lower
one is one thousand and forty feet in circuit, and the one above
four hundred and fifty-two feet. Both are built of sandstone and
cobblestone and adobe mortar. No part of the walls are standing
above the rubbish; but they were apparently contemporary with the
stone pueblos. The first stands upon the brink of the river, which
is now cutting away its foundations, thus proving that it was
insecurely located. The mass of fallen material is very great,
showing an apparent depth of at least fifteen feet. Some of the
basement rooms in each of these pueblos are probably still entire,
judging from the great mass of material over them. Great pit-holes
indicate the position of chambers and inclosing-walls. The largest
of the two pueblos is 300 feet in depth. In one place, where some
excavation has been done, the corner of a basement room is in sight.
All these ruins ought to be re-examined, and so far excavated as to
recover complete ground plans.

Near the mouth of the river are said to be still other ruins, and
still others on the east side of the river, which we had no time to
examine.

The valley of the Animas River is here broad and beautiful, about
three miles wide. The river passes nearly through the center of the
valley. The cliff, on the east side of the level plain, is bold and
mountainous, rising from fifteen hundred to two thousand feet high,
while on the west side the valley is bordered with the mesa
formation in two benches, one rising back of the other, and both as
level as a floor, with the highlands forming the divide between the
Animas and La Plata Rivers in the distance.

From the number and size of the houses, there was probably a
population of at least five thousand persons at this settlement,
living by horticulture. It is not now known by what tribe of Indians
these pueblos were inhabited or constructed.

These pueblos, newly constructed and in their best condition, must
have presented a commanding appearance. From the materials used in
their construction, from their palatial size and unique design, and
from the cultivated gardens by which they were doubtless surrounded,
they were calculated to impress the beholder very favorably with the
degree of culture to which the people had attained. It is a singular
fact that none of the occupied pueblos in New Mexico at the present
time are equal in materials or in construction with those found in
ruins. It tends to show a decadence of art among them since the
period of European discovery.

Westward of the Animas, the La Plata, and the Mancos Rivers, which
run southwesterly into the San Juan, is the Montezuma Valley, a
broad and level plain, so named by General Heffernan, of Animas City.
It is about fifty miles in length, and apparently ten miles wide at
the ranch of Mr. Henry L. Mitchell, which is situated at the
commencement of the McElmo Canyon.

[Illustration: Fig. 44.--Pueblos at commencement of McElmo Canyon.]

It stretches southward thirty-six miles to the San Juan. In this
valley, which has no flowing stream through it at present (and there
is no certainty that it ever had), and which is without water,
except in springs and pools, and has but a slight rainfall during
the year, Mr. Mitchell was successfully cultivating, at the time of
our visit, wheat, oats, maize, and the garden vegetables. The valley
is uninhabited, except by the family of Mr. Mitchell, and a solitary
man living four miles westward. Their nearest neighbors are on the
Mancos River, twenty-five miles distant. The bluffs bordering the
eastern side of the valley rise boldly about fifteen hundred feet,
with table lands above, while on the west the valley is bordered
with mountains. About ten miles southwest of Mr. Mitchell's ranch
the Ute Mountain rises out of the plain, and from this point appears
as a solitary and detached mountain. The McElmo Canyon passes along
its north and westerly sides, while the main valley passes southward
along its eastern base. This high and noble mountain is situated in
the southwest corner of Colorado, near the intersection of the
boundary lines of Colorado, Utah, Arizona, and New Mexico. It is a
conspicuous object from the La Plata Valley. The Montezuma Valley
possesses features of remarkable natural beauty.

Near Mr. Mitchell's ranch, and within a space of less than a mile
square are the ruins of nine pueblo houses of moderate size. They
are built of sandstone intermixed with cobblestone and adobe mortar.
They are now in a very ruinous condition, without standing walls in
any part of them above the rubbish. The largest of the number is
marked No. 1 in the plan Fig. 44, of which the outline of the
original structure is still discernible. It is ninety-four feet in
length and forty-seven feet in depth, and shows the remains of a
stone wall in front inclosing a small court about fifteen feet wide.
The mass of material over some parts of this structure is ten or
twelve feet deep. There are, no doubt, rooms with a portion of the
walls still standing covered with rubbish, the removal of which
would reveal a considerable portion of the original ground-plan.

A short distance below the pueblos last named is another cluster of
the same number of pueblos, and much in the same condition; and upon
rising ground near the foot of the bluff, on the east side of the
valley, there are, as Mr. Mitchell informed me, the ruins of several
pueblos of stone. He also informed me that similar ruins were to be
found here and there in the valley to the San Juan. Four miles
westerly, near the ranch of Mr. Shirt, are the ruins of another
large stone pueblo, together with an Indian cemetery, where each
grave is marked by a border of flat stones set level with the ground
in the form of a parallelogram eight feet by four feet. Near the
cluster of nine pueblos shown in the figure are found strewn on the
ground numerous fragments of pottery of high grade in the
ornamentation, and small arrow-heads of flint, quartz, and
chalcedony delicately formed, and small knife-blades with convex and
serrated edges in considerable numbers.

[Illustration: Fig. 45.--Outline plan of a stone pueblo near the
base of Ute Mountain.]

This is an immense ruin with small portions of the walls still
standing, particularly of the round tower of stone of three
concentric walls, incorporated in the structure, and a few chambers
in the north end of the main building. The round tower is still
standing nearly to the height of the first story. In its present
condition it was impossible to make a ground-plan showing the
several chambers, or to determine with certainty which side was the
front of the structure, assuming that it was constructed in the
terraced form. It is situated upon a vertical bluff of yellowish
sandstone rock about twenty feet high and about four miles below
Mr. Mitchell's ranch in the direction of the Ute Mountain and near
its northeastern base. The bluff is broken through to the bottom in
one place about twenty feet wide. Here there are some evidences that
a spring of water was inclosed in a reservoir by means of masonry.
The building is in two sections, separated by this break, of which
the main one is five hundred and ten feet long, and the smallest one
hundred and twenty feet, forming a nearly continuous front. They
stand back ten or fifteen feet from the verge of the bluff, and are
built of tabular pieces of sandstone and adobe mortar. Numerous
pit-holes in each structure indicate the chambers and the line of
the inclosing walls. The removal of the loose material would
doubtless disclose the ground-plan, but it would involve immense
labor. With the Ute Mountain rising majestically in the background,
and the broad valley in front, the situation of the pueblo is
remarkably fine.

The Round Tower is the most singular feature in this structure.
While it resembles the ordinary estufa, common to all these
structures, it differs from them in having three concentric walls.
No doorways are visible in the portion still standing, consequently
it must have been entered through the roof, in which respect it
agrees with the ordinary estufa. The inner chamber is about twenty
feet in diameter, and the spaces between the encircling walls are
about two feet each; the walls are about two feet in thickness, and
were laid up mainly with stones about four inches square, and, for
the most part, in courses. There is a similar round tower, having
but two concentric walls, at the head of the McElmo Canyon, and near
the ranch of Mr. Mitchell. It is shown in Fig. 44, and stands
entirely isolated. The diameter of the tower is thirty-four feet, of
which the inner chamber is twenty-three feet; the space between the
two walls is about six feet, and the thickness of the walls about
two feet six inches. It is laid up in the same manner as the one
last named, with stones about the same size, and the walls still
standing are about five feet in height. Partition walls divide the
outer space, one of which measured twenty inches in thickness.

Several hundred feet from the pueblo last named, further down the
valley, is another pueblo of large extent, and in a very ruined
condition.

A mile or more below the ranch of Mr. Mitchell, in the bordering
walls of the McElmo Canyon, are two cliff houses. The walls of the
bluff are here about twenty feet high, with large cavities formed in
them here and there. These houses, each of which consists of but two
or three small chambers, are built of stone, and stand but a few
feet above the bottom of the canyon. They are narrow, and not very
high, as the cavity in the rock is not very deep. Corrals for some
kind of domestic animals are found by the side of these houses in
the same hollows in the rock. This is proved by a mass of excrement,
about a foot in depth, still there, whether of the goat or sheep
cannot be stated, but this fact shows that they were inhabited
subsequent to the period of European discovery, although they may
have been built and used before. The canyon, at this point, is from
three hundred to five hundred feet wide.

I wish to call attention again to the San Juan district, to its
numerous ruins, and to its importance as an early seat of Village
Indian life. These ruins and those of a similar character in the
valley of the Chaco, together with numerous remains of structures of
sandstone, of cobblestone, and adobe in the San Juan Valley, in the
Pine River Valley, in the La Plata Valley, in the Animas River Valley,
in the Montezuma Valley, on the Hovenweep, and on the Rio Dolores,
suggest the probability that the remarkable area within the drainage
of the San Juan River and its tributaries has held a prominent place
in the first and most ancient development of Village Indian life in
America. The evidence of Indian occupation and cultivation
throughout the greater part of this area is sufficient to suggest
the hypothesis that the Indian here first attained to the condition
of the Middle Status of barbarism, and sent forth the migrating
bands who carried this advanced culture to the Mississippi Valley,
to Mexico, and Central America, and not unlikely to South America as
well.

Indian migrations are gradual outflows from an overstocked area,
followed by organization into independent tribes, and continuing
through centuries of time, until the ethnic life of each tribe is
expended, or a successful establishment is finally gained in a new
and perhaps far distant land. They planted gardens and constructed
houses as they advanced from district to district, and removed as
circumstances prompted a change of location.

Since the cultivation of maize and plants precedes or is synchronous
with this stage of development, it leads to the supposition that
maize must have been indigenous in this region, and that it was here
first brought under cultivation. There are some facts that seem to
favor this hypothesis.