Agriculture._ 30. _Magic, Sorcery, Witchcraft._ 31.
     _Miraculous, Monstrous, and Supernatural._ 32. _Lives of
     Eminent Persons._ 33. _Laws and Customs of divers Places._
     34. _Tythes, Sacrilege, and Non-residence, &c._ 35. _Cases
     of divers Persons._ 36. _Prisons and Prisoners._ 37. _Lives
     of Murderers, Highwaymen, Pirates, &c._ 38. _Speeches of
     Persons executed for divers Offences._ 39. _Justices,
     Juries, and Charges._ 40. _Poor, and Charitable Uses._ 41.
     _Matrimony, Divorce, &c._ 42. _Universities._ 43.
     _Allegiance, Supremacy, Non Resistance, &c._ 44. _Bank and
     Bankers._ 45. _Funds, Taxes, Public Credit, Money, Coin,
     &c._ 46. _War and Standing Armies._ 47. _Admiralty and
     Navy._ 48. _Letters on various Subjects._ 49. _Treatises of
     Peace, Royal Prerogative, &c._ 50. _Navigation._ 51.
     _Education, Grammar and Schools._ 52. _Ludicrous,
     Entertaining, Satirical, and Witty._ 53. _English
     Miscellanies._ 54. _Ecclesiastical and Civil History of
     Scotland._ 55. _Do. of Ireland._ 56. _Grammars and
     Dictionnaries._ 57. _Plays, and relating to the Theatre._
     58. _Mathematics._ 59. _Astrology, Astronomy, and
     Chymistry._ 60. _Horsemanship._ 61. _Cookery._ 62.
     _Convocation._ 63. _Sieges, Battles, War, &c._ 64. _Pomp and
     Ceremony._ 65. _Books relating to Writing and Printing._ 66.
     _Essays on various Subjects._ It will probably be no very
     unreasonable computation to allow to each of these remaining
     divisions 80 volumes: so that multiplying the whole 50
     divisions by 80 there will be the additional number of 4000
     volumes to make the library complete. I ought to mention
     that, in my account of this extensive library, I have not
     included the _Pamphlets_. Of these alone, according to Mr.
     Gough (_Brit. Topog._ v., i., 669), there were computed to
     be 400,000! We will now say a few words about the private
     character of Lord Oxford, and conclude with a brief account
     of Osborne. Every body has heard of the intimacy which
     subsisted between POPE and the Earl of Oxford. In the year
     1721, when the latter was at his country seat, Pope sent him
     a copy of Parnell's poems (of which he had undertaken the
     publication on the decease of Parnell), with a letter in
     poetry and prose. It seems that Pope wished to prefix his
     own verses to the collection; and thus alludes to them, in
     his letter to Lord Harley of the date of 1721: "Poor
     Parnell, before he died, left me the charge of publishing
     those few remains of his: I have a strong desire to make
     them, their author, and their publisher, more considerable,
     by addressing and dedicating them all to you, &c. All I
     shall say for it is that 'tis the only dedication I ever
     writ, and shall be the only one, whether you accept it or
     not: for I will not bow the knee to a less man than my Lord
     Oxford, and I expect to see no greater in my time."

     The following is the latter part of the _Poetical Epistle_
     here alluded to:

          And sure, if aught below the seats divine
          Can touch immortals, 'tis a soul like thine:
          A soul supreme, in each hard instance tried,
          Above all pain, all passion, and all pride;
          The rage of power, the blast of public breath,
          The lust of lucre, and the dread of death.

            In vain to deserts thy retreat is made;
          The muse attends thee to thy silent shade:
          'Tis her's the brave man's latest steps to trace,
          Rejudge his acts, and dignify disgrace.
          When int'rest calls off all her sneaking train,
          And all th' obliged desert, and all the vain;
          She waits, or to the scaffold, or the cell,
          When the last lingering friend has bid farewell.
          Ev'n now, she shades thy evening walk with bays,
          (No hireling she, no prostitute of praise)
          Ev'n now, observant of the parting ray,
          Eyes the calm sun-set of thy various day;
          Thro' fortune's cloud ONE truly great can see,
          Nor fears to tell that MORTIMER is he!

          _Pope's Works_, vol. ii., p. 320-3. Bowles's edit.

     The following was the reply of the Earl of Oxford to Mr.
     Pope.

     SIR,

     I received your packet, which could not but give me great
     pleasure to see you preserve an old friend in your memory;
     for it must needs be very agreeable to be remembered by
     those we highly value. But then, how much shame did it cause
     me when I read your very fine verses inclosed! My mind
     reproached me how far short I came of what your great
     friendship and delicate pen would partially describe me. You
     ask my consent to publish it: to what straits doth this
     reduce me! I look back, indeed, to those evenings I have
     usefully and pleasantly spent with Mr. Pope, Mr. Parnell,
     Dean Swift, the Doctor (Arbuthnot), &c. I should be glad the
     world knew you admitted me to your friendship; and since
     your affection is too hard for your judgment, I am contented
     to let the world know how well Mr. Pope can write upon a
     barren subject. I return you an exact copy of the verses,
     that I may keep the original, as a testimony of the only
     error you have been guilty of. I hope, very speedily, to
     embrace you in London, and to assure you of the particular
     esteem and friendship wherewith I am your, &c.,

     OXFORD.

     Of TOM OSBORNE I have in vain endeavoured to collect some
     interesting biographical details. What I know of him shall
     be briefly stated. He was the most celebrated bookseller of
     his day; and appears, from a series of his catalogues in my
     possession, to have carried on a successful trade from the
     year 1738 to 1768. What fortune he amassed, is not, I
     believe, very well known: his collections were truly
     valuable, for they consisted of the purchased libraries of
     the most eminent men of those times. In his stature he was
     short and thick; and, to his inferiors, generally spoke in
     an authoritative and insolent manner. "It has been
     confidently related," says Boswell, "that Johnson, one day,
     knocked Osborne down in his shop with a folio, and put his
     foot upon his neck. The simple truth I had from Johnson
     himself. 'Sir, he was impertinent to me, and I beat him. But
     it was not in his shop: it was in my own chamber.'" 4to.
     edit., i., 81. Of Osborne's philological attainments, the
     meanest opinion must be formed, if we judge from his
     advertisements, which were sometimes inserted in the London
     Gazette, and drawn up in the most ridiculously vain and
     ostentatious style. He used to tell the public that he
     possessed "all the pompous editions of Classicks and
     Lexicons." I insert the two following advertisements,
     prefixed, the one to his catalogue of 1748, the other to
     that of 1753, for the amusement of my bibliographical
     readers, and as a model for Messrs. Payne, White, Miller,
     Evans, Priestley, and Cuthell. "This catalogue being very
     large, and of consequence very expensive to the proprietor,
     he humbly requests that, if it falls into the hands of any
     gentleman _gratis_, who chooses not himself to be a
     purchaser of any of the books contained in it, that such
     gentleman will be pleased to recommend it to any other whom
     he thinks may be so, or to return it." To his catalogue of
     1753 was the following: "To the Nobility and Gentry who
     please to favour me with their commands. It is hoped, as I
     intend to give no offence to any nobleman or gentleman, that
     do me the honour of being my customer, by putting a price on
     my catalogue, by which means they may not receive it as
     usual--it is desired that such nobleman or gentleman as have
     not received it, would be pleased to send for it; and it's
     likewise requested of such gentleman who do receive it,
     that, if they chuse not to purchase any of the books
     themselves, _they would recommend it to any bookish
     gentleman of their acquaintance, or to return it_, and the
     favour shall be acknowledged by, their most obedient and
     obliged,

     T. OSBORNE."

     I shall conclude with the following curious story told of
     him, in Mr. Nichols's _Anecdotes of Bowyer_ the Printer.
     "Mr. David Papillon, a gentleman of fortune and literary
     taste, as well as a good antiquary (who died in 1762)
     contracted with Osborne to furnish him with an 100_l._ worth
     of books, at _threepence a piece_. The only conditions were,
     that they should be perfect, and that there should be no
     duplicate. Osborne was highly pleased with his bargain, and
     the first great purchase he made, he sent Mr. P. a large
     quantity; but in the next purchase, he found he could send
     but few, and the next, still fewer. Not willing, however, to
     give up, he sent books worth _five shillings_ a piece; and,
     at last, was forced to go and beg to be let off the
     contract. Eight thousand books would have been wanted!"--See
     p. 101-2, note [symbol: double dagger].]

LIS. Let us rise to pay him homage!

PHIL. Lisardo is now fairly bewitched. He believes in the existence
of the group!--Help, ho! Fetters and warder for--

LOREN. Philemon loves to indulge his wit at his friend's expense. Is't
not so, Lisardo?

LIS. I forgive him. 'Twas a "glorious fault." But, indeed, I would
strip to the skin, if this said nobleman longed for my coat,
waistcoat, small clothes, and shirt, to form him a cushion to sit
upon! I have heard such wonderful things said of his library!--

LYSAND. And not more wonderful than its reputation justifies. Well
might Pope be enamoured of such a noble friend--and well might even
Dr. Mead bow to the superior splendour of such a book-competitor!
While the higher order of bibliomaniacs, reposing upon satin sofas,
were quaffing burgundy out of Harley's curiously cut goblets, and
listening to the captivating tale of Mead or Folkes, respecting a
VELLUM _Editio Princeps_--the lower order, with Bagford at their head,
were boisterously regaling themselves below, drinking ale round an
oaken table, and toasting their patron, till the eye could no longer
discover the glass, nor the tongue utter his name. Aloft, in mid air,
sat the soothed spirits of Smith and North; pointing, with their thin,
transparent fingers, to the apotheosis of CAXTON and ALDUS! Suddenly,
a crowd of pipy fragrance involves the room: these ærial forms cease
to be visible; and broken sounds, like the retiring tide beneath Dover
cliff, die away into utter silence. Sleep succeeds: but short is the
slumber of enthusiastic bibliomaniacs! The watchman rouses them from
repose: and the annunciation of the hour of "two o'clock, and a
moonlight morning," reminds them of their cotton night-caps and flock
mattrasses. They start up, and sally forwards; chaunting, midst the
deserted streets, and with eyes turned sapiently towards the moon,
"Long life to the King of Book-Collectors, HARLEY, EARL OF OXFORD!"

LOREN. A truce, Lysander! I entreat a truce!

LYSAND. To what?

LOREN. To this discourse. You must be exhausted.

PHIL. Indeed I agree with Lorenzo: for Lysander has surpassed, in
prolixity, the reputation of any orator within St. Stephen's chapel.
It only remains to eclipse, in a similar manner, the speeches which
were delivered at Hardy's trial--and then he may be called the
_Nonpareil_ of orators!

LYSAND. If you banter me, I am dumb. Nor did I know that there was any
thing of eloquence in my chit-chat. If Lisardo had had my experience,
we might _then_ have witnessed some glittering exhibitions of
imagination in the book-way!

LIS. My most excellent friend, I will strive to obtain this
experience, since you are pleased to compliment me upon what I was not
conscious of possessing--But, in truth, Lysander, our obligations to
you are infinite.

LYSAND. No more; unless you are weary of this discourse--

PHIL. LIS. Weary!?

LOREN. Let me here exercise my undeniable authority. A _sandwich_,
like the evening rain after a parching day, will recruit Lysander's
exhausted strength. What say you?

LYSAND. "I shall in all things obey your high command." But hark--I
hear the outer gate bell ring! The ladies are arrived: and you know my
bashfulness in female society. Adieu, BIBLIOMANIA! 'till the morrow.

LOREN. Nay, you are drawing too dismal conclusions. My sisters are not
sworn enemies to this kind of discourse.



The arrival of ALMANSA and BELINDA, the sisters of Lorenzo put a stop
to the conversation. So abrupt a silence disconcerted the ladies; who,
in a sudden, but, it must be confessed, rather taunting, strain--asked
whether they should order their bed-chamber candlesticks, and retire
to rest?

LIS. Not if you are disposed to listen to the most engaging
book-anecdote orator in his majesty's united realms!

ALMAN. Well, this may be a sufficient inducement for us to remain. But
why so suddenly silent, gentlemen?

LOREN. The conversation had ceased before you arrived. We were
thinking of a _hung-beef sandwich_ and a glass of madeira to recruit
Lysander's exhausted powers. He has been discoursing ever since
dinner.

BELIND. I will be his attendant and cup-bearer too, if he promises to
resume his discourse. But you have probably dispatched the most
interesting part.

LYSAND. Not exactly so, I would hope, fair Lady! Your brother's
hospitality will add fresh energy to my spirit; and, like the renewed
oil in an exhausted lamp, will cause the flame to break forth with
fresh splendour.

BELIND. Sir, I perceive your ingenuity, at least, has not forsaken
you--in whatever state your memory may be!--



Here the _sandwiches_ made their appearance: and Lorenzo seated his
guests, with his sisters, near him, round a small circular table. The
repast was quickly over: and Philemon, stirring the sugar within a
goblet of hot madeira wine and water, promised them all a romantic
book-story, if the ladies would only lend a gracious ear. Such a
request was, of course, immediately complied with.

PHIL. The story is short--

LIS. And sweet, I ween.

PHIL. That remains to be proved. But listen.

You all know my worthy friend, FERDINAND: a very _Helluo Librorum_. It
was on a warm evening in summer--about an hour after sunset--that
Ferdinand made his way towards a small inn, or rather village
alehouse, that stood on a gentle eminence, skirted by a luxuriant
wood. He entered, oppressed with heat and fatigue; but observed, on
walking up to the porch "smothered with honey-suckles" (as I think
Cowper expresses it), that every thing around bore the character of
neatness and simplicity. The holy-oaks were tall and finely variegated
in blossom: the pinks were carefully tied up: and roses of all colours
and fragrance stood around, in a compacted form, like a body-guard,
forbidding the rude foot of trespasser to intrude. Within, Ferdinand
found corresponding simplicity and comfort.

The "gude" man of the house was spending the evening with a neighbour;
but poached eggs and a rasher of bacon, accompanied with a flagon of
sparkling ale, gave our guest no occasion to doubt the hospitality of
the house, on account of the absence of its master. A little past ten,
after reading some dozen pages in a volume of Sir Egerton Brydges's
_Censura Literaria_, which he happened to carry about him, and
partaking pretty largely of the aforesaid eggs and ale, Ferdinand
called for his candle, and retired to repose. His bed-room was small,
but neat and airy: at one end, and almost facing the window, there was
a pretty large closet, with the door open: but Ferdinand was too
fatigued to indulge any curiosity about what it might contain.

He extinguished his candle, and sank upon his bed to rest. The heat of
the evening seemed to increase. He became restless; and, throwing off
his quilt, and drawing his curtain aside, turned towards the window,
to inhale the last breeze which yet might be wafted from the
neighbouring heath. But no zephyr was stirring. On a sudden, a broad
white flash of lightning--(nothing more than summer heat) made our
bibliomaniac lay his head upon his pillow, and turn his eyes in an
opposite direction. The lightning increased--and one flash, more vivid
than the rest, illuminated the interior of the closet, and made
manifest--_an old mahogany Book-Case_, STORED WITH BOOKS. Up started
Ferdinand, and put his phosphoric treasures into action. He lit his
match, and trimmed his candle, and rushed into the closet--no longer
mindful of the heavens--which now were in a blaze with the summer
heat.

The book-case was guarded both with glass and brass wires--and the
key--no where to be found! Hapless man!--for, to his astonishment, he
saw _Morte d'Arthur_, printed by _Caxton_--_Richard Coeur de Lyon_,
by _W. de Worde_--_The Widow Edyth_, by _Pynson_--and, towering above
the rest, a LARGE PAPER copy of the original edition of _Prince's
Worthies of Devon_; while, lying transversely at top, reposed _John
Weever's Epigrams_, "The spirit of Captain Cox is here revived"--exclaimed
Ferdinand--while, on looking above, he saw a curious set of old plays,
with _Dido, Queen of Carthage_, at the head of them! What should he
do? No key: no chance of handling such precious tomes--'till the
morning light, with the landlord, returned! He moved backwards and
forwards with a hurried step--prepared his pocket knife to cut out the
panes of glass, and untwist the brazen wires--but a "_prick of
conscience_" made him desist from carrying his wicked design into
execution. Ferdinand then advanced towards the window; and throwing it
open, and listening to the rich notes of a concert of nightingales,
forgot the cause of his torments--'till, his situation reminding him
of "_The Churl and the Bird_," he rushed with renewed madness into the
cupboard--then searched for the bell--but, finding none, he made all
sorts of strange noises. The landlady rose, and, conceiving robbers to
have broken into the stranger's room, came and demanded the cause of
the disturbance.

"Madam," said Ferdinand, "is there no possibility of inspecting the
_books_ in the _cupboard_--where is the key?" "Alack, sir," rejoined
the landlady, "what is there that thus disturbs you in the sight of
those books? Let me shut the closet-door and take away the key of it,
and you will then sleep in peace." "Sleep in _peace_!" resumed
Ferdinand--"sleep in _wretchedness_, you mean! I can have no peace
unless you indulge me with the key of the book-case. To whom do such
gems belong?" "Sir, they are not stolen goods."--"Madam, I ask
pardon--I did not mean to question their being honest property--but"--"Sir,
they are not mine or my husband's." "Who, madam, who is the lucky
owner?" "An elderly gentleman of the name of--Sir, I am not at liberty
to mention his name--but they belong to an elderly gentleman." "Will
he part with them--where does he live? Can you introduce me to
him?"--The good woman soon answered all Ferdinand's rapid queries, but
the result was by no means satisfactory to him.

He learnt that these uncommonly scarce and precious volumes belonged
to an ancient gentleman, whose name was studiously concealed; but who
was in the habit of coming once or twice a week, during the autumn, to
smoke his pipe, and lounge over his books: sometimes making extracts
from them, and sometimes making observations in the margin with a
pencil. Whenever a very curious passage occurred, he would take out a
small memorandum book, and put on a pair of large tortoise-shell
spectacles, with powerful magnifying glasses, in order to insert this
passage with particular care and neatness. He usually concluded his
evening amusements by sleeping in the very bed in which Ferdinand had
been lying.

Such intelligence only sharpened the curiosity, and increased the
restlessness, of poor Ferdinand. He retired to this said
bibliomaniacal bed, but not to repose. The morning sun-beams, which
irradiated the book-case with complete effect, shone upon his pallid
countenance and thoughtful brow. He rose at five: walked in the
meadows till seven; returned and breakfasted--stole up stairs to take
a farewell peep at his beloved _Morte d'Arthur_--sighed "three times
and more"--paid his reckoning; apologised for the night's adventure;
told the landlady he would shortly come and visit her again, and try
to pay his respects to the anonymous old gentleman. "Meanwhile," said
he, "I will leave no bookseller's shop in the neighbourhood unvisited,
'till I gain intelligence of his name and character." The landlady
eyed him steadily; took a pinch of snuff with a significant air; and,
returning, with a smile of triumph, to her kitchen, thanked her stars
that she had got rid of such a madman!

Ladies and gentlemen, I have done.

LIS. And creditably done, too!

ALMAN. If this be a specimen of your previous conversation, we know
not what we have lost by our absence. But I suspect, that the
principal ingredient of poetry, fiction, has a little aided in the
embellishment of your story.

BELIN. This is not very gallant or complimentary on your part,
Almansa. I harbour no suspicion of its verity; for marvellous things
have been told me, by my brother, of the whimsical phrensies of
book-fanciers.

LOREN. If you will only listen a little to Lysander's _sequel_, you
will hear almost equally marvellous things; which I suspect my
liberally minded sister, Almansa, will put down to the score of
poetical embellishment. But I see she is conscious of her treasonable
aspersions of the noble character of bibliomaniacs, and is only
anxious for Lysander to resume.

ALMAN. Sir, I entreat you to finish your HISTORY OF BIBLIOMANIACS.
Your friend, Philemon, has regaled us with an entertaining episode,
and you have probably, by this time, recovered strength sufficient to
proceed with the main story.

LYSAND. Madam, I am equally indebted to your brother for his care of
the body, and to my friend for his recreation of the mind. The
midnight hour, I fear, is swiftly approaching.

LOREN. It is yet at a considerable distance. We have nearly reached
the middle of the eighteenth century, and you may surely carry on your
reminiscential exertions to the close of the same. By that time, we
may be disposed for our nightcaps.

LYSAND. Unheeded be the moments and hours which are devoted to the
celebration of eminent BOOK-COLLECTORS! Let the sand roll down the
glass as it will; let "the chirping on each thorn" remind us of
Aurora's saucy face peering above the horizon! in such society, and
with such a subject of discussion, who--

LIS. Lysander brightens as his story draws to a close: his colouring
will be more vivid than ever.

BELIND. Tell me--are bibliographers usually thus eloquent? They have
been described to me as a dry, technical race of mortals--quoting only
title-pages and dates.

LYSAND. Madam, believe not the malicious evidence of book-heretics.
Let ladies, like yourself and your sister, only make their appearance
with a choice set of bibliomaniacs, at this time of night, and if the
most interesting conversation be not the result--I have very much
under-rated the colloquial powers of my brethren. But you shall hear.

We left off with lauding the bibliomaniacal celebrity of Harley, Earl
of Oxford. Before the dispersion of his grand collection, died JOHN
BRIDGES,[378] a gentleman, a scholar, and a notorious book-collector.
The catalogue of his books is almost the first classically arranged
one in the eighteenth century: and it must be confessed that the
collection was both curious and valuable. Bridges was succeeded by
ANTHONY COLLINS,[379] the Free Thinker; a character equally strange
and unenviable. Book-fanciers now and then bid a few shillings, for a
copy of the catalogue of his library; and some sly free-thinkers, of
modern date, are not backward in shewing a sympathy in their
predecessor's fame, by the readiness with which they bid a
half-guinea, or more, for a _priced copy_ of it.

     [Footnote 378: _Bibliothecæ Bridgesianæ Catalogus_: or a
     Catalogue of the Library of JOHN BRIDGES, Esq., consisting
     of above 4000 books and manuscripts in all Languages and
     Faculties; particularly in Classics and History; and
     especially the History and Antiquities of Great Britain and
     Ireland, &c., London, 1725, 8vo. Two different catalogues of
     this valuable collection of books were printed. The one was
     analysed, or a _catalogue raisonné_, to which was prefixed a
     print of a Grecian portico, &c., with ornaments and statues:
     the other (expressly for the sale) was an indigested and
     extremely confused one--to which was prefixed a print,
     designed and engraved by A. Motte, of an oak felled, with a
     number of men cutting down and carrying away its branches;
     illustrative of the following Greek Motto inscribed on a
     scroll above--[Greek: Dryos pesousês pas anêr xyleuetai];
     "An affecting momento (says Mr. Nichols, very justly, in his
     _Anecdotes of Bowyer_, p. 557) to the collectors of great
     libraries, who cannot, or do not, leave them to some public
     accessible repository." My friend, Dr. Gosset, was once so
     fortunate as to pick up for me a _large paper_ copy of the
     analysed catalogue, bound in old blue morocco, and ruled
     with red lines, for 4_s._!--"Happy day!"]

     [Footnote 379: In the year 1730-1, there was sold by auction
     at St. Paul's Coffee House, in St. Paul's Church Yard
     (beginning every evening at five o'clock), the library of
     the celebrated Free Thinker, ANTHONY COLLINS, Esq.
     "Containing a collection of several thousand volumes in
     Greek, Latin, English, French, and Spanish; in divinity,
     history, antiquity, philosophy, husbandry, and all polite
     literature: and especially many curious travels and voyages;
     and many rare and valuable pamphlets." This collection,
     which is divided into _two parts_ (the first containing 3451
     articles, the second 3442), is well worthy of being
     consulted by the theologian who is writing upon any
     controverted point of divinity; as there are articles in it
     of the rarest occurrence. The singular character of its
     owner and of his works is well known: he was at once the
     friend and the opponent of Locke and Clarke, who both were
     anxious for the conversion of a character of such strong,
     but misguided, talents. The former, on his death-bed, wrote
     Collins a letter to be delivered to him after his decease,
     which was full of affection and good advice.]

We may here but slightly allude to the bibliographical reputation of
MAITTAIRE, as so much was said of him the day before yesterday.[380]

     [Footnote 380: The reader will find some account of
     MAITTAIRE'S bibliographical labours at p. 47, ante; and of
     his editions of the ancient Classics, at p. 442, vol. ii.,
     of my _Introduction to the Knowledge of rare and valuable
     editions of the Greek and Latin Classics_. He need here only
     be informed that Maittaire's books were sold by auction in
     November, 1748, and January, 1749; the catalogue of them
     forming _two parts_, with one of these dates affixed to
     each. The collection must have been uncommonly numerous; and
     of their intrinsic value the reader will best judge by the
     following extract from the "Advertisement," by Cock the
     auctioneer, at the back of the title-page: "tho' the books,
     in their present condition, make not the most ostentatious
     appearance, yet, like the late worthy possessor of them,
     however plain their outside may be, they contain within an
     invaluable treasure of ingenuity and learning. In fine, this
     is (after fifty years' diligent search and labour in
     collecting) THE ENTIRE LIBRARY OF MR. MAITTAIRE; whose
     judgement in the choice of books, as it ever was confessed,
     so are they, undoubtedly, far beyond whatever I can attempt
     to say in their praise. In exhibiting them thus to the
     public, I comply with the will of my deceased friend; and in
     printing the catalogue from his OWN COPY just as he left it
     (tho' by so doing it is the more voluminous) I had an
     opportunity, not only of doing the justice I owe to his
     memory, but also of gratifying the curious." I incline
     strongly to think there were no copies of this catalogue
     printed upon large paper. When priced, the usual copy brings
     a fair round sum.]

BELIN. All this may be very learned and just. But of these gentlemen I
find no account in the fashionable necrologies.

LOREN. Only wait a little, and Lysander will break forth with the
mention of some transcendental bibliomaniac.

LYSAND. Yes, ever renowned RICHARD MEAD![381] thy _pharmacopæal_
reputation is lost in the blaze of thy _bibliomaniacal_ glory!
Æsculapius may plant his herbal crown round thy brow, and Hygeia may
scatter her cornucopia of roses at thy feet--but what are these
things compared with the homage offered thee by the Gesners,
Baillets, and Le Longs, of old? What avail even the roseate blushes of
thousands, whom thy medical skill, may have snatched from a premature
grave--compared with the life, vigour, animation and competition which
thy example infused into the BOOK-WORLD!

     [Footnote 381: It is almost impossible to dwell on the
     memory of THIS GREAT MAN, without emotions of
     delight--whether we consider him as an eminent physician, a
     friend to literature, or a collector of books, pictures, and
     coins. Benevolence, magnanimity, and erudition were the
     striking features of his character. His house was the
     general receptacle of men of genius and talent, and of every
     thing beautiful, precious, and rare. His curiosities,
     whether books, or coins, or pictures, were freely laid open
     to the public; and the enterprising student, and experienced
     antiquary, alike found amusement and a courteous reception.
     He was known to all foreigners of intellectual distinction,
     and corresponded both with the artisan and the potentate.
     The great patron of literature, and the leader of his
     profession, it was hardly possible, as Lysander has well
     observed, "for modest merit if properly introduced to him,
     to depart unrewarded or ungratified." The clergy, and, in
     general, all men of learning, received his advice
     gratuitously; and his doors were open every morning to the
     most indigent, whom he frequently assisted with money.
     Although his income, from his professional practice, was
     very considerable, he died by no means a rich man--so large
     were the sums which he devoted to the encouragement of
     literature and the fine arts! The sale of Dr. Mead's _Books_
     commenced on the 18th of November, 1754, and again on the
     7th of April, 1755: lasting together 57 days. The sale of
     the _prints_ and _drawings_ continued 14 nights. The _gems_,
     _bronzes_, _busts_, and _antiquities_, 8 days.

     His books produced                 £5496 15 0
         Pictures                        3417 11 0
         Prints and drawings             1908 14 0
         Coins and medals                1977 17 0
         Antiquities                     3246 15 0

     Amount of all the sales          £16,047 12 0


     It would be difficult to mention, within a moderate compass,
     all the rare and curious articles which his library
     contained--but the following are too conspicuous to be
     passed over. The _Spira Virgil_, of 1470, _Pfintzing's
     Tewrdanchk's_, 1527, _Brandt's Stultifera Navis_, 1498, and
     the _Aldine Petrarch_, of 1501, ALL UPON VELLUM. The large
     paper _Olivet's Cicero_ was purchased by Dr. Askew, for
     14_l._ 14_s._, and was sold again at his sale for 36_l._
     15_s._ The King of France bought the editio princeps of
     _Pliny Senior_ for 11_l._ 11_s._: and Mr. Wilcock, a
     bookseller, bought the magnificently illuminated _Pliny by
     Jenson_, of 1472, for 18_l._ 18_s._: of which Maittaire has
     said so many fine things. The _French_ books, and all the
     works upon the _Fine Arts_, were of the first rarity and
     value, and bound in a sumptuous manner. Winstanley's
     _Prospects of Audley End_ brought 50_l._ An amusing account
     of some of the pictures will be found in Mr. Beloe's
     _Anecdotes of Literature and scarce Books_, vol. i., 166,
     71. But consult also _Nichols's Anecdotes of Bowyer_, p.
     225, &c. Of the catalogue of Dr. Mead's books, there were
     only six copies printed upon _large paper_. See _Bibl.
     Lort_, no. 1149. I possess one of these copies, uncut and
     priced. Dr. MEAD had parted, in his life-time, to the
     present king's father, with several miniature pictures of
     great value (Walpole Anec., vol. i., 165) by Isaac Oliver
     and Holbein, which are now in his majesty's collection. Dr.
     Askew had purchased his Greek MSS. for 500_l._ Pope has
     admirably well said,

          "Rare _monkish manuscripts_ for HEARNE alone,
          And _Books_ FOR MEAD, and _butterflies_ for SLOANE."

          _Epistle_ iv.

     Upon which his commentator, Warburton, thus observes: "These
     were two eminent physicians; the one had an excellent
     library, the other the finest collection in Europe of
     natural curiosities." For nearly half a century did Dr. Mead
     pursue an unrivalled career in his profession. He was
     (perhaps "thrice") presented with the presidentship of the
     College of Physicians, which he ("thrice") refused. One year
     it is said he made 7000_l._, a great sum in his time! His
     regular emoluments were between 5000_l._ and 6000_l._ per
     annum. He died on the 25th of February, 1754, in the 81st
     year of his age. On his death, Dr. ASKEW, who seems to have
     had a sort of filial veneration for his character, and whose
     pursuits were in every respect congenial with Dr. Mead's,
     presented the College of Physicians with a marble bust of
     him, beautifully executed by Roubilliac, and for which he
     paid the sculptor 100_l._ A whimsical anecdote is connected
     with the execution of this bust. Roubilliac agreed with Dr.
     Askew for 50_l._: the doctor found it so highly finished
     that he paid him for it 100_l._ The sculptor said this was
     not enough, and brought in a bill for 108_l._ 2_s._ Dr.
     Askew paid this demand, even to the odd shillings, and then
     enclosed the receipt to Mr. Hogarth, to produce at the next
     meeting of artists. Nichols's _Anec. of Bowyer_, p. 580. "I
     cannot help," says Mr. Edwards, the late ornithologist,
     "informing succeeding generations that they may see the
     _real features_ of Dr. Mead in this bust: for I, who was as
     well acquainted with his face as any man living, do
     pronounce this bust of him to be so like that, as often as I
     see it, my mind is filled with the strongest idea of the
     original." Hearne speaks of the MEADEAN FAMILY with proper
     respect, in his _Alured de Beverly_, p. XLV.; and in _Walter
     Hemingford_, vol. i., XXXV. In his _Gulielmus Nubrigensis_,
     vol. iii., p. 744 (note), he says of our illustrious
     bibliomaniac:--"that most excellent physician, and truly
     great man, Dr. Richard Mead, to whom I am eternally
     obliged." There is an idle story somewhere told of Dr.
     Mead's declining the acceptance of a challenge to fight with
     swords--alleging his want of skill in the art of fencing:
     but this seems to be totally void of authority. Thus far,
     concerning Dr. Mead, from the first edition of this work,
     and the paper entitled "The Director." The following
     particulars, which I have recently learnt of the MEAD
     FAMILY, from John Nicholl, Esq., my neighbour at Kensington,
     and the maternal grandson of the Doctor, may be thought well
     worth subjoining. MATTHEW MEAD, his father, was a clergyman.
     He gave up his living at Stepney in 1662; which was
     afterwards divided into the four fine livings now in the
     gift of Brazen-Nose College, Oxford. His parishioners built
     him a chapel; but he retired to a farm in the country, and
     had the reputation of handling a bullock as well as any
     butcher in the county. He went abroad in the reign of James
     II., and had his sons, Samuel and Richard, educated under
     Grævius. SAMUEL MEAD, _his brother_, was a distinguished
     Chancery barrister, and got his 4000_l._ per ann.; his
     cronies were Wilbraham and Lord Harcourt. These, with a few
     other eminent barristers, used to meet at a coffee-house,
     and drink their favourite, and then fashionable,
     liquor--called _Bishop_, which consisted of red wine, lemon,
     and sugar. Samuel was a shy character, and loved privacy. He
     had a good country house, and handsome chambers in Lincoln's
     Inn, and kept a carriage for his sister's use, having his
     coachmaker's arms painted upon the panel. What is very
     characteristic of the modesty of his profession, he
     pertinaciously refused a silk gown! A word or two remains to
     be said of our illustrious bibliomaniac RICHARD. His brother
     left him 30,000_l._, and giving full indulgence to his noble
     literary feelings, the Doctor sent Carte, the historian, to
     France, to rummage for MSS. of _Thuanus_, and to restore the
     castrated passages which were not originally published for
     fear of offending certain families. He made Buckley, the
     editor, procure the best _ink and paper_ from Holland, for
     this edition of Thuanus, which was published at his own
     expense; and the Doctor was remarkably solicitous that
     nothing of exterior pomp and beauty should be wanting in the
     publication. The result verified his most sanguine
     expectation; for a finer edition of a valuable historian has
     never seen the light. Dr. Ward, says Mr. Nichols, is
     supposed to have written Mead's Latin, but the fact is not
     so; or it is exclusively applicable to the _later_ pieces of
     Mead. The Doctor died in his 83rd year (and in full
     possession of his mental powers), from a fall occasioned by
     the negligence of a servant. He was a great _diagnostic_
     physician; and, when he thought deeply, was generally
     correct in judging of the disorder by the appearance of the
     countenance.]

The tears shed by virtuous bibliomaniacs at Harley's death were
speedily wiped away, when the recollection of thine, and of thy
contemporary's, FOLKES'S[382] fame, was excited in their bosoms.
Illustrious Bibliomaniacs! your names and memories will always live in
the hearts of noble-minded Literati: the treasures of your Museums and
Libraries--your liberal patronage and ever-active exertions in the
cause of VIRTU--whether connected with coins, pictures, or books--can
never be banished, at least, from my grateful mind:--And if, at this
solemn hour, when yonder groves and serpentine walks are sleeping in
the quiet of moon-light, your spirits could be seen placidly to flit
along, I would burst from this society--dear and congenial as it
is--to take your last instructions, or receive your last warnings,
respecting the rearing of a future age of bibliomaniacs! Ye were, in
good earnest, noble-hearted book-heroes!--but I wander:--forgive me!

     [Footnote 382: "_A Catalogue of the entire and valuable
     library of_ MARTIN FOLKES, Esq., President of the Royal
     Society, and Member of the Royal Academy of Sciences at
     Paris, lately deceased; which will be sold by auction, by
     Samuel Baker, at his house in York Street, Covent-Garden. To
     begin on Monday, February 2, 1756, and to continue for forty
     days successively (Sundays excepted). Catalogues to be had
     at most of the considerable places in Europe, and all the
     booksellers of Great Britain and Ireland. Price sixpence."
     This collection was an exceedingly fine one; enriched with
     many books of the choicest description, which Mr. Folkes had
     acquired in his travels in Italy and Germany. The works on
     natural history, coins, medals, inscriptions, and on the
     fine arts in general, formed the most valuable
     department--those on the Greek, Latin, and English classics
     were comparatively of inferior importance. It is a great
     pity the catalogue was not better digested; or the books
     classed according to the nature of their contents. The
     following prices, for some of the more rare and interesting
     articles, will amuse a bibliographer of the present day. The
     chronicles of Fabian, Hall, and Grafton, did not,
     altogether, bring quite 2_l._, though the copies are
     described as perfect and fair. There seems to have been a
     fine set of Sir Wm. Dugdale's Works (Nos. 3074-81) in 13
     vols., which, collectively, produced about 30 guineas! At
     the present day, they are worth about 250_l._--In _Spanish
     literature_, the history of South America, by John Duan and
     Ant. di Ulloa, Madr., fol., in 5 vols., was sold for 5_l._:
     a fine large paper copy of the description of the monastery
     of St. Lorenzo, and the Escorial, Madr., 1657, brought 1_l._
     2_s._; de Lastanosa's Spanish medals, Huesca, fol., 1645,
     2_l._ 2_s._--In _English_, the first edition of Shakspeare,
     1623, which is now what a French bibliographer would say,
     "presque introuvable," produced the sum of 3_l._ 3_s._; and
     Fuller's Worthies, 18_s._!----_Fine Arts, Antiquities, and
     Voyages._ Sandrart's works, in 9 folio volumes (of which a
     fine perfect copy is now rarely to be met with, and of very
     great value) were sold for 13_l._ 13_s._ only: Desgodetz
     Roman edifices, Paris, 1682, 4_l._ 10_s._ Galleria
     Giustiniano, 2 vols., fol., 13_l._ 13_s._ Le Brun's Voyages
     in Muscovy, &c., in large paper, 4_l._ 4_s._ De Rossi's
     Raccolta de Statue, &c., Rom., 1704, 6_l._ 10_s._ Medailles
     du Regne de Louis le Grand: de l'Imp. Roy. 1. p. fol., 1702,
     5_l._ 15_s._ 6_d._----The works on _Natural History_ brought
     still higher prices: but the whole, from the present
     depreciation of money, and increased rarity of the articles,
     would now bring thrice the sums then given.--Of the _Greek
     and Latin Classics_, the Pliny of 1469 and 1472 were sold to
     Dr. Askew, for 11_l._ 11_s._ and 7_l._ 17_s._ 6_d._ At the
     Doctor's sale they brought 43_l._ and 23_l._, although the
     first was lately sold (A.D. 1805) among some duplicates of
     books belonging to the British Museum, at a much lower
     price: the copy was, in fact, neither large nor beautiful.
     Those in Lord Spencer's, and the Hunter and Cracherode
     collections, are greatly superior, and would each bring more
     than double the price. From a priced copy of the sale
     catalogue, upon _large paper_, and uncut, in my possession,
     I find that the amount of the sale, consisting of 5126
     articles, was 3091_l._ 6_s._ The _Prints, and Drawings_ of
     Mr. Folkes occupied a sale of 8 days: and his _pictures_,
     _gems_, _coins_, and _mathematical instruments_, of five
     days. Mr. MARTIN FOLKES may justly be ranked among the most
     useful, as well as splendid, literary characters, of which
     this country can boast. He appears to have imbibed, at a
     very early age, an extreme passion for science and
     literature; and to have distinguished himself so much at the
     University of Cambridge, under the able tuition of Dr.
     Laughton, that, in his 23rd year, he was admitted a Fellow
     of the Royal Society. About two years afterwards he was
     chosen one of the council; and rose in succession to the
     chair of the presidentship, which, as Lysander above truly
     says, he filled with a credit and celebrity that has since
     never been surpassed. On this occasion he was told by Dr.
     Jurin, the Secretary, who dedicated to him the 34th vol. of
     the Transactions, that "the greatest man that ever lived
     (Sir Isaac Newton) singled him out to fill the chair, and to
     preside in the society, when he himself was so frequently
     prevented by indisposition; and that it was sufficient to
     say of him that he was _Sir Isaac's friend_." Within a few
     years afterwards, he was elected President of the Society of
     Antiquaries. Two situations, the filling of which may be
     considered as the _ne plus ultra_ of literary distinction.
     Mr. Folkes travelled abroad, with his family, about two
     years and a half, visiting the cities of Rome, Florence, and
     Venice--where he was noticed by almost every person of rank
     and reputation, and whence he brought away many a valuable
     article to enrich his own collection. He was born in the
     year 1690, and died of a second stroke of the palsy, under
     which he languished for three years, in 1754. He seems to
     have left behind him a considerable fortune. Among his
     numerous bequests was one to the Royal Society of 200_l._,
     along with a fine portrait of Lord Bacon, and a large
     cornelian ring, with the arms of the society engraved upon
     it, for the perpetual use of the president and his
     successors in office. The MSS. of his own composition, not
     being quite perfect, were, to the great loss of the learned
     world, ordered by him to be destroyed. The following
     wood-cut portrait is taken from a copper-plate in the
     _Portraits des Hommes Illustres de Denmark_, 4to., 7 parts,
     1746: part 4th, a volume which abounds with a number of
     copper-plate engravings, _worked off_ in a style of uncommon
     clearness and brilliancy. Some of the portraits themselves
     are rather stiff and unexpressive; but the vignettes are
     uniformly tasteful and agreeable. The seven parts are rarely
     found in an equal state of perfection.

     [Illustration]

     Dr. Birch has drawn a very just and interesting character of
     this eminent man, which may be found in Nichols's _Anecdotes
     of Bowyer_, pp. 562-7. Mr. Edwards, the late ornithologist,
     has described him in a simple, but appropriate, manner. "He
     seemed," says he, "to have attained to universal knowledge;
     for, in the many opportunities I have had of being in his
     company, almost every part of science has happened to be the
     subject of discourse, all of which he handled as an adept.
     He was a man of great politeness in his manners, free from
     all pedantry and pride, and, in every respect, the real,
     unaffected, fine gentleman."]

ALMAN. Pray keep to this earth, and condescend to notice us mortals of
flesh and blood, who have heard of Dr. Mead, and Martin Folkes, only
as eminently learned and tasteful characters.

LYSAND. I crave your forgiveness. But Dr. Mead's cabinet of coins,
statues, and books, was so liberally thrown open for the public
inspection that it was hardly possible for modest merit, if properly
made known to him, to depart unrewarded or ungratified. Nor does the
renowned President of the Royal and Antiquarian Societies--Martin
Folkes--merit a less warm eulogy; for he filled these distinguished
situations with a credit which has never since been surpassed.

But there is yet an illustrious tribe to be recorded. We have, first,
RICHARD RAWLINSON,[383] brother of the renowned _Tom Folio_, whose
choice and tasteful collection of books, as recorded in auctioneering
annals, is deserving of high commendation. But his name and virtues
are better known in the University, to which he was a benefactor, than
to the noisy circles of the metropolis. The sale of ORATOR HENLEY'S
books "followed hard upon" that of Richard Rawlinson's; and if the
spirit of their owner could, from his "gilt tub," have witnessed the
grimaces and jokes which marked the sale--with the distorted
countenances and boisterous laughter which were to be seen on every
side--how it must have writhed under the smart of general ridicule, or
have groaned under the torture of contemptuous indignation! Peace to
Henley's[384] vexed _manes_!--and similar contempt await the efforts
of all literary quacks and philosophical knaves!

     [Footnote 383: "BIBLIOTHECA RAWLINSONIANA, _sive Catalogus
     Librorum Richardi Rawlinson_, LL.D. Qui prostabunt Venales
     sub hasta, Apud Samuelem Baker, In Vico dicto York-street,
     Covent Garden, Londoni, Die Lunæ 29 Marti MDCCLVI." With the
     following whimsical Greek motto in the title-page:

          [Greek: Kai gar o taôs dia to spanion thaumazetai].

          EUBULUS.

          ("The peacock is admired on account of its rarity.")

     This valuable library must have contained nearly 25,000
     volumes, multiplying the number of articles (9405) by 3--the
     usual mode of calculation. Unfortunately, as was the case
     with Dr. Mead's and Mr. Folkes's, the books were not
     arranged according to any particular classification. Old
     black-letter English were mixed with modern Italian, French,
     and Latin; and novels and romances interspersed with
     theology and mathematics. An _alphabetical_ arrangement, be
     the books of whatever kind they may, will in general obviate
     the inconvenience felt from such an undigested plan; and it
     were "devoutly to be wished," by all true bibliographers,
     that an act of parliament should pass for the due observance
     of this alphabetical order. We all know our A, B, C, but
     have not all analytical heads; or we may differ in our ideas
     of analysis. The scientific and alphabetical _united_ is
     certainly better; like Mr. Harris's excellent catalogue,
     noticed at p. 99, ante. The "_Méthode pour dresser une
     bibliothéque_," about which De Bure, Formey, and Peignot
     have so solemnly argued, is not worth a moment's discussion.
     Every man likes to be his own librarian, as well as "his own
     broker." But to return to Dr. Rawlinson's collection. On
     examining a priced catalogue of it, which now lies before
     me, I have not found any higher sum offered for a work than
     4_l._ 1_s._ for a collection of fine prints, by Aldegrever.
     (No. 9405.) The Greek and Latin Classics, of which there
     were few _Editiones Principes_, or on _large paper_, brought
     the usual sums given at that period. The old English
     black-letter books, which were pretty thickly scattered
     throughout the collection, were sold for exceedingly low
     prices--if the copies were perfect. Witness the following:

                                                      £ _s._ _d._
     The Newe Testament in English, 1500              0   2   9
     The Ymage of both Churches, after the Revelation
       of St. John, by Bale, 1550                     0   1   6
     The boke called the Pype or Tonne of Perfection,
       by Richard Whytforde, 1553                     0   1   9
     The Visions of Pierce Plowman, 1561              0   2   0
     The Creede of Pierce Plowman, 1532               0   1   6
     The Bookes of Moses, in English, 1530            0   3   9
     Bale's Actes of English Votaryes, 1550           0   1   3
     The Boke of Chivalrie, by Caxton                 0  11   0
     The Boke of St. Alban's, by W. de Worde          1   1   0

     These are only very few of the rare articles in English
     literature; of the whole of which (perhaps upwards of 200 in
     number) I believe the boke of St. Albans brought the highest
     sum. Hence it will be seen that this was not the age of
     curious research into the productions of our ancestors.
     Shakspeare had not then appeared in a proper _variorum
     edition_. Theobald, Pope, and Warburton, had not
     investigated the =black-letter= lore of ancient English
     writers for the illustration of their favourite author. This
     was reserved for Capell, Farmer, Steevens, Malone, Chalmers,
     Reed, and Douce: and it is expressly to these latter
     gentlemen (for Johnson and Hanmer were very sparing, or very
     shy, of the black-letter), that we are indebted for the
     present spirit of research into the works of our ancestors.
     The sale of the _books_ lasted 50 days. There was a second
     sale of _pamphlets, books of prints, &c._, in the following
     year, which lasted 10 days: and this was immediately
     succeeded by a sale of the doctor's _single prints and
     drawings_, which continued 8 days. Dr. Rawlinson's
     benefactions to Oxford, besides his Anglo-Saxon endowment at
     St. John's College, were very considerable; including,
     amongst other curiosities, _a series of medals of the
     Popes_, which the Doctor supposed to be one of the most
     complete collections in Europe; and a great number of
     valuable MSS., which he directed to be safely locked up, and
     not to be opened till seven years after his decease. He died
     on the 6th of April, 1755. To St. John's College, where he
     had been a gentleman commoner, Dr. Rawlinson left the bulk
     of his estate, amounting to near 700_l._ a year: _a plate of
     Abp. Laud_, 31 volumes of _Parliamentary Journals and
     Debates_, a set of _Rymer's Foedera_, his _Greek_,
     _Roman_, and _English coins_, not given to the Bodleian
     Library; all his plates engraved at the expense of the
     Society of Antiquaries; his diploma, and his _heart_; which
     latter is placed in a beautiful urn against the chapel wall,
     with this inscription:

          Urbi thesaurus, ibi cor.
          RIC. RAWLINSON, LL.D. & ANT. S.S.
          Olim hujus collegii superioris ordinis
          commensalis.
          Obiit. vi. Apr. MDCCLV.

     Hearne speaks of him, in the preface of his _Tit. Liv. For.
     Jul. vita Hen. V._, p. xvi., as "vir antiquis moribus
     ornatus, perque eam viam euns, quæ ad immortalem gloriam
     ducit."]

     [Footnote 384: This gentleman's library, not so remarkable
     for the black-letter as for whimsical publications, was sold
     by auction, by Samuel Paterson (the earliest sale in which I
     find this well known book-auctioneer engaged), in June,
     1759, and the three ensuing evenings. The title of the Sale
     Catalogue is as follows:----"_A Catalogue of the original
     MSS. and manuscript collections of the late_ Reverend Mr.
     JOHN HENLEY, A.M., Independent Minister of the Oratory, &c.,
     in which are included sundry collections of the late Mons.
     des Maizeaux, the learned editor of Bayle, &c., Mr. Lowndes,
     author of the Report for the Amendment of Silver coins, &c.,
     Dr. Patrick Blair, Physician at Boston, and F.R.S., &c.
     Together with original letters and papers of State,
     addressed to Henry d'Avenant, Esq., her Britannic Majesty's
     Envoy at Francfort, from 1703 to 1708 inclusive." Few
     libraries have contained more curious and remarkable
     publications than did this. The following articles, given as
     notable specimens, remind us somewhat of Addison's memoranda
     for the Spectator, which the waiter at the coffee-house
     picked up and read aloud for the amusement of the
     company.----No. 166. God's Manifestation by a Star to the
     Dutch. A mortifying Fast-Diet at Court. On the Birth Day of
     the first and oldest young Gentleman. All corrupt: none
     good; no, not one.----168. General Thumbissimo. The Spring
     reversed, or the Flanderkin's Opera and Dutch Pickle
     Herrings. The Creolean Fillip, or Royal Mishap. A Martial
     Telescope, &c. England's Passion Sunday, and April
     Changelings.----170. Speech upon Speech. A Telescope for
     Tournay. No Battle, but worse, and the True Meaning of it.
     An Army beaten and interred.----174. Signs when the P. will
     come. Was Captain Sw-n, a Prisoner on Parole, to be
     catechised? David's Opinion of like Times. The Seeds of the
     plot may rise though the leaves fall. A Perspective, from
     the Blair of Athol. The Pretender's Popery. Murder! Fire!
     Where! Where!----178. Taking Carlise, catching an eel by the
     tail. Address of a Bishop, Dean, and Clergy. Swearing to the
     P----r, &c. Anathema denounced against those parents,
     Masters, and Magistrates, that do not punish the Sin at
     Stokesley. A Speech, &c. A Parallel between the Rebels to K.
     Charles I. and those to his successor. _Jane Cameron_ looked
     killing at _Falkirk_.----179. Let Stocks be knighted, write,
     Sir Bank, &c., the Ramhead Month. A Proof that the Writers
     against Popery, fear it will be established in this Kingdom.
     A Scheme wisely blabbed to root and branch the Highlanders.
     Let St. Patrick have fair Play, &c.----Of ORATOR HENLEY I
     have not been able to collect any biographical details, more
     interesting than those which are to be found in Warburton's
     notes to Pope's Dunciad: He was born at Melton Mowbray, in
     Leicestershire, in 1692, and was brought up at St. John's
     College, in the University of Cambridge. After entering into
     orders, he became a preacher in London, and established a
     lecture on Sunday evenings, near Lincoln's-Inn Fields, and
     another on Wednesday evenings, chiefly on political and
     scientific subjects. Each auditor paid one shilling for
     admission. "He declaimed," says Warburton, "against the
     greatest persons, and occasionally did our poet (Pope) that
     honour. When he was at Cambridge, he began to be uneasy; for
     it shocked him to find he was commanded to believe against
     his own judgment in points of religion, philosophy, &c.: for
     his genius leading him freely to _dispute all propositions_,
     and _call all points to account_, he was impatient under
     those fetters of the free-born mind." When he was admitted
     into priest's orders, he thought the examination so short
     and superficial that he considered it "_not necessary to
     conform to the Christian religion_, in order either to be a
     deacon or priest." With these quixotic sentiments he came to
     town; and "after having, for some years, been a writer for
     the booksellers, he had an ambition to be so for ministers
     of state." The only reason he did not rise in the church, we
     are told, "was the envy of others, and a disrelish
     entertained of him, because _he was not qualified to be a
     complete spaniel_." However, he offered the service of his
     pen to two great men, of opinions and interests directly
     opposite: but being rejected by both of them, he set up a
     new project, and styled himself, "_The restorer of ancient
     eloquence._" Henley's pulpit, in which he preached, "was
     covered with velvet, and adorned with gold." It is to this
     that Pope alludes, in the first couplet of his second book
     of the Dunciad:

          High on a gorgeous seat, that far outshone
          HENLEY'S _gilt tub_----

     "He had also an altar, and placed over it this extraordinary
     inscription, '_The primitive Eucharist._'" We are told by
     his friend Welsted (narrative in Oratory Transact. No. 1)
     that "he had the assurance to form a plan, which no mortal
     _ever thought of_; he had success against all opposition;
     challenged his adversaries to fair disputations, and _none
     would dispute with him_: he wrote, read, and studied, twelve
     hours a day; composed three dissertations a week on all
     subjects; undertook to teach in _one year_ what schools and
     universities teach in _five_: was not terrified by menaces,
     insults, or satires; but still proceeded, matured his bold
     scheme, and put the church and _all that in danger_!" See
     note to Dunciad, book iii., v. 199. Pope has described this
     extraordinary character with singular felicity of
     expression:

            But, where each science lifts its modern type,
          Hist'ry her Pot, Divinity her Pipe,
          While proud philosophy repines to shew,
          Dishonest sight! his breeches rent below;
          Imbrown'd with native bronze, lo! Henley stands,
          Tuning his voice and balancing his hands.
          How fluent nonsense trickles from his tongue!
          How sweet the periods, neither said nor sung!
          Still break the benches, Henley! with thy strain,
          While SHERLOCK, HARE, and GIBSON, preach in vain.
          Oh great restorer of the good old stage,
          Preacher at once, and zany of thy age,
          Oh worthy thou, of Egypt's wise abodes,
          A decent priest, where monkeys were the gods!
          But fate with butchers plac'd thy priestly stall,
          Meek modern faith to murder, hack, and mawl;
          And bade thee live, to crown Britannia's praise,
          In TOLAND'S, TINDAL'S, and in WOOLSTON'S days.

          _Dunciad_, b. iii., v. 190, &c.

     Bromley, in his catalogue of engraved Portraits, mentions
     _four_ of orator Henley: two of which are inscribed, one by
     Worlidge "The Orator of Newport Market;" another (without
     engraver's name) "A Rationalist." There is a floating story
     which I have heard of Henley. He gave out that he would shew
     a new and expeditious method of converting a pair of boots
     into shoes. A great concourse of people attended, expecting
     to see something very marvellous; when Henley mounted his
     "tub," and, holding up a boot, he took a knife, and _cut
     away the leg part of the leather_!]

There are, I had almost said, innumerable contemporaneous
bibliomaniacal characters to be described--or rather, lesser stars or
satellites that move, in their now unperceived orbits, around the
great planets of the book world--but, at this protracted hour of
discussion, I will not pretend even to mention their names.

LIS. Yet, go on--unless the female part of the audience be weary--go
on describing, by means of your great telescopic powers, every little
white star that is sprinkled in this bibliomaniacal _Via Lactea_![385]

     [Footnote 385: With great submission to the "reminescential"
     talents of Lysander, he might have devoted one _minute_ to
     the commendation of the very curious library of JOHN HUTTON,
     which was disposed of, by auction, in the same year (1764)
     in which Genl. Dormer's was sold. Hutton's library consisted
     almost entirely of _English Literature_: the rarest books in
     which are printed in the italic type. When the reader is
     informed that "_Robinsons Life, Actes, and Death of Prince
     Arthur_," and his "_ancient order, societie, and unitie,
     laudable of the same_," 1583, 4to. (see no. 2730;
     concerning which my worthy friend, Mr. Haslewood, has
     discoursed so accurately and copiously: _British
     Bibliographer_, vol. i., pp. 109; 125), when he is informed
     that this produced only 9_s._ 6_d._--that
     "_Hypnerotomachia_," 1592, 4to. (no. 2755), was sold for
     only 2_s._--the _Myrrour of Knighthood_, 1585, 4to. (no.
     2759), only 5_s._--_Palmerin of England_, 3 pts. in 3 vols.
     1602, 1639, 4to. (no. 2767), 14_s._--_Painter's Palace of
     Pleasure_, 2 vols. in 1, 1566-7, 4to. (no. 2770)--when, I
     say, the tender-hearted bibliomaniac thinks that all these
     rare and precious black letter gems were sold, collectively,
     for only 2_l._ 16_s._ 6_d._!--what must be his reproaches
     upon the lack of spirit which was evinced at this sale!
     Especially must his heart melt within him, upon looking at
     the produce of some of these articles at the sale of George
     Steevens' books, only 36 years afterwards! No depreciation
     of money can account for this woful difference. I possess a
     wretchedly priced copy of the _Bibl. Huttoniana_, which I
     purchased, without title-page or a decent cover, at the sale
     of Mr. Gough's books, for 11_s._ Lysander ought also to have
     noticed in its chronological order, the extensive and truly
     valuable library of ROBERT HOBLYN; the catalogue of which
     was published in the year 1769, 8vo., in two parts: pp. 650.
     I know not who was the author of the arrangement of this
     collection; but I am pretty confident that the judicious
     observer will find it greatly superior to every thing of its
     kind, with hardly even the exception of the _Bibliotheca
     Croftsiana_. It is accurately and handsomely executed, and
     wants only an index to make it truly valuable. The
     collection, moreover, is a very sensible one. My copy is
     upon _large paper_; which is rather common.]

ALMAN. Upon my word, Lisardo, there is no subject however barren, but
what may be made fruitful by your metaphorical powers of imagination.

LIS. Madam, I entreat you not to be excursive. Lysander has taken a
fresh sip of his nectar, and has given a hem or two--preparing to
resume his narrative.

LYSAND. We have just passed over the bar that separates the one half
of the 18th century from the other: and among the ensuing eminent
collectors, whose brave fronts strike us with respect, is GENERAL
DORMER:[386] a soldier who, I warrant you, had faced full many a
cannon, and stormed many a rampart, with courage and success. But he
could not resist the raging influence of the Book-Mania: nor could all
his embrasures and entrenchments screen him from the attacks of this
insanity. His collection was both select and valuable.

     [Footnote 386: "_A Catalogue of the genuine and elegant
     Library of the late_ Sir C.C. DORMER, collected by
     Lieutenant General James Dormer; which will be sold, &c., by
     Samuel Baker, at his house in York-Street, Covent Garden; to
     begin on Monday, February the 20th, 1764, and to continue
     the nineteen following evenings." At the end of the
     catalogue we are told that the books were "in general of the
     best editions, and in the finest condition, many of them in
     _large paper_, bound in morocco, gilt leaves," &c. This was
     a very choice collection of books; consisting almost
     entirely of French, Greek, Latin, Italian, and Spanish. The
     number of articles did not exceed 3082; and of volumes,
     probably not 7000. The catalogue is neatly printed, and
     copies of it on _large paper_ are exceedingly scarce. Among
     the most curious and valuable articles are the
     following:----no. 599. Les Glorieuses Conquestes de Louis
     le Grand, par Pontault, _en maroquin_. Paris, 1678. ("_N.B.
     In this copy many very fine and rare portraits are added,
     engraved by the most eminent masters._")----no. 604.
     Recueil des Maisons Royales, fort bien gravés par Sylvestre,
     &c. (N.B. In the book was the following note. "_Ce recueil
     des Maisons Royales n'est pas seulement complet, en toutes
     manières, mais on y a ajouté plusieurs plans, que l'on ne
     trouvent que très rarement._")----no. 731. Fabian's
     Chronicle, 1559.----752, Hall's ditto. 1548.----751.
     Higden's Polychronicon. 1527. (I suspect that Dr. Askew
     purchased the large paper Hutchinson's Xenophon, and
     Hudson's Thucydides. nos. 2246, 2585.)----no. 2249.
     Don Quixote, por Cervantes. Madr., 4to., 1605. In hoc libro
     hæc nota est. "_Cecy est l'edition originale; il y a une
     autre du mesme année, imprimée en quarto à Madrid, mais
     imprimée apres cecy. J'ay veu l'autre, et je les ay comparez
     avec deux autres editions du mesme année, 1605; une imprimée
     à Lisbonne, en 4to., l'autre en Valentia, en_
     8vo."----no. 2590. Thuanus by Buckley, on _large paper_,
     in 14 volumes, folio; a magnificent copy, illustrated with
     many beautiful and rare portraits of eminent characters,
     mentioned by De Thou. (N.B. This very copy was recently sold
     for 74_l._)----From no. 2680 to the end of the Catalogue
     (401 articles) there appears a choice collection of Italian
     and Spanish books.]

We have before noticed the celebrated diplomatic character, CONSUL
SMITH, and have spoken with due respect of his library: let us here,
therefore, pass by him,[387] in order to take a full and complete
view of a _Non-Pareil_ Collector: the first who, after the days of
Richard Smith, succeeded in reviving the love of black-letter lore and
of Caxtonian typography--need I say JAMES WEST?[388]

     [Footnote 387: The reader has had a sufficiently particular
     account of the book-collections of CONSUL SMITH, at p. 95,
     ante, to render any farther discussion superfluous. As these
     libraries were collected _abroad_, the catalogues of them
     were arranged in the place here referred to.]

     [Footnote 388: I am now to notice, in less romantic manner
     than Lysander, a collection of books, in _English
     Literature_, which, for rarity and value, in a proportionate
     number, have never been equalled; I mean the library of
     JAMES WEST, Esq., _President of the Royal Society_. The sale
     commenced on March 29, 1773, and continued for the
     twenty-three following days. The catalogue was digested by
     Samuel Paterson, a man whose ability in such undertakings
     has been generally allowed. The title was as follows:
     "BIBLIOTHECA WESTIANA; _A Catalogue of the curious and truly
     valuable library of the late_ JAMES WEST, Esq., _President
     of the Royal Society, deceased_; comprehending a choice
     collection of books in various languages, and upon most
     branches of polite literature: more especially such as
     relate to the history and antiquities of Great Britain and
     Ireland; their early navigators, discoverers, and improvers,
     and the _ancient English literature_: of which there are a
     great number of uncommon books and tracts, elucidated by MS.
     notes and original letters, and embellished with scarce
     portraits and devices, rarely to be found: including the
     works of Caxton, Lettou, Machlinia, the anonymous St. Albans
     school-master, Wynkyn de Worde, Pynson, and the rest of the
     old English typographers. Digested by Samuel Paterson, and
     sold by Messrs. Langfords." The title-page is succeeded by
     the

     PREFACE.

     "The following catalogue exhibits a very curious and
     uncommon collection of printed books and tracts. Of British
     History and Antiquities, and of _Rare Old English
     Literature_, the most copious of any which has appeared for
     several years past; formed with great taste, and a thorough
     knowledge of authors and characters, by that judicious
     critic and able antiquary the late JAMES WEST, Esq.,
     President of the Royal Society. Several anonymous writers
     are herein brought to light--many works enlarged and further
     explained by their respective authors and editors--and a far
     greater number illustrated with the MS. notes and
     observations of some of our most respectable antiquaries:
     among whom will be found the revered names of Camden,
     Selden, Spelman, Somner, Dugdale, Gibson, Tanner, Nicolson,
     Gale, Le Neve, Hearne, Anstis, Lewis, St. Amand, Ames,
     Browne, Willis, Stukely, Mr. West, &c. But, above all, the
     intense application and unwearied diligence of the admirable
     Bishop White Kennett, upon the ecclesiastical, monastical,
     constitutional, and topographical history of Great Britain,
     so apparent throughout this collection, furnish matter even
     to astonishment; and are alone sufficient to establish the
     reputation, and to perpetuate the memory, of this
     illustrious prelate, without any other monuments of his
     greatness." "In an age of general inquiry, like the present,
     when studies less interesting give place to the most
     laudable curiosity and thirst after investigating every
     particular relative to the history and literature of our own
     country, nothing less than an elaborate digest of this
     valuable library could be expected; and, as a supplement to
     the history of English literature, more desired." "That task
     the Editor has cheerfully undertaken: and, he flatters
     himself, executed as well as the short time allowed would
     permit. He further hopes, to the satisfaction of such who
     are capable of judging of its utility and importance." "The
     lovers of engraved English portraits (a species of modern
     connoisseurship which appears to have been first started by
     the late noble Earl of Oxford, afterwards taken up by Mr.
     West, Mr. Nicolls, editor of Cromwell's State-Papers, Mr.
     Ames, &c., and since perfected by the Muse of
     Strawberry-Hill, the Rev. Wm. Granger, and some few more
     ingenious collectors) may here look to find a considerable
     number of singular and scarce heads, and will not be
     disappointed in their search." Thus much Paterson; who, it
     must be confessed, has promised more than he has performed:
     for the catalogue, notwithstanding it was the _second_ which
     was published (the first being by a different hand, and most
     barbarously compiled) might have exhibited better method and
     taste in its execution. Never were rare and magnificent
     books more huddled together and smothered, as it were, than
     in this catalogue. Let us now proceed to an analysis of Mr.
     West's Collection.

     1. _Volumes of Miscellaneous Tracts._

     These volumes extend from no. 148 to 200, from 915 to
     992, from 1201 to 1330, and from no. 1401 to 1480.--Among
     them are some singularly choice and curious articles. The
     following is but an imperfect specimen.

     NO. 154. Atkyns on Printing, _with the frontispiece_, &c.,
     &c., 4to.

     164. G. Whetstone's Honorable Profession of a Soldier, 1586,
     &c., 4to.

     179. Life and death of Wolsey, 1641, &c.

     183. Nashe's Lenten Stuffe, with the Praise of the Red
     Herring, 1599, &c. 4to. (the three articles together did not
     exceed) £0 12_s._ 0_d._

     188. A Mornynge Remembrance, had at the Moneth Mynde of the
     Noble Prynces Countesse of Rychmonde, &c. Wynkyn de Worde,
     &c. 4to. 2 2 0

     194. Oh! read over Dr. John Bridges, for it is a worthie
     Worke, &c. bl. letter, &c. 4to. Strange and fearful Newes
     from Plasto, near Bow, in the house of one Paul Fox, a Silk
     Weaver, where is daily to be seene throwing of Stones,
     Bricbats, Oyster-shells, Bread, cutting his Work in Pieces,
     breaking his Windows, &c. _No date_, 4to. 0 12 6

     1477. Leylande's Journey and Serche, given of hym as a Newe
     Yeares Gyfte to K. Henry 8th, enlarged by Bale, bl. letter,
     1549, 8vo., (with three other curious articles.) 0 17 6

     1480. A disclosing of the great Bull and certain Calves that
     he hath gotten, and especially the Monster Bull that roared
     at my Lord Byshop's gate. Bl. letter, pr. by Daye. No date.
     4to.

     The preceding affords but a very inadequate idea of the
     "pithie, pleasant, and profitable" discourses mid tracts
     which abounded among the miscellaneous articles of Mr.
     West's library. Whatever be the defects of modern
     literature, it must be allowed that we are not _quite so
     coarse_ in the _title pages_ of our books.

     2. _Divinity._

     This comprehended a vast mass of information, under the
     following general title. Scarce Tracts: Old and New
     Testaments (including almost all the first English editions
     of the New Testament, which are now of the rarest
     occurrence): Commentators: Ecclesiastical History: Polemics:
     Devotions, Catholic and Calvinistical: Enthusiasm:
     Monastical History: Lives of Saints: Fathers: Missionaries:
     Martyrs: Modern Divines and Persons of eminent piety: Free
     Thinkers: Old English Primers: Meditations: Some of the
     earliest Popish and Puritanical Controversy: Sermons by old
     English Divines, &c. In the whole 560 articles: probably
     about 1200 volumes. These general heads are sufficient to
     satisfy the bibliographer that, with such an indefatigable
     collector as was Mr. West, the greater part of the
     theological books must have been extremely rare and curious.
     From so _many Caxtons_, _Wynkyn de Wordes_, _Pynsons, &c._,
     it would be difficult to select a _few_ which should give a
     specimen of the value of the rest. Suffice it to observe
     that such a cluster of _Black Letter Gems_, in this
     department of English literature, has never since been seen
     in any sale catalogue.

     3. _Education, Languages, Criticism, Classics, Dictionaries,
     Catalogues of Libraries, &c._

     There were about 700 volumes in these departments. The
     catalogues of English books, from that of Maunsell in 1595,
     to the latest before Mr. West's time, were nearly complete.
     The treatises on education, and translations of the ancient
     classics, comprehended a curious and uncommon collection.
     The Greek and Latin Classics were rather select than rare.

     4. _English Poetry, Romances, and Miscellanies._

     This interesting part of the collection comprehended about
     355 articles, or probably about 750 volumes: and, if the
     singularly rare and curious books which may be found _under
     these heads alone_ were now to be concentrated in one
     library, the owner of them might safely demand 4000 guineas
     for such a treasure! I make no doubt but that his MAJESTY is
     the fortunate possessor of the greater number of articles
     under all the foregoing heads.

     5. _Philosophy, Mathematics, Inventions, Agriculture, and
     Horticulture, Medicine, Cookery, Surgery, &c._

     Two hundred and forty articles, or about 560 volumes.

     6. _Chemistry, Natural History, Astrology, Sorcery,
     Gigantology._

     Probably not more than 100 volumes. The word "Gigantology,"
     first introduced by Mr. Paterson, I believe, into the
     English language, was used by the French more than two
     centuries ago. See no. 2198 in the catalogue.

     7. _History and Antiquities._

     This comprehended a great number of curious and valuable
     productions, relating both to foreign and domestic
     transactions.

     8. _Heraldry and Genealogy._

     An equal number of curious and scarce articles may be found
     under these heads.

     9. _Antient Legends and Chronicles._

     To the English antiquary, few departments of literature are
     more interesting than this. Mr. West seems to have paid
     particular attention to it, and to have enriched his library
     with many articles of this description of the rarest
     occurrence. The lovers of Caxton, Fabian, Hardyng, Hall,
     Grafton, and Holinshed, may be highly gratified by
     inspecting the various editions of these old chroniclers. I
     entreat the diligent bibliographer to examine the first 8
     articles of page 209 of the catalogue. Alas! when will such
     gems again glitter at one sale? The fortunate period for
     collectors is gone by: a knowledge of books almost every
     where prevails. At York, at Exeter, at Manchester, and at
     Bristol, as well as in London, this knowledge may be found
     sometimes on the dusty stall, as well as in the splendid
     shop. The worth of books begins to be considered by a
     different standard from that of the quantity of gold on the
     exterior! We are now for "_drinking deep_," as well as
     "_tasting_!" But I crave pardon for this digression, and
     lose sight of Mr. West's _uniques_.

     10. _Topography._

     Even to a veteran like the late Mr. Gough, such a collection
     as may be found from p. 217 to 239 of the catalogue, would
     be considered a very first-rate acquisition. I am aware that
     the Gothic wainscot and stained glass windows of _Enfield
     Study_ enshrined a still more exquisite topographical
     collection! But we are improved since the days of Mr. West;
     and every body knows to _whom_ these improvements are, in a
     great measure, to be attributed! When I call to mind the
     author of "_British Topography_" and "_Sepulchral
     Monuments_," I am not insensible to the taste, diligence,
     and erudition of the "par nobile fratrum," who have
     gratified us with the "_Environs of London_," and the three
     volumes of "_Magna Britannia_!" Catalogues of Mr. West's
     library, with the sums for which the books were sold, are
     now found with difficulty, and bring a considerable price.
     The late Mr. G. Baker, who had a surprisingly curious
     collection of priced catalogues, was in possession of the
     _original sale_ one of West's library. It is interleaved,
     and, of course, has the prices and names of the purchasers.
     Mr. Heber has also a priced copy, with the names, which was
     executed by my industrious and accurate predecessor, William
     Herbert, of typographico-antiquarian renown. The number of
     articles, on the whole, was 4653; and of the volumes as many
     articles were single, probably about 8000. _Ample_ as some
     "pithy" reader may imagine the foregoing analysis to be, I
     cannot find it in my heart to suffer such a collection, as
     was the _Bibliotheca Westiana_, to be here dismissed in so
     _summary_ a manner. Take, therefore, "pleasaunt" reader, the
     following account of the _prices_ for which some of the
     aforesaid book-gems were sold. They are presented to thee as
     a matter of curiosity only; and not as a criterion of their
     present value. And as MASTER CAXTON has of late become so
     popular amongst us, we will see, inter alios, what some of
     the books printed by so "simple a person" produced at this
     renowned sale.

     NO. 564. Salesbury (Wyllyam) his Dictionary in Englyshe and
     Welshe, moste necessary to all such Welshemen as wil spedly
     learne the English tongue, &c. _Printed by Waley_, 1547,
     4to. £0 17_s._ 0_d._

     566. Mulcaster (Rich.) of the right writing of our English
     Tung. _Imp. by Vautrollier_, 1582, 4to. 0 2 6

     575. Florio's Frutes to be gathered of 12 trees of divers
     but delyghtfule tastes to the Tongues of Italians and
     Englishmen, also his Garden of Recreation, &c., 1591, 4to. 0
     6 6

     580. Eliot's Indian Grammar, _no title_. 0 4 0

     Thus much for GRAMMATICAL TRACTS.

     808. The fyve Bokes of Moses, wythe the Prologes of Wyllyam
     Tyndale, b.b. 1534, _printed in different characters at
     different periods_, 8vo. 4 4 0

     813. The Actes of the Apostles translated into Englyshe
     metre, by Chrystofer Tye, Doctor in musyke, with notes to
     synge, and also to play upon the lute. _Printed by Seres_,
     1553, 12mo. 0 11 6

     819. The Newe Testament, with the Prologes of Wyllyam
     Tyndale, cuts, printed at Andwarp, &c., 1534, 12mo. 0 18 0

     820. The same, with the same cuts, emprynted at Antwerpe, by
     M. Crom, 1538, _a fine copy, in morocco binding_ (title
     wanting). 2 4 0

     1341. The Gospels of the fower Evangelists, translated in
     the olde Saxons Tyme, &c. Sax. and Eng. Imprinted by Daye,
     1571, 4to. 1 12 0

     1383. The Discipline of the Kirk of Scotlande, subscribet by
     the Handes off Superintendentes, one parte off Ministers,
     and scribet in oure generalle Assemblies ad Edenbourg, 28
     Decemb., 1566. _No title._ 4to. 1 3 0

     1714. The most sacred Bible, recognised with great diligence
     by Richard Taverner, &c., _printed by Byddell for Barthelet,
     1539, in russia_. 3 5 0

     1716. The Byble in Englyshe of the largest and greatest
     volume, &c. _Printed by Grafton_, 1541, Folio. 1 3 0

     1870. Speculum Vite Christi, the Booke that is cleped the
     Myrroure of the blessed Lyf of Jhesu Cryste, _emprynted by
     Caxton_, fol., _no date, fine copy in morocco_. 9 9 0

     1871. The prouffytable Boke for Mannes Soule, &c.,
     _emprynted by Caxton_, fol., no date, a fine copy in
     morocco. 5 0 0

     1873. Cordyale, or of the fowre last Thynges, &c.,
     _emprynted by Caxton_, 1480, fol., _fine copy in morocco_.
     14 0 0

     1874. The Pylgremage of the Sowle, &c., 1483, folio,
     _emprynted by Caxton_. 8 17 6

     1875. The Booke entytled and named Ryal, &c., _translated
     and printed by Caxton_, 1484, _fine morocco copy_. 10 0 0

     1876. The Arte and Crafte to knowe well to dye; _translated
     and prynted by Caxton_, 1490, folio. 5 2 6

     So take we leave of DIVINITY!

     1047. Hall's Virgidemiarum, lib. vi. 1599, 1602, 12mo. "Mr.
     Pope's copy, who presented it to Mr. West, telling him that
     he esteemed them the best poetry and truest satire in the
     English language." (N.B. These satires were incorrectly
     published in 1753, 8vo.: a republication of them, with
     pertinent notes, would be very acceptable.) 0 18 0

     1658. Churchyard's Works; 3 vols. in 1, _very elegant_, bl.
     letter. 3 13 6

     1816. The Passe Tyme of Pleasure, &c., _printed by Wynkyn de
     Worde_, 1517, 4to., fine copy. 3 3 0

     1821. Merie conceited Jests of George Peele, Gent. 1607,
     4to. Robin the Devil, his two penni-worth of Wit in half a
     penni-worth of paper, &c., 1607, 4to. 0 18 6

     1846. The Hye Waye to the Spyttell Hous; printed by the
     compyler Rob. Copland, no date. 0 6 6

     1847. Another copy of the Spyttell House; "A thousande fyve
     hundredth fortye and foure," no printer's name, mark, or
     date, 4to. Here begynneth a lytell propre Jest, called
     Cryste Crosse me spede, a b c. 1 11 6

     2274. Chaucer's Work; first edition, _emprentyd by Caxton_,
     folio, _in russia_. 47 15 6

     2280. ---- Troylus and Creseyde, _printed b [Transcriber's
     Note: by] Caxton_, folio. 10 10 0

     2281. ---- Booke of Fame, _printed by Caxton_, folio. 4 5 0

     2297. Gower de Confessione Amantis; _printed by Caxton_,
     1483, folio, _in morocco_. 9 9 0

     2282. The Bokys of Haukyng and Hunting; _printed at Seynt
     Albons_, 1486, _folio: fine copy in morocco_. 13 0 0

     And here farewell POETRY!

     1678. The Booke of the moste victoryouse Prynce, Guy of
     Warwick. _Impr. by W. Copland_, 4to. 1 1 0

     1683. The Historye of Graunde Amoure and la bell Pucel, &c.
     _Impr. by John Wayland_, 1554, 4to. 1 2 0

     1685. The Historye of Olyver of Castylle, &c. _Impr. by
     Wynkyn de Worde_, 1518, 4to. 1 12 0

     1656. The Booke of the Ordre of Chyvalry or Knyghthode.
     _Translated and printed by William Caxton_; no date, a fine
     copy in russia, 4to. 5 5 0

     (Shall I put one, or one hundred marks--not of admiration
     but of astonishment--at this price?! but go on kind reader!)

     2480. The Boke of Jason: _emprynted by Caxton_, folio. 4 4 0

     2481. The Boke of Fayttes of Armes and of Chyvalrye,
     _emprynted by Caxton_, 1489, folio. 10 10 0

     2582. Thystorye, &c., of the Knyght Parys, and of the fayre
     Vyenne, &c. 1485, fol., _translated and printed by Caxton_.
     14 0 0

     [Illustration: CAXTON.]

     But why should I go on tantalising the S----s, H----s,
     S----s, R----s, and U----s, of the day, by further specimens
     of the _enormous_ sums here given for such _common_ editions
     of old ROMANCES? Mr. George Nicol, his majesty's bookseller,
     told me, with his usual pleasantry and point, that he got
     abused in the public papers, by Almon and others, for his
     having purchased nearly the whole of the Caxtonian volumes
     in this collection for his Majesty's library. It was said
     abroad that "a Scotchman had lavished away the king's money
     in buying old black-letter books." A pretty specimen of
     _lavishing_ away royal money, truly! There is also another
     thing, connected with these _invaluable_ (I speak as a
     bibliomaniac--and, perhaps, as a metaphysician may think--as
     a fool! but let it pass!) with these invaluable
     purchases:--his Majesty, in his directions to Mr. Nicol,
     forbade any competition with those purchasers who wanted
     books of science and belles-lettres for their _own
     professional_ or _literary_ pursuits: thus using, I ween,
     the powers of his purse in a manner at once merciful and
     wise.--"O si sic"--may we say to many a heavy-metalled
     book-auction bibliomaniac of the present day!--Old Tom
     Payne, the father of the respectable Mr. Payne, of
     Pall-Mall, used to tell Mr. Nichol--_pendente hastâ_--that
     he had been "raising all the CAXTONS!" "Many a copy," quoth
     he, "hath _stuck_ in my shop at two guineas!" Mr. NICHOLS,
     in his amusing biography of Bowyer, has not devoted so large
     a portion of his pages to the description of Mr. West's
     collection, life, and character, as he has to many
     collectors who have been less eminently distinguished in the
     bibliographical world. Whether this was the result of the
     paucity, or incongruity, of his materials, or whether, from
     feelings of delicacy he might not choose to declare all he
     knew, are points into which I have neither right nor
     inclination to enquire. There seems every reason to conclude
     that, from youth, West had an elegant and well-directed
     taste in matters of literature and the fine arts. As early
     as the year 1720, he shewed the munificence of his
     disposition, in these respects, by befriending Hearne with a
     plate for his _Antiquities of Glastonbury_; see p.
     285--which was executed, says Hearne, "Sumptibus ornatissimi
     amicissimique Juvenis (multis sane nominibus de studiis
     nostris optime meriti) JACOBI WEST," &c. So in his pref. to
     _Adam de Domerham de reb. gest. Glaston_:--"antiquitatum ac
     historiarum nostrarum studiosus in primis--Jacobus West." p.
     xx. And in his _Walter Hemingford_, we have:--"fragmentum,
     ad civitatem Oxoniensem pertinens, admodum egregium, mihi
     dono dedit amicus eximius Jacobus West--is quem alibi
     juvenem ornatissimum appellavi," &c., p. 428. How the
     promise of an abundant harvest, in the mature years of so
     excellent a young man, was realized, the celebrity of West,
     throughout Europe, to his dying day, is a sufficient
     demonstration. I conclude with the following; which is
     literally from Nichols's _Anecdotes of Bowyer_. "James West,
     of Alscott, in the county of Warwick, Esq., M.A., of Baliol
     College, Oxford, (son of Richard West, said to be descended,
     according to family tradition, from Leonard, a younger son
     of Thomas West, Lord Delawar, who died in 1525) was
     representative in parliament for St. Alban's, in 1741; and
     being appointed one of the joint Secretaries of the
     Treasury, held that office till 1762. In 1765 or 1766, his
     old patron the Duke of Newcastle, obtained for him a pension
     of 2000_l._ a year. He was an early member, and one of the
     Vice Presidents, of the Antiquary Society; and was first
     Treasurer, and afterwards President, of the Royal Society.
     He married the daughter and heiress of Sir Thomas Stephens,
     timber merchant, in Southwark, with whom he had a large
     fortune in houses in Rotherhithe; and by whom he had a son,
     James West, Esq., now (1782) of Alscott, one of the Auditors
     of the Land-Tax, and sometime Member of Parliament for
     Boroughbridge, in Yorkshire (who in 1774 married the
     daughter of Christopher Wren, of Wroxhall in Warwickshire,
     Esq.), and had two daughters. Mr. West died in July, 1772.
     His large and valuable collection of MANUSCRIPTS was sold to
     the _Earl of Shelburne_, and is now deposited in the British
     Museum."]

LOREN. All hail to thee--transcendant bibliomaniac of other times!--of
times, in which my father lived, and procured, at the sale of thy
precious book-treasures, not a few of those rare volumes which have so
much gladdened the eyes of Lisardo.

BELIN. I presume you mean, dear brother, some of those _black-looking_
gentlemen, bound in fancifully marked coats of morocco, and _washed_
and _ironed_ within (for you collectors must have recourse to a
woman's occupation) with so much care and nicety that even the eyes
of our ancient Rebecca, with "spectacle on nose" to boot, could hardly
detect the cunning' conceit of your binder!

LOREN. Spare my feelings and your own reputation, if you wish to
appreciate justly the noble craft of book-repairing, &c.--But proceed,
dear Lysander.

LYSAND. You cannot have a greater affection towards the memory of the
collector of the _Bibliotheca Westiana_ than myself. Hark--! or is it
only a soft murmur from a congregation of autumnal zephyrs!--but
methought I heard a sound, as if calling upon us to look well to the
future fate of our libraries--to look well to their being _creditably
catalogued_--"For" (and indeed it _is_ the voice of West's spirit that
speaks) "my collection was barbarously murdered; and hence I am doomed
to wander for a century, to give warning to the ----, ----, and ----,
of the day, to execute this useful task with their own hands! Yes;
even the name of PATERSON has not saved my collection from censure;
but his hands were then young and inexperienced--yet I suffer from
this innocent error!" Away, away, vexed spirit--and let thy head rest
in peace beneath the sod!

ALMAN. For heaven's sake, into what society are we introduced, sister?
All mad--book mad! but I hope harmless.

LYSAND. Allay your apprehensions; for, though we may have the
energies of the lion, we have the gentleness of the "unweaned lamb."
But, in describing so many and such discordant characters, how can I
proceed in the jog-trot way of--"next comes such a one--and then
follows another--and afterwards proceeds a third, and now a fourth!?"

ALMAN. Sir, you are right, and I solicit your forgiveness. If I have
not sufficient bookish enthusiasm to fall down and worship your
CAXTONIAN DEITY, JAMES WEST, I am at least fully disposed to concede
him every excellent and amiable quality which sheds lustre upon a
literary character.

LYSAND. All offence is expiated: for look, the spirit walks off
calmly--and seems to acknowledge, with satisfaction, such proper
sentiments in the breast of one whose father and brother have been
benefited by his book treasures.

The rapturous, and, I fear you will think, the wild and incoherent,
manner in which I have noticed the sale of the _Bibliotheca Westiana_
had nearly driven from my recollection that, in the preceding, the
same, and subsequent, year, there was sold by auction a very curious
and extraordinary collection of books and Prints belonging to honest
TOM MARTIN,[389] _of Palgrave_, in Suffolk: a collector of whom, if I
remember rightly, Herbert has, upon several occasions, spoken with a
sort of veneration. If Lavater's system of physiognomy happen to
receive your approbation, you will conclude, upon contemplating Tom's
frank countenance--of which a cut precedes the title-page of the first
catalogue--that the collector of Palgrave must have been "a fine old
fellow." Martin's book-pursuits were miscellaneous, and perhaps a
little too wildly followed up; yet some good fortune contributed to
furnish his collection with volumes of singular curiosity.

     [Footnote 389: "Hereafter followeth" rather a rough outline
     of the contents of honest Tom Martin's miscellaneous and
     curious collection. To the IVth part I have added a few
     prices, and but a few. I respect too much the quiet and
     comfort of the present race of bibliomaniacs, to inflame
     their minds by a longer extract of such tantalizing sums
     given for some of the most extraordinary volumes in English
     Literature.----I. _A Catalogue of the Library of_ Mr. THOMAS
     MARTIN, _of Palgrave, in Suffolk, lately deceased. Lynn,
     Printed by W. Whittingham_, 1772, 8vo. With a portrait
     engraved by Lamborn, from a painting of Bardwell. 5240
     articles; with 15 pages of Appendix, containing
     MSS.----no. 86. Juliana Barnes on Hawking, &c.,
     black-letter, wants a leaf, folio. 56. Chauncey's History of
     Hertfordshire, with marginal notes, by P. Le Neve, Esq.,
     1700, folio. 757. Scriptores Rerum Brunsvicensium, 3 vols.
     folio, 1707. ("N.B. Only 3 sets in England at the accession
     of Geo. III.")----II. _A Catalogue of the very curious and
     numerous collection of Manuscripts of_ THOMAS MARTIN, Esq.,
     _of Suffolk, lately deceased_. Consisting of Pedigrees,
     Genealogies, Heraldic Papers, Old Deeds, Charters, Sign
     Manuals, Autographs, &c., likewise some very rare old
     printed books. Sold by auction by Baker and Leigh, April 28,
     1773, 8vo. The MSS. (of many of which Edmonson was a
     purchaser) consisted of 181 articles, ending with "The 15
     O's, in old English verse--St. Bridget." Among the 19
     volumes only of "Scarce Printed Books" were the
     following:--no. 188. Edwards' Paradyse of daynty Devices,
     1577. 196. The Holy Life of Saynt Werburge, printed by
     Pynson, 1521. The Lyfe of Saynte Radegunde, by Pynson. Lyfe
     of Saynt Katherine, printed by Waley, 4to.----III. _A
     Catalogue of the remaining Part of the valuable Collection
     of the late well known Antiquary_, Mr. MARTIN, _of Palgrave,
     Suffolk_: consisting of many very valuable and ancient
     Manuscripts on vellum, early printed black-letter Books, and
     several other scarce Books; his Law Library, Deeds, Grants,
     and Pedigrees; a valuable collection of Drawings and Prints,
     by the best masters--and his Collection of Greek, Roman,
     Saxon, and English Coins--with some curiosities. Sold by
     auction by Baker and Leigh, 18th May, 1774. 8vo. This
     collection consisted of 537 articles, exclusively of the
     coins, &c., which were 75 in number. Among the printed books
     were several very curious ones; such as----no. 88. The
     Death and Martyrdom of Campione the Jesuite, 1581, 8vo. 124.
     Heywood's "If you know not me, you know nobody," 1623, 4to.
     "This has a wood-cut of the whole length of Q. Elizabeth,
     and is very scarce." 183. Fabyan's Chronicle. This I take it
     was the first edition. 186. Promptuarium Parvulorum. Pynson,
     folio, 1499. See Hearne's Peter Langtoft, vol. ii., 624-5.
     228. Dives et Pauper; yis Tretyys ben dyvydit into elevene
     partys, and ev'ry part is dyvidit into chapitalis. "The
     above extremely curious and valuable Manuscript on vellum is
     wrote on 539 pages. Vide Leland, vol. ii., 452: Bale, 609.
     Pits, 660. MS., 4to." 236. Original Proclamations of Q.
     Elizabeth, folio. "A most rare collection, and of very great
     value: the Earl of Oxford once offered Mr. Martin one
     hundred guineas for them, which he refused." Qu. what they
     sold for? 237. The Pastyme of the People; the Cronycles of
     dyvers Realmys, and most specyally of the Realme of Englond,
     &c., by John Rastell. An elegant copy, in the original
     binding, large folio, black-letter, London, 1529. "Supposed
     to be only two or three copies existing;" but see page 337,
     ante. The folio Manuscripts, extending to no. 345, are
     very curious; especially the first 60 numbers.----IV.
     _Bibliotheca Martiniana. A Catalogue of the entire Library
     of the late eminent Antiquary_ Mr. THOMAS MARTIN, _of
     Suffolk_. Containing some thousand volumes in every
     Language, Art, and Science, a large collection of the
     scarcest early Printers, and some hundreds of Manuscripts,
     &c., which will begin to be sold very cheap, on Saturday,
     June 5 (1773). By Martin Booth and John Berry, Booksellers,
     at their Warehouse in the Angel Yard, Market Place, Norwich,
     and continue on sale only two months: 8vo. This Catalogue is
     full of curious, rare, and interesting books; containing
     4895 articles; all priced. Take, as a sample, the following:

     NO. 4071. Wynkyn de Worde's reprint of Juliana Berners' book
     of Hawking, &c., 1496, folio, 1_l._ 11_s._ 6_d._: no.
     4292. Copland's ditto of ditto, fair 7_s._ 6_d._

     4099. A collection of Old Romances in the Dutch Language,
     with wood-cuts, very fair, 1544 to 1556, folio 10 6

     4169. Horace's Art of poetry, by Drant, 1567, 4to. 3 6

     4234. A certayne Tragedye, &c., entitled, Freewil, wants
     title, very fair and scarce, 4to. 5 0

     4254. Historie of Prince Arthur and his Knights of the Round
     Table, 1634, 4to. 7 6

     4336. The Life off the 70 Archbishopp off Canterbury
     presentlye sittinge, &c. Imprinted in 1574, 8vo., neat 10 6

     A severe satire against Parker, Abp. of Canterbury, for
     which 'tis said the author was punished with the loss of his
     arm.

     4345. Amorous Tales, by James Sanforde, very rare, printed
     by Bynneman, 1567, 12mo. (or small 8vo. perhaps) 5 0

     4432. Hereafter followeth a little boke whyche hath to name
     Whye come ye not to court: by Mayster Skelton; printed by
     Anthony Kytson, no date. A little boke of Philip Sparrow,
     compiled by Mayster Skelton; printed by Ant. Veale, no date,
     very fair, both 8vo. 7 6

     "This is a most extraordinarily scarce edition of Skelton's
     Pieces, and has besides these, some other fragments of his
     by various early printers."]

But I proceed. The commotions excited in the book world, by means of
the sales of the _Bibliotheca Westiana_ and _Martiniana_, had hardly
ceased, when a similar agitation took place from the dispersion of the
_Monastic Library_ which once belonged to SERJEANT FLETEWODE;[390] a
bibliomaniac who flourished in full vigour during the reign of
Elizabeth. The catalogue of these truly curious books is but a sorry
performance; but let the lover of rare articles put on his bathing
corks, and swim quietly across this ocean of black-letter, and he will
be abundantly repaid for the toil of such an aquatic excursion.

     [Footnote 390: The year following the sale of Mr. West's
     books, a very curious and valuable collection, chiefly of
     English literature, was disposed of by auction, by Paterson,
     who published the catalogue under the following title:
     "BIBLIOTHECA MONASTICO-FLETEWODIANA." "_A Catalogue of rare
     books and tracts in various languages and faculties;
     including the Ancient Conventual Library of Missenden Abbey,
     in Buckinghamshire_; together with some choice remains of
     that of the late eminent Serjeant at Law, WILLIAM FLETEWODE,
     Esq., Recorder of London, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth;
     among which are several specimens of the earliest
     typography, foreign and English, including Caxton, Wynkyn de
     Worde, Pynson, and others: a fine collection of English
     history, some scarce old law books, a great number of old
     English plays, several choice MSS. upon vellum, and other
     subjects of literary curiosity. Also several of the best
     editions of the classics, and modern English and French
     books. Sold by auction by S. Paterson, December," 1774,
     8vo., 3641 lots, or articles. I am in possession of a
     _priced catalogue_ of this collection, with the names of the
     purchasers. The latter were principally Herbert, Garrick,
     Dodd, Elmsley, T. Payne, Richardson, Chapman, Wagstaff,
     Bindley, and Gough. The following is a specimen of some
     curious and interesting articles contained in this
     celebrated library:

     NO. 172. Bale's brefe Chronycle relating to Syr Johan
     Oldecastell, 1544. The Life off the 70th Archbishop off
     Canterbury, presentlye sittinge, 1574, &c. Life of Hen.
     Hills, Printer to O. Cromwell, with the Relation of what
     passed between him and the Taylor's Wife in Black Friars,
     1688, 8vo., &c. £0 7_s._ 9_d._

     Purchased by Mores.

     361 to 367. Upwards of thirty _scarce Theological Tracts_,
     in Latin and English. 1 5 0

     746 to 784. A fine collection of early English Translations,
     in black letter, with some good foreign editions of the
     classics. Not exceeding, in the whole 10 10 0

     837, 838. Two copies of the _first edition_ of Bacon's
     Essays, 1597. MIRABILE DICTU! 0 0 6

     The reader will just glance at no. 970, in the catalogue,
     en passant, to

     1082. (1_l._ 2_s._) and 1091 (12_s._) but more particularly
     to

     1173. The Boke of Tulle of Olde Age, &c. _Emprynted by
     Caxton_, 1481, folio 8 0 0

     1174. The Boke which is sayd or called Cathon, &c. _printed
     by the same_, 1483, folio. Purchased by Alchorne 5 0 0

     1256. The Doctrinal of Sapyence, _printed by the same_,
     1489, folio. Purchased by Alchorne 6 6 0

     1257. The Booke named the Cordyal, _printed by the same_,
     1479, folio 6 12 6

     But there is no end to these curious volumes. I will,
     however, only add that there were upwards of 150 articles of
     _Old Plays_, mostly in quarto. See page 73. Of
     _Antiquities_, _Chronicles_, and _Topography_, it would be
     difficult to pitch upon the rarest volumes. The collection,
     including very few MSS., contained probably about 7000
     volumes. The catalogue, in a clean condition, is somewhat
     uncommon.]

You will imagine that the BOOK-DISEASE now began to be more active and
fatal than ever; for the ensuing year (namely, in 1775) died the
famous ANTHONY ASKEW, M.D. Those who recollect the zeal and
scholarship of this illustrious bibliomaniac,[391] and the precious
volumes with which his library was stored, from the choice
collections of De Boze, Gaignat, Mead, and Folkes, cannot but sigh,
with grief of heart, on reflecting upon such a victim! How ardently,
and how kindly (as I remember to have heard one of his intimate friend