"No doubt.  Harmonies of outline, and concords of colour make an
unconscious appeal, but in Nature's products knowledge adds to
admiration.  The deeper you probe, the more you reveal, until you come
to mysteries beyond our solving."  He added with some dryness: "It's
often otherwise with man's work; knowledge means disillusion.  You see
how the trick is done."

"Must it always be a trick?"

"Oh! no; not necessarily.  There is a sincerity of effort that leads to
lasting and beautiful work, but perhaps it's not common."

"I'm afraid you're a pessimist."

"I wouldn't like to think so, but I have lived a long time and insisted
on using my eyes, even when clearsightedness may not have been a
benefit.  There's a penalty attached to the habit of close observation;
one sees things that hurt."

He spoke with dry humour, but his words had their effect on his
companion, who was by no means philosophical.  When she studied human
weaknesses it was with the object of turning them to her advantage, but
the shrewd, upright soldier saw them as things to avoid or recognize
with scorn.  He, however, plucked a bunch of crimson berries which he
gave her.

"This," he said, "is in my opinion an exceptionally beautiful bush.
Mrs. Keith sent it me from the Tyrol some years ago."

"You are old friends then?"

"Our friendship is of forty years standing, which I should imagine is a
severe test, but in many ways we are alike, and Margaret Keith knows
enough about me to make allowances.  We are both well-seasoned and
strong-willed, and sometimes we differ, but I must confess that
whenever the point has been one of importance time has proved her
right."

Mrs. Chudleigh looked up at him, smiling.  "That is a handsome
admission, because I shouldn't imagine you easily changed your mind."

"No; as one grows older one's ideas are apt to fall into a groove.  It
requires an effort to force them out of it."

She said nothing for a few minutes, though his confession had its
significance, since she must sooner or later persuade him to abandon
one fixed idea.

"After all, none of us find that easy," she remarked.

He glanced across the lawn, where Millicent was talking to Greythorpe.
"That girl has a very attractive face.  I don't merely mean that it's
pretty."

"What do you call it then?"

He seemed to ponder.  "I think I could best say it looks untainted,
though that is rather vague.  There's purity in it, by which I don't
mean the guilelessness of inexperience."

"That could hardly be, considering who Miss Graham's father was, and
that she has earned her living for some years."

There was a hint of surprise in the look Challoner gave her and she saw
that she had made a mistake.

"A few people have natures which can't be spoiled," he said.  "To them
knowledge brings pity or shrinking instead of temptation.  I think Miss
Graham is to be numbered among these, and she is in good hands with my
old friend."

Two or three minutes afterwards, Mrs. Keith resolutely crossed the lawn
towards them, but her determined expression softened as she approached
Challoner.

"Do you know that I feel neglected?" she said.  "Where are those
American azaleas you promised to show me?"

Challoner made her an apologetic bow.  "Have I been remiss?  I saw you
with Greythorpe, and understood you found him interesting."

"I've nothing against the man, and he never bores one, but he's a
friend of yesterday by comparison; it's only six years since I first
met him."

"Ah!" said Challoner; "the old ties are strongest."

Mrs. Keith insisted on examining the azaleas, though they were dry and
leafless, and Mrs. Chudleigh, seeing no further opportunity of a quiet
talk with Challoner, left them.  When she had gone, Mrs. Keith looked
at her companion with a twinkle.

"Well," she said, "what do you think of Mrs. Chudleigh?"

"You'll allow me to say that I find her charming?  It's a comprehensive
word."

"And means anything or nothing.  But I understand.  You're often only
conventional when you think yourself gallant."

"It's possible, but what would you have me say?  She's attractive, a
pleasant talker, and I think intelligent."

"Highly intelligent," Mrs. Keith remarked pointedly "Do you think she's
to be trusted?"

"It doesn't enter into the question.  I don't see that either of us is
required to trust her."

"I'm inclined to think that's fortunate," Mrs. Keith rejoined.

For the next half hour she kept Challoner at her side and then left him
with Mrs. Foster.  It was hard to resist Margaret Keith when she had
made up her mind, and Challoner had no wish to do so.  Moreover he was
glad to talk to Mrs. Foster, whom he liked, but he had other guests to
whom he owed some attention and he felt as if he were being gently but
firmly kept away from them.  Mrs. Chudleigh and Millicent, however,
seemed to be content with Greythorpe's society, and finding it
difficult to leave Mrs. Foster he acquiesced.

Presently she suggested that he should show her friends his pictures,
but he said that as it was near sunset and the gallery was badly
lighted it would be better if she brought her party back in a day or
two.  Having promised to do so she summoned the others, and they were
driven home.




CHAPTER XVII

THE PICTURE GALLERY

Mrs. Foster brought her guests back to Sandymere, and when Challoner
had shown them the best bits of the old carved oak with which the house
was decorated and some curious works of art he had picked up in India,
he took them to the picture gallery which ran round the big square
hall.  A lantern dome admitted a cold light, but a few sunrays struck
through a window looking to the south-west and fell in long bright bars
on polished floor and sombre panelling.  On entering the gallery,
Challoner took out a case of miniatures and placing it on a small table
brought a chair for Mrs. Keith.

"You know the pictures, but this collection generally interested you,
and I have added a few examples of a good French period since you were
last here," he said.

Mrs. Keith sat down.  She was fond of miniatures, and though she would
have preferred to accompany her host she had kept him away from Mrs.
Chudleigh since their arrival and thought she must be content with
that.  She seldom overdid anything and had no wish to make her object
too plain; Geoffrey Challoner was by no means a fool.  As she expected,
Mrs. Chudleigh found an opportunity of joining him after a time and
diverted his attention from Mrs. Foster, who left him to talk to his
sister.  Mrs. Keith watched the manoeuvre, which was cleverly carried
out, with ironical amusement, though she was troubled by a faint
uneasiness.  She felt that her old friend was threatened, but she could
not see where the danger lay, and, sitting with the miniatures before
her, she tried to formulate her suspicions.

In the first place, she had unwisely given Mrs. Chudleigh to understand
that it was doubtful whether Richard Blake had merited his disgrace.
Then the former had met Lieutenant Walters, who had fought in the
frontier action, and had gained his confidence.  It was possible that
she had led him on to talk about the affair with injudicious freedom,
and now she had met Greythorpe and seemed desirous of cultivating his
acquaintance.  All this had an ominous look, because the woman was
ambitious and scheming, besides being in love with Sedgwick, who was
something of an adventurer.  She would no doubt seize upon any
opportunity of securing his promotion.

Margaret's Keith's suspicions were justified, for Mrs. Chudleigh was
then cleverly clearing the ground for future action.  She had some
knowledge of art and the row of family portraits, hung between suits of
armour and trophies of Eastern weapons, interested her, while Challoner
was gratified by the way she listened as he spoke of them.  One or two
were by well-known artists, and the faces of the old Challoners, some
of whom wore wigs and rich court dress, and some obsolete uniforms,
fixed her attention.  The resemblance between them all was
recognizable, and she thought the family strain must be unusually
strong.  They had obviously been stern, masterful men, practical rather
than imaginative and not likely to be troubled by any emotional
weaknesses.  Then she glanced at the picture of a young woman with a
face of singularly delicate beauty.  Its expression was gentle and
pensive.

"My wife; she died in Simla twenty years ago," said Challoner gravely,
and passing on, stopped before a water-colour drawing of his son.

It had been painted when Bertram was young, and he had his mother's
dreamy look.  Mrs. Chudleigh missed the hardness of expression that
marked the Challoners.

"A sketch rather than a finished study, but there's talent in it," she
remarked.  "The subject's temperament has been cleverly seized; I have
met Captain Challoner."

"My wife's work," said the Colonel.  "Although I value it, I have
thought she was mistaken in this drawing.  My son is a man of action,
and this is the face of a sentimentalist."

"Ah!" said Mrs. Chudleigh; "his mother should know him best."

"Undoubtedly," agreed Challoner, who looked disturbed at the
suggestion.  "Still, perhaps, in painting a portrait the artist may be
misled into unduly emphasizing some single, passing phase of the
sitter's character.  A lad's moods are variable; his nature has not had
time to harden into its mould.  I imagine this is what has happened,
because if the likeness is faithful, my son has changed since then."

"One does not change much in essentials," Mrs. Chudleigh answered
thoughtfully.  "But what would you have different?  It is a good and
very likeable face."

"There is a hint of weakness; something that suggests a too sensitive
disposition."  The Colonel pointed to an officer in the old East India
Company's uniform whose expression was grim and arrogant.  "A crude
piece of work, but he has the Challoner look."

"It may sound presumptuous, but I think you are scarcely doing the
family justice.  One can see the salient characteristics of the male
line in this example, but they're too strongly marked.  Good qualities,
such as resolution and courage, may degenerate through being developed
to exaggeration at the expense of others, and after all Captain
Challoner strikes me as a much finer type.  I'm afraid you undervalue
the gift of imagination."

"These others," said Challoner, indicating the portraits generally,
"had imagination enough to do their duty, often in difficult
situations.  I don't know that one needs much more."

"A stern doctrine; it seems to bar out a good deal of the beauty and
joy of life.  But I see some landscapes yonder."

She led him up to several small impressionist sketches in water-colour
of Indian subjects, and stopped in admiration.

"These are very good.  I know the country, and they make you realise
what it is like.  There is genius here."

"My son did them," said Challoner with dry amusement.  "I can see their
cleverness, but I'll admit that I think them rather a waste of time."

"A shocking view.  Would you sooner have had him study his drill book
or attend a kit inspection?"

"On the whole, I believe so.  It would be more in line with his
profession."

Mrs. Chudleigh gave him a direct, reproachful glance.  "I know your son
and that he is a good soldier, but I feel you were wrong when you sent
him into the army.  With training, he might have made a great artist."

Challoner regarded her with frank astonishment.  "But, my dear lady,
would you prefer the latter; a coverer of canvases, a mere portrayer of
action instead of a doer?  Is it better to paint human passions and
emotions than to control and direct your own and those of others?"

"Painting is his work," Mrs. Chudleigh persisted.  "He has the
temperament; you can see it triumphing over circumstances.  In spite of
his duties, the amusements he must be expected to take part in, and, no
doubt, the banter of the mess, he finds time to make these sketches.
Then they exhibit more than mere skill with the brush; they show clear
understanding and the power of feeling."

"The latter is a dangerous gift.  A man of action is better without it."

"Your son has it, and it cannot be got rid of; but in a sense, you're
right.  Sensibility must be a handicap to a soldier now and then,
making him realize dangers and cruelties he had better have been blind
to."  Mrs. Chudleigh paused and added with a thoughtful air: "Captain
Challoner's courage and coolness are known, but I think they must cost
him more than is required of his comrades.  I mean that his having
something to overcome before he can practise them, and yet always doing
so, shows a fine moral fibre."

Challoner looked grave.  He had suspected what he thought were symptoms
of weakness in his son, though Bertram had never given way to it.  His
companion's talk disturbed him because it seemed to prove the
correctness of his suppositions, but he was shortly relieved of her.

Margaret Keith, who had watched closely, decided that Mrs. Chudleigh
had been alone with her host long enough, but for a time she could see
no suitable means of separating them.  By and by, however, Millicent
came towards her and she beckoned the girl.

"Isn't Arrowdale near your aunts' place in the North?" she said.
"There's a picture of the hills round it that I think you would like.
Ask Colonel Challoner to show it you."

Millicent joined the others, and when she spoke about the picture Mrs.
Chudleigh went away.  She thought she had said enough, for her object
had been to plant a seed of doubt about his son's character in
Challoner's; mind.  If he considered sensitiveness, artistic talent,
and imagination failings in a Challoner, she had given him food for
thought, which was as far as she wished to go just then, and on the
whole she thought she had reason to be satisfied.  When she had moved
away, Challoner showed Millicent a picture of grey hills and a sullen
tarn, half revealed between folds of rolling vapour, and the girl was
stirred to keen appreciation.

"It's beautiful and full of life," she said.  "One can see the mist
drive by and the ripples break upon the stones.  Perhaps it's because I
know the tarn I like the picture so much, but it makes one realize the
rugged grandeur and melancholy charm of the place.  I suppose that is
genius; who is the painter?"

"My son," said the Colonel, and added with a curious smile: "You are
the second person who has lately tried to persuade me that he should
have been an artist."

Millicent saw he was troubled, though she could not imagine the reason.

"I hardly know Captain Challoner, whom I only met once, but it is
obvious that he has talent.  You would sooner have him a soldier?"

"Very much sooner."'

"But he is one and I understand has distinguished himself.  After all,
it is perhaps a mistake to think of genius as limited to one ability,
music or painting for example.  Real genius, the power of
understanding, is more comprehensive; the man who has it ought to be
successful at whatever he undertakes."

"I'm dubious," said Challoner.  "It strikes me as a rather daring
theory."

"It isn't mine," Millicent answered, blushing.  "It's a favourite theme
of a philosopher I'm fond of, and he insists upon it when he speaks
about great men.  Perhaps I'm talking too freely, but I feel that
Captain Challoner's being able to paint well shouldn't prevent his
making a good officer."

"Great men are scarce.  I'm content that my son has so far done his
duty quietly and well; all I could wish for is that if any exceptional
call should be made on him he should rise to the occasion.  That is the
supreme test, and men one expects much from sometimes fail to meet it."

Millicent guessed that he was thinking of a man who had been dear to
him and had apparently broken down beneath sudden stress.

"It must be hard to judge them unless one knows all the circumstances,"
she remarked.

"Not when a man has entered his country's service.  He must carry out
his orders; what he is sent to do must be done.  No excuse can justify
disobedience and failure.  But we are getting too serious and I am
boring you.  There is another picture I think you would like to see."

Soon afterwards Mrs. Foster said that she must go, and when she and her
friends had left, Challoner sat alone for a time while the pictures
faded as dusk crept into the gallery.  A man of practical abilities
with a stern perception of his duty, he was inclined to distrust all
that made its strongest appeal to the senses.  Art and music he thought
were vocations for women; in his opinion it was hardly fitting that a
man should exploit his emotions by expressing them for public
exhibition.  Indeed, he regarded sentimentality of any kind as a
failing, and it had been suggested that his son possessed the dangerous
gift.  One of his guests had gone further and hinted that Bertram
should never have been a soldier.  Challoner could not agree with this
conclusion, but he thought there was, perhaps, a grain of truth in it.
Then he banished his disturbing thoughts and went out in search of
Greythorpe.

During the next week Mrs. Chudleigh met Challoner twice and skilfully
led the conversation to his son.  Then she heard from Sedgwick, who
said that if he could obtain the vacant appointment it would give him
an opportunity of making his mark.  The time was ripe for a bold stroke
which would lead to the acquisition of valuable territory, but he could
not carry out his plans unless he had full command.  They were, he
felt, bound to succeed, but he frankly owned that he meant to force the
hand of the Colonial authorities and could not act while he held a
subordinate position.  Accordingly he begged Mrs. Chudleigh to exert
all her influence to secure his promotion, adding that his name had
been mentioned in connexion with the post, but that there were other
candidates with stronger claims on those who had the power to make the
appointment.

Mrs. Chudleigh had already been at work in different quarters, but she
thought Colonel Challoner the most likely man to help her, though he
might be difficult to persuade and she could not hurry him.  She had
moreover had several confidential talks with Lieutenant Walters and had
extracted a good deal of information.  This enabled her to form a
plausible theory of what had happened during the night attack, and she
was inclined to think that even an experienced soldier could not find
much fault with the conclusions she had arrived at, but she did not
wish to make use of it unless compelled.

When it was getting dark one evening Foster, who was crossing a meadow
with two young men carrying guns dropped behind to speak to a keeper as
Mrs. Chudleigh and Millicent came forward to meet the party.  Soon
afterwards he joined his wife, who had waited for him, and they walked
to the house behind the others.

"How did you get on at the Seymours' this afternoon?" he asked.  "Did
Ada air her views for the benefit of your friends?"

Mrs. Foster laughed, for Ada Seymour was a lady with strong opinions
which she was fond of proclaiming.

"Yes," she said; "in fact, she went farther than usual and rather
forgot her manners.  After a while Mrs. Chudleigh took exception to
something she said and Miss Graham was drawn into the argument.
Somewhat to my surprise, she supported Ada and spoke really well, but
Ada was getting angry and I was so busy trying to smooth things down
that I hardly know what it was all about."

"The degeneracy of the age and the insidious influence of luxury no
doubt.  Ada can't keep off these topics and she makes some surprising
statements when she warms up, but I'm not surprised that Mrs. Chudleigh
and Miss Graham took opposite sides."

"Why?"

"They're very different types; about as different as a moonlight night
and a spring morning."

Mrs. Foster looked at him sharply and he chuckled.

"Not often so poetical, am I?  But I prefer the bright morning;
moonlight's a tricky, elusive thing, apt to dazzle and mislead one.
However, does Mrs. Chudleigh intend to remain long?  She looks like a
fixture."

"She doesn't inconvenience you."

"Not at all.  She's amusing and that and moderate good looks are all
you expect from a woman, so long as you don't mean to marry her.  I'm
interested in your friend; very much so, although I can't see her game."

"What do you mean by her game?"

"If you don't know, it isn't often you're so dull.  She's up to
something and Meg Keith sees it; she keeps a close watch on the woman
and when she's forced to take her eyes off her sets Miss Graham on
guard."

"Do you mean that Miss Graham informs her of what Mrs. Chudleigh says
or does?"

"Nothing farther from my thoughts.  Meg Keith has lots of pluck, but
she'd be shy of suggesting such a course to that girl.  What she does
is not to trust the woman alone when she can help it; when you see Mrs.
Chudleigh you'll generally find Meg or her companion in the
neighbourhood.  The plot's interesting and the Colonel's in it.  I've
an idea that Meg's somehow defending him.  He's an old friend and she's
as staunch as they're made."

"If there is more in the situation than appears on the surface, you had
better leave it alone.  You won't improve matters by interfering."

"Seen that all along," Foster agreed.  "I'll stick to my shooting, but
provided that I keep my hands off, there's no harm in looking on.  But
you mark me; there'll be developments."

He broke off with a chuckle and Mrs. Foster walked on in thoughtful
silence.  Her husband occasionally showed shrewd observation, and she
believed that he was right in the present instance.  Something was
undoubtedly going on, but she could not determine what it was.  As she
entered the hall she saw Millicent talking to one of her sporting
guests who had shown a preference for her society and Mrs. Chudleigh
watching.  The latter liked admiration but her expression indicated
critical scrutiny rather than jealousy.  Mrs. Foster imagined that she
was trying to analyse the girl's charm.  Then as she came forward with
her husband the others joined them and shortly afterwards tea was
brought in.




CHAPTER XVIII

COLONEL CHALLONER PROVES OBDURATE

A week after Mrs. Foster's visit Challoner drove over to Hazlehurst in
the afternoon and on reaching the lodge found her setting out with
several of her guests to meet Foster and his friends on their return
from shooting.  Refusing to allow her to turn back with him, he
accompanied the party, and some time later Mrs. Keith, who had remained
at home, went out on the terrace.  Following it to the end of the house
near which the stables stood, she saw a man leading in a horse which
she thought she knew.

"Isn't that bay Colonel Challoner's?" she asked.

"Yes, ma'am," said the groom.  "The gardener brought it up from the
lodge.  The Colonel went on with Mrs. Foster to the long wood."

Mrs. Keith turned away and sat down on a terrace seat feeling
disturbed.  Mrs. Chudleigh was with the others and would no doubt
detach Challoner from them, as she generally succeeded in doing when
Mrs. Keith was unable to prevent her.  Now there was nobody to come to
his rescue, he would be at the woman's mercy, and though she admitted
that this was perhaps an exaggerated view to take, Mrs. Keith felt that
he was threatened.  It was, however, a long walk to the wood and she
was old enough to shrink from it; besides there was a possibility that
she was after all suspecting Mrs. Chudleigh without much cause, but she
made up her mind to follow.  By walking fast she might overtake the
party before much harm was done.  Entering the house, she put on thick
boots and then set out with all the speed she was capable of.

In the meanwhile Mrs. Foster's party had split up, and Mrs. Chudleigh
and Challoner were left together.  The Colonel did not regret this,
because he had found her an entertaining companion.  Though it was a
winter day, the weather was mild and the road almost dry, and after a
time they reached a birch wood which skirted its eastern side.  The
rays of the low sun struck in among the trees, forcing up the silvery
trunks and fragile twigs which looked like lacework against a
background of blue shadow.  Thick hollies and rhododendrons planted
near the wayside kept off the light wind, and dead leaves and withered
fern made patches of glowing colour.  When they came to a gate leading
to a drive through the wood Mrs. Chudleigh stopped.

"The others have vanished; I can't even hear them," she said.  "I
wonder which way they have gone."

Challoner listened, but could only distinguish the murmur of the wind
among the birches and the rustle of fallen leaves.  The rest of the
party were obviously some distance ahead.

"The road's the longer, but as the field-path's often wet I can't tell
which they've taken," he said.

"The field-path for me," Mrs. Chudleigh replied.

"I'm afraid I'm not very fond of walking."

They entered the wood and presently reached a stile, on the other side
of which a boggy patch cut off the path from a strip of sticky
ploughing.  Mrs. Chudleigh regarded it with disapproval.

"I don't know if Mrs. Foster could jump over that, but I can't," she
said.

She sat down upon the stile and Challoner leaned against the fence.

"There'll be time to meet them coming back before they reach the spot
where the path rejoins the road.  After all, I see no reason to
complain of being left behind."

Mrs. Chudleigh smiled at him.  "That's very nice of you, and while the
sunshine lasts it's pleasant here.  I often think an English wood, with
the varied colours of the trunks and mosses showing, is most beautiful
on a bright winter day.  Besides, I wanted to talk to you.  There's a
favour I must ask."

"You can consider it granted if it's in my power."

"Don't be rash," she warned him.  "You may be surprised when you hear
what it is, but I want you to see the matter in its proper light and
not to be actuated merely by a wish to please me."

"It's a wish I should like to gratify," Challoner assured her.  "But
please go on."

Mrs. Chudleigh hesitated.  Beneath his formal, old-fashioned courtesy
which she had found attractive she recognized a stern
conscientiousness.  He must, if possible, be convinced that the course
she meant to urge was the best, though she had the means of putting
pressure on him if this proved needful.

"Well," she said, "there is a rather important post vacant in a West
African colony and you have influence.  Mr. Greythorpe is an intimate
friend of yours and may consult you about the matter.  He will, no
doubt, have a part in making the selection."

"I have heard about it," Challoner admitted guardedly.

Instead of answering, Mrs. Chudleigh started and clenched her hand, for
she was looking towards the road and could see a woman's figure through
an opening between the trees.  She recognized the dress, which was
behind the current fashion, and the new-comer's carriage, which somehow
suggested determination, further indicated Mrs. Keith.  Mrs. Chudleigh
was glad that Challoner stood where he could not see the road, but she
watched in keen suspense when Mrs. Keith reached the gate and stopped
as if undecided which way to go.  If she chose the field-path, Mrs.
Chudleigh's opportunity would be gone, and it might be some time before
she found another, while her business brooked no delay.  It was,
however, fortunate that she and her companion could not be plainly seen
from the road because there were some bushes in the way and a tall
thicket close by formed a background against which their figures would
not show.  After a few moments Mrs. Keith moved on and Mrs. Chudleigh,
who was conscious of deep relief, saw that Challoner was waiting for
her to speak.

"It is essential that the right man should be chosen," she resumed.
"Our political and commercial interests demand this.  There is a chance
of acquiring a strip of territory which would open a way to the trade
of the interior, but it must be done with tact as well as boldness.  We
need a man with firmness and judgment who can secure us this opening
without giving the French definite ground for offence, and he must be
experienced in West African affairs.  The post could not be entrusted
safely to a newcomer."

"Ah!" said Challoner; "as you seem so well informed, I presume you have
somebody to suggest."

She could learn nothing from his manner, which had changed and grown
formal.

"I know a man who has all the necessary qualifications.  He is resolute
and enterprising; a soldier who has distinguished himself in action and
a clever administrator.  What is more, the direction of affairs has
been largely left in his hands for some time."

"You mean Captain Sedgwick?"  Challoner's tone was discouragingly
reserved.  "May I ask what leads you to plead his cause?"

"First of all because I think he is the best man."

"A good reason," said the Colonel.  "Still I'm inclined to think you
have a better one."

Mrs. Chudleigh hesitated while the colour crept into her face; then she
said simply, "I love him."

Challoner bowed.  "I am honoured by your confidence, but if he were
chosen, it would separate you.  You could not stand the climate of
Western Africa."

"I know," she said eagerly.  "These appointments, however, are not for
long and we are willing to defer our marriage if it will give him an
opportunity of showing what he can do."

There was silence for the next minute.  Challoner was somewhat touched
by her frank appeal, and though he saw that she was sufficiently
ambitious to subordinate her affection to her desire for her lover's
advancement, it was an ambition he could sympathize with.  The woman
was willing to make a sacrifice.  For all that, he felt that he could
not conscientiously help her.

"I wish you had asked for something else," he said.  "I'm sorry this
favour is not in my power."

"You can know nothing against Captain Sedgwick," the answered sharply.

"Certainly not; the trouble is that personally I know nothing in his
favour."

"But I have assured you that there is nobody so suitable."

"That is a different matter.  Your opinion is very natural and does you
credit; I will not suggest that your affection for him may lead you to
rate Captain Sedgwick's qualifications too highly.  No doubt, he is an
excellent officer, but these appointments are not made on a lady's
recommendation."

"Are they not?" Mrs. Chudleigh asked with a touch of irony.  "Remember
that I have lived at Simla and know that influence often goes a long
way I have seen it at work."

Challoner frowned.  "So have I, but it is a thing I have always set my
face against.  The man for a post of this kind must be chosen on his
merits."

"How are they to be ascertained, unless you take the opinion of those
who know him best?"

"It is often difficult, but the safest test is his work as it is known
to his official superiors.  Unless he is judged by this, there is a
risk of partiality and unfairness.  Social influence is a dangerous
thing and deplorable mistakes have been made when it has been allowed
to have effect."

"Then you will do nothing?"

Her tone was harsh and Challoner looked at her in surprise.

"It is possible that Greythorpe may consult me, though I do not know
what weight my opinion would have with him.  If the information he lays
before me seems to indicate that Captain Sedgwick is the best man, I
should suggest his appointment."

Mrs. Chudleigh appeared to acquiesce and said nothing for some minutes.
She was sorry that Challoner had not proved more amenable, since his
stubbornness forced her into a distasteful line of action, but she
could not spare him when her lover's future was at stake.

"After all," she said, "a soldier's official record is sometimes as
little to be trusted as you think his friends' estimate of him ought to
be.  I have an instance in view; two men I know took part in an action
on the Indian frontier, and one gained a reputation for courage, and
the other obloquy.  As it happened, neither was deserved."

"On the Indian frontier?" Challoner glanced at her sharply.

"Yes; some time since.  A night attack was made upon a hill which
formed the key to the position of a small British force.  An order to
retreat was wrongly given."

"Ah!" said Challoner; "I have good reason to remember that affair.  May
I ask what you know about it?"

"I'm convinced I know the truth, which has been concealed."

Challoner started and his face grew eager.  "Then your knowledge is of
great importance and I must beg you to share it with me.  It may clear
a man I have a strong affection for."

"At the cost of involving another."

"I suppose that follows."

"Then you do not believe it wiser to let a painful matter which is
already almost forgotten rest?  You would rake it up, even if it
brought trouble upon innocent people?"

"Justice must be done," said Challoner.  "I have always hated jobbery.
If a wrong has been committed, it must be put right."

"You no doubt know that the order to retreat could only have been given
by one of two officers?"

There were signs of tension in Challoner's face and Mrs. Chudleigh
pitied him, but she was forced to be merciless.

"That seems to have been taken for granted.  What then?"

"It was a dark night and nobody saw who gave the order, but Blake was
stationed with his electric apparatus in the ravine and the bugler some
distance behind him.  Besides, the latter was attached to Captain
Challoner's company."

"But Blake did not fire the mine."  Challoner's voice was strained.

"That is true.  The conclusion was that he had deserted his post, but I
believe it must be wrong because he was seen busy with the wires."

"Who saw him?"

"One of his comrades, after the attack began, and it seems impossible
that Blake could have reached the bugler when the retreat was sounded.
There were one or two other points which might have been raised, only
that he made no defence.  I will mention them."

She had after a long and careful consideration arranged her evidence in
a skilful manner.  Facts which had appeared of minor importance to the
men who had noticed them had now, as she handled them, a telling effect
and Challoner grew troubled.

"If needful, I believe I could prove all this, though it would require
strong pressure to make my informant speak," she concluded.  "You must
see what it implies?"

"That my son is a coward and gave the shameful order?"  Challoner's
eyes glittered, though his face was colourless.  "It's unthinkable!"

"Nevertheless it's true.  Why did he, without permission and abusing
his authority over the guard, spend two hours late at night with Blake
who was under arrest?  What had they to say that took so long, when
there was a risk of Captain Challoner's being discovered?  Why did
Blake make no defence, unless it was because he knew that to clear
himself would throw the blame upon his friend?"

"You press me hard," said Challoner in a hoarse voice.  "But that my
son should so have failed in his duty to his country and his cousin is
impossible."

"Yet you were willing to believe your nephew guilty.  Had you any cause
to doubt his courage?"

"No," said Challoner.  "I used to think he loved a risk."

He felt beaten by her remorseless reasoning; there was scarcely a point
he could contest and his heart grew very heavy.  A conviction that
humbled him to the dust was being forced on him.

"There is only one conclusion," Mrs. Chudleigh resumed.  "The order to
retreat was given by the weaker man, Bertram Challoner."

He turned to her with a gesture that begged her to desist.  "My dear
lady, this is very painful.  I must try to think it out calmly, and I
am not able now."

For a time there was strained silence, and Mrs. Chudleigh waited until
he roused himself.

"I must know if what you have told me has any bearing on your request
that I should recommend Captain Sedgwick's appointment?"

She paused before she answered, for he was very stern and peremptory.

"Not a direct one.  I have kept the secret out of consideration for you
and your son, but since I have done so, I ventured to believe you would
not refuse me a favour that would only cost you a few words to your
friend."

"I'm relieved to hear it," Challoner grimly replied.  "You wish to
appeal to my gratitude and not my fears?  Has it struck you that, if
you are correct in your conclusions, by keeping silent you were
wronging an innocent man?"

"Think!" she said impressively.  "In a sense, Blake stands by himself,
a man of no importance; your son is heir to a fine estate and is
expected to carry on the traditions of the family.  He has a young wife
who adores him, and many friends.  Is a career such as lies before him
to be destroyed by one weak action which he has since well atoned for?
I believe your nephew saw that his cousin's disgrace would be a
disaster and felt that at any cost the situation must be saved."

Challoner regarded her with a stern smile.  "One would imagine that you
are trying to heighten the value of your silence."

"You misjudge me, but since you take this line, I have some claim on
your gratitude.  Can you deny it?"

"I had better answer frankly.  If my opinion is desired, I will try to
consider Captain Sedgwick's appointment on its merits.  You must not
count on more than this."

Mrs. Chudleigh rose and they turned back to the road in silence.  It
looked as if she had failed, but she would not give up the game yet.
When Challoner had time to think he would, no doubt, realize the
necessity of safeguarding his son's good name and even his austere
uprightness might fail to stand the strain.

It was half an hour later when Mrs. Keith, who had walked as fast as
she was able, met Foster and the others coming back.  She stopped, hot
and breathless, with keen disappointment, for neither Colonel Challoner
nor Mrs. Chudleigh were among them.  Then, rousing herself, with an
effort, she asked where they were.

"I can't tell," Mrs. Foster replied.  "They dropped behind us and may
have gone home.  Mrs. Chudleigh soon gets tired of walking."

Mrs. Keith's heart sank and Foster noticed her expression.  "It's a
good way from Hazlehurst, but you look as if you had been hurrying," he
remarked.  "Are you very much disappointed that you didn't meet us
earlier?"

"I am disappointed that I missed Challoner," Mrs. Keith answered with a
forced smile.

Foster, who gave her a keen glance, tactfully talked about his shooting
as they went back together, and on reaching the house they found that
Challoner had already driven home.




CHAPTER XIX

CHALLONER'S DECISION

The morning was mild and Challoner paced slowly up and down his
shrubbery.  Bright sunshine fell upon him, the massed evergreens cut
off the wind, and in a sheltered border spear-like green points were
pushing through the soil in promise of the spring.  Challoner knew them
all, the veined crocus blades, the tight-closed heads of the hyacinths,
and the twin shoots of the daffodils, but, fond as he was of his
garden, he gave them scanty attention, and by and by sat down in a
sheltered nook lost in painful thought.  He had a careworn look and had
left the house in a restless mood with a wish to be alone in the open
air.

Mrs. Chudleigh's revelation had been a shock.  With his sense of duty
and family pride, he had, when the news of the frontier disaster first
reached him, found it almost impossible to believe that his nephew had
been guilty of shameful cowardice; and now it looked as if the disgrace
might be brought still closer home.  Bertram would presently take his
place and, retiring from active service, rule the estate in accordance
with Challoner traditions and perhaps exert some influence in politics;
he remembered that Mrs. Chudleigh had laid some stress on this.  She
had, however, told him that Bertram, from whom so much was expected,
had shown himself a poltroon and, what was even worse, had allowed an
innocent man to suffer for his baseness.  Challoner had spent the last
few days pondering the evidence she had offered him and had seen one or
two weak points in it.  By making the most of these, it might, perhaps,
be rebutted, but his honesty rendered such a course out of the question
if she were right in her conclusions, and he was forced to admit that
this was possible.  Bertram had shown timidity in his younger
days--Challoner remembered that they had had some trouble in teaching
him to ride--and there was no doubt that his was a highly-strung and
nervous temperament.  He had not the calm which marked the Challoners
in time of strain.  Then Dick Blake was recklessly generous and loved
his cousin; it would be consistent with his character if he were
willing to suffer in Bertram's stead.  Moreover there were reasons
which might have had some effect in inducing Bertram to consent,
because Challoner knew the affection his son bore him and that he would
shrink from involving him in his disgrace.  What Bertram would
certainly not have done to secure his own escape he might have done for
the sake of his father and the girl he was to marry.

Admitting all this, Challoner could not take his son's guilt for
granted.  There was room for doubt, and soon after leaving Mrs.
Chudleigh he had cabled a friend in Montreal asking him to spare no
effort to trace Blake.  If the latter could be found, he must be
summoned home and forced to declare the truth.  By and by Challoner
heard a footstep and looking up saw Foster approaching.  He stopped and
regarded the Colonel with surprise, for it was seldom Challoner was to
be seen sitting moodily idle.

"I'm taking a short cut through your grounds to the fir spinney," he
said.  "As I was leaving home Mrs. Chudleigh asked me to give you this
note, and when I looked in at the house Miss Challoner said she didn't
know where you were and a telegram had just come in.  Thinking I might
find you, I brought it along."  Handing the other two envelopes he
added: "Sorry to see you're not looking as brisk as usual."

"There's not much the matter," Challoner replied, forcing a smile.
"Still, I do feel a trifle slack, and I've had something to worry me."

Foster gave him a sympathetic nod.  "Worry's bad; make a rule to avoid
it when I can.  But will you walk as far as the wood?"

He went on when Challoner said he would sooner remain, and the latter
eagerly opened the telegram.  It was in answer to his cable and read--


"Blake and two others left Sweetwater settlement.  Destination supposed
far North."


This implied the impossibility of learning anything from his nephew for
some time, and Challoner could not recall his son, who was then in
Japan and must shortly rejoin his Indian regiment.  Besides, if Bertram
were blameless, it would be a cruel blow for him to find that his
father had suspected him of a shameful deed, while if he were guilty,
something must be done.  This would probably lead to a disastrous
change in their relations and compel Bertram to leave the army.  Though
the suspense was hard to bear, Challoner, as Mrs. Chudleigh had
foreseen, was beginning to feel afraid to learn the truth and inclined
to temporize.

Then he opened her note and read--


"As I hear you expect Mr. Greythorpe, shortly, I venture to believe
that now you have had time for reflection you will see that it would be
better for everybody if you did as I suggested.  This would be a great
favour and you could count upon my gratitude and discretion."


Studying it carefully, Challoner saw a threat as well as a promise that
she would keep his secret if he complied, but he tore the note up and
trod the fragments into the soil.  So far as the African appointment
was concerned, he was not to be influenced.  He would not offer a bribe
for her silence, nor would he derive a personal advantage from a piece
of jobbery.  On that point his mind was made up.

A little later Mrs. Keith opened a neighbouring gate and came towards
him.

"The fine morning tempted me out, and as Lucy Foster was passing with
the car, I thought I'd look your sister up," she said.  "But I'm afraid
you're in trouble.  The last time we met you had a downcast air and you
don't look much brighter to-day."

"It's unpleasant to think I'm in the habit of showing my feelings so
plainly," he answered.

"You don't, but your moody calm has its meaning.  I've known you long
enough to recognize it.  You can't deny that something is disturbing
you."

"No," said Challoner.  "I'm not clever enough to hide it from your keen
eyes."

"They're very friendly, as you know.  I'll strain a friend's privilege
far enough to guess that your perplexities began the last time you and
Mrs. Chudleigh met."

He wondered how much she knew and longed to confide in her.  She was
very staunch, but his secret must be kept until he had learned the
truth.

"I'm sorry, Margaret, but I can't tell you what is troubling me."

She made a sign of acquiescence.  "You would if it were possible and I
won't press you, but you know I can be trusted if you need me.  I was
afraid of that woman; I felt she threatened you."

Their glances met and lingered, and Challoner felt that the reason for
his grief was but thinly veiled from her.  Still, for his son's sake,
he could not confirm her suspicions, and he broke into a dry smile.

"I believe you tried to protect me, and it certainly wasn't your fault
that you failed.  I appreciate it, Margaret, but after all there may be
less cause for anxiety than I imagine, and we'll talk about something
else.  Will you come up to the house?"

They walked slowly across the lawn, and though his companion chatted
about indifferent matters Challoner knew he had her sympathy.  When
they reached the door she stopped.

"I needn't bring you in, because I have something to ask Hilda.  No
doubt, it's unnecessary, but you won't mind my warning you not to be
influenced by anything that woman said."

"I had already decided to disregard it."

A look of gratified confidence came into her eyes.  "That is what I
expected; you are not easily swayed, but I see signs of strain.  There
is some crisis you must face, and I think it is connected with
Greythorpe's visit."

"You have guessed correctly."

"When one is in difficulties the easiest way out is not always the
best.  But you know that."

"I have learned it.  One has often to chose between the right and the
most prudent thing."

"Ah!" said Mrs. Keith, "I believe they are generally the same in the
end; that is, if one has the courage to choose the former."

Challoner bowed.  "You have never failed me, Margaret, and you give me
good counsel now."

She went in, and he turned away, feeling encouraged; but a reaction
followed, and he spent the rest of the day in troubled thought.  A day
or two later Greythorpe arrived and in the early evening sat with his
host in the library.  Though dusk was closing in, a window near them
stood open and a single shaded candle burned upon a neighbouring table.
Presently Greythorpe opened some papers.

"We have not settled the African appointment yet," he said.  "The
matter, of course, is not altogether in my hands, but my recommendation
will have weight, and I should be glad of your opinion before making
it.  You will find the names and qualifications of the candidates here."

Challoner studied the papers, and then gazed out of the window without
speaking.  It was not quite dark, and he could see the great oaks in
the park, and the sombre masses of the woods rolling back up the
valley.  In the foreground, a sheet of water shone with a pale gleam.
It was a rich and beautiful countryside and much of it belonged to him.
Though his wife had brought him money, Sandymere had long been the
property of the Challoners, and the old house had a picturesque
stateliness, while every field and farmstead had been well cared for.

In process of time it would all be his son's, and, in that sense,
Bertram had more than an individual importance.  He was one of a line
of men who had served their country well in court and field, and any
disgrace that fell upon him would taint a respected name and reflect
upon his children, for the family honour was indivisible, a thing that
stretched backwards to the past as well as forward.  Now, however, it
was threatened by an unprincipled woman who claimed the power to drag
it in the mire; but Challoner recognized that he could not allow this
to influence him.  His private affairs must not count where the
interests of his country were concerned.

"Well," he said at length, "the matter seems difficult to decide.  You
have two men of excellent character, whom I know something about, and a
third who has shown ability in a subordinate post."

"Sedgwick?  Your manner leads me to believe that you don't quite class
him with the others."

"There is a difference.  The first two are honest and reliable but not
brilliant men.  Sedgwick is obviously more capable than either, but I
suspect that self-interest is his strongest motive.  I knew a major in
his regiment.  He might use this appointment to force himself into
prominence."

"It's possible, but that needn't prove a great drawback."

"Is the Cabinet ready to embark upon a bold course of Colonial
expansion?"

"No," said Greythorpe with a smile, "not so far as I'm acquainted with
their views, but we would like the strip of unoccupied territory, and
Sedgwick seems alive to its importance."

"He'll probably get it for you if you give him a chance, but I imagine
he won't stop there.  In fact, he may take you much farther than you
wish to go.  Suppose he brings off some sensational coup in which you
would have to support him at the expense of France?"

"There might be some risk of that, but he's undoubtedly an able man."

"I think so," Challoner agreed.  "It's his disinterestedness I suspect."

"Then if the post were at your disposal, you would not offer it to him?"

Challoner was silent for a few moments.  It looked as if Greythorpe
were disposed to favour Sedgwick's claim and to concur might save a
good deal of trouble.  Even then, it did not follow that Sedgwick would
be chosen, because there were higher authorities to be consulted.
Challoner thought he would not be blamed if they refused the man the
post, because he did Mrs. Chudleigh the justice to believe that she
would not doubt his assurance that he had done his best and that she
would afterwards put no further pressure on him.  It was her lover's
promotion she wished to secure.  For all that, easy as it would be to
humour her, he had been asked for his opinion by a man who trusted him,
and he must give it honestly.

"No," he said with a resolute air, "I should prefer either of the
others.  On the whole, I believe I'd select the first on your list."

"You seem to have thought it well over."

"That's true.  It's a rather grave matter," Challoner answered drily.

"Well," said Greythorpe, "my idea is that Sedgwick should be left in
charge a month or two longer.  Then if we send out another man, we'll
try to find him something else."

He changed the subject and Challoner lighted a cigar and listened,
sitting back in the shadow where his companion could not see him.  He
felt weary, because he had borne a heavy strain during the last few
days, and the course he had taken had cost him a good deal.  Now he
knew that if Sedgwick were not appointed Mrs. Chudleigh would hold him
responsible.




CHAPTER XX

MRS. CHUDLEIGH MAKES A FRESH ATTEMPT

Next evening Challoner and Greythorpe dined at Foster's with several
other guests, and the Colonel was placed next to Mrs. Chudleigh, while
Mrs. Keith sat opposite.  He found his position uncomfortable, because
when he looked up he saw that his old friend was watching him, and,
though she chatted carelessly, there was now and then a hint of tension
in his companion's manner.  It was a relief when Mrs. Foster rose, but
he afterwards felt that opposing influences were being brought to bear
on him.  When the party dispersed, as was usual at Hazlehurst, some to
play billiards and some to the drawing-room, Mrs. Keith engaged him in
casual talk and stuck to him determinedly for a time.  He had no doubt
that her intentions were good, since he noticed Mrs. Chudleigh hovering
in the background, but he wished that she would leave him alone.  By
and by their hostess took Mrs. Keith away, but then Millicent, whom he
suspected had been told to do so, came up and spoke to him.  It looked
as if he were to be saved from his persecutor, even against his will,
for he was anxious to meet her and get the unpleasant business over,
but he liked Millicent and courtesy demanded that he should listen.
Presently she rather hesitatingly mentioned his nephew.

"Have you heard anything from Mr. Blake since he left Montreal?"

"Nothing," said Challoner with a trace of grimness.  "He does not
correspond with me."

"Then I suppose you don't know where he is?"

"I took some trouble to find out, but nothing came of it.  I merely
learned that he had left a small settlement on the Western prairie and
started for the North."  He gave her a sharp glance.  "Are you
interested in my nephew?"

"Yes," she said frankly.  "I don't know him very well, but on two
occasions he came to my assistance when I needed it.  He was very
tactful and considerate."

"Then he's fortunate in gaining your good opinion.  No doubt, you know
something about his history?"

"I daresay my good opinion is not worth much, but I feel that he
deserves it, in spite of what I've been told about him," she answered
with a blush.  "It is very sad that he should have to give up all he
valued, and I thought there was something gallant in his cheerfulness;
he was always ready with a jest."

"Have you met his companion?  I understand that he is not a man of my
nephew's stamp."

Millicent smiled.  "Hardly so, from your point of view."

"Does that mean that yours is not the same as mine?"

"I have had to earn my living, which changes one's outlook; perhaps I'd
better not say enlarges it.  However, you shall judge.  Mr. Harding is
a traveller for an American paint factory and had to begin work at an
age when your nephew was at Eton, but I think him a very fine type.
He's serious, courteous, and sanguine, and seems to have a strong
confidence in his partner."

"Ah!" said Challoner; "that is not so strange.  The Blakes have a way
of inspiring trust and liking.  It's a gift of theirs."

"Your nephew undoubtedly has it.  He uses it unconsciously, but I think
that those who trust him are not deceived."

Challoner regarded her with a curious expression.  "After all," he
said, "that may be true."

Then Greythorpe came up in search of Millicent, and when she went away
with him Challoner saw Mrs. Chudleigh approaching.  Obeying her sign he
followed her to a seat in the recess in the hall.

"Mr. Greythorpe came down yesterday," she said.  "I suppose you have
already had a talk with him."

"Last night.  As you anticipated, he asked my opinion about the African
matter.  Several names have been submitted; trustworthy men."

"Come to the point," she told him sharply.  "What did you do about
Captain Sedgwick?"

Challoner gravely met her insistent gaze.  "I felt compelled to suggest
that he was not the best man for the post."

Mrs. Chudleigh's eyes sparkled and the blood swept into her face.  Her
pose grew tense and she looked dangerous, but with an obvious effort
she controlled her anger.

"Then if I were a revengeful person, I would warn you that you must
take the consequences."

"I suppose that follows, but I would prefer to think you are fair
enough to make allowances for a man who tried to do the right thing in
a difficult situation."

She was silent for a moment, watching him with a curious, half-ashamed
feeling.  Then she made an abrupt movement.

"It's hard to do so.  A word or two, which you would not speak, would
have led to the appointment of the most talented man.  I'm not a saint;
you mustn't expect a higher standard from me than I'm capable of."

She dismissed him with an angry gesture and got up as Mrs. Foster came
in with Greythorpe.  When the latter left his hostess she beckoned him
and led him to a seat near the hearth.

"How far does Colonel Challoner's opinion go with you?" she asked
boldly.

"That depends," he answered, smiling.  "On some matters it goes a long
way."

"On the choosing of a West African officer, for instance?"

"Ah!" said Greythorpe, "now I begin to understand.  If I am not
indiscreet in mentioning it, I thought my old friend was rather in
disgrace with you."

"You are keen," she told him.  "I must warn you that Challoner is
prejudiced."

"If that is so, there is probably a reason for it."

"There is," she said coolly.  "I'm afraid it is my fault.  I made a
mistake in trying to force the Colonel to speak in favour of one of the
candidates."

"It was unwise," Greythorpe agreed.  "Our friend is by no means
amenable to treatment of the kind."

"Still you would not let a good officer suffer because of my
tactlessness?"

"Certainly not; the only thing that could count against any of the men
we are considering is some shortcoming of their own."

"Then I must try to remove a wrong impression and my task is difficult
because you know Challoner better than I do.  We can, however, agree
that he is honest."

"Eminently conscientious," Greythorpe remarked.

"Then you must allow for a reaction against the injudicious course I
took.  I urged him to speak for a friend of mine, which was, no doubt,
very wrong, and it seems I went too far.  Can you not imagine his
resenting it and being so determined not to be influenced that he
became hypercritical?"

Greythorpe thought this clever, since it was the best means of
lessening the value of Challoner's opinion that she could use.

"I gather that you put too severe a strain upon his friendship."

"I'm afraid there's a breach between us now, but that is not the point."

"No," said Greythorpe.  "In a general way, your reasoning is logical,
but I hardly think it applicable to Challoner.  He might resent your
action; but it would not make him unjust.  I presume the man you favour
is Captain Sedgwick?"

"He's much the best of the three you have in view."

"Then you know something about the matter?  We thought it was secret."

She laughed.  "Secrets are not always well kept.  I know the other men,
and though there is nothing that can be urged against their character,
they are plodders, men of routine, without much foresight or
enterprise."

"Allowing that you are right, isn't there something to be said for the
steady plodder?"

"I daresay he's useful," Mrs. Chudleigh agreed with a touch of scorn.
"But for the vacant post you want a bold determined man who can see
ahead."

"To some extent, I must agree.  You believe Captain Sedgwick is such a
man?"

He felt a certain tempered admiration for her.  She made no secret of
her aim, though he supposed she must find it embarrassing to plead for
her lover, since he did not doubt that she loved Sedgwick.  She had
courage and cleverness and he listened with close attention while she
spoke about the man's exploits and abilities.  Then she looked up with
an eagerness which somewhat moved him.

"Have I convinced you?" she asked.

Greythorpe smiled.  "That Sedgwick is a dashing and intrepid soldier?
Yes.  But there are other points to take into account, and the matter
does not entirely rest with me.  Still, I think if he serves us well,
we may find some use for him."

It was a guarded promise and by no means all that she desired, but she
knew she must be content with it.

"Then I have accomplished something and will remember the consideration
and patience you have shown," she said, and when some of the other
guests came in moved away to join them.

In the meanwhile, Millicent had been sitting alone for a few minutes at
the opposite end of the hall.  Somebody was singing in the adjoining
drawing-room, the door of which stood open, and she could see several
people gathered about the piano, though she was herself partly secluded
by a screen.  By and by Lieutenant Walters came in, and as he made his
way towards her after looking round she felt tempted to change her
place, but could not do so without making her retreat too marked.  Now
and then he suffered from a relapse, and she felt compassionate as she
noticed the heaviness of his movements and his pinched expression.
Still his eyes had been eager as he searched the room, and this had
caused her some alarm, because he had lately shown a noticeable
preference for her society.  When he stopped he laid his hand, as if
for support, on the back of a chair and glanced towards a window that
opened into the conservatory.

"I've been hanging about since dinner trying to get hold of you, but
you were in too great demand," he said.  "Shall we slip out to the seat
among the palms yonder for a quiet talk?"

The conservatory looked inviting with the coloured lamps hanging among
the flowers and screens of trailing plants throwing their shadows
across warm, scented nooks.  Walters, however, had framed his question
injudiciously, because it implied a mutual desire to escape observation
and confidential relations which did not exist.

"I think not," said Millicent.  "I may be wanted."

"Mrs. Keith's talking to Challoner and won't ask for you," Walters
objected.  "Be good-natured; it's quiet yonder.  That fellow in the
drawing-room can't sing and the piano makes my head ache."

"It really oughtn't to.  The girl who's accompanying him plays well,
but I'm afraid you're not feeling very fit to-night."

"I'm not; I suppose it's weak, but when I seem to be going back instead
of picking up, I get depressed.  That's partly why I came for you; you
know how to cheer one."

"I feel flattered," Millicent rejoined, smiling.  "But you shouldn't be
downcast.  You're making excellent progress."

"Oh! well," he said irritably, "don't let us talk about my ailments;
I'm tired of them.  But this light's glaring.  Take pity on me and come
in among the flowers, where it's quiet and dim."

Millicent was tempted to agree.  She liked the man and felt sorry for
him; he was frank, rather handsome, and generally a pleasant companion,
but she thought their friendship was ripening too fast and was not
prepared to see it change to something deeper  Indeed, since it was
pleasant to be sought after, she feared she had allowed herself to
drift too far, and now the time to pull up had come.

"No," she said, "I must stay here."

He looked at her rather hard, for there was decision in her tone and he
was not dull.  She was very attractive; he liked her thoughtful
expression and her gentle firmness.  Half-consciously he compared her
with the highly polished, clever woman, who had at first fascinated
him, and his appreciation of the girl grew stronger.  Mrs. Chudleigh,
who did not improve upon close acquaintance, had been inclined to leave
him alone of late, and though he could not resent this he had an
unflattering suspicion that he had somehow been made use of and had
served his turn.  Miss Graham was different; she was genuine, which was
the word that occurred to him, and he was growing fond of her.

"As you wish, of course," he said.  "Am I allowed to remain?"

She indicated a place on the corner seat and when he took it began to
talk, carefully avoiding any personal topic, but after a time he
interrupted her--

"I heard Mrs. Keith say she was going to the Vivians in Durham later.
I suppose she will take you?"

Millicent said she believed so, and he continued: "It's possible I may
turn up there."

He watched her closely, but could see nothing that suggested
satisfaction.

"Do you know the people?" she inquired.

"I used to know Herbert Vivian, though I haven't seen him for some
time.  No doubt, if he got a hint he'd ask me down."

"It's a high, bleak place," said Millicent.  "We were nearly frozen on
our last visit, and I'm afraid you wouldn't find the cold good for you.
Were you not recommended to stay in Devonshire?"

Walters gave her a half-indignant glance.  "When that brute of a hill
man knocked me out I'd no suspicion how much his shot would cost me.
Anyhow, I'm not going to Devonshire, and I ventured to think you might
have been glad to see me at the Vivians'."

"Why should I wish you to do an unwise thing?" Millicent asked.

"That's an evasion," he answered bluntly.  "I'll be candid.  This place
won't be the same after you have gone."

Millicent was silent a moment.  She knew he wanted a tacit admission
that their acquaintance need not end with her visit to Hazlehurst, but
he would be right in attaching some significance to her action if she
made it.  The man, who had only known her a few weeks, could go no
further yet, and he was eminently likeable, but she would not lead him
on.

"That," she said, "was very nice of you, but you will soon get used to
the change."

"You may," he replied with rather bitter humour.

"After all," said Millicent, "one meets pleasant people here and there,
and though one regrets it has to part from them."

Looking at her fixedly, he understood.  Her expression was quietly
resolute, and he recognized that their friendship must shortly come to
an end.  The girl knew her mind and had obviously made it up.

"Well,"  he said in a resigned tone, "you won't be forgotten.  I must
get back to India as soon as I can."

By and by he went away and Mrs. Keith joined Millicent.

"What have you been saying to Walters?" she asked.  "I met him going
out, and he looked very crestfallen."

"He hinted that he might follow us to the Vivians' and I suggested that
it was too cold a place for him," Millicent answered with a blush.

"I see," remarked Mrs. Keith, who was sometimes blunt.  "Well, I
daresay you were wise; though I'm told he'll be captain shortly, and he
has his good points, Jimmy is no catch.  You certainly might do better."

Millicent turned her head, half-indignant, half-embarrassed, and Mrs.
Keith laughed.

"My dear," she resumed gently, "I'm glad you have some sense.  It's
perhaps not impossible for the wife of a young Indian officer to live
upon her husband's pay, but unless they're exceptional people it's apt
to lead to disaster."

"It wasn't that," Millicent protested, unwilling to be suspected of a
mercenary mind, and Mrs. Keith's eyes twinkled.

"Then what was it that influenced you?"

As the girl did not answer, she turned away and left her to face the
question.  It proved troublesome, for Millicent was not daunted by
poverty and could find no fault with Walters; indeed, she was sensible
of some esteem for him.  Then, though she would not admit that this was
her reason for checking his advances, her thoughts centred on another
man.  He was in disgrace, but she remembered how chivalrously and
adroitly he had come to her rescue in London and had again been of
assistance on the St. Lawrence steamer.  He was prompt in action,
pitiful and humorous.  She remembered his gay buoyancy, she could
imagine his facing his troubles with a laugh.  It was characteristic of
him that he had gone up into the wilds of the frozen North with an
inexperienced companion on a rash search for fortune, which she
gathered would probably elude him.  Still, she knew that he would
struggle gallantly against the perils and hardships he might have to
face.  Then she remembered that by sitting alone with an abstracted air
she might excite curiosity, and rousing herself, went to look for her
hostess.




CHAPTER XXI

A NEW PERSECUTOR

Soon after Greythorpe's visit Mrs. Chudleigh went away, leaving
Challoner unpleasantly uncertain about the course she might take.  He
was still without news of Blake; he could not question his son, whose
integrity he tried hard to believe in, and he spent a few anxious
weeks.  Then one evening when he came home from a neighbour's house he
was told that a man who had called to see him some time earlier was in
the library.  Challoner glanced at the card his servant gave him.

"Clarke?  I don't know anybody of that name," he said and then started
as he saw the word Sweetwater in small type at the bottom of the card.

Taking off his coat he went up the staircase with some eagerness.  The
lamps had been lighted in the library and a good fire burned on the
hearth, near which his visitor was comfortably seated in a big leather
chair.  He rose as Challoner entered, and the latter was not favourably
impressed by him.  There was a hint of grossness about the fellow which
repelled the Colonel, who was of an ascetic type; besides, he was badly
and carelessly dressed, and Challoner was fastidious in such matters.
Also the man had an irritating air of assurance.

"Colonel Challoner, I presume?" he said.

Challoner bowed.  "You have brought me some news of my nephew, Richard
Blake?"

This disconcerted Clarke, who had not imagined that his object would be
known and had counted upon Challoner's being surprised when he heard it
and thrown off his guard.  It, however, looked as if the Colonel had
been making inquiries about Blake, and Clarke wished he could guess his
reason, because it might affect the situation.

"That is correct," he said.  "I have a good deal to tell you and it may
take some time."

Signing him to be seated, Challoner rang a bell, and wine and cigars
and hothouse fruit were brought in.  These he offered his guest, who
helped himself freely and then said, "Your nephew spent a week in the
settlement where I live, preparing for a journey to the North.  Though
his object was secret, I believe he went in search of something to make
varnish of, because he took a young American traveller for a colour
factory with him, besides another man."

"I know this," Challoner replied.  "I heard about his American
companion; who was the other?"

"We will come to him presently.  There is still something which I think
you do not know."

"Then I should be glad to be informed.  But, first of all, could you
find Blake if it were necessary?"

"I'm doubtful; the thing would be difficult," Clarke answered in a
significant tone.  "He hadn't returned when I left, and the country he
meant to cross is rugged and covered deep with snow all winter.  Food
is hard to get and the temperature varies from forty to fifty degrees
below."

"I suppose it could be traversed by a properly equipped expedition?"

Though Challoner's face was calm, Clarke inferred some anxiety to find
his nephew, and answered cautiously: "It would be possible, but whether
a party sent up could strike the others' trail is a different matter."

"Very well," said Challoner; "we'll talk of it again.  Go on with what
you wished to say."

He was suspicious, for his visitor's looks were not in his favour, and
the man gave him a keen glance.

"It concerns your nephew's earlier history."

"That is of most importance to himself and me.  It can't interest you."

"It interests me very much," Clarke rejoined with an ironical smile.
"I must ask you to let me tell you what I know."

Challoner, who thought he had better learn it, consented, and Clarke
gave him what he admitted was a very accurate account of the action on
the Indian frontier.

"Now," he concluded, "the question, Who gave the order to retreat? is
of vital importance to you."

"In a sense, it has been answered."

"I think incorrectly."

"Then if you differ from the general opinion on the matter, you can let
me have your theory of what occurred."

It took Clarke some minutes to give it and Challoner's heart sank, for
the man carefully arranged his points and the damaging inference could
hardly be shirked.  On the whole, his account agreed with Mrs.
Chudleigh's, although it was more cleverly worked out, but there was
nothing to be learned from Challoner's expression.  He was now not
dealing with a woman who had the excuse that she was acting in her
lover's interest.

"Your suggestions are plausible, but you can't seriously expect me to
attach much weight to them," he remarked.  "Besides, you seem to have
overlooked the important fact that at the regimental inquiry the
verdict was that nobody in particular was to blame.

"Oh! no," Clarke rejoined with a harsh laugh.  "I merely question its
validity.  I imagine that reasons which would not be officially
recognized led the court to take a lenient view; but what of that?
Blake had to leave the army, a ruined man, and I've good reason for
knowing what an acquittal like his is worth."  He paused a moment.  "I
may as well tell you candidly, because it's probable that you'll make
inquiries about me.  Well, I'd won some reputation as a medical
specialist when I became involved in a sensational police case--you may
recollect it."

Challoner started.  "Yes," he said.  "So you are the man!  I think
nothing was actually proved against you."

"No," said Clarke drily; "there was only a fatal suspicion.  As it
happens, I was innocent, but I had to give up my profession and my life
was spoiled.  There's no reason why you should be interested in this,
and I mentioned it merely because a similar misfortune has befallen
Richard Blake.  The point, of course, is that it has done so
undeservedly.  I think you must see who the real culprit is."

"I'll admit that you have told me a rather likely tale.  As you don't
speak of having been in India, who gave you the information?"

"Blake's companion, the man I've mentioned, a former Indian officer
called Benson."

"His full name, please."

Clarke gave it him and Challoner, crossing the floor, took a book from
a shelf and turned it over by a lamp.

"Yes; he's here.  What led him to talk of the thing to an outsider?"

"Drink," said Clarke.  "I'll own to having taken advantage of the
condition he was often in."

Challoner, sitting down, coolly lighted a cigar.  His position seemed a
weak one, but he had no thought of surrender.

"Well, you have given me some interesting information; but there's one
thing you haven't mentioned, and that is your reason for doing so."

"Can't you guess?"

"I shouldn't have suspected you of being so diffident, but I daresay
you thought this was a chance of earning some money easily."

"Yes," said Clarke.  "For five thousand pounds I'll undertake that no
word of what I've told you will ever pass my lips again."

"You're not flattering.  Do you suppose I'd pay five thousand pounds to
see my nephew wronged?"

"I believe you might do so to save your son."

Challoner, who wished to lead the man on and learn something about his
plans, made a negative sign.

"Out of the question."

"Then I'll make you an alternative offer, and it's worth considering.
Take, or get your friends to subscribe for, ten thousand pounds worth
of shares in a commercial syndicate I'm getting up, and you'll never
regret it.  If you wish, I'll make you a director so you can satisfy
yourself that the money will be wisely spent.  You'll get it back
several times over."

Challoner laughed.  "This is to salve my feelings; to make the thing
look like a business transaction?"

"No," said Clarke, leaning forward and speaking eagerly.  "It's a
genuine offer, and I'll ask your attention for a minute or two.
Canada's an undeveloped country; we have scarcely begun to tap its
natural resources, and there's wealth ready for exploitation all over
it.  We roughly know the extent of the farming land and the value of
the timber, but the minerals still to a large extent await discovery,
while perhaps the most readily and profitably handled product is oil.
Now I know a belt of country where it's oozing from the soil and with
ten thousand pounds I'll engage to bore wells that will give a
remarkable yield."

His manner was impressive, and though Challoner had no cause to trust
him he thought the man sincere.

"One understands that in Canada all natural commodities belong to the
State and any person discovering them can work them on certain terms.
It seems to follow that if your knowledge of the locality is worth
anything, it must belong to you alone.  How is it that nobody else
suspects the belt contains oil?"

"A shrewd objection, but easily answered.  The country in question is
one of the most rugged tracts in Canada, difficult to get through in
summer, while the man who enters it in winter runs a serious risk.  Now
I'll allow that what you know about me is not likely to prejudice you
in my favour, but on your promise to keep it secret I'll give you
information that must convince you."

"Why don't you make your offer to some company floater or stockjobber?"

Clarke smiled in a pointed manner.  "Because I've a damaging record and
no friends to vouch for me.  I came here because I felt I had some
claim on you."

"You were mistaken," said Challoner drily.

"Hear me out; try to consider my proposition on its merits.  For a
number of years I've known the existence of the oil and have tried to
prospect the country.  It was difficult; to transport enough food and
tools meant a costly expedition and the attracting of undesirable
attention.  I went alone, living with primitive Russian settlers and
afterwards with the Indians.  To gain a hold on them I studied the
occult sciences and learned tricks that impose upon the credulous.  To
the white men I'm a crank, to the Indians something of a magician, but
my search for the oil has gone on, and now while I already know where
boring would be commercially profitable, I'm on the brink of tapping a
remarkable flow."

"What will you do if it comes up to your expectations?" Challoner
asked, for he had grown interested.

"Turn it over to a company strong enough to exact good terms from the
American producers or, failing that, to work the wells.  Then I'd go
back to London where with money and the standing it would buy me I'd
take up my old profession.  I believe I've kept abreast of medical
progress and could still make my mark and reinstate myself.  It has
been my steadfast object ever since I became an outcast; I've schemed
and cheated to gain it, besides risking my life often in desolate
muskegs and the Arctic frost.  Now I ask you to make it possible, and
you cannot refuse."

Challoner was silent for a minute or two while Clarke smoked
impassively.  The former knew he had a determined man to deal with and
believed moreover that he had spoken the truth.  Still, the fellow,
although in some respects to be pitied, was obviously a dangerous
rascal, embittered and robbed of all scruples by injustice.  There was
something malignant in his face that testified against him, and, worse
than all, he had come there resolved to extort money as the price of
his connivance in a wrong.

"Well?" Clarke said, breaking the pause.

"So far as I can judge, your ultimate object's creditable, but I can't
say as much for the means you are ready to employ in raising the money.
If you go on with the scheme, it must be without any help of mine."

Clarke's face grew hard, and there was something forbidding in the way
he knitted his brows.

"Think!  Have you gauged the consequences of your refusal?"

"It's more to the purpose that I've tried to estimate the importance of
your version of what happened during the night attack.  It has one
fatal weakness which you seem to have overlooked."

"Ah!" said Clarke with ironical calm.  "You will no doubt mention it."

"You suggest Blake's innocence, but you must be content with doing so.
You cannot prove it in the face of his denial."

To Challoner's surprise, Clarke smiled.

"So you have seen that!  The trouble is that your nephew may never have
an opportunity of denying it.  He left for the North very badly
equipped, and he has not come back yet."  Then he rose with an
undisturbed air.  "Well, as it seems we can't come to terms, I needn't
waste my time, and it's a long walk to the station.  I must try some
other market, and while I think you have made a grave mistake that is
your affair."

Challoner let him go and afterwards sat down to think.  There had been
nothing forcible or obviously threatening in the man's last few
remarks, but their effect was somehow sinister.  Challoner wondered
whether he had done well in suggesting that Blake's denial would prove
Clarke's greatest difficulty.  After all, he had a strong affection for
his nephew, who might be in danger, and knew that the wilds of Northern
Canada might prove deadly to a weak party unprovided with proper
sledges and stores.  Still, something might, perhaps, be done, and by
and by he wrote a letter to a friend who had once made an adventurous
journey across the frozen land.




CHAPTER XXII

CLARKE MODIFIES HIS PLANS

A bitter wind swept the snowy prairie and the cold was Arctic when
Clarke, shivering in his furs, came into sight of his homestead as he
walked back from Sweetwater.  He had gone there for his mail, which
included an English newspaper, and had taken supper at the hotel.  It
was now about two hours after dark, but a full moon hung in the western
sky and the cluster of wooden buildings formed a shadowy blur on the
glittering plain.  There was no fence, not a tree to break the white
expanse that ran back to the skyline, and it struck Clarke, who had
lately returned from England, that the place looked very dreary.

He walked on with the fine, dry snow the wind whipped up glistening on
his furs, and on reaching the homestead went first to the stable.  It
was built of sod, which was cheaper and warmer than sawn lumber, and,
lighting a lantern, he fed his teams.  The heavy Clydesdales and
lighter driving horses were all valuable, for Clarke was a successful
farmer and had found that the purchase of the best animals and
implements led to economy, though it was said he seldom paid the full
market price for them.  He had walked home because it was impossible to
keep warm driving, and felt tired and morose.  The man had passed his
prime and was beginning to find the labour he had never shirked more
irksome than it had been, while he dispensed with a hired hand in
winter, when there was less to be done.  Clarke neglected no
opportunity of saving a dollar.

When he had finished in the stable, he crossed the snow to the house,
which was dark and silent.  After the bustle and stir of London where
he had spent some time, it was depressing to come back to the empty
dwelling, and he was glad that he had saved himself the task of getting
supper.  Shaking the snow from his furs, he lighted the lamp and filled
up the stove before he sat down wearily.  The small room was not a
cheerful place in which to spend the winter nights alone, though he
remembered that for a number of years he had not noticed this.  Walls
and floor were uncovered and roughly boarded with heat-cracked lumber;
the stove was rusty and gave out a smell of warm iron, while a black
distillate had dripped from its pipe.  There were, however, several
well-filled bookcases and one or two comfortable chairs.

Clarke lighted his pipe and drawing his seat as near the stove as
possible opened an English newspaper, which contained some news that
interested him.  A short paragraph stated that Captain Bertram
Challoner, then stationed at Delhi, had received an appointment which
would shortly necessitate his return from India.  This, Clarke
imagined, might be turned to good account, but the matter demanded
thought, and for a time he sat motionless, deeply pondering.  His
farming had prospered, though the bare and laborious life had tried him
hard, and he had made some money by more questionable means, lending to
unfortunate neighbours at extortionate interest and foreclosing on
their possessions.  No defaulter got any mercy at his hands and shrewd
sellers of seed and implements took precautions when they dealt with
him.

His money, however, would not last him long if he returned to England
and attempted to regain a footing in his profession, and he had
daringly schemed to increase it.  Glancing across the room, his eyes
rested on a bookcase, with a curious smile.  It contained works on
hypnotism, telepathy, and psychological speculations in general, and he
had studied some with ironical amusement and others with a quickening
of his interest.  Amidst much that he thought of as sterile chaff he
saw germs of truth, and had once or twice been led to the brink of a
startling discovery.  There the elusive clue had failed him, though he
felt that strange secrets might be revealed some day.

After all, the books had served his purpose, as well as kept him from
brooding when he sat alone at nights while the icy wind howled round
his dwelling.  He passed for a sage and something of a prophet with the
primitive Dubokars, his Indian friends regarded him as a medicine man,
and both had unknowingly made his search for the petroleum easier.
Then, contrary to his expectations, he had found speculators in London
willing to venture a few hundred pounds on his scheme, but the amount
was insufficient and the terms were exacting.  It would pay him better
to get rid of his associates.  He was growing old; it would be too late
to return to his former life unless he could do so soon, but he must
make a fair start with ample means.  The man had no scruples and no
illusions; money well employed would buy him standing and friends.
People were charitable to a man who had something to offer them, and
the blot upon his name must be nearly forgotten.

First of all, however, the richest spot of the oil field must be found
and money enough raised to place him in a strong position when the
venture was put on the market.  He had failed to extort any from
Challoner, but he might be more successful with his son.  The man who
was weak enough to allow his cousin to suffer for his fault would no
doubt yield to judicious pressure.  It was fortunate that Bertram
Challoner was coming to England, because he could be more easily
reached.  This led Clarke to think of Blake, since he realized that
Challoner was right in pointing out that the man was his greatest
difficulty.  If Blake maintained that the fault was his, nothing could
be done; it was therefore desirable that he should be kept out of the
way.  There was another person to whom the same applied; Clarke had
preyed on Benson's weakness, but if the fellow had overcome it and
returned to farm industriously, his exploitation would be no longer
possible.  On the other hand, if he failed to pay off his debts, Clarke
saw how he could with much advantage seize his possessions.  Thus both
Blake and Benson were obstacles, and now they had ventured into the icy
North it would be better if they did not reappear.

Clarke refilled his pipe and his face wore a sinister look as he took
down a rather sketchy map of the wilds beyond the prairie belt.  After
studying it for a time he sank into an attitude of concentrated
thought.  The stove crackled, its pipe glowing red, driving snow lashed
the shiplap walls, and the wind moaned drearily about the house.  Its
occupant was, however, oblivious to his surroundings and sat very still
in his chair, with pouches under his fixed eyes and his lips set tight.
He looked malignant and dangerous, and perhaps his mental attitude was
not quite normal.  Close study and severe physical toil, coupled with
free indulgence, had weakened him; there were drugs he was addicted to
which affected the brain, and he had long been possessed by one fixed
idea.  By degrees it had become a mania, and he would stick at nothing
that might help him to carry his purpose out.  When at length he got up
with a shiver to throw wood into the stove as the room grew cold, he
thought he saw how his object could be secured.

A month before Clarke spent the evening thinking about them, Blake and
his comrades camped at sunset in a belt of small spruces near the edge
of the open waste that runs back to the Polar Sea.  They were worn and
hungry, for the shortage of provisions had been a constant trouble and
such supplies as they obtained from Indians, who had seldom much to
spare, soon ran out.  Once or twice they had feasted royally after
shooting a big bull moose, but the frozen meat they were able to carry
did not last long, and again they were threatened with starvation.

It was a calm evening with a coppery sunset flaring across the snow,
but intensely cold, and though they had wood enough and sat close
beside a fire with their ragged blankets wrapped round them they could
not keep warm.  Harding and Benson were openly dejected, but Blake had
somehow preserved his cheerful serenity.  As usual after finishing
their scanty supper, they began to talk, for during the day
conversation was limited by the toil of the march.  By and by Harding
took a few bits of resin out of a bag.

"No good," he said.  "It's common fir gum, such as I could gather a
carload of in the forests of Michigan.  Guess there's something wrong
with my theory about the effects of extreme cold."  Then he took a
larger lump from a neat leather case.  "This is the genuine article,
and it's certainly the product of a coniferous tree, while the fellow I
got it from said it was found in the coldest parts of North America.
Seems to me we have tried all the varieties of the firs, but we're as
far from finding what we want as when we started."

"Hard luck!" Benson remarked gloomily.

Harding broke off a fragment and lighted it.  "Notice the smell.  It's
characteristic."

"The fellow may have been right on one point," said Blake.  "When I was
in India I once got some incense which was brought down in small
quantities from the Himalayas, and, I understood, came from near the
snow-line.  The smell was the same, one doesn't forget a curious scent."

"That's so.  Talking about it reminds me that I was puzzled by a smell
I thought I ought to know when I brought Clarke out of the tepee.  I
remembered what it was not long since and the thing's significant.  It
was gasoline."

"They extract it from crude petroleum, don't they."

"Yes; it's called petrol on your side.  Clarke's out for coal-oil, and
I guess he's struck it."

"Then he's lucky, but his good fortune doesn't concern us and we have
other things to think about.  What are you going to do, now we don't
seem able to find the gum?"

"It's a difficult question," Harding answered in a troubled voice.
"I'd hate to go back, with nothing accomplished and all my dollars
spent, and take to the road again.  Marianna's paying for this journey
in many ways, and I haven't the grit to tell her we're poorer than when
I left.  She wouldn't complain, but when you have to live on a small
commission that's hard to make, it's the woman who meets the bill."

Blake made a sign of sympathy.  He had never shared Harding's
confidence in the success of his search and had joined in it from love
of adventure and a warm liking for his comrade.

"Well," he said, "I've no means except a small allowance which is so
tied up that it's difficult to borrow anything upon it, but it's at
your disposal as far as it goes.  Suppose we keep this prospecting up."

"If Clarke's mortgage doesn't stop me, I might raise a few dollars on
my farm," Benson remarked.  "I'll throw them in with pleasure, because
I'm pretty deep in your debt."

"Thanks," said Harding.  "I'm sorry I can't agree, but I wouldn't take
your offer when you first made it, and I can't do so now my plan's a
failure.  Anyway, we're doing some useless talking, because I don't see
how we're to go on prospecting or get south again when we have only
three or four days' food in hand."

He stated an unpleasant truth which the others had characteristically
shirked, for Blake was often careless and Benson had taken the risks of
the journey with frank indifference, though they had the excuse that
after nearly starving once or twice they had succeeded in getting fresh
supplies.  Now, however, their hearts sank as they thought of the
expanse of frozen wilderness that lay between them and the settlements.

"Well," said Blake, "there's a Hudson's Bay factory somewhere to the
east of us.  I can't tell how far off it is, though it must be a long
way, but if we could reach it, the agent might take us in."

"How are you going to find the place?"

"I don't know, but a Hudson's Bay post is generally fixed where there
are furs to be got, and there will, no doubt, be Indians trapping in
the neighbourhood.  We must take our chances of hitting their tracks."

"But we can't make a long march without food," Benson objected.

"The trouble is that we can't stay here without it," Blake rejoined
with a short laugh.

This was undeniable, and neither of his companions answered.  They were
unkempt, worn out, and ragged, and had travelled a long way through
fresh snow on short rations in the past week.  Ahead of them lay a vast
and almost untrodden desolation; behind them a rugged wilderness which
there seemed no probability of their being able to cross.  Lured by the
hope of finding what they sought they had pushed on from point to
point, and now it was too late to return.

By and by Blake got up.  "Our best chance is to kill a caribou, and
this is the kind of country they generally haunt.  Since the sooner we
look for one the better, I may as well start at once.  There'll be a
moon to-night."

He threw off his blanket and picking up a Marlin rifle, which was their
only weapon, strode out of camp, and as he was a good shot and tracker
they let him go.  It was getting dark when he left the shelter of the
trees and the cold in the open struck through him like a knife.  The
moon had not risen yet and the waste stretched away before him, its
whiteness changed to a soft blue-grey.  In the distance scattered
bluffs rose in long dark smears, but there was nothing to indicate
which way he should turn, and he had no reason to believe there was a
caribou near the camp.  As a matter of fact, they had found the larger
deer remarkably scarce.  He was tired after breaking the trail since
sunrise, and the snow was loose beneath his big net shoes, but he
plodded towards the farthest bluff, feeling that he was largely to
blame for the party's difficulties.

Knowing something of the country, he should have insisted on turning
back when he found they could obtain no dog-teams to transport their
supplies.  Occasionally the Hudson's Bay agents and patrols of the
North-West Police made long journeys in Arctic weather, but they were
provided with proper sledges and sufficient preserved food.  Indeed,
Blake was astonished that he and his comrades had got so far.  He had,
however, given way to Harding, who hardly knew the risks he ran, and
now he supposed must take the consequences.  This did not daunt him
badly.  After all, life had not much to offer an outcast, and though he
had managed to extract some amusement from it he had nothing to look
forward to.  There was no prospect of his making money--his talents
were not commercial--and the hardships he could bear with now would
press on him more heavily as he grew older.  These considerations,
however, were too philosophical for him to continue.  He was
essentially a man of action and feeling unpleasantly hungry, and he
quickened his pace, knowing that the chance of his getting a shot at a
caribou in the open was small.

The moon had not risen when he reached the bluff, but the snow
reflected a faint light and he noticed a row of small depressions on
its surface.  Kneeling down, he examined them, but there had been wind
during the day and the marks were blurred.  He felt for a match, but
his fingers were too numbed to open the watertight case, and he
proceeded to measure the distance between the footprints.  This was an
unreliable test because a big deer's stride varies with its pace, but
he thought the tracks indicated a caribou.  Then he stopped, without
rising, and looked about.

Close in front the trees rose in a shadowy wall against the clear blue
sky; there was no wind, and it was oppressively still.  He could see
about a quarter of a mile across the open, but the darkness of the wood
was impenetrable and its silence daunting.  The row of tracks was the
only sign of life he had seen for days.

While he listened a faint howl came out of the distance and was
followed by another.  After the deep silence, the sound was startling
and there was danger in it, for Blake recognized the cry of the timber
wolves.  The big grey brutes would make short work of a lonely man and
his flesh crept as he wondered whether they were on his trail.  On the
whole, it did not seem likely, though they might get scent of him, and,
rising to his feet, he felt that the rifle magazine was full before he
set off at his highest speed.

The snow was loose, however, and his shoes packed and sank; his breath
got shorter, and he began to feel distressed.  There was no sound
behind him, but that somehow increased his uneasiness and now and then
he anxiously turned his head.  Nothing moved on the sweep of blue-grey
shadow and he pressed on, knowing how poor his speed was compared with
that the wolves were capable of making.  At length it was with keen
satisfaction he saw a flicker of light break out from the dark mass of
a bluff ahead and a few minutes later he came, breathing hard, into
camp.

"You haven't stayed out long," Benson remarked.  "I suppose you saw
nothing."

"I heard wolves," Blake answered drily.  "You had better gather wood
enough to keep a big fire going, because I've no doubt they'll pick up
my trail.  However, it's a promising sign."

"I guess we could do without it," Harding broke in.  "I've no use for
wolves."

"They must live on something," Blake rejoined.  "Since they're here,
there are probably moose or caribou in the neighbourhood.  I'll have
another try to-morrow."

"But the wolves."

"They're not so bold in daylight.  Anyhow, it seems to me we must take
some risks."

This was obvious, and when they had heaped up a good supply of wood
Harding and Blake went to sleep, leaving Benson to keep watch.




CHAPTER XXIII

THE CARIBOU

When Blake was awakened by Harding, the cold was almost unendurable,
and it cost him a determined effort to rise from the hollow he had
scraped out of the snow and lined with spruce twigs close beside the
fire.  He had not been warm there, and it was significant that the snow
was dry, but sleep had brought him relief from discomfort and he had
found getting up the greatest hardship of the trying journey.  In
answer to his drowsy questions, Harding said he had once or twice heard
a wolf howl in the distance, but that was all, and then lay down,
leaving Blake on guard.  He sat with his back to a snowbank which
afforded some shelter and imagined from his sensations that the
temperature must be about fifty degrees below zero.  The frost bit
through him, stiffening his muscles until he felt that if vigorous
movement were demanded of him he would be incapable of it, and dulling
his brain.  He could not reason clearly, though he had things to
consider, and he looked about with heavy eyes, trying to forget his
physical discomfort, while his mind wandered through a maze of confused
thought.

There was a half-moon in the sky, which was pitilessly clear, for
cloudiness might have made it warmer; when the firelight sank he could
see the slender spruce trunks cutting against the silvery radiance and
the hard glitter of the snow.  Everything was tinted with blue and
white, and the deathly cold colouring depressed him.  Then he began to
consider their position, which was serious.  They were worn out and
half-fed; their furs were ragged, and shortage of money and the
difficulty of transport had forced them to cut down their camp
equipment.  Indeed, looking back on the long march, he was surprised
that they had escaped crippling frostbite, although both Benson and
Harding were somewhat lame from the strain which the use of snowshoes
puts upon the muscles of the leg.  There was, moreover, a risk of this
becoming dangerous.

He imagined that it must be two hundred miles to the Hudson's Bay post
and recognized that the chances were against their reaching it; but
just then a howl rang, harsh and ominous, through the frosty air, and
with a nervous start he reached for his rifle.  The wolves had scented
them, and, turning his back to the light, he spent some minutes gazing
fixedly at the glistening white patches among the straggling trees, but
could make out none of the stealthy, flitting shapes he had half
expected to see.  It was encouraging that the wolves had not overcome
their timidity of the fire.  Keen hunger might have driven them to an
attack, and Blake had no illusions about the result of that.  However,
since the fierce brutes were not starving, they must have found
something to eat, and what a wolf could eat would feed men who were by
no means fastidious.  Seeing nothing that alarmed him, Blake resumed
his musing.

Their search for the gum had proved useless and he pitied Harding, who
had staked his future upon its success.  The man had not complained
much, but Blake knew what he must feel and thought with compassion of
the lonely woman who had bravely sent his comrade out and was now
waiting for him in the mean discomfort of a cheap tenement.  It was not
difficult to imagine her anxiety and suspense.

Next he began to ponder his own affairs, which were not encouraging,
though he did not think he really regretted the self-sacrificing course
he had taken.  His father had died involved in debt, and Blake
suspected that it had cost Challoner something to redeem the share of
his mother's property which brought him in a small income.  That it had
been carefully tied up was not, he thought, enough to guard it from the
Blake extravagance and ingenuity in raising money.  Afterwards the
Colonel had brought him up and sent him into the army, doing so with a
generous affection which was very different from cold charity, and
demanded some return.  Then Bertram had never been jealous of the
favour shown his cousin, but had given him warm friendship, and Blake,
who was much the stronger, had now and then stood between the lad and
harm.  He had done so again in Bertram's greatest need, and now he must
not grumble at the consequences.

Of late they had seemed heavier than formerly, for in tempting him
Clarke had made a telling suggestion--suppose he married?  This
appeared improbable; for one thing, no girl he was likely to be
attracted by would look with favour on a man with his reputation, but
he had thought a good deal about Millicent Graham during the weary
march.  He imagined that she had inherited enough of her father's
reckless character to make her willing to take a risk.  She would not
have a man betray his friend for an advantage that he might gain; she
had a courage that would help her, for love's sake, to tread a
difficult path.  Still, there was no reason to believe that she had any
love for him, or indeed that she thought of him except as a stranger to
whom she had, perhaps, some reason to be grateful.  Resolutely breaking
off this train of thought, he threw fresh wood upon the fire and sat
shivering and making plans for the march to the factory, until Benson
relieved him.  When the grey dawn broke above the trees he got up stiff
with cold and after eating his share of a very frugal breakfast
carefully examined his rifle.  Though he kept it clean of superfluous
grease, there was some risk of the striker and magazine-slide freezing,
and a missfire might prove disastrous.  Then he glanced up between the
branches and noticed the low, dingy sky, while he thought it was not
quite so cold.

"I'm going to look for a caribou," he said.  "I'll be back by dark."

"We'll have snow," said Harding.  "If there's much, you'll find it hard
to get home."

"I'd find it harder to do without breakfast and supper, which is what
may happen very soon," Blake rejoined.  "One can eat the _tripe de
roche_ which grows upon the stones, but I don't know where to look for
it, and a North-West Police trooper who once tried it told me that it
made him very ill."

"Anyway, you had better take one of us along."

"With the axe?" Blake said, laughing.  "It's bad enough to reach a
caribou with a rifle, and Benson's as poor a hand at stalking as I
know, while a day's rest may save you from getting a snowshoe leg.  As
we haven't a sledge, it would be awkward to carry you to the factory."

They let him go, but when he reached the open his face hardened.  The
sky had a threatening look, the snow was soft, and there were wolves
about, but he was comparatively safe while daylight lasted and food
must be found.  During the morning he saw wolf tracks, but no sign of a
deer, and at noon sat down for a few minutes in a sheltered hollow and
managed to light the half-frozen pipe he kept in an inner pocket.  He
had brought nothing to eat, since they had decided that it would be
prudent to dispense with a midday meal, and getting stiffly on his feet
by and by, he plodded from bluff to bluff throughout the afternoon.
For the most part, they were thin and the trees very small, while so
far as he could make out the country between them was covered with
slabs of rocks and stones.  It was utterly empty, with no sign of life
in it, but he continued his search until the light began to fail, when
he stopped to look about.

No snow had fallen, but the sky was very thick and a stinging wind had
risen, while he would have trouble in reaching camp if his trail got
drifted up.  He knew he should have turned back earlier, but there was
what seemed to be an extensive wood in front, and he could not face the
thought of returning empty-handed to his scanty, unearned supper.  The
grey trees were not far away; he might reach them and make a mile or
two on the back trail before dark, though he was weary and hunger had
given him a pain in his left side.

Quickening his pace, he neared the bluff, which looked very black and
shadowy against the snow, though the latter was fading to a curious,
lifeless grey.  The trees were stunted and scattered, which made it
possible for him to get through, though there were half-covered, fallen
branches which entangled his big shoes.  He could see no tracks of any
animal and hardly expected to do so, but in a savage mood he held on
without much caution until he entered a belt of broken ground strewn
with rocky hillocks.  Here he could not see where he was going and it
was almost dark in the hollows, but he had found that chance sometimes
favours the hunter as much as careful stalking.  Stopping for breath a
moment, half way up a steep ascent, he started, for a shadowy object
unexpectedly appeared upon the summit.  It was barely distinguishable
against the background of trees, but he saw the broad-tined horns in an
opening and knew it for a caribou.

There was no time to lose, since the swift creature would take flight
in an instant, and almost as he caught sight of it the rifle went up to
his shoulder.  For a moment the foresight wavered across the indistinct
form, and then his numbed hands grew steady, and, trusting that nothing
would check the frost-clogged action, he pressed the trigger.  He felt
the jar of the butt, a little smoke blew in his eyes, and he could make
out nothing on the crest of the ridge.  It, however, seemed impossible
that he had missed and next moment he heard a heavy floundering in the
snow among the rocks above.  He went up the slope at a savage run and
plunged down a precipitous hollow, on the farther side of which a
half-seen object was moving through the gloom of the trees.  Stopping a
moment, he threw up the rifle and after the thin red flash the deer
staggered and collapsed.

Running on in desperate haste, he fell upon it with his hunting knife;
and then stopped, feeling strangely limp and breathless, with the long
blade dripping in his hand.  Now the caribou lay dead before him, the
strain of the last few minutes made itself felt.  Surprised when
exhausted and weak from want of food by an opportunity he had not
looked for, he had forced upon himself sufficient steadiness to shoot.
It had cost him an effort; the short fierce chase had tried him hard,
and now the reaction had set in.  For all that, he was conscious of a
savage, exultant excitement.  Here was food, and food meant life.

His first impulse was to light a fire and feast, but as he grew calmer
he began to think.  He was a long way from camp and feared that if he
rested he could not force himself to resume the march.  Besides, there
were the wolves to reckon with, and he could not escape if they
followed him in the dark.  Prudence suggested that he should cut off as
much meat as possible, and after placing it out of reach in a tree set
off for camp at his best speed without taking any of the raw flesh to
scent the air; but this was more than he could bring himself to do.
His comrades were very hungry, and some animal might climb to the
frozen meat.  It was unthinkable that he should run any risk of losing
the precious food.  He decided to take as much as he could carry and
make a depot of the rest, and set to work with the hunting knife in
anxious haste.

It was now quite dark; he could not see what he was cutting, and if he
gashed his hand, which was numbed and almost useless, the wound would
not heal.  Then the haft of the knife grew slippery and tough skin and
bone turned the wandering blade.  It was an unpleasant business, but he
was not fastidious and he tore the flesh off with his fingers, knowing
that he was in danger while he worked.  There were wolves in the
neighbourhood, and their scent for blood was wonderfully keen; it was a
question whether they would reach the spot before he had left it, and
when he stopped to clean the knife in the snow he cast a swift glance
about.

He could see nothing farther off than a fallen trunk about a dozen
yards away; beyond that the trees had faded into a sombre mass.  A
biting wind wailed among them, and he could hear the harsh rustle of
the needles, but except for this there was a daunting silence.  He
began to feel a horror of the lonely wood and a longing to escape into
the open, though he would be no safer there.  But to give way to this
weakness would be dangerous and, pulling himself together, he went to
work more calmly.

It was difficult to reach the branches of the spruce he chose, and when
he had placed the first load of meat in safety he was tempted to
flight.  Indeed, for some moments he stood irresolute, struggling to
hold his fears in subjection; and then went back for another supply.
He climbed the tree three times before he was satisfied that he had
stored enough, and afterwards gathered up as much of the flesh as he
could conveniently carry.  It would soon freeze, but not before it had
left a scent that any wolf which might happen to be near could follow.

He left the wood with a steady stride, refraining from attempting a
faster pace than he could keep up, but when he had gone a mile he felt
distressed.

His load, which included the rifle, was heavy, and he had been exerting
himself since early morning.  The wind was in his face, lashing it
until the cold became intolerable, the dry snow was loose, and he could
not find his outward trail.  Still, he was thankful that no more had
fallen and thought he knew the quarter he must make for.  Now he was in
the open, he could see some distance, for the snow threw up a dim
light.  It stretched away before him, a sweep of glimmering grey, and
the squeaking crunch it made beneath his shoes emphasized the silence.

Skirting a bluff he did not remember, he stopped in alarm until a
taller clump of trees which he thought he knew caught his searching
eyes.  If he were right, he must incline farther to the east to strike
the shortest line to camp, and he set off, breathing heavily and
longing to fling away his load.  Cold flakes stung his face and a
creeping haze obscured his view in the direction where he expected to
find the next wood.  He was within a hundred yards of the nearest trees
when he saw them and as he left the last it was snowing hard.  His
heart sank as he launched out into the open, for he had now no guide,
and having neither axe nor blanket he could not make a fire and camp in
a bluff, even if he could find one.  It looked as if he must perish
should he fail to reach the camp.  The thought of the wolves no longer
troubled him, but when he had gone a mile or two he imagined he heard a
howl behind him and quickened his speed.

After that he had only a hazy recollection of floundering on, passing a
bluff he could not locate and here there and a white rock, while the
snow fell thicker and its surface got worse.  Then, when he felt he
could go no farther, a faint glow of light broke out and he turned
towards it with a hoarse cry.  An answer reached him; the light grew
brighter, and he was in among the trees.  Benson met him, and in
another minute or two he flung himself down, exhausted by the fire.

"I've brought you your supper, boys," he said.  "We'll have a feast
to-night."

They ate with keen appetite and afterwards went to sleep, but when they
reached the wood next morning nothing was left of the caribou except
the meat in the tree and a few clean-picked bones.




CHAPTER XXIV

THE FACTORY

Light snow was driving across the waste before a savage wind when the
party sat at breakfast one morning a fortnight after Blake had shot the
caribou.  They had spent the first two days enjoying a badly needed
rest, but the rest of the time had been passed in forced marches which
severely taxed their strength.  Part of their way, however, had lain
across open country, for they were near the northern edge of the timber
belt, and the straggling trees, dwarfed and bent by the wind, ran east
and west in a deeply indented line.  In some places they boldly
stretched out towards the Pole in long promontories; in others they
fell back in wide bays which Blake, steering by compass, held straight
across and afterwards again plunged into the scrub.  Three days were
spent in struggling through the broadest tongue, but as a rule, a few
hours' arduous march brought them out into the open.  Even there the
ground was very rough and broken, and they were thankful for the
numerous frozen creeks and lakes which provided an easier road.

Pushing on stubbornly, camping where they could find shelter and wood,
since they could hardly have survived a night spent without a fire in
the open, they had made, by calculation, two hundred miles, and Blake
believed they might by a determined effort reach the Hudson's Bay post
about nightfall.  This was necessary since their strength was nearly
exhausted, and provisions had run out, but an Indian trapper whom they
had met two days before had given them directions and landmarks, some
of which they recognized.

Day had broken, but there was little light and Blake, looking out from
behind a slab of rock in the shelter of which a few junipers clung,
thought that three or four miles would be the longest distance that he
could see.  This was peculiarly unfortunate, because he understood that
their course led across a wide untimbered stretch, on the opposite side
of which one or two isolated bluffs would indicate the neighbourhood of
the factory.  Disastrous consequences might follow the missing of these
woods.

A pannikin of weak tea made from leaves which had already been once or
twice infused stood among the embers, and by and by Benson, who was
dividing the last of the meat, held up a piece.

"I had thought of saving this, but it hardly seems worth while," he
said.  "If we make the factory, we'll get a good supper."

"You don't mention what will happen if we miss it," Harding remarked
with grim humour.  "Anyhow, that piece of meat won't make much
difference.  What do you think, Blake?"

Blake forced a cheerful laugh.  "Put it all in; we're going to make the
post; as a matter of fact, we have to.  How's the leg this morning?"

"I don't think it's worse than it was last night," Harding answered.
"If I'm careful how I go, it ought to stand another journey."

He made a grimace as he stretched out the limb, which was very sore,
for during the last few days the strain the snowshoe threw on the
muscles had nearly disabled him.  Now he knew it would be difficult to
hold out for another journey, but he had grown accustomed to pain and
weariness and hunger.  They were, he imagined, the lot of all who
braved the rigours of winter in the northern wilds.

"Well," said Benson, "there's no use in carrying anything that's not
strictly needful and the empty grub-bag may stay behind.  Then here's a
pair of worn out moccasins I was keeping as a stand by.  I should be
able to get new ones at the factory."

"It's still some distance off," Harding drily reminded him.

"If we don't make it, the chances are that I won't need the things.
But what about your collection of gum?"

Nothing had been said on this point for some time, but Harding's face
wore a curious look as he took up a bag which weighed three or four
pounds.

"Some of the stuff might be used for low-grade varnish, but that's not
what I'm out for.  I've been trying to believe that a few of the
specimens might prove better on analysis, but I guess it's a delusion."

With a quick resolute movement he threw the bag into the fire and when
the resin flared up with a thick brown smoke the others regarded him
with silent sympathy.  This was the end of the project he had expected
so much from, but it was obvious that he could meet failure with
fortitude.  Nothing that would serve any purpose could be said, and
they quietly strapped on their blankets.

There was not much snow when they set off and fortunately the wind blew
behind them, but the white haze narrowed in the prospect and Blake, who
broke the trail, kept his eyes upon the compass.  He was not quite sure
of the right line, but he had the satisfaction of knowing that he was,
at least, going straight.  After a few minutes, Harding glanced behind.
Their camping place had vanished, they were out in an open waste, and
he knew that he had started on the last march he was capable of making.
Where it would lead him he could not tell, though the answer to the
question was of vital importance.

For a time he thought of his wife and wondered with keen anxiety what
would become of her if his strength gave way before they reached the
post, but he drove these cares out of his mind.  It was dangerous to
harbour them and served no purpose; his part was to struggle on,
swinging the net shoes while he grappled with the pain each step caused
him.  He shrank from contemplating the distance yet to be covered; it
seemed vast to him in his weakness, and he felt himself a feeble,
crippled thing.  Soft snow and Arctic cold opposed his advance with
malignant force, but his worn-out body still obeyed the spur of his
will, and he roused himself to fight for the life that had some value
to another.  He must march, dividing up the distance into short stages
that had less effect upon the imagination; limping forward from the
ice-glazed rock abreast of him to the white hillock which loomed up
dimly where the snow blurred the horizon.  Then he would again look
ahead from some patch of scrub to the most prominent elevation that he
could see.

The marks he chose and passed seemed innumerable, but the wilderness
still ran on, pitilessly empty, in front of him.  His leg was horribly
painful, he knew he must break down soon, and they had seen nothing of
a stony rise they were looking for.  To find it would simplify matters,
because the Indian had made them understand that the bluffs about the
post lay nearly east of it.

Noon passed and they still pressed forward without a halt, for there
was little more than three hours' daylight left, and it was unthinkable
that they should spend the night without food or shelter.  The horizon
steadily narrowed as the snow thickened; there was a risk of their
passing the guiding-marks or even the factory.

It was nearly three o'clock when Harding stumbled and falling into the
snow found himself unable to get up until Benson helped him.  In his
attempt to rise he further strained his weakened leg and for a moment
or two he leaned on his companion, his face contorted with pain.

"The fall seems to have hurt you," Benson said sympathetically.

"I'll have to go on," Harding gasped and, setting his teeth, strode
forward, made a few paces with horrible pain, and then sank down on his
knees.

The others stopped in consternation and Blake said, "If I've kept the
right line, we can't be far from the factory."

"I'm played out," said Harding.  "You'll have to leave me here.  If you
make the post, you can come back with a sledge."

"No," Blake answered shortly.  "How are we to find you with our trail
drifting up?  Besides, you'd be frozen in a few hours.  If you can't
walk, you'll have to be carried.  Get hold of him, Benson."

Benson lifted him to his feet, Blake seized his arm, and, both
supporting him, they resumed the march.  Leaning on them heavily,
Harding was dragged along, and they silenced the feeble protests he
made now and then.

"Stop talking that rot!  We see this out together," Blake told him
roughly.

None of them had much doubt as to what the end would be, but they
stubbornly held on.  Nothing further was said; Blake and Benson's
pinched faces were set and stern and Harding's drawn up in a ghastly
fashion by suffering.  Still, their overtaxed muscles somehow obeyed
the relentless call on them.

At length, when the light had almost gone, Benson stepped into a slight
depression that slanted across their path.

"Hold on!" he cried hoarsely.  "Look at this!"

Blake stooped while Harding, swaying awkwardly with bent leg, held on
to him.  The hollow was small, a smooth groove of slightly lower level
than the rest of the snow.

"A sledge trail!" he said in an exultant voice.  "Drifted up a bit, but
they've been hauling lumber over it and that means a good deal to us."
He indicated a shallow furrow a foot or two outside the groove.
"That's been made by the butt of a trailing log.  The Indian said there
were bluffs near the post and they wouldn't haul their cordwood farther
than necessary."

Then they were silent for a few moments, overcome by relief.  They had
now a guide to shelter and safety, but when they had gathered breath
Blake steadied Harding, who found standing difficult, with his arm.

"We must make a move and hustle all we can," he said.  "It will be dark
in half an hour and the snow won't take long in filling up the trail."

The risk of missing the factory, which might be close at hand, was not
to be faced, and they pulled themselves together for a last effort;
Blake and Benson breathing hard as they dragged Harding along.  The
light was rapidly going, now they had changed their course the snow
lashed their faces, making it difficult to see, and they plodded
forward with lowered heads and eyes fixed on the guiding-line.  It grew
faint in places and vanished altogether after a while.  Then they
stopped in dismay, and Blake went down upon his knees scraping with
ragged mittens in the snow.

"I can't see which way it runs, but it certainly doesn't end here," he
said.  "Go ahead and look for it, Benson, but don't get out of call."

Benson moved forward and when he faded into the cloud of driving flakes
those he left behind were conscious of a keen uneasiness.  They could
only see a few yards, it was blowing fresh and the wind might carry
their voices away, while if this happened the chances were against
their comrade's being able to rejoin them.  By and by Blake shouted and
the answer was reassuring.  They waited for a time and then when they
cried out a hail came back very faintly: "Nothing yet!"

"Keep closer!" Blake shouted, but it seemed that Benson did not hear
him, for there was no reply.

"Hadn't you better go after him?" Harding suggested.

"No," said Blake shortly.  "It would make things worse to scatter."  He
raised his voice.  "Come back before your tracks fill up."

The silence that followed filled them with alarm, but while they
listened in strained suspense a minute or two later a faint call came
out of the snow.  The words were indistinguishable, but the voice had
an exultant note in it, and Blake said with deep relief, "He has found
the trail."

It was difficult to see the print of Benson's shoes and Harding could
not move a step alone, but they called out at intervals as Blake slowly
helped him along, and at length a shadowy object loomed in front of
them.  As they came up Benson pointed to a slight depression.

"We can follow it if it gets no fainter, but there's no time to lose,"
he said.  "It might be safer if I went first and kept my eye on the
trail."

He shuffled forward with lowered head while Blake came behind, helping
Harding as best he could, and all three long remembered the next half
hour.  Once or twice they lost the trail and were seized with despair,
but searching anxiously they found it again.  At length a pale, elusive
light appeared amidst the snow ahead and they saw it grow clearer with
keen satisfaction.  When it had changed to a strong yellow glow they
passed a broken white barrier which Blake supposed was a ruined
stockade, and the hazy mass of a building showed against the snow.
Then there was a loud barking of dogs, and while they sought for the
door a stream of light suddenly shone out with a man's dark figure in
the midst of it.

Next minute they entered the house and Harding lurching forward across
the floor of a large room, clutched at a table and then fell with a
crash into a chair.  After the extreme cold outside, the air was
suffocatingly hot and, overcome by the change and pain, he leaned back
with flushed face and half closed eyes.  His companions stood still,
with the snow thick upon their ragged furs, and the other man shut the
door before he turned to them.

"A rough night," he said calmly.  "Ye might as weel sit down.  Where do
ye hail from?"

Blake laughed as he found a seat.  He imagined that their appearance
must have been somewhat startling, but he knew it takes a good deal to
disturb the equanimity of a Hudson's Bay Scot.

"From Sweetwater, but we have been up in the timber belt since winter
set in.  Now we have run out of provisions and my partner's lamed by
snowshoe trouble."

"Ay," said the other, "I suspected something o' the kind.  But maybe
ye'll be wanting supper?"

"I believe, if we were put to it, we could eat half a caribou," Benson
told him with a grin.

"It's no to be had," the Scot answered in a matter-of-fact tone.  "I
can give ye a good thick bannock and some whitefish.  Our stores are no
so plentiful the now."

They took off their furs and glanced about the place while their host
was busy at the stove.  The room was large, its walls of narrow logs
chinked with clay and moss.  Guns and steel traps hung upon them, the
floor was made of uneven boards which had obviously been split in the
nearest bluff, and the furniture was of the simplest and rudest
description.  It had, however, an air of supreme comfort to the
famishing newcomers, and after the first few minutes they found it
delightfully warm.  They ate the food given them ravenously and
afterwards the agent brought Harding some warm water and examined his
leg.

"Ye'll no walk far for a while I'm thinking," he remarked.  "Rest it on
the chair here and sit ye still."

Harding was glad to comply and lighting their pipes they began to talk.
Their host, who told them his name was Robertson, was a rather
hard-featured man of middle age.

"I'm all my lone; my clerk's away with the breeds at the Swan lake," he
said.  "Where are ye making for?"

"For the south," said Blake.  "We came here for shelter, badly tired,
and want to hire a dog team and a half-breed guide if possible, as soon
as my partner's fit to travel.  Then we want provisions."

"I'm afraid I cannot supply ye.  Our stores are low--we got few fish
and caribou the year, and we have not a team to spare."

"Well," said Benson, "I don't suppose you'll turn us out, and we'd be
glad to pay for our accommodation.  We have no wish to take the trail
again without food or transport."

Robertson looked thoughtful.  "Ye might wait a week or two; and then
we'll maybe see better what can be done."

He asked them a few questions about their journey, and by and by
Harding took the piece of gum from its case.

"I guess you have seen nothing like this round here?"

"No," said Robertson, who examined it carefully.  "I have made it my
business to study the natural products o' the district, and it's my
opinion ye'll find no gum of this kind in the northern timber belt."

"I expect you're right.  Leaving furs out, if the country's rich in
anything, it's probably minerals."

"There's copper and some silver, but I've seen no ore that would pay
for working when ye consider the transport."

"I don't suppose you're anxious to encourage prospecting," Benson
suggested.

Robertson smiled.  "If there was a rich strike, we would no object.
We're here to trade, and supplying miners is no quite so chancy as
dealing in furs; but to have a crowd from the settlements disturbing
our preserves and going away after finding nothing of value would not
suit us.  Still I'm thinking, it's no likely; the distance and the
winter will keep them out."

"Did you ever see signs of oil?"

"No here; there's petroleum three hundred miles south, but no enough,
in my opinion, to pay for driving wells.  Onyway, the two prospecting
parties that once came up didna come back again."

He left them presently, and when they heard him moving about an
adjoining room, Harding said, "We'll stay here for a time and then look
for that petroleum on our way to the settlements."

Blake, who agreed, thought this determination was characteristic of his
comrade.  Harding's project had failed, but instead of being crushed by
disappointment, he was already considering another.  While they talked
about it Robertson returned, and shortly afterwards they went to sleep.




CHAFFER XXV

THE BACK TRAIL

Blake and his friends spent three weeks at the Hudson's Bay post, and
throughout the first fortnight an icy wind hurled the snow against the
quivering building.  It was dangerous to venture as far as a
neighbouring bluff where fuel had been cut, and one evening Benson and
the agent, who were hauling cordwood home, narrowly escaped from death
in the suddenly freshening storm.  None of the half-breeds could reach
the factory and Robertson confessed to some anxiety about them; there
was little that could be done, and they spent the dreary days lounging
about the red-hot stove, and listening to the roar of the gale.  In the
long evenings Robertson told them grim stories of the North.

Then there came a week of still, clear weather with intense frost, and
when several of the trappers arrived Robertson suggested that his
guests had better accompany a man who was going some distance south
with a dog team.  He could, however, only spare them a scanty supply of
food, and they knew that a long forced march lay before them when they
had left their guide.

Day was breaking when the dogs were harnessed to the sledge, and
Harding and his companions, shivering in their furs, felt a strong
reluctance to leave the factory.  It was a rude place and very lonely,
but they had enjoyed warmth and food there, and their physical nature
shrank from the toil and bitter cold.  None of them wished to linger in
the North, and Harding least of all, but it was daunting to contemplate
the distance that lay between them and the settlements.  Strong effort
and stern endurance would be required of them before they rested beside
a hearth again.

There was no wind, the smoke went straight up and then, spreading out,
hung above the roof in a motionless cloud; the snow had a strange
ghostly glimmer in the creeping light, and the cold bit to the bone.
It was with a pang they bade their host farewell, and followed the
half-breed, who ran down the slope from the door after his team.
Robertson was going back to sit, warm and well-fed, by his stove, but
they could not tell what hardships awaited them.

Their depression, however, vanished after a time.  The snow was good
for travelling, the dogs trotted fast, and the half-breed grunted
approval of their speed as he pointed to landmarks that proved it when
they stopped at noon.  After that they held on until dark, and made
camp among a few junipers in the shelter of a rock.  All had gone well
the first day, Harding's leg no longer troubled him, and there was
comfort in travelling light with their packs upon the sledge.  The
journey began to look less formidable, and gathering close round the
fire they ate their supper cheerfully while the dogs fought over the
scraps of frozen fish.  Harding, however, had some misgivings about
their ability to keep the pace up; he thought that in a day or two it
would tell on the white men.

Nothing disturbed their sleep, which was sound, for the cold has less
effect on the man who is fresh and properly fed.  Breakfast was quickly
dispatched, and after a short struggle with the dogs they set out
again.  It was another good day, and they travelled fast, over a
rolling tableland on which the snow smoothed out the inequalities among
the rocks.  Bright sunshine streamed down on them, the sledge ran
easily up the slopes and down the hollows, and looking back when they
nooned Harding noticed the straightness of their course.  Picked out in
delicate shades of blue against the unbroken white surface surrounding
it, the sledge trail ran back with scarcely a waver to the crest of a
rise two miles away.  This was not how they had journeyed north, with
the icy wind in their faces, laboriously struggling round broken ridges
and through tangled woods.  Harding was a sanguine man, but experience
warned him to prepare for much less favourable conditions.  It was not
often the wilderness showed a smiling face.

Still, the fine weather held and they were deep in the timber when they
parted from their guide on a frozen stream which he must follow while
they pushed south across a rugged country.  He was not a companionable
person, and spoke only a few words of barbarous French, but they were
sorry to see the last of him when he left them with a friendly
farewell.  He had brought them speedily a long distance on their way,
but they must now trust to the compass and their own resources, while
the loads they strapped on were unpleasantly heavy.  Before this task
was finished dogs and driver had vanished up the white riband of the
stream, and they felt lonely as they stood in the bottom of the gorge
with steep rocks and dark pines hemming them in.  Blake glanced at the
high bank with a rueful smile.

"There are advantages in having a good guide, and we hadn't to face a
climb like that all the way," he said.  "Anyhow, we had better get up."

It cost them some labour and, after reaching the summit they stopped to
look for the easiest road.  Ahead, as far as they could see, small,
ragged pines grew among the rocks, and breaks in the uneven surface
hinted at troublesome ravines.

"It looks rough," said Benson.  "There's rather a high ridge yonder.
It might save trouble to work round its end.  What do you think?"

"When I'm not sure," said Harding, "I mean to go straight south."

Benson gave him a sympathetic nod.  "One can understand that; you have
better reasons for getting back than the rest of us, though I've no
particular wish to loiter up here.  Break the trail, Blake; due south
by compass!"

They plunged deeper into the broken belt, clambering down ravines,
crossing frozen lakes and snowy creeks.  Indeed, they were thankful
when a strip of level surface indicated water, for the toil of getting
through the timber was heavy.  After two days of travel there was a
yellow sunset, and the snow gleamed in the lurid light with an ominous
brilliance, while as they made their fire a moaning wind got up.  These
things presaged a change in the weather, and they were rather silent
over the evening meal.  They missed the half-breed and the snarling
dogs, while it looked as if the good fortune that had so far attended
them was coming to an end.

Next morning there was a low, brooding sky, and at noon snow began to
fall, but they kept on until evening over very rough ground and then
held a council round the fire.

"The situation requires some thought," Blake remarked.  "First of all,
our provisions won't carry us through the timber belt.  Now the
shortest course to the prairie, where the going will be easier, is due
south, but after we get there we'll have a long march to the
settlements.  I'd partly counted on our killing a caribou or perhaps a
moose, but so far we've seen no tracks."

"There must be some smaller beasts that the Indians eat," Benson
suggested.

"None of us knows where to look for them, and we haven't much time to
spare for hunting."

"That's so," Harding agreed.  "What's your plan?"

"I'm in favour of heading south-west.  It may mean an extra hundred
miles, or more, but it would bring us nearer the Stony village, and
afterwards the logging camp on the edge of the timber, where we might
get supplies."

"It's understood that the Indians are often half starved in winter,"
Benson observed.  "For all that, they might have had good luck, and
anyhow we couldn't cross the prairie with an empty grub-sack.  My
vote's for striking off to the west."

Harding concurred, though as his leg had threatened further trouble
during the last day or two, he would have preferred the shorter route.
Then Blake asked him: "What about the petroleum?"

"We can't stop to look for it unless we can lay in a good stock of
food, and I don't suppose we could do much prospecting with the snow
upon the ground."  He paused a moment with a thoughtful air.  "When we
reach the settlement I must go home, but if the dollars can be raised,
I'll be back as soon as the thaw comes to try for the oil.  Clarke's an
unusually smart man, and there's no doubt he's on the trail."

"We'll raise enough money somehow," Benson told him, and Blake
signified his agreement with a nod.  Then they dropped into casual talk
which lasted until they went to sleep.

When dawn came it was snowing hard, and for a week they made poor
progress with a bitter gale driving the flakes in their faces, while
rations were cut down as the distance covered daily steadily lessened.
Harding's leg was getting sore, but he did not mean to speak of this
unless it was necessary.  They were, however, approaching the
neighbourhood of the Indian village and Blake began to speculate upon
the probability of their finding its inhabitants at home.  He
understood that the Stonies wandered about, and realized with
uneasiness that it would be singularly unfortunate if they were away on
a hunting trip.

At length, after laboriously climbing the rough but gently rising slope
of a long divide all one blustering day, they camped on a high
tableland, and lay awake, too cold to sleep, beside a sulky, greenwood
fire.  In the morning it was difficult to get upon their feet, but as
the light grew clearer, the prospect they looked down upon seized their
attention.  The hill summits were wrapped in leaden cloud, but a valley
opened up below.  It was wider and deeper than any they had met with
since leaving the factory, the bottom looked unusually level, and it
ran roughly south.

They gazed at it in silence for a time; and then Harding said, "I've a
notion that this is the valley where Blake fell sick, and it's going to
straighten out things for us if I'm right."

"That's so," Benson agreed.  "We would be sure of striking the Stony
village, and we could afterwards follow the low ground right down to
the river.  With the muskegs frozen solid, it ought to make an easy
road."

Blake was conscious of keen satisfaction, but there was still a doubt.

"We'll know more about it after another march," he said.

No snow fell that morning, and as their packs were ominously light they
made good speed across the hill benches and down a ravine where they
scrambled among the boulders of a frozen creek.  It was a grey day
without the rise in temperature that often accompanies cloudiness, and
the light was strangely dim.  Rocks and pines melted into one another
at a short distance, and leaden haze obscured the lower valley.  Blake
was, however, becoming sure it was the one they had travelled up and,
dispensing with the usual noon halt, they pushed on as fast as
possible.  All were anxious to set their doubts at rest, for there was
now a prospect of obtaining food and shelter in a few days, but they
recognized no landmarks, and with the approach of evening the frost
grew very keen.  The haze drew in closer, the scattered pines they
passed wailed drearily in a rising wind, and the men were tired, but
they could see no suitable camping place and held on, looking for
thicker timber.

It was getting dark when a belt of trees stretched across the valley,
and they were thinking of stopping, when Benson, who led the way, cried
out.

"What is it?" Harding asked.

Benson hesitated.  "Well," he said, "the thing doesn't seem probable,
but I believe I saw a light.  Anyway, it's gone."

They stopped, gazing eagerly into the gloom.  A light meant that there
were men not far off, and after the grim desolation they had travelled
through all were conscious of a longing for human society.  Besides,
the strangers would, no doubt, have something to eat and might be
cooking a plentiful supper.  There was, however, nothing to be seen
until Blake moved a few yards to one side.  Then he turned to Benson
with a cheerful laugh.

"You were right; I can see a glimmer about a mile ahead.  I wonder who
the fellows are, though that's not important."

They set off as fast as they could go, though travelling among the
fallen branches and slanting trees was difficult in the dark.  Now and
then they lost their beacon, but the brightening glow shone out again
and when it was visible Blake watched it with surprise.  It was low,
and he thought hardly large enough for a fire, besides which it had a
curious irregular flicker.  Drawing nearer, they dipped into a hollow
where they could only distinguish a faint brightness beyond the rising
ground ahead which they eagerly ascended.  Reaching the summit, they
saw the light plainly, but it was very small, and there were no figures
outlined against it.  Benson shouted, and all three felt a shock of
disappointment when he got no answer.

He ran as fast as his snowshoes would let him, smashing through brush,
floundering over snowy stones, with Blake and Harding stumbling, short
of breath, behind; and then stopped with a hoarse cry close to the
light.  There was nobody about, and the blaze sprang up mysteriously
from the frozen ground.

"A blower of natural gas," said Harding in an excited tone.  "In a
sense, we've had our run for nothing, but this may be worth a good deal
more than your supper."

"If I had the option, I'd trade all the natural gas in Canada for a
thick, red moose steak, and a warm place to sleep in," Benson savagely
rejoined.  "Anyhow, it will help us to light our fire, and we have a
bit of whitefish and a few hard bannocks left."

Blake shared his comrade's disappointment.  He was tired and hungry,
and felt irritated by Harding's satisfaction.  For all that, he chopped
wood and made camp, and their frugal supper was half eaten before he
turned to the American.

"Now," he said, "you may as well tell us what you think about this gas."

"First of all," Harding answered good-humouredly, "it indicates that
there's oil somewhere about; the two generally go together.  Anyhow, if
there were only gas, it would be worth exploiting so long as we found
enough of it, but judging by the pressure there's not much here."

"What would you do with gas in this wilderness?"

"In due time, I or somebody else would build a town.  Fuel's power and
if you could get it cheap I expect you'd find minerals that would pay
for working.  Men with money in Montreal and New York are looking for
openings like this, and no place is too remote to build a railroad to
if you can ensure freight."

"You're the most sanguine man I ever met," Blake said, grinning.  "Take
care your optimism doesn't ruin you."

"I wonder," Harding continued, "whether Clarke knows about this gas,
and on the whole I think it probable.  We can't be very far from the
Stony camp, and there's reason to believe he's been prospecting this
district.  It's oil he's out for."

"How did the thing get lighted?" Benson asked in an indifferent tone.

Harding smiled as he gave him a sharp glance.  He had failed in his
search for the gum and did not expect his companions to share his
enthusiasm over a new plan.  They had, however, promised to support
him, and that was enough, for he believed he might yet show them the
way to prosperity.

"Well," he said, "I guess I can't blame you for not feeling very keen,
but that's not the point.  I can't answer what you ask, and I believe
our forest wardens are now and then puzzled about how bush fires get
started.  We have crossed big belts of burnt trees in a country where
we saw no signs of Indians."

"If this blower has been burning long, the Stonies must have known of
it," Blake remarked.  "Isn't it curious that no news of it has reached
the settlements?"

"I'm not sure," Harding rejoined.  "They may venerate the thing, and
anyway, they're smart in some respects.  They know that where the white
men come their people are rounded up on reserves, and I guess they'd
sooner have the whole country to themselves for trapping and fishing.
Then Clarke may have persuaded them to say nothing."

"It's possible," Blake said thoughtfully.  "We'll push on for their
camp first thing to-morrow."




CHAPTER XXVI

THE RESCUE

Starting at daybreak, they reached a hillside overlooking the Stony
village on the third afternoon.  Surrounded by willows and ragged
spruces the conical tepees rose in the plain beneath, but Blake, who
was leading, stopped abruptly as he caught sight of them.  They were
white to the apex, where the escaping heat of the fire within generally
melted the snow, and no curl of smoke floated across the clearing.  The
village was ominously silent and had a deserted look.

"I'm very much afraid Clarke's friends are not at home," he said with
forced calm.  "We'll know more about it in half an hour; that is, if
you think it worth while to go down."

The others were silent a moment, struggling with their disappointment.
They had made a toilsome journey to reach the village, their food was
nearly exhausted, and it would cost them two days to return to the
valley which was their best road to the south.

Then Harding said, "Now we're here, we may as well spend another hour
over the job.  It's possible they haven't packed all their stores
along."

His companions suspected that they were wasting time, but they followed
him down hill, until Benson, who was a short distance to one side of
them, called out.  When they joined him he indicated a row of footsteps
leading up the slope.

"That fellow hasn't been gone very long; there was snow yesterday," he
said.  "By the line he took, he must have passed near us.  I wonder why
he stayed on after the others."

Blake examined the footsteps carefully, and compared them with the
impress of his own snowshoes.

"It's obvious that they can't be older than yesterday afternoon," he
said.  "From their depth and sharpness, I should judge that the fellow
was carrying a good load, which probably means that he meant to be some
time gone.  The stride suggests a white man."

"Clarke," said Harding.  "He seems to be up here pretty often, though I
can't see how he'd do much prospecting in the winter."

"It's possible," Blake rejoined.  "Anyhow, the point doesn't seem to
matter, and I'm anxious to find out whether there's anything to eat in
the tepees."

They hurried on, and discovered only a few skins in the first tent.
Then, separating, they eagerly searched the rest without result, and
when they met again were forced to the conclusion that there was no
food in the place.  It was about three o'clock and a threatening
afternoon.  The light was dim and a savage wind blew the snow about.
They stood with gloomy faces in the shelter of the largest tepee,
feeling that luck was hard against them.

"These northern Indians have often to put up with short commons while
the snow lies," Benson remarked.  "No doubt, they set off for some
place where game's more plentiful when they found their grub running
out, and as they've all gone the chances are that they won't come back
soon.  We've had our trouble for nothing, but we may as well camp here.
With a big fire going, one could make this tepee warm."

The others felt strongly tempted to agree.  The cold had been extreme
the last few nights and weary and scantily fed as they were, they
craved for shelter.  Still they had misgivings and Blake said, "We have
wasted too much time already, and there's only a few days' rations in
the bag.  We have got to get back to the valley and ought to make
another three hours' march before we stop."

"Yes," Harding regretfully assented, "I guess that would be wiser."

Setting off at once, they wearily struggled up the hill, and it had
been dark some time when they made camp in a hollow at the foot of a
great rock.  It kept off the wind and the spruces which grew close
about it further sheltered them, but Blake told his companions to throw
up a snow bank while he cut wood.

"I'm afraid we're going to have an unusually bad night, and we may as
well take precautions," he said.

His forecast proved correct, for soon after they had finished supper a
cloud of snow swept past the hollow and the spruces roared among the
rocks above.  Then there was a crash and the top of a shattered tree
plunged down between the men and fell on the edge of the fire,
scattering a shower of sparks.

"Another foot would have made a difference to two of us," said Harding
coolly.  "However, it's fallen where it was wanted; help me heave the
thing on."

It crackled fiercely as the flame licked about it, and sitting between
the snowbank and the fire, the men kept fairly warm, but a white haze
drove past their shelter and eddying in now and then covered them with
snow.  In an hour the drifts were level with the top of the bank, but
this was a protection, and they were thankful they had found such a
camping place, since death would have been the consequence of being
caught in the open.  The blizzard gathered strength, but though they
heard the crash of broken trees through the roar of the wind no more
logs fell, and by and by they went to sleep, secure in the shelter of
the rock.

When day broke it was long past the usual hour, and the cloud of
driving flakes obscured even the spruces a few yards away.  The hollow
at the foot of the crag was shadowy, and the snow had piled up several
feet above the bank, and lapped over at one end.  Still, with wood
enough, they could keep warm, and had their supplies been larger they
would have been content to rest.  As things were, however, they were
confronted with perhaps the gravest peril that threatens the traveller
in the North--they might be detained by bad weather until their food
ran out.  None of them spoke of this, but by tacit agreement they made
a very sparing breakfast and ate nothing at noon.  When night came and
the storm still raged, their hearts were very heavy.

It lasted three days, and on the fourth morning it seemed scarcely
possible to face the somewhat lighter wind and break a trail through
the fresh snow.  They, however, dare risk no further delay, and
strapping on their packs struggled up the range.  At nightfall they
were high among the rocks, and it was piercingly cold, but they got a
few hours' sleep in a clump of junipers and struck the valley late next
day.  Finding shelter, they made camp and after dividing a small
bannock between them sat talking gloomily.  Their fire had been lighted
to lee of a cluster of willows and burned sulkily because the wood was
green.  Pungent smoke curled about them, and they shivered in the
draughts.

"How far do you make it to the logging camp?" Benson asked.  "I'm
taking it for granted that the lumber gang's still there."

"A hundred and sixty miles," said Blake.

"And we have food enough for two days; say forty miles."

"About that; it depends upon the snow."

Benson made no answer, and Harding was silent a while, sitting very
still with knitted brows.  Then he said, "I can't see any way out.  Can
you?"

"Well," said Blake quietly, "we'll go on as long as we are able.
Though I haven't had a rosy time, I've faith in my luck."

Conversation languished after this, but they had a small cake of
tobacco left, and sat smoking and hiding their fears while the wind
moaned among the willows and thin snow blew past.  The camp was exposed
and hungry and dejected, as they were, they felt the stinging cold.
After an hour of moody silence, Harding suddenly leaned forward, with a
lifted hand.

"What's that?" he said sharply.  "Didn't you hear it?"

For a few moments the others only heard the rustle of the willows and
the swishing sound of driven snow; then a faint patter caught their
ears, and a crack followed like the snapping of a whip.

"A dog team!" cried Benson, and springing to his feet set up a loud
shout.

It was answered in English and while they stood, shaken by excitement
and intense relief, several low shadowy shapes emerged from the gloom;
then a tall figure appeared, and after it two more.  Somebody shouted
harsh orders in uncouth French; the dogs sped towards the fire and
stopped.  Then their driver, hurrying after them, began to loose the
traces, while another man walked up to Blake.

"We saw your fire and thought we'd make for it," he said.  "I see your
cooking outfit's still lying round."

"It's at your service," Blake told him.  "I'm sorry we can't offer you
much supper, though there's a bit of a bannock and some flour."

"We'll soon fix that," said the other.  "Guess you're up against it,
but our grub's holding out."  He turned to the driver.  "Come and tend
to the cooking when you're through, Emile."

Though the order was given good-humouredly, there was a hint of
authority in his voice, and the man he spoke to quickened his
movements.  Then another came up, and while the dogs snapped at each
other, and rolled in the snow, the half-breed driver unloaded a heavy
provision bag and filled Harding's frying pan.

"Don't spare it," said the first comer.  "I guess these folks are
hungry; fix up your best menoo."

Sitting down by the fire, shapeless in his whitened coat, with his
bronzed face half hidden by his big fur cap, he had nevertheless a
soldierly look.

"You'll be wondering who we are?" he said.

"No," Blake answered, smiling.  "I can make a guess; there's a stamp on
you I recognize.  You're from Regina."

"You've hit it first time.  I'm Sergeant Lane, R.N.W.M.P.  This"--he
indicated his companion--"is Private Walthew.  We've been up on a
special patrol to Copper Lake and left two of the boys there to make
some inquiries about the Indians.  Now we're on the back trail."

He looked as if he expected the others to return his confidence and
Blake had no hesitation about doing so.  He knew the high reputation of
the Royal North-West Mounted Police, which is a force of well-mounted
and carefully chosen frontier cavalry.  Its business is to keep order
on a vast stretch of plain, to watch over adventurous settlers who push
out ahead of the advancing farming community, and to keep a keen eye on
the reserve Indians.  Men from widely different walks of life serve in
its ranks, and the private history of each squadron is rich in romance,
but one and all are called upon to scour the windy plains in the saddle
in the fierce summer heat and make adventurous sledge journeys across
the winter snow.  Their patrols search the lonely North from Hudson's
Bay to the Mackenzie, living in the open in Arctic weather, and the
peaceful progress of Western Canada is largely due to their unrelaxing
vigilance.  Blake accordingly gave a short account of his journey and
explained his present straits.

"Well," said the Sergeant, "I figure we have stores enough to see us
down to the settlements all right, and we'll be glad of your company.
The stronger the party, the smoother the trail, and after what you've
told me, I guess you can march."

"Where did you find the breed?" Benson asked.  "Your chiefs at Regina
don't allow you hired packers."

"They surely don't.  He's a Hudson's Bay man, working his passage.
Going back to his friends somewhere about Lake Winnipeg, and allowed
he'd come south with us and take the cars to Selkirk.  I was glad to
get him; I'm not smart at driving dogs."

"We found it hard to understand the few Indians we met," said Harding.
"The farther north you go, the worse it must be.  How will the fellows
you left up yonder get on?"

The Sergeant laughed.  "When we want a thing done, we can find a man in
the force fit for the job.  One of the boys I took up can talk to them
in Cree or Assiniboine, and it wouldn't beat us if they spoke Hebrew or
Greek.  There's a trooper in my detachment who knows both."

Benson, who did not doubt this, turned to Private Walthew, whose face,
upon which the firelight fell, suggested intelligence and refinement.

"What do you specialize in?"

"Farriery," answered the young man, who might have added that
extravagance had cut short his career as veterinary surgeon in the old
country.

"Knows a horse all over, outside and in," Sergeant Lane interposed.  "I
allow that's why they sent him when I asked for a good dog driver,
though in a general way our bosses aren't given to joking.  Walthew
will tell you there's a difference between physicking a horse and
harnessing a sledge team."

"It's marked," Walthew agreed with a chuckle.  "When I first tried to
put the traces on I thought they'd eat me.  Even now I have some
trouble, and I'll venture to remind my superior that he'd be short of
some of his fingers if they didn't serve us out good thick mittens."

"That's right," said Lane good-humouredly.  "I'm sure no good at dogs.
If you're going to drive them, you want to speak Karalit or French.
Plain English cussin's no blame use."

By and by Emile said that supper was ready, and the police watched
their new acquaintances devour it with sympathetic understanding, for
they had more than once covered long distances on very short commons in
the Arctic frost.  Afterwards they lighted their pipes, and Emile,
being tactfully encouraged, told them in broken English stories of the
barrens.  These were so strange and gruesome that it was only because
they had learned something of the wilds that Harding and his friends
believed him.  Had  they been less experienced, they would have denied
that flesh and blood could bear the things the half-breed calmly talked
about.  While he spoke there broke out behind the camp a sudden
radiance which leaped from the horizon far up the sky.  It had in it
the scintillation of the diamond, for the flickering brilliance changed
to evanescent blue and rose from pure white light.  Spreading in a
vast, irregular arc, it hung like a curtain, wavering to and fro and
casting off luminous spears that stabbed the dark.  For a time it
blazed in transcendental splendour, then faded and receded, dying out
with Unearthly glimmering far back in the lonely North.

"Now," said Lane with mild approval, "I allow that's pretty fine."

Blake smiled, but made no answer.  He and his comrades were getting
drowsy, and although a stinging wind swept the camp and the green wood
burned badly, they were filled with a serene content.  The keen bodily
craving was satisfied, they had eaten and could sleep, while it looked
as if their troubles were over.  The dogs were obviously fit for
travel, because they were still engaged in a vigorous quarrel over some
caribou bones, the toil of the journey would be lightened by carrying
their loads on the sledge, and the party was strong enough to assist
any member of it whose strength might give way.  There was no reason to
apprehend any difficulty in reaching the settlements, and in their
relief at the unexpected rescue their thoughts went no further.  After
the hunger and nervous strain they had borne, they were blissfully
satisfied with their present ease.  There would be time enough by and
by to consider the future.

At length Sergeant Lane got up and shook the snow from his blanket.

"I've seen a better fire, boys, but I've camped with none at all on as
cold a night," he said.  "So far as I can figure, we have grub enough,
but now there are three more of us we don't want to lose time.  You'll
be ready to pull out by seven in the morning."

They lay down in the most comfortable places they could find, though
the choice was limited, and spent the night in comfort, though Harding
was once awakened by a dog that crept up to him for warmth.




CHAPTER XXVII

A STARTLING DISCOVERY

It was getting light next morning when the reinforced party entered a
belt of thicker timber where they first clearly realized the fury of
the storm.  The trees were small and sprang from a frozen muskeg so
that they could not be uprooted, but the gale had snapped the trunks
and laid them low in swaths.  Even in the spots where some had
withstood its force the ground was strewn with split and broken
branches, to lee of which the snow had gathered in billowy drifts.  The
scene of ruin impressed the men, who were forced to make long rounds in
search of a passage for the sledge.

"About as fierce a blizzard as I remember," Sergeant Lane remarked.
"We were held up three days and thought ourselves lucky in making a
ravine with a steep bank, but the wind couldn't have been quite so
strong back north a piece.  There'd have been two names less on the
roster if we'd been caught down here."

Harding thought this was probable.  He had had a protecting rock at his
back, but there was no shelter in the valley from the storm that had
levelled the stoutest trees.  Even the four-footed inhabitants of the
wilds could hardly have escaped, and as he stumbled among the wreckage
he thought about the man whose footsteps they had seen near the Indian
village.  Unless he had found some secure retreat he must have had to
face the fury of the gale, and Harding felt convinced that the man was
Clarke.  It was curious that he should have been living alone among the
empty tepees, but Harding imagined that he was in some way accountable
for the Indians' departure and wondered where he was going when he
crossed the range.  There was a mystery about the matter, and if an
explanation could be arrived at it would be of interest to him and his
friends.  Even before Clarke had sent them into the muskeg when he knew
it was practically impassable, Harding had entertained a deep distrust
of him.  He was, however, called upon to help in dragging the sledge
over an obstacle, and the difficulties of the way afterwards occupied
his attention.

By and by they found clearer ground and made good progress until late
in the afternoon when, seeing a rocky spur running out from the
hillside, they headed for it to look for a sheltered camping place.
There was still some daylight, but a cold wind had sprung up, blowing
the loose snow into their faces, and when, as they neared the spur, the
dogs swerved as if attracted by something, the half-breed struck the
nearest beast and drove them on.

"That was curious," said Private Walthew.  "It was old Chasseur who led
them off and he's not given to playing tricks."

"A dead mink or beaver in the snow," the Sergeant suggested.  "I didn't
notice anything, but they've a keen scent.  Anyhow, let's get into
camp."

They found a nook among the rocks and Emile loosed the dogs and threw
them some frozen fish while the rest made supper.  It was a heavy,
lowering evening, and the bitter air was filled with the murmur of the
spruces as the wind passed over them.  Though the light was fading,
they kept their sharpness of outline, rising, black and ragged, from a
sweep of chill, lifeless grey.  When the meal was nearly finished, Lane
looked round the camp.

"Where are the dogs?" he asked.  "They're very quiet."

"I leaf zem la bas," said Emile, waving his hand towards a neighbouring
hollow.  Then moving a few paces forward he exclaimed: "Ah! les
coquins!"

"Looks as if they'd bolted," Walthew remarked.  "I think I know where
to find them."

He left the camp with Emile and presently the others heard the
half-breed threatening the dogs; then Walthew's voice reached them and
there was a hoarse and urgent tone in it.  Springing up, they ran back
along the trail and found Emile keeping off the dogs while Walthew bent
over a dark object that lay half revealed in the clawed up snow.  At
first Harding saw only a patch or two of ragged fur that looked as if
it belonged to an animal; then with a shock he caught the outline of a
man's shoulder and arm.  The rest of the party gathered round,
breathless after their haste, and when Lane spoke there was grave
authority in his voice.

"Give me a hand, boys.  We have to get him out."

They did so with mingled compassion and reluctance, though Harding was
sensible of a curious strained expectation, and soon the body lay clear
of the snow.  The dim light fell on the frozen face and Blake started.

"It's Clarke!" he cried.

"Sure," said Harding gravely.  "I'm not surprised."

"Then you knew him?" Lane's tone was sharp.

"Yes," Benson interposed, "I knew him pretty well.  He lived at
Sweetwater, where we're going.  I can give you any particulars you
want."

"I'll ask you later."  The Sergeant knelt down and carefully studied
the dead man's pose before he added: "Looks as if he'd been caught in
the blizzard and died of exposure; but that's a thing I've got to
ascertain.  I'll want somebody's help in getting him out of this big
coat."

None of them volunteered, but when Lane gave Walthew a sharp order
Blake and Harding joined them and the latter afterwards held the fur
coat.  Blake noticed that he folded and arranged it on his arm with
what seemed needless care, though he first turned his back upon the
others.  Lane was now engaged in examining the body and the others
stood watching him, impressed by the scene.  All round the narrow
opening the spruces rose darkly against the threatening sky, and in its
midst the Sergeant bent over the still form.  It made a dark blot on
the pale glimmer of the snow and the white patch of the face was
faintly distinguishable in the fading light.  The spruce tops stirred,
shaking down loose snow, which fell with a soft patter, and the wind
blew trails of it about.

"I can find nothing wrong," Lane said at last.

"Considering that you came across the man lying frozen after one of the
worst storms you remember, what did you expect to find?" Harding asked.

"Well," said the Sergeant drily, "it's my duty to make investigations.
Though I didn't think it likely, there might have been a knife cut or a
bullet hole.  Now one of you had better bring up the sledge.  We can't
break this ground without dynamite, but there are some loose rocks
along the foot of the spur."

The sledge was brought and Clarke gently placed on it, wrapped in his
fur coat, after which they took the traces and started for the ridge,
where they built up a few stones above the hollow in which they laid
him.  It was quite dark when they had finished, and Lane made a gesture
of relief.

"Well," he said, "that's done and he'll lie safely there.  Rough on
him, but it's a hard country and many a good man has left his bones in
it.  I guess we'll get back to camp."

They crossed the snow in silence, trailing the empty sledge and for a
time after they reached camp nobody spoke.  Lane sat near the fire
where the light fell upon the book in which he wrote with a pencil held
awkwardly in his mittened hand, while Blake watched him and mused.  He
had no cause to regret Clarke's death, but he felt some pity for the
man.  Gifted with high ability he had, through no fault of his own,
been driven out of a profession he was keenly interested in and made an
outcast.  His subsequent life had been a hard and evil one, but it had
ended in a tragic manner and, what made this more impressive, Blake and
his companions had narrowly escaped his fate.  In spite of the cheerful
fire, the camp had a lonely air, and Blake shivered as he glanced at
the gleaming snow and dusky trees that shut it in.  There was something
in the desolate North that daunted him.

Harding's reflections also centred on the dead man, and he had food for
thought.  There was a mystery to be explained, and he imagined that he
had a clue to it in his pocket, though he could not follow it up for
the present.  He waited with some anxiety until Lane closed his book.

"Now," said the Sergeant, "there are one or two points I want
explained, and as you know the man, it's possible you can help me.  How
did he come to be here with only about three days' rations?"

"I can answer that," said Harding.  "He was in the habit of staying at
the Indian village we told you of.  We saw tracks coming from it when
we were there the day before the blizzard began."

"A white man's tracks?  Why did you go to the village?"

"I believe they were," Blake replied.  "We went to look for provisions
and didn't get them, because the place was empty."

"Then how do you account for the fellow's being there alone?"

"I can't account for it," Blake said quietly.

Lane turned to Harding, who had a theory but was not prepared to
communicate it to the police.

"It's certainly curious," he remarked.

"We'll start for the village to-morrow."

"As the Indians are away, there won't be much to be learned," Benson
suggested.

"They may have come back.  Anyway, it's my business to find out all I
can."

Soon afterwards they went to sleep and rising an hour or two before
daylight broke camp and turned back across the hills.  The march was
rough and toilsome, and when they camped at night fatigue and
drowsiness checked conversation, but Blake's party were sensible of a
difference in Lane's manner.  It had become reserved and he had a
thoughtful look.  Reaching the village one evening, they were surprised
to find that some of the Indians had returned and after supper Lane
summoned them into the tepee he occupied.  Emile interpreted, but he
had some difficulty in making himself understood, for which Harding was
inclined to be thankful.

The Sergeant began by explaining the authority and business of the
North-West Police, of whom it appeared one or two of the Indians had
heard, after which he made Emile ask them if they knew Clarke.  One of
them said they did and added that he stayed with them now and then.
Lane next asked why they took him in and the Indian hesitated.

"He was a big medicine man and cured us when we were ill," he replied.

"Do you know these white men?" Lane asked, indicating Blake's party.

An Indian declared that they had never seen them, though he added that
it was known they were in the neighbourhood.  Being questioned about
this, he explained that about the time of Clarke's arrival one of the
tribe had come in from the North, where he had met a half-breed who
told him that he had travelled some distance with three white men who
were going to the settlements.  Knowing the country, they had
calculated that the white men could not be very far off.  As he heard
this Harding felt anxious.  He saw where Lane's questions led, and that
the Sergeant meant to sift the matter thoroughly.  There was not much
cause to fear that he and his friends would be held responsible for
Clarke's death, but he suspected things he did not wish the police to
guess, and the Indians might mention having seen a white man's
footprints on the occasion when he had forcibly taken Clarke away.
Owing perhaps to their difficulty in making themselves understood,
nothing was, however, said of this, and by and by Lane asked--

"How was it you left the white man in your village by himself?"

The Indians began to talk to one another, and it was with some trouble
Emile at length elicited an answer.

"It is a thing that puzzles us," said one.  "The white man came alone
and told us he had seen tracks of caribou three days' journey back.  As
we had no meat and our fish was nearly done, six of us went to look for
the deer."

"Six of you?" said Lane.  "Where are the rest?  These tepees would hold
a good many people."

"They are hunting farther North," answered the man.  "When we got to
the place the white man told us of we could see no caribou tracks.  As
he was a good hunter, we thought this strange, but we went on, because
there was another muskeg like the one he spoke of and we might not have
understood him.  Then the snow came and we camped until it was over and
afterwards came back, finding no deer.  When we reached the tepees, he
had gone and we do not know what has become of him.  We could not
follow because the snow had covered his trail."

"He is dead," Lane told them.  "I found him frozen some days ago."

Their surprise was obviously genuine and Lane was quick to notice signs
of regret.  He imagined that Clarke had been a person of some
importance among them.

"Tell them I don't want them any more," he said to Emile, and when the
Indians went out turned to Benson.  "You had better give me all the
information you are able about the man."

Benson told him as much as he thought judicious, after which Lane sat
silent for a time.  Then he said, "There is no reason to doubt that he
came to his death by misadventure.  I don't quite understand what led
him to visit these fellows, but after all that doesn't count."

"It isn't very plain," Benson agreed.  "Is there anything else you wish
to know?"

"No," said Lane, looking at him steadily.  "You can take it that this
inquiry is closed; we'll pull out first thing to-morrow."  He beckoned
Walthew.  "Now we're here, we may as well find out what we can about
these fellows and how they live.  It will fill up our report, and they
like that kind of information at Regina."

When the police had left the tepee Harding turned to his companions
with a smile.  "Sergeant Lane is a painstaking officer, but his
shrewdness has its limits, and there are points he seems to have
missed.  It would have been wiser not to have let Clarke's coat out of
his hands until he had searched it."

"Ah!" said Blake sharply.  "You emptied the pockets?"

"I did; I allow my action was hardly justifiable, but I thought it
better that the police shouldn't get on the track of matters that
haven't much bearing on Clarke's death.  I found two things and they're
both of interest to us.  We'll take this one first."

He drew out a metal flask and when he unstoppered it a pungent smell
pervaded the tepee.  "Crude petroleum," he explained.  "I should
imagine the flashpoint is low.  I can't say how Clarke got the stuff
when the ground's hard frozen, but here it is."

"Isn't a low flash-point a disadvantage?" Benson asked.  "It must make
the oil explosive."

"It does, but all petroleum's refined and the by-products they take
off, which include gasoline, fetch a remarkably good price.  Shake a
few drops on the end of a hot log and we'll see how it lights."

A fire burned in a ring of stones in the middle of the tepee and Benson
carefully did as he was told.  Hardly had the oil fallen on the wood
than it burst into flame.

"As I thought!" said Harding.  "I suspect the presence of one or two
distillates that should be worth as much as the kerosene.  We'll get
the stuff analysed later, but you had better stopper the flask, because
we don't want the smell to rouse Lane's curiosity.  The important point
is that as I've reasons for believing the oil is fresh from the ground,
Clarke must have found it shortly before the blizzard overtook him.
That fixes the locality and we shouldn't have much trouble in striking
the spot when we come back again."  His eyes sparkled as he concluded:
"It's going to be well worth while; this is a big thing."

Blake did not feel much elation.  His was not a mercenary nature, and
he had all along thought his comrade too sanguine, though he meant to
back him.

"In a way, it was very hard luck for Clarke," he said.  "If you're
right in your conclusions, he's been searching for the oil for several
years, and now he was cut off just when it looks as if he'd found it."

"You don't owe him much pity.  What would have happened if we hadn't
met the police?"

"It's unpleasant to think of.  No doubt we'd have starved to death."

"A sure thing!" said Harding.  "It hasn't struck you that this was what
he meant us to do?"

Blake started.  "Are you making a bold guess, or have you any ground
for what you're saying?"

"I see you'll have to be convinced.  Very well; in the first place, the
man would have stuck at nothing, and I've already tried to show you
that he'd something to gain by Benson's death."  He turned to the
latter.  "I suspected when we took you away from him that you were
running a risk."

"I was running a bigger one before that, if you can call a thing a risk
when the result's inevitable," Benson rejoined.  "The pace I was going
would have killed me in another year or two, and even now I'm half
afraid----"  He paused for a few moments with sombre face and knitted
brows; and then resumed thoughtfully: "I believe you're right, Harding,
but you haven't told us how he proposed to get rid of me."

"I'm coming to that.  There was, however, another member of this party
who was in his way, and he made his plans to remove you both."

"You mean me?" Blake broke in.  "It's possible, but I don't altogether
see how he'd profit."

"First, let's look at what he did.  As soon as he reached the village
he heard that we had started from the Hudson's Bay post.  It wouldn't
be difficult to calculate how long the stores we could carry would
last, and he'd see that the chances were in favour of our calling at
the village for provisions.  Presuming on that, he sent his friends
away to look for caribou which they couldn't find.  Recollect that they
owned to being puzzled because he was a good hunter.  Then he cleared
out by himself, but I believe that if there was any food left in the
place he carefully hid it."

The others felt that their comrade was taking something for granted,
but they believed his suspicions were correct.  They, however, made no
comment, and Harding went on, looking at Blake--

"Now I'll show you how he would have profited.  I found this in his
pocket."

He took out a letter which he gave to Blake, and the latter started as
he recognized the writing.  It was from Colonel Challoner to Clarke.

"You had better read the thing; it's justifiable," Benson remarked.

Blake read it aloud, holding the paper near the fire with the light
upon his face, which looked very grim.

"'In reply to your letter, I have nothing new to say and believe I have
already made my intentions plain.  It would be useless for you to
trouble me with any further proposals.'"

Then Blake folded the letter and put it into his pocket.

"Now," he said, "I think I see.  The man had been trying to bleed the
Colonel and got his answer."

"Is that all?" Harding asked.

"Well," said Blake, "I believe it proves your conclusions right.  I
won't go into particulars, but where my uncle and cousin are threatened
I'm, so to speak, the leading witness for the defence and it wouldn't
have suited Clarke to let me speak.  No doubt, that's why he took
rather drastic measures to put me out of the way."

"Then you never mean to question the story of the Indian affair?"

"What do you know about it?" Blake asked curtly.

Harding laughed.  "I believe I know the true one.  Haven't I marched
and starved and shared my plans with you?  If there had been any
meanness in you wouldn't I have found it out?  What's more, Benson
knows what really happened and so does Colonel Challoner.  How else
could Clarke have put the screw on him?"

"He doesn't seem to have made much impression; you have heard the
Colonel's answer."  Blake frowned.  "We'll drop this subject.  If
Challoner attached any importance to what you think Clarke told him,
his first step would have been to send for me."

"I expect you'll find a letter waiting for you at Sweetwater," Harding
rejoined.

Blake did not answer, and soon afterwards Sergeant Lane came in with
Walthew.




CHAPTER XXVIII

A MATTER OF DUTY

Sergeant Lane sat by the camp fire in a straggling bluff, a notebook in
his hand, while Emile repacked a quantity of provisions, the weight of
which they had been carefully estimating.  The scattered trees were
small and let the cold wind in, for the party had now reached the edge
of the plain where the poplars began to grow.  The Sergeant's brows
were knitted, for the calculations he had made were not reassuring.

"The time we lost turning back to the Stony village has made a big hole
in our grub," he said.  "Guess we'll have to cut the menoo down and do
a few more miles a day."

"Our party's used to that," Blake answered with a smile.  "I suggest
another plan.  You have brought us a long way and Sweetwater's a bit
off your line.  Suppose you give us food enough to last us on half
rations and let us push on."

"No, sir," said Lane decidedly; "we see this trip through together.
For another thing, the dogs are playing out and after the way they've
served us I want to save them.  With your help at the traces we make
better time."

Blake could not deny this.  The snow had been in bad condition for the
last week, and the men had relieved each other in hauling the sledge.
The police camp equipment was heavy, but it could not be thrown away,
because they preferred some degree of hunger to lying awake at nights,
half frozen.  Moreover, neither Blake nor his comrades desired to leave
their new friends and once more face the rigours of the wilds alone.

"Then we'll have to make the best speed we can," he said.

They talked about the journey still before them for another hour.  It
was a clear night and very cold, but with a crescent moon in the sky
and no wind stirring.  The fragile twigs of the birches which shot up
among the poplars were still, and deep silence brooded over the wide
stretch of snow.  By and by Emile looked up with his face towards the
south.

"Ah!" he said; "you hear somet'ing?"

They did not, though they listened hard, but the half-breed had been
born in the wilderness and they could not think him mistaken.  For a
minute or two his pose suggested strained attention, and then he smiled.

"White man come from the sout'.  Mais oui!  He come, sure t'ing."

Lane nodded.  "I guess he's right, but I can't figure on the kind of
outfit."

Then Blake heard a sound which puzzled him.  It was not the quick
patter of a dog-team or the sliding fall of netted shoes.  The noise
was dull and heavy, and as he knew the snow would deaden it, whoever
was coming could not be far away.

"Bob-sled!" Emile exclaimed with scorn.  "V'la la belle chose!  Arrive
the great horse of the plough."

"The fellow's sure a farmer since he's coming up with a Clydesdale
team," Lane said, laughing.  "One wouldn't have much trouble in
following his trail."

A few minutes later three men appeared, carefully leading two big
horses through the trees.

"Saw your fire a piece back," said one, when they had hauled up a
clumsy sled.  Then he caught sight of Blake.  "I'm mighty glad to find
you; we were wondering how far we might have to go."

"Then you came up after me, Tom?" said Blake, who knew the man.  "You
wouldn't have got much further with that team; but who sent you?"

"I don't quite know.  It seems Gardner got orders from somebody that
you were to be found, and he hired me and the boys.  We'd trouble in
getting here, but we allowed we could bring up more grub and blankets
on the sled and we'd send Jake back with the team when we struck the
thick bush.  Then we were going to make a depot and pack along the
stuff we didn't cache.  But I've a letter which may tell you something."

Blake opened it and Harding noticed that his face grew intent, but he
put the letter into his pocket and turned to the man.

"It's from a friend in England," he said.  "You were lucky in finding
me and we'll go back together in the morning."

After attending to their horses, the new arrivals joined the others at
the fire and explained that at the hotelkeeper's suggestion they had
meant to head for the Indian village and make inquiries on their way up
at the logging camp.  Though Blake talked to them, he had a preoccupied
look, and Harding knew he was thinking of the letter.  He had, however,
no opportunity of questioning him and waited until next day, when
Emile, whom they were helping, chose a shorter way across a ravine than
that taken by the police and the men with the bob-sled.  When they
reached the bottom of the hollow, Blake told the half-breed to stop,
and took his comrades aside.

"There's something I must tell you," he said.  "It was Colonel
Challoner who sent the boys up from the settlement with food for us and
he begs me to come home at once.  That's a point on which I'd like your
opinion, but you shall hear what he has to say."  Then, sitting down
upon a log, he began to read from his letter:--

"'A man called Clarke, whom you have evidently met, lately called on me
and suggested an explanation of the Indian affair.  As the price of his
keeping silence on the subject, he demanded that I should take a number
of shares in a syndicate he is forming for the exploitation of some
petroleum wells.'"

"I think it was a good offer," Harding interposed.  "Clarke must have
had reason for believing he was about to make a big strike; he'd have
kept quiet until he was sure of the thing."

"'The fellow's story was plausible,' Blake continued reading.  'It
seems possible that you have been badly wronged, and I have been
troubled----'  He omitted the next few lines and went on:  'As it
happens, another account of the frontier action had been given me some
time earlier by a lady who has been in India.  It differed from
Clarke's in one or two details, but agreed in exonerating you; and she
also asked a price which I declined to pay.  After giving the matter
careful thought, I feel that these people may have hit upon the truth.
It would, of course, afford me the keenest satisfaction to see you
cleared, but the thing must be thoroughly sifted because----'"

Blake stopped and added quietly: "He insists upon my going home."

"His difficulty is obvious," Benson remarked.  "If you are blameless,
his son must be guilty.  I arrived at the former conclusion some time
ago."

Blake, who did not answer, sat musing with a disturbed expression.
There was now no sign of the others, who had left the ravine, and no
sound reached the men from the plain above.  Emile stood patiently
waiting some distance off, and though they were sheltered from the wind
it was bitterly cold.

"In some ways, it might be better if I went home at once," he said at
last.  "I could come back and join you as soon as I saw how things were
going.  The Colonel would be safe from any further persecution if I
were with him, but, all the same, I'm inclined to stay away."

"Why?" Harding asked.

"For one thing, if I were there, he might insist on taking some quite
unnecessary course that would only cause trouble."

"Now," said Harding curtly, "I'm going to give you my opinion.  I take
it that your uncle is a man who tries to do the square thing?"

Blake's face relaxed and his eyes twinkled.  "He's what you call white
and as obstinate as they're made.  Convince him that a thing's right
and he'll see it done, no matter how many people it makes
uncomfortable.  That's why I don't see my way to encourage him."

"Here's a man who's up against a point of honour; he has, I understand,
a long, clean record and now he's prepared to take a course that may
cost him dear.  Are you going to play a low-down game on him; to twist
the truth so's to give him a chance of deceiving himself?"

"Aren't you and Benson taking what you mean by the truth too much for
granted?"

Harding gave him a searching look.  "I haven't heard you deny it
squarely; you're a poor liar.  It's your clear duty to go back to
England right away and see your uncle through with the thing he means
to do."

"After all, I'll go to England," Blake answered with significant
reserve.  "However, we had better get on or we won't catch the others
until they've finished dinner."

Emile started the dogs, and when they had toiled up the ascent they saw
the rest of the party far ahead on the great white plain.

"We mayn't have another chance of a private talk until we reach the
settlement," said Blake.  "What are you going to do about the
petroleum?"

"I'll come back and prospect the muskeg as soon as the frost goes."

"It will cost a good deal to do that thoroughly.  We must hire
transport for a full supply of all the tools and stores we are likely
to need; one experience of the kind we've had this trip is enough.  How
are you going to get the money?"

"I'm not going to the city men for it until our position's secure.  The
thing must be kept quiet until we're ready to put it on the market."

"You were doubtful about taking me for a partner once," Benson
interposed.  "I don't know that I could blame you, but now I mean to do
all I can to make the scheme successful, and I don't think you'll have
as much reason for being afraid that I might fail you."

"Call it a deal," said Harding.  "You're the man we want."

"Well," said Blake, "I ought to be out again before you start, and if I
can raise any money in England, I'll send it over.  You're satisfied
that this is a project I can recommend to my friends?"

"I believe it's such a chance as few people ever get," Harding answered
in a tone of firm conviction.

"Then we'll see what can be done.  It won't be your fault if the
venture fails."

Harding smiled.  "There's hard work and perhaps some trouble ahead, but
you won't regret you faced it.  You'll be a rich man in another year or
two."

Then Emile urged the dogs, and they set off after the others as fast as
they could go.  Sweetwater was safely reached, but on the morning after
his arrival there Blake pushed on south for the railroad with the
police and a week later caught a steamer in Montreal.  On landing, he
took the first train to Shropshire, but before going on to Sandymere
called at Hazlehurst, where he had learned that Mrs. Keith was staying.

As it happened, Mrs. Keith was out with Mrs. Foster, and Millicent was
the first to welcome him.  She started when he was shown into the hall,
and, dropping the book she was reading, rose with a tingle of
heightened colour, while he felt his heart beat fast.  It was a clear
winter afternoon and the sunshine that entered a window fell upon the
girl.  Blake thought she looked very beautiful, and, thrown off her
guard as she had been, he caught the gladness in her eyes before she
could hide it.

"I expect you are surprised at my turning up," he remarked.

"Yes," she said with a shyness she could not overcome.  "Indeed I was
startled when you came in, but of course it's pleasant to see you
safely back.  I knew Colonel Challoner had given orders for you to be
traced if possible, and that you had been found, but that was all Mrs.
Keith told me.  I suppose she didn't know--didn't think, I mean--that I
was interested."

"I'd like to believe that was foolish of her," Blake answered with a
twinkle.

Millicent laughed; though she felt that his rejoinder did not
adequately express his feelings, his humorous manner set her at ease.

"It really was foolish," she said, smiling.  "But you must have some
tea and wait until she comes.  I don't think she will be long."

The tea was brought, and she studied him unobtrusively as he sat
opposite her at the small table.  He had grown thin, his bronzed face
was worn, and he looked graver than he had done.  Though she could not
imagine his ever becoming very solemn, it was obvious that something
had happened in Canada which had had its effect on him.  Looking up
suddenly from his plate, he surprised her attentive glance.

"You have changed," she said.

"That's not astonishing," Blake replied.  "We didn't get much to eat in
the wilds, and I was thinking how pleasant it is to be back again."  He
examined his prettily decorated cup.  "It's remarkable how many things
one can do without.  In the bush, we drank our tea, when we had any,
out of a blackened can and the rest of our table equipment was to
match.  But we'll take it that the change in me is an improvement?"

It was an excuse for looking at her, as if demanding a reply, but she
answered readily: "In a sense, it is."

"Then I feel encouraged to continue starving myself."

"There's a limit; extremes are to be avoided," Millicent rejoined.
"But did you starve yourselves in Canada?"

"I must confess that the thing wasn't altogether voluntary.  I'm afraid
we were rather gluttonous when we got the chance."

"Did you find what you were looking for?"

"No," said Blake, who saw that she was interested.  "I think it was a
serious disappointment for Harding, and I was very sorry for him at
first."

"So am I," said Millicent.  "It must have been very hard, after leaving
his wife alone and badly provided for and risking everything on his
success.  But why did you say you _were_ sorry for him?  Aren't you
sorry now?"

"Though we didn't find what we were looking for, we found something
else which Harding seems firmly convinced is quite as valuable.  Of
course, he's a bit of an optimist, but it looks as if he were right
this time.  Anyway, I'm plunging on his scheme."

"You mean you will stake all you have on it?"

"That's it," Blake agreed with a humorous twinkle.  "It's true that
what I have doesn't amount to much, but I'm throwing in what I would
like to get, and that's a great deal."

There was something of a hint in his manner and she noticed his
expression suddenly grow serious.  It seemed advisable to choose
another topic and she said: "You must have had adventures.  Tell me
about them."

"Oh!" he protested, "they're really not interesting."

"Let me judge.  Is it nothing to have gone where other men seldom
venture?"

He began rather awkwardly, but she prompted him with tactful questions,
and he saw that she wished to hear his story.  By degrees he lost
himself in his subject and, being gifted with keen imagination, she
followed his journey into the wilds.  It was not his wish to represent
himself as a hero, and now and then he spoke with deprecatory humour,
but he betrayed something of his character in doing justice to his
theme.  Millicent's eyes sparkled as she listened, for she found the
story moving; he was the man she had thought him, capable of grim
endurance, determined action, and steadfast loyalty.

"So you carried your crippled comrade when you were exhausted and
starving," she said when he came to their search for the factory.  "One
likes to hear of such things as that!  But what would you have done if
you hadn't found the post?"

"I can't answer," he said soberly.  "We durst not think of it; a
starving man's will gets weak."  Then his expression grew whimsical.
"Besides, if one must be accurate, we dragged him."

"Still," said Millicent softly, "I can't think you would have left him."

He looked at her with some embarrassment and then smiled.  "I'm
flattered, Miss Graham, but you really haven't very strong grounds for
your confidence in me."

Supposing he was thinking of his disgrace, she made a gesture of half
scornful impatience.

"Well," she said, "please go on with the tale."

The rest of it had its interest, though he made no reference to
Clarke's treachery, and Millicent listened with close attention.  It
was growing dark, but they had forgotten to ring for lights; neither of
them heard the door open when he was near the conclusion, and Mrs.
Keith, entering quietly with Mrs. Foster, stopped a moment in surprise.
The room was shadowy, but she could see the man leaning forward with an
arm upon the table and the girl's intent face.  There was something
that pleased her in the scene.  Then as she moved forward Millicent
looked up quickly and Blake rose.

"So you have come back," said Mrs. Keith, giving him her hand.  "How
was it you didn't go straight to Sandymere, where your uncle is eagerly
waiting you?"

"I sent him a telegram as soon as the steamer was boarded, but on
landing found there was an earlier train.  As he won't expect me for
another two hours, I thought I'd like to pay my respects to you."

"It sounds plausible," Mrs. Keith rejoined with rather dry amusement.
"Well, I'm flattered, and as it happens I've something to say to you."

Then Mrs. Foster joined them, and it was some time later when Mrs.
Keith took Blake into the empty drawing-room.

"I'm glad you have come home," she said.  "I think you are needed."

"That," said Blake, "is how it seemed to me."

His quietness was reassuring.  Mrs. Keith knew he was to be trusted,
but she felt some misgivings about supporting him in a line of action
that would cost him much.  Still, she could not be deterred by
compassionate scruples when there was an opportunity of saving her old
friend from suffering.  Troubled by a certain sense of guilt but
determined, she tried to test his feelings.

"You didn't find waiting for us tedious," she remarked.  "I suppose you
were telling Millicent about your adventures when we came in; playing
Othello, and she seemed to be listening as Desdemona did."

"I expect she was exercising a good deal of patience," Blake rejoined
with a laugh.  "Anyway, since you compare me to the Moor, you must own
that I've never pretended to be less black that I'm painted."

"Ah!" said Mrs. Keith with marked gentleness, "you needn't pretend to
me.  I have my own opinion about you, and if it doesn't agree with
other people's, so much the worse for theirs.  I knew you would come
home as soon as you could be found."

"Then you must know what has been going on in my absence."

"I have a strong suspicion.  Your uncle has been hard pressed by
unscrupulous people with an end to gain.  How much impression they have
made on him I cannot tell, but he's fond of you, Dick, and in trouble.
It's a cruel position for an honourable man with traditions like those
of the Challoners' behind him."

"That's true; I hate to think of it.  You know what I owe to him and
Bertram."

"He's old," continued Mrs. Keith.  "It would be a great thing if he
could be allowed to spend his last years in quietness, but I fear
that's impossible, although, perhaps, to some extent, it lies in your
hands."  Then she looked steadily at Blake.  "Now you have come back,
what do you mean to do?"

"Whatever is needful; I'm for the defence.  The Colonel's position
can't be stormed while I'm on guard; and this time there'll be no
retreat."

"Don't add that, Dick; it hurts me.  I'm not so hard as I sometimes
pretend.  I never doubted your staunchness, but I wonder whether you
quite realize what the defence may cost you.  Have you thought about
your future?"

"You ought to know that the Blakes never think of the future.  We're a
happy-go-lucky, irresponsible lot."

"But suppose you wished to marry?"

He smiled at her.  "It's a difficulty that has already been pointed
out.  If I ever marry, the girl I choose will believe in me in spite of
appearances.  In fact, she'll have to; I've no medals and decorations
to bring her."

"You have much that's worth more!" Mrs. Keith exclaimed, moved by his
steadfastness.  "Still, it's a severe test for any girl."  Then she
laid her hand gently on his arm.  "In the end, you won't regret the
course you mean to take.  I have lived a long while and have lost many
pleasant illusions, but I believe that loyalty like yours has its
reward.  I loved you for your mother's sake when you were a boy;
afterwards when things looked blackest I kept my faith in you, and now
I'm proud I did so."

Blake looked confused.  "Confidence like yours is an embarrassing gift.
It makes one feel one must live up to it, and that isn't easy."

Mrs. Keith regarded him affectionately.  "It's yours, Dick; given
without reserve.  But I think there's nothing more to be said, and no
doubt you're anxious to get away.  Besides, the Colonel will be
expecting you."

"He used to be seriously annoyed if he had to wait for dinner, and I've
been here some time," Blake answered, laughing, and went out to take
leave of Mrs. Foster.




CHAPTER XXIX

BLAKE HOLDS HIS GROUND

Dinner was finished at Sandymere, Miss Challoner had gone out, and, in
accordance with ancient custom, the cloth had been removed from the
great mahogany table.  Its glistening surface was only broken by a
decanter, two choice wine-glasses, and a tall silver candlestick.
There were lamps in other parts of the room, but Challoner liked
candles.  Lighting a cigar, Blake looked about while he braced himself
for the ordeal that must be faced.

He knew the big room well, but its air of solemnity, with which the
heavy Georgian furniture was in keeping, impressed him.  The ceiling
had been decorated by a French artist of the eighteenth century and the
faded delicacy of the design, bearing as it did the stamp of its
period, helped to give the place a look of age.  Challoner could trace
his descent much further than his house and furniture suggested, but
the family had first come to the front in the East India Company's
wars, and while maintaining its position afterwards had escaped the
modernizing influence of the country's awakening in the early Victorian
days.  It seemed to Blake, fresh from the new and democratic West, that
his uncle, shrewd and well-informed man as he was, was very much of the
type of Wellington's officers.  For all that he pitied him.  Challoner
looked old and worn, and there were wrinkles that hinted at anxious
thought round his eyes.  His life was lonely, and his unmarried sister,
who spent much of her time in visits, was the only relative who shared
his home.  Now that age was limiting his activities and interests, he
had one great source of gratification; the career of the soldier son
who was worthily following in his steps.  His nephew determined that
this should be saved for him, as he remembered the benefits he had
received at his hands.

By and by Challoner filled the glasses.  "Dick," he said, "I'm very
glad to see you home.  I should like to think you have come to stay."

"Thank you, sir.  I'll stay as long as you need me."

"I feel I need you altogether.  It's now doubtful whether Bertram will
leave India after all.  His regiment has been ordered into the hills
where there's serious trouble brewing, and he has asked permission to
remain.  Even if he comes home, he will have many duties, and I have
nobody left."

Blake did not answer immediately, and his uncle studied him.  Dick had
grown thin, but he looked very hard, and the evening dress set off his
fine, muscular figure.  His face was still somewhat pinched, but its
deep bronze and the steadiness of his eyes and firmness of his lips
gave him a very soldierly look and a certain air of distinction.  There
was no doubt that he was true to the Challoner type.

Then Blake said slowly, "I must go back sooner or later, sir; there is
an engagement I am bound to keep.  Besides, your pressing me to stay
raises a question.  The last time we met you acquiesced in my decision
that I had better keep out of the country, and I see no reason for
changing it."

"The question must certainly be raised; that is why I sent for you.
You can understand my anxiety to learn what truth there is in the
stories I have heard."

"It might be better if you told me all about it."

"Very well; the task is painful, but it can't be shirked.  We'll take
the woman's tale first."  Challoner carefully outlined Mrs. Chudleigh's
theory of what had happened during the night attack and Blake listened
quietly.

"Now," he said, "you might give me Clarke's account."

Challoner did so and concluded: "Both these people have an obvious end
to serve, and I daresay they're capable of misrepresenting things to
suit it.  I'll confess I found the thought comforting; but I want the
truth, Dick.  I must do what's right."

"In the first place, Clarke, who once approached me about the matter,
will never trouble either of us again.  I helped to bury him up in the
wilds."

"Dead!" exclaimed Challoner.

"Frozen.  In fact, it was not his fault we escaped his fate.  He set a
trap for us, intending that we should starve."

"But why?"

"His motive was obvious," Blake rejoined.  "There was a man with us
whose farm and stock would, in the event of his death, fall into
Clarke's hands, and it's clear that I was a serious obstacle in his
way.  Can't you see that he couldn't use his absurd story to bleed you
unless I supported it?"

Challoner felt the force of this.  He was a shrewd man, but just then
he was too disturbed to reason closely and failed to perceive that his
nephew's refusal to confirm the story did not necessarily disprove it.
That Clarke had thought it worth while to attempt his life bulked most
largely in his uncle's eye.

"He urged me to take some shares in a petroleum syndicate," he remarked.

"Then I believe you missed a good thing, sir."  Blake seized upon the
change of topic.  "The shares would probably have paid you well."

"I thought he proposed it to make the thing look better; in fact, to
give me something to salve my conscience with."

"Anyway, he found the oil and put us on the track of it, though I don't
suppose he had any wish to do the latter.  We expect to make a good
deal out of the discovery."

"It looks like justice," said Challoner.  "But we are getting away from
the point.  I'd better tell you that after my talk with the man I felt
he might be dangerous and that I must send for you."

"Why didn't you send for Bertram?"

Challoner hesitated.  "When I cabled out instructions to find you,
there was no word of his leaving India; then you must see how hard it
would have been to hint at my suspicions.  This would have opened a
breach between us that could never be closed."

"Yes," said Blake, leaning forward on the table and speaking earnestly,
"your reluctance was very natural.  I'm afraid of presuming too far,
but I can't understand how you could believe this thing of your only
son."

"It lies between my son and my nephew, Dick."

There was emotion in the Colonel's voice.  "I had a great liking for
your father and I brought you up.  Then I took a keen pride in you;
there were respects in which I found you truer to our type than
Bertram."

"You heaped favours on me," Blake replied.  "That I bitterly
disappointed you has been my deepest shame; in fact, it's the one thing
that counts.  For the rest, I can't regret the friends who turned their
backs on me, and poverty never troubled the Blakes."

"But the taint--the stain upon your name!"

"I have the advantage of bearing it alone, and, to tell the truth, it
doesn't bother me much.  That a man should go straight in the present
is all they ask in Canada, and homeless adventurers with no
possessions, which is the kind of comrades I've generally met, are
charitable.  As a rule, it wouldn't become them to be fastidious.
Anyhow, sir, you must see the absurdity of believing that Bertram could
have failed in his duty in the way these tales suggest."

"I once felt that strongly; the trouble is that the objection applies
with equal force to you.  Your mother had a resolute character; your
father was a daring man."

Blake coloured as he answered: "I'm glad you mentioned this; my parents
can't be held responsible for my faults.  You must know that rather
surprising variations are apt to appear in a family strain.  It's
possible I'm what gardeners call a sport; a throwback to some inferior
type.  There may have been a weakling even among the Challoners."

"I have dreaded that there was one in the present generation," the
Colonel answered with stern gravity.  "But we get no farther.  Do you
deny the stories these people have told me?"

Blake felt that his task was hard.  He had to convict himself and must
do so logically, since Challoner was by no means a fool.  As he nerved
himself to the effort he was conscious of a rather grim amusement.

"I think it would be better if I tried to show you how the attack was
made.  Is the old set of Indian chessmen still in the drawer?"

"I believe so.  It must be twenty years since they were taken out.
It's strange you should remember them."

A stirring of half-painful emotions troubled Blake.

He loved the old house and all that it contained and had a deep-seated
pride in the Challoner traditions.  Now he must show that he was a
degenerate scion of the honoured stock and could have no part in them.

"I have forgotten nothing at Sandymere, but we must stick to the
subject."  Crossing the floor he came back with the chessmen, which he
carefully arranged, setting up the white pawns in two separate ranks to
represent bodies of infantry, with the knights and bishops for
officers.  The coloured pieces he placed in an irregular mass.

"Now," he continued, "this represents the disposition of our force
pretty well, and I've good reason for remembering it.  I was here, at
the top of the ravine"--he laid a cigar on the table to indicate the
spot--"Bertram on the ridge yonder.  This bunch of red pawns stands for
the Ghazee rush."

"It agrees with what I've heard," said Challoner, surveying the roughly
marked scene of battle with critical eyes.  "You were weak in numbers,
but your position was strong.  It could have been held."

"We'll take Mrs. Chudleigh's suggestion first."  Blake began to move
the pieces.  "The Ghazees rolled straight over our first line; my mine,
which might have checked them, wouldn't go off; a broken circuit in the
firing wires, I suppose.  We were hustled out of the trenches; it was
too dark for effective rifle fire."

"The trench the second detachment held should have been difficult to
rush."

"Oh! well," said Blake, "you must remember that the beggars were
Ghazees; they're hard to stop.  Then our men were worn out and had been
sniped every night for the last week or two.  However, the bugler's the
key to my explanation; I'll put this dab of cigar ash here to represent
him.  This bishop's Bertram, and you can judge by the distance whether
the fellow could have heard the order to blow, 'Cease fire,' through
the row that was going on."

He resumed his quick moving of the chessmen, accompanying it by a
running commentary.  "Here's another weak point in the woman's tale,
which must be obvious to any one who has handled troops; these fellows
couldn't have gained a footing in this hollow because it was raked by
our fire.  There was no cover and the range was short.  Then you see
the folly of believing that the section with which the bugler was could
have moved along the ridge; they couldn't have crossed between the
Ghazees and the trench.  They'd have been exposed to our own fire in
the rear."

He added more to much the same effect, and concluded: "I think that
disposes of Mrs. Chudleigh's theory."

Challoner made a sign of agreement without speaking, and Blake,
lighting a fresh cigar, leaned back in his chair.  He believed he had
succeeded so far, but he was feeling the strain.

"Now I'll deal with Clarke's suggestion; it's certainly ingenious," he
said presently and began to rearrange the chessmen.

Proceeding much as he had already done, he followed the movements of
the pieces with short explanations, and when he finally swept them up
into a heap looked hard at his companion.

"I think you ought to be convinced," he said.

"It all turns upon the bugler's movements," Challoner remarked.

"And he was killed.  Mrs. Chudleigh's account presupposes that he was
in one place, Clarke's in another, while I've tried to show you that he
couldn't have been in either."

Challoner was silent for a time and Blake watched him anxiously until
he looked up.

"I think you have succeeded, Dick, though I feel that with a trifling
alteration here and there you could have cleared yourself.  Now we'll
let the painful matter drop for good, unless, indeed, some fresh light
is ever thrown on it."

"That can't happen," Blake replied and added with a gleam of humour:
"As a matter of fact, I'd sooner remain in friendly obscurity."

Challoner rose and laid a hand on his arm.  "If you were once at fault,
you have since shown yourself a man of honour.  Though the thing hurt
me at the time, I'm glad you are my nephew.  Had there been any
baseness in you, some suspicion must always have rested on your cousin.
Well, we are neither of us sentimentalists, but I must say that you
have amply made amends."

He turned away and Blake went out into the open air to walk up and
down.  The face of the old house rose above him, dark against the clear
night sky; in front the great oaks in the park rolled back in shadowy
masses.  Blake, who loved Sandymere, had thought of it often in his
wanderings, and now he was glad that through his action his cousin
would enjoy it without reproach.  After all, it was some return to make
for the favours he had received.  For himself there remained the charm
of the lonely trail and the wide wilderness, unless, indeed, Harding
succeeded better than Blake really expected with his petroleum
exploitation scheme.

For all that, he had been badly tempted.  Poverty and disgrace were
serious obstacles to marriage, and had he been free to do so, he would
eagerly have sought the hand of Millicent Graham.  He knew now that he
loved her and it was hard to hold his longing for her in check, but
while this must be done for the present he did not altogether despair.
He was hopeful and believed that if she loved him, she would not shrink
from his painful story, while it was possible that another of his
disadvantages might be removed.  Harding was confident that they were
going to be rich.  Thinking about the girl tenderly, he walked up and
down the terrace until he grew calm, and then went in to talk to Miss
Challoner.

The next fortnight passed uneventfully and then one afternoon he met
Millicent in a field-path and turned back with her to Hazlehurst.  It
was a raw day and the wind had brought a fine colour into her face,
while she wore a little fur cap and fur-trimmed jacket which he thought
became her very well.

"You have not been over often; Foster was remarking about it," she said
to him.

"That's true," said Blake, who had kept away for fear of his resolution
melting if he saw much of her.  "Still, my uncle seems to think he has
a prior claim, and I mayn't be able to stay with him long."

"Then you are going back to Canada?"  The quick way the girl looked up,
and something in her tone, suggested unpleasant surprise, for she had
been taken off her guard.

"I shall have to go when Harding needs me.  I haven't heard from him
since I arrived, but I'll get my summons sooner or later."

"I thought you had come home for good."

There was rueful humour but no bitterness in Blake's smile.  "Oh! no;
though I'm very fond of it, Sandymere is not my home.  It will be
Bertram's by and by and he is married.  I'm the poor relation and no
great credit to the family."

Millicent's colour deepened, but she looked at him steadily.  "I think
that is wrong.  Since you have been so frank, I may perhaps say that I
know there has been a serious mistake somewhere."

"I'm flattered," Blake rejoined, and something in his voice was out of
keeping with his half whimsical bow.  "It's nice to know your friends
think well of you; but you mustn't let your good-nature get the better
of your judgment."

"Perhaps I shouldn't have ventured so far."  There was a hint of
impatience in Millicent's gesture.  "But are you content with your life
in the North-West?"

"It has its charm.  There are very few restrictions, one feels free.
The fences haven't reached us yet; you can ride as far as you can see
over miles of grass and through the clumps of bush.  There's something
attractive in the wide horizon; the riband of trail that seems to run
forward for ever draws you on."

"But the Arctic frost and snow?"

"After all, they're bracing.  Our board shacks with the big stoves in
them are fairly warm, and no one can tell what developments may
suddenly come about in such a country.  A railroad may be run through,
wheat-land opened up, minerals found, and wooden cities spring up from
the empty plain.  Life's rapid and strenuous; one is swept along with
the stream."

"But you were in the wilds."

Blake laughed.  "We were, but not far behind us the tide of population
pours across the plain, and if we had stayed a year or two in the
timber, it would have caught us up.  That flood won't stop until it
reaches the Polar Sea."

"But can people live in a rugged land covered with snow that only melts
for a month or two?"

"It depends upon what they find there.  So long as the country has
natural resources, the climate doesn't count.  One hears of precious
metals and some are being mined."  He paused and added in a tone of
humorous confidence: "My partner believes in oil."

They were now close to Hazlehurst and Millicent could ask no more
questions because as they reached the high-road Mrs. Keith joined them.

"You might go in and write the letter I told you about," she said to
Millicent, and then turned to Blake.  "As I want a quiet walk, Dick, I
daresay you will keep me company."

Blake said he would be delighted, and when Millicent had left them
remarked: "I didn't know you were given to this form of exercise."

"I may as well tell you that I came out because I couldn't take part in
the meaningless chatter that was going on.  As a matter of fact, I was
too disturbed to stay in."

"May one ask what disturbed you?"

"Mrs. Foster's announcement that Mrs. Chudleigh is coming down again.
She only heard this morning."

"You think this means a fresh attack upon my persecuted relative?"

"Judge for yourself.  Mrs. Chudleigh had no pressing invitation to come
back and has not been away long; after all, she and Lucy Foster are not
great friends.  Now she has only a flimsy excuse for the visit--I've
seen her letter.  Why should the woman force herself into Hazlehurst,
unless it's to be within striking distance of your uncle?"

"I don't know.  I suppose she couldn't have come down independently and
called on him, because it would have excited remark; but that's not the
question.  The Colonel mustn't see her."

"How would you prevent his doing so if she goes to the house?"

"I think," said Blake, "the matter could be most effectively dealt with
by letting her see me."

"An excellent plan, but if your uncle's to be kept in ignorance, it
will need some arranging."

"Undoubtedly," said Blake; "that's your business."

"I suppose I must undertake it.  The probability is that Mrs. Chudleigh
doesn't know you are at home and she must, if possible, be kept from
learning it until she sees you.  As she's only down for a few days, I
expect she'll make her first move to-morrow.  Is your uncle going to
the Croxleigh meet?"

"He is; so am I.  Is there any risk of Mrs. Chudleigh's turning up at
the cover?"

"I don't think so.  Foster has only one spare horse, and as he promised
it to Millicent I'll see she goes.  I'm more afraid that Mrs. Chudleigh
will make Lucy Foster take her across to Sandymere in the afternoon,
and if I'm able to prevent that, she'll go alone.  She has cultivated
an acquaintance with your aunt."

"Well," said Blake, "it's a long way to Croxleigh, and the Colonel
won't ride hard.  He'll probably be satisfied with seeing the hounds
throw off and then go quietly home.  As it happens, there isn't a
direct road."

"Where does all this lead?"

"I should imagine it will be four o'clock when he gets back, while by
leaving the hunt and heading straight across country I ought to beat
him by some time.  In fact, I might get rid of the lady before he
arrives.  After she has seen me she mayn't wish to stay."

"Very well," said Mrs. Keith.  "If Lucy goes to Sandymere, I'll go with
them and hurry them off as soon as I can.  Then I'll try to make an
opportunity for you."

After a few more words she dismissed him and turned back to Hazlehurst.
She thought the plan would work.




CHAPTER XXX

MRS. CHUDLEIGH'S DEFEAT

Challoner kept one or two good horses, though he no longer used them
much, and he and his nephew were well mounted when they rode to
Croxleigh gorse.  As the place was difficult of access, the meet had
been arranged late, and it was after mid-day when they drew near a
broad stretch of furze on the crest of a grassy hill.  Mounted men and
a few women were climbing the slope, the scarlet coats shining in a
gleam of light, carriages and motors were drawn up in the shelter of a
beech wood, and from the summit there fell a faint blast of a horn.

It was a raw day, with a nipping wind and blinks of sunshine that swept
across grass and ploughland and faded again.  There were glistening
pools in the narrow road and drops of moisture hung on the briars and
withered fern along the hedgerows.  Both Challoner and Blake were
dressed in sober tweed, for the Colonel said he only wore the pink when
he felt fit to follow the hounds and now he must be content to see them
find.  Glancing at his watch, he pulled up his horse to a walk.

"We are in good time, and it's generally a lengthy matter getting a fox
out of the gorse," he said.  "Though we haven't hurried, it's rather a
long way, and I feel I have done enough.  Don't trouble about me when
the hounds get off.  I expect to pick up some elderly crony, and, if
the fox does not run straight, may be able to see something of the hunt
after an easy ride; then I'll jog quietly home."

"I'll stay with you, if you'd prefer it, sir," Blake declared, though
this was far from his wish, but Challoner shook his head.

"Get a good run if you can, my boy.  Old folks mustn't be selfish, and
I know what young blood is."  He turned and regarded Blake
affectionately.  "You have been a good nephew, Dick, and since you came
home I have felt that I ought to make some provision for you.  That, of
course, was my intention when you were young, but when the break
occurred you cut yourself adrift and refused assistance."

Blake coloured, for there were, he thought, adequate reasons why he
should take no further favours from his uncle.  If the truth about the
frontier affair ever came out, it would look as if he had valued his
honour less than the money he could extort and the Colonel would bear
the stigma of having bought his silence.

"I'm grateful, sir, but I must still refuse," he said.

"But why?  The property would stand the cost of the arrangement I
thought of making, and Bertram wouldn't feel that I had been unfair to
him; besides, his wife has means."

"Bertram's as generous as you are; he pressed me to take some help from
him in Montreal, but I could not consent."

"I think you were wrong, and see I have made a mistake.  I should have
stuck to my first intention of saying nothing about it and putting you
into my will, but it struck me that you would like to know how you
stood, in case you thought of marrying or going in for farming on a
remunerative scale in Canada."

"Thank you, but if my future is to be provided for, I'm the person who
ought to look after it.  There's no reason why it should become a
charge on you."

"I think there is," Challoner rejoined.  "In fact, I feel somewhat hurt
that you don't see it."

Blake was touched, but his determination held.  "I'm glad you made me
the offer, sir, because it shows I haven't forfeited your regard.  You
must, however, let me have my way, particularly as I see a chance of
making money."

"Then you have some plan?"

"My partner has," Blake answered, smiling.  "I leave that kind of thing
to him.  I told you about the oil."

"You did, and Clarke had something to say upon the subject.  He,
however, gave me to understand that capital was needed."

"That is so," Blake replied unguardedly, for he did not see where his
uncle's remark led.  "Boring plant is expensive, and transport costs
something.  Then you have to spend a good deal beforehand if you wish
to float a company."

"But you believe this venture will pay you?"

"Harding is convinced of it, and he's shrewd.  Personally, I don't know
enough about the business to judge, but if I had any money to risk I'd
take his word for it."

"Well," said Challoner, urging his horse to a trot, "perhaps we had
better get on."

They joined the company gathered round the edge of the gorse and when
Challoner greeted an acquaintance Blake found what he thought was a
good place for getting a start from.  He could hear the cries of the
huntsman and an occasional blast of his horn among the furze; once or
twice a ranging dog broke cover and disappeared again.  Outside,
red-coated men and some in grey jammed their hats tight and tried to
keep their fidgeting horses quiet.  Close by a young girl, finely
habited, with a glowing face, gracefully controlled her plunging mount,
and a few older women seemed to have some trouble in holding their
thoroughbreds.  Everybody wore a strained, eager look, but Blake was
disappointed, for although he looked round for Millicent and Foster he
did not see them.

By and by a deep baying broke out and swelled into a burst of thrilling
sound, the horn called sharply, somebody shouted, and there was a rush
of well-mounted riders towards a corner of the gorse.  Then the hounds
streamed out, speeding across the grassy slope with a small, red-brown
object travelling very fast some distance in front.  Blake, who let his
chestnut go, swept down the hill at a furious gallop, and felt the
horse rise and heard a thud of hoofs on sloppy ground as a fence was
cleared.  Then he toiled across a strip of ploughing, with firm grip on
the bridle, for, exhilarating as the chase was, he could not enjoy it
long.  In his younger days he had hunted the country he was now riding
over, he had been a crack polo player, and had covered wide stretches
of the Canadian prairie in the saddle.  He could feel the power of the
good horse he bestrode, the speed fired his blood, and for the first
few minutes he had been in danger of forgetting that the keen pleasure
he was conscious of could not be enjoyed long.

There was a crash as they broke through the top of a bending hedge, he
heard a rail break beneath the hoofs, and they were flying across a
wide pasture, the chestnut pulling hard.  It needed some strength of
will to hold him, but Blake did so, keeping his place behind the
foremost while the rest of the hunt tailed out.  After another awkward
jump or two most of the rearguard were out of sight, scattering, no
doubt, in search of gates, and Blake was not pleased to find himself
level with two well-mounted, red-coated men.  There was a brook with a
fringe of willows along its side not far ahead and, a short distance to
the right, a deep, tree-shrouded hollow.  This was where he must break
off, but, sitting a good horse in the company of hard-riding men, it
was not pleasant to look as if he shirked the leap.

"'Ware rotten bank!" cried one, glancing round at him.  "Head for the
pollard stump!"

"Give me a lead," Blake shouted.  "You know the country."

With a strong effort, he held the chestnut back, and saw the first
red-coated figure rise above the willows and alight with the mire
flying among the rushes across the stream.  Then he swung to the right,
where he remembered there was a broad, shallow place, and drove the
chestnut at its widest part.  They came down with a great splash and
the horse floundered badly, for the bottom was soft, but Blake had done
what he meant to do, and as the second horseman leaped across a
narrower spot he caught a sympathetic, "Hard luck!"

Then he turned the chestnut and scrambling out upon the bank he had
left trotted to the hollow, where he was lost among the trees before
the tail of the hunt came up.  He thought he had withdrawn himself
neatly and must now get home as soon as possible, because if his uncle
saw no opportunity of picking up the hounds again after an easy ride,
he might return before Mrs. Chudleigh could be dealt with.

Crossing a sunk lane by and by, Blake, who glanced at his watch, held
straight across the fields, and was glad to find that the hunt-club
subsidies had had some effect in determining the nature of the fences.
The most part could be jumped without much trouble, but the chestnut
was foul-coated and flecked with spume when at length he turned into a
road.  There he pulled up to a steady trot and got home, rather wet and
splashed with mire, early in the afternoon, and after a bath and change
felt himself ready for the encounter.  He had not much diplomacy, but
thought he could make up for that by stubbornly sticking to his point.

As he sat in the library with the door left open he heard Mrs. Foster
and her friends arrive and recognized the voices.  Mrs. Keith had come
and Millicent, besides another lady whom he surmised was Mrs.
Chudleigh.  He hardly thought his aunt, whom he had not taken into his
confidence, would mention him, and it might be better if he waited
until tea was served, after which the party would probably separate and
saunter about the hall and picture gallery.  It was important that he
should have a few words with Mrs. Chudleigh alone.  Fortune favoured
him, for when he entered the gallery she stood before a picture and the
nearest of her companions was some yards further on.  She started when
he came up and joined her.

"You remember me, though I imagine my appearance is a surprise to you,"
he said with a bow.

"Yes," she answered calmly, though she had received something of a
shock.  "Nobody told me you had returned from Canada."

"There was no obvious reason for thinking you would be interested.  But
will you sit down?  My uncle has some rather good miniatures which
might please you.  They're in yonder drawer."

She looked at him sharply.  "You may bring them.  I suppose you have
something to say."

Blake placed the case of miniatures on a table and she took up one or
two.  "They are worth seeing, and in good French style; beauties of
Marie Antoinette's court, perhaps, though this one in the high-waisted
dress may have been attached to Josephine's."  Then she put them down
with a smile.  "Now they have served their purpose.  What have you to
say?"

"You must excuse the bluntness which I feel is needful.  You came over
to see my uncle and I'm afraid you were disappointed in finding me
instead."

"Suppose I admit it?  That wouldn't prevent my seeing Colonel Challoner
another time."

"Certainly not, provided that you still wished to do so, but I'm
inclined to think you won't consider it necessary when you know what my
attitude is.  You must realize that a good deal depends on this."

"Yes," she said frankly, "in a sense, you're important.  I see you
understand the situation."

"You believe you have the power to force my uncle into furthering a
plan of yours.  You found him obstinate at your first attempt, but you
think his resolution may since have given way."

"Yes," she said; "if I insist, he cannot refuse me."

"That is where we differ.  I'm in your way, and you'll excuse my saying
that you'll find me rather troublesome to remove.  Then a secret loses
its value when people find it out, and it's perhaps news to you that a
man from Canada called upon my uncle not long since with a story very
like yours.  He found the Colonel no more amenable than you did."

Mrs. Chudleigh looked surprised, but that was all.  "It may save us
both trouble if you tell me candidly what you mean to do."

Blake glanced down the gallery.  Mrs. Keith was sitting at a table with
some old prints spread out before her, but as the light was fading he
hardly supposed that she could see him well, though he imagined that
she was watching.  In the background Mrs. Foster was talking to Miss
Challoner, with Millicent standing in the shadow.  The Challoner
portraits were growing indistinct, though their heavy gold frames
glimmered faintly, and he could no longer distinguish the carving on
the ends of the dark oak beams.  Though he thought he was safe from
interruption by any of the others, Blake realized that he had no time
to lose, because Challoner must arrive soon.

"Yes," he said, "I think it would be better.  Well, I mean to relieve
my uncle from any further attacks of the kind you have made on him and
to defend my cousin's honour.  You must see that you are powerless to
injure it unless I confirm your tale."

Mrs. Chudleigh clenched her hand and her eyes flashed.  "You are
willing to bear undeserved disgrace, to wander about Canada, an outcast
from all society you could take pleasure in?  It's incomprehensible,
unless you have something to gain."

Blake regarded her with a tolerant smile.  "My dear lady, it's obvious
that I should not gain anything by supporting your ingenious theory of
what happened on the frontier, because if you were right, your only
power over the Colonel would lie in his supposed desire to keep it
quiet, which would, of course, prevent my clearing my character.  If,
however, you wish to believe that I have been bought over by him or
Bertram, you must do so.  I'll own that it seems the best explanation;
but I should then have a strong reason for opposing you."

"But you are opposing me."

"Yes," said Blake.  "My object in doing so hasn't much bearing on the
matter so far as you are concerned, but it will simplify things if you
will realize that I mean to stand between my relatives and harm.  I'm
not a clever player of this kind of game, but you must see I hold the
ace of trumps among my cards.  Now you know I'm ready to play it, don't
you think it would be wiser to leave the Colonel alone?"

For a few moments she looked at him in silence, and though she burned
with anger and disappointment she kept her head.  She was beaten; no
art that she could practise and no argument would prevail against the
man's resolution.  The only thing left was to retire with as much
dignity as possible from the fight.

"Well," she answered, getting up, "I suppose there is no more to be
said, and after all you might have shown me less consideration.  I must
do you the justice to admit that I believe you are acting out of
loyalty to your friends."

"Thank you," Blake said with a bow.  "Now I notice Mrs. Foster coming
towards us and imagine that she doesn't mean to stay much longer."

Mrs. Chudleigh left him, and in another few minutes Mrs. Foster
declared that she must go, while as they walked towards the staircase
Mrs. Keith came up to Blake.

"Well?" she asked in an anxious tone.

Blake smiled at her.  "I think we needn't fear any further trouble."

Admiration shone in Margaret Keith's eyes.  "It's a great relief,
though I knew the worst danger was over when you came home.  None of
the Challoners ever did so fine a thing, Dick."

She went by before he could answer and he turned back into the gallery
while the others descended to the hall.  Standing near a window, he saw
Foster's car speed down the drive; then the hoot of the horn reached
him from the corner by the lodge, and there was silence again.  It was
broken a few minutes later by a beat of hoofs, and Blake, looking out,
saw Challoner dismount.

"Where did you get to, Dick?" the Colonel asked when his nephew went
down to meet him.  "I saw you close behind the hounds for a time, but
you disappeared and nobody seemed to know what had become of you."

"I had a good run," Blake said, smiling.  "Then I dropped out and rode
home across country.  I remembered that there was something I had to
do."

"It must have been something important to take you off the field when
the hounds were running as they were then."

"I thought the matter needed attention," Blake rejoined, lighting a
cigar.




CHAPTER XXXI

A DIFFICULT QUESTION

On the evening after Mrs. Chudleigh's visit, Challoner sent for Blake,
who had just returned from an afternoon's shooting with Foster.  The
Colonel was sitting in a big leather chair near a good fire, but he had
a heavy rug wrapped about him.

"Had you good sport?" he asked.  "You must have found it very cold
standing about the covers."

"We made a fair bag.  The air was raw, but nothing unusual."

"I can't keep warm; I've been shivering all day.  It looks as if I'd
got a chill waiting outside Croxleigh gorse, but that is not what I
want to talk about."  His tone grew sharper.  "It's curious that I
wasn't told Mrs. Chudleigh came here yesterday; had you anything to do
with keeping the information from me?"

"I'm afraid I must own up, sir.  I thought it might disturb you, if you
knew."

"Your intentions were, no doubt, good, but please remember in future
that I can't permit things that concern me to be taken out of my hands.
I believe I'm still capable of managing my affairs."

It struck Blake that his uncle looked ill, which might account for his
asperity, and he made an apologetic answer.

"You may as well tell me what she said," Challoner resumed.

"As a matter of fact, she didn't say very much," Blake answered with a
twinkle.  "I did most of the talking, but you must guess her object;
she seems a persistent lady."

"Then what did you say?"

"I tried to show her that she was helpless to make any trouble so long
as I stuck to my guns, and I think she recognized it.  Anyhow, Foster
mentioned that she told his wife this morning she was afraid she
couldn't stay as long as she had expected.  I suppose this means she's
ready to leave the field as soon as she can do so without exciting
curiosity."

Challoner looked much relieved, but when Blake left him he grew
thoughtful.  His nephew's demonstration with the chessmen had lifted a
weight off his mind, but he was troubled by a doubt about the absolute
correctness of his explanation.  Moreover, when he dwelt upon it, the
doubt gathered strength, but there was nothing that he could do; Dick
obviously meant to stick to his story, and Bertram could not be
questioned.  Another matter troubled him; Dick, whom he had meant to
provide for, would not allow it, and though Challoner admired his
independence he thought Dick was carrying it too far.

In the meanwhile, Blake sought Miss Challoner and said, "I don't think
my uncle's looking fit.  Mightn't it be better to send for Dr. Onslow?"

"He wouldn't be pleased," Miss Challoner answered dubiously  "Still, he
sometimes enjoys a talk with Onslow, who's a tactful man.  If he looked
in, as it were, casually----"

"Yes," said Blake; "we'll give him a hint.  I'll send the groom with a
note at once."

The doctor came and left without expressing any clear opinion, but when
he returned next day he ordered Challoner to bed and told Blake he
feared a sharp attack of pneumonia.  His fears were justified, for it
was some weeks before Challoner was able to leave his room.  During his
illness he insisted on his nephew's company whenever the nurses would
allow it, and when he began to recover, again begged him to remain at
Sandymere.  He had come to lean upon the younger man and entrusted him
with all the business of the estate, which he was no longer able to
attend to.

"Dick," he said one day when Blake thought he was too ill to perceive
that he was casting a reflection on his son, "I wish my personal means
were larger, so I could give Bertram enough and leave Sandymere to you;
then I'd know the place would be in good hands.  On the surface, you're
a happy-go-lucky fellow, but that's deceptive.  In reality, you have a
surprising grip of things--however, you know my opinion of you.  But
you won't go away, Dick?"

The nurse interrupted them, and Blake was glad he had written to
Harding stating his inability to rejoin him.  A week or two later he
received a cable message: "No hurry."

When spring came he was still at Sandymere, for Challoner, who got
better very slowly, would not let him go, and saw Millicent frequently.
At first he felt that this was a weakness, since he had nothing to
offer her except a tainted name, but his love was getting beyond
control and his resistance feebler.  After all, he thought, the story
of the Indian disaster must be almost forgotten, and Harding had a good
chance of finding the oil.  If the latter had not already started for
the North, he would do so soon, but Blake had had no news from him
since his cabled message.

Then, after a quiet month, things began to happen, for one afternoon
when Challoner had driven over to Hazlehurst with his nephew, Foster
came in from the station, bringing a newspaper.  The party was sitting
in the conservatory; Mrs. Keith talking to Challoner, Millicent and
Blake standing close by, but there were no other guests, and Mrs.
Chudleigh had left some weeks earlier.  Foster sat down near the
Colonel.

"Here's a paragraph that may be of interest; it wasn't in the morning
papers."  he remarked.  "I believe I've heard Miss Graham and Mrs.
Chudleigh mention a Captain Sedgwick."

"Yes," said Millicent; "we both knew him, but what has he been doing?"

"He seems to have got into trouble, but I'll read you the account."

The interest he had roused was obvious.  Challoner leaned forward with
an intent face, Blake dropped the match with which he was lighting a
cigarette, while Mrs. Keith fixed her eyes eagerly on Foster.
Millicent was the least concerned, and she wondered at the others' air
of tension while Foster unfolded his paper.

"'Telegraphic news has been received of a disaster to a small British
force in Western Africa,' he read.  'Captain Sedgwick left his
headquarters at Ambolana with a detachment of native troops to demand
guarantees of good behaviour from the headman of a fortified village
near the French frontier.  The expedition was ambushed in thick jungle,
but, escaping after heavy loss, made a stand against large numbers at a
place which appears to lie outside the British boundary.  Here Sedgwick
again suffered some loss before a body of French black troops appeared
upon the field.  Further details are anxiously waited, since the
affair, which is complicated by a doubt about the headman's suzerainty,
may lead to strong representations from France.'"

"It looks as if your friend will get a wigging," Foster remarked to
Millicent as he laid down the paper.  "As I understand it, the
Government doesn't thank too zealous officers who make trouble with our
neighbours, unless there's some substantial gain.  There can't be any
in this case, because the French had to rescue the fellow."

"Then I'm sorry for Captain Sedgwick," Millicent replied.  "I met him
in Quebec, but only saw him for a few weeks."  She turned to Blake.
"The news seems to have made some impression on you."

"It has, in a way," Blake admitted with embarrassment, because he did
not wish his interest to be noticed.  "As it happens, I've heard a good
deal about the man."

Then Mrs. Keith beckoned the girl.  "I think I left my outdoor
spectacles in my room; would you mind getting them?"

Millicent went away and Mrs. Keith led Foster to talk about something
else, because she saw that his wife's curiosity was aroused.  It was
undesirable that any one should guess that the news had its importance
to Challoner.  Prudence prevented her saying anything to her old friend
alone before he left, but she gave him a look which was expressive of
relief and satisfaction.  As they drove home Challoner turned to Blake.

"I'll know more about the matter in a day or two," he said.
"Greythorpe's coming down."

"In my opinion, Sedgwick has ruined himself," Blake replied.  "No
influence could get him the appointment now."

This view was taken by Greythorpe when he sat talking with Challoner a
few evenings afterwards.

"You were right about Captain Sedgwick," he remarked.  "The man came
near getting us into serious difficulties.  I suppose you have read the
newspaper account?"

"Yes.  You have more complete information?"

Greythorpe nodded.  "The other was accurate, so far as it went.  The
fellow played a bold stroke, making the usual excuse; the necessity for
putting an end to the depredations and barbarities of a native headman."

"To do him justice, I daresay the excuse was good."

"It's possible, but Sedgwick's motive was not humanitarian.  He knew
that if he could seize the headman's stronghold and effectively occupy
the surrounding country, we should stay there and after a protest or
two the French would have to acquiesce.  As it happened, he bungled the
business, and, worst of all, had to be extricated by the people he
meant to outwit.  They led him politely but very firmly across the
frontier, and now it's our part to express our regret and promise to
avoid any fresh aggression."

"What will you do with Sedgwick?"

"He'll have to be reprimanded, and after this we can't trust him with
independent authority.  He's too venturesome, though I'll admit that it
would have been different if he had succeeded.  Still, he has his
talents, and I daresay we'll find him useful in a subordinate post.
I'm inclined to sympathize with your friend Mrs. Chudleigh."

Challoner made no answer to this, and they talked about matters until
Blake came in, when Greythorpe left them alone together.

"He agrees with you about the African affair," said the Colonel.
"Sedgwick is, so to speak, done for and will be kept in the background
after this."

"It's more important that Mrs. Chudleigh is disposed of," Blake
replied.  "As she can't help the man, she'll no longer have any motive
for troubling us, and I don't think she would do so out of malice.
That sets me free, and as you're getting strong again I ought to go
back to Canada as soon as I can."

"If you feel you must go, I'll have to consent."

"I've a duty to my partner.  It's probable that he has already set off,
but I know where to find him and there'll be plenty to do.  For one
thing, as transport is expensive, we'll have to relay our supplies over
very rough country and that means making the same stage several times,
while I don't suppose Harding will have been able to buy very efficient
boring plant."

"He may have done better than you imagined," Challoner remarked.  "A
man as capable as he seems to be would somehow get hold of what was
needful."

Blake was surprised at this, because his uncle understood their
financial difficulties; but he said, "There's a fast boat next
Saturday.  I think I'll go by her."

"Wait another week, to please me," Challoner urged him.  "You have had
a dull time since I've been ill, and now I'd like you to get about.  I
shall miss you badly, Dick."

Blake agreed.  He felt that he ought to have sailed earlier, but the
temptation to remain was strong.  He now met Millicent every day, and
it might be a very long time before he returned to England.  He feared
that he was laying up trouble for himself, but he recklessly determined
to make the most of the present, and, in spite of his misgivings, the
next eight or nine days brought him many delightful hours.  Now she
knew he was going, Millicent abandoned the reserve she had sometimes
shown.  She was sympathetic, interested in his plans, and, he thought,
wonderfully charming.  They were rapidly drawn closer together, and the
more he learned of her character, the stronger his admiration grew.  At
times he imagined he noticed a tender shyness in her manner, and though
it delighted him he afterwards took himself to task.  He was not acting
honourably; he had no right to win this girl's love, as he was trying
to do, but there was the excuse that she knew his history and it had
not made her cold to him.

In the meanwhile, Mrs. Keith, who had grown very fond of her companion
and entirely approved of her, looked on with observant eyes and made
opportunities for throwing the two together.  One afternoon a day or
two before Blake's departure she called Millicent into her room and
asked her abruptly: "Have you ever thought about your future?"

"Not often since I have been with you," Millicent answered.  "Before
that it used to trouble me."

"Then I'm afraid you're imprudent.  You have no relations you could
look to for help, and while my health is pretty good I can't, of
course, live for ever.  I might leave you something, but it would not
be much, because my property is earmarked for a particular purpose."

Millicent wondered where this led, but Mrs. Keith went on: "As you have
found out, I'm a frank old woman and not afraid to say what I think.
Well, considering how attractive you are, there's a way out of the
difficulty, and I believe it's the best one.  You ought to marry; it's
your true vocation."

"I'm not sure," said Millicent, blushing.  "Besides it mightn't be
possible.  I owe everything to your generosity, but you have brought me
into a station where I must stand comparison with girls who have more
advantages."

"You mean they have more money?  Well, it's not to be despised, but
I've met men who didn't attach too much importance to it.  They had the
sense to see there were other things of greater value, and while I
don't often flatter people, you're not poor in this respect.  But if
you liked a man who was far from rich, would you marry him?"

"It would depend," Millicent replied, while her colour deepened.  "Why
do you ask?  I can't give you a general answer."

"Then give me a particular one; I want to know."

The girl was embarrassed, but she had learned that her employer was not
to be put off easily.

"I suppose his being poor wouldn't daunt me, if I loved him enough."

"Then we'll suppose something else.  If he had done something to be
ashamed of?"

Millicent looked up with a flash in her eyes.  "People are so ready to
believe the worst.  He did nothing that he need blush for--that's
impossible."  Then she saw the trap into which her generous indignation
had led her, but instead of looking down in confusion she boldly faced
Mrs. Keith.  "Yes," she added, "if he loved me, I would marry him in
spite of what people are foolish enough to think."

"And you would not regret it."  Mrs. Keith laid her hand on the girl's
arm with a caressing touch.  "My dear, if you value your happiness, you
will tell him so.  Remember that he is going away in a day or two."

"How can I tell him?" Millicent cried with burning face.  "I only--I
mean you tricked me into telling you."

"It shouldn't be difficult to give him a tactful hint, and that
wouldn't be a remarkably unusual course," Mrs. Keith rejoined with
amusement.  "The idea that a proposal comes quite spontaneously is to
some extent a convention nowadays.  I don't suppose you need reminding
that we dine at Sandymere to-morrow."

Millicent made no reply, and as she seemed rather overwhelmed by her
employer's frankness, the latter took pity on her.

"You might ask Foster for the review he promised me, but you can send
it up instead of coming back," she said, and added as Millicent turned
away: "Think over what I told you."

The recommendation was superfluous, because Millicent thought of
nothing else.  She knew Blake was her lover and believed she understood
why he had not declared himself.  Now he might go away without speaking
if she let him.  Mrs. Keith's blunt candour left her no excuse for
shirking the truth; she loved the man, but it was hateful to feel that
she must make the first advances and reveal her tenderness for him.
She said she could not do so and yet vacillated, for the alternative
was worse.




CHAPTER XXXII

HARDING STRIKES OIL

Next evening Millicent accompanied Mrs. Keith to Sandymere in a
troubled mood.  Dinner was a trying function, because she sat next to
Foster, who talked in a humorous strain and expected her to appreciate
his jokes.  She found it hard to smile at the right moment and noticed
that Blake was unusually quiet.  It was his last evening in England.

When they went into the drawing-room Challoner engaged her in
conversation for a time and she was afterwards asked to sing.  An hour
passed before Blake had an opportunity of exchanging a word with her,
and then Miss Challoner was sitting close by.

"They'll make you sing again if you stop here," he said softly.

She understood that he wanted her to himself and thrilled at something
in his voice, but instead of complying she asked: "Don't you wish me
to?"

"Yes, of course," he answered lamely and was silent for a few moments.
Then he resumed: "You're interested in Eastern brasswork, I think?"

"I hardly know," said Millicent.  "I haven't seen much of it."

She was vexed with herself for her prudish weakness.  An opportunity
that might never be repeated was offered her, and she could not muster
the courage to seize it.  Blake, however, did not seem daunted.

"You said you were delighted with the things my uncle showed you when
you were last here and a friend has just sent him a fresh lot from
Benares."  He gave her an appealing look.  "It struck me you might like
to see them."

"Yes," said Millicent with forced calm; "I really think I would."

"Will you give me the key of the Indian collection?" Blake asked
Challoner.

"Here it is," said the Colonel, who turned to Mrs. Keith.  "That
reminds me, you haven't seen my new treasures yet.  Dryhurst has lately
sent me some rather good things; among others there's a small Buddha,
exquisitely carved.  Shall we go and look at them?"

Mrs. Keith felt angry with him for a marplot, but she said: "Wouldn't
it be better to wait until I'm here in the daylight?  If I try to
examine anything closely with these spectacles, they strain my eyes."

"I've had a new lamp placed in front of the case," Challoner persisted,
and Mrs. Keith found it hard to forgive him for his obtuseness.

"Very well," she said in a resigned tone, and when Millicent and Blake
had gone out walked slowly to the door with Challoner.

They were half way up the staircase which led rather sharply from the
hall when she stopped and turned to her companion.

"It's obvious that you have recovered," she said.

"I certainly feel much better, but what prompted your remark?"

"These stairs.  You don't seem to feel them, but if you expect me to
run up and down, you'll have to make them shallower and less steep.
I've been up twice since I came; Hilda insisted on my seeing the new
decorations in the west wing, and I must confess to a weakness in my
knee."

Challoner gave her a sharp glance and then said, "I'm sorry.  Mrs.
Foster mentioned something about your not walking much; I should have
remembered."

"It's the weather; I find the damp troublesome.  If you don't mind, I
think we'll go down."

Challoner gave her his arm, and Millicent, standing in the picture
gallery, noticed their return.  She suspected that this was the result
of some manoeuvre of Mrs. Keith's intended for her advantage, and tried
to summon her resolution.  The man she loved would sail next day,
believing that his poverty and the stain he had not earned must stand
between them, unless she could force herself to give him a hint to the
contrary.  This was the only sensible course, but she timidly shrank
from it.

Blake unlocked a glass case and taking out two shelves laid them on a
table.  "There they are," he said with a rather nervous smile.  "I've
no doubt the things are interesting, and if our friends come up they
can look at them.  But it wasn't Benares brassware that brought me
here."

"Was it not?" Millicent asked with a fluttering heart.

"Certainly not!  One couldn't talk with Foster enlarging upon the only
rational way of rearing pheasants, and you know I'm going away first
thing to-morrow."

"Yes; I know," said Millicent, and then looked up at him with sudden
courage.  "I'm sorry."

"Truly sorry; you mean that?"  He gave her a very keen glance while he
knitted his brows.

"Yes," she said recklessly; "I mean it.  You ought to know I do."

He laid his hand on her shoulder, holding her a little away from him.
"I came up here in a state of horrible indecision, torn different ways
by a sense of the duty I owed you and my selfish longing.  Even if
nothing had been said to make it harder for me, I can't tell how the
struggle would have ended."

"Why should there be a struggle?" she asked him.

His grasp tightened and his eyes were steadily fixed upon her face.
"You're very young and beautiful and, though I love you, I'm a broken
man."

"Then it's through no fault of yours."

"The consequences are the same and, apart from this, I have nothing to
offer.  Can you wonder, my dear, that I was afraid?  I come to you a
beggar, with everything to gain."

"Ah!" she said, "all I have to give is yours; I think it was yours
before you asked for it."

"Then you are not afraid?"

She looked at him with a happy smile.  "What should I fear?  Aren't you
able to take care of me?  It must be for my sake that you are so timid
and I love you for it, but I think this must be the first time you ever
hesitated long.  Where has your usual recklessness gone?"

"It's coming back."  He passed his arm about her waist, drawing her
strongly to him.  "We'll laugh at cold-blooded prudence and take our
chances.  It's a wide world, and we'll find a nook somewhere if we go
out and look for it.  All my care will be to smooth the trail for your
dear, pretty feet."

They spent a time in happy talk, and Blake murmured when Millicent
protested that they must go back, while she feared that her lover's
exultant air would betray them as they entered the drawing-room.

"Where's the key?" Challoner asked.

"I'm afraid I forgot it, sir," Blake confessed.  "Very sorry, but I'm
not even sure I put the things away."

Challoner rang a bell and gave an order to a servant.  Then he asked
Millicent: "Did you see the Buddha?"

"No," she said.  "I don't think so."

"Or the brass plate with the fantastic serpent pattern round the rim?"

"I'm afraid I didn't," Millicent owned with a trace of confusion.

Challoner looked hard at Blake, and then his eyes twinkled.

"Well," he said pointedly, "perhaps it wasn't to be expected."

There was a moment's silence.  Millicent looked down with the colour in
her face; Blake stood very straight, smiling at the others.  Then he
said, "We are all friends here, and I'm proud to announce that
Millicent has promised to marry me as soon as I return from Canada."
He bowed to Mrs. Keith and the Colonel.  "As you have taken her
guardian's place, madam, and you, sir, are the head of the house, I
should like to think we have your approval."

"How formal, Dick!" said Mrs. Keith with a laugh.  "I imagine my
consent is very much a matter of form, but I give it with the greatest
satisfaction."

Challoner got up and took Millicent's hand.  "My dear, I am very glad,
and I think Dick has shown great wisdom.  I wish you both all
happiness."

Mrs. Foster and her husband offered their congratulations, and for the
next hour they discussed Blake's future plans, after which they were
interrupted by the entrance of a servant with a small silver tray.

"Telegram, sir, for Mr. Blake," he said.  "Hopkins was at the post
office, and they gave it him."

Blake took the envelope and looked at Miss Challoner for permission to
open it.  When he had done so, he started and gave the form to
Millicent.

"Oh, Dick!" she cried with sparkling eyes.  "Isn't this very good."

"I believe so."  Blake turned to the others.  "After the good feeling
you have shown towards us, I daresay you'll be interested to hear my
partner's latest news."  He read out: "'Come.  Struck it.  Tell
Challoner.'"

He turned to Mrs. Keith.  "This should set me firmly on my feet and may
make me rich."  Then he addressed Challoner.  "But I don't understand
the last of it.  Why does he wish you to know?"

The Colonel chuckled.  "I sent Mr. Harding five hundred pounds to buy
anything he needed for his prospecting, and told him to give me an
option on a good block of shares in the new syndicate at par.  You're
very independent, Dick, but I can't see why you should object to your
relatives putting money into what looks like a promising thing."

"I've no doubt it was mainly through your help Harding found the oil,"
Blake said gratefully.

Soon after this the Fosters rose to go, but they waited sympathetically
in the hall while Millicent lingered with Blake in the drawing-room.

"Dick," she said, blushing, "you made a rash statement, I didn't quite
promise to marry you as soon as you came back."

"Then it was understood," Blake answered firmly.

"I can't let you off."

"Well," she said; "if it will bring you home any quicker, dear!  But
how long must you stay?"

"I can't tell; there may be much to do and, if Harding needs me, I must
see it out, but I won't delay a minute more than's needful.  You know
we may have to live in Canada?"

"Yes," she said shyly; "I won't object.  Where you are will be home."

Then Foster opened the door.  "The car's waiting, and it's coming on to
rain."

Millicent went out with him; and Blake, who sailed next day, found, on
reaching the timber belt, that, as he had predicted, there was much to
be done.  After some months' hard work, Harding, who was confident that
the oil would pay handsomely, left him in charge while he set off for
the cities to arrange about pipes and plant and the raising of capital.
It was early winter when he returned, satisfied with what he had
accomplished, and Blake saw that he would be able to visit England in a
few weeks.

He was sitting in their office shack one bitter day when a sledge
arrived with supplies, and the teamster brought him a telegram.  His
face grew grave as he opened it and read--


"Bertram killed in action.--Challoner."


"This sets you free, doesn't it?" Harding remarked after expressing his
sympathy.

"I can't tell," Blake answered.  "I haven't thought of it in such a
light.  I was very fond of my cousin."

"But the action must have been in India," Harding resumed after a
while.  "Didn't you tell me Captain Challoner was coming home?"

"He gave up a good appointment when he found his regiment was to be
sent to a station where there was a likelihood of some fighting.  I
think I can guess the reason."

Shortly before Blake left the camp he received further news by mail and
some English newspapers.  Bertram had been shot when leading an attack
upon a fort among the frontier hills, and the accounts agreed that he
had shown exceptional gallantry.

On reaching England, Blake found Millicent at the station.  Mrs. Keith,
she told him, had given up her London house and taken one near
Sandymere.  Then she looked thoughtful when he asked about his uncle.

"I'm afraid you will see a marked change in him," she said.  "He has
not been well since you left, and the news of Bertram's death was a
shock."

She was with him when he met Challoner, who looked very frail and
forlorn.

"It's a comfort to see you back, Dick; you are all I have now," he
said, and went on with a break in his voice: "After all, it was a good
end my boy made--a very daring thing!  The place was supposed to be
unassailable by such a force as he had, but he stormed it.  In spite of
his fondness for painting, he was true to strain."

Some time later Blake said to Millicent, "You heard what he told me,
dear?  The secret must still be kept; I can't speak."

"No," said Millicent, "not while your uncle lives.  It's hard, when I
want everybody to know what you are."

He kissed her.  "I daresay it's natural that you should be prejudiced
in my favour, but I like it."

"Oh!" she answered, smiling, "I've no doubt you have some faults, but
you're very staunch.  You must do what you think right, Dick, and I'll
try to be content.  One reason for my loving you is that you are brave
enough to take this generous part."




THE END