Yarmouth Notes




                                1830–1872.



             _Collated from the File of the Norwich Mercury_.



                                    BY
                         FREDERICK DANBY PALMER.



                             GREAT YARMOUTH:
                    PRINTED BY J. BUCKLE, KING STREET.
                                  1889.




PREFACE.


The following pages are a reprint of extracts from the file of the
_Norwich Mercury_, which, under the heading of “Yarmouth Notes,” have
recently appeared in the columns of the _Yarmouth Mercury_; and in
consequence of a very generally expressed wish on the part of the public,
re-appear in the present form.

At the time these notices of Yarmouth News appeared in the _Norwich
Mercury_, that journal was the organ of the old Whig party, and such of
them, as treat of politics, being doubtless tinged by the party feeling
of the Editor, should be so taken and read.

The idea of collating this matter suggested itself to the compiler upon
the occasion of Geo. Wm. Darby Palmer-Kerrison, Esq., presenting the file
of the _Norwich Mercury_, (then in his Library), but which had been
preserved by the late Robert Palmer Kemp, Esq., to the Yarmouth Free
Library, and it is hoped that this action will not only prove of some
entertainment and amusement to the reader, but also will be of service to
any person who may, in the future, deal with local events as affecting
the history of the borough of Great Yarmouth.

                                                                  F. D. P.

HALL QUAY,
      _December_, 1889.



                                    TO
                           THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
                          CHARLES LORD SUFFIELD,
                          P.C., K.C.B., &c, &c.

_The following pages_, _relating to a Town_, _in the welfare of which his
Lordship and his noble forefathers have taken so deep an interest for
many years_, _are with his permission_, _inscribed by_

                                                     HIS OBEDIENT SERVANT,
                                                               THE AUTHOR.

_Great Yarmouth_,
      _December_, 1889.




FIRST SERIES, 1830–40.


    “When found, make a note of”—

                                                             CAPT. CUTTLE.



1830.


Jan. 2nd.—Contains an advertisement of the report of the “Norfolk
Association for preserving the lives of Shipwrecked Mariners,” held at
Norwich, William Barth, Esq., in the chair, from which it appears that an
investigation had taken place as to the loss of seven men from the brig
Hamond, and that as the lifeboat was not constructed with a view to
affording aid to vessels immediately on the beach, Mr. Ambrose Palmer had
most kindly offered to supply a boat for that purpose.

Jan. 9th.—The prisoners in the gaol returned thanks to Mr. Daniel Hook
for the good dinner of “roast beef and plum pudding and a quart of ale
each,” which he had given them on New Year’s Day.

Jan. 21.—Mr. William Ferrier had given a lecture on Natural History, at
the Mechanics’ Institution; and at an adjourned meeting of the Public
library, Mr. Charles Nicholls entered upon the office of Treasurer in the
room of the Rev. H. R. Bowles, deceased; and Mr. Thomas Hammond was
re-elected librarian.

Jan. 28th.—Charles John Palmer, Esq., had been elected a F.S.A.

Feb. 4th.—Navigation was stopped by the frost.

Feb. 11th.—A Fisherman’s Provident Society had been established, to which
George Danby-Palmer, Esq., “had been a liberal subscriber, and had
accepted the office of treasurer, Mr. Thomas Hammond acting as
secretary.”

March 25th.—A meeting had been held at the New Hall (George Bateman,
Mayor, in the chair) to take into consideration “the expediency of
building a new church,” when Robert Wall, Esq., George Danby-Palmer,
Esq., Samuel Tolver, Esq. (Town-clerk), and Mr. Ferrier took part, and a
resolution was carried against the proposal to build the church.

April 3rd.—A boldly contested steeplechase had been run off between
several gentlemen of the Munro Hunt, when the prize, a large silver Cup
and cover, was won by H. Munro, Esq., who rode the distance, from Fritton
to Gorleston (above four miles), in fifteen minutes.  Above forty
gentlemen afterwards dined at the Bear.

April 15th.—A meeting had been held at the New Hall “for the purpose of
petitioning Parliament for the further reduction of taxation and a
retrenchment in the public expenditure.”  George Danby-Palmer, Esq., was
in the chair, and William Barth, Esq., Simon Cobb, Esq., John Shelley,
Esq., John Burton Palmer, Esq., William Smith, Esq., Mr. John Barnes, Mr.
Boulton, Mr. Dennent, and Mr. Barrett, took part in the proceedings.

April 22nd.—Much damage had been done to the shipping and in the town by
a gale.

May 6th.—A meeting (George Danby-Palmer, Esq., in the chair) had been
held for the purpose of appointing a select vestry for the parish.

July 3rd.—Owing to the death of King George IV. the paper appeared in
mourning.

July 8th.—The Hon. Col. Anson and Mr. Rumbold had arrived to canvass the
Borough.

July 15th.—A funeral service had been held for the late King (the
Corporation attending in black robes, were afterwards entertained by the
Mayor to chocolate, &c.)  It was estimated that there were 3,000 persons
in the church.

July 22nd.—Messrs. Preston and Campbell (the Tory candidates) had
arrived.  They were attended (so says the advertisement) “by upwards of
400 persons, 50 gentlemen on horseback, and an enormous company of
gentlemen in their carriages, comprising all the consequence and wealth
of the town.”

Aug. 12th.—A meeting had been held to congratulate the King on his
accession to the Throne (George Danby-Palmer, Esq., in the chair); to the
resolution then passed Mr. Palmer received a reply from Sir Robert Peel,
stating that the King had received the same in a most gracious manner.

Aug. 15th.—Messrs. Anson and Rumbold had been returned “after a severe
opposition by almost the entire force of the Corporation.”  The poll
closing—Anson, 944; Rumbold, 944; Campbell, 754; Preston, 754.  A dinner
of their supporters (W. Barth, Esq., in the chair) was afterwards held at
the Masonic Hall.

Aug. 26th.—Contains an advertisement that “the old annual main of cocks
would be fought near the Feathers’ Inn, on Tuesday and Wednesday, the 7th
and 8th September, between the gentlemen of Norwich and Yarmouth, for
five sovs. a battle and 50 the odds.  Feeders—Stafford, Norwich, and
Lamb, Yarmouth.”

Sept. 2nd.—On the “decollation of S. John” the following officers were
elected for the Borough for the ensuing year:—

Mayor elect—Edmund Preston, Esq.

Chamberlain—Mr. Robert B. Fenn.

Churchwardens—I. Preston, Esq. and Mr. J. T. Bracey.

Auditors—G. Bateman, Esq., F. R. Reynolds, Esq., Mr. I. Preston, and Mr.
E. Youell.

Collectors—Charles Costerton, Esq., and Mr. James Clarke.

Muragers—Charles Symonds and Charles J. Palmer, Esqs.

Dec. 9th.—A meeting had been held to petition the legislature for a
Reform in Parliament.  The Mayor (E. Preston, Esq., in the chair), Mr.
Alderman Barth, Mr. S. Cobb, John Shelley, Esq., and John Brightwen,
Esq., took part in the proceedings.

Dec. 23rd.—The self-styled Gorleston and Southtown Corporation dissolved,
and formed itself into the “Hand in Hand Friendly Society,” and it was
ordered that “the regalia of the late Corporation should be sold and the
money arising therefrom distributed among the poor of the parish.”



1831.


Feb. 10th—_The Gorleston and Southtown Magazine_ had been issued in
weekly numbers or monthly parts, and contained a biographical notice of
Mr. Dawson Turner, F.S.A., &c.

Feb. 17th.—Amongst the vessels lost and driven ashore by the then late
gales were the Alfred (Simmonds), the Flora, the Juno (Moss), the
Elizabeth and Mary Welch (Amis), and the Anson (Garwood).

March 5th.—Contains the following notice of Mr. Palmer’s Fancy Dress
Ball:—

                           MR. PALMER’S FANCY BALL.

    In our notice of this amusement at the late Festival, we recollect to
    have said—“The ice has been broken, the pleasure has been felt, and
    we shall be mistaken if the next effort be not more successful.”
    This prediction, intended at the time to be applied to future
    festivals, we did not expect to be so soon, so completely, or so
    successfully fulfilled, as in the instance we now have the pleasure
    to record.  This entertainment was given at the Town Hall on Tuesday
    evening last, in celebration of the attainment of his majority by Mr.
    S. Palmer, the grandson of the late Danby Palmer, Esq., whose
    extended private connections and still wider mercantile pursuits have
    bequeathed to his grandson a more numerous portion of friends than it
    is the lot of most persons to enjoy at an early period of life.  The
    invitations were sent out with such hospitality, the preparations
    were on so munificent a scale, that the spirit of the donor seemed to
    diffuse itself not only to all those who were about to be present,
    but to all the inhabitants of the borough.  The novelty, the
    continued arrivals, the firing of cannon, the banners floating at the
    Town Hall, and in various parts of the town, the gay appearance of
    the ships in the harbour, most of which were decorated with pennons,
    as were several vessels in the Roads—all aided in keeping alive the
    expectation, so that in the evening the Quay, around the hall, was
    crowded with persons anxious to see the company—so anxious, indeed,
    that the carriage windows were assailed by men and women jumping up
    to get a peep at the interior.  The company began to assemble about
    half-past eight, and on entering the ball room were announced by
    name, and received by Mr. Palmer and his mother and Miss A. Burton
    (to whom, we understand, Mr. Palmer is about to be united.)  These
    ladies appeared in very elegant Court dresses, and Mr. Palmer in a
    full-dress Court suit.  Till ten o’clock the company continued to
    arrive, at which hour Mr. Palmer opened the Ball by leading off a
    country dance with Miss A. Burton.  We never saw a similar
    entertainment combining so great a variety of character.  The
    brilliancy of the colours and the constant succession of costumes,
    the reliefs, the contrasts, and the varying shades, reminded us
    forcibly of those beautiful combinations formed by the kaleidoscope,
    of which, visually, this scene may be said to have been an animated
    representation.  On the one side of a quadrille was to be seen the
    gawdy Spaniard, leading with haughty dignity the lively Mrs. Ford of
    the Elizabethian age; while behind him stood pondering o’er the
    fleeting vanity of this world the solitary Friar; opposite ranged the
    joyous Sailor, indulging his mirth at the expense of the courtly
    dignity of his fair partner.  At one end was the Old Gentleman of two
    centuries since, in all the gravity and politeness of that age,
    leading forth some sprightly Tyrolese; while at the other was a
    Chinese Mandarin, paired off with a black-eyed Gipsy; a little
    further, and the Scotchman promenaded with the brilliant Circassian;
    the Frieselander with the simply-dressed Quakeress; the Queen of
    Scots with the bronze and fierce Turk; the reckless Massaroni with
    the lively Mrs. Page; the dark Colombian with the prim lady of an
    hundred years ago; the Forester with the Flower Girl; the haughty
    Knight Templar with the simple Swiss Peasant; the chivalrous Pole
    with the heavy Russian; the youthful Ivanhoe with a French Peasant;
    and to crown the diversity, Day and Night were to be seen at once,
    arm and arm with a Chimney Sweep.

April 14th.—The Preston (Capt. Woodthorpe), with passengers, for Prince
Edward’s Island and Quebec, had been towed down the Harbour.

May 5th.—This number contains the following account of the Borough
Election, consequent upon the rejection of a Reform Bill:—

    The Mayor, in opening the proceedings, said that the electors were
    met to exercise an important trust, that of electing two persons to
    represent the Borough—a trust at all times of the greatest
    responsibility, but certainly never more so than at the present
    eventful crisis.  Determined as he was to act with strict justice,
    and with that fairness and impartiality which were the best ornaments
    of the office he had the honour to hold, he entreated that the
    contest in which they were now about to be engaged might be conducted
    on both sides with that order and decorum that forbearance and
    moderation due from gentlemen to gentlemen, and from man to man.
    (Cheers.)

    Mr. B. Dowson, in a brief but emphatic address, put in nomination the
    Hon. George Anson, this was seconded by R. Palmer Kemp, Esq.

    T. Clowes, Esq., then proposed, in an address replete with sterling
    sense and strength, C. E. Rumbold, Esq., seconded by J. Shelley,
    Esq., who adverted to the circumstance of Mr. Colville being a
    merchant connected with the West Indian Trade and a supporter of
    colonial slavery.

    I. Preston, Esq., jun., and — White, Esq., nominated A. Colville,
    Esq., and J. Lacon, Esq., jun., and Mr. J. Laws nominated W. Bliss,
    Esq.

    Col. Anson and Mr. Rumbold addressed the electors at considerable
    length, pointing out the merits of the measure they supported, during
    which they were enthusiastically cheered.

    Mr. Colville also spoke at length, amid much tumult, during which he
    was interrupted by loud yells of various kinds—attacking the Bill for
    its disfranchising nature, and defending colonial slavery.

    Mr. Bliss had not arrived at that time.

    A poll was determined and immediately opened and continued till five
    o’clock on that and the following day, when the numbers were
    announced by the Committee of Anson and Rumbold to be—

For Col. Anson       748
Mr. Rumbold          748
Mr. Colville         503
Mr. Bliss            497

    The poll was adjourned till Monday.

    On Sunday morning, however, Messrs. Colville and Bliss left the town,
    or, as our correspondent writes, “May Day became more than commonly
    exhilarating, by the agreeable information quickly diffused through
    the town, that the enemies of freedom and of the Constitution had
    fled, happy in evading and escaping from merited punishment, so
    irritated were the minds of the lower class of society against these
    obtruders, without a shadow of claim to their suffrages, that, by
    their flight on Sunday morning, they probably escaped an ablution in
    the waters of the beautiful river Yare.”

    On Monday the books opened, and at the close the final numbers were—

For Col. Anson       903
Mr. Rumbold          903
Mr. Colville         547
Mr. Bliss            541

    This vexatious contest, for it was vexatious, inasmuch as it was
    opposed to the general wish of the inhabitants, as not the slightest
    chance of success prevailed from the commencement, and the only
    object of which was to extract money from the purses of the two
    Members, terminated, not only in the triumphant defeat of the
    Boroughmongers, but by affording a lesson to the Charles Street
    Society in London, whose only object is to continue corruption, by
    the means of corruption, a proof that true independence and love of
    country is far beyond the purchase of the greatest wealth.  But the
    friends of Reform at Yarmouth have set a noble example of
    consistency, for they have commenced among themselves one of the
    modes which the Reform Bill will enforce.  They have determined to
    raise among themselves a sum sufficient to defray the legal expenses
    of the election, and to return their well-tried Members as unhurt in
    their finances as they are independent in principal, and by this mark
    of gratitude and esteem to repay the obligations which the
    inhabitants of Yarmouth in common with the country at large owe to
    the supporters of the Reform Bill—£1,750—has already been raised.  We
    say to the rest of the nation, “Go thou and do likewise.”

    The Chairing of the Members had taken place amid the most
    enthusiastic cheers.

May 19th.—The thanks of the Yarmouth District Committee for saving lives
from shipwreck was voted to Lieut. Harmer, R.N., on saving the crew of
the schooner Fleece, which had been wrecked on the Scroby Sand on the
14th inst.

May 26th.—The men employed by Messrs. Grout, Baylis, and Co., had an
excellent dinner provided for them at J. B. Bales’, Apollo Gardens.

June 9th.—The Mayor had obtained a rule for a mandamus commanding the
Members of the Corporation to attend a Court for the “transaction of
public business.”

June 16th.—The population had increased 3,024 since the census of 1821,
the numbers being—

1831.       22,028 including 913 sailors.
1821.       19,004.
            3,024 increase.

The remaining part of the Eastern Regiment of Norfolk Militia, consisting
of about 440 men, had assembled for 28 days’ training, under the command
of Major Sir E. K. Lacon.

June 23rd.—“Our venerable and highly respected Recorder, Robert Alderson,
Esq., had delivered in his resignation.”

June 30th.—The Bishop of Norwich consecrated St. Mary’s Church,
Southtown.  His Lordship was met by the Corporation “in full robes,” the
Hon. and Rev. Viscount Nevill, the Rev. R. Turner, J. Kitson, Esq.
(Registrar), W. Rackham, Esq. (Proctor), and the principal clergymen and
gentry of the neighbourhood.

The following was the “correct statement” of the population, taken by the
Overseers on 30th May and following days, and sworn by them in Petty
Session:—

Males                          8,980
Females                       12,135
                              21,115
Sailors                          913
                              22,028
Inhabited houses               4,570
Number of families             4,869
Houses building                   23
Houses uninhabited               191

July 7th contains the following notice of the laying the first stone of
St. Peter’s Church:—

“For some days past notices had been issued that the first stone of the
new Church, to be erected in this town, was to be laid this day; and at
half-past ten this morning the Mayor, Corporation, gentry, and
inhabitants assembled at the Town Hall, and proceeded to St. Nicholas’
Church.  Prayers were read by the Rev. Harvey Bawtree, and after service
the procession moved in the following order:—Bellman, Church Beadles,
Constables, the Corporation Band, Hospital Charity Children, Inhabitants
and Gentry, Officers of the Navy, Mr. J. J. Scoles, the Architect, the
Clergy of Yarmouth and its vicinity, the Regalia, the Right Worshipful
Edmund Preston, Esq., the Mayor, his Majesty’s Lieutenant for the County,
the Hon. and Very Rev. Dr. Pellew, Dean of Norwich, and the Rev. Richard
Turner, the Right Hon. and Rev. Viscount Nevill, the Deputy-Mayor, the
Aldermen in their scarlet gowns, the Common Councilmen, Constables.  On
arriving at the ground, the procession passed once round the building to
the north-east corner.

A copy of the inscription, which had been written on vellum, and placed
with the coins of the present King in a bottle, hermetically sealed, was
then read by the Town Clerk:—

    “Great Yarmouth.—The first stone of this Church, dedicated to St.
    Peter, and erected by His Majesty’s Commissioners for building new
    Churches (under the authority of an Act of Parliament, 58th Geo. III.
    c. 45) on a site granted by the Corporation, and with the assistance
    of their donations, and the subscriptions of several of the
    inhabitants of the town and its vicinity, was laid on the seventh day
    of July, in the second year of the reign of His Most Gracious Majesty
    King William the Fourth, MDCCCXXXI., by the Right Worshipful Edmund
    Preston, Esquire, Mayor; the Right Reverend Henry Bathurst, Lord
    Bishop of the Diocese; the Honourable and Very Reverend George
    Pellew, D.D., Dean of Norwich; the Honourable and Reverend Edward
    Pellew, M.A., Minister of the parish.  Architect, Joseph John Scoles;
    contractors, John Pigg, Jeremiah Wright, George Cattermole, Samuel
    Bligh, James Watson.”

The children sang the 100th Psalm during the operation of inserting the
bottle in a cavity, and securing the stone, which had been prepared to
receive it.  A silver trowel was then presented by the Architect, and
after the Mayor had spread the mortar, the stone was lowered to the
proper place, and the ceremony of striking it was performed by the Clergy
and Corporation in succession.

The Dean offered up appropriate prayers, accompanied by an address
expressly composed for this occasion.  The children then sang a collect.
The Mayor afterwards addressed the company present, on the pious work
which they had assisted in commencing; amidst the general plaudits of the
surrounding multitude the band struck up “God save the King,” and the
company returned to the Town Hall and partook of an elegant cold
collation.

“The Church, which has been so happily begun, is calculated to contain
1,800 persons, and three-fifths of the seats are to be appropriated for
ever as free sittings.”

August 25th.—Contains the following notice:—“By invitation from the Mayor
and Mrs. Preston, on Monday sennight, to a promenade at their beautiful
garden, situate on the banks of the river Yare, were assembled almost all
the fashion of the town and its vicinity.  At seven o’clock the band
struck up the national air of “God Save the King,” immediately after
which the younger part of the company formed themselves into quadrilles,
&c., upon the grass plat, near the centre of which tables were supplied
with wines of the first quality and every refreshment in season.  At
eight o’clock a fire balloon ascended from the grounds in very fine
style, which was visible on the grounds and town for about twenty
minutes.  The amusements concluded with a brilliant display of fireworks.
The extreme serenity of the evening, aided by the wild light of the moon
and the more refulgent illumination of the garden with variegated lamps,
rendered this a scene which for good humour and pleasantness has rarely
or ever been equalled in this town.”

Sept. 1st.—Mr. Shelly attended the Corporation meeting and insisted on
reading a protest in respect of the non-attendance of that body to their
“ordinance.”  The following officers were then elected:—

Mayor-Elect—John Preston, Esq.

Chamberlain—Mr. E. Youell.

Churchwardens—S. Paget, Esq., and Mr. T. E. Laws.

Auditors—R. Cory, jun., Esq., E. Preston, Esq., G. Danby-Palmer, Esq.,
and Mr. J. M. Bell.

Sept. 8th.—The Coronation Day was observed as a holiday.

The Races had been held on the 6th and 7th, as follows:—

                    “FIRST DAY—Tuesday, September 6th.

THE GOLD CUP STAKES of 100 sovs. (8 subscribers 10 sovs. each) with 20
sovs. added; the second horse to withdraw his stake.  The winner to be
sold for 400 sovs. if demanded, &c.  Heats, two miles and distance.

Mr. S. Palmer named Lord Exeter’s ch m               1       2       1
Schumla, by Selim, out of Bess, 4 years old,
8st. 1lb. (Hornsby)
Col. Wilson’s ch h Ringleader, by Merlin, out        2       1       0
of Spotless, 4 years old, 8st. 4lbs.
Lord Stradbroke’s b f by Morisco, out of        3 dis.
Arethusa, 3 years old, 6st. 11lbs.

A good race after the second heat.  Two to one was freely betted on
Ringleader; the last heat was very close, and was won by half a head.
Lord Stradbroke’s filly lost her rider by a stirrup leather breaking in
the second heat.

HALF-BRED STAKE.  Heats, one mile and distance; 5 sovs. each.

Mr. Munro’s b h Charley, aged, 11st.        2       2
Mr. Smith’s ch g Sportsman, aged, 11st.     1       1

THE MEMBERS’ PLATE of 50 sovs.  The winner to be sold for 180 sovs. if
demanded, &c.  Heats, two miles and distance.

Mr. Bromley’s ch m Miss Nicolo, 4 years old,    3 dr.
7st. 13lbs.
Mr. Pettit’s b m Ipsala, by Sultan, 4 years     1       2       1
old, 8st. 21bs. (C. Edwards)
Col. Wilson’s br c Whiskey, by Tuesias, out     4       3 dr.
of Schedam, 3 years old, 6st. 12lbs.
Lord Stradbroke’s b m Gallopade, 5 years old,   2       1       0
8st. 13lbs.
Mr. S. Palmer’s gr m Christina, 4 years old,    5       4       3
8st. 2lbs

An excellent race; the heats with difficulty decided.  The winner was
well rode by C. Edwards.

                   SECOND DAY—Wednesday, 7th September.

TOWN AND COUNTRY GENTLEMEN’S PLATE of 50 sovs.  The winner to be sold for
250 sovs. if demanded, &c.  Heats, two miles and distance.

Mr. Pettit’s b m Ipsala, by     1       2       2       (A dead
Sultan, 4 years old, 8st.                               heat.)
6lbs.
Col. Wilson’s ch h              2       1       1
Ringleader, 4 years old, 8st.
9lbs. (Gosling)

A severely contested race of four heats.

HANDICAP SWEEPSTAKES of 10 sovs. each, with the remainder added.  Heats,
one mile and distance.

Lord Stradbroke’s b f by Morisco, out of Arethusa, 3       1 w.o.
years old, 7st. 2lbs
Mr. Pettit’s b m Ipsala, by Sultan, 4 years old, 8st.      2 dr.
5lb.

After the above account of sport, it is needless to say that everyone who
attended the Races was delighted.  The severe running on the first day
prevented several of the horses starting on the second, but the four
well-contested heats for the Town and Country Gentlemen’s Plate more than
compensated for the deficiency in the number of horses.  The ordinaries
and Ball were well attended—a very liberal subscription was entered into
for the Races of 1832.  The Gold Cup Stakes is already filled, and the
Norfolk and Suffolk Hunters’ Stake of 5 sovs. each, with 20 sovs. added,
for horses not thoroughbred, which have been regularly hunted in either
of the above counties, has already six subscribers.  The ladies at the
Ball on Tuesday evening commenced a subscription for a Ladies’ Plate of
50 sovs. for next year, which will be in addition to the two Fifty Pounds
Plates usually given.  Edmund Preston, Esq., is appointed one of the
stewards for 1832.”

Sept. 29th.—The Reformers of Yarmouth “had an excellent meeting” at the
Town-hall.  Mr. Alderman Barth was in the chair, and Messrs. Clowes, S.
Cobb, Shelley, Hammond, Sewell, and Munsey took part in the proceedings.

Oct. 6th.—The Mayor (John Preston, Esq.,) “celebrated his inauguration at
the Town-hall on Thursday sennight by a sumptuous entertainment, which
was attended by the Lord Lieutenant, Judge Alderson, Sir W. Folkes, M.P.,
the Hon. E. Pellew, and about 300 gentlemen of the county and town.”

Nov. 17th.—A Board of Health had been established for the better
cleansing the streets and lanes, and the removal of nuisances.

The “Star” coach, when about a mile this side of Eye, was driven into by
“a fellow in a drunken state,” and one of the leaders was killed on the
spot.

Nov. 24th.—The dairy of John Waters, Esq., of Ormesby, had been broken
into and 16 pints of butter, 14 cheeses, a fat goose, and a quantity of
meat and flour stolen.

Large flocks of “Stormy Petrels” had visited our shores, and between 6
and 7 dozen of them taken alive; several “Little Auks” and “Arctic Gulls”
had also been shot.

Dec. 29th.—A poor man known as “Do you know him” was insulted, by a man
pulling a nightcap over his face, and at the same time informing him that
he was about to be “burked,” which so much “alarmed the poor creature,
that he was taken to his home in a desponding state.”



1832.


Jan. 5th.—The Hon. and Rev. E. Pellew had distributed the prizes to the
Sunday School children.

Jan. 12th.—Dr. Cox had delivered a very interesting lecture on
“Physiology.”

Feb. 2nd.—The Rev. Henry Squire was advertised to deliver a course of
lectures at the Old Meeting.

The case of the King against the Aldermen of Yarmouth is reported.

Feb. 9th.—With regard to which the following notice appears this week:—

                  THE KING AGAINST THE ALDERMEN OF YARMOUTH.

    We are authorized to state that the Report of the hearing of this
    cause, in our last week’s paper, is incorrect, Lord Tenterden having
    observed that there was no ground for an attachment, as the parties
    had acted _bona fide_; that the business of the Corporation must be
    done, and directed that the rule should be enlarged, to give the
    Defendants an opportunity of doing so.  The Counsel for the
    Defendants said they were ready to proceed, but could not compel the
    Mayor to call an Assembly, or the Common Councilmen to
    meet,—whereupon his Lordship, on the motion of Defendants’ Counsel,
    directed a mandamus to be issued for the filling up all vacancies,
    and then transacting the other necessary business; and upon a Return
    being made to the Writ, the Rule will be discharged.

Feb. 16th—A general meeting of the inhabitants was proposed to be held to
take into consideration the expediency of erecting a new Workhouse, “it
appearing by a report of the select Vestry now published, that the
present one is quite inadequate to the purpose, both as to extent and
arrangement, and as being utterly incapable of affording room for that
classification which is indispensable to the moral improvement and
employment of its inmates, and also to the comfort of the aged and
infirm.  It is now about fifty years since any room was added to it.  The
increase of inhabitants in the town, and not less so of pauperism during
that period, calls for enlarged accommodation.  It appears by the report
that they are without a day room for the females, or any means of
separating the sick from the healthy, and so cramped for lodging room,
that a considerable number of the inmates are compelled to sleep three in
a bed.  It is intended to proceed agreeably to the directions of the 59th
Geo. III. cap 12, and 1st and 2nd of William IV. cap. 42.”

March 22nd.—The National Fast had been observed “with a decent
solemnity.”

April 5th.—The appointment of a Recorder is noticed as follows:—“At a
Corporate Assembly, held on Tuesday last, the long-contested question of
‘who should fill the office of Recorder for the borough?’ (vacant by the
resignation of Robert Alderson, Esq.,) was decided.  The first business
which came before the Court was the accepting of that gentleman’s
resignation, after which Isaac Preston, Sen., Esq., proposed the
Sub-Steward (I. Preston, Esq.,) to fill the vacant office; this was
seconded by C. Symonds, Esq.  R. Cory, Esq., then proposed Mr. Sergeant
Merewether; this nomination was seconded by Samuel Paget, Esq.  On a
ballot being demanded, the numbers were found to be equal, viz., 20 for
Merewether and the same number for Preston.  There were 41 members of the
body present, one of whom declined voting.  A second ballot was proposed
and acceded to, and the same result followed.  The Deputy-Mayor (who
presided in consequence of the extreme ill health of the Mayor) then said
that he would give the members of the Court the chance of a third ballot,
on which the gentleman before mentioned voted for Merewether, which gave
the learned Sergeant a majority of one, the numbers being for Merewether
21, for Preston 20.  Thus has terminated this long agitated question, the
product of much squabbling, aye, and of much litigation too.  Lord
Viscount Exmouth was unanimously chosen Lord High Steward; Isaac Preston,
Jun., Esq., and J. Baker, Esq., were elected Aldermen; and Messrs. J. E.
Lacon, E. H. L. Preston, Henry Costerton and Samuel Jay, Common
Councilmen.  At this Court, Mr. J. Seaman received the appointment of
Parish Clerk, and Mr. J. Daniel, Sexton; 50 guineas were also voted to
St. Mary’s Church, Southtown; £15 per year granted to Mrs. Breeze (widow
of the late hall-keeper), and £12 annuity settled on Mrs. Absolon (widow
of the late Parish Clerk.)  It was likewise ordered that the usual fee of
20s. upon apprentices’ indentures should be taken off.  It is only right
to state that the entire business of the day was conducted in the most
amicable way possible, and that the greatest good temper and gentlemanly
feeling was displayed during the discussion on the pending Recordership.”

April 12th.—The thanks of the Corporation were voted to the Rev. R.
Turner upon his resignation of his office of Chaplain to that body.

The Sylvan (owned by J. H. Palmer, Esq., and commanded by Captain W.
Gilham) and the Preston (belonging to I. Preston, Esq.) had respectively
sailed with 100 and 110 emigrants.

April 19th.—Two more emigrant vessels, the Syren and Miser, were
advertised to sail for America.—On Friday, then last, (here commonly
called Black Friday) the annual meeting had been held at the Guild Hall
for the purpose of “reading over” the income and expenditure of our local
affairs when “secundum custom (sic.) it was proved that the receipts of
any sum, say £5,299, and the payment of £5,298 was balanced by £1 being
added to the credit side.”  Mr. Shelly and other gentlemen protested
against the manner in which these accounts were made out and presented to
the freemen.

April 26th.—The newly elected Common Councilmen, Messrs. John Lacon, E.
H. L. Preston, Henry Costerton, and Samuel Jay entertained the
Corporation and others.  John Lacon, Esq., presided, and the following
toasts were given:—The King, Queen Adelaide, Princess Victoria, and the
Royal Family, Lord Hill and the Army, Sir James Graham and the Navy, Lord
Viscount Exmouth, the County Members, &c.

Burglaries had been committed on the premises of Mr. William Green,
Messrs. Bracey and Son, Mr. Benjamin Welch, and Mr. Joseph Stevenson, and
a man named Woolsey had been charged with the offences.

May 3rd.—The Fair had been held without “A Yarmouth Fair Wind,” and was
“very numerously and respectably attended, nor could its visitants
complain of lack of amusements, for of remarkable giantesses, as
remarkable dwarfs, optical dioramas, &c., &c., there were quantum suff,
while roundabouts, Russian swings, and ups-and-downs displayed themselves
in abundance to allure the juvenile part of the company out of their
stray half-pence and pence.”

May 10th.—The southern bastion of the fort had fallen “with an immense
crash.”

The “first fruits of the fishing season” had been landed by a boat, (No.
3), belonging to Mr. George Giles.  The night’s haul had produced 48
mackerel, which sold at 1s. 6d. each.

The following vessels had been launched:—The brig Sarah, 190 tons (from
Messrs. Tuck’s yard), and the brig Sarepta, 160 tons (from Mr. Lubbock’s
yard.)

May 17th.—The news that the Duke of Wellington had “given in and that
Lord Grey was then at the palace” was received with joy, and the bells
had been rung.

May 24th.—The Rattlesnake (180 tons) had been launched from Mr. F.
Preston’s yard.

The mackerel fishery was going on badly, and there was great distress in
the town, as thousands depended on that industry for a living.

May 31st.—There had been a great fire at Messrs. Grout and Co’s. Factory,
the loss estimated at £12,000, the premises were uninsured.

Two female factory hands, aged respectively 16 and 17, had “fought it
out” on the Denes, the prize, a “young tar,” when the “shorter combatant”
proved victorious.

June 7th.—The King’s birthday had been celebrated with a great display of
flags, the firing of the Church bells, salutes from the Forts, batteries,
etc.

June 14th.—The following notice appears as to the Reform Act:—

                                   REFORM.

    For some days previous to the passing of the new Magna Charta of our
    liberties, the Reform Bill, the friends of that great and really
    Conservative measure had met at the Ship Tavern, for the purpose of
    considering the best method of celebrating the anticipated triumph.
    At their first meeting it was determined to open a subscription,
    leaving the precise manner in which the proceeds should be expended
    as a matter for future consideration.  District Committees were
    forthwith appointed to manage the collections.  The subscription,
    which is not yet closed, is expected to amount to something very
    handsome.  It was first intended to give the freemen a dinner, but on
    sounding the latter it was found that they (without any exception)
    preferred receiving a pecuniary present; it was therefore at a
    subsequent meeting resolved, that each of those persons should
    receive a donation in money, and that the friends of Reform should
    dine together at a time and place hereafter to be appointed.  The
    news of the passing of the unmutilated Bill was received here with
    every demonstration of joy.  The vessels at the Quay displayed a
    profusion of flags, as did also the principal taverns and inns in the
    town—indeed everything seemed to show a universal gladness of heart.
    On Friday last, however, when information arrived of the Royal
    sanction having been given to the Bill, the fullness of joy exhibited
    on the occasion knew no bounds.  Expectant of the event, a large
    party of our townsmen (of every grade and condition in life) had
    proceeded along the Southtown Road on the forenoon of the day,
    accompanied by a band, flags with appropriate mottoes, &c., to meet
    the Telegraph.  Singular enough, however, the guard of that coach
    refused to take up the colours, and in answer to repeated enquiries
    declared “there was no news,” although it was afterwards ascertained
    that he had read from a newspaper in his possession an account of the
    Royal signature to the inhabitants of Gorleston while passing through
    that village.  The Reformers of Yarmouth, to show their indignant
    sense of such conduct, refused to wait at night for the Morning Star
    (that coach being under the same proprietory as the Telegraph), but
    instantly sent a courier to Lowestoft to announce their intention of
    meeting, in procession, the Old Blue.  Ultimately, that coach,
    surrounded by a profusion of elegant and appropriate flags, bands
    playing, &c., paraded the town.  It was really a most animating and
    exhilarating spectacle; numbers of elegant and beautiful females
    assembled at the windows to witness the heart-cheering sight of a
    countless multitude of persons, composed of all ranks in life, alike
    animated by one feeling, that of exultation and delight.  Surely
    after this our enemies will no longer prate of a reaction!  At any
    rate, such a flagrant attempt at delusion would be scouted by our
    patriotic townsmen, as one of the basest of libels on old Yarmouth *
    * * * The public dinner, rejoicings, &c., will, we have just heard,
    not take place till after the passing of the Scotch and Irish Bills.
    The dinner, will, we believe, be held at the Town Hall, there being
    no reason to doubt that the Mayor, with his accustomed gentlemanly
    feeling, will grant the building for that purpose.  Wm. Barth, Esq.,
    is expected to preside.

During the Spring eight vessels had sailed from Yarmouth to different
parts of the Canadas, carrying 916 passengers.

June 21st.—The Haven and Pier Commissioners had attended for the purpose
of examining the Harbour Works, and it was hoped that extensive
improvements would be made therein.

The Conservatives had not announced any candidates, and it was considered
probable that Messrs. Anson and Rumbold would be re-elected.

The Rev. Mr. Griffith, junr., had delivered a very impressive sermon on
board the Cyrus under the Bethel Flag.

June 28th.—The Corporation had voted an address to the King upon his
escape from the late “atrocious” attack upon him.

A vessel was lying off the Pier Head with the Yellow Flag (cholera)
flying.

July 5th.—A public dinner was to be held to celebrate the passing of the
Reform Bill, and Mr. Windham, the Liberal candidate for E. Norfolk, was
to meet his friends, Major Keppel being unable to accompany him.

July 12th.—The Dreadnought lugger (having on board a large cargo of
smuggled goods) had been captured.

The Sylvan (belonging to J. H. Palmer, Esq.,) had arrived at Quebec with
emigrants.

July 26th.—The annual water frolic is thus noticed: “Monday last was our
annual water frolic.  The heavens, which appeared inauspiciously to lour
during the early part of the day, cleared about noon, and a cloudless and
sun-lit sky enabled the admirers of boating excursions to enjoy with high
zest the pleasures afforded them by the recurrence of this aquatic treat.
The beautiful bosom of Breydon was literally covered with craft of every
description, from the stately barge and elegant pleasure boat, down to
the humble punt.  Three boats, the Coriander, Balls; the Emerald, of
Lowestoft, Col. Jones; and the Hornet, of Beccles (the two latter
latteeners), were the competitors for the cup.  The former had the start,
and kept the lead during the three heats, and eventually won by 400
yards.  About five o’clock p.m. the boats drew up for dinner.  The _toute
ensemble_ was at this time picturesque in the extreme, the river, as we
have said, studded with boats of various descriptions; the rond (which at
this time was more than usually dry and firm) crowded with well-dressed
persons of both sexes, whose joyous countenances showed that they looked
gratifyingly on the sight; the beautiful ruins of Burgh Castle (the
Garianonum of the ancients) in the distance, gilded with the gloomy
brightness of a western sun—the declivity of the hill bedecked with many
tea-drinking parties, all presented a scene which must have given delight
to every true lover of his species.  On the following day a cup (the gift
of the spirited landlord of the Berney Arms) was sailed for by five 14
feet boats, which was won by the Sultan, George Alexander, who beat her
antagonists hollow.  We are happy to say that the general feeling of
pleasure was not alloyed by the occurrence of a single accident.”

The Theatre had opened with _Guy Mannering_ and _Damp Beds_.  There was a
very poor house.

The brig Ida (188 tons) had been launched from Mr. F. Preston’s yard.

August 23rd.—The following estimate of the number of electors under the
Reform Act had been made:—Freemen 1,063; £10 householders in Yarmouth,
492; and in Gorleston, 144; total, 1,699.

The Summer Fishing had commenced; 300 lasts of herring had already been
brought in.

August 30th.—Messrs. Windham and Keppel (the Liberal candidates for East
Norfolk) had dined with about 50 electors at the King’s Head (B. Dowson,
Esq., in the chair.)

The following Corporate officers had been elected:—

Mayor-Elect—John Baker, Esq.

Chamberlain—Mr. R. Ferrier.

Churchwardens—John Preston and Charles Symonds, Esqs.

Auditors—I. Preston, John Danby-Palmer, T. F. Garwood, and Charles J.
Palmer, Esqs.

Collectors—John Danby-Palmer, Esq., and Mr. Henry Costerton.

Sept. 6th.—The Races had been held and proved very successful.

Sept 13th.—Mr. C. E. Rumbold (Col. Anson being detained in Derbyshire by
illness) made a public entry into this town, when the carriage containing
the Hon. Member and N. B. Palmer, Esq., had supported on its roof a most
elegant silk flag bearing the words “Gorleston and Southtown Voters” upon
it.

Sept. 20th.—A public dinner had been given by the Gorleston voters to
Messrs. Anson and Rumbold, when 52 gentlemen attended, and W. Barth,
Esq., occupied the chair.

Oct. 4th.—The inaugural dinner to the Mayor was held at the Town Hall,
and was attended by “nearly 500 guests, among whom were a large number of
the nobility and gentry residing in or near Yarmouth.”

Oct. 11th.—The herring fishing had been very unsuccessful.  This was
attributed to warm weather.

Oct. 18th.—The following notice as to the Wandering Piper appears:—“The
Wandering Piper, who has attracted so much notoriety, is expected to
visit Yarmouth in the course of a very few days.  He is of a rank in life
which few suspect who are not acquainted with his private history.  He
was for a considerable time an officer in the Army, served under Sir John
Moore and the Duke of Wellington, and sold his commission after the
battle of Waterloo.  His opponent is Count Bender, a French Nobleman, but
educated in Scotland at the same school with the piper, and betwixt him a
great friendship subsisted.  They met in London in 1825, when a dispute
arose between them concerning the hospitality of different nations, which
ended in both parties finally agreeing, for the sum of £5,000, to travel
in disguise, the one as a fiddler in France and Belgium, and the other
(our hero) as a piper in Britain and Ireland, to subsist upon what the
public might be pleased to give them unsolicited, and whoever should have
most money in the end was to gain the prize.  They both commenced their
wanderings in the summer of 1825, but an uncle of the piper’s, who then
held a high official situation, having got notice of the freak, put a
stop to the proceedings before the end of three months; this gentleman,
however, died in 1827, which left both parties free from restraint, in
consequence of which they started in August, 1828, the one from
Stonehaven, in Scotland, and the other from Calais, in France.  This
important campaign was only intended to last three years, and would have
been finished before now had not the piper received a severe hurt from
the upsetting of a stage coach in Ireland, which confined him for fifteen
months—during which time there was a secession of hostilities on both
sides.  The piper during his illness lay at the house of Sir Thomas
Butler, Bart., Ballintemple, county Carlow, where he met with the
greatest kindness; indeed, the Irish, high and low, seem to have
completely entered into the spirit of the undertaking.  He was never
allowed in any one instance to pay anything at the hotels where he put
up, waiter, chambermaid, boots, and porter all refused to accept of any
remuneration for their services, nay, the very beggar wished his ‘honour
good luck and a safe journey,’ without laying him under further
contribution.  He says that he has been charged in all instances to the
very utmost extent in England; we could have wished it had been
otherwise, for the honour of our national character.  During his rambles,
it is said he had given £550 to different charities, that receipts for
which are lodged for safety with John Stuart, Esq., of 19, Cleveland Row,
Finsbury Square, London.”

Oct. 25th.—The wandering piper had begun his rounds and had lunched with
the Mayor.

Nov. 8th—Electioneering partizanship was displaying itself.  A “True Red
Committee (composed of the lowest order of beer-loving Burgesses) had
been formed” and Andrew Colville, Esq., had been requested to stand for
the Borough in that interest.

Nov. 15th.—Mr. Colville had arrived in the Borough and addressed the
electors from the “Star” balcony.

Dec. 6th.—Contains the following article:—

    Tuesday last was a proud day for the friends of Reform, comprising as
    they do a vast majority of all ranks of our town’s-people.  It having
    been announced by hand-bill the day previous that Col. Anson and Mr.
    Rumbold would arrive the following day, as early as the hour at noon,
    the Southtown Road was crowded with pedestrians and equestrians of
    all classes.  Between twelve and one o’clock the entire body of the
    Political Union (full 400 strong) assembled at the Guardian Angel,
    with blue ribbons and their badges round their necks.  The worthy
    candidates having arrived at the above inn, the procession began to
    move in the following order:—Two trumpeters on horseback;
    banner—Yarmouth Union of the Working Classes; flags—Union Jack, Royal
    Standard of England; ‘Universal Suffrage and Vote by Ballot’; ‘Short
    Parliaments and Liberty of the Press’; ‘The love of our Country leads
    us’; ‘Close Corporations abolished’; ‘Equal Laws and Equal Rights’;
    ‘United we stand, divided we fall’; banners of the King and Reform.
    Flags—‘Gorleston and Southtown Voters’; ‘Anson and Rumbold’;
    ‘Friends.’  Flags—‘The People’s Cause’; ‘The Poor Man’s Rights’;
    ‘Reduction of Taxation’; ‘Close Corporations Opened’; ‘Abolition of
    Slavery’; ‘Cheap Government and Equal Rights’; ‘The Liberty of the
    Press’; ‘Knowledge is Power’; ‘Civil and Religious Liberty’; ‘Freedom
    of Election.’  The procession, on entering the town by the Bridge,
    was welcomed by the exultant shouts of an innumerable concourse of
    expectant individuals, who had by this time lined the new Hall Quay,
    eager to witness the imposing spectacle.  The blue pennons of
    numerous ships, ‘floating in the breeze,’ added not a little to the
    joyousness of the occasion.  The procession moved on, adding to its
    numbers as it advanced along the Quay, up South Street, along King
    Street, down our beautiful Market Place, and back to the Committee
    Rooms, from the windows of which the assembled multitude (consisting
    certainly of not less than 5,000 persons) were addressed by Mr.
    Alderman Barth, Col. Anson, Mr. Rumbold, and J. Shelly, Esq.  The
    weather was till towards noon rather showery; fortunately it then
    cleared up.  Such, however, appeared to us the general enthusiasm,
    that it seemed as if no weather could have damped the universal
    feeling of delight, nor have abated the desire to witness the
    proceedings of this memorable day.  Numbers of well-dressed females
    from the windows of the houses, as the procession passed along, were
    to be seen, with approving smiles, shaking blue flags, elegant
    banners, &c., &c., thus demonstrating their hearty participation in
    the high feeling of satisfaction which displayed itself all around.
    Too much praise cannot be given to Capt. Garson and Mr. Gamble for
    the judgment shown by them in marshalling the procession.  Nor ought
    we to omit mentioning, in terms of high commendation, the excellent
    conduct of the Union on the occasion—conduct which was noticed in the
    evening at the King’s Head, by the Chairman (Mr. T. Hammond) making a
    very handsome acknowledgment of their services, and giving as a toast
    (which was drank with three times three and very general applause)
    ‘The Council of the Political Union.’  Surely, if it had been before
    possible for the Conservatives (as they improperly styled themselves)
    to have mistaken the feeling of the town, the proceedings of Tuesday
    last must have entirely undeceived them, and enabled them to see the
    utter hopelessness of a contest with our late excellent
    representatives.  Monday next is the day of election, when we shall
    see whether these hardy and obstinate men are still determined to
    pull down certain ruin on their party.

    On Thursday night Messrs. Anson and Rumbold, addressing their
    numerous friends from the balcony of the Crown and Anchor, were
    insulted by water thrown upon, and it is reported tiles at them, from
    a small _red_ inn adjoining.  This roused the indignation of the
    multitude, and the destruction of the windows was the consequence.  A
    spirited youth resented still further indignity offered to his
    friends by springing from the balcony and seizing upon and destroying
    the enemy’s blood-red standard.

Dec. 15th.—The nomination took place at the “Tol-hall,” and after the
Mayor had opened the proceedings, Col. Anson was nominated by William
Barth, Esq., seconded by Mr. Thomas Clowes, Mr. Rumbold by John Shelly
and John Brightwen, Esqs., and A. Colville, Esq., by John Lacon, Esq.,
and Mr. B. Gooch.  The show of hands was in favour of Messrs. Anson and
Rumbold.  The poll for the first day was—

Rumbold        715
Anson          699
Colville       631

And at the close on the second day—

Rumbold        838
Anson          829
Colville       751

Dec. 20th.—A dinner had been held to celebrate the return of these
gentlemen, “when William Barth, Esq., presided, C. Sayers, Esq., was his
vice, and N. Palmer and John Shelly, Esqs., headed the tables to the
right and left of him.”



1833.


Jan. 3rd.—The prisoners in the Gaol and Bridewell returned thanks to the
Mayor (J. Baker, Esq.) for the plentiful dinner of roast beef, plum
pudding, and a quart of ale each, which he gave them on Christmas Day.

Jan. 10th.—A large alligator had been taken by a Dutch fishing boat off
Orford Ness.

Jan. 14th.—H.M. frigates Castor (Capt. Lord J. Hay) and Conway (Capt.
Eden), together with the French frigate Arcade, came into the Roads to
victual and get a supply of water.

Jan. 17th.—A number of ladies and gentlemen visited the men-of-war; and
on the following Tuesday the vessels proceeded “out of the Cockle,”
accompanied by the Royal Charlotte cutter (Lieut. Harmer), she “keeping
to windward until lost to view.”

Jan. 31st.—A suggestion had been made at the Corporation assembly as to
reform of that body, but was not supported.

Feb. 7th.—A fine vessel of 216 tons had been launched from Mr. Preston’s
yard, and it was stated that “It is now allowed by merchants from all
parts of the world that the finest and handsomest vessels are now built
in this port.”

Feb. 21st.—The Flora, a French frigate, had arrived in the Roads.

Feb. 28th.—The petition against the return of Messrs. Windham and Keppel
(M.P.’s for East Norfolk) had “excited much surprise and indignation
amongst the numerous friends of these gentlemen in the town.”

March 7th.—It was proposed to start a steam packet for the conveying of
goods and passengers to Hull.

A warrant from the Speaker of the House of Commons had been received,
requesting the attendance of the Mayor and Town Clerk before a Committee
of the House “to give an account of all matters relating to the town and
Corporation; consequently J. Baker, Esq., and S. Tolver, Esq., had left
Yarmouth on Monday.”

A public meeting on the question of Corporation Reform had been held, Mr.
C. Sayers in the chair.  Messrs. J. Shelly and S. Cobb spoke, and a
petition was adopted, which received 1,958 signatures.

A petition had also been adopted by the members of the “Yarmouth Union of
the Working Classes” against “The Irish Coercion Bill.”

March 14th.—The Inquiry as to the administration of Corporate affairs was
proceeding in London, when the following gentlemen were there upon that
business on behalf of the Corporation:—The Mayor, the Town Clerk, and the
Water Bailiff, while Messrs. Worship, Barth, Shelly, and Barrett
represented the Town Committee.

March 21st.—The works at St. Peter’s Church were “at a stand” for the
want of funds, £600 being required.

April 4th.—The Haven Commission were indebted £25,000.

The Sessions were held with the “light calendar of 15 prisoners.”

April 18th.—Lord Orford had accepted the office of Lord High Steward of
the Borough, rendered vacant through the death of Lord Exmouth.

The Rev. Mark Waters had been appointed one of the ministers of St.
George’s Chapel.

April 24th.—The Rev. Mr. Clarke of Norwich, had accepted the ministry of
St. Peter’s, the ladies proposed to present the communion plate to this
Church.

May 23rd.—The mackerel fishing had been very unsuccessful.

A meeting had been held to approve of the proposed Rules for the intended
Proprietary Grammar School.

May 30th.—A Commission had been appointed to inquire into Corporate
affairs “on the spot.”

Sir F. Palgrave had obtained from H.M. Commissioners of Records the
presentation of some valuable publications to the Library.

June 13th.—Lord Exmouth had arrived in his yacht, and subsequently sailed
with his brother, the Vicar (the Hon. E. Pellew), for St. Petersburgh.

June 20th.—Vice-Admiral Parker had been appointed a K.C.B.

July 11th.—The following is the account of the Burgh Water Frolic:—

    “Monday last being the day appointed for our annual water frolic, an
    immense quantity of boats (from the splendid pleasure barge to the
    humble punt) started from our Bridge at eleven o’clock a.m. with a
    favourable and somewhat stiff breeze from the N.E.  At two o’clock
    the various crafts laid-to in the Narrows to witness the sailing
    match.  The competitors were the Venus (cutter-rigged boat), Last;
    Algerine (latteener), Craske; Emerald, (latteener) Col. Jones; and
    the Hornet, Everett.  The prize (an elegant silver cup) was won by
    the Venus.  At starting the Hornet had the lead for a short distance,
    when she was passed by the Venus, and on rounding the upper cross
    stake the latter boat and the Emerald were close together, and
    remained so, till they got within the Narrows, when the Colonel
    succeeded in passing her, winning the first by about half a minute.
    In two minutes after the Venus recovered her lost ground and passed
    her opponent, and succeeded in rounding the stake one minute before
    the Emerald, who, however, neared so fast that had not the Venus
    rounded the flag very closely she must have lost the match, the
    Colonel being to windward.  The oldest boater never remembers so
    closely contested a run.  After sailing, the various crafts (which
    absolutely studded the river) got under weigh, and proceeded towards
    the ancient Garianonum, opposite to which they dined.  At seven
    o’clock p.m. the boats started for home, where they arrived in about
    an hour, all safe, nothing having occurred to damp the pleasures of
    the day, which was an extremely fine one.  At Burgh, Chase, the
    spirited proprietor of the Neptune Gardens, was completely at home,
    while on the adjacent hills, opposite the cage, various groups of
    happy faces were to be seen enjoying tea, &c.  This, together with
    the immense crowd of company that congregated on the road, presented
    a scene that must have been witnessed to have been fully appreciated.
    Among the company were our worthy Mayor and a large party of
    fashionables in the handsome barge belonging to W. Fisher, Esq., S.
    T. Berney, and J. Penrice, Esqs., in the former’s fast-sailing boat
    Meteor, Mr. Alderman Barth in the admiral’s (Green’s) boat, &c., &c.
    This, together with the countless multitudes that crowded the decks
    of the tug, Royal Sovereign and Emperor steamers, made the river
    appear a sort of floating fair.  On the next day a number of boats,
    barges, &c., sailed to the Berney Arms to witness a rowing match (for
    a silver cup, given by Mr. Barnett, the landlord of the house) by
    four-oared gigs, which was won by the Wasp, a Norwich boat, belonging
    to William Gallant, jun.  Nearer home we observed an unusually large
    number of stalls, &c., at our bridge foot.  On the whole, there
    seemed nothing wanting to make this annual festival worthy of
    brighter days, but the presence of the Corporation barge, without
    which (although no brawlers against innovation) we cannot but think
    the Regatta is shorn of much of its glory.”

July 18th.—A fight had taken place on the Factory Denes, for one
Sovereign, between Thomas Purdy, of Caister, commonly known as “The
Caister Champion,” and George Elliott, of Ingham.  At the 133rd round
(the battle lasted 1 h. 50 min.)  Elliott was declared the victor.

Two men (Seager and Hanson) had quarrelled in the Bear Tap, when
Nathaniel Lacey, in trying to part them, was knocked down and his leg
broken.

August 22nd.—“As early as nine o’clock on Friday morning an immense
concourse of genteely-dressed persons had congregated before St. Peter’s
Church, anxious not to miss the opportunity of witnessing the solemn and
imposing ceremonial about to take place.  At ten o’clock the principal
door was thrown open, and this large assemblage entered.  The greatest
order and decorum prevailed, owing certainly to the excellent arrangement
of C. Symonds, Esq., one of the Churchwardens for the year, who, to
prevent confusion, had issued tickets, which were left at the houses of
the respectable housekeepers, without the least distinction, as also at
the various lodging houses for the use of the visitors.  About eleven
o’clock the Mayor (John Baker, Esq.), with the customary regalia,
attended by several other members of the Corporate body entered the
church, and were shown to the pews appropriated for their reception.  The
Bishop of Winchester soon arrived with his Chaplain and Registrar and
proceeded up the middle aisle to the altar, where the service began by
the latter gentleman presenting the petition to the Bishop, who
redelivered it to the Registrar, when it was by him read aloud.  The
Right Rev. Prelate then pronounced the following words, in a solemn,
appropriate, and sonorous tone of voice—“I am now ready to give my full
consent to that which you have desired, and may Almighty God bless the
good work in which we are about engaging.”  His Lordship then, with his
officers and clergy, walked to the west end of the church and back again
to the altar, repeating alternate versicles of the 42nd Psalm.  The
Bishop having seated himself at the table, the Deed of Consecration was
read by the surrogate (the Very Rev. the Dean of Norwich), after which
his Lordship read the exhortation, prayers, &c., appointed for the
occasion.  The usual morning prayers were read from the desk by the Hon.
and Rev. E. Pellew, with the exception of those parts especially
appropriated to the occasion, which were read by the Bishop.  The reading
Psalms most judiciously selected for the occasion were the 84th, 122nd,
and 132nd; the lessons, parts of the 8th chapter of 1st Kings, and of the
10th chapter of Hebrews.  After the prayers, verses 6, 7, and 8 of 26th,
with Gloria Patri, was performed by a very full orchestra of
instrumentalists and vocalists.  The common service was performed by the
Bishop, with the exception of the Epistle and the Nicene Creed, which
were read by his Lordship’s Chaplain, the Rev. Alexander Dallas.  The
100th Psalm (Tate and Brady’s version) was then sung by the whole choir.
The sermon, a striking, apposite, and eloquent one, was preached by the
Rev. Mr. Clark, the appointed minister of the Church, from Genesis,
chapter 28th, verses 16 and 17—“And Jacob awaketh out of his sleep, &c.”
[832 young persons were confirmed by the Bishop of Winchester.]”

August 29th.—The Races had been held, and on “Tuesday and Wednesday the
great annual main of cocks had been fought at the Bush Tavern, South
Quay, between the gentlemen of Norwich and the gentlemen of Yarmouth for
£5 a battle and £50 the odds, which was won by Norwich, who were six
battles a head.”

Sept. 15th.—The smack Endeavour, of London, had been seized with 65 casks
and 16 bales (2,800 lbs. in weight) of tobacco on board her.

The following Corporate officers had been chosen:—John Danby-Palmer,
Esq., Mayor; Mr. James Jay, Chamberlain; F. R. Reynolds, Esq., and J. M.
Bell, Esq., Churchwardens.

The late gales had caused an immense quantity of sand and shingle to be
washed into the Harbour, so as to form a point opposite the South Pier.

Oct. 3rd.—The following is the report of the Yarmouth Guild Day:—

    On Monday the Mayor and the Mayor Elect (J. Danby-Palmer, Esq.),
    accompanied by the Earl of Orford and the members of the Corporation,
    attended divine service at St. Nicholas’ Church, by the Hon. and Rev.
    Edward Pellew, after which the Rev. Thomas Baker, Chaplain to the
    Body Corporate, preached an excellent sermon.  After service the
    Corporation adjourned to the Guildhall, where the Mayor-Elect was
    sworn into office with the customary ceremonies.

    The Recorder (Mr. Sergeant Merewether) being absent, the Town Clerk,
    previous to presenting the patent of appointment as Lord High Steward
    of the Borough to the Earl of Orford, addressed his Lordship,
    observing that the Corporation entertained a high sense of the honour
    conferred upon them by his Lordship’s acceptance of an office which
    (as constituted by one of the charters of the borough) assimilated
    with that of Lord High Steward of England, an office of great power
    and authority, having under the King the regulating the
    administration of justice, which had not since its forfeiture in the
    reign of Henry the Third, by its hereditary possessor, been granted
    to any one except upon and for particular occasions, and had only
    been presented to one of the Nobility and a Lord of Parliament.  So
    by the Charter of King Charles, the High Steward of the borough of
    Yarmouth must be ‘unus praeclarus vir,’ the meaning of which might be
    gathered from the appointment of William, Earl of Yarmouth, to be the
    first modern High Steward, and that to the present time the office
    had been filled by noblemen distinguished by their talents and
    services as statesmen, or great naval and military commanders.
    Amongst them were the celebrated Sir Robert Walpole, Earl of Orford,
    a second Robert Earl of Orford, and George Earl of Orford, who
    together held that office for nearly 60 years, much to the honour and
    advantage of the Borough.  Although their connection with that noble
    family had been interrupted, it had not been forgotten by the
    Corporation, who were happy in having the honour of renewing it in
    the person of his Lordship, in whom they found that ‘praeclarus vir’
    pointed out by the charter, and they doubted not but that his
    Lordship would support them in all transactions grounded in honour,
    honesty, and good faith, and having for their object the public good,
    and that he would defend and maintain their ancient rights,
    privileges, and immunities.  The Town Clerk then presented Lord
    Orford with his appointment, and assured his Lordship that his
    presence among them would always be hailed with pleasure by the
    Corporation.

    The Earl of Orford was then sworn, and immediately addressed the
    Mayor and Corporation in an eloquent speech, in which he said he
    claimed no merit to himself for the choice which had been made by the
    Corporation, but attributed it solely to the recollection of the
    former connection of the borough with his ancestors, which had been
    so handsomely alluded to by the Town Clerk, and to that firm line of
    conduct in political life which he had thought it his duty
    steadfastly to pursue, which it was his pride and pleasure to
    maintain, and that although the Corporation might have selected a
    person of more influence than himself, yet he would yield to no one
    in zeal, and no exertion on his part would be spared to uphold the
    rights, privileges, and immunities of the Corporation, which had that
    day been entrusted to the Mayor, and which it was to be hoped he
    would be permitted to resign unimpaired to his successor.  He himself
    should always feel it his duty and pleasure to render his services
    available to the true interests of the borough.

    The other annual officers were then sworn, and the Mayor, accompanied
    by the High Steward and the Corporate Body, walked to the Town Hall,
    where a most splendid entertainment was provided for upwards of three
    hundred and thirty gentlemen, among whom were the Right Hon. the Earl
    of Orford, the Right Hon. Viscount Nevill, the Hon. Mr. Justice
    Alderson, the Hon. the Rev. E. Pellew, the Hon. P. H. Abbott, Sir E.
    K. Lacon, Bart., Vice-Admiral Sir George Parker, K.C.B., Col. Petre,
    Col. Mason, Robert Marsham, Esq., J. Postle, Esq., Stratton Marsham,
    Esq., E. H. K. Lacon, Esq., W. M. Praed, Esq., Rev. C. Penrice, Rev.
    J. Humfrey, Rev. — Clarke, Rev. J. Gunn, Rev. B. Winthorp, John
    Penrice, Esq., R. Rising, Esq., S. Palmer, Esq., W. Carpenter, Esq.,
    Capt. Onslow, R.N., Capt. M. Kelly, R.N., Capt. Travers, R.N., Major
    Travers, Capt. Carew, R.N., H. Munro, Esq., B. Caldecott, Esq., &c.,
    &c.

    The healths of their Majesties—the Princess Victoria and the rest of
    the Royal Family—his Majesty’s Ministers, and the Duke of Wellington,
    were drank.  On the health of the Earl of Orford being given, the
    noble Lord, in returning thanks, alluded to the commission for
    investigating Corporations, declaring ‘that he denounced the
    illegality of the commission.’  His Lordship gave the health of the
    Mayor and Prosperity to the Town of Yarmouth, for which the Chief
    Magistrate expressed his acknowledgment, stating his determination to
    do all he could to forward the best interests of the town on every
    occasion.

    On the health of Mr. Justice Alderson being given, the learned Judge
    spoke of the Constitution of this country as being so framed as to
    allow all who had the talents and industry to arrive at the very
    highest dignities the King could confer, and concluded by saying that
    the question for the people to consider was whether they would close
    the avenues to those dignities.  The healths of Lord Nevill, Mr.
    Charles Palmer (the son of the Mayor), Sir E. K. Lacon, Lord Walpole
    and the House of Wolterton, Lord Wodehouse and the House of
    Kimberley, and a variety of other toasts were given; after which the
    Mayor and a large party adjourned to the Ball at the Bath Rooms,
    where dancing continued till a late hour.

Oct. 31st.—“On Monday evening last, as Mr. Marsh, of the house of Marsh
and Barnes, wine and spirit merchants, was returning in his gig from
Beccles, he overtook a female on the road near Fritton, who, as Mr. M.
passed, implored assistance.  He pulled up, and finding the poor creature
in an exhausted and high state of nervous excitement, and that she was on
her way to this place, he took her up, when she stated as follows—that
she had walked from Yarmouth to Heckingham House to obtain relief for a
relative residing in Yarmouth, that she had obtained 3s., was returning
home across the Marshes, and when near the New Cut and bridge over the
dam, she saw two men, who appeared to come from a wherry, and when they
met her one of them presented a pistol and threatened to shoot her, but
she answering in the negative to the enquiry of “Do you know us,” one of
them said, “Don’t shoot her.”  They then searched, took from her 2s. 6d.,
some halfpence, and a handkerchief with some trifles, knocked her down by
a blow on the face, and so left her.  When she recovered she proceeded on
her journey till the above gentleman humanely assisted her into the town
and relieved her; but she was so weak from the fright as to stagger when
she left the gig.  She states that she thinks she could recognize one of
the men.  Might not some enquiry as to what wherry was moored in the Cut
at that time lead to the detection of the perpetrators of so diabolical
an act as that of distressing the distressed.  We respectfully submit to
the gentlemen who are the guardians for the hundred of Heckingham if some
safe plan could not be devised to relieve non-resident paupers, so as to
obviate the necessity of a journey by them of so many miles.”

Dec. 5th.—The winter assemblies having been discontinued for two years
had been revived, and the first assembly had been held at the Town Hall,
(the Mayor (J. Danby Palmer, Esq.) and Vice-Admiral Sir George Parker,
K.C.B., Stewards).  It was attended by all the principal families of the
town and neighbourhood.

Dec. 12th.—A fine schooner named the Fairy Queen, 150 tons register, had
been launched from W. Lubbock’s yard.

Dec. 28th.—The altar piece presented to St. Peter’s Church by Col. Mason
was put up on Christmas Eve.



1834.


Jan. 9th.—Samuel Tolver and Charles John Palmer, Esqs., had been
appointed Perpetual Commissioners for the counties of Norfolk and
Suffolk.

Jan. 16th.—News had been received that the Lion, belonging to G. D.
Palmer, Esq., had arrived at Civita Vecchia on the 26th ult.

Jan. 30th.—Two schooners of about 80 tons register, named the Norwich
Trader and Lowestoft Merchant, had been launched from Mr. Thomas W.
Branford’s yard.

A requisition was being signed for the purpose of having the “upper”
ferry established.

Feb. 6th.—Messrs. Buckle and Hogg, two of H.M. Municipal Commissioners,
had arrived for the purpose of holding an Inquiry into the doings of the
Corporation.

A crowded meeting had been held to petition Parliament for an abolition
of Church Rates.  J. Shelly, Esq., was called to the chair, and the
following gentlemen took part in the proceedings:—Rev. Mr. Betts, J. B.
Palmer, Esq., Rev. T. Tait, Mr. D. Chapman, Rev. H. Squire, and Rev. A.
Creak.

Feb. 20th.—Capt. Manby had given “an elegant and fully attended fete” at
the Barracks.

Feb. 29th.—The Municipal Commissioners were sitting at the Tolhouse.

March 6th.—The Commissioners having finished their investigation were
entertained by Alderman Bath at Dinner.

April 10th.—Mr. G. Garson had been appointed Lloyd’s Surveyor.

The annual silver cup, given by Mr. Bales to the members of the “Yarmouth
British Yacht Club,” was to be sailed for in May.

April 17th.—A meeting had been held to oppose certain clauses in the
proposed Haven and Pier Bill then before Parliament, Mr. Alderman Barth
in the chair, the following took part in the proceedings:—Messrs. J.
Brightwen, J. Shelly, A. Palmer, S. Cobb, R. Ferrier, G. D. Palmer, B.
Dowson, P. Stead, and William Barber.

April 24th.—The Baltic (belonging to I. Preston, Esq.) and The Venus
(belonging to G. D. Palmer, Esq.) had sailed with emigrants for North
America.

May 1st.—A brig called the Friends, of 190 tons register, had been
launched from Mr. A. Palmer’s yard.

May 15th.—The “New Proprietary Grammar School” had been opened, John
Danby Palmer, Esq., being Chairman during the proceedings.

June 5th.—The Misses Seaman had been appointed postmistresses.

June 12th.—“A remarkably fine ship of 374 tons” had been launched from
the dockyard of Ambrose Palmer, Esq.

June 26th.—Contains the following notice of an “Ingenious Invention”:—“A
few weeks since a young lady having lost her left leg by amputation, four
inches below the knee, applied to Mr. W. B. Neslen, shoe and last maker,
of this town, complaining of the inconvenience she experienced from the
wooden substitute she had procured.  Mr. N. immediately set about
remedying this, which he eventually accomplished by the making of a leg,
which for useful purposes has in a very great measure supplied the loss
of the original limb.  It was composed of light sycamore wood, cased with
leather, with elastic springs for the foot.  It was shown to several
mechanics in the neighbourhood, who all gave an opinion highly favourable
to the ingenuity of its construction.  It weighs 3lbs. (the former
substitute weighed 7lbs.) and is connected with the knee by springs.  The
lady is enabled to make very nearly the same use of the artificial as she
previously had done with the real limb.”

The anniversary of the King’s accession to the Throne had been observed,
the Corporation attending divine service, when the Rev. T. Baker preached
“an appropriate sermon.”

July 24th.—Mr. William Mabson had been chosen a Common Councilman in the
room of Mr. John Robson, deceased.

July 31st.—The annual water frolic had been held, Mr. Stephen Miller’s
Water Witch taking the prize.

Aug. 14th.—Messrs. C. Davie, Samuel Palmer, Frederick Paget, Capt.
Todman, R.N., and the Rev. Mark Waters had been elected Paving
Commissioners.

Aug. 21st.—A dinner had been given (G. D. Palmer, Esq., in the chair) to
Messrs. T. Hammond and R. B. Fenn, as a compliment for services rendered
by them to the fishing interest.

Aug. 28th.—The Stratheden, 400 tons register, had been launched from Mr.
F. Preston’s yard.

Sept. 2nd.—The following had been chosen Corporate officers for the
ensuing year:—Isaac Preston, jun., Esq., Mayor; Mr. J. E. Laws,
Chamberlain; J. Danby Palmer, and E. H. L. Preston, Esqs., Churchwardens;
Sir E. K. Lacon, Bart., Isaac Preston, Esq., and Messrs. R. Ferrier and
William Yetts, Auditors; J. D. Palmer, Edmund Preston, Robert Cory, jun.,
William Barth, Esqs., and Messrs. E. H. L. Preston, S. B. Cory, C. J.
Palmer, Vestry; J. Baker, Esq., and Mr. James Jay, Collectors; and
Messrs. F. Preston and Samuel Jay, Muragers.

Oct. 2nd.—Contains the following report of the proceedings on the
“Mayor’s Day”:—

    Monday being the feast of St. Michael, the day was ushered in by
    ringing of Bells, flags at the New Hall, Church, &c.  The Mayor-Elect
    (I. Preston, jun., Esq.) ordered twopenny buns to be given to the
    children of the different charity schools in the town, and it was
    really gratifying to observe the number of happy boys and girls, with
    cheers parading Gaol-street, the Quay, &c., with their gifts in their
    hands.  About two o’clock in the afternoon the Mayor and Corporation
    attended divine service at St. Nicholas’ Church, where a sermon was
    delivered by the Rev. F. Baker (son of the Rector of Rollesby) from
    Acts, chapter 23rd, 4th and 5th verses, which in the days when
    passive obedience and non-resistance reigned might have been
    considered an excellent one.  Happily, however, those days are past,
    and few, probably, of the rev. gentleman’s hearers accorded with him
    when they heard him denounce from the pulpit the great majority of
    those who sought Reform in the Church, and other acknowledged abuses
    as infidels, atheists, and anarchists, and those who aimed at the
    overthrow of the Church, the Altar, and the Crown.  From the Church
    the Corporation proceeded to the Guildhall, where the Mayor-Elect
    (after having taken the oath of office) spoke to the following
    effect:—“Gentlemen, previous to assuming the chair of Chief
    Magistracy, which I am about to fill, you will allow me to thank you
    for the proof that you have given me of your confidence.  Gentlemen,
    I sought not this office; I have accepted it only that I might
    endeavour to render myself useful to my fellow townsmen.  Gentlemen,
    it is not the pageantry, the sword and mace (though even these may be
    of use in their way) that have allured me to this office—no; had I
    been capable of being actuated by such motives, I should have been
    indeed unworthy of taking (as I have just taken) the Holy Gospels in
    my hand, and to have sworn before my God, to execute to the best of
    my ability, the important duties of Chief Magistrate of my native
    town.  I would now address myself to my proper brethren, I would
    address myself to all, high or low, rich or poor, and exhort them to
    do all that in their power lie to promote the decorum of social life,
    by cheeking vice, immorality, and debauchery.  Gentlemen, I thank you
    very much for the patience with which you have heard me.”  This
    address was delivered with much firmness, and at the same time with
    considerable emotion, and was received with great applause.  After
    the ceremony of robing, and the other routine business had been gone
    through, the newly-elected Mayor, Deputy-Mayor, &c., proceeded
    (escorted by the town band, flags, &c.) to the New Hall, where a
    sumptuous dinner was served to a numerous and highly respectable
    assembly of the Body Corporate, and the friends of the Chief
    Magistrate.  The dessert, which was fine and abundant, was, we
    understand, served by Mr. Brooks, of the Market Row.

Oct. 9th.—Harry Worship, Esq., had delivered a very interesting lecture
on the “Philosophy of Dreams.”

Oct. 16th.—The frequency of robbery at sea had induced the fishermen to
keep an unusually sharp look out.

Oct. 23rd.—Charles J. Palmer, Esq., had been elected an Alderman in the
place of Dr. Bateman, deceased.

It appears from the report of the proceedings at the Revision Court that
the lower ferry was then let at £30 a year only.

Oct. 30th.—The “Blues” claimed a gain of 50 on the revision of the
Freeman’s list.

The fishing was reported as going on “very badly.”

Nov. 6th.—A public meeting had been held on the subject of the Port and
Haven Bill, the Mayor in the chair, when Messrs. George Danby Palmer,
Shelly, Brightwen, Ferrier, Barth, and Dowson took part in the
proceedings.

Nov. 20th.—The Conservatives had held a meeting at Bammant’s Green, Mr.
William Mabson in the chair, pledging themselves to support the Hon. W.
H. Beresford and W. M. Praed.

Nov. 27th.—Col. Anson had spoken from the Committee Room in Regent
Street, when Messrs. George Steward and J. Shelly took part in the
proceedings.

The “Political Union” required Col. Anson and Mr. Rumbold to pledge
themselves to support “Corporation Reform, Triennial Parliaments,
Extension of the Suffrage, and Vote by Ballot.”

Dec. 4th.—A meeting of voters in the Blue interest had been held at the
Crown and Anchor Tavern, when it was determined “to sink all minor
differences” in order to secure the return of Col. Anson and Mr. Rumbold.
Mr. N. B. Palmer addressed a crowded assembly from the Committee Rooms.

Dec. 11th.—Thomas Baring, Esq., had arrived as Mr. Praed’s colleague, and
both gentlemen had addressed the electors from the Newcastle Tavern, and
a house on the South Quay, which they had engaged as a Committee Room.

Dec. 18th.—The contest was progressing, Col. Anson assuring his
supporters “that at that moment their canvassing book stood better than
he had ever known it to stand since he had known Yarmouth.”

Dec. 23rd.—There had been a “violent scuffle” between the Reds and the
Blues, during which “the son of a Baronet was pulled from his horse and
beaten violently.”



1835.


Jan. 8th, contains the following account of the election:—

    “It is with feelings of the deepest sorrow that we announce that our
    late members, Messrs. Anson and Rumbold, are ousted from the
    representation.  We said last week that nothing but the most gross
    and unblushing bribery could possibly unseat these gentlemen, and
    these means have been had recourse to, to an unprecedented extent.
    Messrs. Baring and Praed are returned, not by the free and
    independent voice of the people, but by a bought majority, bought by
    means most disgraceful both to giver and receiver, although we cannot
    help thinking that the larger portion of disgrace attaches to the
    former—for what can be more discreditable, what can be more contrary
    to the high honour which ought to distinguish the gentleman, than to
    take advantage of the poor freeman, and by (in this instance doubly
    accursed) gold to make him forfeit his solemn promises?  Do our
    opponents ask for proofs of this?  We have them in the infamous
    system of cooping (a system which we had hoped was confined to a
    neighbouring city, but which has been now imported into this till now
    uncorrupt borough), which has been with a bold unblushing front
    carried on to a large extent in certain houses in the town.  We have
    them in the number of freemen who were to be seen on both election
    days coming up to the Red booth with Blue colours in their hats, and
    in the madness of infuriating drink, flinging them in the face of and
    grossly abusing a highly respected and respectable fellow townsman of
    ours, while at the same time they recorded their votes for Messrs.
    Baring and Praed.  We have it in the fact that four sovereigns, with
    a promise of as much more, and £2 10s., with a like promise, were
    given to two poor freemen of the names of Boyce and Stevenson, to
    induce them to vote for the Reds, but who, with a truly noble spirit
    that cannot be too highly appreciated, brought the money into their
    hands to the Blue booth, and then polled for Messrs. Anson and
    Rumbold.  But, unfortunately for the good cause, these glorious
    examples were not generally followed.  The Red Leaders took good care
    for the most part of their deluded and purchased victims, by plying
    them with drink, keeping them in strong hold, &c., to allow them to
    return to the paths of rectitude.  We do think that the feelings of
    our late members are rather to be envied by those of the present, the
    former having lost with honour, the latter owing their election not
    to the feeling of the town (that we confidently say, without fear of
    contradiction, is with Messrs. Anson and Rumbold), but to the
    exercise of the most abominable and venal means to effectuate it.  If
    anything like the sums which we have heard mentioned have been
    expended in this shameful warfare of gold against principle, our
    opponents may truly say with one of yore, ‘another such victory will
    ruin us!’  The most active measures are being had recourse to (and
    may they be successful) either by substantiating the individual
    instances of bribery, which we know have to a great extent taken
    place to oust the members from those seats which they so unjustly
    obtained by bad means, manifestly against the feeling and real wishes
    of the town to oust Messrs. Baring and Praed from the ill-earned
    honours so surreptitiously procured for them, or at any rate to make
    the guilty individual perpetrators pay the penalty of such acts!”

    “The nomination of the candidates took place at the Guildhall, on
    hustings erected outside.  The Town Clerk (S. Tolver, Esq.) having
    read the precept, the Mayor, in a loud voice, requested a patient
    hearing for those who might address them.  Mr. Alderman Barth, in a
    neat speech, proposed the Hon. Col Anson as a fit and proper person
    to represent the borough.  B. Dowson, Esq., seconded the nomination.
    Vice-Admiral Sir G. Parker, K.C.B., in a very manly and
    straightforward speech, proposed Mr. Rumbold, when Mr. Shelly
    presented himself as the seconder.  A picked party of his opponents,
    evidently brought there for the purpose, attempted by every
    discordant noise to prevent his being heard; by dint of perseverance,
    however, and the powerful support of his numerous friends, Mr. S.
    with even more than his usual eloquence, at considerable length
    supported the nomination.  Messrs. R. Ferrier and A. Palmer proposed
    and seconded Mr. Baring, and Mr. J. Penrice proposed and Mr. J. Lacon
    seconded the nomination of Mr. Praed.  The Hon. Col. Anson spoke at
    great length, and with all his wonted power, in the course of a
    really luminous speech, he expressed the surprise he had felt on
    finding Mr. A. Palmer (a gentleman who had before honoured him with
    his support) among the ranks of his opponents.  Mr. P. explained by
    saying it was because Col. A. had allied himself to Radicals and
    destructives.  The Hon. Col. said he was surprised at having such a
    reason assigned.  It was known to all that he had never succumbed to
    the Radicals.  That deeply grateful as he was for their support, he
    had, and should again, unless convinced of their necessity, oppose
    their great measures of vote by ballot and triennial parliaments.
    That he was so far independent appeared in this, that with the ballot
    he believed the present opposition would scarcely have occurred, or
    if it had it would have been but a very few hours ere it would have
    terminated in the triumph of himself and Mr. Rumbold.  (Loud cheers.)
    The other candidates also addressed the assembled multitude.  The
    poll commenced the following day, and from the activity with the Pink
    and Purples, or Reds, or Conservatives, for in the motley assemblage
    of coalition of colours we scarcely know what exactly they call
    themselves, brought up their voters, it was feared that they would
    head the first day’s poll.  The event proved the correctness of the
    prediction, for at four o’clock it was found that the Tories had a
    majority of 192; although the Blues rallied next morning, that
    majority could not be altogether overcome.  The final close of the
    poll left Messrs. Baring and Praed a majority of 88.

Anson         680
Rumbold       675
Baring        772
Praed         768

    “Col. Anson and Mr. Rumbold addressed an immense concourse of
    persons, by whom they were repeatedly and loudly cheered, from the
    King’s Head windows.  They were preceded by Mr. Alderman Barth, Col.
    Anson’s very deep emotion not enabling him immediately to come
    forward.  When he did come forward he said no language which he could
    use could sufficiently express his sorrow at the dissolution of the
    connection so long subsisting between them; their present members
    would find their task a comparatively easy one; they would find that
    such attention had been paid to the town that the path would be plain
    before them, and that little indeed would remain to be done.  (Loud
    cheers.)  They had been defeated by means most flagitious.  Let not
    the present members, however, be too certain of their seats, for if
    by any means these foul proceedings could be sifted to the bottom,
    measures would be taken to remove them from their ill-acquired
    honours.  With him and Mr. Rumbold, he was happy to say, still
    remained the real voice of the people.  (Cheers.)  He was proud of
    this, and would in conclusion assure them that whether in or out of
    Parliament their interests would ever have a prominent place in his
    regards.  (Loud cheers.)  Mr. Rumbold spoke under the influence of
    great agitation, and in the course of a very luminous speech adverted
    to the disgraceful fact of having in his pocket a proof that, in a
    room in this town a bribe was offered in the presence and with the
    cognizance of a Magistrate.  (Cries of ‘Shame, shame.’)  He should
    carry into retirement with him the deepest sense of their uniform
    kindness, and a determination ever to forward the interests of any of
    his former constituents, who might apply to him, to the best of his
    ability.  The chairing of to-day was hailed by numbers with
    demonstrations which must have been the very reverse to the members;
    indeed, we are sure that if the Blues had shown in full strength
    their exasperated feelings (and they did not do this alone in
    compliance with the advice of their leaders), there could have been
    no chairing.  A dinner of our late members’ friends is now about
    taking place at the Masonic Hall, very numerously attended.  A
    subscription for the purchase of a piece of plate for them is
    commenced, and will include the smallest amount.  This will confirm
    us in our conviction that the sense of the town is with the Blues.”

Jan. 15th.—About 100 supporters of Messrs. Anson and Rumbold dined at the
Masonic Hall, when both those gentlemen were present.

Jan. 22nd.—The polling for East Norfolk showed a majority of 149 in the
town for Windham and Gurney.  Mr. Hume, M.P., Mr. Windham, and Mr. Palmer
had addressed the electors.

Feb. 12th contains the following account of a sailing match from Yarmouth
to Venice:—

    “The Lion, Punchard, having some time been considered the fastest
    ship out of this port, a brig was built, and launched in the middle
    of September, called the Vivid (Captain M. Butcher, jun.) and matched
    against the Lion, for Venice, which vessel sailed at 3 p.m. on the
    2nd of December, and the Vivid sailed at 6 p.m. on the following day,
    being 27 hours difference in favour of the former vessel; since which
    period letters have been received from Venice from each Captain,
    stating that the Vivid passed the Gut of Gibraltar on the 22nd of
    December and the Lion on the 29th.  They also state that the Vivid
    arrived at Venice on the 17th ult, and the Lion on the 24th ult.”

A meeting of the subscribers to the plate to be presented to the late
M.P.’s (Messrs. Anson and Rumbold) had been held, when it appeared that
3,685 persons had contributed £370 0s. 8d.

March 2nd.—Mr. C. Aldred had given a lecture on the “Philosophy of
Sleep.”

There had been “a most tremendous hurricane,” and it was stated that “the
oldest seaman does not recollect so much damage occurring on this coast
with an off-shore wind.”

March 16th.—£100 had been deposited by three gentlemen “as the issue of a
voyage to be performed by the Vivid, Lion, and Rapid, from these Roads to
the Naze of Norway and back.”

March 26th.—The ladies of Yarmouth were about to present two very elegant
silver mugs to Miss Anson and Miss Emily Anson, the daughters of the late
M.P. for the borough.

April 16th.—Mr. W. Davie, Trinity Agent, had been appointed a
Sub-Commissioner of Pilotage in the room of John Fisher, Esq., on the
recommendation of John Danby Palmer, Esq., and W. J. Hurry, Esq., the
other Commissioners.

Mr. F. Preston had launched a very fine vessel of 464 tons called the
Mary Anne.

A Society for promoting the Purity of Election had been formed.

April 23rd.—The members (Messrs. Baring and Praed) attended a dinner to
which they had been invited by their constituents, at the Town Hall.  Sir
E. K. Lacon, Bart., presided.  John Penrice, Esq., sat at the head of the
right hand table, and Ambrose Palmer, Esq., at the head of the left.  Mr.
Paget was vice-president.  Among the company were Lord Walpole, M.P., E.
Wodehouse, Esq., M.P., Sir Thomas Gooch, Bart., Sir Jacob Preston,
Bart.,— Lawson, Esq., M.P., the Mayor of Yarmouth, John Danby Palmer,
Esq., Captains Onslow, Gunthorpe, Manby, and Grint; M. Lacon, J. M.
Lacon, W. Fisher, I. Preston, J. Preston, R. Ferrier, J. G. Fisher, E.
Leathes, G. E. Francis, R. Cory, W. Yetts, F. Preston, and Chas. J.
Palmer, Esqs.; the Revs. T. Baker, C. Penrice, W. Lucas, — Green, and
about 250 electors.

May 14th.—The smuggler “Nancy, of London,” was brought in by the Badger,
cutter, having on board 150 tubs of brandy, a few bags of tea, and some
dry goods.

June 18th.—A meeting of Reformers had been held at the Star Hotel, when
G. Danby Palmer, Esq., moved that a petition should be presented in
favour of the Corporation Reform Bill.

June 25th.—Another meeting on the same subject had been held at the
Mechanics’ Hall.  Messrs. William Barth, R. Wall, Thomas Hammond, E.
Sewell, S. Cobb, and J. Shelly taking part in the proceedings.

July 2nd.—Mr. Praed had presented a petition against the Corporation
Reform Bill from the town.

July 30th.—The following notice appears of the death of J. Shelly, Esq.:—

    “It is with feelings of more than ordinary regret that we this week
    announce the sudden death of John Shelly, Esq.  This estimable
    gentleman had concluded his examination on Tuesday forenoon last
    before the Parliamentary Committee, and after being highly
    complimented by the noble Chairman (Lord F. Egerton) for his ability
    (feeling himself somewhat unwell), had retired to his inn, where he
    directed the waiter to call him in half-an-hour.  The servant went
    upstairs at the time appointed, about two in the afternoon, and found
    Mr. S. sitting in a chair, nearly dead.  We repeat that we feel more
    than ordinary regret at having this announcement to make.  As a
    leader and representative (if we may so say) of a party his death
    will create a void that it will be long indeed ere it be filled.  His
    was a master mind—once embarked in a subject (whatever might be its
    magnitude) it was sure to be treated powerfully and ably by Mr.
    Shelly, the whole energies of whose mind were directed to its
    elucidation for the benefit of his fellow townsmen.  There might,
    indeed, be those who excelled this really gifted man in some
    particular department, but for general knowledge, facility, power,
    ease, and even elegance of expression, our lamented friend, we should
    say, has not left his equal in this, his native town.  That he was a
    warm partizan, no one can deny, but that he was directed in his every
    movement of a public nature by sincerity and conscience is equally
    clear to every one who had the happiness of knowing him.  The great
    majority of the shops kept by those in the Liberal interest are
    shaded, to show the sense which is entertained of the irreparable
    nature of the public loss sustained.  But it is not alone in public
    that the work of Mr. S. was known.  As a father, husband, friend, and
    Christian, his conduct was alike exemplary.  We will venture to say
    that, warm as was his political partizanship, he never made himself
    one personal enemy.  Mr. Shelly has left an amiable wife and eleven
    children to deplore his loss.”

August 8th.—The Regatta had been held, when the cup was won by Sir Jacob
Preston’s “Maria”; on this occasion Edmund Preston, Esq., entertained
“about 200 of the fashionables of the town.”

August 13th.—The petition in favour of Corporation Reform had been signed
by 2,500 persons.

August 20th.—The following notice appears:—

    “On Friday night, Mr. Prentice, of whose contumacy before a Committee
    of the House of Commons our readers have heard so much, arrived here,
    having been recently released from Newgate.  The day previous
    handbills made their appearance, inviting the friends of Messrs.
    Baring and Praed to accompany Prentice into town.  About seven
    o’clock on the first-mentioned evening a party of from twenty to
    thirty left the house of a publican in Chapel Street, preceded with
    band, colours, and banners down Regent Street, over the bridge, and
    so on to Hopton.  On the arrival of the “Morning Star” coach Prentice
    was taken out and placed in an open landau, in which he stood
    upright, bowing, as he went along, to the assemblage, which by this
    time had become very large, induced thereto by the novelty of the
    scene.  The procession with much mock gravity moved on to the bridge,
    by torch light, went round the town, and thence proceeded to the
    Bowling Green, where the lion of the night spoke from a window.  He
    described the present as the proudest, the happiest day of his
    life—said that although the Reform Bill had given him a vote, yet he
    hated it,—he hated also the Corporation Reform Bill, and hoped that
    the Lords would so mutilate it that Lord John Russell might not know
    his own child again.”

October 8th contains the following paragraph:—

    “Some admirers of the Corporation met on Tuesday sen’night to
    celebrate Michaelmas Day at the Angel Inn, Mr. F. Paget in the chair.
    We understand that some of the leading members of the expiring body
    were present.”

October 18th contains a notice of Brock’s miraculous escape from
drowning.

Oct. 22nd.—The first Oddfellows’ funeral in this town is thus recorded:—

    “On Thursday afternoon last the novel ceremonial of an Oddfellows’
    funeral took place in processional order.  The deceased, Nathaniel
    Spilman, had been for many years a member of the two lodges in this
    town, and, it having been his request, he was interred with the usual
    honours appertaining to the Order.  Accordingly, the brethren of the
    two lodges proceeded in the following order to the house of the
    deceased:—officer of the lodge with his drawn sword, secretary
    bearing the scroll, two officers with their wands, two of the head
    officers of each lodge, two officers with wands, two of the second
    officers of the lodges, a large concourse of the brethren adorned
    with their numerous silver medals, aprons, &c., two of the wardens
    carrying their badges.  On their arrival at the house they proceeded
    to the churchyard in the above order, with the addition of the Hon.
    and Rev. Edward Pellew preceding the body, which was carried by six
    of the brethren of the lodge, with six others as pall-holders,
    wearing their different medals and aprons.  When at the grave the
    Hon. and Rev. E. Pellew read the burial service, and at the
    conclusion the scroll was thrown in, each of the brethren throwing in
    sprigs of rosemary.  The secretary to both lodges read the funeral
    obsequies over the grave.  They then returned to the house of the
    deceased’s relatives, and after leaving the family (who had attended
    the remains to the grave) proceeded in the same order to the
    lodge-room, where they soon after separated.  Certainly nothing could
    have been more solemn and impressive than was the whole of this
    ceremonial.  At a meeting of the brethren on the Monday following, it
    was unanimously resolved, that the secretary should issue a circular
    to the Hon. and Rev. E. Pellew, thanking him for the great
    condescension and kindness evinced by him in attending the funeral of
    their late departed brother.”

Nov. 5th.—A meeting to consider the question of constructing a railway
had been held.  Admiral Sir G. Parker, William Barth, Esq., Ambrose
Palmer, Esq. (who prognosticated that by means of a railway the fisheries
would become so immense as to be the astonishment of all), R. S.
Lonsdale, Esq., R. Ferrier, Esq., R. Palmer Kemp, Esq., and others took
part in the proceedings.

Nov. 12th.—The following gentlemen had been nominated by the Whig party
as the candidates for election to the Reformed Corporation:—_Gorleston
Ward_: William Barth, Thomas Hammond, J. S. Bell, H. Martin, P. Stead,
and J. W. Dowson.  _Nelson Ward_: George Danby Palmer, R. Palmer Kemp, S.
Robinson, J. Symonds, G. W. Garson, and M. Butcher.  _St. George’s Ward_:
C. Sayers, H. V. Worship, Thomas Lettis, William Grave, George Penrice,
M.D., and William Barker.  _Regent Ward_: John Brightwen, S. Palmer, S.
C. Marsh, C. Davie, B. Dowson, and J. Tomlinson.  _Market Ward_: E. M.
Clowes, William Johnson, W. Hammond, S. Cobb, E. Sewell, and B. Cobb.
_St. Nicholas’ Ward_: Thomas Thornton, A. Sewell, Joseph Fiddes, R.
Hammond, W. N. Burroughs, and C. E. Doughty.  It was reported that the
Tories had held “secret meetings” and were prepared to nominate Messrs.
S. H. Aldred, J. E. Laws, B. Sherrington, P. Moore, E. H. L. Preston, and
— Moore.  Messrs. J. G. Plummer, D. Hook, and S. Sherrington had also
issued a joint address in the South Ward; R. Ferrier and F. Preston had
offered themselves for the St. George’s and St. Andrew’s Wards, and R.
Wall for the South Ward.

Nov. 26th.—It is recorded that in the month ending October, then last,
there entered “inwards” at the Custom House of this port 306 vessels, the
tonnage of which amounted to 24,933 tons, and with cargoes “outwards” 120
vessels, of a tonnage of 8,560 tons.  The “Old Spring,” a ship of nearly
400 tons (belonging to George Danby Palmer, Esq.), had arrived from
Archangel with timber, and came up to the Quay without unlading any part
of her cargo.

Dec. 10th.—The retiring Aldermen (except Mr. Barth) were entertained by
their Tory friends previous to their quitting office.

Dec. 20th.—About 120 gentlemen retaliated upon this course by giving a
dinner to Mr. Barth, S. Cobb, Esq., in the chair.  S. Palmer, H. Worship,
Thos. Hammond, George Danby Palmer, R. Palmer Kemp, H. V. Worship, C.
Bell, Thomas Green, Esqs., Capt. Jeffries, and Messrs. Burroughs, W. J.
Mason, B. Cobb, Grave, R. Hammond, T. Lettis, and S. Robinson took part
in this entertainment.



1836.


Jan. 2nd.—The following is the account of the first election of Town
Councillors under the Municipal Reform Act:—

    “The election of Town Councillors took place here on Saturday last.
    The polling commenced at nine o’clock in the morning, and finished at
    four in the afternoon.  The return was published on Monday by the
    Mayor, as follows:—

             NORTH WARD.
Richard Hammond                   108
William N. Burroughs               99
Abraham Sewell                     94
Charles George Doughty             91
Benjamin Sherrington               90
E. H. L. Preston                   89
            MARKET WARD.
Simon Cobb                        135
William Johnson                   134
William Hammond                   131
Benjamin Cobb                     129
Edward N. Clowes                  128
Edward Sewell                     124
            REGENT WARD.
John Brightwen                     98
Samuel Palmer                      98
S. C. Marsh                        98
Joseph Tomlinson                   98
C. Davie                           97
Benjamin Dowson                    95
         ST. GEORGE’S WARD.
C. Sayers                          91
W. Grave                           91
George Penrice, M.D.               91
W. Barber                          91
H. V. Worship                      90
Thomas Lettis                      89
             SOUTH WARD.
G. D. Palmer                      147
R. P. Kemp                        137
George Garson                     127
M. Butcher                        124
John Symonds                      122
Samuel Robinson                   118
   GORLESTON AND SOUTHTOWN, OR ST.
           ANDREW’S WARD.
J. S. Bell                        115
Thomas Hammond                    111
J. W. Dowson                      105
William Barth                     101
Hezekiah Martin                    91
P. Stead                           87

    It is a matter of great congratulation that 34 out of the 36
    Councillors are Reformers.  This election was conducted with
    tranquility.  Devoutly it is to be wished that parliamentary
    elections were managed in the same way.  The laborious portion of our
    population had no inducement held out to them to lose a single hour.
    It is a little curious that Mr. William Prentice—that very Mr.
    Prentice who made so conspicuous a figure in our election
    parliamentary investigation, proved one of the most formidable
    antagonists with whom the Liberal candidates in the town had to
    contend.”

Jan. 7th.—The first meeting of the Reformed Corporation is reported as
follows:—

    “The Town Council met on Thursday last at the Tolhouse Hall, John
    Brightwen, Esq., in the chair, (Isaac Preston, Esq., having, we
    understand, ceased to exercise the functions of Mayor since his
    publication of the Council List), for the purpose of choosing twelve
    Aldermen.  The choice fell on the following gentlemen:—Messrs. J.
    Brightwen, Benjamin Dowson, Robert Teasdel, Joseph Starling, J. B.
    Palmer, R. S. Lonsdale, Thomas Pitt, Captain William Larke, R.N.,
    Benjamin Fenn, Robert Wall, Christopher Nicholls, and Captain James
    Jefferies.  On the following day the Aldermen and Council met at the
    same place for the election of a Mayor and for other public business.
    Mr. E. H. L. Preston proposed Mr. Richard Hammond.  Mr. H. thanked
    Mr. P. for the proposition, and said that he should still more thank
    his friends if they voted against him.  William Barth, Esq., was then
    chosen Mayor, amidst loud cheering.  Mr. B. was then, together with
    the Aldermen, sworn in.  The Court was then thrown open to the
    public, when the front and side galleries were instantly filled by a
    very respectable concourse of persons, the body of the hall being
    appropriated to the Council.  Several gentlemen were named for
    Magistrates to be recommended to the Crown.  Accounts were ordered
    touching the property (and profits arising from such property) held
    by the late Corporation, together with accounts of the official
    persons employed, their salaries, &c., for the last five years.  J.
    Tolver, Esq., was then chosen, during pleasure, as Town Clerk.”

    “Our Conservatives had dined together on Thursday to celebrate the
    anniversary of the return of Messrs. Baring and Praed.  They have
    been obliged to put themselves on a level with the Reformers, and be
    content with three shilling tickets instead of fifteen.  The dinner
    took place at the Angel Inn, J. E. Lacon, Esq., in the chair.”

Jan. 14th contains the following report:—

    “There was an unusual quantity of business transacted at the
    Corporation Assembly on Wednesday last.  It was first proposed that a
    petition should be addressed to the King, praying for four Sessions
    of Oyer and Terminer a year.  It was suggested that the Recorder
    should be allowed £60 a year.  To this Mr. E. L. Preston objected,
    who moved that it should be £50.  To this it was replied that the
    latter sum was allowed by the late Corporation when Sessions were
    only held twice a year.  The original motion was carried unanimously,
    Mr. E. Sewell observing that Mr. P’s was a false economy.  It was
    next moved by Mr. S. Cobb that the Great Seal should be called that
    of the Town Council, and not of St. Nicholas.  He had no objection to
    all remaining as it was except the expensive name of St. Nicholas.
    This was warmly opposed by Mr. Preston.  It was, however, carried
    unanimously.  Mr. Richard Hammond read a list of persons to form the
    Committee of Finance.  To this plan Mr. Preston warmly objected,
    saying he had no notion of names being got up “ready cut and dried.”
    It was stated in answer that the list (to which no objection was then
    made) was agreed to at the Watch Committee, of which Mr. P. formed
    one, and which he might have attended if he pleased.  Mr. B.
    Sherrington (of the same politics as Mr. P.) was on the Committee,
    and was present.  The Finance Committee agreed to were, the Mayor
    (who is appointed _ex-officio_ on all Committees), Messrs. S. Cobb,
    R. S. Lonsdale, Charles Nicholls, B. Dowson, Martin, G. D. Palmer, C.
    Sayers, W. Johnson, and Burroughs.  On the Mayor explaining the
    duties of the Borough Lands Committee, it was suggested and agreed
    to, that the tradesmen employed solely by this Committee should be
    only for small jobs.  This being a most important business, it was
    determined that all the Council should form the Committee.  On the
    Water-Bailiffs and Met Farm Office Committee, it was resolved, on the
    motion of Mr. S. Cobb, that it be called “Committee of Port Dues”;
    the officer “Collector of Port Dues.”  The Committee appointed were
    Messrs. W. Barber, G. D. Palmer, T. Pitt, R. Teasdel, Martin, J. B.
    Palmer, Thomas Hammond, Fenn, Butcher, and Dowson.  Market and
    Corporation Tolls’ Committee: Messrs. Johnson, Brightwen, S. Cobb,
    Sayers, Nicholls, Sherrington, R. Hammond, S. Palmer, Symonds, J. B.
    Palmer, and Martin.  Committee for Caister Causeway: Messrs. R. P.
    Kemp, S. Palmer, Nicholls, Fenn, Tomlinson, R. Hammond, and Sayers.
    Church Trustees: Messrs. Larke, Kemp, Burroughs, J. Dowson, Starling,
    B. Cobb, S. Palmer, E. N. Clowes, Marsh, Tomlinson, Garson, Grave,
    Butcher, Barber, Robinson, Preston, Martin, Symonds, Sherrington, and
    G. D. Palmer.  All the outstanding drawbacks arc to be referred to
    the Port Dues Committee.  The ringers’ bill, £12 10s. for five days’
    ringing, was disallowed.  Admiralty Court: R. Cory, jun., returned
    that he had in five years received as registrar £1,483 16s. 8d., and
    claimed as compensation £200 per year for his natural life.
    Proctors: C. J. Palmer claimed £1,036 7s., C. Sayers £1,196 5s. 6d.,
    I. Preston £692, E. R. Palmer £497.  Thomas King, gaoler, petitioned
    for continuance of place, stated emoluments, and asked £13 7s. 4½d.
    compensation, as Marshall of the Court of Admiralty.  Mrs. King, as
    matron, received £10 per year, and prayed to be continued.  Alfred
    King, turnkey, received 14s. per. week, and prayed for continuance.
    The five sergeants-at-mace sent a return of their emoluments for five
    years, and petitioned for their continuance.  B. Welsh, chapel clerk,
    made about £47 per year, and prayed for continuance.  The Rev. Thomas
    Baker, as lecturer, received £120 per year.  The Hon. and Rev. E.
    Pellew received from the late Corporation £40 per year and a house,
    for which he pays 1s. per year rent.  John Seaman, parish clerk,
    receives no salary, but averages about £80 per annum.  The Revs. J.
    Homfray and Mark Waters declined the statement of their proceeds, as
    they conceived the returns did not apply to them as Ministers of a
    Chapel endowed by Act of Parliament.  They begged their refusal might
    not be considered as arising from discourtesy.  Their communication
    was rejected.  These returns were referred to a Committee of the
    Mayor’s assistants.”

Jan. 21st.—The Earl of Orford had been removed from his office of High
Steward and the Earl of Lichfield elected in his place.

The following gentlemen were suggested as Magistrates:—William Barth,
Esq., Sir George Parker, K.C.B., George Danby Palmer, H. V. Worship, J.
Brightwen, C. Nicholls, R. Palmer Kemp, S. Cobb, and S. Palmer, Esqs.,
and Capt. Larke, R.N., by the Council.

Sixteen new watch and policemen, and two superintendents had been
appointed.

The Mayor and Town Council had attended service at St. Nicholas’ Church,
“The Mayor with no other insignia of office than the chain and the sword
carried by an officer.”

Feb. 4th.—The Tories had held a dinner in the Theatre in honour of
Messrs. Baring and Praed.  Seven hundred persons attended.

Feb. 18th.—Has the following report of a high tide:—

    “The scene of devastation on our beach, occasioned by the late high
    tides, exceed the powers of description.  Wednesday morning, in some
    measure, prepared us for the event; the sea was at that time breaking
    over the jetty, and reached as high as the houses.  It was prophesied
    by nautical men that if the next tide was equally high the
    consequences would be most disastrous, and, unfortunately, it so
    proved.  The sea in the evening undermined the foundations of most of
    the dwellings, throwing down the walls of many, to the great injury
    of those of the inmates who had not taken the precautions to remove
    their property.  Furniture was seen floating in all directions, in
    the presence of the astonished and alarmed multitude.  The summer
    residence of the Right Hon. Lord Berners is more than half destroyed,
    while the house of the Misses Ansell and the Right Hon. Lord Nevill
    were surrounded; in fact, such a scene of general devastation never
    in the memory of the oldest inhabitant presented itself.  The sea at
    one time reached some way up the Jetty Road.  While a person was
    assisting the landlord of the Holkham Tavern to remove his beds, &c.,
    to a back warehouse, the sea burst in and broke down the front wall.
    At one part of the South Denes the sea and river might be seen
    meeting.  Part of the South Quay was flooded.  It was unusually high
    at the bridge, and likewise some of the lower parts of the town.
    Amidst this wide spreading destruction, we are glad to say, no lives
    were lost.”

Feb. 22nd.—The Lord High Steward (the Earl of Lichfield) had been sworn
in, and a dinner given in his honour.  The noble lord was accompanied by
the Mayor, Lord Suffield, the Hon. George Anson, Mr. Rumbold, Sir W.
Ffolkes, and Mr. Adair.

March 10th.—A meeting had been held, the Hon. and Rev. E. Pellew
presiding, to consider the establishment of a penny library for the
working classes.

March 24th.—A bet had been made by Mr. Ringer, of the Elephant and Castle
liquor shop in the Market Place, “that on Monday he would sell 1,000
glasses of ale and porter from six o’clock in the morning and close the
same night.  Mr. R. closed at 10, after selling 2,454, at one penny per
glass.”

Mr. F. Preston had launched a fine ship of 370 tons from his yard.

April 2nd.—Mr. Edward H. L. Preston and Mr. Green had been tried and
acquitted upon charges of bribery alleged to have been committed by them
at the General Election, when Messrs. Baring and Praed were returned for
the borough.

April 7th.—A poll had taken place for two Haven and Pier Commissioners,
as follows:—

George Danby Palmer       375
William Barth             375
Sir E. Lacon              207
Samuel Paget              168

and Messrs. Palmer and Barth were consequently elected.

April 14th contains the following paragraph as to the recent bribery
prosecution:—

    “Yesterday there was a grand public dinner at the Angel Inn, to
    celebrate what the Tories call ‘the defeat of the Attorney-General
    and the Yarmouth Radicals;’ but what we should say was a fortunate
    escape of the accused parties, arising from the glorious uncertainty
    of the law.  John Lacon, Esq., was in the chair.  Richard Ferrier,
    Esq., presided at the left hand table.  The two vice-presidents were
    Mr. Aldred and Mr. John Clarke.  A very handsome silver teapot and
    ewer were presented to Mr. William Green, by John Penrice, Esq., in
    an appropriate speech, for his exertions at the last election.  We
    were not present, but had these particulars from a Tory friend, who
    also said ‘he thought ’twas hard poor Prentice hadn’t something, as
    he did as much as Green, and more too.’  There were about 70 persons
    present.”

Twenty gentlemen, all of Reform principles, had been elected select
Vestrymen.

Five hundred merchants and others had attended a public meeting to
protest against the proposal of the Eastern Counties’ Railway Company to
construct a line to Harwich.

April 28th.—The seamen had “struck” for an increase of wages.

Several persons had been fined for keeping disorderly houses.

Seven vessels had been cleared with emigrants for America, carrying 850
adults and 600 children, and several other vessels were fitting out for
the same voyage.

May 5th.—The town was suffering from a number of dogs prowling about, one
of which had severely bitten a young lady.

May 19th.—Mr. William Ferrier had been elected Coroner by the Council,
which body had voted, by a majority of one, to retain the Market Cross.

June 9th—Mr. Jefferies Barth had been elected Clerk of the Peace.

June 17th.—Nathaniel Palmer, Esq., had been appointed Recorder.

June 23rd.—A fine new schooner (The Clipper) had been launched for
William Hurry Palmer, Esq., and was expected to be the fastest sailing
vessel out of the port.

June 30th.—The Cross was ordered to be pulled down.

July 14th.—It was stated that “Yarmouth is very full of strangers, who
flock here from all parts of the country to enjoy the cool sea breezes.
We believe there is not any other place that affords so excellent a view
of shipping in motion as Yarmouth Roads, it being the great thoroughfare
for all vessels trading to the North.  The Bath Room is one of the
principal attractions to visitors, as it is a most agreeable lounge
during the heat of the day, and frequent undress balls enliven the
youthful part of the company.  The Bath Room has been well attended this
year, and we are happy to say the list of subscribers gives promise of a
good season.”

The destruction of the Cross is thus noticed:—

    “On Friday last the Market Cross was sold by public tender for £55
    6s., and on Monday morning workmen commenced pulling it down.  It has
    now entirely disappeared, to the gratification of the residents in
    the Market Place, to whom it had long been a great annoyance, in
    consequence of its having become a rendezvous for idle and dissolute
    persons.  The Tories lament the loss of it, and call the Corporation
    destructives for having removed a public nuisance!  We know not what
    claim it had upon their sympathies, except in being a fit emblem of
    the late Body Corporate, for like that it perhaps was of service at
    some bygone period of time, but having long ceased to be useful, it
    had fallen to abuse and rottenness, and to complete the resemblance
    it has, after some struggles, been swept away by the current of
    public opinion.”

August 9th.—The Hon. and Rev. E. Pellew had been presented with plate of
the value of £100 by the parishioners.

August 25th.—The Races had been held, the Stewards being the Earl of
Orford, Lord Henniker, and T. Baring, Esq., M.P.  About 160 ladies and
gentlemen attended the Race Ball, and 2,000 persons patronized the
Vauxhall Gardens.

Sept. 1st.—The Regatta had been held, and the Theatre had been well
filled on the Stewards’ bespeak, when an attempt to get up a cry of
“Baring and Rumbold” proved a failure.

Sept. 22nd.—172 persons holding Corporation leaseholds had intimated
their desire to purchase the freehold of their properties, at prices
amounting to £6,911.

Oct. 6th.—The price of herrings was £23 to £24 per last.

Oct. 13th.—The compensation awarded to the Town Clerk for loss of his
offices of Magistrates’ Clerk and Clerk of the Peace had been settled at
£222 per annum.

Nov. 3rd.—The result of the Municipal Election is reported as follows:—

    “Our Municipal Election took place on Tuesday last.  The contest in
    the St. Nicholas’ Ward was a severe one.  It was neck and neck
    between Mr. Nuthall and E. H. L. Preston all day.  At length the
    election was carried by a _worthy_, who, after promising constantly
    to vote for Nuthall and Sherrington, was suddenly not to be found;
    but about five minutes before the close of the poll he was brought
    out of the Saracen’s Head, a low public-house, in a state of
    intoxication, his voting paper having been changed or altered to
    Preston and Fiddes.  This decided the thing in Mr. Preston’s favour,
    as before that time the numbers for him and Mr. Nuthall were 102
    each.  Such a mode of gaining an election is quite in keeping with
    Tory practices, and needs no comment.  The validity of the election
    is, however, disputed on the grounds of a bad vote on the Tory side,
    and an informality in the appointment of an Alderman to preside in
    the absence of the Aldermen of the Ward.  The following is a list of
    Councillors returned:—_St. Nicholas’ Ward_: Mr. Sherrington and Mr.
    Preston.  _Market_: Mr. E. N. Clowes and Mr. Sewell.  _Regent_: Mr.
    Cufaude Davie and Mr. John Fish.  _St. George’s_: Mr. Worship and Mr.
    Lettis.  _Nelson_: Mr. Robinson and Mr. Symonds.  _St. Andrew’s_: Mr.
    Martin and Mr. Frederick Preston.”

Nov. 10th.—A dinner, attended by 200 gentlemen, had been given to William
Barth, Esq. (the Mayor.)

Nov. 24th.—The old Bridge had been sold in one lot for £96.

Dec. 22nd.—Mr. F. Preston had launched a beautiful brig called the
“Catherine,” of 212 tons register.

Dec. 29th.—Heavy weather prevailed, with so much snow that the coaches
were obliged to cease running.



1837.


Jan. 5th.—The “Isis,” of this port, and a sloop belonging to Wells, had
been towed off the beach into the harbour.

Jan. 12th.—Eleven vessels still remained on the beach, and the jetty had
been damaged by the Henry, of North Shields, having run into it.

Improvements were being effected at the Bath Rooms.

A floating-light was to be placed at St. Nicholas’ Gat.

Jan. 19th.—The increase in the Customs for the year ended 5th January,
1837, was £7,000.

Feb. 2nd.—The Town debt was stated to have been left by the late
Corporation at £11,000, with 19s. 6d. in hand to meet that demand.

Feb. 16th.—A meeting had been held for the purpose of moving for the
abolition of Church Rates.

Feb. 23rd.—Mr. Kay, Assistant Poor Law Commissioner, had been down with a
view to bringing the Town under the Poor Law Amendment Act.

March 23rd.—The “Export Merchants” had given a dinner to their friends at
the Star Hotel, when George Danby Palmer, Esq., presided.

March 30th.—At the Vestry meeting the parishioners claimed and exercised
the right of electing both Churchwardens.

April 6th.—The nomination for the first Board of Guardians (N. Palmer,
Esq., acting as Returning Officer) had been sent in.  The following
gentlemen were elected:—Messrs. John Brightwen, H. V. Worship, S. V.
Moore, S. Miller, jun., E. N. Clowes, W. Chambers, J. Fish, G. Harley, S.
Cobb, R. P. Kemp, S. Palmer, and W. Grave.

April 20th.—The following officers were elected by the Board:—R. P. Kemp,
Chairman; S. Cobb, Vice-Chairman; J. L. Cufaude, Clerk; D. Turner,
Treasurer; B. L. Love, Auditor; Harry Worship and Joseph Bayly,
Registrars; Charles Bell and Henry Palmer, Joint Superintendent
Registrars; and — Kemp, Governor of the Workhouse.

May 4th.—The Guardians had fixed the site for the new Workhouse on the
North Denes.

May 11th.—Mr. Harry Worship and Mr. J. Bayly had been elected parish
surgeons.

May 18th.—Mackerel were selling at £2 14s. per hundred.

May 25th.—The inhabitants had voted an address to the Princess Victoria.

June 22nd.—The paper appears in mourning for the King.  It contained a
notice that “The proclamation of Her Majesty the Queen was to be made
to-morrow” (_i.e._, on 21st June.)

June 29th.—Mr. Baring had given £25 to the Methodist Chapel.

The Queen had been proclaimed by the Mayor “in front of the Hall” and at
other places in the town.

Kerrison Kerrison, Esq., son of M. Kerrison, Esq., of Ranworth, had been
drowned while bathing from the beach.

July 13th.—S. Palmer, Esq., had called a meeting at his own house to
consider the question of selecting candidates for the representation of
the Borough, when Mr. Rumbold and Mr. Wiltshire were introduced to the
electors.

July 29th.—The election is reported, when Mr. Baring was proposed and
seconded by Messrs. Ambrose Palmer and Richard Ferrier; Mr. Rumbold by
Sir George Parker and Mr. Brightwen; Mr. Gambier by Mr. J. Penrice and
Mr. J. E. Lacon; and Mr. Wilshere by Mr. Robert Palmer Kemp and Mr. B. U.
Dowson.

The poll closed—

Rumbold        790
Wilshere       779
Baring         699
Gambier        685

August 24th.—The Races had been held, Mr. Wilshere, M.P., staying with
Mr. S. Palmer, while Mr. Rumbold, M.P., was at the Mayor’s house.

Sept. 7th.—First meeting of the “Reform” Magistrates for the purpose of
granting licences; present—The Mayor, Dr. Penrice, G. Danby Palmer, S.
Cobb, Charles Nicholls, and William Hammond, Esqs., and “the first step
taken towards breaking up the monopoly which had hitherto been enjoyed by
brewers and spirit merchants.”

Sept. 14th.—The “Foxhound” (Captain Betts), belonging to G. Danby Palmer,
Esq., had sailed with 1,250 barrels of herrings for Venice.

The schooner “Wilshere” had been launched from Messrs. Fellows’ yard for
Messrs. Barker and Stone, who entertained their friends on the occasion
at the Star Hotel.

Sept. 21st.—£21 had been voted for pulling down the Pudding Gates.

Sept. 28th.—The Lord Bishop had held a confirmation, and received an
address from the Corporation at the Guild Hall.

Oct. 5th.—The Reformers claimed a gain of 56 at the Revision Court.

The “Parroch Hall,” a fine ship of 450 tons, had been launched from Mr.
I. Preston’s yard.

Oct. 26th.—Joseph Bonaparte, ex-King of Spain, had visited the town.

The “Tantivy,” schooner had been launched from Messrs. Fellows’ yard.

Nov. 2nd.—The Liberal candidates had been re-elected in all the Wards
without opposition.

Nov. 9th.—Dr. Penrice was elected Mayor, after a ballot, by 20 votes, as
against 14 votes given for Mr. S. Cobb; Samuel Jay, Esq., was elected an
Alderman in the place of Mr. Wall.

Nov. 23rd.—Mr. Joseph Fiddes, James N. Sherrington, and James Raven had
been elected Commissioners of the Borough Court of Requests.

The “Harlequin,” 350 tons burthen, had been launched from Mr. L Preston’s
yard.

Dec. 7th.—The Tories had petitioned against the return of the sitting
members, but had suggested a compromise, which had been “rejected with
the ridicule it deserved.”

Mr. Joseph Bayly had been elected a Councillor for St. George’s Ward.

Dec. 21st.—Mr. William Danby Palmer had been elected a Councillor for St.
Andrew’s Ward, in the place of Mr. Dowson, deceased.

Dee. 28th.—A Temperance sermon had been preached by the Rev. T. Clowes
from I. Cor., viii., 8, 13.

The weather had been remarkably mild, warmer than it was often in May and
June.



1838.


April 19th.—Winter had come again, and the frost had blocked up several
pumps.  The nights were extremely dark, and great complaints had been
made by inhabitants of the total absence of lights in the streets.

Coaches had been engaged to take up the Tory witnesses for the hearing of
the election petition, while the Whigs were going to London by the “Ailsa
Craig” steam packet.

April 26th.—The following Committee had been struck for the hearing of
such petition:—The Hon. E. Grimshaw, Charles Rushout, H. Thomas, E.
Baker, W. C. Brodie, J. C. Holmes, and J. Bailey (Tories), and J. E.
Vivian, R. W. Hunt Lord M. Hill, and the Hon. George Byng (Whigs).

May 3rd.—This Committee had come to the resolution—That C. E. Rumbold and
W. Wilshere, Esqs., are duly elected, but that the petition was not
frivolous or vexatious.

May 10th.—This decision appears to have been the result of an arrangement
made by a few gentlemen of the Whig and Tory parties, that one of the
members (it is believed Mr. Wilshere) would accept the Chiltern Hundreds
at the end of the present Session of Parliament.  It was believed in that
event Mr. Baring would be opposed.  It is stated that “of late our
members have not reposed on a bed of roses.”

May 17th.—The schooner “Stamboul” had been launched from Messrs. A.
Palmer and Son’s yard.

May 24th.—A suggestion appears to found a Dispensary in Yarmouth and that
the Council fund should be applied towards this end.  This fund then
consisted of £2,500, and was formed by the contributions of each Alderman
of £10 and each Common Councilman £5 on his election.

May 31st.—The “Pantaloon,” a fine, large, round-sterned brig of 180 tons,
had been launched by her owners, Messrs. A. and G. Steward; and the
“Victoria,” 350 tons, by Mr. J. Preston.

A meeting had been held at the Town Hall to consider the propriety of
establishing a small Hospital for Great Yarmouth and the East and West
Fleggs and Mutford and Lothingland Hundreds.  The Hon. and Rev. E. Pellew
presided, and amongst those present were all the resident clergy and
medical gentlemen of the town, with Messrs. G. D. Palmer, Brightwen, W.
Steward, B. Dowson, Worship, &c.

June 7th and 14th.—Col. Thompson had been suggested as a candidate for
the Borough, and Mr. Northhouse had addressed a meeting on his behalf.
Mr. George Steward was taking an active part in this affair.

June 21st.—Suggestions were being made for the celebration of the Queen’s
Coronation.

Messrs. Henry Emms and William Simms had been appointed Relieving
Officers.

The donations for the proposed Hospital were £200 and the annual
subscriptions £280.

June 28th.—This issue contains the following account of how, after a
futile effort had been made by the Vicar, which appears not to have been
a success, H.M. Coronation was celebrated.  At an “adjourned meeting of
the subscribers to the fund for celebrating her Majesty’s Coronation, by
giving a dinner to the poor children of the town on that day, held at the
New Hall, on Thursday evening last, the Hon. and Rev. E. Pellew in the
chair, those gentlemen who had undertaken to collect subscriptions
reported that they had scarcely any further funds to add to those already
collected.  Under these circumstances the chairman submitted to the
meeting that the proposed plan of feasting the children was a failure
from the want of funds.  Considerable discussion then ensued as to the
propriety of taking steps towards celebrating the Coronation day in any
other way, upon which there were many conflicting opinions.  At length
Mr. Samuel Palmer, after recapitulating all that had been done, and
regretting that up to that time nothing had been realized, moved—‘That a
subscription be now entered into, to provide such amusements for the poor
of the town on the day of the Coronation as may seem fit to the
subscribers, and that a committee be appointed to carry the same into
effect.’  Mr. Samuel Barber moved, as an amendment, ‘that all the poor of
the town be regaled with roast beef and plum pudding’; but it appearing
to the meeting that as money enough could not be raised to regale the
children, it would be impossible to raise a sufficient sum to feast all
the poor.  The amendment was negatived, and Mr. Palmer’s motion was
unanimously carried.  The Chairman then left the chair, and Mr. George
Danby Palmer was called on to preside, when thanks were voted to the late
Chairman; a spirited subscription was begun in the room; a committee was
appointed to carry Mr. Palmer’s motion into effect, and the meeting
separated.”

“Since that time the gentlemen composing the committee have collected
money to the amount of about £200, and a bill of fare has been issued
sports and entertainments to take place on the South Denes, amongst which
are horse, pony, and donkey races, jumping in sacks, climbing matches,
and running after pigs with soaped tails.  There will also be sailing
matches on the river.  A dinner will take place in a marquee erected on
the ground, the Mayor in the chair.  A stand and several booths have also
been built for the accommodation of the public.  The amusements will
conclude with a superb display of fireworks, under the direction of an
artist from London.”

July 7th contains the following record of the result of such action:—

    The festivities and sports which were to have taken place on Thursday
    last in honour of the Coronation were interrupted by a heavy fall of
    rain, which commenced at the hour fixed for the fun to begin, and
    continued nearly, ‘sans’ intermission, until night.  This untoward
    state of the elements prevented any very great assembly of multitude
    taking place; nevertheless there were some two or three thousand
    determined holiday-makers congregated on the South Denes, and the
    horse and pony races came off in spite of the unfavourable state of
    the weather.  The race for hacks was well contested and won by
    Highflyer, beating Whiscumsnivet, the Ambassador, and Sir William.
    The pony race was also a good one; we could not learn the name of the
    winner.  Four boats started for the silver cup—value £7—viz., the
    Coriander (Balls), Leviathian (Preston), Louisa (Fiddis), and Neptune
    (Green).  The wind was light at starting, and towards the end of the
    match there was so little as scarcely to fill the sails; the
    Coriander won by about half a length.  The remainder of the sports
    were postponed until Friday afternoon.  At four o’clock upwards of
    100 gentlemen sat down to dinner in a marquee erected on the Denes,
    the Mayor (Dr. Penrice) in the chair.  After dinner the health of the
    Queen was drunk with long, loud, and hearty cheers, and the usual
    loyal and patriotic toasts were given; several excellent songs were
    sung, and about half-past ten the company returned to the town
    preceded by a band of music.  The children at the various charity
    schools and the inmates of the Fishermen’s Hospital were handsomely
    entertained.  The Temperance people had a tea meeting, and all, as
    far as the weather would permit, appeared to enjoy themselves in
    their own way.

    On Friday afternoon, at three o’clock, the sports were re-commenced,
    the weather being most propitious and the sun shining with surpassing
    brilliancy.  Yarmouth poured out thousands upon thousands of its
    working population, and great numbers of all classes were present to
    witness the fun and partake of the amusement of the day.  The
    performances, if so they may be called, took place on a stage
    immediately opposite the stand, which was filled with spectators,
    under the superintendence and direction of a gentleman, to whose good
    humoured exertions too much praise cannot be given, and who was ably
    assisted by others in providing and bringing out such entertainments
    for the humbler classes as seemed best adapted to their taste and
    habits.  First came two chimney sweeps in _full costume_; they dived
    in a tub of meal for pieces of money, which they picked out with
    their mouths.  Numberless sneezings and many collisions of sooty
    heads, now, however, converted into floury nobs, took place during
    this match, to the great merriment of the assembled crowds; at length
    the money was all abstracted, and the performers, well washed, made
    their bows and retired from the stage.  Next came bobbing for oranges
    in tubs of water, by boys with their hands tied behind them.  Then a
    singing match by boys, which was won by an urchin of the name of John
    Hutchin, who sung two comic songs with inimitable humour and effect.
    A horn pipe match followed, in which the best dancers made up by
    agility for what was wanting in grace and elegance.  Grinning through
    horse collars succeeded, and here one Billy Derry out-uglied the
    ugliest—O! for grinning through a horse collar, commend me to Billy
    Derry.  Then we had six old women, drinking scalding hot tea for a
    prize of one sovereign; the efforts of these poor old creatures to
    gulp down the almost boiling fluid, were at once both pitiable and
    ludicrous, but they appeared to enjoy the parts they were acting
    almost as much as the spectators did, who gave way to the most
    uproarious laughter we ever remember to have heard, they were all
    well rewarded for their exhibition.  There were also donkey races,
    climbing soaped poles, gingling matches, running wheelbarrows
    blindfold, a rowing match, and races after pigs with their tails
    soaped, and twenty-four barrels of ale were given away to the
    populace on the ground.  At half-past ten at night the Market Place
    was literally crammed with people to witness the display of
    fireworks, which was splendid and worthy of the occasion, and
    concluded the Coronation amusements.  Immediately after the fireworks
    had ceased the crowd dispersed, and by twelve o’clock the streets
    were as quiet as upon ordinary occasions.

July 14th.—The Corporation had voted an address to the Queen, of which
the following is the notice:—

    “At an assembly of the Corporation, held on Wednesday, the Mayor read
    a congratulatory address to Her Majesty the Queen, upon the
    Coronation, which was unanimously adopted by the Council, and Mr.
    Barth, Mr. Robert Palmer Kemp and Mr. Samuel Palmer, were appointed a
    deputation to carry up and present the same; it being left to the
    option of any other gentlemen of the Council to join the deputation.”

The Mayor, preceded by the Regalia, had walked to church, “unaccompanied
by a single member of the Town Council.”

July 5th.—Col. Thompson had declined to come forward.

Mr. J. Symonds had given a silver cup, value £5 5s., to be bowled for in
honour of the Coronation.  There were 34 competitors, and it was won by
Mr. John Porrett, “the veteran bowler.”

July 12th.—A meeting of freemen to oppose Mr. Baring’s return at the
ensuing election had been held at the Masonic Hall, Mr. Joseph Bayly
(Chairman).  Capt. Love, Mr. John Clowes, jun., Mr. Lawrence, and Mr.
Charles Marsh took part in the proceedings, and the following gentlemen
were appointed a committee to carry the resolutions passed at the meeting
into effect:—Messrs. Joseph Bayly, John Clowes, jun., S. Cobb, E. R.
Palmer, Henry Pickard, Charles Marsh, Thomas Thompson, jun., and Capt.
Love.

The Corporation address to Her Majesty had been presented by Messrs.
Barth, R. P. Kemp, and S. Palmer.

July 26th.—The Water Frolic had been held, when the “Leviathian” (Bessey)
beat the “Union” (Barber), the Mayor and Corporation attended the sports
in a barge.

Dr. Penrice (the Mayor) and Dr. Cox has been elected physicians, and
Messrs. Charles Costerton, George Bateman, John Prichard, and John C.
Smith, surgeons to the Hospital.

August 9th.—The Queen had signified her intention of becoming a patron of
the Hospital.

August 16th.—The freemen had determined to re-elect Mr. Wilshere free of
expense, Messrs. Simon Cobb and George Steward speaking on the subject;
and a committee had been formed to further this object, of which Mr. Cobb
was chairman, Mr. J. Bayly, secretary, and Mr. J. Clowes, treasurer.

August 16th.—The new Writ had been moved for, and the blue flag with the
inscription of “Wilshere, the Reformer,” had been displayed at the
Committee Room in Regent Street.

August 25th.—Mr. Baring, and Mr. G. Steward (for Mr. Wilshere) had been
canvassing the electors.  At the nomination the former gentleman was
proposed and seconded by Mr. J. Lacon and Mr. E. H. L. Preston, and the
latter by Mr. John Clowes, jun., and Mr. Joseph Bayly; Mr. George Steward
representing Mr. Wilshere.  Mr. Baring then addressed the electors.  The
result of the poll was declared to be—

For Wilshere       735
Baring             702

A very painful occurrence had happened.  A poor fellow “who took some
part in the election” declared that if Mr. Baring lost the election he
would hang himself.  The poll closed at 4, and he had effectually hung
himself and was cut down before 5 o’clock.

August 30th.—The friends of Mr. Wilshere had dined together at the
“Star.”

Mr. G. Steward had been chaired for Mr. Wilshere.  Mr. S. Palmer had
received a letter from Mr. Wilshere, expressing in the warmest terms his
sense of the high honour thus conferred upon him.

Sept. 6th.—Mr. Wilshere had arrived in Yarmouth and addressed the
electors.

C. F. Burton, Esq., had died from the effects of a fall from his horse on
the Southtown Road.

Sept 17th.—A public dinner of the supporters of Mr. Wilshere had been
held at the Town Hall.  Admiral Sir George Parker, K.C.B., presided, and
amongst those present were Messrs. George Steward, S. Cobb, the Mayor, T.
O. Springfield, Capt. Pearson, Capt. Harmer, J. Fowler, H. Munro, Rev. T.
Fowler, R. Hammond, H. Worship, C. Bell, S. Palmer, N. Palmer, C. Marsh,
E. R. Palmer, J. L. Cufaude, Clowes, &c.

Sept. 20th.—At the Roads Regatta the “Brilliant” was first, the “Red
Rover” second, and the “Algerine” third, in the match for the silver cup,
weighing 17oz.  The “Coastguard” had been practising, under the direction
of Capt. Harmer and Lieut. Kisbee.

Sept. 27th.—In consequence of the long continuance of calm weather the
millers had not been able to grind any corn for three weeks.

Oct. 4th.—The Revision Court had been held, Messrs. W. Worship and J. L.
Cufaude appearing for the Reformers, and Messrs. Waters and E. H. L.
Preston for the Tories.  The Whigs claimed a majority, on the result of
51.

Oct. 11th.—Lord Tavistock and C. B. Greville (acting as referees) with
regard to the recent contest had stated “that if requested by Mr. Baring,
Mr. Wilshere is bound to resign his seat for Yarmouth (for which he was
elected without his knowledge or consent), and that in the event of Mr.
Baring offering himself again as a candidate for the representation of
that borough, Mr. Wilshere is not at liberty to oppose him.”

Mr. William Nolloth, jun., had been elected organist of St. George’s
Chapel.

Oct. 18th.—There had been a strong wind from the W.N.W., and from 150 to
200 vessels had sustained damage.  It is contemplated that there were
between 2,000 and 3,000 ships at anchor within sight of the Jetty.

The “Reis Effendi,” schooner, had been launched from Messrs. A. Palmer
and Son’s yard.

Mr. Wilshere was staying with Mr. Palmer, who had entertained most of the
principal inhabitants, including the Mayor, Sir George Parker, and W.
Danby Palmer, John Carr, George Steward, Esq., and others.

In case Mr. Wilshere was asked to resign his seat by Mr. Baring, Mr.
Robert Palmer Kemp had been selected as the candidate in the Blue
interest.

Oct. 25th.—The Tories had commenced their “Municipal campaign.”

Nov. 1st.—There had been from 1,500 to 2,000 vessels windbound and at
anchor in the Roads, these had got under sail on Sunday, and were
immediately followed by about 1,000 vessels from beyond Lowestoft, and it
was contemplated that more than 3,000 vessels had passed through the
Roads in five hours, in so close procession that the sea could not be
discerned beyond them.

With regard to the Municipal Election, only one Tory was on the 1st
November “found in the field,” viz., Mr. J. G. Plummer, who opposed Mr.
Marsh in the Regent Ward.  At the close of the poll the numbers were—

Tomlinson       89
Marsh           73
Plummer         72

The following was the general return for the town:—_St. Nicholas’ Ward_:
Messrs. R. Hammond and W. N. Burroughs.  _Market Ward_: Messrs. S. Cobb
and W. Johnson.  _Regent Ward_: Messrs. J. Tomlinson and C. Marsh.  _St.
George’s Ward_: Dr. Penrice and Mr. A. Clarke.  _Nelson Ward_: Messrs. G.
Danby Palmer and R. Palmer Kemp, all of whom were of the Liberal party.

A meeting of the members of the “Operative Conservative Club” had been
held, Mr. Thomas Paul, printer, in the chair.

Nov. 25th.—Messrs. Thomas Hammond and Samuel Crowe had been elected
Councillors for the South Ward.

The fishing-boats “Mary,” “Reward,” and “Walter and Ann” had been lost
with all hands.

Mr. F. Preston had launched a brig of 250 tons named the “Undaunted.”

Nov. 15th.—Mr. Simon Cobb had been elected Mayor.  He was the first
Dissenter who had been elected to that office since the time of Charles
II.  On Sunday he had given a lunch, when amongst those present were the
Hon. and Rev. E. Pellew, Dr. Penrice, Dr. Cox, the Rev. W. Squire, and
Messrs. S. Tolver, Nichols, Hammond, Palmer, Pullyn, Marsh, B. Cobb, E.
H. L. Preston, &c.

Mr. Thomas Lettis, jun., had been elected a Councillor for the St.
George’s Ward, in the place of Dr. Penrice, who had been made an
Alderman.

Mr. Samuel Costerton, ballast lessee, had been fined 40s. and costs for
contravention of the Harbour Act.

It was contemplated to hold a meeting in favour of the repeal of the Corn
Laws.

The annual Savings’ Bank meeting had been held, when it appeared that
2,004 accounts totalling £60,065 11s. 1d. were deposited in this
institution.

The “Reindeer,” yawl, had been launched for the Young Company.  She was
75 feet long and could carry 500 yards of canvas.  Eighty-two persons
were launched in her.

The “Columbine,” brig, built for Messrs. G. and A. Steward, had been
launched.

Dec. 27th.—Mr. W. Saunders had been elected a Councillor for the St.
George’s Ward, in the place of Mr. Grave, deceased.

The Teetotal Society had a procession, headed by a boy on horseback,
which was “set upon” by the rabble, and several of its banners destroyed.



1839.


Jan. 3rd.—The first half-yearly meeting of the governors and subscribers
to the Hospital had been held, and is reported as follows:—

    “On Friday the first half-yearly meeting of the governors and
    subscribers to the Hospital was held at the Town Hall, the Hon. and
    Rev. Edward Pellew in the chair.  Mr. A. Drew was unanimously elected
    resident Dispenser, at a salary of £60 per annum.  Some alterations
    of the rules were agreed upon.  Mr. S. S. Barber then moved that the
    votes for officers to the institution should be taken by ballot, and
    not by voting papers, as at the first meeting, which was lost by a
    majority of 17 to 13.  It is intended to bring the question forward
    again at the next meeting.  The Rev. J. North, honorary secretary to
    the institution, stated that at the last yearly meeting of the old
    Dispensary, in October, it was resolved that an application be made
    to the subscribers to the Hospital for a grant from their funds to
    discharge the additional bills.  At Lady-day last they had moved into
    the house at present used for the Hospital.  They soon felt they
    could not maintain the increased expenditure with the same funds, and
    a meeting was called of the subscribers, when the proposition was
    first started for the Hospital, and in the end the Hospital was
    established.  At the close of the year, owing to circumstances over
    which he could not say who had the control, it was found that the
    managers of the Dispensary could not pay their liabilities by £33.
    They had furniture which was valued at £7 10s., leaving them minus
    £25 10s. 0¼d.  He now asked whether they would make a grant of that
    amount from the funds of the Hospital.  B. Dowson, Esq., proposed
    that a transfer be made of that sum to defray the deficiency, the new
    institution having been established on the old one.  C. Nichols,
    Esq., seconded it on the further ground that the old institution had
    deferred several applications for assistance for the benefit of the
    Hospital, such as sermons at church, &c.  Mr. North said all their
    funds had been merged into those of the Hospital.  John Lacon, Esq.,
    thought it would be better to raise the sum among themselves, which
    proposition, after a great deal of discussion, was ultimately
    carried, and 13 sovereigns were subscribed in the room.  The decision
    was extremely satisfactory to all the new subscribers to the
    Hospital.”

A very handsome vessel named the “Jenny Jones” had been launched from Mr.
F. Preston’s yard.

Jan. 10.—Edward Woodrow, baker, had been committed for trial on the
prosecution of the Guardians, for selling them short weight bread for the
paupers.

Jan. 17th.—The Poor Law Commissioners having complained of the Board of
Guardians because they had presented a Christmas dinner to the paupers,
the Guardians justified such proceedings.

Jan. 24th.—A subscription had been entered upon for the purpose of
relieving the families of those seamen who had been lost in the recent
gales.  £115 was collected in the room.

Jan. 31st.—An Anti-Corn Law meeting had been held at the Town Hall.

Feb. 7th.—Meetings of the freemen had been held as to the question of
whether Mr. Wilshere should be called on to resign his seat.

At the Quarter Sessions, Mr. Edward Woodrow was convicted for selling
“short weight” bread to the Guardians, and sentenced to pay a fine of
£50, which he paid, but “not until the Recorder (N. Palmer, Esq.) had
twice threatened to commit him for contempt of Court.”

Feb. 14th.—The Town Council adopted a petition for the abolition of the
Corn Laws with only two dissentients.

Feb. 21st.—Mr. John Owles had been elected a Councillor in the place of
Mr. Cobb, who had been raised to the Aldermanic Bench.

Mr. Wilshere had presented the town petition against the Corn Laws; it
was signed by 2,355 persons.

Mr. Owen had delivered a lecture on “Socialism.”

March 7th.—The use of the Town Hall had been refused to Mr. Hallock, a
“Socialist” lecturer.

March 14th.—Mr. Rumbold had presented the Corporation’s petition for the
repeal of the Corn Laws.

A meeting of the Chartists had been held at the Masonic Hall, Mr. Fleet
in the chair, and was addressed by Messrs. Gill and Deegan, delegates.

March 21st.—The Rev. W. Squire had lectured at the Masonic Hall in reply
to Mr. Owen.  More than 1,200 persons were present.

March 28th.—The sixteen Liberal candidates had been elected Guardians.

April 4th.—A meeting had been held for the purpose of forming a local
branch of the Shipwrecked Mariners’ Society, S. Cobb, Esq. (Mayor) in the
chair.  Sir George Parker and Messrs. James H. Palmer, Matthew Butcher,
and George Danby Palmer took part in the proceedings.

April 11th.—The election of Haven Commissioners had resulted as follows:—

For George Danby Palmer       511
W. Barth                      473
E. H. L. Preston              380
C. J. Palmer                  277

April 18th.—A petition had been adopted in favour of a penny postage.

May 2nd.—Mr. Pickard (a Guardian) had complained to the Mayor that he was
continually being insulted by Mr. E. Woodrow since that person had been
convicted at the Sessions.

May 9th.—An endeavour was being made to revive the “Dutch Fair,” in order
to which such vessels were to be exempted from dues from the 17th to 30th
September.

There were 23 prisoners for trial at the Sessions.

May 23rd.—An address had been voted to the Queen to congratulate her upon
the issue of the “Bed Chamber” plot.  The Mayor was in the chair and G.
Penrice, R. Palmer Kemp, William Danby Palmer, W. Johnson, George
Steward, and E. H. L. Preston, Esqs., took part in the proceedings.

May 30th.—Sixty gentlemen dined at the King’s Head to commemorate the
Queen’s Birthday.  The Mayor presided, and the following toasts were
given:—“The Queen,” “The Duchess of Kent,” “Capt. Harmer and the Navy,”
“The Army,” “The Mayor,” “The Borough Members,” “George Danby Palmer,
Esq.,” “Mr. George Steward,” “Lord Durham,” “Mr. William Johnson,” “The
Vice-Chairman,” “The Mayoress and Ladies of Yarmouth,” and a number of
other toasts.  The meeting separated “at a late hour.”

June 13th.—A large assemblage of ladies and gentlemen had witnessed a
Jewish wedding at the Town Hall, performed by Rabbi Sternbergh; it was
publicly performed.

The Races were not likely to be held, owing to a want of funds.

June 20th.—The Rev. George Anguish, of Somerleyton Hall, had given £50
towards the Hospital fund.

July 4th contains the following as to the Yarmouth Hospital and
Dispensary:—

    The first annual meeting of this Institution was held at the Town
    Hall on Friday last, on which occasion the Worshipful the Mayor was
    in the chair.  He felt gratified by the honour that meeting had done
    him in calling him to the chair.  In looking over the programme of
    the meeting, he found the accounts were to be audited—they were
    requested to pay their subscriptions, to elect annual officers, and
    to take into consideration the erection or purchase of a building for
    a new Hospital.

    William Steward, Esq., read abstracts from the secretary and
    treasurer’s books, by which it appeared that the benefactions
    amounted to £292 9s. 6d., subscriptions to £435 19s., and interest at
    the bankers £8 15s. 2d., and that there had been expended for fitting
    up and furniture, £141 8s. 10d.; for housekeeping, salaries, and
    wages, £94 15s. 9d.; chemists’ bills, drugs, &c., £90 15s.; books,
    stationery, and printing, £35 14s. 9d.; rent and incidentals, £33 3s.
    1d.; leaving a balance in treasurer’s hands of £341 6s. 3d.  Mr.
    Steward stated that the accounts had been made out with great care,
    and examined by two auditors.  The total number of patients that had
    been admitted from October 1st, 1838, to June 1st, 1839, was 532,
    being 35 in and 439 out-patients, of whom 5 in and 9 out remained on
    the books.

    J. Tidswell, Esq., moved that the report now read be received, that
    it be ordered to be printed, and a copy placed in the hands of each
    of the subscribers, which was seconded by the Rev. W. F. Clarke, and
    carried unanimously.

    The meeting then proceeded to the election of such officers as retire
    annually, when all the old officers were unanimously elected, with
    one alteration.  The Rev. M. Waters, who had been on the Committee,
    having accepted the office of honorary secretary, _vice_ Rev. J.
    North, who had left the town, J. Tidswell, Esq., was chosen in his
    room.

    The Chairman said the next business was of considerable importance.
    It was to consider the propriety of erecting or purchasing a building
    for the use of the Institution.

    William Steward, Esq., would submit to the meeting a proposal he held
    in his hand, which was to raise a building fund of £1,000, in shares
    of £10 each, on which interest at £3 per cent. per annum is to be
    paid till the fund will enable them to liquidate it; and in the
    interim every shareholder to have the right of recommending one
    out-patient for each share annually.  One object in raising the fund
    now was, that they had £151 in hand from the benefactions, and Mr.
    Anguish had sent them £50 towards the building fund.  The interest
    would not amount to what they now paid for rent.  They hoped the
    Corporation would grant them an eligible site for the intended new
    building.

    The Rev. M. Waters was sure there would be no difficulty in raising
    the required fund, as they would soon have £300 paid in donations,
    which would prevent any risk to the shareholders.

    The Chairman suggested that it would be better first to resolve that
    it would be expedient to erect or purchase a building, and then to
    submit the means for raising the money, in which opinion J.
    Brightwen, Esq., fully concurred, when

    Mr. S. S. Barber proposed, that it is the opinion of this meeting
    that it is expedient that an Hospital should be built, which was
    seconded by Mr. E. H. L. Preston.

    Mr. W. S. Lacon thought it premature to build at present; the
    Hospital had only been in operation a few months, and at the last
    meeting, when certain resolutions were proposed, certain gentlemen,
    who did not like those resolutions, said they would withdraw.  He
    would propose that the consideration of the question be postponed to
    that day twelve months, which was seconded by Dr. Sabine.

    J. G. Fisher, Esq., thought the building of an Hospital would promote
    the object they had in view, and could not agree with Mr. Lacon, in
    which he was supported by the Rev. M. Waters.

    The amendment being put, only six voted for it, and the original
    motion was carried.

    Mr. E H. L. Preston then proposed that the plan for raising a fund,
    as proposed by Mr. Steward, be adopted, and that a paper be laid on
    the table to receive the names of persons willing to take shares,
    which was seconded by Mr. Barber.

    J. G. Fisher, Esq., proposed the thanks of the meeting to the Mayor
    for his conduct in the chair, which was carried by acclamation.

    The Mayor, in returning thanks, expressed his determination to do all
    in his power to procure them an eligible spot on which to erect the
    new edifice.  Those present having paid their subscriptions, the
    meeting separated.

A band of music had been engaged to perform near the Jetty on Wednesday
and Saturday evenings during the summer.

July 11th.—A vessel named the “Cadmus” had been launched from Teasdell’s
Wharf.

An inquest had been held at Shrublands, Gorleston, the residence of
William Danby Palmer, Esq., upon the body of a boy who had been killed by
a fall from a stack.  Verdict, “Accidental death.”

July 18th.—The “Galatea” (schooner) had been launched from Mr. A.
Palmer’s, jun., yard.

Aug. 1st.—Another meeting in connection with the Shipwrecked Mariners’
Society had been held.  Sir George Parker, the Hon. and Rev. E. Pellew,
George Danby Palmer, Esq., and the Rev. Mr. Sidney took part in the
proceedings.

Pleasure yachts were allowed to enter the Harbour free of dues.

August 10th.—The Races had been held for the following stakes:—Gold, cup,
£10 each, and £20 added; the Members’ Plate of £50; the Vauxhall
Coronation Cup, £25; and the Innkeepers’ and Tradesmen’s Silver Cup, £50.
The following local gentlemen entered or named horses at this
meeting:—Mr. Wilshere, Mr. Rumbold, Mr. Webber, Mr. Wodehouse, Mr.
Burroughes, Mr. R. P. Kemp, Mr. Samuel Palmer, Mr. A. Tompson, Mr. John
Kerrison, and Mr. William Danby Palmer.

Madame Vestris and Mr. Charles Matthews were filling the Theatre nightly.

At the Regatta, “The Widgeon,” a London yacht, had carried off the prize.

The Dissenters, not approving of these sports (the Regatta and Races),
had had a meeting of their own in the shape of a choral festival.

August 15th.—Sir Jacob Preston, John Penrice, and Charles Steward, Esqs.,
were announced as Stewards of next year’s Races.

August 22nd contains the following:—“We hear from the most undoubted
authority that Mr. John E. Lacon, with a munificence almost
unparallelled, has equally divided the large property left to him by his
father between himself and his brother, the present Sir Edmund H. K.
Lacon, Bart.”

Sept. 5th.—Mr. Preston had launched the “George Lord,” of 205 tons
register.

Oct. 3rd.—The Revision Court had been held, and the Liberals claimed a
gain of 58 on the return.

Oct. 17th.—At a Liberal meeting held at the “Crown and Anchor,” G. D.
Palmer, Esq., had proposed the health of Samuel Jay, Esq., as
“Mayor-Elect.”

There were “nightly depredations” taking place at Gorleston.

Oct. 31st.—Fortunatus Robert Townshend Crisp was indicted for publishing
on the 13th October a certain filthy and libellous paper called the “Paul
Pry,” containing a slanderous and malicious libel on Henry Holmes Baker.
The Jury were locked up two hours before returning a verdict of guilty,
on which Crisp was fined £5.

Nov. 7th.—The Earl of Lichfield had given £30 to the Hospital Fund.

The old members of the Council had been re-elected, except in St.
Andrew’s Ward, where William Hurry Palmer, Esq., was returned.  The only
Ward contested was the Regent, with the following result:—C. Davie, 81;
J. Fish, 76; J. G. Plummer, 71; S. Miller, 62.  A meeting of Liberals was
afterwards held, and Mr. Jay’s health (as Mayor-Elect) drunk with three
times three.

Nov. 14th.—At the Council on the 9th, Mr. G. D. Palmer proposed Mr. Jay
as Mayor for the ensuing year, and he was elected to that office.

Dec. 5th.—Capt. Pearson had been elected an Alderman in the place of John
B. Palmer, Esq., deceased.

An anti-poor law meeting had been held; only 52 persons present.

Dec. 19th.—The Mayor (S. Jay, Esq.) had commenced a round of Civic
entertainments of a most “recherchê” character.

The Yarmouth Savings’ Bank had 2,137 accounts and £63,513 13s. 7d. on
deposit.

Dec. 26th.—The Mayor and Corporation had attended St. Nicholas’ Church,
after which his Worship entertained a large party of friends at lunch.

The “Blue” freemen had held a meeting to receive a very handsome blue
banner, inscribed “Presented to the freemen in commemoration of their
victory over the attempt to enslave them, and ‘United we stand, divided
we fall.  Wilshere’s majority 38.’”



1840.


Jan. 2nd contains the following as to “Yarmouth Hospital”:—

    The half-yearly meeting of the governors of this institution was held
    at the Town Hall on Saturday.  William Steward, Esq., took the chair,
    and stated that the building was expected to be completed for the
    reception of patients by Lady-day.  The cost of the building,
    including furniture and the tower (a very ornamental building, to be
    used as a look-out), with other incidental charges, would amount to
    £1,600.  (Expressions of surprise, and “What! no more?”)  He believed
    that £1,600 would cover the whole expense, to meet which they had
    already received by benefaction (including £200 from the Norwich
    Musical Festival) upwards of £600, while upwards of £1,000 had been
    raised among the shareholders.  It would be highly desirable to pay
    off the shareholders as the funds would allow, and to keep up the
    annual subscriptions.  At present they were adequate to the annual
    expenditure, but he trusted the inhabitants would do their utmost to
    increase the annual income.  This was the only charitable institution
    founded on the day of her Majesty’s Coronation, and he was induced to
    hope that an application to Her Majesty’s advisers would obtain a
    benefaction from her privy purse.  He was sanguine in his
    anticipation that in a short time the shares would be reduced to one
    for each shareholder, which it was thought desirable should remain.

    F. R. Reynolds, Esq., thought the reduction would be made in less
    than seven years.

    The Rev. M. Waters said that, allowing them to remain in their
    present position, the new institution would not be more rent than the
    present Hospital in Queen Street.

    Mr. Steward then submitted a resolution, that all monies arising from
    benefactions or otherwise, except from annual subscriptions, be
    applied in paying the shareholders till such shareholders should have
    but one share each; and that the annual subscriptions should be kept
    as a distinct fund.

    This resolution was moved by H. V. Worship, Esq., and seconded by C.
    J. Palmer, Esq., and carried unanimously.

    The Secretary observed that the balance of subscriptions would be
    less at the end of the present year than it was at the end of the
    preceding one, and this he mentioned that the public might know it
    would depend on themselves whether so excellent an institution should
    continue as efficient as it had hitherto been.

    It was stated that the number of out-patients had never been less
    than 100 throughout the past half-year.

Jan. 16th.—The first subscription Ball had been held at the Town Hall,
when about 70 or 80 of the _elite_ were present.  Howlett’s band had been
engaged for the occasion.

Jan. 23rd.—A “dreadful storm” had visited the town, and considerable
damage had been done to the roofs of houses, while a schooner in making
for the Harbour had been caught in the squall and sunk, with the loss of
four lives.

George Danby Palmer, Esq., had entertained a large party of the members
of the “Yarmouth Fishing Clubs” and others in the new room at Bird’s
Royal Hotel, when the Mayor, Sir George Parker, Capt. Pearson, R.N.,
Capt. Harmer, R.N., George Penrice, M.D., W. Barth, R. P. Kemp, S.
Palmer, W. H. Palmer, W. S. Ferrier, R. S. Lonsdale, S. P. Edwards, W.
Yetts, G. Steward, T. Hammond, R. Hammond, S. C Marsh, Esqs., and most of
the influential gentlemen and merchants of the town were present.

Feb. 13th—The Queen’s Marriage had been celebrated as a general holiday,
with the usual demonstrations of loyalty, and 150 gentlemen had dined
together at the Town Hall, when the Mayor presided.

Feb. 20th.—Ambrose Palmer, Esq., had complained to the Magistrates of the
late delivery of the mails, which it appeared often did not arrive until
after 12 o’clock in the day.

March 5th.—Samuel Jay, Esq., and William Barth, Esq., had proceeded to
London to present an address to Her Majesty from the Town Council upon
her marriage.

Messrs. Fellows had launched the “Lucy,” a schooner of 100 tons register.

March 12th.—The Mayor (S. Jay, Esq.) had been presented at Court by
William Wilshere, Esq., M.P., on the occasion of taking up the
Corporation address.

Capt. Love had been elected Inspector of Police by thirteen votes to one
vote.  There were twelve candidates for the office.

March 26th.—Mr. Joseph Fiddes had been elected an Alderman in the place
of Mr. William Barber, deceased.

April 2nd.—The Hospital having been completed, was opened for public
inspection, and had been visited by nearly 1,000 inhabitants of the town
and neighbourhood.  Eight hundred patients had been relieved by this
Charity since the previous August.

April 9th.—Sixteen Whigs had been elected Guardians by very large
majorities.

April 23rd.—Messrs. C. Davie, William Johnson, and S. V. Moore had been
nominated at the Vestry meeting as Churchwardens, and a poll demanded.

The Conservatives had dined together at the Angel Hotel, Sir E. H. K.
Lacon, Bart., in the chair, when a magnificent silver waiter, weighing
221 ozs., was presented to Mr. Edward H. L. Preston.  Upon it was the
following inscription: “Presented to Edward Harbord Lushington Preston by
the Conservatives of Great Yarmouth, as a testimonial of their esteem and
high approval of his firm and active support of those principals which
constitute the best bulwark of the Throne, and the surest safeguard of
the people.”  Messrs. Aldred and Son supplied it.

The Mayor (S. Jay, Esq.) had received the Sacrament at St. Nicholas’
Church, and afterwards entertained the Town Council and a party of
friends with a sumptuous cold collation.

April 30th.—Messrs. Davie and Johnson had been elected Churchwardens,
three votes only having been polled for Mr. Moore.

Not a single case of theft or disorderly conduct had been reported at the
Fair, “a circumstance unparallelled in the history of Yarmouth.”

May 14th.—A petition for the repeal of the Corn Laws had been signed by
1,400 persons.

May 21st.—Mr. and Mrs. Bird’s “opening dinner” had been held at the Royal
Hotel.  The Mayor occupied the chair, and was supported by the Rev.
Richard Gooch, G. Danby Palmer, W. Barth, T. Brown (Thrigby), R. Ferrier,
W. Ferrier, T. Fowler, C. Marsh, G. Steward, A. Tompson, W. Carpenter,
and F. Lloyd, Esqs., Captain Nelson, Messrs. Paul, Christmas, Primrose,
Smith, E. Browne, Hart, Middleton, and upwards of 100 gentlemen of the
town and neighbourhood.

May 28th.—Complaints had been made of the “screaming” and “bell-ringing”
of the steamboats, which the editor thought should be “reformed
altogether.”

The London letters had not been received on Saturday last, owing to those
intended for Yarmouth, Isle of Wight, having been forwarded to this town,
while “our mails” were sent on to Edinburgh.

June 6th.—The carcase of a grampus had been towed on to the Beach.

June 11th.—The Mayor (S. Jay, Esq.) had again entertained his friends at
luncheon after Divine Service.

The “Eleanor Palmer,” schooner, had been launched from Mr. A. Palmer,
junr.’s, yard, for W. H. Palmer, Esq., who, in the evening, entertained a
large party of friends at the Royal Hotel.

June 19th.—The Council had voted addresses of congratulation to H.M. the
Queen, Prince Albert, and the Duke of Kent, on the “escape of Her Majesty
from assassination.”  This was moved by Mr. E. Sewell, and seconded by G.
D. Palmer, Esq.

July 2nd.—The new police had made “their maiden turn out” under Capt.
Love.  Mr. J. Nolloth had supplied the uniforms.

The annual Hospital meeting had been held at the Board Boom of that
institution.

July 9th.—The Mayor had attended the Annual Water Frolic, accompanied by
some 30 gentlemen, including the Deputy-Mayor, G. D. Palmer, Esq., Capt.
Harmer, Capt. Pearson, S. P. Edwards, Esq., and several members of the
Council.

Three young men were capsized and two of them, Mr. John Rivett and Mr.
Walter Feek, drowned.

“A fellow named Cullingford had cut down the doorstalls of Mr. Wm.
Sayer’s house in which he was engaged nearly two hours without being
detected by any of the new police.”

July 16th.—The Council resolved that “the old tower on the Chapel Mount
be levelled with that of the Hospital, and that the wall to the east
thereof be faced with white brick and coped with cement.”

Mr. Guthrie (son of Capt. Guthrie) had saved a boy from being drowned at
the Jetty.

The “Maid of Athens” had been launched from Mr. I. Preston’s yard.

July 25th.—The Races had been held.  The Town and County Plate of £50 was
won by the Hon. I. Sandiland’s “Luther,” which was “claimed” by Mr. S.
Palmer for £150 (his horse “Diana” running second in the race.)

As Stewards for next year, Henry Stracey, Alexander Shafto Adair, and
Samuel Palmer, Esqs., were chosen.

At the Regatta, Lord A. Paget’s “Sabrina” won the £25 cup.

When a hearse, with mourning coach and friends of the deceased arrived at
the Cemetery, it was found that “no orders had been given to dig a
grave,” and the funeral had to be postponed.

Aug. 16th.—Youell’s gardens were “most attractive;” there were 3,000
pairs of carnations and picotees in bloom.

Samuel Jay, Esq., had been appointed a Justice of the Peace for the
Borough.

Aug. 20th.—A great improvement had been made by lighting the town with
gas; the Gas Company having laid down a large main, and reduced the price
of gas 25 per cent.

Mr. A. Thrower had been elected a Councillor in the place of Mr. F.
Preston.

Sept. 3rd.—A meeting had been held at the Town Hall, Wm. Steward, Esq.,
in the chair, for promoting the erection of a better class of houses on
the Beach to the south of the Royal Hotel (the Victoria Building
Company.)

Mr. John Clowes had been thrown from his gig on the Quay.

Sept. 17th.—Lord and Lady Wodehouse were staying at the Royal Hotel; his
Lordship had consented to patronise the New Building Company.

Sept. 24th.—Madame Persiani, and Signors Nigri, Rubini, and Puzzi, had
given a grand concert at the Town Hall.

A meeting of the provisional Committee of the Victoria Building Company
had been held, and £8,000 had been subscribed for the objects of the
Company.

Oct. 8th.—The prospectus of the Victoria Building Company appears in this
issue, the Directors being William Steward, William Baynes, Benjamin
Dowson, Richard Ferrier, William Johnson, Robert Palmer Kemp, John E.
Lacon, George Danby Palmer, Thomas Fowler Steward, and Charles Symonds,
Esqs.

A letter had been received at the Post-office, directed “Mr. Thompson,
Row next my grandmother’s, Yarmouth.”

Nov. 5th.—The following was the result of the Municipal election:—

                        NORTH WARD.
J. N. Sherrington          119  J. C. Smith              98
C. G. Doughty              116  J. F. Costerton          68
                       NELSON WARD.
       M. Butcher and J. G. Connell (no opposition.)
                    ST. ANDREW’S WARD.
Wm. Barth                  100  John G. Rivett           77
Wm. Danby Palmer            88  Henry Teasdell           56
                    ST. GEORGE’S WARD.
Joseph Bayly                89  John Algar               89
John L. Cufaude             89  Charles Cory             83
And the Alderman gave his casting vote in favour of Messrs
Bayly and Cufaude
                       REGENT WARD.
      Samuel Palmer and John Barker (no opposition.)
                       MARKET WARD.
     D. A. Gourlay and Charles Miller (no opposition.)

A deputation had waited on Mr. Samuel Palmer and presented a requisition
to him, to be put in nomination for the office of Mayor.  Mr. W. Johnson
presented this, signed by 40 members of the Council.

The “Hamlet,” 400 tons, had been launched from Mr. A. Palmer’s, jun.,
yard.

Nov. 12th.—Mr. Samuel Palmer had been elected Mayor.

Nov. 26th.—Richard Ferrier and Charles Cory, Esqs., refused to pay the
Poor’s Rate, and a distress warrant was issued, under which a clock, a
silver cup, and a hat stand had been seized.  The object of these
gentlemen appeared to be to dispute the validity of a Rate of 1s. 3d. in
the £.

Dec. 3rd.—The Council had voted the usual loyal addresses on the birth of
the Princess Royal.

Dec. 10th.—A public meeting had been held for the like purpose when the
address to Her Majesty was moved by the Hon. and Rev. E. Pellew, and
seconded by Wm. Steward, Esq.

That to Prince Albert, by Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart., and George Danby
Palmer, Esq.

And that to the Duke of Kent by Sir George Parker, K.C.B., and J. G.
Fisher, Esq., S. Palmer, Esq., Sir E. H. K. Lacon, and Sir George Parker,
were deputed to present such addresses.

Dec. 17th.—A meeting of the Shipwrecked Mariners’ Society had been held.
The local committee then consisted of Messrs. G. W. Manby, Isaac Preston,
W. J. Hurry, G. D. Palmer, J. W. Shelly, Costerton, Capt. Harmer, J. G.
Fisher, D. Turner, Gunthorpe, Ambrose Palmer, W. Barth, John Penrice, M.
Butcher, and Capt. Pearson.

Dec. 24th.—An anti-slavery meeting had been held (the Mayor in the
chair.)

Dec. 31st.—The teetotallers had had a procession.  Among their flags a
new one by the workmen of Mr. Brand (tailor) on which was painted a
lifeboat, with the motto “Total Abstinence, the Drunkard’s Lifeboat.”

Samuel Jay, Charles Pearson, William Johnson and J. W. Shelly, qualified
as Magistrates at the Quarter Sessions.

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]




SECOND SERIES, 1841–51.


    “When found, make a note of”—

                                                             CAPT. CUTTLE.



1841.


Jan. 14th.—A meeting for the relief of the poor had been held, when £300
was raised in the room.

Jan. 21st.—Mr. E. R. Palmer had been appointed Inspector of Corn Returns.

Jan. 28th—The “Greyhound” (Barker) had arrived at Naples in fifteen days,
“being the quickest passage ever known.”

Feb. 11th.—About fifty tradesmen had dined at the “Star” to commemorate
the baptism of the Princess Royal.

Feb. 18th.—A local committee had been formed in connection with the
“Marine Penitent Female Refuge,” with the Hon. and Rev. E. Pellew,
president; Mrs. C. S. D. Steward, treasurer; and Mrs. G. Danby-Palmer,
secretary.

On Tuesday, the whole of the London traders, sixteen in number, were
lying in the harbour, owing to the late frost.

A meeting of the Conservative ratepayers had been held to protest against
the 1s. 3d. poor’s rate.

Feb. 25th.—A meeting had been held at the Town Hall for promoting a
railway from Yarmouth to London.

March 11th.—The works of the Victoria Building Company had been
commenced, and the Mayor had been requested to lay the first stone.

The “Saucy Jack,” 250 tons, had been launched from Mr. I. Chapman’s yard.

March 18th.—Wm. Barth, Esq., had received an appointment in the Money
Order Office of the Post Office, London.

March 25th.—Records the laying of the first stone on the Victoria
Building Company’s Estate, when Captain Harmer, R.N., (W.M. of Lodge
“United Friends,”) addressed the assembly as follows:—

    “At the request of the Directors of the Victoria Building Company, we
    are here assembled as Masons to assist our Worthy Brother, who now
    occupies the civic chair of this borough, to lay the foundation stone
    of this important and interesting work—important and interesting
    indeed to Yarmouth.  May the work prosper, and from the foundation
    about to be laid, may structures arise ornamental to the town,
    beneficial to its inhabitants, and advantageous to the builders.  May
    the promoters of these buildings live to see their great and spirited
    design carried out, and when it shall please the Grand Leveller of
    human greatness to call them from hence, may they arrive at the point
    or centre where the World’s Great Architect lives and reigns for
    ever.”

Bro. Richard Ferrier, P.M.—“So mote it be.”

The Mayor then proceeded to deposit two coins of her present Majesty in
the stone, over which a brass plate was laid bearing the following
inscription:—

    “The first stone of Kimberley Terrace, Great Yarmouth, to be erected
    by the Victoria Building Company, was laid by Samuel Palmer, Esq.,
    Mayor of Great Yarmouth, on the 22nd day of March, in the Year of our
    Lord One Thousand Eight Hundred and Forty One, and in the Fourth year
    of the reign of Queen Victoria.  William Steward, Esq., Chairman of
    the Board of Directors; Thomas Marsh Nelson, Esq., Architect.”

A public dinner was afterwards held at the Royal Hotel, George
Danby-Palmer, Esq., in the chair.

April 1st.—The election of Guardians had ended in “the signal defeat of
the Tories.”

April 15th.—Messrs. C. Davie and D. A. Gourlay had been elected
Churchwardens by the Vestry.

April 22nd.—Mr. F. Preston’s shipyard was likely to be given up, thus
throwing many men out of employment.

An Ecclesiastical inquiry had been held “to make inquiry into a certain
charge preferred by one James Laws, a sailmaker, living in Row 99,
against the Rev. — —, Clerk in Holy Orders.  Nathaniel Palmer, Esq.
(instructed by Messrs. Tolver, Preston and Tolver) appeared for the
respondent.  The charge was that of soliciting the chastity of the
complainant’s wife by sending her letters, one of which was as
follows:—Meet me to-night about nine or half-past nine between Penrice’s
and the beach.”  This charge, in the absence of the letter, was
pronounced by the Commissioners not to have been proved.

May 6th.—At the Leveé, S. Palmer, Esq., and Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart.,
had been presented by W. Wilshere, Esq., M.P.

Six hundred persons had been confirmed at St. Nicholas’ Church by the
Bishop of Norwich.

The “Indiaman,” 821 tons, had been launched from Mr. Preston’s yard for
Mr. Somes.  She was estimated to cost £18,000.

May 13th.—The “Highlander,” 122 tons, had been launched from Mr. D.
King’s yard.

Mr. W. Johnson had been appointed a “tradesman to Her Most Gracious
Majesty.”

May 20th.—A merry peal was rung upon St. Nicholas’ Church bells in
consequence of Sir Jacob Astley having made good his claim to the Barony
of Hastings.

The Norfolk Yeomanry, under the command of Major Loftus, had entered the
town for seven days’ duty.

May 27th.—The Officers of this corps had given a splendid ball at the
Bath Rooms, at which 200 persons were present.

Mr. G. Blake had been summoned for refusal, on conscientious grounds, to
pay the Church Rate.

June 3rd.—A meeting had been held “in support of Her Majesty’s
Ministers.”

June 10th.—Messrs. Rumbold and Wilshere had issued their address to the
electors; Lord George Somerset and Mr. Smythe had been named as probable
Tory candidates for the Borough.

June 17th.—Mr. G. Blake had been ordered to pay 1s. 6d., the amount of
the Church Rate, “which he did and departed.”

The census had been taken, showing a population of 25,000.

During the week the roof had been placed on the hotel and houses forming
the south end of Kimberley Terrace.

June 24th.—The Mayor “having received the precept for the election
proceeded to the Market Place, and Guild Hall, accompanied by several
hundred gentlemen, when such precept was read,” no opposition being yet
announced.

The “Norfolk,” 120 tons, had been launched by Mr. A. R. Palmer.

July 3rd.—The election had taken place when Sir George Parker proposed,
and Mr. J. Brightwen seconded Mr. C. E. Rumbold; Mr. Geo. Danby-Palmer
and Mr. B. Dowson proposed and seconded Mr. Wilshere; Mr. R. Ferrier and
Mr. Lacon proposed and seconded Mr. Thos. Baring; and Mr. E. H. L.
Preston and Mr. W. H. Bessey performed the like office for Mr. J. Soames.
These proceedings lasted from eleven o’clock until half-past two o’clock,
during which time “it rained hard and many got wet to the skin,” but,
notwithstanding that, “a more disorderly attendance” had never been seen.
After the nomination the late members were chaired round the town, when
there was a scuffle in the Market Place and one man was seriously
wounded.  Next day the poll was held and the numbers declared—

C. E. Rumbold       943
W. Wilshere         945
T. Baring           501
J. Soames           491

July 15th.—Alex. Shafto Adair, Esq., (the late candidate for East
Suffolk) had accompanied S. Palmer, Esq. (with whom he was staying), to
church.

The “Vanguard,” built by Mr. W. Teasdel, had sailed for London.

Six shipwrights, who had gone out with the “Norfolk” to finish her at
sea, were capsized on their return journey in their boat, one of them
named Cole being drowned.

July 22nd.—“Mr. R. R. B. Norman, surgeon dentist, had been admitted a
Licentiate of “Apothecaries’ Hall, London.”

The “Good Samaritan” Lodge had held its anniversary at the Gallon Can,
Gaol Street.

Mrs. Barnwell (late Miss Shipston), a native of Yarmouth, had given a
concert at the Town Hall to a very “genteel” audience.  Among those
present were W. Wilshere, Esq., M.P., A. S. Adair, Esq., Rev. C. Penrice,
Mrs. G. D. Palmer, the Misses Chevalier, and G. Borrett, and A. Tompson,
Esq.

An explosion of fireworks had taken place at the Vauxhall Gardens, but,
fortunately, no one was injured.

The Races had been held, when the “Gold Cup,” value £100, was won by Mr.
S. Palmer’s “Langolee.”  The £50 plate by Mr. Rogers’ “Jessica.”  The
Vauxhall Coronation Cup Stakes by Mr. Munro’s “Clifton.”  The Town and
Country Gentlemen’s plate by Mr. Horman’s “Blanche.”  The Handicap Stakes
by Mr. Bradford’s “Vigilance,” and the Tally-Ho Stakes (for Hunters) by
Mr. Wm. Danby-Palmer’s “Daniel.”

July 29th.—The Mayor had proceeded to the Narrow Waters for the Water
Frolic, accompanied by Messrs. W. Wilshere, M.P., S. Jay, G. D. Palmer,
J. Tomlinson, W. Johnson, and several other members of the Corporate
body.  The cup was won by the “Red Rover,” the property of Mr. S. C.
Marsh.

At night the Vauxhall Gardens had “a bumper.”

August 5th.—A splendid terrace, road, and promenade was being formed on
the Victoria Building Company’s Estate by Mr. George Fenn.

A very superb silver soup tureen weighing 230 ozs., was to be presented
to Samuel Paget, Esq., by the Shipping Assurance Association.

A _dejeuner_ had been given at the Barracks by Captain George W. Manby,
then in his 76th year, to commemorate the 38th anniversary of his
appointment as Barrack Master.

August 12th.—The census showed the population of the Borough to be as
follows:—

                Males.       Females.       Total.
                   10,427         13,524       23,951
Sailors             1,300                       1,300
Totals             11,727         13,524       25,251

August 19th.—The “Rosa Anna,” 115 tons, had been launched from Mr.
Lubbock’s yard.

August 26th.—A complaint was made by Mr. John E. Lacon to the Secretary
of State, that the police (being voters) had “on the day preceding the
recent election been permitted to resign, and that immediately after the
contest they were all re-appointed.”

The Mayor and Mrs. Palmer had given a bespeak at the Theatre.

Sept. 9th.—It was stated that Captain Harmer, “whose undaunted courage
had rendered him the means of saving many lives from shipwreck, had
obtained the command of H.M. Steamship “Driver,” on board which he
hoisted his flag a few days since.”

The “Oriental” (schooner), had been launched from Mr. Preston’s yard.

Sept. 16th.—There had been a fire at the house of Mr. Simon Jay, surgeon,
Regent Street.

Sept. 30th.—The Brethren of Lodge “United Friends” had given a dinner to
their late W.M., Capt. Harmer, R.N., previous to his departure in the
“Driver,” at the Star Hotel.

On Sunday, the following collections had been made for the Hospital:—S.
Nicholas’, £10; S. Peter’s, £16 14s. 2d.; S. George’s, £8 6s. 2d.; S.
Mary’s, £8 11s. 5¼d.; New Meeting, £5 3s. 4½d.; Wesleyan, £7 7s.; Old
Meeting, £3 6s. 8d.

At the Sessions, the Grand Jury presented the disorderly state of the
Market Place every evening between eight and ten o’clock.

Oct. 7th.—The testimonial before mentioned had been presented to Mr.
Samuel Paget, at a dinner held in the Town Hall.  Geo. Danby Palmer,
Esq., was in the chair “doing the honours of the table with much spirit.”

Nov. 4th.—The Municipal election had passed over without contests, the
following was the return:—_St. Nicholas’ Ward_: R. Hammond and W. N.
Burroughs.  _Market_: W. Johnson and John Owles.  _Regent_: J. Tomlinson
and S. C. Marsh.  _St. George’s_: T. Lettis, jun., and J. W. Shelly.
_Nelson_: G. Danby Palmer and W. Chambers.  _St. Andrew’s_: T. Hammond
and S. Crowe.

John Penrice, Esq. had qualified as a Magistrate; the Editor remarks—“We
understand that a large batch of Tory Magistrates is about to be
created,” (George Bateman, James Clarke, J. F. Costerton, Ambrose Palmer,
E. H. L. Preston, J. C. Smith, and Wm. Yetts, Esqs., were then added to
the Roll of Justices.)

Wm. Johnson, Esq., had been requested by 38 Councillors to allow himself
to be nominated for the office of Mayor.

Nov. 11th.—On the 9th November, Mr. Johnson had been elected to that
office.

Nov. 25th.—The “Arab,” 175 tons, had been launched from Mr. Teasdel’s
yard.

The “Sabbath Observance Society” had issued an address, stating that “no
less than 144 shops were doing business; that carting of fish and other
articles connected with the fishing, and beer from the breweries, &c.,
was witnessed to a great extent, and that 150 public-houses were open on
the Lord’s Day.”

The Magistrates had cautioned Mr. I. Mayers and Mr D. L. Cohen (Jews) as
to Sunday trading.

Dec. 9th.—The “Driver” (Capt. Harmer) had been nearly lost on the rocks
under Steel point, near Flamborough Head, but after heaving the guns
overboard she got off and put into Shields for repairs.

Dec. 23rd.—The Savings’ Bank report showed 2,378 accounts and £71,521
16s. 10d. amount deposited.

The Rev. H. N. Burrows, A.M., had been elected Head-Master of the
Proprietary Grammar School.



1842.


Jan. 1st.—The half-yearly Hospital meeting had been held.

The prisoners had been regaled by the Mayor with roast beef, plum pudding
and one pint of beer each.

Jan. 8th.—Some boys had made a “slider” near Dr. Borrett’s house, upon
which Mrs. Borrett had fallen and broken one of her arms.

Jan. 20th.—A public meeting of the inhabitants had been held for the
purpose of considering the way in which they should celebrate the Royal
Christening, when Sir E. Lacon, the Hon. and Rev. E. Pellew, Messrs. G.
D. Palmer, J. Brightwen, W. N. Burroughs, I. Preston, C. Nichols, and J.
F. Costerton were, with others, present.

The members of the “Loyal Prince of Wales” Lodge of Oddfellows, which had
then been “newly formed,” dined together at the Black Lion, Bro. W. N.
Turner, N.G., presided, supported by Bro. Loft, P.G.M., and Bro. Raven,
P.D.G.M.; F. Palmer, Esq., surgeon to the Order, occupied the Vice-chair,
and about 50 Brethren were present; the following toasts were drunk:—“The
Queen,” “Prince Albert,” “The Princess Royal and the Prince of Wales,”
“The Duke of Sussex and the rest of the Royal Family,” “The Army and
Navy,” “Our Glorious Institutions,” and “The Loyal Prince of Wales’ Lodge
of O.F. of the M.U.”

Jan. 27th.—The Christening of the Prince of Wales had been commemorated
by a dinner at the Crown and Anchor Hotel, where the Mayor and a large
number of his friends dined together, and by a ball at the Town Hall
(opened by C. J. Palmer, Esq., and the Mayoress), at which about 200
persons were present.

A meeting had been held to consider the question of the erection of a
Corn Exchange.

The inmates of the Workhouse and Fisherman’s Hospital returned thanks to
S. Palmer, Esq., for an excellent dinner provided for them by that
gentleman on the “Christening Day.”

Feb. 3rd.—The London Mail did not get in until 12.38; the frequent delays
in these Mails were a source of serious inconvenience.

Feb. 10th.—The Vicar had issued an address, calling attention to the
spiritual destitution of the town, and the restoration of St. Nicholas’
Church.

A correspondent states, “Never, perhaps, has a church been so disfigured;
the introduction of that deformity, the Fisherman’s Gallery, that
wretched ‘gew-gaw’ the Mayor’s seat, those laternal deformities, the desk
and pulpit, and in a word those violations of every principle of taste by
which the building has been defaced, have rendered it the ugliest as well
as the dirtiest church in the Kingdom.”

Feb. 17th.—Great excitement had been caused in the town by the death of
James Duck, aged 69, after having been pushed or knocked down by Mr.
Francis Paget.  The Coroner’s Jury found, “That deceased died of
apoplexy, aided and accelerated by a fall he received shortly before his
death, but how or in what manner the fall was received doth not appear to
the said Jurors,” only 12 (of the 18 Jurors) signed this inquisition.

Feb. 24th.—From a petition presented as to the Mail service, it appeared
there were then 574 ships of an aggregate burden of 50,325 tons,
belonging to this port.

Mr. Christopher Taylor had been appointed agent and surgeon to the sick
and wounded seamen, in the place of Wm. Taylor, Esq., deceased.

March 3rd.—2,300 inhabitants of Yarmouth had signed the petition for the
total Repeal of the Corn Laws.

March 10th.—Wm. Worship, Esq., had been elected a Councillor for the
North Ward.

March 31st.—A “Gold Coronation Medal” had been presented by the Queen to
Capt. Manby, for preservation of lives from shipwreck.

A meeting, convened by circular, had been held to consider Sir Robert
Peel’s proposed “Income Tax.”  The Mayor presided; Mr. S. Cobb moved and
Mr. G. D. Palmer seconded, a resolution to the effect “That it is the
duty of the meeting by every constitutional means in its power to resist
the income tax proposed by Sir R. Peel.”

Mr. E. H. L. Preston moved, and Mr. C. Cory seconded as an amendment,
“That the Mayor be instructed to call a meeting of the public,” which was
lost by 31 to 34.

A petition was to be “got up” against the tax.

April 7th.—It was rumoured that Jas. M. Cox had been killed by W. B.
Ebbage, but the Jury found that he died from “mis-adventure.”

April 14th.—A Hemsby boat, which had put off to a vessel, had been lost
and nine hands drowned out of her.

May 5th.—The Vauxhall Gardens had been opened for the season, and 100
gentlemen had partaken of a cold collation there on the occasion.

Charges of manslaughter had been preferred before the Magistrates in
respect of the cases of Ebbage and Cox.

May 19th.—The Mayor had attended the Leveé and presented addresses to
H.M. the Queen, Prince Albert, and the Duke of Kent, on the birth of the
Prince of Wales.

June 9th.—Mr. Matthew Hastings Swann had had the degree of “Doctor of
Philology” conferred on him by the University of Berlin.

The Victoria hotel had been completed, and was to be opened by Mr. Balls
of St. James’ Square, London.

June 23rd.—The Victoria hotel had been opened with a public dinner, at
which J. E. Lacon, Esq., presided.

June 30th.—At the Hospital meeting it was stated that the annual
subscriptions had amounted to £334 9s., and the benefactions to £150 0s.
5d., the expenditure being £357 18s. 3d.  76 in-patients and 829
out-patients had been relieved.  Geo. Penrice, Esq., M.D., was re-elected
physician, and J. C. Smith and Geo. Bateman, Esqs., were re-elected
surgeons.

July 14th.—Commissioners had been appointed for the purpose of carrying
into effect the provisions of the Income Tax Act.

July 21st.—Samuel Palmer, Esq., had been chosen clerk to such
Commissioners.

July 28th.—A prospectus had been issued for the purpose of establishing
“Shampooing Baths” at Yarmouth.

The Mayor had attended the Water Frolic; the first match was won by the
“Red Rover” (S. C. Marsh, Esq.)

August 4th.—There had been a fire at Mr. Harvey’s tan yard.

August 11th.—The first general meeting of the shareholders in the
Yarmouth and Norwich Railway had been held at the Victoria hotel, Geo.
Stephenson, Esq., in the chair.  It was stated that the line would be
probably opened in the Spring of 1844, that the expenses already incurred
would not exceed £10,000, and that 8,000 shares had been taken up.

August 25th.—A “young lady from Lincolnshire,” about 18 years of age, had
eloped from lodgings on the Beach with a Yarmouth gentleman.

Sept. 8th.—At the Races, the Gold Cup was won by Mr. Wilshere’s
“Evasion”; the Vauxhall Stakes by Mr. H. Stracey’s “Protempore”; the
Member’s Plate, and the Gentlemen’s Plate by Mr. S. Palmer’s “Everilda”;
and the Handicap Stakes by Mr. Bignold’s “Camille.”

Strenuous endeavours were made to “put down low gambling,” but the
gamblers appeared to have found refuge in the public-houses, notably at
the King’s Head Inn, Market Place.

The “Bruce” had been launched from Mr. Chapman’s yard.

Sept. 15th.—The Mayor (W. Johnson, Esq.), had entertained 100 friends at
luncheon, on Sunday, after attending Church, where the Hon. and Rev. E.
Pellew had preached in aid of the Charity Schools, established in 1713.

The Race ball had been held at the Bath Rooms, which only 68 persons had
attended.

Sailing matches had been held on the river, the starting place had being
opposite the monument, when the “Red Rover” (S. C. Marsh), beat the
“Maria” (Sir J. Preston), and the “Neptune” (J. Green).  The Royal
Sovereign won the Yawl Match.

Sept. 22nd.—H.M. the Queen had passed through the roads in the “Trident,”
accompanied by two other steamers.

Sept. 29th.—The “India” had, after extensive repairs, been launched from
Mr. A. R. Palmer’s yard.

Mr. R. Lubbock had launched the “Isabella” (200 tons) for S. Sherrington,
Esq.

Oct. 6th.—One of Mr. Shuckford’s boats had brought in 23½ lasts of
herring, valued at £700.

Oct. 13th.—The Corn Exchange in Regent Street had been opened, when 150
gentlemen dined together.  B. Dowson, Esq., was chairman, and Messrs J.
E. Laws and Thos. Barber were vice-chairmen.  The Mayor, G. Danby-Palmer,
Esq., Sir E. Lacon, Bart., and others being present.

Oct. 20th.—There had been a fire at the “New Commercial” club house.

Nov. 3rd.—A prisoner named Lessey complained to the Judge of the
Insolvent Debtors’ Court that he had lain in prison for 23 weeks before
he obtained his discharge, and had then been arrested again at the suit
of his solicitor for £19 19s. 4d. and was thus again a prisoner.

The following Councillors had been elected:—

_North Ward_: Mr. W. H. Bessey and Mr. C. May (vice Mr. E. H. L. Preston
retired.)

_Market Ward_: Mr. E. Sewell and Mr. S. Miller, jun. (vice Mr. E. N.
Clowes, resigned).  The polling being for

Sewell              162
Miller              142
Richmond             29
J. Lawn              29

_Regent Ward_: Messrs. C. Davie and J. Fish (re-elected.)

_St. George’s Ward_: Mr. Lettis and P. Pullyn, Esq. (vice A. Woods, Esq.,
resigned.)

_Nelson Ward_: Messrs. Robinson and Symonds (re-elected.)

_St. Andrew’s Ward_: Messrs. Thrower and W. H. Palmer (re-elected.)

Nov. 10th.—At the Council meeting on the 9th, Mr. R. Hammond proposed and
Capt. Pearson seconded, the election of Samuel Palmer, Esq., as Mayor;
and Mr. Brightwen moved and Mr. C. Davie seconded, William Hurry Palmer,
Esq., for that office.  A warm debate ensued, during which Mr. S. Cobb
was somewhat violent, and in the result Mr. S. Palmer was elected by 23
to 13 votes.

Those voting for Mr. S. Palmer were Messrs. W. Hammond, C. Pearson, W. D.
Palmer, G. D. Palmer, J. Fiddes, H. Fellows, T. Lettis, jun., S. C.
Marsh, J. Tomlinson, T. Hammond, J. G. Cannell, J. Fish, M. Butcher, J.
Crow, W. Chambers, J. L. Cufaude, J. Bayly, T. Lettis, R. Hammond, J.
Barker, B. Fenn, A. Thrower, and S. Cobb.  And for Mr. W. H.
Palmer—Messrs. J. Brightwen, C. Miller, E. Sewell, C. Davie, S. Robinson,
D. A. Gourlay, S. Miller, jun., W. Worship, C. May, J. Owles, J. N.
Sherrington, J. Symonds, and W. N. Burroughs.

In the evening a dinner took place at the Star Hotel, the Mayor in the
chair.

A meeting of the Victoria Building Company had been held, when it
appeared that £14,000 raised by shares and £6,000 raised on mortgages,
had been expended on the buildings.

Nov. 17th.—A “Total Abstinence” lecture had been delivered by Mr.
Smeeton, at the Guild Hall.

Nov. 24th.—The Amateur Musical Society had held a concert at the Town
Hall, when Mr. Suggate, Mrs. Barnwell, and Mr. Norfor’s performances were
specially praised.

The opening dinner had been held at the “Bear.”

Nine hundred lasts of herring had been caught “between Thursday se’night
and the succeeding Sunday,” which was considered an extraordinary catch
of fish.

Dec. 22nd.—Savings’ Bank meeting showed 2507 depositors and upwards of
£75,591 funds.  The Rev. M. Waters was elected a trustee of the
institution.

The Poor Law Commissioners having refused to sanction a Christmas Dinner
at the Workhouse, a subscription was being got up to provide the inmates
with one.



1843.


Jan. 5th.—A Bachelors’ ball had been held at the Bath Rooms, when 57
ladies and about a similar number of gentlemen were present.  The party
broke up at about three o’clock in the morning.

Some young fig trees had sprung up in Mr. H. Fellows’ Dock.

Jan. 12th.—A “true and complete peal of Grandsire Caters containing 5004
changes,” had been rung on St. Nicholas’ bells:—James Burman (treble),
James Stolworthy (second), Robert Bunn (third), James Lamb, aged 83
(fourth), Henry Stolworthy (fifth), Frederick Watering (sixth), Thomas
Fox (seventh), Daniel Woods (eighth), Charles Payne (ninth), and Thomas
Stolworthy (tenor).

Jan. 19th.—A meeting of the Trustees of the Acle Turnpike Road had been
held in regard to the state of their accounts.

Jan. 26th.—Mr. and Mrs. J. E. Laws had given a grand ball at the Corn
Exchange.

The Hospital had received £120 from the Managers of the Norwich Festival

Feb. 2nd.—Miss Hulley had given a concert and a ball at the Town Hall,
when Mr. Norfor sang two songs with judgment and the ball was well
attended.

The Gaol was so full “that it was almost impossible to provide sufficient
accommodation for the sleeping of the prisoners.”

Feb. 9th.—Messrs. Youell and Co. had received Her Majesty’s commands to
supply her with some plants from their nursery.

“On Tuesday, owing to the badness of the road, the London Mail arrived so
late that the letters could not be delivered till one o’clock.”

The third concert of the Musical Society had been held at the Town Hall,
when Mrs. Barnwell and Messrs. Palmer, Norfor, West, Springall, Offord,
Hardingham, and Brightwen, took part in the proceedings.

Feb. 16th.—H. Patteson and C. J. Palmer, Esqs., attended before the
Magistrates and obtained their certificates, that the whole of the
capital of £150,000 had been subscribed for the Norwich and Yarmouth
Railway Company.

Feb. 23rd.—Two cargoes of iron had arrived for the Railway.

“Button Smith, a notorious highwayman,” had been taken at Norwich, and
was to be examined before the Yarmouth Justices on account of his
depredations in the neighbourhood.

A man of “very respectable dress and genteel appearance” persisted in
standing near Mr. Bell’s malthouse door, which he stated was “the
entrance to Hell,” and as he seemed to be suffering from monomania he was
placed under the care of his brother, who was the captain of a ship in
the Roads.

March 2nd.—It was proposed to place a lightship at the “Cockle Gat.”

March 16th.—Mr. (now Sir James) Paget had been presented with plate of
the value of £70, by his pupils at St. Bartholomew’s Hospital.

The “Trinity Arms” Lodge, No. 220, U.A.O.D., had held its first
anniversary dinner at the Trinity Arms, South Quay, “when 50 brethren and
friends sat down to a most sumptuous dinner.”

March 30th.—Sixteen Liberal Guardians had been again elected.

April 13th.—It was understood that the contracts for building the new
Bridge had been taken for something less than £10,000.

April 20th.—Messrs. C. Davie and D. A. Gourlay had been re-elected
churchwardens by the Vestry.

April 27th.—The petitions against the Educational Clauses of the
Factories Regulation Bill from the parents of Sunday School Children had
received upwards of 500 signatures in the course of a few hours.

May 11th.—The Acle Turnpike Road was being thoroughly repaired; it was
stated that these Tolls were then let for upwards of £400 a year.

May 18th.—R. Rising, Esq., of Horsey, had shot a crested Cormorant, which
had been stuffed by Mr. Harvey, and could be seen at his shop.

May 25th.—A meeting of the Victoria Building Company had been held, when
Mr. Dowson admitted “that much money had been mis-spent,” and a warm
discussion took place between Mr. Worship and Mr. Nelson (the architect);
Mr. Spilling threatened to file a Bill in Chancery against the Directors,
and Messrs. R. P. Kemp and W. Johnson refused to be re-elected to the
Board.  This meeting, “which was frequently one of great confusion,”
lasted six hours.

June 1st.—A new Jetty was projected opposite the Victoria Terrace, at
which steampackets could land passengers and goods.

June 18th.—A single-wicket game of cricket had been played on the Denes
between six members of the Amateur Club, the players being Messrs.
Chamberlin, Tyrrell, and Diver, _v._ Greenacre, Aldred and Nolloth, the
latter won by 23 to 8 runs.

June 24th.—Mr. H. Worship had resigned the office of Parish Surgeon.

June 29th.—Mr. F. N. Palmer had been elected to that office in Mr.
Worship’s place.

Many gentlemen had been fined for riding across the corner of the
pavement near the Star.

July 6th.—The London letters now arrived before eight o’clock by “Patent
Mail” in lieu of the Telegraph Coach.

July 13th.—The “Hudson” had been lengthened and launched from Mr. F.
Preston’s yard.

A shark, seven feet long, had been taken by some fishermen.

July 20th.—S. Tolver, Esq., had presented an hydraulic bed to the
Hospital.

Robert Stevenson, Esq., had been in Yarmouth and determined on the site
for the Terminus.

July 27th.—The “Good Samaritan” Lodge had held its anniversary at the
Masonic Hall.  The chair was filled by the N. G. William Freeman, P. G.
Borking occupying the vice-chair.  Among the company present were R. H.
Beart and F. Palmer, Esqs., and Messrs. W. Hammond, W. H. Perkins, G.
Rainer, G. R. Storey, R. Symonds, C. Hall, C. Bartram, W. Sayers, &c.

The Water Frolic had been held, the Mayor and Corporation attending in a
Barge.

August 10th.—Wm. Steward, Esq., had bequeathed £100 to the Hospital.

The intelligence of the death of Capt. Harmer, R.N., of H.M.S. “Driver,”
had been received, and the flags thereupon hoisted at half-mast on the
Town Hall.

August 17th.—The Races had afforded little real sport; the Gold Cup race
was “drawn” as there were only two entries for it.

The Magistrates had issued a notice against gambling.

There had not been a single case of pocket picking reported at the Races.

August 24th.—As no Regatta had been held this year, Lieut. Eyton, R.N.,
was endeavouring to get up a subscription for one to be held next year.

Sept. 7th.—The Government Inspector was very dissatisfied with the state
of the Gaol.

The Yarmouth Mail had been upset near the Suspension Bridge.

Sept. 14th—Capt. Pike had been elected an Alderman in the room of Dr.
Penrice, deceased.

The Council had determined not to appoint a chaplain in future, and to
let the Vicarage “as any other property is let.”

Sept. 21st.—The Norwich and Yarmouth Cricket Clubs had played a match
here with the result:—

                 1st ins.       2nd ins.       Total.
Yarmouth            79             50            129
Norwich             96             42            138
                  (And three wickets.)

Oct. 5th.—The hotels and lodging-houses continued well filled, and the
roadstead was crowded with shipping.

Oct. 12th.—Four Women and a man had been baptized by immersion in the sea
from three of Mr. Bowles’ machines.

Nov. 2nd.—A Temperance meeting had been held at the Town Hall, addressed
by Messrs. Fisher, Pike and Kelf, the Rev. J. Meffin occupied the chair.

An awful storm of wind from the S.E. had visited the town, and several
ships had been driven on to the Beach.

The following Councillors had been elected:—

_North Ward_:—Messrs. Wm. Worship and Peter White.

_Market Ward_:—Messrs. D. A. Gourlay and C. Miller.

_Regent Ward_: Messrs. S. Palmer and J. D. Chapman.

_St. George’s Ward_: Messrs. J. Bayly and W. A. Burton.

_Nelson Ward_: Messrs. J. G. Cannell and Wm. Thos. Clarke.

_Gorleston Ward_: Messrs. W. Danby-Palmer and John Hammond.

Nov. 9th.—There were then forty-seven Liberals and one Conservative in
the Town Council.

At the election of Mayor, Mr. Alderman Fenn proposed, and Mr. Thomas
Hammond seconded, Samuel Charles Marsh, Esq., and Mr. Sewell proposed,
and Mr. Shelly seconded Wm. Hurry Palmer, Esq., for that office; on a
division Mr. Marsh was elected by 20 votes as against 18 given for Mr.
Palmer.

Nov. 18th.—A large party of the Town Council and their friends had dined
together at the Star Tavern; amongst those present were the Mayor, the
Ex-Mayor, G. Danby Palmer, W. Johnson, R. Hammond, W. Danby Palmer, C.
Pearson, R. S. Lonsdale, W. S. Ferrier, H. Worship, and G. W. Holt, Esqs.

The Mayor had entertained 200 gentlemen on his return from Church on
Mayor’s Sunday.

                     THE FUNERAL OF CAPTAIN HARMER, R.N.

    The following particulars, relative to the interment of this much
    lamented officer (who died while in command of Her Majesty’s steam
    frigate “Driver,” in China), will, (the Editor thinks), no doubt, be
    read with much interest:—

                                        H.M.S. “Thalia,” at Chusan, China,
                                                         17th April, 1843.

    As I have arranged, with the kind concurrence of Major General Sir
    James Schoedde, that the interment of the late lamented Capt. Harmer,
    of Her Majesty’s steam frigate “Driver,” shall take place to-morrow
    forenoon at ten o’clock; it is my direction that the officers,
    seamen, and marines mentioned underneath, be sent in boats also
    stated against each ship’s name, so as to assemble round the “Driver”
    at half-past nine o’clock.  The procession of boats will leave the
    “Driver” precisely at ten o’clock and proceed to the West pier,
    abreast that vessel, when it will be met by the Major General and all
    the officers of the garrison and a detachment of 100 rank and file of
    Her Majesty’s 95th Regiment, as that gallant officer has, in the most
    handsome and kind manner, expressed an anxious wish to pay every
    possible mark of respect to the remains of the much regretted Capt.
    Harmer.  As many of the officers of the army lost their full dress
    coats during the late war in this country, I have arranged with
    General Sir James Schoedde, in order that both services may appear
    alike, that all the officers of the navy and marines appear in
    undress coats, epaulettes, cocked hats and swords, with crape on the
    left arm above the elbow, if it can be procured in time.  The marines
    will be in full dress, but without chakos, and will be provided with
    three rounds of blank cartridges for every man.  The seamen are to be
    in blue jackets and trousers, white frocks and black hats.  All the
    arrangements on the part of the army are to be conducted by Major
    O’Leary, Brigade Major of Chusan; on the part of the navy, Capt.
    Quin, of H.M.S. “Minden.”

The pall bearers are to be three Field Officers of the army, and the
Commanders of the “Pelican,” “Serpent,” and “Pylades.”  Lieut. Kisbee, of
the “Driver,” will be chief mourner, supported by the Officers of that
vessel.

H.M.S. “Thalia.”—Four boats, three lieutenants, purser, naval instructor,
two medical officers, one midshipman, three volunteers (1st class.)

H.M.S. “Minden.”—Three boats, two lieutenants, master, purser, two
medical officers, two volunteers (1st class), one sergeant and ten
marines.

H.M.S. “Pelican”—Two boats, two lieutenants, one medical officer, purser,
one mate, one midshipman one volunteer (1st class), one sergeant, and
fifteen marines.

H.M.S. “Serpent” and “Pylades.”—Same as “Pelican” in every respect as to
boats and marines, and as nearly as possible with regard to officers.

All the officers and crew of the “Driver” will attend, excepting those
left on board to take care of the vessel.  The above number of boats is
exclusive of those the Captains and Commanders will be in.

The colours of all the squadron will be hoisted half-mast high at eight
o’clock, and remain so till sunset.

                                                                   Signed,
                                                               CHAS. HOPE,

                    Captain of H.M.S. “Thalia,” and senior officer Chusan.

P.S.—The boats will be provided with ensigns and pendants, but only the
former will be half-mast high.

Capt. Harmer was buried under the fort, surrounded by hundreds of his
brethren in arms, who were either killed at the last capture of Chusan or
who died from the effects of the climate.  The officers of the “Driver,”
much to their credit, and evincing a proper respect for a much-loved
commander, have erected a neat monument over his remains at their own
expense.  So highly was he esteemed, even by the Chinese, that numbers of
the respectable men of the city also attended.

The merchant ships, following the example of the squadron, kept their
colours half-mast high until sunset.

Of Capt. Harmer it might well be said, in the language of the order,
“that he paid proper respect to those who were destined to rule over him;
that he worked diligently, lived creditably, and acted honourably by all
men.”  Brother, farewell.

Dec. 2nd.—Mr. John B. Bales had been presented with a splendid tea
service, inscribed, “presented to Mr. John Barney Bales,
Sergeant-at-Mace, by the inhabitants of this town, for their high opinion
of him as a public officer.”

A swindler, calling himself “Clinton,” had been victimising the
inhabitants.

Dec. 9th.—The first subscription concert had been held at the Town Hall.

Dec. 16th.—It was stated that the value of the Yarmouth living was then
estimated at £430 per annum.

Dec. 23rd.—The Birmingham and Leicester coach had run over Mr. John
Clowes, jun., at Caister, the hind wheel passing over his body and very
severely bruising his leg and thigh.

A light vessel had been placed in the Cockle Gat.

Dec. 30th.—The Temperance Society had held their annual festival at the
Town Hall, and in the course of the afternoon some members of Rechabite
Tent had walked in procession round the town, headed by the Temperance
Band, and carrying a few banners and the insignia of the order.



1844.


Jan. 6th.—At a concert and ball given at the Town Hall, a violin duet, by
the Masters Hulley, was played with “great spirit.”

Bartholomew Earle, “for the last eight years butler to S. Palmer, Esq.”
had been discovered quite dead, suspended by the neck from a beam in that
gentleman’s cellar.  The inquest lasted seven hours, and was attended by
S. C. Marsh, Esq. (Mayor), and S. Palmer, G. D. Palmer, W. D. Palmer, C.
Pearson, G. Bateman, J. C. Smith, J. Hammond, and A. Woods, Esqs.  The
deceased left a widow and four children; the verdict was temporary
insanity.

Jan. 13th.—The Railway Company had abandoned their plan of erecting a
bridge over the river with wharfs on the North Quay.

Jan. 20th.—The congregation of the Mariner’s Chapel had presented a
testimonial to their minister, Mr. Joseph Pike.

Jan. 27th.—The Hon. and Rev. E. Pellew had been presented with a
testimonial consisting of a teapot, coffee pot, massive silver waiter,
cream ewer, and sugar basin upon his resigning the Vicarage.

Feb. 3rd.—The Haven Commissioners had determined to oppose the proposed
Railway bridge over the Bure, the following Commissioners being present
on this occasion:—Robert Marsham, Esq. (Chairman), H. N. Burroughes,
Esq., M.P., Col. Petre, John Penrice, John F. Leathes, F. W. Farr, Geo.
Danby Palmer, T. O. Springall, John Marshall, Peter Finch, and W.
Hammond, Esqs.

The Borough Lands Committee recommended that the Rev. H. Mackenzie (the
incoming Vicar) should have the parsonage house at the yearly rent of 1s.

Feb. 10th.—John Franklin, the Southtown pedestrian, had walked from the
Duke’s Head Inn, Yarmouth, to the Shire Hall, Norwich, and back in 11½
hours for a wager of £10.

Feb. 17th.—In pursuance of the will of the late Mr. James Moyse, of
Yarmouth, the Rev. F. P. Baker and Mr. John Baker had distributed £50
amongst poor persons residing in the town, and Mr. E. C. Sharpin, of
Beccles, had distributed £10 amongst the poor there.

It was proposed to appoint a schoolmaster at the Gaol, with a salary of
£50 a year.

Feb. 24th.—A dispute having arisen between the Magistrates and the Town
Council as to the liability of the latter to furnish the Justices Court
Room, Mr. C. Austin’s opinion had been taken on the subject, which proved
to be in favour of the Justices.

March 2nd.—The electric telegraph had been laid along the railway.

March 8th.—A meeting had been held of the owners and occupiers of
property in the Market Ward, when it was proposed to oppose the Railway
Bridge scheme, and Messrs. Wm. Johnson and Richard Ferrier were appointed
a deputation to wait upon Sir E. Lacon (the only local Director) to urge
the views of the meeting upon him.

March 23rd.—The Town Council had determined to expend £500 in alterations
at the Gaol.

The Rev. R. G. Mason, “the Father Matthew of Scotland,” had held two
meetings at the Town Hall.

March 30th.—The Committee of the House of Commons sitting on the Railway
Bill had found the preamble as to the proposed Bridge over the Bure “not
proven.”

Mr. Pellew had been presented with the testimonial by Sir E. Lacon and B.
Dowson, Esq., on behalf of the subscribers.

April 6th.—Messrs. Wm. Cross, John Richmond, Wm. Burton, and J. T. Buston
had been appointed overseers.

The following gentlemen had been elected Guardians:—Messrs. G. Danby
Palmer, W. A. Burton, J. Fiddes, J. Fish, S. C. Marsh, J. Starling, J.
Tomlinson, D. A. Gourlay, J. Lawn, F. Clark, S. W. Bly, W. Smith, J. D.
Chapman, T. Hammond, J. Brightwen, and C. Pearson.  There was only one
Tory candidate, who was rejected.

April 13th.—On Good Friday, Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Tomlinson had been thrown
from a gig at Fritton, and Mrs. Tomlinson was seriously injured, while
Mr. Tomlinson escaped with a few bruises; their little boy who was with
them was unhurt.

May 4th.—Contains the report of the opening of the Railway from Norwich
to Yarmouth, on the 30th April, it was stated that the works had been
completed in the space of eight months from their commencement, by
Messrs. Peto, Grissel & Co.

A _dejeneur_ had been given at the Assembly Rooms, Norwich, by the
contractor to 150 ladies and gentlemen, when the following toasts were
given:—“The Queen,” “Success to the Yarmouth and Norwich Railway,”
“Prosperity to the City of Norwich and the Port of Yarmouth,” “The
healths of the Mayors of Norwich and Yarmouth,” “Mr. Peto” (by the Mayor
of Norwich), “The Ladies,” (by Mr. Peto), after which they retired; “Mr.
Stephenson and the Directors,” and “Mr. Grissel” (by John Penrice, Esq.)

On the same day a train made its first trip to Yarmouth, starting at
twelve o’clock, and returning at 7 minutes to 4 o’clock, accomplishing
the return journey between Yarmouth and Norwich in 42 minutes.

On 1st May the shareholders and friends of the Railway gave a dinner to
the Directors, at the Victoria Hotel, the Mayor in the chair.  C. J.
Palmer, Esq., was vice-president, and there were also present Sir E. H.
K. Lacon, Bart., Adam Duff, Esq., H. Bolingbroke, Esq., R. Till, Esq.
(treasurer), G. N. Tootal, Esq.  (secretary), the Mayor and Sheriff of
Norwich, J. Penrice, J. E. Lacon, Capt. Lacon, RN., E. H. L. Preston, W.
H. Palmer, W. Johnson, W. Yetts, J. C. Smith, R. Hammond, W. Goldsmith,
T. M. Nelson, E. Youell, I. O. Taylor, W. S. Ferrier, H. Fellows, S.
Nightingale, C. Brown, and H. Aldred, Esqs.

May 11th.—A number of sailors had been thrown out of employment owing to
a strike of pitmen in the North and other causes, and it was proposed
that they should apply to the Guardians for temporary relief.

May 18th.—The Yarmouth Anti-Corn Law League had held a meeting at the
Masonic Hall, Mr. D. A. Gourlay in the chair.

A meeting of the Gas Company had been held in London, when it was agreed
to reduce the price of gas from 10s. to 8s. per 1000 cubic feet; (in 1840
the price had been 13s. 4d.,) the shareholders were then receiving 5 per
cent. on their shares.

Mr. Nelson had stated to Mr. Lacon that he could not redeem his pledge to
complete Kimberley Terrace.

Mr. T. C. Foreman (confectioner), had been assaulted by Mr. Bidden
(surgeon).

May 25th.—Miss Pestall had received a telegraphic message to provide a
dinner for the Railway Directors at five o’clock, which left Norwich at
four o’clock on the same day, and the order was fulfilled in “the fine
old carved room.”

June 1st.—The second instance of the escape of a prisoner from the gaol
during the last few months had occurred, this man’s name was Cooper.

June 9th.—A meeting, to establish a Marine Regatta, had been held, when
the following Committee was appointed for that purpose:—The Mayor, S.
Palmer, B. Dowson, John Penrice, and Chas. Pearson, Esqs., Sir George
Parker, and Lieut. Eaton.

The Victoria Brass Band had commenced playing on the Terrace.

June 15th.—Madame Vestris and Chas. Matthews were to appear at the
Theatre.

July 6th.—The “Byzantium,” 290 tons, had been launched from Mr. F.
Preston’s yard.

A meeting of the local Anti-Corn Law League had been held, and the
conduct of Messrs. Rumbold and Wilshere censured for not supporting the
movement for the entire abolition of these duties.

July 13th.—Mr. C. D. Arnott, of Gorleston, had obtained the diploma of
the Royal College of Surgeons of England, and had been admitted a
Licentiate of the Apothecaries’ Company.

July 27th.—At the Water Frolic, the “Red Rover” (S. C. Marsh) had beaten
the “Leviathan” (Bessey), and the “Pearl” (Sir W. B. Proctor), but was
disqualified on protest, and the prize awarded to the “Leviathan.”

August 3rd.—The Regatta had proved a success, the following is the report
given of the sport:—

    “The Regatta at Yarmouth, on Friday, was one of the most spirited and
    gay scenes ever witnessed.  The terrace, the shore, the Jetty, the
    windows, were filled with gaily-dressed spectators, whose constantly
    moving figures rendered the scene one vast and ever-changing
    kaleidoscope.  The day was glorious, and the sea was thickly
    sprinkled with boats and vessels of all kinds, which merrily bounded
    before the gale in quick and ever-varying succession.  The following
    was the result of the day’s amusement, which gave infinite pleasure
    to the thousands who thronged from all parts of the country.

    A silver cup and cover, value £50, for Yachts not exceeding 25 tons,
    belonging to a Yacht Club.

            Yachts       tons.         Owners.          Colours.
1.       Mystery       25          Lord A. Paget     b & w Maltese
                                                     cross
2.       Gnome         25          Thos. Meeson      b & w with
                                                     crown

    Carried away gaff topsail yard, and gave up.

    A silver cup, value £12, by Pleasure Boats, 19 feet on the ram and
    upwards.

    Won by “Leviathan,” (Mr. W. Bessey), beating four others.

    A handsome silver Cup.—A Rowing Match by Amateur Gigs, not exceeding
    25 feet, given by Mr. Balls of the Victoria Hotel, which was won by
    the “Enigma.”

    A grand sailing match for a purse of 25 sovs. by Yawls of any
    length.—First yawl to have 12 sovs., the second 5, and the third 3.
    Won by the “Victoria”; 2nd, “Greyhound”; 3rd, “Royal Sovereign.”

    A Rowing Match for a purse of 10 sovs. by Beach Gigs of any
    description, and manned as they pleased.  First gig 7 sovs., second 3
    sovs., which was won by the “Princess Victoria” (Critten), the “Star”
    being second.

    The amount of receipts at the Repository held at Bath Rooms, on
    Friday, including a few subsequent sales, was £77 8s. 0d., viz.,
    received at the doors, £16 16s. 6d.; contributions by the members for
    the Borough, £10; amount of sales, £50 11s. 6d.; the expenses of
    fitting up the rooms, etc., were £12 8s. 0d.; leaving a balance of
    £65, which was distributed as follows:—For the aged poor, £3; the
    sick poor £1; and to the District Visiting Society, School of
    Industry, and Blanket and Clothing Society, £20 6s. 8d. each.

Aug. 10th.—Five individuals were living in a house in the Lion and Lamb
Row, whose united ages amounted to 385 years.

Aug. 24th.—The tide had flowed up to Victoria Terrace and beyond Ansell’s
Buildings, affording an enchanting sight to the visitors.

The foundation stone of the New Wesleyan Chapel had been laid at
Gorleston.

Sept. 21st.—The organ of S. Nicholas’ had been re-opened, full Cathedral
service being performed, when about 5,000 persons attended the two
services.  Mr. Mackenzie preached from Psalm 100, 1st and 2nd, and £72
10s. was collected.

A choir was about to be formed, under Mr. Warne.

Oct. 5th.—The Victoria Building Company had sold the ground for the
purpose of the erection of Brandon Terrace.

Oct. 19th.—The Magistrates had determined upon memorialising the
Postmaster General to have the mails transmitted by railroad.

Nov. 2nd.—A “Railway meeting” had been held upon the requisition of the
Mayor, and the following committee appointed to inquire as to the schemes
proposed.  The Mayor (S. C. Marsh), G. Danby Palmer, E. H. L. Preston, W.
Johnson, J. E. Lacon, R. Hammond, R. Ferrier, R. S. Lonsdale, J. Clark,
S. Palmer, A. Palmer, W. H. Palmer, J. Orfeur, B. Dowson, D. Turner, and
J. W. Shelly, Esqs., and Messrs. C. Moore and T. Hammond.

The following had been again re-elected Councillors without any
opposition:—Richard Hammond, W. N. Burroughs, W. Johnson, John Owles, J.
Tomlinson, S. C. Marsh, Thos. Lettis, jun., J. W. Shelly, Geo. Danby
Palmer, W. Chambers, S. Crow, and T. Hammond.

Messrs. Chas. Cory, Geo. Danby Palmer, T. O. Springfield, R. Marsham,
Samuel Tolver, and Capt. Smyth, R.N., had had an interview with the
President of the Board of Trade on the subject of the proposed new Bridge
over the Bure.

Twenty-five gentlemen of the Corporation had dined at the Feather’s Inn,
to commemorate the opening of the new Fish Market by S. C. Marsh, Esq.
(the Mayor), who presided on the occasion.

November 9th contains the following legal report:—

    The Queen v. Chas. Cory Aldred.—Application for a criminal
    information.—Mr. Martin applied in this case on behalf of Mr. Marsh,
    the Mayor of Yarmouth, for a rule for a criminal information against
    the defendant.  Mr. Marsh stated in his affidavit that he was Mayor
    of Yarmouth, and a Magistrate of the Borough, and that on the 10th of
    June last he attended at his office for the purpose of transacting
    magisterial business, upon which occasion a person was charged with
    ringing the bell of Mr. Aldred during divine service, and a constable
    produced a paper without any direction or signature relative to the
    offence with which the person was charged.  The Mayor and the
    Magistrate who was with him were of opinion that they could not
    receive such a paper, and that Mr. Aldred ought to attend himself.
    The paper was returned to the constable with injunctions to tell Mr.
    Aldred that he must attend himself if he wished to take proceedings
    against the party.  This took place on the 10th of June.  On the 12th
    of June, Mr. Marsh was going along King-street, when defendant came
    up to him, seized him by the arm, and making use of some very
    offensive expressions, demanded an explanation for the impertinent
    manner in which the Mayor had treated his letter.  The Mayor replied
    that he was the Chief Magistrate of the town, that his hands were
    therefore tied up, and that he could not enter into any explanation
    then.  Mr. Aldred then reiterated the expressions, and followed Mr.
    Marsh up the street, still repeating them all the time.  Mr. Marsh
    after this sent two persons to Mr. Aldred, requesting him to consider
    what he had done, and whether he would not attend to make some
    apology for his conduct.  Mr. Aldred did attend, but instead of
    making an apology he repeated the observations again in a manner most
    offensive to the Mayor.  After the first offence, the Mayor thought
    to take proceedings against the defendant for sureties to keep the
    peace, but considered that the repetition of such conduct in an open
    Court was such an aggravation of the original offence, that he felt
    it due to his office and himself to take other proceedings.  One of
    the Magistrates insisted on taking sureties, which he did two or
    three days afterwards.  But he (Mr. Martin) apprehended that the
    circumstances of this case were such as not to deprive Mr. Marsh on
    that account of coming to this Court.

    Mr. Justice Patteson—You do not put this as being a provocation to a
    breach of the peace?

    Mr. Martin—It was an actual breach of the peace, for an assault was
    committed.

    Mr. Justice Patteson—That was in the first instance.  There was
    nothing but words in the second instance, but the Magistrate was
    acting at the time in his magisterial capacity.

    Mr. Martin—It was so; and they thought it also right to have an
    affidavit from the Police-constable, who stated in his affidavit that
    he merely delivered the paper without any offensive expression
    whatever, and the answer he received was “D---n the Mayor and
    Magistrates; what do I care for them?—Rule _nisi_ granted.”

Nov. 16th.—Wm. Hurry Palmer, Esq., had been unanimously elected Mayor,
and entertained 50 or 60 of his friends at the Star Hotel.  The event was
also commemorated by dinners at the “Capt. Harmer” and at the “Queen’s
Head.”

Nov. 23rd—Colliers were getting 7s. a ton for freight.

A large party of gentlemen of different politics had given a dinner to
the Mayor (W. H. Palmer, Esq.) at the “Victoria,” when J. E. Lacon, Esq.,
presided.

Nov. 30th.—The Rule in “the Queen’s on prosecution of Marsh v. Aldred”
had been made absolute.  Mr. Martin and Mr. Palmer supported, and Mr.
Platt opposed in these proceedings.

Dec. 14th.—Complaint was made that the Bridport nets were driving the
nets made in Yarmouth by women and girls out of use.

Great excitement prevailed in consequence of the murder of Mrs. Chandler,
with regard to which some men named Yarham, Royal, and Hall were supposed
to be the culprits.

Dec. 21st.—The grocers had determined to close their shops at 8 o’clock.



1845.


Jan. 11th.—A Railway meeting had been held (W. H. Palmer, Esq., in the
chair) to consider the report of the Committee appointed at the previous
meeting.

Feb. 1st.—A meeting had been held to assist the widows and children of
the men lost on the 26th January then last.

Progress was being made in building Brandon Terrace.

On Sunday night, between 11 and 12 o’clock, there had been 19 feet 6 ins.
of water on the bar, being 10 ins. higher than any tide of which there
was an official report.  Southtown was flooded, and the water flowed up
to the trees on the Quay.

Feb. 8th.—The Board of Trade had remitted £20 to the fund for the relief
of the sufferers by the late storm.

Feb. 15th.—And her Majesty the Queen had sent a like sum to the same
fund.

Feb. 22nd.—The Town Council had petitioned against the Income Tax, and in
favour of the Waveney Valley Railway.

The rivers were “fast with frost.”

March 1st.—A ball had been held at the Town-hall for the benefit of the
Hospital.  130 persons were present, among whom were the Mayor and Mrs.
W. H. Palmer, Mr. and Mrs. C. J. Palmer, Mr. and Mrs. S. C. Marsh,
Messrs. F. and W. Worship, the Misses Worship, Mr. Wm. Johnson, the
Misses Johnson, Miss M. Lacon, Mr. C. Dowson, Mr. and Mrs. Playford, Mr.
and Mrs. F. Palmer, Messrs. Salmon Palmer, J. Richard, G. B. Costerton,
Henry Danby-Palmer, &c.

March 8th.—Large quantities of wreck were floating in the Roads.

March 15th.—The subscription to the “Shipwreck (Phœnix) Fund” amounted to
£1,500 9s. 4d., and a suggestion had been made to form it into a
“permanent fund,” or to endow the Fishermen’s Hospital with it.

March 15th.—A petition had been adopted against the Dereham Railway Bill.

C. J. Harley, Esq., had bequeathed £100 to the Hospital.

There were only four cases at the Quarter Sessions.

March 22nd.—The case of “Hook against Davie” had been tried, and the Will
prepared by Mr. Cory declared against, the Judge stating that Mr. Cory
should have taken “a more correct view of his duty as a solicitor.”

April 5th.—R. Rising, Esq., had taken, at Horsey, a pike measuring 3½
feet in length, 2 feet in circumference, and weighing 28 lbs., it was
supposed to be from 8 to 10 years old.

An accident had happened at Cooke’s Circus, during the performance of
“St. George and the Dragon,” by the breaking down of a gallery, owing to
which William Lilley, aged 33, had broken his leg in two places.  Mr. F.
Palmer was treating this case at the Hospital.

April 12th.—Royal, Hall and Mapes, had been tried at the assizes for the
murder of Harriet Chandler.  Mr. Palmer and Mr. O’Malley appeared for the
prosecution, and Mr. Prendegast and Mr. Couch for the defence, which was
an “alibi;” the jury acquitted all the prisoners.

April 19th.—S. Cobb, Esq., had laid the foundation stone of the Unitarian
Chapel, which was to be built on the site of the “Old Meeting House” in
Gaol Street.

April 26th.—“In the Bail Court, Saturday, 19th April, 1845.  Before Mr.
Justice Coleridge.

  The Queen on the prosecution of Samuel Charles Marsh, Esq., v. Charles
                               Cory Aldred.

Mr. Martin—My Lord, in the case of the Queen v. Aldred, my learned
friend, Mr. Robinson, will address your Lordship.

Mr. Robinson—In this case, my Lord, Mr. Aldred has been indicted for
having spoken certain words of the prosecutor; he has pleaded not guilty.
This gentleman, I have to state, used the words under some mistake, and
he is now anxious to withdraw his plea of not guilty, and to express his
regret for having used the words of which the prosecutor has complained.
I have now, therefore, to withdraw the plea of not guilty and to enter a
plea of guilty.

Mr. Martin—My Lord, I appear on behalf of the prosecutor, the Mayor of
Yarmouth, who felt himself compelled to bring the matter before the
Court.  He has no personal feeling in the matter, and is perfectly
satisfied with the expression of regret made by my learned friend, and
upon payment of the costs by the defendant, if your Lordship pleases, he
will not proceed further.

Mr. Justice Coleridge—Very well.”

Yarham (who figured in the Chandler murder case) had “at length been
compelled, by the expression of public feeling, to quit the town.”

May 3rd.—Only one tender had been sent in for the New Haven Bridge, and
it was considered probable that the plans for it would be amended.

May 10th.—Reports the “Fall of the Yarmouth Suspension Bridge,” (with a
wood-cut of the wreck of that structure), which had happened on Friday,
the 2nd inst.  The following is extracted from such report:—

    On the afternoon of the day on which this narration bears date,
    Nelson, the Clown at Mr. Cooke’s Circus, had undertaken to swim in a
    tub, drawn by four geese, from the drawbridge on the Quay to the
    Suspension Bridge across the North river—a foolish exhibition—but it
    was one which, from its novelty in Yarmouth, was calculated to
    attract the multitude.  As early as five o’clock, when the train
    arrived from Norwich, although raining smartly, thousands of
    spectators had already assembled to witness the feat on both sides of
    the river.  The Bridge was then comparatively clear.  The Clown
    commenced his feat with the flood tide at the drawbridge, and had
    entered the North river.  There were many persons on the Bridge, and
    as he drew near, the multitude upon it endeavoured to obtain a full
    view as he should pass underneath.  Already had he reached Bessey’s
    Wharf, not far from the Bridge, when one or two of the rods were
    observed to give way; an instant alarm was given to quit the bridge.
    Alas! the caution came too late.  The chains broke, and quick as the
    passing thought, one entire side fell, and the whole mass of the
    human beings, whose numbers were estimated from three to four
    hundred, were swept into the river below.  The traffic road of the
    Bridge, which but an instant before was horizontal, had become nearly
    perpendicular.

    The children, poor little things, of whom there were very many, and
    had naturally gathered to the balustrade, were of course the first to
    sink, while the force with which the whole fell, caused those who
    were in the background to be hurled with terrific force into the
    water beneath, crushing and annihilating those under them.

    Oh! who shall paint the one mighty simultaneous agonizing
    death-scream which burst upon the affrighted multitude
    around—re-echoing from earth to heaven—may the appeal not be made in
    vain.  One instant and all was hushed, save the struggling of a few
    whose lives it pleased their Maker in his mercy to spare.  The
    waters, we are told, as if gifted with a sudden impulse of horror, at
    this fell swoop of death, recoiled in the impetus of the fall and
    “boiled up” at the back of the Bridge, which hung perpendicularly
    below the surface of the river.  As suddenly the struggle for life
    was past to all but a few.

    Then came a scene scarcely less heartrending.  With an energy,
    activity, and stern determination of purpose, which are among the
    wise and merciful provisions of the Almighty, twenty-seven children,
    all girls, were immediately rescued alive on the West side of the
    river, and as instantly put to bed at the “Vauxhall Gardens,” who as
    soon as revived were replaced by others equally beneficially spared,
    or by some never to be recalled.  Some scrambled out and rushed home
    to their own houses, not a few fainting after arriving safe at home.
    On the East side numbers of bodies were taken into the adjoining
    houses, where all the assistance which medical skill, humane
    attention, in short all the aid which humanity would teach everyone
    to offer, was brought to bear.  Alas how often in vain.  In one house
    alone, at nine o’clock at night, out of sixty-eight bodies carried in
    only three were revived.

    Many a touching scene was witnessed as the anxious mother, and the
    hardly less excited father or friend, recognised some missing one
    safely emerging from the crowd.  Thousands thronged the North
    Quay—messengers were despatched in all directions to procure medical
    aid, and the communication with the West side of the water being cut
    off, hundreds were left in painful suspense respecting those who were
    safe on the opposite shore.  Nothing could exceed the promptitude,
    activity, and attention of the surgeons and medical men of the town,
    all of whom were in immediate attendance doing all they could to
    afford relief to the sufferers, where the slightest chance of
    resuscitation appeared.  Mr. Lacon and a number of the persons
    employed in his brewery were exceedingly active in supplying hot
    water for baths, which is not far distant.  All the blankets from the
    Union House that could possibly be spared were in requisition.

    The scene now presented is still most agonising.  Children, mothers,
    and fathers, seeking one or other of their families, tracing and
    discovering in the pale face of some of the dead, one of their
    dearest ties.  In every street are to be seen one or more bodies
    extended on biers, returning to that home from which but short
    minutes before they had passed in health and life.  The
    consternation—the agony of the town is not to be described—it is as
    if some dread punishment was felt to have fallen upon its
    inhabitants—every face is horror-stricken—every eye is dim.

    Never since the devastating plague in 1664, which swept off 2000 of
    its inhabitants, has Yarmouth, notwithstanding its numberless
    shipwrecks, been visited with so dire a calamity, occurring too at
    the very moment a public meeting was about to be held to make
    arrangements for the distribution of the funds which have been
    received for the widows and families of the Beachmen who were lost in
    January last.  How many are there added to this list?  We dare not
    anticipate—Time will show.

    Numbers, it is believed, are entangled with the rods and other
    portions of the broken Bridge.  At this hour it is impossible to say
    how many or who are called to their dread accounts.  The escape of
    some was miraculous.  One woman, of the name of Gillings, the wife of
    a carpenter, was on the Bridge with her child; when she was hurled
    into the water, with extraordinary presence of mind she seized her
    child’s clothes with her teeth—thus preventing the rush of water, and
    paddled herself to a place of safety.

    On the East side of the Bridge the greater number were taken to the
    “Norwich Arms Inn,” where there were at one time fifty-three corpses.
    Others were taken to the “Admiral Collingwood” and to the “Swan,” and
    many to their own houses.  Not a few of those who first got out of
    the water went away unnoticed, and their number is unknown.  Up to a
    late hour last night, it was ascertained that seventy-five dead
    bodies had been taken out of the water; and up to midnight, from the
    enquiries made, it was ascertained that forty-five others were
    missing.

    By far the greater number of those lost were females and children.
    James Marshall, 16, escaped with a wound in the scalp.  Two boys
    named Honorley, aged twelve and seventeen, were taken home, the
    younger died last evening, the elder is likely to recover.

    The inquest on the bodies of the drowned was held next day at the
    “Church Hall,” before W. S. Ferrier, Esq., coroner, when the
    following gentlemen were sworn on the Jury:—Samuel Palmer, Esq.,
    (foreman), and Messrs. John Norman, John Orfeur, John Fenn, G. B.
    Palmer, William Smith, William Spillings, Charles Barber, Charles
    Woolverton, Joseph Davy, James Emms, William Haylett, Mark Blowers,
    J. E. Laws, John Stagg, E. Garrod, Thomas Davy, and James Pratt, and
    after hearing evidence as to the identification of the bodies of the
    drowned was adjourned _sine die_.  The following list of the victims
    is given:—

No.                                                               AGE.
1.         Adams, Robert, Rainbow Corner                             7
2.         Augur, Caroline, Garden Row                              10
3.         Bussey, Harriett, Ferry Boat Row                         26
4.         Beloe, George John Henry, Fuller’s Hill                   9
5.         Buttifant, Sarah Ann, Row 2                              18
6.         Borking, Emily Hanworth, George Street                    5
7.         Burton, Benjamin Patteson, Row 54                         7
8.         Barber, Christopher, Pudding Gates                       11
9.         Bradberry, Isaac, King Street, Norwich                   20
10.        Beckett, Ann, Priory                                      8
11.        Barker, Leonard, Surrey Street, Norwich (not             22
           yet found)
12.        Buck, James Seaman, Row 17 (not yet found)                4
13.        Balls, Reeder Thurston, Bath Place                       16
14.        Church, James, Rainbow Corner                             7
15.        Crowe, Eliza, Row 6                                      14
16.        Church, Caroline, Horn Row                               16
17.        Conyers, Elizabeth, Row 13                               13
18.        Cole, Jane, Row 65                                       16
19.        Durrant, William, Row 24                                 12
20.        Ditcham, Mary Ann, Row 18                                64
21.        Duffield, Eliza, Rainbow Corner                          10
22.        Dye, Charles, Moat                                        2
23.        Dye, Benjamin, Rainbow Corner                             9
24.        Edwards, Maria, Garden Row                               12
25.        Ebbage, David, Row 17                                     9
26.        Field, Hannah, Row 14                                    12
27.        Fulcher, James, Row 34                                   14
28.        Fulcher Elizabeth, St. John’s Head Row                   16
29.        Funnell, John, Wortwell (not yet found)                  19
30.        Fox, John Horace, Butcher’s Row                          19
31.        Field, Susannah, Say’s Corner Row                         7
32.        Gilbert, Sarah, Row 14                                   12
33.        Gotts, Alice, Conge                                      52
34.        Gotts, Alice, jun.                                        9
35.        Grimmer, William, Moat                                    8
36.        Hendle, William, Ferry Boat Row                          10
37.        Hunn, Sarah, Row 3                                       13
38.        Hunnibal, Elizabeth Jane, Row 110                        12
39.        Hatch, Elizabeth, East Hill                              11
40.        Johnson, Elizabeth, Row 23                                8
41.        Johnson, Sarah Ann, Row 23                               16
42.        Johnson, Thomas (or Robert), Row 1                        8
43.        Jenkerson, Mary Ann, Row 1                               10
44.        Juniper, Maud, at Workhouse                               9
45.        King, Mary Ann, Apollo Walk                              11
46.        Lucas, Frederick, Row 21                                 62
47.        Lake, Mary Ann, George and Dragon Row                     2
48.        Lyons, William, Row 1                                     6
49.        Little, Harriet Mary, Market                             13
50.        Livingstone, Joseph, King Street                          6
51.        Livingstone, Matilda, King Street                         7
52.        May, Clara, Row 6                                        20
53.        Mears, Susan, Ferry Boat Row                              8
54.        Manship, Elizabeth, Rainbow Corner                       28
55.        Morgan, Elizabeth, Row 1                                 62
56.        Maze, Robert, Charlotte Street                           26
57.        Powley, Elizabeth, Row 2                                 21
58.        Powley, Richard, Row 3                                    4
59.        Parker, Charlotte, Row 13                                 8
60.        Powley, Amelia, White Lion Opening                       10
61.        Richardson, Phœbe, Row 99                                17
62.        Roberts, Lydia, Pudding Gates                            12
63.        Roberts, Mary Ann, Pudding Gates                         19
64.        Read, Elizabeth, Rainbow Corner                           5
65.        Scotten, Ann Maria, Row 3                                20
66.        Stolworthy, Maria, King’s Arms Yard                      14
67.        Tann, Harriett, George and Dragon Row                    15
68.        Tennant, John, Railway Walk                              11
69.        Tennant, William, ditto                                  10
70.        Thorpe, Heppy, Row 2                                     12
71.        Trory, William Townshend, George Street                  12
72.        Thompson, Mary Ann, British Lion Alley                   15
73.        Utting, Louise, Row 33 (not yet found)                    7
74.        Utting, Sarah, Gaol Paved Row                            18
75.        Utting, Caroline, Row 33                                  9
76.        Vincent, Maria, Apollo Walk                              19
77.        Vincent, Richard, missing                                 —
78.        Watts, William Walter, Coble’s Buildings,                 —
           Pudding Lane (not yet found)
79.        Young, Emily, Fuller’s Hill                               6
80.        Yallop, Martha, George Street                            20

The following is the list of persons who were rescued, as far as
ascertained:—

Sarah Ann Thorpe, aged 13, who continues very ill.

Mary Ann Arnold, with child in her arms.

Mrs. Thomas Money, reported to be in great danger.

Rebecca Page.

Mary Church, was taken out near the lime kiln.

Hannah Eliza Lake, an infant.

Widow Edwards, reported to be in a dangerous state.

Martha Field, aged 7 years.

Mr. Frederick Nathaniel Palmer, surgeon.

Mr. William Jackson.

Eliza, daughter of Mr. James Borking, dyer, aged 12, whose sister was
drowned.  She got hold of a man’s leg and he pulled her out.

Martha Field, a young woman, who came into Court, but had her head tied
up and seemed much bruised.

Elizabeth Cuddon, a young woman from Ipswich.

Mary Utting, mother of Caroline Utting.

Ann Bowles, aged 11 years.

Mrs. David Little and one child, another being drowned.

Mrs. Livingstone and one child, two having been drowned.

Mrs. Louisa Beloe and one child, another child drowned.

Mrs. Susan Money and one child.

Elizabeth Rowland, aged 16, said that she and her four brothers were on
the Bridge but a minute or two before, but having been cautioned by her
mother not to take the children on the Bridge for fear they should come
to any harm, and being fearful lest from the crowd they might be pushed
into the water, she left, and thus providently escaped.

Susan Knights stated that she was on the West end of the Bridge with
three children, all of whom were happily saved.

Maria Smith went down twice, when she caught hold of a boat and was taken
into a wherry.

Elizabeth Bowles was on the end of the Bridge, but happily escaped.

Grace Duffell, mother of Elizabeth Duffell.

Elizabeth Browne.—She said there was plenty of time for all to have
escaped after they heard the chain break, had they been aware of the
danger.

A little girl, sister of Maria Stolworthy.

Betsy Wright left the Bridge a minute or two before it fell.

Alfred Norman on hearing a cracking noise ran off on the West side of the
Bridge, when he saw the Bridge fall.

Eleanor Eliza Allman says, a man called out that the Bridge would fall,
and she ran off; she said “In about five minutes after the Bridge fell.”

Robert Whitlock left the Bridge to look for his brother, and the Bridge
fell before he returned.

A little boy named Jay, son of Mr. Jay, baker, White Lion Gates, said
that when he was under the water, the people looked as if they were
hugging each other.  He could see them quite perfectly.

One man fell across a piece of iron with his head just above water; he
reached to two girls who were struggling for life, and a third caught
hold of his collar.  All four were saved.

A young man named Simmons, (whose leg was also fractured in extricating
them from the bended iron of the Bridge with a crowbar).

Robert Marshall, aged 16, escaped with a scalp wound.

Sarah Linder, aged 12, Bow 132, was also rescued with a wounded scalp.

Martha Ann Stolworthy, aged 7 years.

Mr. John Lake’s servant and one child saved.

A brother of B. P. Burton’s.

A young woman named Cook, living in Bow 65.

Harriett Hunnibal, Row 110.

Caroline Roberts was standing quite at the foot of the Bridge, and
escaped without going into the water.

John Watts, aged 16, and three brothers were saved.

Tresor Steward, aged 12, Priory.

Hannah Watering, aged 8, Priory.

It was noted that the handbill issued by Nelson, the Clown, was prefaced
by this extraordinary motto, “Is it to be a benefit, ‘or not?’ that is
the question.”  And in another part of it, it is stated, “Mr. Wm. Cooke
will appear in a dying scene’”

May 17th.—In reply to a memorial from the Town Council, the Government
had directed Mr. Jas. Walker, C.I., to attend at Yarmouth and examine the
wreck of the Suspension Bridge.

A meeting of the Beachmen’s Relief Fund had been held, Wm. H. Palmer,
Esq., in the chair, when the following account was presented:—

                                              £         s.       d.
Annuities to widows                              438        0        0
Weekly allowances to children                    434        4        0
Gratuities to widows of Warner,                   50        0        0
Poyntz, and S. George
Star Company for loss of yawl                    212        0        0
Survivors for loss of clothes, &c.                60        0        0
                                              £1,194        4        0

Leaving a balance of about £600 in hand, and it was determined on the
motion of the Rev. H. Mackenzie, seconded by Geo. Danby Palmer, Esq.,
that the fund should be called, “The Great Yarmouth Royal Life Fund.”

Mr. Marsh had attended the _levée_.

May 24th.—The Rev. H. Mackenzie had proposed the restoration of S.
Nicholas’ Church, which he estimated would cost £5,000.

The “Bridge Jury” had met again, and, after hearing evidence, arrived at
the following verdict in one case which governed the rest:—“That deceased
came to her death by the falling of the Suspension Bridge across the
river Bure, in this Borough, on the 2nd May, 1845; and that the falling
of the bridge was attributable immediately to a defect in the joint or
welding of the bar that first gave way, and to the quality of part of the
iron, the workmanship being inferior to the requirements of the original
contract, which had provided that such should be of the first quality.”

May 31st.—A temporary bridge had been opened across the Bure.

The Committee on the Norfolk and Suffolk Railway lines had met.  The
“Diss, Beccles and Yarmouth” promoters had abandoned that portion of
their line which connected Lowestoft with Yarmouth, and had agreed to go
to Reedham and abandon Yarmouth.  The Lowestoft line had passed through
committee.

The Yarmouth and Norwich line was thrown out as regarded the bridge and
tramway, so that no second bridge would be built that year.

June 7th.—The Royal Hospital on the South Denes was being converted into
a Naval Lunatic Asylum.

June 14th.—Three of the houses on Brandon Terrace were nearly ready for
occupation.

An arrangement had been come to between the Directors of the Norwich and
Yarmouth Railway and Mr. Cory as to the bridge toll question and the
Company were to erect a free bridge over the river, but it was still
doubtful on which side of the stream the station would be erected.

June 21st.—The price agreed to be paid by the Company for this right,
with the adjacent land required by them and Paget’s brewery was stated by
the _Bury Post_ to be £26,000.

Many influential traders were moving to get the terminus fixed at
Southtown near the bridge foot.

A new Roman Catholic Chapel was projected on a site near Paget’s brewery
(North Quay.)

June 28th.—The “Vauxhall Gardens” had passed from Mr. Symonds to Mr.
Franklin, and a magnificent saloon upwards of 60 feet erected there.

July 5th.—The Church trustees had determined to spend £1,250 on repairs
of the fabric of S. Nicholas’ Church.

Two tenders had been sent in for the Haven bridge, one by Mr. Peto
exceeding £32,000, and the other by Mr. Simpson something under £20,000.

July 12th.—Fifty persons had taken a trip to Holland in the steamer
“Cambridge” of Hull.

Sunday night had been one of incessant thunder and lightning.

July 19th.—The Regatta was advertised under the patronage of “The Earl of
Stradbroke, Sir Thomas Gooch, Bart., the M.P’s. for Great Yarmouth, and
other noblemen and gentlemen.  Stewards: Capt. A. W. Jerningham, R.N.,
and Capt. J. H. Windham, R.N.”

Mr. W. S. Simpson’s tender of £19,070 for the erection of the Haven
Bridge had been accepted by the Commissioners, but he not having complied
with their terms, the matter had been ordered to be “postponed for the
present.”

July 26th.—The Borough Members (Messrs. Rumbold and Wilshere) had
attended an Anti-Corn Law League meeting at the Corn Hall.

The Mayor had entertained a large party (forty to fifty gentlemen) on
board his barge at the Burgh Water Frolic, this the reporter appears to
have considered of more importance than the sailing matches, as regards
which he makes the faintest allusion.

Aug. 12th.—The Regatta had been a great success, 5,000 persons coming
from Norwich alone.  The following yachts competed:—“Belvidere” (Lord A.
Paget), “Blue Bell” (Mr. Hodges), “Prima Donna” (Mr. Tatham), and
“Phantom” (Mr. Wilkinson).  The “Blue Bell” won, the “Belvidere” which
was leading at the time, having got on Scroby, for which a salvage claim
of £75 was made by the beachmen.  (They were ultimately awarded £27 for
their services.)

A dinner was given during the day to the beachmen in a tent on the Beach,
and the lifeboats tested.

At the Races the following stakes were rim for on the first day:—The Gold
Cup Stakes by subscribers of £10 each; a Plate of £50, given by the
Members; Vauxhall Hunters’ Cup Stakes of £30; and on the 2nd day, The
Town and County Gentlemen’s Plate of £50; the Railway Stakes of £30; and
the Tally Ho Stakes of £1 each with £10 added.  A number of
“light-fingered” gentry were present.

The Race dinner had been held at the “Victoria” Hotel, when the Mayor
presided; and a Ball at the Town Hall, when the following ladies and
gentlemen were present:—The Mayor and Mrs. W. H. Palmer, C. E. Rumbold,
Esq., M.P., W. Wilshere, Esq., M.P., Sir Henry and Lady Robinson, H. N.
Burroughes, Esq., S. C. Marsh, Esq. and Mrs. Marsh, Mrs. and the Miss
Musketts, Mr. Recorder Jermy, Mrs. Jermy, Mr. Penrice, Mrs. and Miss
Onslow, Mrs. and Miss Pooley, Mr. and Mrs. Wythe, Mr. and Mrs. Charles
Palmer, Mr. and Mrs. Edmund Preston and the Miss Prestons, Mr., Mrs. and
Miss Bateman, Mr. and Miss Steward, Mr. Henry Steward, Mrs. and the Miss
Stewards, Captain, Mrs. and the Miss Pearson, Mrs. and the Miss
Chevalliers, Mr. Clement Chevallier, Mr. Dowson, Mr. George Tompson, Mr.
and Mrs. E. H. L. Preston, Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Tompson, Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Preston, Mr. B. Caldecott, Mr. W. Worship, Mrs. and Miss Burton,
Miss Paget, Mr. Fisher, Mr. W. C. Reynolds, &c.  Clapp’s celebrated
military band attended, and the whole went off exceedingly well, the
company not separating till half-past three o’clock.

It was computed that not less than 2,000 persons attended the Vauxhall
Gardens, among whom were the members for the Borough.

Aug. 9th.—A hurricane had visited the town, but beyond dismasting two
vessels and blowing a girl into a pool of water does not appear to have
caused much mischief.

The only mails then brought to Yarmouth by rail were those from London
and Norwich.

The “Repository” sale at the Bath Room on the Regatta day had realized
£82.

Mr. C. D. Arnott had had conferred on him the degree of M.D. by the
Edinburgh University.

Aug. 16th.—A Poor’s rate of 1s. 4d. in the £ had been made.

The Railway Company was forwarding its own goods by water as the cheaper
process.

Aug. 23rd.—Messrs. Youell’s nurseries were very attractive, they had
4,000 carnations and 180 fuchsias in bloom.

Complaints had been made that “for two Sundays past” great quantities of
herring had been despatched to London by rail.

Six hundred sail of colliers and merchant vessels which had been
wind-bound here had proceeded to sea.

Aug. 30th.—The abolition of the coal dues, and the question of the better
delivery of the mails were being agitated.

Mrs. Spooner (Dr. Bateman’s sister) had met with a fatal accident by
falling downstairs.

Sept. 6th.—£3,600 had been subscribed for the S. Nicholas’ Church
restoration.

Sept. 13th.—Mr. C. S. D. Steward had been elected an Alderman against his
express wish, and only took the oath upon being threatened with a fine.

The allotment of Waveney Valley shares was to take place.  The
applications exceeded 80,000.

Oct. 11th.—S. Palmer, Esq., had been requested to accept the office of
Mayor, as it was considered desirable to have “a gentleman of sufficient
influence and leisure to watch and protect the interests of this
important port during the progress through Parliament of the several
railway schemes.”

The Freemasons meeting at the “Star Tavern” (Lodge 313) had been honoured
by the presence of Lord Suffield, Provincial Grand Master.

Oct. 25th.—The Hon. Col. George Anson had been on a visit to S. Palmer,
Esq., leaving to visit Lord Stradbroke, with the object of making
arrangements as to the Waveney Valley Line.  Whilst in Yarmouth the Hon.
Colonel accepted the office of Steward of the Races next year.

Nov. 1st.—6,600,000 herrings had been landed in one day.  A fishmonger
wanting to buy a turbot was asked 24s. for one on the Beach, which being
refused, these fish were forwarded to London, when they fetched 55s.
each.

Nov. 8th.—At the Municipal Election, Henry Danby Palmer, Esq., had been
returned for the North Ward, vice C. May; Mr. James Lawn for the Market
Ward, vice S. Miller, jun. (who had been selected for St. Andrew’s Ward,
vice A. Thrower); and Frederick Palmer, Esq., for Regent Ward, vice C.
Davie, “whose sudden resignation had caused much astonishment.”  There
was no contest and the other Councillors were re-elected.

Nov. 15th.—The Mayor (S. Palmer, Esq.) had entertained about 50 members
of the Council and others at the “Star Tavern.”  The following toasts
were given:—The Queen, H.R.H. Prince Albert, The Prince of Wales, The
Queen Dowager, The Army and Navy, The Lord High Steward, The Mayor,
George Danby Palmer, Esq., Mr. Burroughs, Mr. Gourlay, Mr. R. Hammond,
The Magistrates, The Mayoress, and the Press.

Nov. 29th.—A report had been circulated that Yarham had confessed that he
was the murderer of Mrs. Chandler.

It was stated that Corton Sand had disappeared and there were 20 feet of
water, when recently there had been only from 2 to 8 feet.

Dec. 6th.—It was then ascertained that it was the North part of the
Holme, and not the Corton Sand, which had been washed away.

There was a pear tree growing on the wall of Messrs. Tolver and Preston’s
Office, on which was a branch of 5 blossoms fully expanded.

Dec. 13th.—The fishing had been a very good one.  Many of the boats had
averaged 30 lasts, and one firm employing 8 boats had averaged 41 lasts a
boat.

Dec. 20th.—There had been a high tide, during which the landlord of the
“Trinity Arms” had been serving customers (who rowed there in boats) out
of the window.



1846.


Jan. 3rd.—The friends of total abstinence had held their ninth
anniversary and festival at the Town-hall on 26th December.

Yarham had been privately examined on the charge of murdering Mrs.
Chandler, and remanded to the 5th inst.

Jan. 10th.—Yarham had been further examined privately and a further
remand granted.

Jan. 17th.—Yarham had been committed for trial on the capital charge by
S. Palmer, W. H. Palmer, and W. Johnson, Esqs.

Feb. 7th—Disputes had arisen with regard to the rating of houses on the
Denes.

The Borough Lands Committee had resolved to allow the enclosure of the
land in front of the Workhouse by the Guardians.

The question of supplying the town with water by Water Works was being
mooted.

Feb. 14th.—Mr. W. Beeching had launched the “Joseph and Mary.”

Feb. 21st.—The “Speedy” (Lieut. G. Spray) had arrived to receive
Volunteers.

Feb. 28th.—Mr. Cufaude Davie had called the Mayor’s attention to the
formation of a proper fire brigade for the town.

The Rev. W. H. Clarke had been presented with a testimonial, consisting
of a purse of £205.

March 14th.—The fishmerchants had determined to take steps to improve and
extend the Jetty.

The Rev. Bowyer Vaux had delivered a lecture on “Alfred the Great” at the
Corn Exchange.

Coals were being retailed at 8d. a cwt. on the Quay.

March 21st.—Mr. Lacon had brought before the Railway Commissioners the
question of the site of the proposed terminus, which Mr. G. D. Palmer
suggested should be opposite Fuller’s Hill, and a meeting was proposed to
be called on the subject.

March 28th.—The question of tramways on the Quay was under consideration.

April 11th.—The price of gas had been reduced from 8s. to 6s. 8d. per
1000 cubic feet.

Yarham had been tried at the Assizes and convicted for the murder of Mrs.
Chandler; the counsel engaged being Mr. Palmer and Mr. O’Malley, for the
prosecution, and Mr. Dasent for the prisoner.

April 18th.—Messrs. C. Davie and D. A. Gourlay had been elected
churchwardens by the Vestry.

Yarham had been executed at Norwich.

April 15th.—A meeting had been held as to the railroad and tramways, the
Mayor (S. Palmer, Esq.) in the chair.  Mr. G. D. Palmer (who thought they
wanted better railway accommodation and a shorter and quicker line to
London), Mr. J. E. Lacon (who advocated a railway station on the Denes),
and others, took part in the proceedings, which eventuated in a
resolution condemning the proposed Denes site for the station.

The Town Council had proposed to present the Town-Clerk (S. Tolver, Esq.)
with his portrait, which offer that gentleman declined to accept.

May 16th.—Mrs. Dick and her daughter, who gave evidence against Yarham
had been subjected to great annoyances, and her husband, who was a
sergeant in the Army, was consequently about to be removed from Yarmouth.

June 6th.—A meeting had been held in favour of the Waveney Valley Railway
line.

Tenders had been invited for the restoration work at St. Nicholas’
Church.

June 13th.—The “Norfolk,” steamer, had made her first trip to London.

Owing to the fine weather a large number of visitors were arriving.

June 27th.—A Church Restoration meeting had been held, when the “Church
Trustees” refused to find £1,250 towards the work as promised, although a
like sum had been raised by subscription.

The annual distribution of prizes had been made by the Rev. H. Mackenzie
at the Proprietary school.

July 17th.—The Mayor had refused to allow the use of the Town Hall for
the Regatta Ball.

July 25th.—The Regatta had been held on the 21st inst., when 100 ladies
and gentlemen attended the Ball at the Corn Hall.  The town was very full
and £1 1s. a night was given for beds.  A steamer from Lynn had landed a
large number of passengers at the Jetty.

The Regatta cups had been supplied by Mr. Simpson, Mr. Last, and Mr.
Hunt.

Aug. 22nd.—Annoyance had been caused by bathing from the Beach between
the Victoria Hotel and Nelson’s Monument.

The Theatre was “doing well”; on Monday, 100 persons had been turned away
from its doors.

Sept. 12th.—The Races had been held when immense crowds of people had
flocked into the town, the “Orwell,” steamer, bringing 200 from Ipswich,
and the first train from Norwich 1,500, and “by the time the trumpet was
sounded for the first race there could not have been less than 10,000
people on the Race ground.”  The Race ordinary was at the “Angel,” and
the Race Ball at the Town Hall, where 170 persons were present, including
the Earl of Stradbroke, Mr. W. Wiltshere, M.P., Sir E. H. K. and Lady
Lacon, the Mayor and Mrs. Palmer, Mr. and Mrs. Wythe, Mr. Percival and
family, Mrs. and Miss Ives, Mr. and Mrs. J. Jermy, junr., Mrs. and Miss
Burton, Mr. and Mrs. W. H. Palmer, Dr. G. Bateman, M.D. and family, Mrs.
and Miss Chevalier, Mr. and Mrs. E. H. L. Preston, Mr. A. Steward and
family, Capt. Pearson, R.N., and family, the Misses Love, the Misses
Penrice, Mrs. and Misses Muskett, Mr. G. Tompson, Mr. W. Worship, Mr. I.
Preston, jun., and Mr. C. J. Palmer.  Dancing was kept up till three
o’clock in the morning with great spirit.

The Tradesmen’s Ball at Noverre’s room was thinly attended.

Sept. 19th.—The “Norfolk” and “Enterprise,” steamers, had arrived with
cargoes from Rotterdam.

Herring was selling at from £35 to £40 per last.

There was a great demand for vessels for the export of grain.

Sept. 26th.—“Sunday had been ‘Dutch Sunday,’ so called from the
circumstance of its being the first Sunday in the home fishing when many
Dutch Schuytz visit our coast.”

Oct. 3rd.—The Rev. H. N. Burrows had left the Proprietary School, on
which occasion he had been presented with a handsome silver waiter.

A Committee had been appointed to carry out the building of S. Peter’s
Schools.

Several locusts had been captured at Youell’s nursery ground and at
Ormesby.

Oct. 17th.—About 70 lunatics had arrived at the Naval Asylum (late
Hospital) on the South Denes.

The “Enterprise” had encountered bad weather, and had to throw half of
her cargo of sheep and bullocks overboard.

Nov. 7th.—One of Mr. Shuckford’s boats had brought in an enormously large
quantity of herrings.

The following notice of the Municipal Election appears:—

    “At the Ward meeting of the constituency of St. George’s Ward, on
    Friday night, not one of the Councillors attended, and the result was
    that Mr. George Playford being called to the chair, a resolution was
    come to, to return Messrs. Ferrier and Benjamin Jay _if they could_.
    An effort was made, a poll was demanded, even the partizans of the
    Blue candidates themselves forgot, for once, the distinction of
    party.  Our friends at least will have the pleasure of knowing that
    if they have two opponents, they, at least have two honourable
    gentlemen, whose intimate acquaintance with business will qualify
    them for the office.”

On Monday evening last a supper was given by the two re-elected
Councillors of the Regent Ward, Samuel Palmer, Esq. and J. D. Chapman,
Esq., to the ratepayers in the above Ward, at the “Crown and Anchor”
tavern.  The chair was taken by B. Fenn, Esq.  The cloth having been
removed, the healths of “Her Majesty the Queen,” “Prince Albert and the
Royal Family,” “The Members for the Borough,” “The re-elected
Councillors,” &c., were given.  Several songs were sung during the
evening, and appropriate speeches were delivered by several gentlemen
present, and the parties retired at a late hour highly pleased with the
evening’s entertainment.  Great credit is due to the hostess (Mrs. Reeve)
for so excellent a collation which was served up in the best style.

Nov. 14th.—Mr. W. N. Burroughs had been elected Mayor, and a dinner given
at the Star to celebrate the event.

Nov. 21st.—The Great Yarmouth and Lowestoft Steam Packet Company was
providing suitable vessels for the station.

F. R. Reynolds, Esq. had been appointed Receiver of Admiralty Droits for
Yarmouth.

Nov. 28th.—And Samuel Palmer, Esq. to the like office for the Norfolk
coast.

It was stated that the New Catholic Church would be 100 feet in length,
50 feet wide, and have a steeple 70 feet in height.

Dec. 5th.—It had been resolved to place gas lamps on the South Market
Road.

Dec. 12th.—Spencer T. Smyth, Esq., had lectured at the Young Men’s
Institute on “Physiological Anatomy.”

£2,256, 12s. 4d. had been raised for S. Nicholas’ Church restoration.

Dec. 19th—An ancient footpath, nearly 6 feet below the present surface of
the street leading from the Quay to Regent Street, had been discovered.

Dec. 26th.—Upwards of £200 had been subscribed for the Ragged School on
the Caister Road.

The Chancel of S. Nicholas’ Church was being cleared for Divine Service;
the Sunday School service and teaching being then conducted in the Guild
Hall and North aisle of the Church.

About 80 electors of St. George’s Ward had given a dinner to Messrs
Ferrier and Jay “to commemorate their recent triumph” at the Masonic
Hall.  Among the guests were W. S. Ferrier, R. Ferrier, jun., C. C.
Aldred, J. C. Smith.  Esqs., and Messrs. J. T. Bracey, J. G. Plummer, J.
Playford, B. Miller, C. Woolverton, Bradbeer, W. Nolloth, P. Coble, W.
Green, &c., &c., Mr. G. S. Shingles occupying the chair.



1847.


Jan. 2nd.—The Mayor had purchased a seventy stone ox, and distributed the
meat from it to the poor.

Jan. 9th.—Chas. J. Palmer, Esq., had been appointed Receiver of Admiralty
Droits in the place of F. R. Reynolds, Esq., deceased.

Jan. 16th.—A meeting had been held to consider the distress in Ireland,
and a subscription list opened for the purpose of affording relief.

A meeting had been held to consider and forward, if possible, the
building of a new bridge over the river.

The frost in Holland had caused the steamers to cease running between
that country and Yarmouth.

Jan. 23rd.—A densely crowded Railway meeting had been held at the Town
Hall.

Charles John Palmer, Esq., had been appointed Clerk to the Southtown
Turnpike Trust, in the place of F. R. Reynolds, Esq., deceased.

Jan. 30th.—There had been heavy gales, at one time approaching a
“complete hurricane.”

Feb. 6th.—Seven persons had recently died in the Workhouse, whose joint
ages amounted to 562 years.

A meeting had been held to protest against the “light dues” on shipping.

Feb. 13th.—There had been a heavy fall of snow accompanied by frost, and
the traffic with Rotterdam was again interrupted.

The Chancel of S. Nicholas’ Church was already occupied for Divine
service.

Feb. 27th.—The Rev. W. Stokes had delivered a lecture upon the subject
that “All war is inconsistent with the Christian religion, and the best
interests of nations.”

March 6th.—James Paget, Esq., had been elected one of the Assistant
Surgeons of St. Bartholemew’s Hospital, London.

There was at this time a uniform depth of nine feet of water on the bar
at low water.

Joseph Turner, of Row 14, having applied to the Guardians for relief, his
house had been searched by the Relieving-Officer, when £40 was found in
it, and he and his sister appeared also to have £180 to their credit on a
banking account.

March 13th.—Mrs. Gooderham had bequeathed £500 to be invested for the
benefit of the New Meeting House.

A Commission of inquiry had been opened on the state of mind of Philip
Blundell Nesbitt, Esq., a gentleman aged 35, and entitled to property
valued at £100,000, when the Jury found “that Mr. Nesbitt had been of
unsound mind since the 21st October, 1813, without any lucid intervals.”

March 20th.—There was only one prisoner for trial at the Sessions, an old
man charged with stealing a cask of pickled herring, for which he was
sentenced to one month’s imprisonment.

Mr. C. J. Palmer had addressed a letter to the local press on the subject
of the discoveries made during the restoration of S. Nicholas’ Church.

Mr. Hilling, engineer, had prepared a scheme for draining the town.

March 27th.—The Dissenters were agitating against the proposals of the
Committee of the Council on education.

A solemn fast had been observed.

April 3rd.—Miss Lettis had been presented with a silver salver by the
poorer members of the Unitarian Congregation.

The “Media” had been launched from Mr. Henry Fellows’ yard.

March 10th.—The burial ground at the east-end of the Churchyard had been
consecrated by the Lord Bishop of Norwich.

J. T. Birch, Esq., the newly-appointed Judge, had held the first County
Court “simply for the appointment of officers”; causes were to be heard
on the 20th inst.

The right of appointing overseers had been claimed by Mr. E. H. L.
Preston on behalf of the Justices generally, the Mayor also claiming the
right personally to appoint them as theretofore.

The Church Trustees having liquidated, the church debt had become
“extinct.”

Both the Churchwardens had been re-elected by the Vestry, and a Church
rate agreed to.

April 17th.—A Shipowner’s Protection Society had been formed, the
necessary funds to be raised by a subscription of 7d. per ton register.

The weather at the Fair had been cold and the business transacted of a
“limited amount.”

April 24th.—The new Terrace on the North Beach was to be commenced
immediately by Mr. C. Cory.  It was described as being “at the beach end
of Regent Road on the late site of Pilch’s Mill and to extend to Page’s
and Ansell’s Buildings.”  Mr. Scholes was the architect.

Judge Birch had held his first Court for trials at the Tolhouse Hall,
there were only three cases heard—“Lettis _v._ Dye,” “Vale _v._ Fenn,”
and “Nolloth _v._ Rooke,” all for the recovery of small debts.

May 1st.—The Bishop of Norwich had confirmed 383 young people, (of whom
270 belonged to Yarmouth) at S. Nicholas’ Church.

It was stated at the Council that while the prisoners cost 4s. 6½d., the
paupers only cost 2s. 9d. per head.

May 8th.—The first stone of a new Jews’ Synagogue had been laid by Mr. D.
L. Cohen.

May 15th.—Mr. Samuel Wm. Aldred had received the first prize for
midwifery at St. Bartholomew’s Hospital.

The annual general meeting of the Victoria Building Company had been
held, B. Dowson, Esq., in the chair, when the Hon. W. R. Rous, Sir E.
Travers, R.N., J. Garnham, W. Baynes, T. F. Steward, J. C. Smith, H. V.
Worship, R. Steward, A. Woods, C. J. Palmer, W. Worship and W. C.
Reynolds, Esq., were present, and dividends of 2s. 6d. per share upon the
original shares, and £5 per cent. upon the new shares were recommended.

The poor’s rate was 1s. 10d. in the £ for the current quarter, being
nearly double the former average.

May 22nd.—Eighty cases had been entered in the County Court.

June 5th.—Mr. Wilshere had determined to retire from the representation,
and as Mr. Rumbold was not likely to be again supported by the
Dissenters, it was thought possible that Col. Anson would be asked to
contest the Borough.

The figures of the boy and girl had been placed in front of the Charity
School, they had previously been in S. Nicholas’ Church.

Messrs. C. C. Aldred and F. Palmer had complained to the Justices of the
dirty state of the fish market.

There had been a plague of mice in the Fleggs, 400 combs of wheat had
been destroyed in one stack by them, and when the corn was threshed the
machine literally ran with their blood.

June 12th.—A rule had been granted for a writ of certiorari to remove the
appointment of Overseers into the Queen’s Bench.

Col. Anson had declined to stand for the Borough.  It was said that Mr.
Rumbold had spent £40,000 in his contests, and that “with the blue party
it seemed Yarmouth is all too _dear_ a place to contest.”

Samuel Palmer, Esq., S. Cobb, Esq., and Mr. D. A. Gourlay had gone to
town to find a candidate.

“Marsh _v._ Travers.—In compliance with Mr. Chancellor Evans’ order on
Saturday last, the defendant (Dame Anne Palmer Travers) duly performed
retraction in the house of the Minister at Yarmouth.”

The foundation of Britannia Terrace was progressing slowly.

June 19th.—Mr. Wynn Ellis had been suggested as a successor to Mr.
Wilshere in the “Blue” interest, while the “Reds” had held a meeting at
the Fish Stall House (Mr. Thomas Paul in the chair.)

Mr. D. A. Gourlay was spoken of as Mayor for the ensuing year.

Mr. C. J. Palmer had resolved to print Manship’s Yarmouth, the M.S. of
which was in his possession.

A Caister yawl had upset near Caister Rails, and three men, Church, Key,
and Howes, drowned.

A meeting of electors had been convened to meet the deputation which had
been in London searching for a Candidate, when nearly an hour having
elapsed without George Danby Palmer, Esq., putting in an appearance as
chairman, Mr. W. Johnson was called on to preside; Mr. Rumbold was
accepted as a candidate, and Mr. Wynn Ellis requested to meet the
electors.

June. 26th.—“A portion of the electors” had held a meeting at the “Crown
and Anchor” when Mr. Lawn presided, and it was alleged that Mr. Goldsmid
had been requested to come forward and that an attempt had been made “to
sell the Borough.”

The Dissenters also had held a meeting at which Mr. I. W. Shelly took the
chair.

“At the Quarter Sessions, the Recorder sat without his wig, that
appendage having been stolen.”

A batch of informations had been laid against “respectable bakers” for
selling short weight bread; they were fined 11s. each and cautioned.

July 3rd.—Upwards of 40 fish-owners had signed a notice stating their
desire to suppress smuggling.

Another meeting of electors had been held at the “Star,” and the
following Committee appointed to consider the position:—Messrs. J.
Brightwen, B. Dowson, J. W. Shelly, R. Hammond, Thomas Clowes, George
Danby Palmer, H. V. Worship, S. Cobb, C. Davie, Thomas Hammond, D. A.
Gourlay, J. Bayly, J. Jackson, J. Fish, T. Lettis, jun., W. Johnson, and
J. Lawn.

The Paving Commissioners had given leave to put down posts to stop the
carriage traffic past the Tolhouse during the sittings of the Council and
the County Court.

The subscriptions to the Hospital “continued to decline” and then
amounted to only £315 16s. per annum.

July 10th.—Gorleston Cliff had been strongly recommended “by the
Faculty,” and among the recent arrivals there, were the Dowager Lady
Suffield and Mrs. Thurlow and family.

Mr. Wynn Ellis had declined to visit the Borough, and R. J. Bagshaw,
Esq., had been requested by the Committee to come before the electors.
Another meeting had been held at the “Star” (Mr. S. Cobb in the chair)
when the charge of “selling the Borough” was made against Mr. Samuel
Palmer by Mr. Cufaude; this was repudiated by that gentleman, and after a
warm discussion, during which Mr. B. Dowson stated “he thought there was
a good deal of treachery going about the town,” it was ultimately decided
“to call a meeting of all electors, and a handbill had been issued
convening such meeting on the Hall Plain for Thursday evening.”

July 17th.—Mr. Bagshaw had arrived in Yarmouth and held a meeting at the
“Star” Hotel, which was “not so fully attended as evening meetings
usually were.”  Among those present were Messrs S. Cobb, W. Johnson, B.
Dowson, W. Worship, J. W. Shelly, R. Hammond, T. Hammond, D. A. Gourlay,
S. Rice, Thompson, Worship and S. Palmer, when a resolution was carried,
inviting Mr. Bagshaw to become a candidate for the Borough.

Another meeting had also been held at the same place, present—Sir George
Parker, B. Dowson, W. Briggs, William Hurry Palmer, W. Worship, P.
Pullyn, C. Pearson, J. W. Shelly, and others, when a resolution was
carried by 19 to 6 requesting Mr. Rumbold to retire from the contest.

Mr. Goldsmid had held a public meeting at the Masonic Hall, Mr. M.
Butcher in the chair, when a resolution was passed pledging the meeting
to support that gentleman at the ensuing contest.

The Regatta had been held, when the Town Plate, value £50, was won by the
“Alarm,” 18 tons.  G. Cooke, Esq., R.T.Y.C., and the Purse of £20 for
yawls, by the “Morning Star,” Star Company.

The Regatta Ball was attended by about “40 or 50 couples,” amongst whom
were the Dowager Lady Suffield, Lady Durrant, R. J. Bagshaw, Esq., and
Mrs. Bagshaw, Miss Burton, R. Marsham, Esq., jun., B. Caldecott, Esq.,
Mr. and Mrs. H. Muskett and family, Capt. Pearson, RN., Capt. Ellis,
R.N., Dr. Robinson, I. Preston, Esq., and Miss Preston, Mr. and Mrs. S.
Palmer, Mr. and Mrs. W. H. Palmer, Mr. and Mrs. Walpole, Mrs. and Miss
Burton, Mr. W. and Miss Worship, &c.

July 24th.—About 50 or 60 Nonconformist electors had held a meeting at
the Congregational Schoolroom, when the pledges of Mr. Bagshaw were
considered satisfactory to the meeting.

A public meeting of the friends of Mr. Rumbold had been held at the
Masonic Hall, (William H. Palmer, Esq., in the chair) when a resolution
that Mr. Rumbold was a fit and proper person to represent the Borough was
carried.

Lord Arthur Lennox and O. E. Coope, Esq., had been met by their friends
at the “Greyhound Inn,” Gorleston, and escorted into the town, the
“procession” consisting of one private carriage, followed at a long
distance by flag bearers and about half-a-dozen gentlemen on horseback
preceding a carriage containing the candidates and their friends.  On
arriving at the Market Place at nine o’clock these gentlemen mounted a
balcony, when R. Ferrier, in a few words, amidst tumultuous cheering
introduced Lord A. Lennox; I. Preston, Esq., did the like service for Mr.
Coope, and the candidates having addressed the meeting, which was also
addressed by Messrs. Harvey, Charles Cory, and R. Ferrier, jun.,
dispersed.

Mr. Goldsmid had also addressed the electors at the “King’s Head.”

The Mayor and Corporation had attended the Water Frolic (Mr. Fiddes
acting as Admiral).  Mr. Bagshaw was of the party, but Mr. Goldsmid,
although expected, did not put in an appearance.

The Mayor’s bespeak at the Theatre for the benefit of the Hospital had
raised £25 6s. 6d.

July 31st.—Mr. D. A. Gourlay had been toasted at the Water Frolic by Mr.
S. Palmer, as Mayor elect.

The following was the return of the polling:—

                                   Rumbold.     Goldsmid.      Lennox.       Coope.
At             9  a.m.                    174           175           140          140
  ,,          10       ,,                 334           330           326          323
  ,,          11       ,,                 469           461           502          493
  ,,          12       ,,                 579           561           601          587
  ,,           1  p.m.                    639           617           687          674
  ,,           2       ,,                 672           643           754          737
  ,,           3       ,,                 709           671           788          772
  ,,           4  ,, (close)              729           698           844          813

Aug. 14th.—It was reported that from 200 to 300 freemen had been bribed
to vote for Lord Lennox and Mr. Coope, and it was “confidently
anticipated” that those gentlemen would resign their seats to avoid
exposure.

Aug. 21st.—The races had been held on the 17th and 18th (Stewards: Lord
Suffield, Viscount Anson, The Hon. Capt. Rous, and George Danby Palmer,
Esq.) when Mr. O. E. Coope’s “Bit Nibble” won the Members’ Plate.  Lord
A. Lennox had attended the Race Ordinary and suggested a course of action
under which better entries were likely to be obtained.

Aug. 28th.—Mrs. Coope (mother of the M.P.) had given £50 to the Church
restoration, £50 to the Town Charities, and £10 to the Hospital.

Lodgers had experienced a difficulty in finding accommodation in the
town.

It was anticipated that Britannia-terrace would be completed in three
weeks’ time.

Sept. 4th—The new Synagogue in Row 42 had been consecrated, the Rev. B.
Levy, of Brighton, conducting the service.  Among the list of donors
towards the building fund where the Mayor, Baron Rothschild, M.P., Sir
Moses Montefiore, Sir S. L. Goldsmid, and F. H. Goldsmid, Esq.

Sept. 11th.—The British School had been repaired and re-opened by Mr. D.
Tomkins (from the British and Foreign School Society, City road, London.)

Mr. Goldsmid had had a bespeak at the Theatre which was “very fully
attended,” and he had given subscriptions to most of the local charities.

Sept. 18th.—Complaints were again being made as to Sunday trading.

Mr. Goldsmid’s friends entertained no doubt as to the success of his
petition.  He had entertained twenty gentlemen at the Royal-hotel.

Oct. 2nd.—It was considered likely that Mr. Gourlay would decline the
Mayoralty, and that Dawson Turner, Esq., would accept that office.

Oct. 16th.—Mr. Dixon, of Norwich, had fitted up the tracing of the
easternmost window of St. Nicholas’ Church with stained glass, and the
circular columns which had been removed when the Fishermen’s gallery was
built, were being restored.

Oct. 25th.—The Liberals claimed a gain of 37 at the Revision Court.

On Sunday a very large party of gentlemen and tradesmen had accompanied
the Mayor to Church, it being the day appointed for the National
thanksgiving for the harvest.  Afterwards His Worship entertained them at
the Town Hall, upwards of 400 invitations had been sent out for this
luncheon.

The increase of buildings was proceeding on the Denes very rapidly.

Coals were very scarce.  On the previous Saturday a vessel had arrived
and sold her cargo at 21s. per ton.

Nov. 6th.—A vessel of 400 tons was about to be launched from Mr. Barber’s
dock.

A herring had been caught off Yarmouth, measuring 15¼ inches in length
and weighing above 15 ozs.

The following had been the result of the Municipal election:—

_North Ward_.—The Mayor (W. N. Burroughs) and R. Hammond re-elected.

_Market Ward_.—No return given.

_Regent Ward_.—Samuel Charles Marsh (re-elected) with Dawson Turner (vice
Tomlinson resigned).

          _St. George’s Ward_.
J. C. Smith (Con.)                    112
J. G. Plummer (Con.)                  121
T. Lettis, jun. (Lib.)                103
M. Butcher, jun. (Lib.)                82
             _Nelson Ward_.
George Danby Palmer (Lib.)            186
William Chambers (Lib.)               133
Henry Jay (Con.)                      113
          _St. Andrew’s Ward_.
E. H. L. Preston (Con.)               148
William Hammond (Con.)                141
Samuel Crow (Lib.)                     96
T. Hammond (Lib.)                      91

Messrs. T. Lettis, T. Hammond, and S. Crow, who were old members of that
body, thus losing their seats in the Council.

Nov. 13th.—Mr. D. Turner had resigned his office as Borough Treasurer and
had been re-elected for the Regent Ward.

The “Cordelia” (400 tons) had been launched from Mr. Barber’s yard.

At the Town Council meeting on the 9th, Mr. Geo. Danby Palmer moved and
Mr. R. Hammond seconded, Philip Pullyn, Esq., for Mayor.

And Mr. Ferrier proposed and Mr. E. H. L. Preston seconded, the
re-election of the Mayor (Mr. Burroughs).

The following was the voting on this:—

For Mr. Pullyn—Messrs. Cobb, Pike, Fellows, Barker, R. Hammond, H. D.
Palmer, P. White, Owles, Lawn, D. A. Gourlay, Marsh, Fish, F. Palmer, S.
Palmer, J. D. Chapman, Lettis, G. D. Palmer, Chambers, Symonds, Cannell,
and Clarke.—21.

For Mr. Burroughs—Messrs. Bessey, Worship, C. Miller, Ferrier, Jay,
Plummer, Smith, W. H. Palmer, John Hammond, Rivett, Preston, W. Hammond,
and Rivett.—13.

The retiring Aldermen were Messrs. John Brightwen, C. S. D. Steward, A.
Steward, W. Walpole, C. Pearson, and S. Cobb.  Nine gentlemen, were
nominated to fill their places, and the following was the result of the
voting:—

                          Votes.
For C. Pearson                     24
,, S. Cobb                         27
,, Geo. Bateman                    12
,, C. J. Palmer                    15
„ W. Walpole                       22
,, Edmund R. Palmer                24
,, R. Hammond                      25
„ H. Boulter                       19
,, A. Steward                       1

In the evening about fifty gentlemen dined with the Mayor at the Star.

Nov. 20th.—A new gas holder, which had been “dignified” by being named
after the Queen, had been erected.

Six vessels had taken in cargoes of herring for the Straits.

Dr. C. L. Robinson had delivered a lecture on the Sanitary condition of
Yarmouth, in which he alluded pointedly to the Corporation.  This was
considered extremely uncourteous to the Mayor, who had presided on the
occasion.

Dec. 4th.—Capt. Manby having completed his 82nd year, had made his annual
distribution of bread to 37 poor families.

Dec. 18th.—There had been 150 cases disposed of in the County Court.

A young gentleman had been fined £5 for wrenching off knockers from
houses on the Denes.

Dec. 25th.—The fishowners had formed a society for the prosecution of
thieves, subscription 10s. for each member.



1848.


Jan. 1.—The elder Brethren of the Trinity House had declined to take
Nelson’s Monument into their hands.

The “Earl Grey,” London trader, had been lost.  It was said that 35 years
had elapsed since a similar fate had befallen one of these vessels.

Jan. 8th.—Five vessels had been fitted out for the sole and turbot
fishery in the style of the Barking smacks.

Jan. 15th.—The Mayor had entertained 140 guests at a dinner in the Town
Hall.

The pumps in Regent street had suddenly become dry.

Jan. 22nd.—The second subscription ball had been held at the Town Hall,
120 persons were present, the Stewards being Capt. Ellis, R.N., and
Richard Bell, William H. Palmer, W. Worship, and C. J. Palmer, Esqs.

Jan. 29th.—The “Venus,” belonging to G. D. Palmer, Esq., had been lost
off Elsinore.

Feb. 5th.—A wild duck had been shot just above the Haven Bridge.

Feb. 12th.—The following Committee had been appointed to try the Yarmouth
Petition:—Mr. E. Ellice, Mr. Charles Lushington, Mr. W. H. C. Plowden,
and Mr. H. Stuart, and they had chosen Mr. Ker Seymour their chairman.
Evidence had then been taken and the proceedings adjourned.

Feb. 19th.—The Members had been unseated and the disfranchisement of the
freemen suggested by this Committee.

Mr. Goldsmid had arrived at the “Royal,” but even his own friends were of
opinion that his visit was “inopportune,” owing to the Committee having
recommended the disfranchisement of the freemen.

Feb. 26th.—A requisition was being signed requesting Mr. John E. Lacon to
offer himself as a candidate for the Borough.

March 11th.—An election for a councillor in the Nelson Ward, to fill the
vacancy caused by the death of Mr. W. Chambers had been held as follows:—

Thomas Hammond (Lib.)            152
Robins Purdy (Con.)               52
Majority for Hammond             100

March 25th.—There had been an eclipse of the moon.

Three hundred idle characters had proceeded to the Workhouse and demanded
out-door relief, but dispersed on the appearance of the Mayor and a few
constables.

April 8th.—Mr. W. R. Last had erected an illuminated clock in King Street
which was a great accommodation to the inhabitants.

Messrs. George Danby Palmer and John Barker had been elected Haven
Commissioners, and Messrs. D. A. Gourlay and R. Hammond Supernumary
Commissioners.

April 15th.—The Mayor had appointed Messrs. George Arbon and William
Livingston (Whigs), and Robert Breeze and John E. Barnby (Tories)
Overseers in the place of the “party” nominations hitherto made of these
officials.

May 6th.—The fair “although pretty well attended so far as numbers was
concerned was altogether as spiritless a concern as could be desired.”

May 13th.—From the report of the Gas Company’s meeting it appeared that
the balance of profit, after paying dividend on the new shares, was £625
17s. 7d.; the rentals amounted to £2164 11s. 5d., and the total income to
£2720 3s., the expenditure being £2094 6s. 11d.

Mr. Tolver (Town-Clerk) had, at the Council meeting, formally announced
his intention to retire, when the deepest regret was expressed by Messrs.
George Danby Palmer, Dawson Turner, and Alderman Fenn, who wished him to
re-consider his decision.

William S. Ferrier, Esq., coroner, had died.

May 20th.—The Race Committee had resolved (as there were no Borough
Members) not to hold any Races this year.

A meeting of the Council had been held to elect a coroner, when, in the
absence of the Mayor and Deputy-Mayor who were attending the Leveè, Simon
Cobb, Esq., was called to the chair.

Dawson Turner, Esq., proposed, and Mr. D. A. Gourlay seconded, Mr.
Frederick Nathaniel Palmer (surgeon).

Mr. Richard Hammond proposed, and Mr. Walpole seconded, Mr. Charles H.
Chamberlin for the office.

Capt. Pike and Messrs. Worship and Sewell left the Council before the
voting, which was, for Mr. Chamberlin: Messrs. J. Barker, S. Cobb,
Walpole, R. Hammond, sen., H. Boulter, H. D. Palmer, P. White, R.
Hammond, jun., C. Miller, J. Owles, J. Fish, J. D. Chapman, R. Ferrier,
J. G. Plummer, W. T. Clarke, G. D. Palmer, T. Hammond, J. G. Rivett, E.
H. L. Preston, H. Butcher, and W. Hammond—21.  For Mr. Palmer: Messrs. H.
Fellows, E. R. Palmer, W. H. Bessey, J. Lawn, D. A. Gourlay, S. C. Marsh,
D. Turner, and S. Miller—8.  Neuter: J. C. Smith.

June 3rd.—Mr. Chamberlin had held his first inquest at the “New Fountain
Tavern,” on the body of Elizabeth Maria Crowe.

June 10th.—Mr. Goldsmid had signified his intention of standing for the
Borough, Mr. Rumbold also was likely to come forward, and Mr. Sandars, of
Taplow House, Bucks, had offered himself (Mr. Lacon not being able to
stand) to the electors.

July 1st.—The Rev. W. Langley Pope, one of the curates, had married a
girl of 16, the granddaughter of Mr. Woodhouse, painter, and had been
dismissed from his curacy.

Mr. Goldsmid had determined not to contest the Borough.

July 8th.—Mr. Bagshaw had met the electors at the Corn Exchange, (George
Danby Palmer, Esq., in the chair,) Mr. J. Bagshaw, M.P., and Mr. J. W
Shelly also addressing the meeting.

July 15th.—At the nomination Mr. S. Cobb proposed and Mr. Sewell
seconded, C. E. Rumbold, Esq.

Mr. S. H. Aldred proposed, and Mr. W. H. Bessey seconded, John Sandars,
Esq.

And Mr. T. Hammond and J. Jackson proposed and seconded, Robert John
Bagshaw, Esq.

The following statements of the poll were issued during the contest:—(The
small number of votes recorded was consequent on the disfranchisement of
the freemen, and the election taking place before those freemen who were
entitled to do so, could qualify as Householders.)

               Sandars.       Rumbold.       Bagshaw.
10 a.m.             121            134            156
12½ p.m.            292            279            244
1 „                 312            301            253
1½ ,,               330            323            264
2 „                 358            338            275
3½ „                393            366            298
4 „                 416            386            300

After the declaration of the poll only Mr. Sandars’ friends made any
preparation for the chairing.  “Not a bit of blue ribbon was seen, and
Mr. Rumbold’s friend seemed all to have been dyed deep red.”

Mr. Bagshaw addressed the electors from the “Star Hotel,” when Mr. J. W.
Shelly made some strong observations on the conduct of Mr. Rumbold’s
friends in supporting Mr. Sandars jointly with that gentleman, which
appear to have caused a great deal of “heart burning” in the borough and
this especially so with regard to a combination known as the “Star
clique.”

July 22nd.—Mr. Edward Sewell (a quaker) who had been denounced by Mr.
Shelly for voting for Sandars and Rumbold, vindicated his conduct in this
issue.

The gigs of Mr. C. C. Aldred and Mr. Spencer Smyth (surgeons) had been in
collision in Regent Street, and the latter gentleman and his assistant
upset.

The Regatta had been held, the band of the 16th Lancers coming from
Norwich, and there was an immense concourse of people present.

In the first match, a purse of £60 for yachts, the following entered:—

1.—“Esk,” R. Antrem, Esq., 25 tons, white with red border, R.T.Y.C.

2.—“Prima Donna,” J. L. Ives, Esq., 25 tons, white with blue cross,
R.T.Y.C.

3.—“Mosquito,” C. Mare, Esq., 50 tons, blue and orange quartered,
R.T.Y.C.

4.—“Secret,” I. Wicks, Esq., 25 tons, blue and white crescent, R.T.Y.C.

5.—“Gauntlet,” J. Penrice, Esq., 15 tons, red and white zigzag, R.V.Y.C.

6.—“Blue Bell,” Lord A. Conyngham, 30 tons, light blue, S.Y.C.

7.—“Daring,” G. Cook, Esq., 31 tons, red burgee R.T.Y.C.

The “Daring” and “Secret” withdrew under protest that the “Mosquito” did
not start from her moorings.  This she had done, but the hour for
starting having been delayed she was obliged to remove.  At ten seconds
past one o’clock they all started with a stiff breeze from the S.W.  The
“Mosquito” took the lead after rounding the first buoy, and maintained it
throughout.  The “Esk” gave up the contest at 2.30, and the “Blue Bell”
in rounding the second buoy carried away her foremast.

The times at which they came in were as follows:—

                          1ST RND.                   2ND RND.                   3RD RND.
                    H.       M.       S.       H.       M.       S.       H.       M.       S.
“Mosquito”              1       55       20        2       54        8        3       52       47
“Blue Bell”             2        3       33        3       12       54        4       19       31
“Prima Donna”           2        7       54        3       33       38        5       10       31
“Gauntlet”              2       18       44        3       59       30

The “Mosquito,” is a very superior vessel, built by Mr. Mare of
Blackwall, who built the “Norfolk,” steampacket, of this port.
Immediately after the receipt of the prize, which was awarded by the
Committee to whom the protest was referred, she set off for Hull to
contend for the prize on Thursday.

Sailing match for a purse of 20 sovereigns.  Time race by Yawls of any
length; the first Yawl to have £12, the second £5, and the third £3.
Four to start or no match.  Time 30 seconds to a foot.  Entrance 2s. 6d.

9.       “Reindeer,” Young Company, 70 feet.
8.       “Royal Victoria,” Denny’s Company, 60 feet.
         “Royal Sovereign,” Young Company, 60 feet, drawn.
7.       “Bees’ Wing,” Star Company, 65 feet.
4.       “Queen Victoria,” Holkham Company, 64 ft.
0.       “Swiftsure,” Southwold, 49 feet.
3.       “Greyhound,” Lowestoft, 45 feet.
X        “Royal Standard,” Standard Company, 51 feet.
6.       “Gratitude,” Star Company, 53 feet.

They started 3h. 7m. 10s.  The “Reindeer” and “Bees’ Wing” carried away
their foremasts in the first round.  The “Swiftsure” and “Greyhound” gave
up in the first round.  The “Royal Standard” completed her first round at
4h. 34m. 51s., after which she gave up, having carried away her foremast,
considerable time being lost in rigging out another which she had on
board.  The other boats came in:—

                           1ST RND.                   2ND RND.                   3RD RND.
                     H.       M.       S.       H.       M.       S.       H.       M.       S.
“Royal Victoria”         4       10       42        5       13       44        6       15        5
“Queen Victoria”         4       15       47        5       20       46        6       21       20
“Gratitude”              4       19       33        5       37       54        6       49       45

Sailing match by Shrimp Boats for £8.  Not to exceed 21 feet in length,
over all, first boat £5, second boat £2, third boat £1; no sail allowed
but their customary mainsail and foresail, six to start or no match;
entrance 1s.  The following boats were entered, and started at 3h. 51m.
10s.:—

The four which came in first, arrived at the winning point at the time
affixed to their names, the others were not timed:—

                                               H.       M.       S.
“Caroline,” Richard Sutton, 19½ feet.
“Four Sisters,” John Edmonds, 20 feet              6       11       27
“Defiance,” Robert Blake, 19 feet                  6       32       48
“Who would have thought it,” Jas. Woods,
20 feet.
“Paragon,” William Lodge, 20 feet.
“Anne,” Robert Drane, 18½ feet.
“Viper,” Richard Harrod, 19 feet.
“Blossom,” Mrs. Larn, 19 feet                      6       14       19
“Robert and Maria,” Robert Garwood, 21             6       16        8
feet
“Providence,” Henry Hellenburgh, 20 feet.
“Elizabeth,” Georges Ives, 20½ feet.

Rowing Match for a purse of 6 sovereigns, by Beach Gigs, not exceeding
six oars, and to be rowed by men belonging to distinct companies.  First
gig £4; second, £2; three to start or no match; entrance 1s.  They
started at 6h. 36m. and came in:—

“Guardian,” Young Company                1
“Star,” Star Company, did not start.
“Fearnought,” Holkham Company            3
“Jenny Lind,” Lowestoft                  2

The first of these came in at 6h. 48m. 5s.

A dinner was provided at the Norfolk Hotel, at which several gentlemen
were present.

    “The ball in the evening was held at the Town Hall, and was very well
    attended, although some families in the town were prevented being
    present by a recent removal by death.  Among those whose names we
    have been able to procure, were some of the Officers of the 16th
    Lancers and their ladies, Lord A. and Lady Conyngham, the Right
    Worshipful the Mayor of Yarmouth and the Misses Boulter, the Mayor of
    Norwich, F. Tattershall, Esq., R. Ferrier, Esq., Captain, Mrs. and
    Misses Pearson, Mr. and Mrs. Chevallier, Mr. and Mrs. A. Steward, Mr.
    and Mrs. C. J. Palmer, Mr. and Mrs. W. C. Reynolds, Mr. and Mrs. E.
    H. L. Preston, J. Wicks, Esq., Mr. and Mrs. Caldecott, Rev. E. B. and
    Mrs. Frere.”

July 26th.—On the previous Thursday “a very calamitous accident” had
occurred; Capt. Pearson and his family had been to the Theatre, and on
their return Miss Mary Sayers walked straight from Regent Street over the
Quay Head and was drowned.

The body was picked up on the following morning.

Mr. J. W. Shelly returned to the charge against Mr. Sewell, and accused
him of unduly influencing a voter named Carr.

At the Water Frolic the “Stranger” won the cup.  The “Thorn,” a
“Bermudian cutter-rigged boat,” belonging to Capt. Ellis, R.N.,
attracting much attention.

Aug. 5th.—Mr. Carr and Mr. Sewell repudiated Mr. Shelly’s suggestions,
and totally denied his statements to be correct.

The following is the report of the inquest held on the body of Miss
Sayers:—

    “On the 27th ult., at the house of Captain Pearson, an inquest was
    held before Mr. C. H. Chamberlin, on the body of Miss Mary Sayers,
    aged 72.  The body of the deceased was identified by W. H. Palmer,
    Esq., who stated that he left her the previous night at the door of
    the Theatre about ten minutes before eleven; her sister, Miss E.
    Sayers, went home in a sedan chair and deceased walked.  The night
    was extremely dark and rainy, but no gas lamps were lighted.  Captain
    Pearson and his family were spending the evening out, and on
    returning at about half-past eleven, found Miss E. Sayers in some
    anxiety that her sister was so long in following her.  Captain
    Pearson immediately went to the police office to procure assistance
    in searching for her, for which purpose Police-constable Page took a
    lantern.  About half-past three in the morning he dragged the river
    opposite the Town Hall, and there found the body.  The watch of
    deceased stopped precisely at eleven o’clock.  The Jury returned a
    verdict that the deceased was accidentally drowned by walking over
    the Quay-head, in consequence of the extreme darkness of the night.”

There had been a considerable discussion on the question of the election
of surgeons to the Hospital, and ultimately a poll was taken as follows:—

A. J. Impey, M.D.            173
John Dunn, M.D.               74
Spencer Smyth                227
C. B. Dashwood               184
Josh. Bayly                  143
G. Dimock                     28

and Dr. Impey and Messrs. Smyth, Dashwood and Bayly were declared duly
elected.

Aug. 26th.—An explosion had taken place on board the “Earl of Liverpool,”
London steam packet, off Lowestoft, by which two of the crew had been
killed.

St. Nicholas’ Church had been re-opened after the work of restoration,
when the Lord Bishop of Norwich preached, and 150 ladies and gentlemen
partook of a luncheon at the Town Hall, amongst those present being Baron
Alderson and M. Guizot and his daughter.

Sept. 2nd.—At the races it was remarked that the Railway, while
increasing the number of people, had decreased the number of vehicles on
the course, gigs, horses and private carriages being superseded by cab
flies and omnibuses.

The ordinary had been held at the “Angel,” when sixty-five gentlemen sat
down to dinner, for which two haunches of venison had been sent by the
M.P’s.

One hundred and eleven ladies and gentlemen had attended the ball at the
Town Hall, when the Members for the Borough, the Officers of the 16th
Lancers, Mr. and Misses Lacon, Mr. and Mrs. Palmer, Mr. I. Jermy, Mr.,
Mrs. and Miss Caldecott, Captain, Mrs. and Misses Pearson, Mr., Mrs. and
Miss Tuck, Mr., Mrs. and Miss A. Steward, Mr. B. Dowson, &c., were
present.

The Rev. Geo. Hills, M.A., P.C. of St. Mary’s Quarry Hill, Leeds, had
accepted the living then vacant by the resignation of the Rev. H.
Mackenzie.

It was remarked that none of the Corporation had attended the luncheon on
the occasion of the re-opening of the Church, the Mayor stating that he
could not attend the meeting as “the Church” was to be one of the toasts
given.

Sept. 9th.—The “Hudson” had been launched from Mr. Barber’s yard, after
extensive repairs.

Sept. 23rd.—The Rev. G. Hills had “read himself in” at St. Nicholas’
Church.

Captain Kisbee, R.N., was making experiments with a “patent float.”

Sept. 30th.—The Bishop of London and Mrs. Blomfield were staying at
Yarmouth.

The first buildings on the Britannia Terrace had been commenced.  A
proposition had been made to extend the esplanade and carriage drive from
this to the Victoria Terrace.

Oct. 7th.—The Good Samaritan Lodge, M.U.O.F., had held its anniversary at
the Masonic Hall, F. Palmer, Esq., in the chair, when about sixty members
sat down to dinner, and a silver watch and gold guard chain were
presented to W. Hanworth, P.G., for his services to the Lodge during the
then past three years.

Oct. 14th.—The wards were likely to be hotly contested in November, Sir
E. H. K. Lacon being one of the candidates; but at the Registration Court
he could not substantiate his claim to be on the Burgess Roll.

Richard Bell, Collector of customs, had died from an attack of the gout.

Oct. 21st.—A meeting had been held, the Mayor in the chair, for purpose
of considering the question of the establishment of Water Works.

Nov. 4th.—At the Municipal election there had been a return to the
corrupt system of “feasting,” and at Gorleston certain voters were so
detained all day until after the poll had closed in order to avoid a
contest.  The following was the result:—

_North Ward_.—Mr. W. H. Bessey and Mr. Henry Danby Palmer re-elected, no
opposition.

_Market Ward_.—Mr. Sewell retired, and Mr. Lawn was unseated.

The poll being—

John E. Barnby, C            123
John Fenn, C                 120 (sic)
James Lawn, L                120
Christopher Steward, L       120

_Regent Ward_ (sic), (_a_) The Mayor (P. Pullyn, Esq.) was re-elected
with Mr. R. Ferrier, jun., a Tory, in the place of Mr. Lettis (a Whig)
resigned.

_Nelson Ward_.—

John Symonds, L            120
A. J. Impey, L             114
W. H. Barnby, C            105
H. Jay, C                   96

_Gorleston Ward_.—Messrs. Wm. H. Palmer, (L), and S. Miller (C), returned
without opposition.

The result was a Conservative gain of 5 seats.

(_a_) Evidently this should be St. George’s Ward.  There is no return for
the Regent Ward, but Sir E. Lacon and Mr. Cherry appeared to have been in
fact then returned for that Ward.  [ED. Y. M.]

Nov. 11th.—At the Council meeting on the 9th, Mr. Richard Hammond
proposed and Mr. Dawson Turner seconded, the re-election of Philip
Pullyn, Esq., to the Mayoralty, and Mr. E. H. L. Preston, proposed and
Mr. Fenn seconded, Mr. S. C. Marsh for that office, but upon a division
being taken, Mr. Pullyn was re-elected by 28 to 15 votes.  For Mr.
Pullyn—Messrs. Fiddes, Bayly, Barker, Cobb, Pearson, Pike, Fellows,
Walpole, R. Hammond, sen., Boulter, E. R. Palmer, H. D. Palmer, P. White,
R. Hammond, jun., W. N. Burroughs, D. A. Gourlay, C. Miller, W. Johnson,
J. Owles, S. Palmer, J. D. Chapman, D. Turner, J. Symonds, W. T. Clarke,
G. D. Palmer, T. Hammond, A. J. Impey and J. Hammond.  For Mr. Marsh—B.
Fenn, W. H. Bessey, J. Fenn, J. E. Barnby, J. Cherry, R. Ferrier, W.
Worship, B. Jay, J. G. Plummer, J. C. Smith, W. H. Palmer, S. Miller, J.
G. Rivett, E. H. L. Preston and W. Hammond.

Nov. 18th.—The case of Reg. _v._ Preston had been decided, the Court of
Queen’s Bench holding that the appointment of Overseers rested with the
Mayor alone, and not with the Magistrates generally.

The friends of Mr. S. C. Marsh, who voted for him as Mayor had dined
together at the Bear.  It was stated that the Tories could not find a
Mayor (mare) without going to _Marsh_.

A high tide had flowed up to the Victoria and Britannia Terraces.

Dec. 2nd.—A dinner had been given to the Mayor at the “Star” Tavern, at
which Mr. W. N. Burroughs presided.

The town had been thrown “into a complete ferment by the report of the
catastrophe at Stanfield Hall.”

Dec. 16th.—A meeting had been held at the Town Hall for the purpose of
impressing the “obligation of the Christian Sabbath.”  Wm. H. Palmer,
Esq., occupied the chair, and was supported by J. W. Shelly, Esq., and
all the local Dissenting Ministers.

John E. Lacon, Esq., had died, to the great grief of the townsfolk.

Dec. 23rd.—Thos. Brightwen, C. J. Palmer and C. L. Robertson, Esqs., had
waited on the Rev H. Mackenzie and presented him with a testimonial of
plate.

The question of the drainage of the Denes was being considered, and a
meeting had been held on the subject, R. Ferrier, Esq., in the chair.



1849.


Jan. 13th.—The “Cosmopolite,” 312 tons register, had been launched from
Mr. Brandford’s yard.

Feb. 3rd.—There were 1,145 boys and 1,461 girls attending the Sunday
Schools, about 1,000 of whom belonged to the Established Church.

Feb. 10th.—Mr. John Lomas Cufaude had been unanimously elected Clerk of
the Peace, in the place of Mr. J. Barth resigned.

Feb. 17th.—Mr. Ferrier, upon wishing to leave the Council found the door
locked, and made a disturbance by kicking it “with great violence.”

The Mayor was requested to take notice of this, and on the motion of Mr.
W. Worship the following resolution was passed:—That “we as a Council
hold the Mayor blameless for taking anyone into custody in protecting
this Council in its deliberation.”

March 3rd.—Complaint was made as to the decay of the South Quay trees.

March 10th.—A religious service had been held on board the “Cosmopolite,”
before her first voyage, she being bound to Singapore.

The Mayor (P. Pullyn, Esq.) had entertained the Recorder, the Bar, and
several friends at a sumptuous dinner at the “Star.”

March 30th.—Contains a full account of the trial of Rush for the
Stanfield Hall murders.

April 14th.—The appointment of Overseers having become vested in the
general body of the Justices by Act of Parliament, the first appointment
by them had been made.  The following Justices being present:—The Mayor,
S. Cobb, R. Hammond, G. D. Palmer, and J. W. Shelly, Esqs., (Whigs), and
Geo. Bateman, W. H. Bessey, W. Thurtell, W. Yetts, J. C. Smith, Wm.
Danby-Palmer, J. F. Costerton, E. H. L. Preston, and B. Jay, Esqs.
(Tories).  The following were appointed:—Wm. Green, James Borking, John
Key, and Samuel Lessey.

The Vestry meeting at the Guildhall had been crowded to suffocation.  R.
Hammond proposed Mr. C. S. D. Steward for re-election, and Mr. Burroughs
nominated Mr. F. Worship for re-election, and they were re-elected
accordingly churchwardens for the ensuing year.

April 21st.—One hundred and ten ladies and gentlemen had attended the
second Subscription Ball.

April 28th.—Mr. Gourlay had been elected chairman, and Messrs. Lawn and
S. Norman, vice-chairmen, of the Board of Guardians.  There had been no
contest at the election of the Board.

May 19th.—The Mayor had given a dinner at the Star.

June 2nd.—The “Yarmouth Bridge Bill” had passed the Committee stage, and
it was confidently expected that Breydon would now be deepened.

On Whit-Monday the Temperance Society had held a meeting at the Masonic
Hall, Mr. W. T. Fisher in the chair.

Captain Wm. Larke, R.N., had received from the Admiralty a war medal
issued for the action fought off Cape St. Vincent, on the 14th February,
1797, in which glorious engagement he was signal midshipman on board the
“Prince George,” 98 guns.

A petition in favour of a national poor’s rate was in course of
signature.

June 9th.—Col. Mason had presented a very handsome carved lectern to St.
Nicholas’ Church.

Most of the lodging houses on or near the Victoria Terrace were let.  The
Marchioness of Wellesley was staying in the town.

June 16th.—The report of the British School showed that there were then
200 scholars at that establishment.

June 23rd.—A tailor, on tramp, had (having procured a bed at the Neptune
Public-house) drank 9 pints of beer at night and 4 the next morning
before proceeding to Lowestoft.

June 30th.—The Lord Lieutenant, with Lady Leicester, several members of
the Digby family, Mr., Mrs. and Miss Whitbread, the Hon. Mr. Coke, Col.
Porter, Lord Hastings, the Hon. Mr. Astley, Mr. F. Astley, and Mr.
Norris, had secured rooms at the Victoria Hotel.

The Guildhall was in progress of demolition.

There had been a good catch of mackerel, one boat having brought upwards
of 6,000 fish.

July 14th.—At the Regatta the following yachts competed:—“Hilda,”
R.T.Y.C., 25 tons; “Cynthia,” R.V.Y.C., 50 tons; “Foam,” R.V.Y.C., 20
tons; “Mosquito,” R.T.Y.C., 50 tons; “Secret,” R.T.Y.C., 20 tons; and the
“Juvenile,” R.H.Y.C., 15 tons.

The “Cynthia,” won the cup.

Upwards of 2,300 passengers were conveyed to Yarmouth by the Railway to
witness these sports.

The Mayor’s windows had been broken and a reward of £10 offered.

Aug. 25th.—Complaint was made that when fishing boats arrived at the Quay
on Sunday, a crowd collected round the door of some public-house, and on
the arrival of a salesman he was accompanied into such house and held a
sale there of the fish, and that the police never interfered to prevent
this violation of the Sabbath.

Sept. 1st.—Lady Agnes Buller, Sir William and Lady Wimper, and Mr. and
Mrs. Wood had taken houses on Brandon Terrace.

An individual resident in the town, had, for the wager of a bottle of
rum, driven a pony and cart to the end of the Jetty, for which he was
taken before the Justices and fined 20s.

Great complaint had been made of persons smoking cigars on Victoria
Terrace to the annoyance of ladies.

Reports as to the appearance of cholera were prevalent in the town.

Sept. 8th.—G. D. Palmer, Esq., had presided at a meeting of sixty of the
paving Commissioners, and with a view to the threatened appearance of
cholera, the following special committee as to scavengering was
appointed:—Messrs. G. D. Palmer, J. Fish, C. E. Bartram, C. Pearson, and
W. Squire.

St. Peter’s Church had been lighted with gas and opened for evening
service.

Sept. 15th.—The Theatre had been closed after a disastrous season, it was
considered that Mr. Clarence had lost £100 by this venture.

Mr. Cufaude and another gentleman amateur had appeared at the Theatre, in
_A new way to pay old Debts_, and had been received with “rapturous
applause.”

The Drainage question had been discussed at a meeting of the inhabitants
(the Mayor in the chair).

Sept. 22nd.—The transfer of the parsonage house from the Corporation to
the Vicar, had been virtually completed.

Oct. 13th.—The tide had flowed up to Britannia Terrace.

A bed of oysters had been discovered between the Monument and North Pier.

“Dogfish” had damaged the fishermen’s nets and devoured a “large quantity
of herring.”

Oct. 20th.—Friday having been the day appointed for “Humiliation and
Prayer,” upwards of 2,900 persons attended St. Nicholas’ Church services;
in the morning the Rev. Geo. Hills preached from Micah vi., 6, 7 and 8;
in the afternoon the Rev. H. Neville; in the evening the Rev. G. Hills,
from Numbers xxi., 48.  The collections amounted to £100.

Nov. 3rd.—The Market and Regent Wards had been contested.  Messrs.
Gourlay and Steward (Whigs) against Messrs. W. Aldred and Fyson
(Conservatives) in the Market Ward, and Messrs. J. Fish and J. D. Chapman
(Whigs) against Messrs. R. D. Barber and H. R. Harmer (Conservatives) in
the Regent Ward.  The elections terminated in favour of Messrs. Barber
and Fish in the Regent, and Messrs. Aldred and Gourlay in the Market
Ward.

In the North, St. George’s, and Nelson Wards there were no contests,
consequently Messrs. Wm. Worship, P. White, R. Ferrier, B. Jay, G.
Cannell, and M. Butcher had been re-elected.  In the Gorleston Ward
Messrs. Clarke (Whig) and R. Steward (Conservative) had been returned.

Nov. 10th.—At the Council meeting on the 9th, Mr. Owles proposed, and Mr.
W. Johnson seconded, Mr. D. A. Gourlay for the Mayoralty, and Mr. R.
Steward proposed and Mr. Cherry seconded, the election of Mr. E. H. L.
Preston to that office, when the voting was, for Mr. Gourlay 27 and for
Mr. Preston 14.

Nov. 17th.—A “Sanitary Inquiry” had been held before Wm. Lee, Esq.

Dec. 22nd.—Mr. Jas. Jackson had been elected a Councillor for the North
Ward in the place of Richard Hammond, Esq., who had been appointed an
Alderman, vice S. Cobb, Esq., deceased.

Dec. 30th.—£35 13s. 6d. had been paid by Mr. Sloman to the funds of the
Hospital, on account of the profits derived from the sale of hymn books.

The inmates of the Workhouse had been regaled with a dinner of plum
pudding and roast beef, with a pint of strong beer each.



1850.


Jan. 5th.—At the Hospital meeting it was stated that £96 4s. 11d. had
been collected for that institution on the general Fast Day.  Mr. B.
Dowson occupied the chair, and Messrs. G. D. Palmer, J. G. Cannell, W.
Steele, W. H. Palmer, and Dr. Impey took part in the proceedings.

Jan. 12th.—The Haven Commissioners were being urged to lengthen the
Jetty, to enable vessels to land there when they could not enter the
port.

Jan. 19th.—An address of condolence had been voted by the Town Council to
the Queen on the occasion of the death of the Queen Dowager.

The parsonage house had been purchased from the Corporation by private
subscription.

The Revs. J. Everitt, S. Dunn, and W. Griffiths, three Wesleyan
Ministers, expelled by the Conference, had held a meeting of their
friends at the Corn Hall.

Jan. 26th.—The annual meeting of the Royal Life Fund had been held, W. H.
Palmer, Esq., in the chair, when the expenditure for the year appeared to
have been £174 11s. 9d., as against assets amounting to £172 15s. 9d.

The Rev. Bowyer Vaux had delivered a lecture on “Nineveh.”

The “Enterprise,” steamer, was being repaired by Mr. A. R. Palmer, prior
to her resuming her passage between this port and Rotterdam.

Feb. 9th.—The fishery business was in a very depressed state, and it was
computed that from £15,000 to £20,000 less cash would on that account be
circulated in the town.

Ninety volumes of books had been given to the library of the Young Men’s
Institute by the Mayor (D. A. Gourlay, Esq.), Admiral Hills and Robert
Steward, Esq.

Feb. 16th.—An endeavour was being made to reduce the wages paid to
coalheavers.

Feb. 23rd.—Disturbances had arisen on this account, and a man named
Lightning had complained to the Mayor that he had been assaulted by James
Miller and others because he agreed to the owners’ terms.

Mr. Henry Pickard (relieving officer) had been charged before the
Magistrates for the manslaughter of Sarah Auger (aged 20) and acquitted.

The smack “Good Intent” had been seized and condemned as a smuggler, and
Richard Parmenter, of the White Swan Inn, and George Shirley, fish curer,
had been committed to Norwich Castle upon Exchequer writs for £8,230
each.

A meeting had been held with regard to the legalisation of marriage with
a deceased wife’s sister (the Mayor in the Chair), when a petition in
favour of that measure was adopted.

March 9th.—The “Sacramento” (400 tons) had been launched from Mr. H.
Fellows’ yard.

March 16th.—Mr. Worship, Mr. Ferrier, and Mr. Jay, had attended a meeting
of the Haven Commissioners, and suggested that the first stone of the
bridge should be laid with Masonic honours.

Mr. Benjamin Button had been appointed one of the parish surgeons in the
place of Mr. William Burgess deceased.

The highest tender for the ballast dues had not been taken owing to a
mistake of the Deputy Town Clerk.

The conduct of the prisoners in the gaol had been of an extremely
disorderly character.

March 23rd.—The “Eagle” (recently launched from the yard of Mr. T.
Barber) had been lost off Jaffa.  Mr. Barber was insured to the extent of
£4,000.

Five wherries had broken adrift at night and fouled the Haven bridge but
they had all been secured by the river watch.

March 30th.—There had been a heavy fall of snow and intense cold, the
thermometer standing at 23 deg.

Two new oyster beds had been discovered in the roadstead, and oysters
vended at 1d. to 3d. per quarter.

April 6th.—The first boilers ever made in the town had been manufactured
by Mr. S. V. Moore, for the “Enterprize,” and fixed in her at the Crane.
They weighed 13 tons each.

William Barth, Esq., had died in London.

Mr. Robert Waters’ mill at Southtown had been burnt.  It was insured for
£1,600 in the Sun and Norwich Union Fire Offices.

April 13th.—The death of Admiral Hills is recorded.

The following Guardians had been elected:—The Mayor (D. A. Gourlay,
Esq.), T. Brightwen, James Jackson, George Danby-Palmer, S. C. Marsh, J.
Fish, J. Fiddes, and B. Fenn, Esqs., and Messrs. M. Blowers, R.
Ecclestone, C. Steward, J. Lawn, T. Lettis, jun., S. Norman, J. D.
Chapman, and S. J. Fill.

April 20th.—A petition for the abolition of Church Rates was being signed
in the town.

April 27th.—The Congregationalists had determined to build a new chapel
upon part of the site of the late Mansion of John Penrice, Esq., in King
Street, and £1,107 10s. 7d. had already been subscribed.

Dr. Smyth had delivered a lecture on “Respiration and Atmospheric Air,”
at the Y.M.I.  The attendance was small.

May 4th.—Contains the record of the death of Samuel Palmer, Esq., from
the effects of an accident.  Mr. Palmer was taking a drive in the
afternoon, and while going over the Bridge his pony took fright at the
firing of some cannon in commemoration of the marriage of Miss Costerton,
Mr. Palmer in attempting to jump out of his gig was thrown with great
force upon his head, which injury proved a fatal one.

A finely-toned bell weighing 10 cwt. 3 qrs. 14 lbs. in the key G, bearing
the inscription “Ad Majorem Dei Gloriam,” had been fixed in the tower of
the new Roman Catholic Church.

The Poor’s box in the Parish Church had been broken open, and the
contents, believed to be a large amount, stolen.

May 11th.—Mr. E. H. L. Preston had been appointed Receiver of Admiralty
Droits in the place of Mr. Samuel Palmer deceased.

The following compensation had been awarded, with regard to the
properties taken for the approach to the new bridge:—

Mr. Puncher            £1,757
Mr. Teasdel              £418

Messrs. Preston’s case was going to a Suffolk jury.

May 18th.—The “Bear Hotel,” was being demolished for the new bridge
approach.

The Jury impannelled in the case of Preston _v._ The Haven Commissioners,
after hearing the evidence of the plaintiff, and Mr. Palmer in reply,
awarded them £950 damage and £100 for the value of the land taken.

May 25th.—Rustic sports had been provided on the South Denes, at
Whitsuntide, when there had been a great influx of people brought by rail
and the “Earl of Liverpool” steamer.

The “Prince of Wales,” Revenue cutter, Lieut. John Allen, had brought
into the harbour the “Seaflower,” having on board 122 parcels of leaf
tobacco of 50 lbs. each.

June 1st.—The Queen _v._ The Justices of Great Yarmouth, as to rating
Vauxhall Gardens, had been heard and the rule obtained for the parish,
discharged with costs.  Mr. O’Malley appeared for Mr. C. Cory, and Mr.
Palmer for the parish.

The Southtown tolls had been let by auction to Mr. W. Matson for £344 per
annum.  In 1820 these tolls had only realised £248.

A large meeting had been held at the Angel inn on the subject of the
exceedingly high Poor’s rate levied in the parish, Mr. Richard Ferrier in
the chair.

June 15th.—It appeared from the Guardians accounts that 25 per cent. was
allowed in their accounts “for waste in the consumption of meat.”

June 22nd.—The following persons had been elected Poor’s rate collectors,
viz., Mr. Robert Bullen, Mr. Thomas Kelf, Mr. High, Mr. R. Harbert, and
Mr. William Nutman.

Bro. Richard Ferrier had entertained his brother Masons at Burgh Castle,
in commemoration of the completion of his new mansion, the foundation of
which was laid with Masonic honours.

July 6th.—Mr. Joseph Clarence had obtained a license for the Theatre for
six months, subject to certain more stringent regulations than had
previously prevailed.

July 13th.—The flag on the church and the town flags on the hall had been
hoisted at half-mast upon the day of Sir R. Peel’s funeral.

William Johnson, Esq., of Southtown, had given an entertainment on the
occasion of the marriage of his daughter to William Mart, Esq., of
London.

July 27th.—A meeting had been held with regard to the “Public Health
Act.”

Aug. 3rd.—A Mrs. Baker (a visitor) had attempted to commit suicide in one
of Mr. Brown’s bathing machines.

Aug. 10th.—Youell’s nurseries were in full bloom.

Mr. John Morton, of Caister, had taken the degree of a M.C.S. Edin.

Aug. 17th.—The late high tide had removed nearly 60 acres of beach and
sandbanks at Caister, and a shoal called the Hood, lying to the North of
the village had disappeared.  Consequent upon this there had been a large
deposit of sand upon Yarmouth Beach.

Robert Rising, Esq., the auditor, having applied for a summons against
Mr. Henry Pickard, late assistant overseer and rate collector, on a
charge of embezzling £675 13s. 8¾d., at the hearing of such information
the prisoner pleaded “guilty,” and failing sufficient distress he was
sentenced to two months’ imprisonment.  He had sureties to the amount of
£400 who were being proceeded against.

Aug. 24th.—Col. Peel, M.P., J. S. Dunkald, Esq., and Sir E. H. K. Lacon,
Bart., had acted as Stewards of the Races.

The Ferries had been let by William Walpole, Esq., by auction, the upper
ferry for £250, and the Gorleston ferry for £175 per annum.

Aug. 31st.—Lady Bolton, a niece of Lord Nelson, had visited Capt. Manby,
who had been a schoolmate of his Lordship 79 years previously.

Sept. 14th.—The churchwardens and overseers had been summoned before the
Justices to show cause why they neglected or refused to pay over to the
Guardians the sum of £789, in accordance with their order, and the
hearing of the case adjourned.

Sept. 21st.—A supplemental rate of 2d. in the £ had been made to meet
this demand.  It appeared that the Guardians asked for £2,800 for the
current quarter, but the overseers insisted that £2,200 would suffice,
and only in the first instance raised that amount, hence the deficiency.

Sept. 28th.—There was likely to be an appeal against this supplemental
poor’s rate.

A meeting of the electors for the Regent Ward had been held at the “Star
and Garter” Inn, at which Mr. Thomas George presided, when S. C. Marsh
and R. H. Harmer, Esqs., offered themselves as candidates, the
determination of D. Turner, Esq., to retire was announced by Mr. W.
Worship.

Oct. 12th.—The season, in consequence of the high position Lowestoft had
taken as a watering place, had been far from prosperous.

Sept. 26th.—The new Roman Catholic Church had been licensed for
marriages.

The following tenders had been sent in for the draining the Denes:—J.
Thompson, (Yarmouth), £4,424; W. Johnson, (London), £4,393; G. Piggins,
(Yarmouth), £4,234 19s.; R. Page, (Yarmouth), £3,922; and R. Pratt,
(Yarmouth), £3,715.  The lowest tender was accepted; about 7,400 feet of
sewer being required.

A Vestry Meeting had been held as to the Rating of small tenements, when
the poll taken on an amendment in favour of applying the Act, was 329 as
against 68 against it.

A special Sessions had been held to hear upwards of 250 appeals against
the recently made Poor’s Rate.

Mr. J. H. Harrison’s was the case taken, and after hearing Mr. Chamberlin
on his behalf, and examining the Rate Book, Mr. Preston moved and Mr. G.
Danby-Palmer seconded, and it was carried by the vote of the bench that
an unequal assessment existed and the rate was accordingly quashed.  Mr.
Cufaude on behalf of the Overseers, then stated that he agreed to this.
The decision was received with applause.

Sir J. Walmesley, M.P., J. Hume, Esq., M.P., and T. Norton, Esq.,
attended a meeting as a deputation from the Financial Reform Association.

Nov. 9th.—The result of the Municipal Election had left the parties
equally balanced in the Council; the means used in these contests having
in most instances been “disgusting and disgraceful.”

The following was the polling:—

         _Gorleston Ward_.
E. H. L. Preston, (C)            185
W. Hammond, (C)                  170
S. Crowe, (L)                     78
F. S. Costerton, (L)              64
           _North Ward_.
J. Jackson, (L)                  108
W. N. Burroughs, (L)             105
S. Nightingale, (C)               90
C. Cory, (C)                      68
           _Regent Ward_.
S. C. Marsh, (C)                 105
J. D. Chapman, (L)               103
H. R. Harmer, (C)                 94
F. Palmer, (L)                    83
        _St. George’s Ward_.
J. G. Plummer, (C)               130
J. C. Smith, (C)                 116
J. Barker, (L)                   101
           _Nelson Ward_.
G. D. Palmer and T. Lettis,
(unopposed).
           _Market Ward_.
C. Aldred, (C)                   129
F. Worship, (C)                  123
J. Owles, (L)                    104
J. Cobb, (L)                      84

Nov. 16th.—At the Council Meeting on the 9th, 46 members being present,
Mr. George Danby-Palmer proposed and Mr. P. Pullyn seconded Capt. Charles
Pearson, R.N., for the office of Mayor, and Mr. Wm. H. Palmer proposed
and Mr. E. H. L. Preston seconded, Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart., for that
office.

Upon taking the votes it appeared 25 were for Capt. Pearson and 21 for
Sir E. H. K. Lacon.  Mr. Ferrier then remarked “The majority for Capt.
Pearson is 4, and as 10 Aldermen voted for him, he is in fact returned by
gentlemen who are now out of office.”  Messrs. J. Fyson, Chas. J. Palmer,
J. C. Smith, H. Jay, W. Yetts, (Conservatives) and the Mayor and Messrs.
J. Pike, J. Fiddes, J. Bayly, J. Barker and B. Fenn, were then nominated
for Aldermen, when 42 members voted for Mr. Fenn and 21 for the other 5
party candidates, whereupon Mayor gave his casting vote in favour of the
Whig Nominees.

The Mayor’s dinner was held at the “Star” on the following Monday, when
His Worship occupied the chair and R. Hammond, Esq., the Vice-chair.  D.
A. Gourlay, Esq. (Deputy-Mayor) P. Pullyn, G. Danby-Palmer, H. Worship,
F. Palmer, W. N. Burroughs, Esqs., and the principal Liberal members of
the Corporation were present.

The price of Gas had been reduced to 5s. per thousand cubic feet.

H. Palmer, Esq., had notified his intention to resign the Town Clerkship.

Mr. Cufaude, Mr. C. Cory, and Mr. J. Clowes, were spoken of as probable
candidates.

Mr. G. Johnson had been elected master of the Workhouse.

Nov. 23rd.—The crew of a Sheringham smack had been fined £100 each, or
six months’ imprisonment for smuggling 2,760 lbs. of tobacco.

Dec. 14th.—Several houses on the Denes had been broken into, and some
brushes stolen from Mr. J. Palmer’s warehouse at the Bridge foot, where
the thieves missed taking a considerable amount of gold and silver
carelessly left on the premises.

Dec. 21st.—W. Lee, Esq., had held an Inquiry as to the drainage of the
Denes.

                      [Picture: Decorative graphic]




THIRD SERIES, 1851–60.


    “When found, make a note of”—

                                                             CAPT. CUTTLE.



1851.


Jan. 4th.—At the meeting of the Town Council, the Councillors for the St.
George’s, Market and Gorleston Wards refused to appoint Ward Aldermen “as
they had no confidence” in the Aldermen recently appointed by the casting
vote of the Mayor.

The “Water question” was before the public, when, as to the Ormesby water
with which it was proposed to supply the town, Mr. Cooper, an eminent
analytical chemist, stated that such water “was turbid from the green and
brown matter in it” and that “the large quantity (four grains) of
vegetable organic matter that it contained rendered it wholly unfit for
domestic purposes other than cleansing.”

Jan. 11th.—Chas. J. Palmer had presided at the Annual Public Library
meeting, when it was stated that upwards of 5,000 books belonged to that
institution.

J. Tolver, Esq. had sent in his resignation as Clerk to the Paving
Commissioners.

Jan. 25th.—It was stated that a provisional order was about to be issued,
applying the “Health of Town’s Act” to the Borough, thus threatening the
Paving Commissioners with extinction.

There was great complaint against these Commissioners for not properly
lighting the Denes.

Wm. Sumner, an ex-constable was bound over to keep the peace at the
instance of Samuel Tolver, Esq.

Feb. 1st.—The following notice appears as to No. 4, South Quay:—

    A tradition has long existed in connection with the Elizabethian
    House upon the Quay, formerly belonging to John Carter, the regicide,
    but now the residence of C. J. Palmer, Esq., F.S.A., (mentioned by
    Noble, vol. 2, p. 340), that of the “many secret consults” which the
    rebels held prior to the trial and execution of King Charles I. the
    fatal and final one took place in a chamber in the above mentioned
    house, in which Carter then lived.  A meeting of the chief
    Parliamentarian Generals was summoned, and the regicides, it is said,
    met early in the afternoon, and the conference, which was one of
    ‘great secrecy,’ did not terminate until near the hour of midnight,
    the dinner which had been ordered for four o’clock not being served
    until the meeting broke up.  This tradition, though generally
    credited, had hitherto received no confirmation to render it of
    historical value.  The important fact has, however, been placed
    almost beyond a doubt, as we can state on the authority of F.
    Worship, Esq., that in the course of the labours of the Committee
    recently appointed by the Town Council to inquire into the ancient
    records and muniments of the Borough, a record has been found of the
    visit of Oliver Cromwell to our town about the time alluded to, it
    having never yet been definitely ascertained that the Protector
    visited Yarmouth.  We hope this very interesting discovery will
    induce the Committee to prosecute their labours, and when the
    valuable town documents have been arranged and restored, the Council
    will see the propriety and necessity of providing some suitable
    depository for them.

Feb. 8th.—The New Mercantile Marine Act had excited much dissatisfaction,
and several handbills had appeared urging the sailors to take action, and
on Tuesday morning having “struck,” they mustered in groups on the
Hall-quay.  Subsequently they formed in procession to the number of 1,000
and paraded the town for several hours; they had a band and flags with
them, and a board on which was written “Do not sign the laws” and “Wages
£2 15s.  Summer and Winter.”

A Seaman’s Union had been formed having 450 members, and Mr. J. Teasdel
having given notice that he did not intend to reduce the wages paid to
his men to 50s. a month, several hundred of the men on strike, went over
the Bridge and manned the yards of a vessel belonging to that gentleman,
for whom they gave some loud and hearty cheers.

The Magistrates refused to sign a 1s. 9d.  Poor rate, but such rate was
subsequently signed by Mr. W. H. Palmer and Mr. J. Fenn and the rate for
that amount made.

Feb. 15th.—A meeting of the shipowners had been held at the Town-hall to
consider the seamen’s grievances, the Mayor in the chair, when upon the
motion of Mr. George Danby-Palmer, a resolution was carried to obtain a
repeal of the act of Parliament complained of, and a Committee formed
consisting of six owners and six seamen with the Mayor as chairman to
give effect to such resolution; the wages question was, however, not
discussed.

Feb. 22nd.—A further meeting had been held “to take into consideration
the present complaint of seamen respecting their wages, that the same may
be equalized throughout the year whether by voyage or month.”

About 30 owners were present, and also the Sailors’ Committee; the Mayor
was in the chair, and the sailors refused to be bound by their “old
agreement;” the following account is given of their subsequent
proceedings:—

    Since the above meeting a letter has been sent to the Mayor,
    announcing that the sailors were determined not to abide for the
    future by the old agreement; and handbills were also publicly issued,
    announcing a “grand procession” of the seamen of the port for the
    following day.  Accordingly on Saturday the sailors assembled
    opposite to their rendezvous, at the Royal Exchange on the Quay, to
    the number of about 1,500, and flags, union jacks, &c., with a band
    of music having been procured, a procession was formed, which paraded
    the town for several hours.  The men were mostly respectably attired,
    and wore rosettes of various colours, from which were suspended the
    medals of the Shipwrecked Mariners’ Society.  Some of the men were
    dressed in various emblematical characters, such as Britannia,
    Neptune, Amphitrite, Triton, &c., and were borne upon the shoulders
    of the crowd in boats, dolphin cars, &c., which were decorated with
    evergreens, &c., in short the whole assemblage seemed more like a
    triumphal procession than that of a demonstration occasioned by one
    of those unfortunate breaches between employers and employed, termed
    a “strike.”  Throughout the crowd a number of placards were
    distributed, bearing the following inscription:—“We, the seamen of
    Yarmouth, hereby testify our gratitude to the inhabitants, for the
    handsome manner in which they have come forward to assist us in
    obtaining our just rights.”  Also a number of poles, terminating in
    tridents, fishes, &c., were borne aloft, together with a handsomely
    carved model ship, covered with the flags of all nations.

Mr. S. S. Barber had applied to the Bench for the assistance of the civil
force to protect his seamen, who had just arrived by the “Maid of the
Yare,” London Trader, and who had been persuaded to leave their vessel,
and even threatened to be taken away by force if they did not leave.  The
Superintendent and some of the police went down to the spot, but, as the
men remained perfectly peaceable, their presence was not at all required.

The following members of the Council had addressed a letter to the
Treasury protesting against a proposed loan for drainage purposes, which
was said to have been carried by a majority of the Council at its last
meeting:—Sir E. H. K. Lacon, R. Ferrier, E. H. L. Preston, F. Worship,
William H. Palmer, R. Steward, R. D. Barber, E. R. Aldred, J. C. Smith,
J. G. Plummer, J. Cherry, J. E. Barnby, C. C. Aldred, B. Jay, R. Ferrier,
junr., S. Miller and William Worship, and thereupon at the Council
meeting a very warm discussion ensued, during which Mr. C. C. Aldred was
accused of having called Mr. George Danby-Palmer “a liar,” and Sir E. H.
K. Lacon (by Mr. Henry Danby-Palmer) of having made a disturbance by
“kicking against the panels.”

March 1st.—The following Councillors subsequently addressed a letter to
the Treasury in respect of these proceedings:—D. A. Gourlay, H.
Danby-Palmer, J. Bayly, R. Hammond, J. Lettis, junr., J. Fish, W. T.
Clarke, J. Barker, P. Pullyn, J. Jackson, J. D. Chapman, R. Hammond,
junr., G. Danby-Palmer, W. N. Burroughs, C. E. Bartram, M. Butcher, J. G.
Cannell, H. Boulter, P. White, J. Fiddes and J. Pike.

This issue contains the following report of the Sailors’ Strike and
Riot:—

    We have this week to record a riot of a serious nature arising out of
    the unfortunate strike among the seamen who, until recently, had
    conducted themselves in a manner highly creditable to so large a body
    of men placed in such circumstances.  Since the ill-advised
    rejection, by the men, of the old agreement as to wages, there have
    been several mariners (as there always must be with an over-stocked
    labour market) quite ready and glad to sail at different rates to
    those proposed by those who struck; and forseeing that if such
    defections from their camp continued, their strike would be
    unavailing, the sailors have during the last week been in the habit
    of parading the Quay, in gangs, for the purpose of unlawfully
    preventing such as were willing to go to sea from joining their
    ships, and partly by force, and partly by threats, several men have
    been deterred from fulfilling their engagements.  Although these
    facts were known to the authorities, no steps were taken to put a
    stop to them, in the hope that the reasonable and peaceable portion
    of the sailors would see how unjustifiable was the course they were
    pursuing, and how really destructive it was to the interests both of
    the owners and men.  The same line of conduct was, however,
    continued.  The first case brought before the Bench was that of
    Samuel Graystone, the mate of the schooner “Ant,” belonging to Mr. S.
    S. Barber, who applied for the protection of the police, the men
    having been taken out of his vessel on Friday afternoon last.  On
    Saturday morning, Mr. Barber again appeared before the Mayor to
    complain that the master and crew of the “Maid of the Yare” had been
    interrupted, and made to go on shore.  The master having come up and
    corroborated this statement, the crew were sent for and asked if they
    were willing to go to sea, having signed articles.  The master and
    mate said they were, but the men declined, through fear of personal
    violence.  They were told that if they did not they must be sent to
    gaol, but if they were willing to go they should be protected.  They
    then agreed to go, and were sent down accordingly with a body of the
    police; the master and mate went on board, but the crew refused, and
    the police were therefore withdrawn, when some sailors went and
    ill-used the mate, throwing him over the bows of his ship on to the
    Quay Head.  The captain also was pushed on shore.  Subsequently the
    Bench were informed that the man Graystone had again been taken out
    of his vessel, which had gone to sea without him, and was then lying
    in Corton Roads.  Graystone was sent for, and said he was not willing
    to go; but on an information being taken against him for refusing, he
    said he would if he could be protected.  A steamtug was therefore
    ordered to convey him to his vessel, and on its arriving opposite the
    Town Hall at half-past two o’clock, the Magistrates agreed, before
    taking any other steps, to try whether the police were not sufficient
    to protect the men on board, notwithstanding the evident
    determination of a large body of sailors to prevent him.  The
    Superintendent of Police, therefore, arranged the whole force, and
    with Graystone in the centre, surrounded by the Mayor and
    Magistrates, the escort left the station-house, distant not more than
    one hundred yards from the steamtug.  When about half way down, the
    crowd, which then consisted of about 200 or 300 sailors, set up a
    tremendous yell and rushed upon the police, whose ranks were speedily
    broken, several of the police and Magistrates being struck.  They
    rallied, and with the assistance of the Magistrates, who were mainly
    instrumental in preventing Graystone from being rescued, they
    succeeded in placing him safely on board the tug.  The principal
    ringleaders were then picked out, and after some considerable
    struggling they were got into the station-house.  By this time the
    concourse of people had increased to upwards of a thousand.  Some of
    the men then obtained a spar or boom which was brought opposite the
    station-house door for the purpose of using it as a battering ram to
    release the six or seven prisoners within.  Several stones were
    thrown, and a few windows broken; upon which the Mayor immediately
    swore in as many persons as were willing to be special constables,
    and a sally was made upon the mob, and with considerable difficulty
    the spar was got away, and one or two of those who were using it were
    taken into custody, but being completely overpowered, the authorities
    were compelled to retreat with the force into the station-house.
    Shortly after, Capt. Ellis, R.N., having arrived with a body of the
    coastguardsmen, armed with muskets, &c., together with some of the
    men from the revenue cutter, they took up a position in front of the
    Hall and Police-station.  The Mayor then read the Riot Act, the
    people not dispersing, but on the contrary rather increasing, as
    there must then have been several thousands.  Mr. G. D. Palmer
    addressed a few words to them from the Hall-door, imploring them to
    desist from the foolish course they had taken, and entreating them to
    disperse peaceably.  A stone was then hurled at the spot where the
    Magistrates were standing, but it fortunately did not take effect,
    and the man who threw it was instantly secured and brought into the
    station-house.  The following proclamation was issued by the Mayor:—

                 “Borough of Great Yarmouth, 22nd Feb., 1851.

    “NOTICE.—A riot having this day taken place in this Borough, and the
    Riot Act having been read, all peaceable and loyal inhabitants are
    desired to keep in their houses until order has been restored.  And
    notice is hereby further given, that no assemblage of persons will be
    allowed.

                                                  CHARLES PEARSON, Mayor.”

    After a consultation of the Magistrates, they unanimously determined
    to send to Norwich for a troop of the Military stationed there.  A
    telegraphic message was therefore despatched, which reached the
    Norwich Station about half-past four o’clock.  In the meantime nine
    of the East Norfolk Militia located here, under Captain Brown,
    arrived, and were speedily followed by detachments of the Coastguard
    from the stations at Caister, Winterton, Corton, &c., who were all
    sworn in as special constables.  The total available force for the
    protection of the town now amounted to 201, viz., 90 special
    constables, 81 officers and men of the revenue cutter and coastguard,
    21 policemen, and 9 militia men; and it was determined to clear the
    space in front of the station-house, which, with much difficulty was
    accomplished, when the police succeeded in picking out and taking
    several of the ringleaders.

    Some persons consider that the people might have been entirely
    dispersed without the aid of the military, but considering the
    overwhelming number of persons present, it could only have been
    accomplished by the armed force charging among the people, which
    might have involved much bloodshed, if not actual loss of life, and
    there can be no doubt that the authorities exercised a wise and
    prudent discretion in contenting themselves by keeping the crowd as
    it were at bay, until the arrival of the military, a troop of which,
    consisting of 35 of the 11th Hussars, under Captain Douglas, reached
    the Yarmouth station by special train at about a quarter to six in
    the evening.  A great mob of people had assembled at the terminus,
    and the officer in command refused to enter the town unless
    accompanied by a magistrate on horseback.  J. C. Smith, Esq.,
    accordingly having gone down, the troop, a little before seven
    o’clock, entered the town and cantering their horses over the quay
    and pavements, the crowd which had remained in front of the
    Police-court fled in every direction, some of them in their anxiety
    to escape the too near approach of the soldiers’ swords, actually
    running over one another.  Several women were knocked down by the mob
    in their flight, but we believe no injuries, beyond a few broken
    heads and bruised limbs, were received by any one.  Great numbers of
    persons, however, secreted themselves by the river side, and in the
    ends of the numerous narrow rows in the town, under the impression
    that the military could not dislodge them.  The Mayor, however,
    having issued orders for the entire quay to be cleared, the police,
    aided by a strong body of special constables, were for some hours
    engaged in dispersing the knots of people who had collected in these
    localities; patrols of the military and the police were then placed
    at all the principal thoroughfares leading to the Town Hall, which
    had been the scene of the riot, for the purpose of stopping all
    persons from coming that way.  About eleven o’clock order having
    been, comparatively speaking, restored, the Magistrates consulted
    with the commanding-officer, and it was agreed that the military
    (which now numbered 75 in all, having been joined by another troop)
    should retire to their quarters, holding themselves in readiness to
    be called out at a minute’s warning.  The police were sent on their
    regular beats, but the cutter’s men and coastguardsmen remained at
    the Hall during the whole of the Saturday night, as did also the
    special constables, who were divided into three divisions, under
    regular captains, for the purpose of relieving each other every four
    hours.  At half-past nine on Sunday morning, the Mayor and
    Magistrates again assembled, but as everything had passed off quietly
    during the night, and as there did not seem any disposition on the
    part of the persons who were collected round the Hall (more by
    curiosity than otherwise) to commit any breach of the peace, the
    special constables, with most of the coastguardsmen were released
    from further duty until they should be again summoned, if required,
    by the alarm bell.  At the close of the morning’s service the
    Magistrates held a further consultation, when it was determined to
    draw up a report of the occurrences which had taken place, and to
    transmit the same to Sir G. Grey, the Secretary of the Home
    Department, to whom it was suggested that it would be advisable that
    a war steamer should be sent down to the port until order was
    entirely restored.

    We cannot conclude our report without bearing our testimony to the
    great and extraordinary exertions to maintain peace and order made by
    our excellent Chief Magistrate, ably supported as he was by everyone
    of his brother Magistrates, and to the firmness and determination
    displayed by the Authorities may be mainly attributed to the
    preservation of the public peace, and the prompt and effectual
    suppression of the riotious spirit displayed by some thoughtless and
    illadvised men.  It could hardly have been supposed that any friends
    of order could have been found ready to cast any blame upon the
    Authorities for the wise precautions they took, but we regret to say
    that some persons who, instead of coming forward to assist in
    preserving the public peace, kept, to their shame, in their own
    houses, and who, entirely ignorant of the organisation which was on
    foot, presume to censure those whom they should have been the first
    to support.  Such parties are, however, we trust, but few, for we
    feel sure that the course pursued on the present occasion by the
    Authorities, will receive the unqualified approval and sanction of
    all the peaceably disposed and loyal inhabitants of the town.  The
    conduct of the Police force—as well as that of the special
    constables—was most meritorious and praiseworthy; some of the former
    especially distinguished themselves for their courageous conduct, but
    it would be invidious to make any distinction between them, as all
    the men in the force are equally deserving of praise.  They exercised
    the greatest forbearance, being most grossly insulted and ill-used,
    notwithstanding which they abstained from using their staves until
    the spirit of riot being openly manifested, they were directed to use
    them by their excellent superintendent, Capt. B. Love.
    Police-constable Fuller has been very seriously injured, it being
    feared that some of his ribs are broken; another man who was engaged
    in the cowardly act of beating Police-constable Johnson while on the
    ground, in his turn received a blow from the truncheon of one of the
    special constables, which inflicted a very serious wound on his head.
    Many other persons were hurt in the course of the riot, but not that
    we can learn to any serious extent.  It is said, however, that a man
    was severely wounded in the hand by the sword of one of the soldiers,
    he having seized the bridle and nearly thrown the latter.

On the succeeding Monday the several cases were dealt with arising out of
these proceedings.

Mr. I. Preston appeared to prosecute, Mr. C. Cooper (instructed by Mr. F.
S. Costerton) representing the prisoners.

Robert Watson (for obstructing Captain Love, Surperintendent of Police)
fined 10s.

James King (for threatening E. H. L. Preston, Esq.,) fined 40s.

Samuel Bowles (like offence) fined £3.

John Crow (ditto) fined £1.

James Harvey, William Balls and William Stoddard (ditto) discharged with
a caution.

Samuel Gowing (ditto) fined £1.

Henry Walpole (charged by William Danby-Palmer, Esq., with a like
offence) fined £2.

James Vincent (for creating a disturbance) fined 10s.

George Walton (charged by Mr. S. S. Barber) for a “rescue,” fined £5.

Alfred Pye (for assaulting Police-constable Lattimore) fined £2.

William Bee, John Creak, Benjamin Mallett, Edward Brooks, and Robert
Willgrass (charged with having taken part in the riot and disturbance)
were committed for trial, but Bee, Mallett and Creak were admitted to
bail in two sureties of £40 each and their own recognizances for £68
each.

H.M. ships “Black Eagle” and “Lightning” had entered the Harbour and laid
on the west side of the river.

The Workhouse (which unfortunately contained a large number of idle and
dissolute characters) had been the scene of frequent disturbances, and
police had been lodged there on that account.  During the riot an
outbreak, however, had taken place, and a ringleader named Charles
Girdlestone taken into custody; he was sentenced to 42 days’ hard labour
for this offence, and would be sent for trial for a ferocious attack on
the police.  Three other paupers had been sent to the treadmill for 21
days each for refractory conduct.

March 8th.—At the Quarter Sessions, (held before N. Palmer, Esq.), the
rioters, John Creak (24), Benjamin Mallett (34), John Brooks (19),
William Bee (26), and Robert Willgrass (—), were put upon their trial.

Mr. Hotson (with whom was Mr. Mills and Mr. Bulwer) prosecuted, and Mr.
Evans (with whom was Mr. C. Cooper) defended the prisoners, the Jury
(having deliberated for 25 minutes) returned a verdict of Not Guilty,
“which verdict was received with a loud burst of applause, which lasted
two or three minutes.”

March 15th.—The strike had ended, most of the owners having consented to
sign agreements for giving the men the wages they asked for, for a period
of 12 months.

March 22nd.—The sailors had held a “Grand Procession with flags, banners,
and triumphant cars.”  In the latter were several men attired as Neptune,
Britannia, &c., in the evening they attended at the Vauxhall Gardens,
where there was a grand display of fireworks.—During the strike 500
stones of flour, 600 lbs. of beef, and 500 cwt. of coals, had been
distributed amongst the families of the men on strike from the
contributions of the inhabitants.

The N.A.O.D. had met at the Trinity Arms to celebrate the 10th
anniversary of the Trinity Lodge, No. 220.  Messrs. R. R. B. Norman, J.
P. Hastings, P.A., and F. Palmer took part in the proceedings.—It was
stated there were then three lodges of this order in the town.

April 5th.—Mr. Ferrier and Sir E. H. K. Lacon had appealed, without
success, against the rating of certain property on the Denes, on the
ground “that it was not within the town.”

April 12th.—Mr. S. Tolver had instructed Mr. Coppock, the parliamentary
agent, to prepare the petition against the application of the Public
Health Act to the town, and this document was being numerously signed.

It was proposed to form a “Pilot” Steam Tug Company (capital, £1,000 in
£5 shares.)

George Danby-Palmer and J. Barker, Esqs., had been elected Haven
Commissioners, and D. A. Gourlay and R. Hammond, Esqs., Supernumerary
Haven Commissioners.

April 19th.—Mr. T. Brightwen was urging the appointment of a Chaplain at
the Workhouse.

The Conservatives had secured, for the first time, several scats at the
Board of Guardians, the following forming the new Board:—

Nominated by both parties—Messrs. B. Fenn, S. C. Marsh, and S. V. Moore.

Liberals—Messrs. G. Danby-Palmer, D. A Gourlay, and T. Brightwen.

Conservatives—Messrs. R. Ferrier, E. R. Aldred, C. Woolverton, W.
Worship, J. G. Plummer, W. Laws, E. H. L. Preston, S. Nightingale, J.
Cherry, and T. Paul.

Captain Ellis, R.N., had exhibited the model of a fast sailing yacht.

Captain James Day had been fined £5 for assaulting Mr. Nolloth, tailor.

The “Public Heath Act” was again being discussed by the Town Council,
where Mr. Burroughs moved, and Mr. Barker seconded, a petition against
the application of the Act to the Borough, and Mr. F. Worship moved, and
Mr. R. Ferrier, jun., seconded as an amendment that the Council pass to
the next business on the agenda paper.

Upon a division the amendment was lost by 15 to 23, and the original
motion declared to be carried by 23 to 17 votes.

April 26th.—At a meeting held at the Angel-inn (C. J. Palmer, Esq., in
the chair) it was thought desirable “to advertise the town, and that a
saxhorn band should play daily on the principal promenades.”

May 10th.—The pilots of Gorleston had succeeded in establishing a Tug
Company, and had purchased a boat of 45 horsepower, called “The Royal
Albert.”

J. Hume, Esq., M.P., had introduced a deputation of Ratepayers opposed to
the “Public Health Act” to Lord Seymour (at the Woods and Forests
Office); it consisted of Charles Pearson, Esq., (Mayor); D. A. Gourlay,
Esq., (Deputy-Mayor); George Danby-Palmer, Esq., and William N.
Burroughs, Esq., with Mr. J. H. Harrison (Secretary), while 18 members of
the Council at the same time petitioned Parliament in favour of the
measure.

The sailors had held a meeting to consider the “Ticket” system and the
“Muster Roll” fund.

May 17th.—In consequence of the removal of the window tax, bricklayers
were busy throughout the town opening out windows formerly blocked up.

Mr. Cosgrove’s saxhorn band was to perform on the North and South
Terraces during the season.

The census head been taken with the following result:—

 Houses inhabited.      Uninhabited.       Total.        Building.
       5,984                344             6,328            78
     Families.             Males.         Females.         Total.
       6,154               11,544          15,014          26,558

Increase of population per cent., 10.3.  This included 347 inmates of the
Workhouse.

It was noted that in 1619 Manship estimated the then population of the
town at 1,200 households, which would give a population of some 7,000.

In 1724 a writer named Andrews stated the population at 13,000 or 14,000;
and in 1784 when it was first accurately taken, it was found to be
12,608.

The then returns were considered disappointing, as it was expected that
the town contained 30,000 persons, but it was noted that 2,500 sailors
belonged to the port, half of whom were probably not at home when the
return was made.

At this time Gorleston had a population of 2,586, and Southtown of 1,412
persons.

John Annison, the driver of the Sutton coach, had been convicted for the
fourth time of conveying passengers to Yarmouth at a greater speed than
four miles an hour without having a number plate on his vehicle, and
fined £10 with £3 3s. costs.

May 31st.—Visitors were beginning to arrive.

June 7th.—A project was on foot for laying out the Chapel Denes as an
ornamental walk for the public.

June 28th.—A mushroom measuring 29 inches in circumference, with a stalk
about the thickness of a man’s wrist and weighing 2½lbs., had been grown
at Bradwell.

James Gedge, a pauper lunatic, had escaped from the Workhouse, having
only a shirt on.

July 5th.—A Bill had been brought in by Lord Seymour and Mr. Cornewall
Lewis confirming the provisional order to applying the provisions of the
Board of Health Act to the town.

July 19th.—A petition, signed by 1,550 persons, had been presented to the
House, and a deputation had waited on Lord John Russell with regard to
this action of the Government.

The M.P’s. for the town being in favour of the measure, “had been
requested to resign the trust they had abused.”  This action emanated
from a public meeting of ratepayers, over which.  George Danby-Palmer,
Esq., presided, and at which Mr. S. W. Bly, Mr. A. Ames, Mr. W. N.
Burroughs, Mr. S. V. Moore, Mr. R. Hammond, and Mr. T. Parker took part.

July 26th.—The Bill nevertheless passed through Committee by a majority
of 92 against 12.

Sir J. Walmsley had opposed and Lord Seymour supported the measure, but
eventually it passed the House of Commons without a division.

The paupers were much dissatisfied at not being allowed, as formerly, to
attend places of Worship in the town on Sundays.

Mr. C. Houchen had delivered an address on this subject, and denounced
the action of the Guardians.

Aug. 9th.—It was computed that many hundreds of children in the North
District were entirely without the opportunity for instruction, and it
was proposed to fit up the Priory as a National School to meet this want.

Evidence had been taken by the Committee of the House of Lords upon the
Public Health Bill being applied to the town, and they reported the Bill
to the House without amendment; thus there was a “speedy prospect of the
town being well drained and made clean and healthy in spite of its
one-idead rulers.”

Captain Smyth, R.N., had been raised to the rank of Post-Captain.

Six hundred and thirty electors had signed a requisition calling on
Messrs. Rumbold and Saunders to resign their seats as M.P’s. for the
Borough.  This would form a majority of the voters.

The East Norfolk and Suffolk Horticultural Show had been held under the
patronage of the Mayoress, Lady Lacon, and Mr. S. C. J. Palmer.

Aug. 16th.—The 279th, and last, meeting of the Paving Commissioners had
been held, when there were present—Messrs. George Danby-Palmer (in the
chair), B. Dowson, W. N. Burroughs, J. Fish, C. E. Bartram, F. Palmer, J.
H. Harrison, S. V. Moore, P. White, J. Cobb, W. Crow, I. Lettis, jun.,
and W. H. Bessey.

Mr. Beeching’s newly-built lifeboat had been submitted to several tests
opposite the Crane.

Aug. 23rd.—Mr. Beeching’s model had obtained the prize in the Lifeboat
Competition at Somerset House.  There were 280 models and plans sent in,
the first six boats being—James Beeching, Great Yarmouth; Henry Hinks,
Appledore; J. and E. Pellew, Newbury; William Teasdel, Great Yarmouth;
Harvey and Son, Ipswich, and George Farrow, South Shields.

Aug. 30th.—The Licensed Victuallers had held a large and important
meeting for the purpose of protecting their interests, S. C. Marsh, Esq.,
in the chair.

Mr. G. Blyth (Reporter to the _Norfolk News_) had been induced to visit
at night a tower in the South-End of the town, belonging to George
Danby-Palmer, Esq., when he had been assaulted by some person there, and
of this he had complained to the Bench.

Sept. 13th.—The Justices had refused to grant any fresh licenses at the
Brewster Sessions.

The “Reindeer” yawl (manned by Beachmen) had challenged the “America”
yacht to sail for £105.

Sept. 20th.—The Council meeting had been broken up, leaving 20 subjects
undisposed of, owing to all the Conservatives and two or three of the
Liberal members leaving the meeting, which was thus reduced below the
required number to form a “quorum.”

Sept. 27th.—Mr. Hilling had been appointed Town Surveyor at a salary of
£30 per annum, and £250 had been proposed as the salary of the
Town-Clerk, he also acting as Clerk to the newly-formed Local Board of
Health.  Mr. Clowes, however, declined to give his assent to serve on
these terms without further consideration.

Oct. 4th.—There had been heavy gales and the Roadstead presented “a most
lamentable scene, crowded with shipping, which had put in for refuge to
the number of some hundreds.”

Two of the vessels belonging to the Franklin Exploration Expedition were
in the Roads.

Oct. 11th.—Harris Wilshak had been charged with being concerned in
smuggling 14lbs. of tobacco.

At the Revision Court Mr. F. S. Costerton appeared for the Liberals, and
Mr. C. Preston for the Tories.  Neither party claimed any gain from the
proceedings on the Parliamentary Lists, but on the Burgess Roll the
Liberals claimed a gain of 19, of which 15 were in the Regent-ward, where
a very warm contest was expected in November.

Oct. 18th.—Mr. J. W. Crowe had been elected Surgeon to the Hospital
School.

The new Valuation Lists had increased the assessment of the parish by
£47,000.

Active preparations were being made for the Municipal contests.

Mr. Wilshak had been acquitted on the charge of smuggling.

George Deacon, known as “The Prophet,” had thrown himself into the river,
as he stated that it was impossible that he should sink; he would have
been drowned but for the help of the bystanders.  When taken to the
Station House he was found to have £18, 2 old gold coins, and 21s. 6d.
upon him.

Oct. 25th.—The Priory was being fitted for National Schools.

Houchen, who had been preaching against “the powers that be,” had been
bound over to keep the peace in two sureties of £25 and himself in £50.

Nov. 8th.—The Municipal Election had been hotly contested and the
partizans of the winning party (the Tories) made it “a boast of having
expended in the five wards a sum of money variously stated from £800 to
£1,200.”  The following was the return given with the poll of 1850
appended to it:—

            _North Ward_.
          1851—219 Voters.
Mr. S. Nightingale, C.            108
Mr. W. H. Bessey, C.              103
Mr. J. Mainprice, L.               97
Mr. H. D. Palmer, L.               95
          1850—208 Voters.
Mr. J. Jackson, L.                108
Mr. Burroughs, L.                 105
Mr. Nightingale, C.                90
Mr. Cory, C.                       68

In this Ward the Liberals headed the poll until nearly one o’clock, when
a detachment of Conservative “runners” with some “dust” turned the
election.  The price of votes was high, and ranged from £8 to £12; and it
is said that two polled for the winning party cost £20!

          _Market Ward_.
         1851—270 Voters.
Mr. J. E. Barnby, C.            148
Mr. J. Fenn, C.                 132
Mr. John Cobb, L.               120
         1850—261 Voters.
Mr. C. Aldred, C.               129
Mr. F. Worship, C.              123
Mr. Owles, L.                   104
Mr. J. S. Cobb, L.               84

In this Ward the Liberals did not bring forward two candidates, being
anxious to mark their approbation of Mr. Barnby’s consistent opposition
to the Public Health Act; and here, as in the North Ward, their candidate
headed the poll until the arrival of the other portion of Conservative
workers from the Regent Ward, when a sufficient number of loose fish were
immediately polled to swamp the majority, at that time about twenty.  The
prices of votes ranged from five pounds to ten guineas at a late hour of
the day.

           _Regent Ward_.
          1851—244 Voters.
Sir E. H. K. Lacon, C.            115
Mr. J. Cherry, C.                 114
Mr. F. Palmer, L.                 101
Mr. J. Clowes, L.                  90
          1850—234 Voters.
Mr. Chapman, L.                   104
Mr. Marsh, C.                     104
Mr. Harmer, C.                     93
Mr. F. Palmer, L.                  84

Great exertions were used to secure the return of the out-going
Councillors, and it having been almost publicly stated that the
Conservatives were determined to win “at any cost,” votes, in
consequence, got up the night before the election to a very high
premium—from £5 to £15; and “split” votes even were in very great demand
at £8 and £10.  One case is mentioned of a voter, in another Ward, who,
forseeing the value which votes would attain, speculated in the purchase
of one in this a month before the election, at the trifling sum of £3,
and so profitable was the investment that on the election morning he sold
it for £10.  The money spent in this Ward was stated at £350.

         _St. George’s Ward_.
           1851—256 Voters.
Mr. R. Ferrier, jun., C.            126
Mr. H. Jay, C.                      126
Mr. P. Pullyn, L.                    76
Mr. J. W. Shelly, L.                 66
           1850—250 Voters.
Mr. J. Plummer, C.                  130
Mr. J. C. Smith, C.                 116
Mr. J. Barker, L.                   101

Mr. Pullyn and Mr. R. Ferrier, jun., were the outgoing Councillors, and
the former was brought forward again by the Liberals, in conjunction with
Mr. Shelly, the Conservatives selecting Mr. H. Jay (who had formerly
contested the Nelson Ward unsuccessfully) as a colleague for Mr. Ferrier.
Messrs. Pullyn and Shelly refused even to canvass the electors, and
although some of their friends solicited the suffrages of the Ward for
them, there can be no doubt, however right in principle the
non-canvassing may be, it operated against them, and this, combined with
the constitutional principles upon which their election was conducted,
contributed to their defeat, money being freely spent on the other side.
Much regret is felt at this result, and especially at the loss of the
public services of Mr. Pullyn, after his having so long served the Ward,
and after his twice filling the office of Chief Magistrate in a manner
that won for him the praise even of his political opponents.

          _Nelson Ward_.
         1851—341 Voters.
Dr. Impey, L.                   132
Mr. S. V. Moore, L.             132
         1850—317 Voters.
Mr. G. D. Palmer, L.            121
Mr. T. Lettis, L.               119

The Conservatives did not contest this Ward, and Dr. Impey was
re-elected, in conjunction with Mr. Moore in the room of Mr. J. Symonds,
now non-resident.

          _Gorleston Ward_.
           1851—344 Voters.
Mr. S. Miller, C                   136
Mr. W. H. Palmer, C                135
Mr. J. H. Harrison, L               76
Mr. N. Sterry, L.                   74
           1850—337 Voters.
Mr. E. H. L. Preston, C            185
Mr. W. Hammond, C                  169
Mr. S. Crow, L                      78
Mr. Costerton, L                    64

This Ward was contested, but in rather a peculiar way, for although it
was supposed that some opposition to the outgoing Councillors would be
made, it was treated by the Conservatives as a “sham” one, and such it
really seemed up to 12 o’clock, when the state of the poll came out with
upwards of 100 for Messrs. Miller and Palmer, and only about two votes
for each of their opponents!  This, however, was only a _ruse de guerre_,
and in a short time the voters came up almost in a body for Messrs.
Harrison and Sterry, who stated in their address that in “the short space
of four hours they obtained 97 promises,” and had they been sooner in the
field it is thought they would have met with better success.

The result of the Elections has been a gain to the Conservative party of
two seats, and this reduces the two parties to a level in the Council;
the Liberals have still, however, a bare majority, and it is doubted
whether they will not be able to carry the Mayoralty for another year.
The Conservatives, it is said, intend nominating either Sir E. H. K.
Lacon, or (which is more likely) Mr. S. C. Marsh for that office, whilst
the names of Alderman E. R. Palmer and Alderman Bartram are spoken of by
the Liberals.

The Bishop of Norwich, attended by the Rev. S. Hills and his chaplain,
had inspected the Priory buildings, when they were received by J. H.
Hakewell, Esq., (the architect) and C. J. Palmer, Esq., (the hon.
secretary to the Committee).

Mr. Worlledge had moved the Court of Queen’s Bench for a “_quo warranto_”
to try the legality of Mr. Hammond’s election as a Councillor for the St.
Andrew’s Ward, and the rule had been granted.

Nov. 15th.—The Hospital was badly supported, and it was stated that
unless £150 a year in additional subscriptions could be obtained, the
assistance afforded to sufferers must be abridged.

A lecture on “Bloomerism” had been delivered by Mrs. Knights at the Corn
Hall in full “Bloomer” costume, but she did not appear to have achieved a
marked success.

Dr. Wolff (the traveller) had offered to give some lectures in the town
in aid of the National Priory Schools.

At the Town Council for the Election of Mayor, a great crowd assembled
prior to the meeting, when Sir E. K. Lacon proposed, and Mr. Fenn
seconded, S. C. Marsh, Esq., to fill that office, and Mr. George
Danby-Palmer moved, and Mr. R. Hammond seconded, the re-election of
Captain Charles Pearson, R.N.  Upon the votes being taken, there appeared
for Captain Pearson—Aldermen Pearson, Boulter, Bartram, Bayly, Fiddes,
Hammond, Pike, R. Hammond, jun., E. R. Palmer, and Barker; Councillors
Burroughs, Butcher, Cannell, Clarke, Chapman, Fish, Gourlay, Impey,
Jackson, Lettis, Moore, G. D. Palmer, and P. White; total, 23.  For Mr.
Marsh—Alderman B. Fenn; Councillors C. Aldred, E. Aldred, Barber, Bessey,
Cherry, Ferrier, Ferrier, jun., J. Fenn, W. Hammond, B. Jay, H. Jay,
Lacon, Marsh, S. Miller, Nightingale, W. H. Palmer, Plummer, Preston,
Smith, Steward, F. Worship, and W. Worship; total, 23.  And the Mayor,
giving a casting vote for himself, declared himself duly elected.
Subsequently the Town Clerk (Mr. John Clowes) declared that he would not
continue in that office at the salary of £250, and it having been stated
that Mr. Charles Cory would accept it on those terms, he was elected Town
Clerk by 23 against 15 voices.  Mr. Cory then attended, was informed of
his election, and an order made on the late Clerk to hand over the papers
relating to the office to him.  In conclusion, the Editor expressed a
hope that “on no future occasion will any parties be allowed to violate
order and decorum in a way so disgraceful as they did on Monday last.”

Nov. 22nd.—A dinner had been given to the Mayor at the Star-hotel, when
45 members of the Council and others attended.

A Poor’s Rate of 1s. 2d. in the £ had been made.  Great dissatisfaction
existed as to the new assessment of the parish.

Nov. 29th.—Mr. Joseph Sandars, M.P., had issued a reply to the
requisition of the electors, justifying the course he had taken with
regard to the Public Health Act.

A meeting had been held with regard to the new assessment, Mr. J. H.
Harrison in the chair.

The town had been visited with a tremendous gale, during which several
vessels had been blown out to sea.  At the time of the storm there were
700 sail between this port and Lowestoft.

The “Enterprise,” 600 tons, had been launched from Mr. Branford’s Yard;
she was christened by Miss Barber and Miss Holt.

Dec. 6th.—A public meeting had been held at the Town-hall (Mr. J. H.
Harrison in the chair) for the purpose of considering the Poor’s Rate
assessment recently made.  About 400 persons attended, when the same was
condemned, and a subscription commenced for the purpose of disputing the
validity of it.

In respect of such proceedings, Mr. F. S. Costerton had been engaged as
solicitor to the owners of small tenements, and Mr. C. H. Chamberlin for
the general body of appellants, estimated at from 500 to 600 in number at
the least.

Dec. 13th.—At the special meeting of the Town Council, “a scene of much
disorder and confusion arose out of some recriminations relative the late
Town-Clerk, between Mr. Burroughs and Mr. Preston.”

Dec. 20th.—On the hearing of the assessment appeals, the rate was quashed
by the Justices on the ground of unequal assessment.  In these
proceedings Mr. Chamberlin appeared on behalf of the Committee of
Ratepayers, Mr. C. Cory for several private individuals, and Mr. Cufaude
for the Overseers.

Dec. 27th—The Overseers had applied for, and obtained a fresh rate of 1s.
2d. in the £.

It had been determined in future not to use the “St. Nicholas’ Seal,”
belonging to the Corporation, and for practical purposes a smaller seal
was to be made; the old one had been in use since about the year 1251.

The Race Committee had issued its report, from which it appeared that the
income had been, for the last year, £512 1s. 3d., as against £523 3s.
11d. expended.



1852.


Jan. 3rd.—The new Railway Bridge had been opened.

Jan. 17th.—There was further dissatisfaction in the town on the subject
of the Assessment and the Poor’s Rate; a summons, obtained by Mr. J. H.
Harrison against some officials for not allowing him to inspect the
rate-books, was dismissed with costs.

Mr. Hammond (one of the Justices) had called the attention of the Press
to the manner in which on certain occasions Magistrates were “drummed
up.”

William Rising, Esq., of Somerton Hall, had entertained a large party of
sporting friends at the Angel Hotel.

A portion of the Gorleston Cliff had fallen away, carrying with it the
Misses Barber, who were subsequently dug out of the sand below.

A high tide had washed over the west side of the Harbour with such force
that a vessel belonging to W. H. Palmer, Esq., had been driven from her
moorings.  On the Beach it flowed past the Britannia Terrace.

Jan. 24th.—There were more Poor’s Rate appeals, and Mr. J. H. Harrison
being dissatisfied with the result of them, gave notice that he should
carry his case to the Quarter Sessions,

Jan. 31st.—Captain Manby had received a medal from the Jurors at the
Great Exhibition for the life-saving models which he had exhibited there.

The parish had been divided into five wards for Poor Law purposes; prior
to this the whole 16 Guardians had been voted for “en bloc” by the
ratepayers throughout the whole parish.

Mr. Worlledge had again appeared before the Queen’s Bench in the case of
“The Queen _v._ Hammond,” and the Court had granted the rule.

Feb. 7th.—Mr. J. H. Harrison had been fined for an alleged assault on a
constable, arising out of the confusion in the Court on the late hearing
of the Poor’s Rate appeals.  He gave notice of appeal to the Quarter
Sessions.

Feb. 14th.—Mr. Harrison had presided at another meeting of ratepayers who
were dissatisfied with the action of the Justices as to the assessment.

Feb. 21st.—It was announced by a handbill signed by Mr. Harrison, that
these owners had come to a satisfactory arrangement with the Overseers,
and that further legal proceedings had been abandoned.

Feb. 28th.—“The Queen Charlotte” and “Mad Bess” steam-packets were
advertised as going to run between this port and Rotterdam.

March 6th.—A meeting of shipowners had been held (S. Paget, Esq., in the
chair), to consider certain representations made to them from other
places, with regard to the action to be taken by their class at the next
General Election, but no resolution was arrived at in conformity
therewith.

Henry Austin, Esq., (Secretary to the General Board of Health), had
visited and inspected the town.

March 13th.—Mr. Beeching continued to receive numerous orders for his
improved lifeboats.

The Mormons had engaged the School of Industry as a “Church.”

The following were the tenders for the Priory Schools:—Mr. John Key
£1,120, Mr. R. Page £1,232, Mr. R. Pratt, £1,310, and a London builder
£1,637.  Mr. Norfor and Mr. Stanley were acting with the successful
contractor.

March 20th.—A meeting had been held at the King’s Head Inn with regard to
the representation of the Borough.  Mr. J. W. Shelly was chairman, and
Mr. R. Hammond, John Owles, and C. E. Bartram took part in the
proceedings, which eventuated in a request to Sir Charles Napier, K.C.B.,
and W. T. M’Cullagh, Esq., M.P., to contest the Borough in the Liberal
interest.

March 27th.—The Conservatives had held a meeting at the Angel-hotel for a
similar purpose.  Mr. E. H. L. Preston presided.  Mr. R. Ferrier moved,
and Mr. W. H. Palmer seconded Sir E. H. K. Lacon as a candidate for the
Borough, and Mr. B. Dowson proposed, and Mr. S. H. Aldred seconded Mr. C.
Rumbold as his colleague.

The question of the rating of the Vauxhall property had been settled by
the Court finding that the premises were in Norfolk, which was, in fact,
a verdict for the plaintiff.  The sum in dispute was 11s. 8d., and it was
estimated that the costs amounted to about £1,000.

A fire had occurred on Mr. Ecclestone’s premises in the Broad Bow.  G.
Danby-Palmer, E. H. L. Preston.  R. Hammond, and W. N. Burroughs, Esqs.,
were early on the spot and rendered valuable assistance.

Mr. George Barrett had been elected Master of the Blue Coat Charity
School in the place of the late Mr. Gershom Davie.

Captain Ellis, R.N., and the Coastguard had seized 162 bales of tobacco
on board the collier “Martha.”

A quartett meeting had been held at Noverre’s Rooms, the performers being
William Yetts, Esq., (leader), Mr. D. Hogarth, Mr. G. Sharp, and Mr.
Stonex.

April 3rd.—The Liberal party had held a meeting at the “Star” for the
purpose of receiving Admiral Sir C. Napier and W. T. M’Cullagh, Esq.,
M.P., who had arrived in the town (J. W. Shelly, Esq., in the chair); on
the same day a public meeting of electors had been held in the Corn
Exchange (George Danby-Palmer, Esq., chairman), and on the platform were
R. Hammond, P. Pullyn, J. W. Shelly, J. Bayly, T. Lettis, J. Jackson, C.
E. Bartram, R. Barber, C. Miller, Esqs., Captain W. Briggs, Messrs. J. D.
Chapman, Chris. Steward, J. Mainprice, B. Bellin, J. Cobb, P. White, and
others.

The meeting was a crowded one, and the candidates appear to have been
heartily received.

April 10th.—W. Stirling Lacon, Esq., H.E.C.S., had invented an appliance
for the more easily lowering of ships’ boats, which was approved by many
nautical gentlemen, including, locally, Admiral Sir E. Travers, R.N., and
Captain Pearson, R.N.

The Rev. Partridge, A.M., had been recommended by the Committee to the
proprietors for the post of Head Master at the Grammar School.

The Priory Schools had been commenced.

At the Election of Guardians, Mr. J. H. Harrison had been nominated for
all the Wards, but had elected to stand for the Nelson Ward, in which he
resided.

Messrs. W. Green, W. Wright, S. Lessey, and J. Borking had been
re-elected Overseers.

Captain John Pike (one of the Aldermen) had died.

April 17th.—Mr. Rumbold, M.P., had arrived in Yarmouth, as also had Sir
E. H. K. Lacon, Admiral Sir C. Napier, and W. T. McCullagh, Esq., M.P.
The Tories were making a private canvass in the evenings.

The Rev. Bowyer Vaux had been appointed Chaplain to the Military Asylum,
vice the Rev. C. Davie, M.A., resigned.

The following Guardians had been elected:—

_St. Nicholas’ Ward_.—Messrs. Thomas Brightwen, E. H. L. Preston, and S.
Nightingale.

_Regent_.—Messrs. W. Worship, S. C. Marsh, and D. A. Gourlay.

_St. George’s_.—Messrs. B. Fenn, R. Ferrier, and P. Coble.

_Market_.—There was a contest here as under:—

E. R. Aldred             248
W. Laws                  238
Edward Harvey            161
Edward B. Jay             89

The first three were elected.

In the _Nelson Ward_ the return was—

George Danby-Palmer            327
Charles Woolverton             286
S. V. Moore                    276
W. Yetts                       176
J. H. Harrison                 147

The first four were therefore elected.

Messrs. William H. Palmer and E. P. Youell had been elected by the
pew-holders, Churchwardens of St. Mary’s, Southtown; and Mr. F. R. King
(vice F. S. Costerton resigned) and Mr. William Hammond had been
appointed to similar office at Gorleston.

At the Yarmouth Vestry (the Rev. G. Hills presiding), Mr. R. Hammond
proposed, and Mr. J. G. Fisher seconded the re-election of Mr. C. D.
Steward, and Mr. B. Fenn proposed, and Mr. F. Worship seconded the
re-election of Mr. E. R. Aldred.  The Church Rate was then 2½d. in the £.
At this meeting Messrs. R. Hammond and J. Davey were re-elected
“auditors” for the ensuing year.

April 24th.—It was said that Lord A. Lennox was ready “to start” for
Yarmouth.  Meanwhile Sir E. H. K. Lacon was canvassing the electors,
accompanied by about 30 leading Conservatives, and Mr. Rumbold M.P. was
taking a similar course in company with six or seven personal friends,
while Sir C. Napier and Mr. McCullagh, M.P., were addressing crowded
meetings of electors in the several Wards of the Borough.

At the Council Meeting, Mr. C. C. Aldred had publicly apologised for
stating as regarded Mr. F. S. Costerton “that a constituency had been
defeated by the advice of a petty-fogging lawyer.”

The election of an Alderman was then proceeded with, when the voting—

For Mr. Yetts            23
,, Mr. Pullyn            23

And the Mayor gave his casting vote in favour of Mr. Pullyn.

Mr. Palmer had obtained a rule in the Queen’s Bench for a new trial in
the case of Bradstreet _v_ Hammond.

May 1st.—Contains much matter reflecting on Mr. Rumbold’s present
position as contrasted with his former one when connected with the
Liberal party.  Having completed his canvass, that gentleman had issued a
joint address with Sir E. Lacon, and being seriously indisposed had left
Yarmouth for his country seat.

The Tory Government, which had been in office six weeks, had appointed
Messrs. B. Fenn, T. Brightwen, J. Cherry, R. Steward, C. C. Aldred, and
J. G. Plummer, Magistrates for the Borough.

The Bench previously to this had consisted of Liberals, Messrs. George
Danby-Palmer, R. Hammond, W. Johnson, and J. W. Shelly, and
Conservatives, J. F. Costerton, E. H. L. Preston, William Danby-Palmer,
W. Thurtell, J. C. Smith, William H. Palmer, B. Jay, W. Yetts, J. Fenn,
and W. H. Bessey.

The “Disfranchised Freemen” had held a meeting and adopted a petition to
Parliament, Messrs. Jacob Harvey, Nelson, Royal, and J. Taylor taking
part in the proceedings.

The agents of the Custom House had taken into custody the landlord of the
“Honest Lawyer.”

May 8th.—The coffer-dam at the new Bridge works had “blown up;” on the
following day the old Bridge had been on fire.

The Cricket Club had been re-established.

The Freemen’s Petition had received 972 signatures.

A tradesman in the town had given a dinner to four old people, whose
united ages amounted to 368 years.

May 15th.—It was stated that the Rev. — Smith had left £14,000 to endow
two scholarships at Caius College for natives of Yarmouth.

The Poor’s Rate was to be 1s. 2d. in the £, the sum of £2,521 being
required for that purpose by the Guardians.

May 22nd.—A salmon trout had been caught near Winterton, having a gutta
percha ring on its tail with “192 Tweed 1852” stamped upon it.

At a mooting of the Sailors’ Association, Mr. J. D. Chapman had been
presented with a silver medal.

The Directors of the Victoria Building Company had dined together at the
Victoria Hotel, (B. Dowson, Esq., in the chair.)

May 29th.—A meeting of the subscribers to the fund for “Promoting the
Prosperity of Great Yarmouth” had been held at the Angel, (C. J. Palmer,
Esq., F.S.A. in the chair) and £25 subscribed in the room.

June 5th.—The Tenth Anniversary of the N.A.O.D. had been held at the
Trinity Arms.  About 50 members and friends were present.

June 12th.—The Liberal candidates had completed their canvass and left
the town.  Complaint was made that Mr. McCullagh had been libelled by the
“Lacon party.”

Mr. Rumbold, it was supposed, would retire, his case being considered (by
the “Blues”) hopeless.

June 19th.—It was reported that Mr. Rumbold would retire in favour of Sir
Harry Smith.  Some of Mr. Rumbold’s friends, and Sir E. Lacon, had gone
to London.

The “Associated Democrats” had held a meeting at the Masonic Hall, when
Messrs. J. T. Blow and Royal took part in the proceedings.

June 26th.—Contains another attack on Mr. Rumbold, who was stated to have
voted in 121, and been absent in 669 divisions of the House.

The Trustees of the Southtown Turnpike had obtained power to light that
road with gas.

Gas in Yarmouth had been reduced from 5s. 6d. to 5s. per 1,000 feet.

The British School had been inspected by Mr. Fletcher, who considered
that its state reflected the “greatest credit” upon Mr. Daniel Tomkins.

At the Sessions, Messrs. C. C. Aldred, B. Fenn, R. Steward and J. G.
Plummer were qualified as Magistrates.

The notice of the rules as to collisions at sea, under 14 and 15 Vic.,
cap. 79, appear in this issue, to come in force on 1st of August then
next.

July 3rd.—Admiral Sir Charles Napier had returned to Yarmouth, and the
Star Hotel was decorated with several of his flags and trophies.  The
hustings were to be erected on the North side of the Town Hall, and the
Liberal polling-booth opposite the King’s Head, that for the Tories being
opposite the Angel.

George Danby-Palmer, Esq., had presided at a meeting of the Liberal
Registration Association at the Star Hotel, when several healths had been
drunk with “Hieland honours.”  The greatest enthusiasm prevailed on this
occasion, and Mr. Chapman presented each of the candidates with a rosette
and some appropriate lines from the ladies of Yarmouth.

July 10th.—On the morning of the Nomination the walls were found covered
with these placards—“Rumbold the Champion of the Board of Health,” “Lacon
the Patron of Lowestoft.”  The Sailors marched in procession to the
“Star” where the Liberal candidates were staying with a band, colours,
and chariots borne by the men, on which were “Britannia,” “Neptune,”
“Triton,” &c.  Upon the Blue flags appeared “M’Cullagh and Freedom of
Election,” “True Blue and Victory,” “England expects that every man will
do his duty,” &c.; and on the Red flags “Lacon our Townsman,” “Lacon and
Rumbold for Ever,” “Church and State,” and “Cheap Bread and no Monopoly.”
Mr. B. Dowson proposed, and Mr. William Hurry Palmer seconded Mr.
Rumbold; Mr. George Danby-Palmer proposed, and Mr. J. W. Shelly seconded
Admiral Sir Charles Napier, K.C.B.; Mr. R. Ferrier proposed, and Mr. E.
H. L. Preston seconded Sir E. H. K. Lacon; and Mr. R. Hammond proposed,
and Mr. Jackson seconded Mr. William T. McCullagh.  The show of hands was
largely in favour of Sir C. Napier and Mr. MeCullagh, whereupon Mr. B.
Dowson demanded a poll for Sir E. H. K. Lacon and Mr. Rumbold.  After
these proceedings the sailors again formed in procession and marched
round the town, and the electors were addressed from the Star by Messrs.
Owles, Jackson, and Shelly.  The poll was taken on the following day as
under:—

             McCullagh.      Napier.       Lacon.       Rumbold.
8.30                   66            63           46            43
9                     118           116          102           101
9.30                  189           185          199           196
10                    239           233          239           234
11                    268           264          278           269
11.30                 344           342          373           352
12                    386           384          430           400
12.15                 410           407          467           423
1                     435           430          493           455
2                     460           448          519           472
2.15                  470           455          521           473

At this point (the Editor says) practices which may be imagined, _and
which will hereafter be described_, decided the poll, and in a quarter of
an hour the numbers stood—

         McCullagh.      Napier.       Lacon.       Rumbold.
                  483           463          542           492
3                 499           476          572           515

Mr. S. W. Craske then proceeded to serve notices upon certain electors
before voting, and Mr. McCullagh, in company with Mr. George
Danby-Palmer, and Mr. J. W. Shelly, informed the Mayor that the
proceedings would be questioned.

            McCullagh.      Napier.       Lacon.       Rumbold.
3.30                 516           484          601           541
4                    521           486          611           547

After the close of the poll Mr. McCullagh again addressed the electors,
and a fracas ensued, during which two or three persons were injured.

July 17th.—From 7,000 to 8,000 visitors had attended the Regatta, when
the Mosquito, Volante, and Secret contended for the Club yacht prize,
which was won by the first-named, yacht; the Reindeer won the principal
yawl prize.

A crowded meeting of the Liberal electors had been held at the
Star-hotel, (W. N. Burroughs, Esq., in the chair), which was addressed in
a speech of two hours’ length by Mr. McCullagh, with a view to
petitioning against the return of Lacon and Rumbold.

It was stated that the boy who was injured during the election at Mr.
Feltham’s was progressing favourably.

An application had been made to the Bench for compensating the persons
whose property had been injured on the day of election.  It was stated
that 40 panes of glass had been broken at Mr. Feltham’s, and that the
windows of the Angel Hotel had also suffered considerably.

July 24th.—The town was very full of visitors, and the price of
provisions much enhanced thereby.

July 31st.—The Mayor had not attended the Water Frolic.

Aug. 7th.—A meeting had been held to consider the question of forming a
Company to supply Gorleston and Southtown with gas, George Danby-Palmer,
Esq., in the chair; William Johnson, S. Crowe, H. Fellows, R. S. Watling,
H. Martin, W. T. Clarke, Esqs., Mr. Page, Mr. Greaves, Mr. Gooda and Mr.
Howes were, with many others, present.  An influential committee was
formed and a considerable sum subscribed in the room.

A curious mural painting had been discovered in St. Nicholas’ Church.

Mr. Craske had recovered 30s. from George Thurtell, Esq., for damages to
his coat on the Election day.

On the application of Mr. Chamberlin for Mr. Gooderich, and Mr. F.
Ferrier for Mr. Brown, the Magistrates had signed the following orders
for payment of damages and costs arising out of the Election riot:—

                  £       s.       d.        £        s.       d.
Mr. Brown,           7        0       11
damages
    costs            6       13        0
                                                13       13       11
Mr.                  4        0        0
Gooderich,
damages
   costs             6        0        0        10        0        0
Magistrates’                                     5       19        1
Clerk’s fees
                                               £29       13        0

Aug. 14th.—The Races had been held.  Stewards: Lord W. Powlett, Sir E. H.
K. Lacon, Bart., M.P., and B. Bond Cabbell, Esq., M.P.  The entries were
“numerous and good”; there were several charges brought against
pickpockets before the Justices arising out of these sports.

It was stated that “a Mr. John Cooper” had been the author of the several
paragraphs during the late Election, of which so much complaint had been
made.

The King of Holland had presented Mr. W. Stirling Lacon with a silver
medal for his invention for lowering ship’s boats.  The Great Britain was
being fitted with this apparatus.

Aug. 28th.—Commander Henry J. Lacon had been appointed to the “Daring,”
12, brig.

W. T. McCullagh, Esq., had been staying with the Mayor, and had visited
Grout’s factory.

Sept. 4th.—There were 182 applicants for renewal of licenses; no new
licenses were granted, although in respect of one ease the Justices
divided five against five, and a “scene of confusion” ensued.

Sept. 11th.—Messrs. Harrison had launched the “Water Witch,” 37, smack,
from their yard.

The Bridge works had been stopped owing to “quicksands.”

Sept. 18th.—The Paper appears in mourning for the Duke of Wellington.

Sept. 25th.—Lieutenant Chambers had ascended in the Prince of Wales
balloon from the Vauxhall-gardens; it contained 36,000 cubic feet of gas.
He descended on a marsh near the Norwich-road at no great distance from
the place of ascent.

Dr. Impey’s sudden and lamented death had caused a vacancy in the
Nelson-ward, and the Conservatives had started Mr. John Clarke as their
nominee.

Oct. 2nd.—The “Lady Haven Estate” in Southtown had been sold for £7,000.

At the Nelson-ward Election, the opposition to Mr. Clarke’s return was
only a nominal one, the numbers being—

Mr. J. Clarke (Con.)            122
Mr. Owles (Lib.)                  4

The numbers in the Council were thus balanced 24 to 24.

Oct. 9th.—Records the death of Admiral Fisher.

An appeal was made for the restoration of the Nelson Column.

At the Registration Court, Mr. C. Chamberlin appeared for the Liberals
and Mr. Cufaude for the Conservatives, and the former claimed a gain of
42 upon the revision.

Oct. 16th.—At the Court held for the Revision of the Burgess Roll, Mr.
Chamberlin again appeared for the Liberals and Mr. Ferrier for the
Conservatives, and the former again claimed a gain upon the proceedings.

It was proposed to erect a monument to the memory of the late Dr. Impey.

Oct. 23rd.—Peter Le Neve Arnold, Esq., a dumb gentleman, had been found
to be of unsound mind since January, 1840.  This Inquiry was conducted at
the Victoria Hotel.

The Bishop of Norwich had confirmed 136 candidates.

Oct. 30th.—A man named Horth had been committed for trial on the charge
of attempting to murder Mrs. Proudfoot.

The names of Messrs. S. C. Marsh, J. G. Plummer, and C. J. Palmer (the
Mayor-Elect in 1835), were mentioned as probable holders of the Mayoralty
during the ensuing year.

Dr. Dunne had been elected Physician to the Hospital (vice Impey
deceased).

Nov. 6th.—Mr. J. S. Cobb had lectured on the “Objects and Uses of
Botany.”

                           MUNICIPAL ELECTION.

_Regent Ward_.—Barber (C) and Fish (L).

_St. George’s Ward_.—Ferrier and B. Jay (C).

_Nelson Ward_.—W. Yetts and C. J. Palmer (C).

_Gorleston_.—R. Steward (C) and W. T. Clarke (L.)

The returns for the _North_ and _Market Wards_ could not be given.

Nov. 13th—At the Council Meeting Mr. Alderman Fenn had proposed, and Mr.
Preston seconded, S. C. Marsh, Esq., as Mayor for the ensuing year, and
that gentleman was thereupon elected without opposition.

Upon the re-election of Corporation officers, Mr. Bales (the old officer)
was opposed by Mr. Collins as second Mayor’s officer, and the latter
appointed, 8 Liberals voting for Bales, and 21 Conservatives for Collins.

The Mayor’s Dinner was held at the Town-hall.  Cosgrove’s Brass Band
attended and a number of ladies were in the gallery; the decorations were
very rich and elegant; 186 gentlemen were present, amongst whom
were—Viscount Le Franchien, Sir E. Travers, K.H., H. N. Burroughes, Esq.,
M.P., Rev. R. Bent, Messrs. T Browne, T. Brightwen, R. D. Barber, J.
Baker, M. Brown, C. Brown, E. Bell, W. H. Bessey, J. Bracey, C. Cherry,
C. Cory, W. Clementson, J. L. Cufaude, T. W. Clarke, C. Chamberlin, W.
Dowson, C. B. Dashwood, W. H. Diver, Captain P. Eyton, R.N., R. Ferrier,
B. Fenn, J. G. Fisher, Captain Gooch, R.N.  D. A. Gourlay, W. Johnson, H.
Jay, B. Jay, J. Jackson, H. Matchett, S. Nightingale, E. H. L. Preston,
Captain Pearson, R.N., A. Preston, William Danby-Palmer, C. J. Palmer, W.
H. Palmer, P. Pullyn, J. G. Plummer, W. Rising, Captain Smyth, R.N., F.
Steward, R. Steward, S. W. Spelman, J. C. Smith, W. Thurtle, H. Teasdel,
Rev. B. Vaux, Captain White, R.N., Rev. M. Waters, H. V. Worship, F.
Worship, W. Worship, R. S. Watling, J. D. Waters, W. Yetts, E. P. Youell,
&c.

The “Norfolk,” 300 tons, had been launched from Mr. Fellows’ yard.

Nov. 20th.—The Right Hon. M. T. Baines had presented the petition against
the return of Sir E. H. K. Lacon and Mr. Rumbold, whereupon “Mr. Rumbold
(who was present) took up his hat and left the House.”

The funeral of the Duke of Wellington had been observed as a general day
of mourning.

A fire had nearly been occasioned by an accident in the Town-hall kitchen
during the Mayor’s Dinner.

Nov. 23rd.—Sir E. Lacon and Mr. Rumbold (accompanied by Mr. W. H. Palmer)
had had an interview with the Right Honourable J. W. Henley, and
presented the Shipowners’ Memorial.

Sergeant Kinglake and Mr. O’Brien had been retained by Mr. F. S.
Costerton in the matter of the Election petition.

Mr. Robert Steward had caused the Attorney-General to serve writs on
several members of the Town Council, with a view to testing the validity
of the renewal of leases by that body under a custom then in force in the
town.  Mr. W. Worship strongly deprecated this proceeding.

Dec. 4th.—At the Council meeting it was resolved, on the motion of Mr.
Ferrier, seconded by Mr. C. C. Aldred, that the Town Clerk defend the
actions so commenced at the instance of Mr. Steward.

The petition had been defeated, as the Examiner had reported “the
sureties to the petition to be informal and invalid.”

The Tories had sent the bellman round the town to announce this fact.

Captain Fisher, R.N., had been appointed to the command of the
“Magician,” 16 gun steam frigate, 400 horse-power.

It was proposed to start a “Conservative Land Society” at Yarmouth.

Dec. 11th.—Messrs. George Danby-Palmer, W. N. Burroughs, John W. Shelly
and R. Hammond, junr., had petitioned the House of Commons for redress as
regarded the action of the Examiner as to the Election petition.

Dec. 18th.—A public meeting had been held to consider the construction of
“a Marine Parade and Drive.”  About 300 or 400 persons were present; the
Mayor presided, and was supported by Charles Pearson, Esq., R.N., C. E.
Bartram, C. Aldred, J. Jackson, J. Chapman, E. Aldred, C. J. Palmer, F.
Palmer, R. Dowson, C. Miller, E. Preston, J. C. Smith, R. Ferrier, H. D.
Palmer, R. Steward, J. Cherry, W. C. Reynolds, F. Worship, W. Worship,
&c.  Mr. C. J. Palmer moved, and Mr. D. R. Fowler seconded a resolution
in favour of the proposal; and Mr. Amis moved, and Mr. J. Cobb seconded
as an amendment “That those who wanted a Parade should pay for it,” which
amendment the Mayor declared, amid some confusion, to be carried.

Dec. 25th.—A “wholesale robbery” of fish had taken place at Mr. Charles
Cannell’s office.

The Government had been defeated upon the Budget, Sir E. H. K. Lacon
voting with, and Mr. C. E. Rumbold against, them.



1853.


Jan. 8th.—A meeting of Liberal electors had been addressed by Mr.
McCullagh relative to the rejection on technical grounds of the petition
against the return of the M.Ps.  George Danby-Palmer, Esq., occupied the
chair, and Messrs. F. S. Costerton, P. Pullyn, R. Hammond, J. Clowes, C.
E. Bartram, J. Jackson, J. Bayly, W. N. Burroughs, J. D. Chapman, J.
Cobb, W. Livingstone, S. Parker, J. Mainprice, D. R. Fowler, P. White and
others were present.

It was rumoured that Mr. Rumbold would not again offer himself for the
Borough, owing to his having voted against the Government, which had
angered his Tory supporters.

Jan. 15th.—An election had been held for a Councillor in the Gorleston
Ward, owing to the death of Mr. S. Miller.  The numbers polled were—

For Mr. William Hammond                132
,, Henry Danby-Palmer, Esq.             88
                        Majority        44

The Tories gave “their usual breakfast.  Many of the electors on both
sides did not poll.”

The Rev. Bowyer Vaux had presided at the Annual Public Library Meeting.

Jan. 22nd.—At the “Great Metropolitan Poultry Show,” E. H. L. Preston,
Esq., Mr. E. Hughes and Mr. Henry Turrell had won prizes.

One hundred and thirty persons had attended the first Subscription Ball
at the Town Hall.

Jan. 29th.—Considerable progress was being made with the new Bridge
works.

Bro. Oswald Diver had been installed Master of Lodge Friendship at the
Duke’s Head.

Feb. 5th.—The return of paupers showed—In-door, 331: out-door, 1,289;
cost of out-relief, £83 15s. 11¾d. for the week.

Feb. 12th.—The Wellington Pier Bill was reported as having complied with
standing orders.

Mr. James W. Crowe had been appointed Medical Officer for the North
District in the place of Mr. Button appointed to a similar office for the
Workhouse.

Feb. 19th.—Mr. C. J. Palmer brought to the notice of the Council the
dilapidated state of the Nelson Monument, and Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Mr.
Palmer, Mr. Burroughs, Mr. Ferrier, Captain Pearson, and Mr. Steward were
appointed a Committee to consider the subject.

Mr. Palmer also called attention to the state of the town’s muniments,
and it was agreed that Mr. Harrod should be engaged to arrange same at a
fee of £20.

Mr. Chamberlin (Coroner) required the Council to seal his appointment:
this had been neglected in 1848 when he was appointed to that office.

Feb. 26th.—The Yarmouth Water Works Bill had been read a second time in
the House of Commons.

March 12th.—Mr. Jarvis, jeweller, Broad Row, had been committed for trial
on the charge of attempting to defraud an Insurance Company by setting
fire to his premises.

March 19th.—The House of Commons Committee had decided that the preamble
of the Water Works Bill was proved.  Mr. Webster appeared for the
promoters, and Mr. Lynde for certain landowners who petitioned against
it.  Evidence was given in support of the measure by Messrs. R. Ferrier,
Charles Cory, W. Rising, and Spelman.

April 2nd.—At the Vestry Meeting, Messrs. Steward and Aldred had been
re-elected Churchwardens, and a Church rate of 1½d. in the £ voted.

The retiring Guardians had been re-elected.

Sir Charles Napier, K.C.B., had visited the town and called on several of
his more active supporters at the recent contest.

April 9th.—Messrs. Borking, Green, Wright, and Bradbeer had been elected
Overseers.

The Wellington Pier and Water Works Bills had passed the Commons.

The East Norfolk Militia were to meet for training on April 19th.

April 16th.—The Town Council had proceeded to elect a Surveyor, when the
voting was—

For Mr. Laing            22
,, Mr. Parker            15

And Mr. Laing was consequently appointed to that post.

April 23rd.—The East Norfolk Militia had assembled and paraded in the
Lunatic Asylum yard.

April 30th.—At a meeting of the Wellington Pier Company (S. C. Marsh,
Esq., in the chair), it was determined to proceed with the erection of
that structure at once.

May 7th.—The second Subscription Ball had been attended by upwards of 170
of the principal inhabitants of the town and neighbourhood, including the
Mayor, Mrs. Marsh and party, Captain, Mrs. and Miss Pearson, Mr. and Mrs.
Caldecott, Misses Caldecott (2) and Miss Leathes, Rev. F. Steward, Mrs.
and Miss Steward, Mr., Mrs., and Miss Brown (Thrigby), Mr. and Mrs.
Harcourt (Burgh Castle), Mr. and Mrs. C. J. Palmer, Rev. S. T. Preston
and Miss Preston, Mr. and Mrs. E. H. L. Preston and Miss H. Preston, Mr.
and Mrs. C. S. Sharpe, Mr. and Mrs. H. Reeve (Lowestoft), Mr. and Mrs. A.
Steward and party, Mr. and Mrs. W. C. Reynolds and Miss Pellew, Rev. E.
B. Frere, Mrs. Frere and party, Mr. and Mrs. R. Ferrier, Mr. and Mrs. J.
Steward and Miss Stephens.  Captain and Miss Money, Colonel Mason and
officers of the East Norfolk Militia, Captain Adsbrighton and the
officers of the 4th Light Dragoons, &c.

May 14th.—Colonel Mason and the officers of the East Norfolk Militia had
been entertained at a Ball at the Town Hall give by some of the principal
inhabitants.

G. W. Haggard, Esq., had delivered a lecture on “The Militia.”

E. H. L. Preston, Esq., had been offered £31 10s. for seven chickens,
hatched in February, the off-set of his prize white Cochin China fowls.

May 21st.—The East Norfolk Militia had been disbanded.

A Spanish hen, the property of Mr. Josiah Stevenson, had laid an egg
measuring 8 inches round, 6½ inches in length, and weighing more than 3½
ounces.

May 28th.—The Queen’s Birthday had been celebrated, the Mayor and a
number of gentlemen dining at Bird’s Royal Hotel on the occasion.

The Reform Association of Great Yarmouth had been addressed by Mr.
McCullagh in a speech of two hours’ duration.

June 4th.—Experiments in “table moving” were being made at the Young
Men’s Institute by the Hon. Secs., Messrs. John Fellows, S. C. Sothern,
John Beattie and Barcham Sayer.

June 11th.—Sir C. Napier, K.C.B., had been appointed Vice-Admiral of the
Blue.

June 26th.—The driving of the first pile of the Wellington-pier was
advertised to take place on the 28th inst.

July 2nd.—A report of which event appears in this issue, when a marquée
was erected near the Victoria Hotel, and at the request of Mr. Waddington
(Chairman of the Company), Mr. S. C. Marsh (the Mayor), performed the
ceremony.  The following was the inscription:—“This, the first pile of
the Wellington Pier, was driven on the 28th of June, 1853, by S. C.
Marsh, Esq., Mayor of this borough; David Waddington, Esq., M.P.,
Chairman of the Board of Directors; Peter Ashcroft, Esq., Engineer;
Charles J. Palmer, Esq., Secretary.”  In the evening between 50 and 60
gentlemen dined at the Victoria Hotel, the Mayor in the chair and C. J.
Palmer, Esq., in the vice-chair.

July 9th.—At the Regatta the “Phantom,” “Thought,” and “Maude,” yachts,
contended for the prize, which was won by the former.

July 30th.—At the Water Frolic the “Shannon” (lateen), Brighten, Beccles,
won the first, and the “Oberon” (cutter), Morton, Aylsham, the second
prize.

The Monument was still in a dilapidated state.

Aug. 6th—The Baptist Chapel in Row 15 had been re-opened after extensive
repairs.

Aug. 20th.—Mr. W. C. Nutman (clerk to Mr. J. L. Cufaude) had been elected
a Relieving-officer in the place of Mr. Thomas Thornton.

Sep. 3rd.—John Mortlock Lacon, Esq., had died suddenly; he was in his
68th year.

At the general Licensing day it was moved by James Cherry, Esq., and
seconded by R. Steward, Esq., “That no fresh licenses be granted.”

Mr. Clinker Newson had appealed against the poor rate on the novel ground
that he was rated at too low an amount.

Sep. 10th.—The “Clarissa” barque, of 335 tons register, had been launched
from Mr. Chapman’s yard.

Oct. 1st.—Mr. Peter Coble had died suddenly from disease of the heart
before his medical adviser, Mr. C. C. Aldred, could attend him.

Oct. 8th.—The Registration Court had been held, Mr. Watson (of Norwich)
and Mr. Preston appearing for the Tories, and Mr. J. Clowes and Mr. W. S.
Costerton for the Liberals, who claimed a gain of 120 on the Borough
Register.

Nov. 5th.—Five hundred and fifty feet of the Wellington Pier had been
opened to the public, the Corporation attending, and in the evening there
was a public dinner at the Victoria Hotel in honour of the event.

At the Municipal Election in the _North Ward_, Messrs. Burroughs (L) and
Jackson (L) were re-elected without opposition.

In the _Market Ward_ the polling was—

F. Worship (C)              125
E. R. Aldred (C)            118
J. Owles (L)                 92
J. Cobb (L)                  68

In the _Regent Ward_, S. C. Marsh (C) and J. D. Chapman (L) and in the
_St. George’s Ward_ J. G. Plummer (C) and J. C. Smith (C) were not
opposed.

In the _Nelson Ward_ there was a contest, but no numbers are given; Dr.
Dunn and Mr. W. Thurtell (Cs) opposing the re-election of Mr. George
Danby-Palmer and Mr. Thomas Lettis (Ls) who were again returned, and in
_St. Andrew’s Ward_ the polling was—

H. Teasdel (C)                  139
E. H. L. Preston (C)            134
S. Crowe (L)                     41
W. Sterry (L)                     7

The Conservatives, on the whole, had increased their majority by one.

The following paragraph appears in this issue:—“Among the passengers by
the “Argo” s.s. from Sydney, is Mr. Harrison, of Great Yarmouth, who
brings with him 3,000 ounces of gold dust, valued at between £11,000 and
£12,000.”—_Morning Chronicle_.

The first Subscription Ball of the season had been held at the Town Hall,
90 persons being present, the hall had been re-painted a light green in
lieu of the old salmon colour, and four beautiful statues of “Clio,”
“Erato,” and “The Dancing Girls of Canova,” had been placed in the
niches.

Nov. 12th.—At the Council meeting, on the nomination of Mr. W. Worship,
seconded by Mr. C. J. Palmer, James Cherry, Esq., had been elected Mayor.

The following Whig Aldermen then went out of office;—R. Hammond, jun., E.
R. Palmer, H. Boulter, C. E. Barham, and W. Walpole with B. Fenn (C), and
the following voting took place to fill these vacancies:—

Mr. T. Bunn                     21
,, T. Foreman                   21
,, W. C. Reynolds               27
,, J. G. Rivett                 26
„ G. S. Shingles                26
,, E. P. Youell                 26
,, R. Hammond, junr.            10
,, Boulter                       6
,, J. Brown                      5
,, E. R. Palmer                  8
,, Sir E. Tavers                 1
,, H. Worship                    1
,, S. Paget                      1

Nov. 26th.—Court “Buck of the Forest,” A.O.F., had been opened at the
Buck Inn.

One hundred and nineteen persons had been confirmed by Bishop Spencer at
St. Nicholas’ Church.

Dec. 3rd.—It was proposed to establish a School of Design in the town.

Captain Manby had attained his 88th year.

Dec. 24th.—A parochial Museum was being formed at the Priory.

The Local Board District Rate was signed at 1s. 4½d. in the £.

Dec. 31st.—Mr. C. J. Palmer had presided at the annual dinner of the
subscribers of the Public Library.



1854.


Jan. 7th.—Several houses had been damaged by a “fearful” storm.

The “Seamen’s Association” had held a demonstration with a procession
round the town.  At a subsequent meeting held at their Club House the
following toasts were given:—“The Queen,” “May British Sailors weather
the Storm,” “England expects every man will do his duty,” “The Owners and
Merchants of Yarmouth,” “May British Sailors never want for grog and
tobacco.”

Jan. 14th.—The “Eleanor Palmer,” belonging to W. H. Palmer, Esq., had
been “totally lost” on the coast near Athens.  This was the third vessel
that gentleman had lost since 1853.

Jan. 21st.—At a meeting of the Town Council it had been determined to
oppose the “Waveney Valley Drainage Bill.”

Captain Broadhead, R.N., was engaged at this port raising a corps of Sea
Fencibles.

Jan. 28th.—The first Subscription Ball had been held, for which
Cosgrove’s Band was engaged, and dancing kept up until four o’clock.

Sergeant Johnson had been charged by Mr. George William Moore with having
been drunk and assaulting him.  The parties, together with Mr. Silvers,
Mr. J. H. Harrison, Mr. Ellis, Mr. Howlett, and Mr. W. Wright appear to
have been in Cosgrove’s public-house at three o’clock in the morning,
when the alleged offences were said to have been committed.

Jan. 28th.—N.B.  This is the first issue of the _Norwich Mercury_ as a
bi-weekly newspaper.

The following improvements were noted:—The now Haven Bridge and also the
Wellington Pier were nearly completed.

The Water Works were being formed.

The Southtown Gas Works would soon be opened.

The new Bank of Messrs. Gurney and Co., was in the course of erection.

Many new streets were being formed on the North, East, and South Denes.

The Marine Drive was projected.

The town had been selected for the Militia Barracks, and it was said that
the Victoria Esplanade was likely to be carried as far as the South
Battery.

On the other hand the state of the Chapel Denes had, however, long been
“a disgrace to the town.”

There had been an “immense fleet” of vessels in the Roads.

Feb. 1st.—There had been snow-drifts 5 feet deep on the line between
Yarmouth and Reedham.

Feb. 8th.—Mr. Burroughs had, at the Council meeting, denounced certain
gentlemen as “traitors to the town” and “tools of Mr. Peto.”

Feb. 11th.—A considerable quantity of human bones had been found near the
Caister Road, which were supposed to be the remains of persons who died
of the plague and received burial from the Leper Houses which formerly
existed there.

Feb. 18th.—There had been extremely high tides, a violent storm, and a
heavy gale.  Several dockyards had been overflowed, and about thirty
balks of timber had been lost from Mr. Steward’s yard.

Feb. 22nd.—A Tradesmen’s Ball had been held in the Town Hall.

Feb. 25th.—A Liberal meeting had been held at the Star Hotel, (George
Danby-Palmer, Esq., in the chair) when resolutions in favour of Lord John
Russell’s Reform Bill and the Ballot were adopted.

There had been another high tide, the Quay being in several places
inundated; the surf rolling over the old Jetty.

March 1st.—Owing to the sitting of the County Court, the Council had met
in the Grand Jury Room at the Tolhouse.

The Seamen’s wages were so high that they preferred the Merchant Service
to the offers being made by Sir Charles Napier to join the Navy.

March 4th.—John Eagleton charged with having fraudulently cheated the
Guardians of the Poor by delivering to poor persons receiving out-door
relief bread of short weight, was found guilty, subject to a case for the
opinion of the Court of Criminal Appeal, (Mr. J. Cobb and Mr. L. A. Meal
being his sureties in £50 each.)

March 8th.—A Tender has arrived to take off the Coastguardsmen and Naval
Volunteers.

Rear-Admiral Plumridge had been summoned to London for the purpose of
hoisting his flag in the Baltic Fleet under Sir Charles Napier.

A vessel had been sent to sea manned entirely by master mariners; the
rise in wages and the attractions of the Navy having so reduced the
number of common seamen.

March. 11th.—The Baltic Fleet was expected to pass Yarmouth.

A public meeting in favour of the Reform Bill had been held at the Corn
Hall (George Danby-Palmer, Esq., in the chair), when the following
gentlemen took part in the proceedings:—Mr. W. N. Burroughs, Mr.
McCullagh, Mr. J. W. Shelly, Mr. C. E. Bartram, Mr. J. Clowes, Mr. J.
Owles, Mr. Jackson, Mr. D. A. Gourlay, and Mr. R. Hammond.

March 18th.—A meeting had been held at the Star Hotel, Mr. J. H. Harrison
in the chair, to consider the rating of cottage property.

March 25th.—A memorial brass had been placed in St. Nicholas’ Church to
the memory of the late Dr. A. Impey.

A meeting in favour of “Sabbath Observance” had been held.

March 20th.—Contains the Royal proclamation of the war with Russia.

April 1st.—The Baltic Fleet was at Kiel, and Admiral Plumridge was likely
to shift his flag from the “Leopard” to the “St. Jean d’ Acre.”

April 12th.—At the meeting for the Election of Haven Commissioners,
Captain Scott proposed and Captain Briggs seconded George Danby-Palmer,
Esq.; W. Yetts, Esq., proposed, and C. J. Palmer Esq., seconded, R.
Ferrier, Esq.; J. Jackson, Esq., proposed, and Garson Blake, Esq.,
seconded, J. Barker, Esq.; H. Palmer, Esq., proposed, and S. Cobb, Esq.,
seconded, Richard Hammond, Esq., junr.; and Mr. J. Owles proposed, and
Mr. T. Lettis seconded, D. A. Gourlay, Esq.  Mr. Ferrier declined to go
to a poll, and thereupon Messrs. Palmer and Barker were elected
Commissioners and Messrs. Hammond and Gourlay Supernumerary Commissioners
without opposition.

The following had been result of the Guardians’ Election:—

_St. Nicholas’ Ward_.—James Jackson, cottage owner, 200, elected; Samuel
Nightingale, brewer, 167, elected; John Mainprice, spirit merchant, 159,
elected; Henry Boulter, confectioner, 129; William Wright, building and
cottage owner, 123; Edward H. L. Preston, timber merchant, 112; Abraham
Amis, cottage owner, 107.

_Market Ward_.—William Laws, grocer, 194, elected; David Abraham Gourlay,
shipowner, 168, elected; Joseph Harvey, tanner, 132, elected; John Cobb,
currier and leather seller, 102; Robert Tooley, miller, 76; Richard
Ecclestone, draper, 71; William Woolston, cottage owner, 56.

_Regent Ward_.—Samuel Charles Marsh, wine merchant, 160, elected; William
Worship, solicitor, 156, elected; Thomas Foreman, shipowner and cottage
owner, 126, elected; James Denny Chapman, draper, 116; Frederick Palmer,
surgeon, 102; William Livingstone, draper, &c., 68: John A. Norman, jun.,
cottage owner, 66.

_St. George’s Ward_.—Richard Ferrier, brewer, 225 elected; Joseph
Goulding Plummer, shipowner, 223, elected; Benjamin Fenn, fish merchant,
222, elected; Cubitt Engal Bartram, gentleman, 116; Christopher Steward,
pawnbroker, 83; Robert Page, cottage owner, 65.

_Nelson Ward_.—George Danby-Palmer, shipowner, 258, elected; James
Hargrave Harrison, cottage owner, 235, elected; Charles Woolverton,
plumber, 212, elected: Thomas Brightwen, gentleman, 206, elected; Samuel
Velzi Moore, anchorsmith, 177; Thomas Lettis, jun., fish merchant, 130;
Benjamin Powell, merchant, 126; John Clarke, shipowner, 158.

April 19th.—Proceedings were threatened with regard to the Election of
Guardians by the Liberals.

April 22nd.—Both Churchwardens had been re-elected by the Vestry, and a
Church rate of 1½d. in the £ voted.

April 26th.—Notice of “the Closing of the Churchyards” had been issued.

Eleanor Warren had died in the old prison Row, aged nearly 103 years.

April 29th.—The men of the East Norfolk Militia and Norfolk Artillery
Militia had assembled in the Market Place under the command of Colonel
Mason and Lord Hastings, respectively.

May 3rd.—The Stewards for the next Subscription Ball were to be the
Mayor, Captain Pearson R.N., S. C. Marsh, Esq., C. J. Palmer, Esq., and
M. Lacon, Esq.

The following law report appears in this issue:—

                          COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL.

     Before the Lord Chief Baron, Mr. Baron Parke, Mr. Justice Cresswell,
                 Mr. Justice Erle, and Mr. Justice Crompton.

                            _Regina_ v _Eagleton_.

    The indictment in this case contained ten counts, seven of which
    charged an attempt to defraud, and the last three an attempt to
    obtain money by false pretences.  The defendant had entered into a
    contract with the Board of Guardians of Great Yarmouth to supply
    loaves of bread of the weight of three pounds and a half to the poor,
    and had supplied many of the out-door paupers with loaves weighing
    only 3lbs. 4 ozs., and had represented to the Overseers of the poor
    that the loaves supplied were of the contract weight, and had
    endeavoured to obtain payment accordingly.  This case was sent back
    to the Recorder of Great Yarmouth to be amended, in order to have the
    question fully argued.

    Mr. Bodkin and Mr. Mills appeared for the defendant, and Mr. Bulwer
    for the prosecution.

May 10th.—The Rev. R. J. Palmer, M.A., had lectured on “Mount Sinai and
Arabia Petrœa.”

May 20th.—The Earl of Leicester (Lord Lieutenant) had presented new
colours to the East Norfolk Militia, which were received by Major Sir E.
Lacon and Captain Bloomfield, the service of consecration being performed
by the Rev. Bowyer Vaux, assisted by the Rev. John Bampton.

Lord Hastings entertained several noblemen and gentlemen at dinner at the
Royal Hotel.

The officers of the East Norfolk Militia kept “open house” at the
Victoria from two to six o’clock, and in the evening gave a ball at the
Town Hall, at which the Earl of Leicester (Lord Lieutenant), Lord
Hastings, Lord Walsingham, Lord Royston, the Hon. Jacob Astley, the Hon.
and Rev. Delaval and Mrs. Astley, Lady Lacon, Mrs. and Miss Lee Warner,
Mr. and Mrs. Hoste, Mr. and Mrs. J. Gay (Thurning), Mr. and Miss Day, the
Officers of the Militia Artillery, Lieutenant-Colonel Custance and the
Officers of the West Norfolk Militia, Captain Norman, R.N., T. R.
Buckworth, Esq., W. Norris, Esq., T. Browne, Esq., the Mayor of Yarmouth,
Mr. and Mrs. C. Marsh, Mr. and Mrs. C. Palmer, Mr. and Mrs. Isaac
Preston, Mr. E. R., Mrs., and the Misses Palmer, the Reverend Mr. and
Mrs. and Miss Waters, Captain and Mrs. Marcon, Captain Pearson, R.N., Mr.
and Miss Pearson, Mr. Mortlock Lacon, Mr. and Mrs. A. Steward and the
Misses Steward were present.  The refreshments and the supper, both of
the most _recherche_ description, were supplied by Mr. Wilson, of this
city.  Weippert’s admirable band was engaged, and the dance was kept up
until near the dawn of day.  Thus ended a day of pleasure without alloy,
and next day the Regiment was inspected by Colonel Kelly.

A fine Russian brig of 400 tons, laden with salt, had been brought into
the Roads, a prize of war.  She subsequently proceeded to Sheerness.

Seven thousand pounds had been expended on the Wellington Pier works,
where the Norfolk Artillery Band occasionally performed.

May 24th.—The North Denes had been selected for rifle practice.

The Mayor (J. Cherry, Esq.,) had given a ball to 200 guests at the Town
Hall.

The “Contest” schooner, of 150 tons, had been launched from Messrs.
Beeching’s yard.

May 31st.—Sir James Plumridge had been promoted to be Rear-Admiral of the
White.

The Military Lunatic Asylum was to be converted into an Hospital for
wounded seamen from the Baltic Fleet.

No. 3, Brighton Terrace, and No. 2, Queen’s Road had been struck by
lightning.

June 3rd.—The “Otter,” war steamer, had put into the Roads.

The “Carolina,” Russian brig, had arrived in this port for condemnation.

June 14th.—H.M.S. “Zeyphr” had been in the Roads.

Mr. John Clowes declined to pay £1 2s. due for Board of Health rate, on
the ground that the Board was indebted to him for services rendered
whilst he was Town Clerk.  A distress was ordered to be issued.

June 17th.—Two vessels with wounded seamen were expected for the
Hospital.

A small steamboat, the property of J. Penrice, Esq., had exploded near
the Bridge.

June 21st.—Mr. McCullough, Mr. Chamberlin, Captain Briggs, and Mr. Scott
had attended the Right Hon. E. Cardwell as a deputation from the
“Shipping Association.”

The premises occupied by the Great Yarmouth and Gorleston Institute had
been purchased by C. J. Palmer, Esq., for £1,780.

July 1st.—The Norfolk Artillery had completed their 50 days’ training,
the gun practice being for 24-pounders at a target range of 1,250.

A meeting to promote the “Roads Regatta” had been held.

July 8th.—The month of June had been intensely cold on the East coast.

July 15th.—The mackerel fishing had been very successful, the returns
then amounting to £30,000, which sum would be probably increased to
£40,000 before the boats made up.

July 22nd.—The “Hornet” screw frigate, 16 guns, had anchored in the
Roads, on her way to join Sir Charles Napier’s Fleet in the Baltic.

Four thousand persons had arrived in one day by excursion trains from
Norwich, Ipswich and Lynn.

S. M. Peto, Esq., M.P., had laid the foundation stone of the King Street
Congregation Chapel; afterwards there was a dejeuner at the Victoria
Hotel, where J. W. Shelly, Esq., presided.

Lord Sondes had been appointed Lord High Steward of the Borough.

Aug. 2nd.—Many visitors were arriving, chiefly from Cambridge and the
Isle of Ely.

A Poor’s rate of 1s. 6d. in the £ had been signed.

Aug. 5th.—At the Roads Regatta the following yachts entered:—

    Name.         Tons.           Owner.
Phantom             25      S. Lane, Esq.
Thought             28      C. Coope, Esq.
Sheldrake           17      Capt. Love.

The Sheldrake gave up and the others were timed as follows:—

                   1st round.                 2nd round.                 3rd round.
              H.       M.       S.       H.       M.       S.       H.       M.       S.
Thought          12       56        0        1       48        0        2       41        6
Phantom          12       58       45        1       50       48        2       45        5

In the yawl match the “Queen Victoria” beat the “Eclipse,” “Royal
Victoria” and “Cambridge Lass.”

The dinner was held at the Victoria Hotel, the Mayor in the chair.  The
Earl of Albemarle, Mr. Butcher, Mr. C. Cory, Mr. C. J. Palmer, and Mr.
Seaman took part in the after dinner proceedings.

Steamers continued to pass through the Roads on their way to the Baltic.

Aug. 9th.—Edward Tupman and Edward Gill, captains of vessels, bound for
the North, had been charged with assaulting S. C. Marsh, Esq.,
Deputy-Mayor, and fined £5 each or two months’ imprisonment, and also
50s. each and 15s. damage to clothes, for assaulting Mr. Joseph Giles
(gaoler).

Aug. 12th.—Sir John Walsham had held an Inquiry as to the Election of
Guardians and “impounded” several voting papers.

The screw frigate “Horatio” had been in the Roads and visited by numbers
of persons.

It was rumoured that some 40 vessels, known as “Barking Smacks” were
likely to be added to the local fishing fleet.

The Centenary of the Baptist Church, Church Plain, had been celebrated.

Messrs. Charles Gill and William Sidney had become lessees of the
Theatre.

Aug. 19th.—The “Amateur,” latteen (F. Brown), Norwich, won the prize at
the Water Frolic.

Aug. 26th.—Seven thousand excursionists had been brought by train from
Norwich and other places to the Races.

George Winkfield (Yarmouth), John Chambers (Hull), George Bell,
(Fakenham), Robert Todd (Yarmouth), J. Bitten (Yarmouth), Charles Reed
(Yarmouth), and T. R. Mills (Southtown), were charged with obstructing
the Hall Quay (but in fact for holding a religious service there.)  They
were defended by Mr. Tillett, of Norwich; Chambers was fined 40s. and
costs.

Aug. 30th.—“Lodgings was scarcely to be obtained” in the town.

There was a band of thieves about who had extracted “the contents of many
pockets.”

The question of the “open air preachers” was again before the Justices,
when the fine proposed to be inflicted on Chambers was abandoned, it
being, in fact, admitted that, under the circumstances of the case there
was no power to inflict it.

Sep. 2nd.—A meeting had been held (the Rev. G. Hills presiding) to
consider the further restoration of St. Nicholas’ Church.

Thirty boats were gone to the Scotch fisheries, and herring was selling
at from £8 to £14 per last.

A foot race for £5 over 100 yards had been run on the South-denes, when
Mr. Browne beat Mr. George Diver by half a yard.

Sep. 6th.—The gas lamps at Gorleston and Southtown had been lighted for
the first time.

No minister had attended at St. Mary’s, Southtown, to conduct the Sunday
morning service.

Sep. 9th.—The Justices had again refused to grant any fresh licenses.

Sep. 18th.—The “Ada,” a barque of 435 tons, had been launched from Mr.
Thomas Barber’s yard.

The Russian Barque “Carolina” had been sold by E. H. L. Preston, Esq., at
the Star, for £1,110, and her cargo of 321 tons of salt for £347, making
a total of £1,457.

Sep. 20th.—The proposed grant of a piece of land by the Corporation, for
the purpose of a cemetery, had been approved by the Secretary of State.

Sep. 23rd.—The French frigate “Expeditive,” 20 guns, was anchored in the
Roads, and a dead body had been landed from her for interment.

Sept. 27th.—The coal trade was unusually brisk; during the week 70
colliers had arrived at the port, and these, with the other daft there,
crowded the Harbour.

After the 1st of October the drapers had determined to close their shops
at seven o’clock.

Messrs. Mann, Giles, and Freeman, “extensive fish salesmen,” had been
summoned for allowing “swills” to remain on the Quay longer than
necessary for their business purposes.

Oct. 4th.—At the revision of the Burgess List, the Liberals had lodged 59
objections and put in 347 new claims, and the Tories had made 373
objections.

The telegraphic announcement of the great victory of the allied armies
over the Russians (Battle of the Alma) had been received shortly after
eleven o’clock, and created intense excitement; the flags had been
hoisted on the Town Hall and the Church, and but for the interference
with divine service, the bells, doubtless, would have sent forth a merry
peal.

Thanksgivings had been offered in all places of worship for the abundant
harvest.

Oct. 7th.—The Borough Revision Court had been engaged with the Lists for
three days and a half; the Liberals sustained 300 claims, as against 50
sustained by the Tories.

Oct. 11th.—Mr. Wright (who had been objected to) was charged before the
Justices for assaulting Sergeant James Gowen (the Tory objector) and
bound over to keep the peace.  There was a warm discussion on the Bench
during these proceedings between Mr. R. Hammond and Mr. R. Steward.

At the Revision of the Parliamentary List, Mr. Cufaude and Mr. Preston
appeared for the Tories, and Mr. Costerton for the Liberals, and the
latter claimed a gain upon the proceedings.

Oct. 18th.—A “great meeting” of Liberals had been held at the Star Inn;
G. Danby-Palmer, Esq., (chairman), Captain Pearson, R.N., J. W. Shelly,
Esq., R. Hammond, Esq., W. T. McCullagh, Esq., J. Clowes, Esq., J. Owles,
Esq., and Mr. Jackson took part in the proceedings.

At the Gaol Sessions, N. Palmer, Esq., (Recorder) and R. Steward, Esq.,
(acting as Visiting Justices) had dismissed the Gaol Chaplain (Rev.
George Hills).  This action was deprecated by some of the Justices, and
ultimately the question was referred by them to the Quarter Sessions.

An “impudent thief” had picked a woman’s pocket, while she was in the
Police-court.

Oct. 21st.—The New Bridge had been completed, and formally opened to the
public, at a cost of little less than £60,000.

H.M. yacht “Fairy” had arrived in the Harbour.

Ladies were collecting linen rags for the wounded soldiers in the East.

Oct. 25th.—Mr. R. Hammond and the Mayor (Mr. Cherry) were at
“loggerheads” with regard to certain statements made by the former
gentleman at the Liberal meeting.

The “Gælan,” a French man-of-war, had entered the Harbour for the purpose
of coaling.

One hundred and thirteen young persons had been confirmed at St.
Nicholas’ Church by the Bishop of Norwich.

Nov. 1st.—A “patriotic fund” meeting had been held at the Town Hall, the
Mayor (J. Cherry, Esq.) in the chair.  Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart., M.P.,
Sir E. Travers, K. H., Rev. J. S. Russell, Rev. B. Vaux, Rev. J. B.
Bampton, Rev. McSwiney, C. J. Palmer, R. Steward, R. Hammond, George
Danby-Palmer, J. W. Shelly, C. C. Aldred, Esqs., and Captains Gilbertson
and Roberts, and others were present, and a subscription list opened,
which was headed by donations of £25 each from Messrs. Gurney & Co.,
George Danby-Palmer, Esq., and Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart., M.P.

Nov. 4th.—At the Municipal Election “it was rumoured that no small amount
of ready cash had been sent into circulation.”

The result of the polling was—

            _St. George’s Ward_.
Mr. H. Jay (C)                           137
Mr. R. Ferrier, junr. (C)                139
Captain Pearson R.N. (L)                  99
Mr. Jas. Scott (L)                        99
               _Regent Ward_.
Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart. (C)            128
Mr. J. Cherry (C)                        126
Mr. John Clowes (L)                       88
Mr. Henry Danby-Palmer (L)                87
               _Market Ward_.
Mr. J. Fenn (C)                          186
Mr. J. E. Barnby (C)                     184
Mr. J. Cobb (L)                          133
Mr. D. R. Fowler (L)                     123
           _St. Nicholas’ Ward_.
Mr. S. Nightingale (C)                   203
Mr. W. H. Bessey (C)                     187
Mr. R. Hammond (L)                       187
Mr. H. Boulter (L)                       173

And the Alderman gave his casting vote in favour of Mr. Bessey.

             _Nelson Ward_.
Mr. J. Clark (C)                     184
Mr. S. V. Moore (L)                  182
Mr. J. H. Harrison (L)               122
           _Gorleston Ward_.
Mr. William H. Palmer (C)            131
Mr. W. Hammond (C)                   118
Mr. G. Blake (L)                      61
Mr. Sterry (L)                        46

Messrs. Henry Palmer, C. J. Palmer, C. H. Chamberlin, William T. Clarke,
E. R. Palmer, and F. W. Ferrier had been appointed Admiralty
Commissioners.

Nov. 11th.—At the Council meeting Mr. E. H. L. Preston proposed and Mr.
Worship seconded, Charles J. Palmer, Esq., as Mayor for the ensuing year,
and he was elected to that office without opposition.

Nov. 15th.—The question of the formation of a “Burial Board” was being
discussed.

The Naval Hospital was being prepared for 350 sick and wounded from the
Black Sea fleet.

Nov. 18th.—The Mayor (C. J. Palmer, Esq.), had issued cards for an
entertainment at the Town Hall on the 30th inst.

Mr. J. L. Porter had been appointed manager of the National Provincial
Bank at Yarmouth.

The Police had contributed one day’s pay to the Patriotic Fund.

The “Tourist,” London passenger steamer, Captain Dawson, had been lost on
the North Sand.  She was a very old vessel, and it was stated that this
would have been her last voyage if no accident had happened to her; she
was fully insured.

Nov. 22nd.—Messrs. Gurney & Co’s. new Bank had been opened.

A poll had been taken on the question of the formation of a “Burial
Board,” when the voting on the first day was—

For the Board            312
Against it               311

A meeting of Ratepayers was subsequently held and the scheme denounced by
several speakers.

Nov. 29th.—The Town Council had re-appointed the Rev. G. Hills, gaol
chaplain “with only two dissentients.”

Nearly £1,000 had been raised for the Patriotic Fund.

The polling for the Burial Board had closed as under—

For                 468
Against             544
     Majority        76

The “Sir William Jolliffe” had been placed on the station in the place of
the “Tourist.”

Dec. 13th.—Messrs. Dumbleton, Bradbeer, Palmer, and Bunn had complained
to the Bench of the obstructions on the Quay.

Dec. 23rd.—The Council had “suspended” the sexton for alleged misconduct.

The grocers and drapers had determined to close their shops on the day
following Christmas Day.

“The Skimmer of the Sea,” a barque of 320 tons, had been launched from
Mr. Branford’s yard.

Dec. 30th.—The East Norfolk Militia having been permanently embodied, had
assembled under the command of Colonel Mason, but the Norfolk Militia
Artillery had not been called up.

T. Brightwen, Esq., had qualified as a Magistrate.

Several large packages of warm clothing had been forwarded by the ladies
of the town for the use of the soldiers in the Crimea.

C. J. Palmer, Esq., had entertained the inmates of the Gaol.

Pickpockets were again in town, and John Webb had been robbed by them of
£4 15s.

Mr. Smyth had been appointed Surgeon to the Gaol in the place of Mr. H.
Worship deceased.



1855.


Jan. 6th.—There had been a high tide and heavy flood; 130 yards of the
rails between Yarmouth and Reedham had been carried away by the latter.

The following gentlemen had been chosen as the Library Committee.—The
Mayor (C. J. Palmer, Esq.), Rev. J. B. Bampton, Rev. H. Squire, and
Messrs. B. Fenn, R. R. B. Norman, J. Bayly, and S. C. Burton.

It was considered too cold to drill the Militia on the South-denes.

Jan. 13th.—The following quantity of fish had been forwarded from
Yarmouth during the preceding year:—

                        Packages.        Tons.       Cwt.
From Jan. to Sep.            282,441       10,591         10
,, Oct. to Dec.              250,981        9,411         15
               Total         533,422       20,003          5

During the week 20 men of the East Norfolk Militia had volunteered for
the line.

At the Tract Lenders’ Festival 400 persons had partaken of tea at the
Priory.  They were addressed by the Rev. G. Hills, Rev. G. W. Grogan and
other friends.

Jan. 17th.—The Norfolk Artillery Militia had received an order to be
permanently embodied from the 23rd inst.

Jan. 20th.—Sixty more men had volunteered from the East Norfolk Militia
for the line, making a total of 300 of such volunteers in all.

Winter had set in “with all the vigour and severity peculiar to this
portion of the Eastern Coast.”

Jan. 24th.—The weather continued intensely cold, and the navigation of
the rivers were stopped by the accumulation of ice.

The District Visiting Society was doing great work in the way of
alleviating distress.

Pickpockets were still at work.  A woman had been robbed by one of them
in the Market Row of 8s. 6d., and Mrs. Pole, of Burgh Castle, had
suffered a loss of £2 17s. in this way.

Jan. 27th.—The Norfolk Artillery Militia had assembled,—156
non-commissioned officers and men, with the following officers: Captain
Astley, Lieutenants Penrice, Tredcroft and North, Adjutant Gilberton, and
Surgeon C. C. Aldred.  Lord Hastings had not yet joined them.

The Rev. Bowyer Vaux had announced to the Hospital Committee that the
Medical Library of the late Mr. Harry Worship would be presented to that
Institution.

Bro. William Lucia had been elected W.M. of Lodge “Friendship,” in
succession to Bro. Oswald Diver.

Feb. 14th.—The business of the Port had been much affected by the rigour
of the weather.

Feb. 17th.—Thirty-four men had volunteered from the Norfolk Militia
Artillery for the Royal Artillery.

The South-quay was blocked by the coal carts near the Town Hall, and
great complaints being made about this it was suggested that the colliers
should unload at a wider part of the quay.

Feb. 21st.—The Subscription Ball had been attended by the Mayor and Mrs.
Charles Palmer, Lieutenant-Colonel Mason, the Honourable Mr. Harbord, Mr.
Astley, Mr. Graver Brown, Mrs. E. Graver Brown, Reverend A. B. Smyth,
Captain Gay, Captain and Mrs. Rippingall, Captain and Mrs. Mathew,
Captain, Mrs., and Miss Pearson, Mr. and Mrs. Meadwell, Mr., Mrs., and
Miss E. H. L. Preston, Mr., Mrs., and Miss Marsh, Mr., Mrs., and the
Misses Steward, Mr. and Miss Chevallier, Mr. and Mrs. Freeman, Mr. and
Mrs. Ferrier, Mr. Smith, (East Norfolk Militia) Mr. Smyth (East Norfolk
Militia) and Mrs. Smyth, Mr. Palgrave, Mr. and the Misses Barber, Mr.
Boycott, Mr. Press, Mr. Aldred, Mr. Eyre, &c., &c.

The town was infested by a gang of thieves.

Four deserters from the Royal Navy had been captured in the town.

A meeting had been held for the relief of the poor, the Mayor presided,
and the Rev. G. Hills, and Messrs. R. Hammond, E. H. L. Preston, T.
Brightwen, S. Dowson, R. Steward, R. Ferrier, and W. N. Burroughs took
part in the proceedings.  Mr. George Danby-Palmer sent £10 to the fund,
and more than £200 was then collected in the room.

Feb. 24th.—Full power to act as a Burial Board had been vested in the
Town Council, and the following Committee of that body appointed to carry
out the Act:—The Mayor, and Messrs. R. Ferrier, F. Worship, E. R. Aldred,
W. N. Burroughs, J. Jackson, C. E. Bartram, P. Pullyn, and T. Foreman.

Feb. 28th.—A thaw had commenced, and it was hoped that the River traffic
would soon be able to be resumed.

Mr. Gyngell had superintended a grand display of fireworks on the Star
Quay, which was witnessed by about 7,000 or 8,000 persons.

March 3rd.—A ship of war was likely to be stationed in the Roads to
protect the shipping there.

The first of the frozen-in wherries had been liberated at Reedham, and
the Steam Packet communication had been resumed with London.

March 10th.—The Norfolk Militia Artillery had been removed to London _en
route_ for Eastbourne; when 170 men and the following officers, Captain
Penrice, Adjutant Gilbertson, Lieutenants Tredcroft, North, and
Micklewaite, left the town.

A meeting, at the Angel Hotel, had been held for the purpose of
establishing a pack of harriers; Mr. H. Grimmer was chairman, Mr. Jex, of
Hopton, undertook to purchase the hounds, and Mr. J. L. Cufaude to act as
honorary secretary to the Committee.

March 14th.—The Market was to be held on Tuesday the 20th, as Wednesday,
the 21st, had been proclaimed a day for fasting and humiliation.

The Batteries were being armed with 24-pounders, and it was proposed to
construct a fort on Gorleston Cliff, to be armed with 68 pound guns.

March 17th.—Lectures had been delivered by the Rev. R. Cory on
“Jerusalem,” and by Mr Craft (a man of colour) upon “American Slavery.”

Bro. Robert Harmer had presided at the annual dinner of the “Druids,
Trinity Lodge, 220.”

March 21st.—Several complaints had been made of unprovoked assaults by
members of the East Norfolk Militia upon respectable inhabitants of the
town.

March 24th.—At the Quarter Sessions, the Grand Jury presented the foul
state of the Court House at the Tolhouse.

The national Fast Day had been strictly observed.

Robberies continued to be very frequently committed in the town.

April 4th.—H.M.S. “Harrier” (17 guns) was then stationed in the Roads,
and a rendezvous had been opened for Volunteers to the North Sea fleet.

Three hundred men of the East Norfolk Militia had claimed a right to be
dismissed, having served 56 days in the then year under the terms of
their enlistments, and they were dismissed accordingly.

April 7th.—Messrs. Green, Borking, Clayton, and Harbord had been
appointed Overseers, which, as a “partizan” step, was justified by Mr. C.
C. Aldred, and objected to by Mr. R. Hammond.

April 14th.—A militiaman had been buried with military honours.

Messrs. Aldred and Steward had been re-elected Churchwardens by the
Vestry.

The Vestry decided on the question of making a Church rate, when there
appeared 64 for and 87 against the rate, but the majority did not press
the matter any further, and ultimately a rate of 1½d. in the £ was agreed
to.

The Guardians’ Election had resulted as follows:—

             _North Ward_.
Mr. J. Jackson (L)                  258
Mr. J. Mainprice (L)                252
Mr. J. W. Craske (L)                198
Mr. S. Nightingale (C)              246
Mr. E. H. L. Preston (C)            214
Mr. W. Wright (C)                   193
            _Market Ward_.
Mr. D. A. Gourlay (L)               226
Mr. C. Steward (L)                  165
Mr. A. Ames (L)                     136
Mr. H. Laws (C)                     252
Mr. C. C. Aldred (C)                247
Mr. J. Browne (C)                   200
            _Regent Ward_.
Mr. John Clowes (L)                 120
Mr. F. Palmer (L)                   147
Mr. J. A. Norman (L)                147
Mr. W. Worship (C)                  198
Mr. S. C. Marsh (C)                 196
Mr. T. Foreman (C)                  164
         _St. George’s Ward_.
Mr. T. Lettis, Jun., (L)            159
Mr. J. Scott (L)                    127
Mr. B. Fenn (C)                     223
Mr. R. Ferrier (C)                  217
Mr. J. G. Plummer (C)               194
            _Nelson Ward_.
Mr. J. H. Harrison (L)              203
Mr. G. Danby-Palmer (L)             225
Mr. S. V. Moore (L)                 193
Mr. W. T. Fisher (L)                131
Mr. W. C. Reynolds (C)              176
Mr. J. Clark (C)                    187
Mr. C. Woolverton (C)               249
Mr. T. Brightwen (C)                218

April 18th.—A proposal had been made to have all the houses in the town
numbered.

April 25th.—A purse of money had been presented to Mr. Farrow, the
Secretary of the Liberal Association, “for his long-continued service in
the Reform cause.”

April 28th.—The Poor’s Rate was estimated at 1s. 6d. in the £, to meet
£3,000 required by the Guardians for the Quarter, who had then £430 in
hand to meet demands amounting to £1,450.

May 2nd.—Mr. Lane had been appointed Collector of Poor’s rates for the
Market Ward.

George Danby-Palmer, Esq., had almost entirely recovered from the
indisposition which he had been suffering from during the winter, and it
was proposed to entertain him at a public dinner.

May 5th.—The new burial ground comprised about 10 acres in extent, and
the following tender was recommended by the Committee to the Council: J.
Thompson, for walls, £1,388; gates, £50; levelling, £110; total, £1,548,
with respect to fitting it for use.

Nelson’s Column was still allowed to fall into decay.

May 9th.—Mr. Allcock had been appointed Poor’s Rate Collector for the
Nelson and Regent Wards.

The sale of part of the landed property of the late Mr. Ambrose Palmer
had taken place, the ship-yard and docks bringing £1,100 and £900
respectively.  The leasehold premises on the west side of the river were
bought by Mr. Joseph Powell, and the building sites near Queen’s Road
fetched about 20s. per foot frontage with a ground rental of about 2s.
per yard upon the same.

Letters could now be posted as late as 8.10 p.m.

Water had been conveyed by the Company’s mains to Yarmouth from Ormesby
for the first time.  One of these pipes burst near the “Gallon Can.”

May 12th.—The Victoria Gardens had been laid out and were likely to
outvie any in the neighbourhood.

May 19th.—Mr. Lummis had resigned the office of Librarian.

The Workhouse had been lighted with gas.

A meeting for the purpose of advocating “Administrative Reform” had been
held at the Town Hall, when Mr. R. Hammond presided, and Mr. McCullagh
delivered a stirring address.

The Tories complained that this meeting was “got up” by the Liberals for
party purposes.

May 23rd.—The Water Company had offered to supply water for
street-watering purposes free of expense.

H.M.S. “Harrier” had been firing shell to a distance of 1,200 yards in
the direction of Scroby; the Queen’s Birthday had been observed in the
usual way.

May 26th.—The Water Works had been opened, and in the evening 80
gentlemen dined at the Town Hall, under the presidency of the Mayor (C.
J. Palmer, Esq.), who was supported by Sir E. H. K. Lacon, M.P., and
Lieut.-Col. Mason.

Mr. F. Maryson and Mr. D. D. Offord, the candidates for the post of
Librarian, having each obtained 27 votes, the Mayor gave his casting vote
in favour of Mr. Offord, who was thus elected to the post.

Eight additional gas lamps had been placed on the Wellington Pier.

May 30th.—The first stone of the Wesleyan Free Church, on the Regent
Road, had been laid by S. C. Marsh, Esq.

June 2nd.—The Russian brig “Phœnix” had been brought in by a prize crew.

June 9th.—The mackerel fishing was going on badly, and many boats had
lost nets.

July 18th.—A brace of tench, weighing between eight and nine pounds, had
been taken at Ormesby.

Mr. Stracey (afterwards Sir Edward Stracey, Bart.), the Tory candidate
for East Norfolk had visited the town.  (He was returned, on this
occasion, without opposition.)

July 21st.—At the Regatta the following prizes were offered for
luggers:—£50, £20, and £10, and there were ten entries; during the match
the “Race-horse” (Mr. I. Shuckford) was run down by the “Ocean Star”
(Smith and Son).  Her crew was rescued by the yawls “Queen Victoria” and
“Standard,” but the master of the lugger (Lark) had two of his ribs
broken.  The “Brothers” (T. Lettis, jun.) won the first prize, the
“Henry” (H. Swann, jun.) and the “Prima Donna” (J. Minns) taking the
other two prizes.  The yawl prizes were not awarded.

The following notice again appeared with regard to the case of

                            “REGINA v. EAGLETON.”

    “The defendant, John Eagleton, a baker, at Yarmouth, who had
    contracted with the Guardians of Yarmouth to supply the poor with
    bread, was tried before the Recorder, N. Palmer, Esq., at the Quarter
    Sessions in March, 1854, upon an indictment charging him, in the
    seven first counts, with an offence at common law, in fraudulently
    supplying the poor with bread of short weight; and, in the three last
    counts, with attempting to obtain payment from the Guardians, by
    falsely pretending that he had supplied full weight.  He was found
    guilty by the jury, but the Recorder reserved a case for the opinion
    of the Court of Criminal Appeal, as to the proprietory of the
    conviction in point of law.  On the first argument on April 29th,
    1854, before Pollock, C.B., Parke, B., Creswell, J., and Williams,
    J., the case was referred back to the Recorder, for him to state the
    whole evidence given at the trial, which he did accordingly, and the
    case, as re-stated, was, on the following 3rd of June, argued before
    Lord Campbell, C. J., Alderson, B., Coleridge, J., Martin, B., and
    Crowder, J., and they, having doubts as to the proprietory of the
    conviction, desired the case to be argued before the 15 judges, and
    on the 2nd December, 1854, it was argued before Jervis, C. J.,
    Pollock, C. B., Parke, B., Maule, J., Wightman, J., Erle, J., Platt,
    B., Martin, B., and Crompton, J., and again on the 3rd of February
    last, before Jervis, C. J., Parke, B., Maule, J., Wightman, J.,
    Creswell, J., Erle, J., Platt, B., Williams, J., Martin, B., and
    Crompton, J.—Mr. Bulwer appeared in support of the conviction, and
    Mr. Bodkin, Mr. Clerk, and Mr. J. H. Mills on behalf of the
    Defendant.  The Judges took time to consider, and on July the 9th,
    Mr. Baron Parke delivered their judgment, affirming the conviction on
    the last three counts.  The defendant will, therefore, have to appear
    before the Recorder at the next October Sessions to receive
    judgment.”

July 25th.—One hundred and thirty ladies and gentlemen had attended the
Regatta Ball at the Town Hall, among whom were—the Mayor and Mrs. Palmer,
Lord Hastings, Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart., M.P., Lieut.-Col. Mason,
Captains Longe, Markham Gay, and other Officers of the East Norfolk
Militia, &c.  Howlett’s band attended, and dancing was kept up until
4.30.

July 28th.—The Grand Jury had found a true bill against Messrs. R.
Ferrier, sen., and R. Ferrier, jun., for assault upon John William de
Caux, and it was stated that the case would be tried at the next Assizes.

Aug. 4th.—The Mayor had presided at a meeting called to consider the
“Small Tenements Act.”

Eighty-five boats engaged in the Mackerel Fishery had taken fish to the
value of £27,994.

Aug. 18th.—All hope of raising the “Racehorse,” which was sunk at the
Regatta, had been abandoned.  The attempt to do so had cost £150.

Aug. 22nd.—C. J. Palmer, Esq., Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart., M.P., and
Captain D. Lane had acted as Stewards of the Races, and 6,000 persons had
been brought to the sports by rail.

Between £170 and £180 had been raised by a bazaar for the Congregational
Chapel, King Street.

Aug. 25th.—Mr. E. H. L. Preston had had the small bone of his arm broken
whilst endeavouring to quell a disturbance which had arisen between some
of the Artillery Militiamen.

Eighty ladies and gentlemen had attended the Race Ball.

Aug. 29th.—Mr. J. H. Tillett had produced the “Bench Warrant” for the
apprehension of the Messrs. Ferrier for the assault upon Mr. J. W. de
Caux, reporter to the _Mercury_ and _Norfolk News_; bail was placed at
£100 and two securities of £50 in each case.

Sept. 8th.—150 men of the Horse Artillery had been encamped on the North
Denes, under the command of Captain Mountain and three Lieutenants.

Sept. 12th.—These troops had been reviewed on the South Denes in the
presence of several thousands of persons.

Sept. 15th.—The news of the evacuation of the Southern part of Sebastopol
by the Russians had been received by the general public with incredulity,
they saying “too good news to be true.”

Sept. 22nd.—A hare had taken to the sea, and was picked up by a person
who went after it in a boat; having killed it, he sold it for 2s. 6d.

Oct. 3rd.—Sunday had been a day of thanksgiving for the success of the
allied armies in the Crimea.

Oct. 10th.—The “Scampo,” a Russian prize, had been brought into the
Harbour.

At the Quarter Sessions there was another discussion between the Recorder
and Mr. Steward on the one hand and the Visiting Justices on the other
side, as to the validity of the appointment of the Rev. G. Hills as
Chaplain to the Gaol.

John Eagleton had been sentenced to three months’ imprisonment.

Oct. 17th.—The Liberals claimed a gain of 44 on the Municipal Revision,
when Mr. Costerton appeared for the Liberal, and Mr. Cufaude for the
Tory, party.

Oct. 20th.—A very brisk corn trade was being carried on, vessels coming
in light to load with corn for France and Holland.

Robert Steward, Esq., had been fined 20s. and costs for obstructing the
Quay-head.

Oct. 27th.—The East Suffolk Railway was projected.

In 1855, 258,121 quarters of corn had been shipped at this port.

The “Hopton Harriers” had held their first meet at the Kennel at Hopton.
Mr. W. Jex provided luncheon.  The next meet was to be at Haddiscoe.

Oct. 31st.—Messrs. Beeching and Son had launched a beautiful lifeboat for
the Gorleston beachmen.

Nov. 3rd.—Only two Wards had been contested.  The returns were:—

        _St. Nicholas’ Ward_.
W. Worship (C)                    405
J. B. Hilton (C)                  405
Henry Danby-Palmer (L)            262
John Mainprice (L)                262
           _Regent Ward_.
R. D. Barber (C)                  224
R. R. B. Norman (C)               224
John Clowes (L)                   159
John Fish (L)                     159

The names of the other re-elected Councillors are not given.

Four gun-boats had come into the Roads from the Baltic.

Nov. 10th.—The Mayor of Norwich had given a grand ball, in St. Andrew’s
Hall; Mr., Mrs. and the Misses Marsh, the Officers of the East Norfolk
Militia and Norfolk Artillery Militia, the Misses Steward, the Mayor of
Yarmouth and Mrs. Palmer, Mr. W. Danby-Palmer, Mr. F. Danby-Palmer, and
others had attended it from Yarmouth.

Nov. 14th.—The “Meander,” 44 gun frigate, was at anchor off the Monument.

Nov. 28th.—Lieut. Matthew Gooda, late of the East Norfolk Militia, had
died at Southtown, aged 76.

Dec. 1st.—The dinner, commemorative of the re-election of C. J. Palmer,
Esq., to the office of Chief Magistrate, had been held at the Town Hall.
His Worship was supported on his right by the Hon. H. Byng, Sir E. H. K.
Lacon, Bart., M.P., Lieut.-Colonel Astley, the Rev. George Hills, and J.
Harcourt, Esq., and on his left by the Recorder (N. Palmer, Esq.), Sir H.
J. Stracey, Bart., M.P., the Mayor of Norwich and Captain Broadhead, R.N.
The Mayor’s guests on this occasion numbered upwards of 100 persons.

George Danby-Palmer, Esq., had presided at a meeting called for the
purpose of promoting a national testimonial to Admiral Sir Charles
Napier, K.C.B.

Dec. 8th.—Mr. Wright (of the Adelphi) had been performing at the Theatre.

Dec. 12th.—The Mayor had attended the magnificent reception given to the
King of Sardinia by the Corporation of London.

Dec. 22nd.—The stormy easterly winds had driven several vessels on to the
Beach.

On the north of the Jetty were four brigs, viz., the “Friends,” of
London; the “George,” of Yarmouth; the “Boa,” of Colchester; and another.
And on the south, one brig, a sloop (the “Telegraph,”) and a billy-boy.

Dec. 26th.—The Norfolk Artillery Militia had marched into the Southtown
Barracks under the command of Colonel Astley.

The following Magistrates had been selected to hear salvage cases:—George
Danby-Palmer, R. Steward, R. Hammond, J. G. Plummer, J. W. Shelly, B.
Fenn, E. H. L. Preston, and W. H. Palmer, Esqs.

Dec. 29th.—The Hon. Colonel Vereker was spoken of as a colleague for Sir
E. H. K. Lacon, should Mr. Rumbold resign his seat, but this rumour as to
Mr. Rumbold’s resignation, the _Globe_ stated on authority, was without
foundation.

At the Quarter Sessions, a conviction of R. Steward, Esq., by the
Justices, for obstructing the quay, was quashed with costs.

The question of the legality of the Rev. G. Hills’ appointment as
chaplain to the gaol was again considered by the Recorder and Justices.

             _N.B.—The file for the Year_ 1856 _is missing_.



1857.


Jan. 3rd.—The fourth anniversary of Court “Crown and Anchor” A.O.F. had
been celebrated by a dinner at Bro. Franklin’s, Hall Quay.  Mr. C. B.
Dashwood occupied the chair, and it was stated that the Court then
consisted of 90 members.

Jan. 10th.—There had been a loan exhibition at the Priory Hall.

Messrs. Charles J. Palmer, B. Fenn, Rev. H. Squire, Dumbleton, R. R. B.
Norman, Burton, and J. Bayly had been elected the members of the Public
Library Committee.

Jan. 17th.—The “Britannia Pier Bill” was projected, and the Wellington
Pier Company had determined not to oppose that undertaking.

The body of a whale, which had been taken at Winterton, was being
exhibited on the Church Plain.

The Rev. W. D. Wade, the new minister of St. Mary’s, Southtown, had,
before leaving Southsea, been presented with a purse of £61.

Jan. 21st.—The “Sisters” had been in collision with one of the stone
piers of the Bridge, which it had considerably damaged.

Feb. 4th.—An Anti-Income Tax meeting had been held at the Town Hall.  The
Mayor presided, and the following took part in the proceedings:—Messrs.
George Danby-Palmer, Bradbeer, Garson Blake, W. Livingston, S. B. Cory,
R. Hammond, J. Clowes, J. H. Harrison, J. Rivett and J. Fiddes.  Mr. S.
Bradbeer appeared to be the mover in this matter.

The Poor’s Rate was 1s. 6d. for the quarter.

Feb. 18th.—H.M. Line of Battle-ship “Blenheim,” 74, had steamed into the
Roads.

Feb. 21st.—A “Poor’s Rate” meeting had been held at the Masonic Hall.
Mr. W. Livingston presided, and a resolution protesting against the 1s.
6d. quarterly rate was adopted.  Messrs J. Rivett, Joseph Neave, Royal,
R. Bailey, Nichols, and F. Starling spoke on the subject, while the
conduct of the Guardians was defended by Mr. J. H. Harrison, one of the
Board.

Feb. 25th.—A case which excited considerable interest, had been heard at
the County Court, Tolhouse-hall, before the Judge (T. J. Birch, Esq.)
The plaintiff was Mr. John Cobb, leather merchant, for whom Mr. C. H.
Chamberlin appeared; the defendants were Messrs. W. N. Burroughs and G.
D. Palmer, who were represented by Mr. J. L. Cufaude.  The plaintiff
stated that he was a candidate for the office of Councillor for the
Market-ward, in November, 1851, and that he became such at the
solicitation of Messrs. W. N. Burroughs and G. D. Palmer.  At the time he
became a candidate he distinctly told them that he would not pay out of
his own pocket more than £10 towards the expenses of the election, and it
was understood that the Liberal party, to which he belonged, would
subscribe the remainder.  The evening before the election he received an
estimate of what the expenses were likely to be, and in consequence of
that he at once saw both Mr. Burroughs and Mr. G. D. Palmer.  That
estimate, he believed, amounted to about £45, while the subscriptions
altogether amounted to but £42.  After some conversation they agreed to
hold him harmless of the amount of the expenses that might exceed the sum
subscribed, and he and Mr. Burroughs then went to the Committee-room of
the North-ward, where Mr. Burroughs said they had made arrangements for
their friend John Cobb winning the Market-ward.  The expenses of the
election, which he (the plaintiff) lost, amounted altogether to £58 1s.
7d.  The balance, therefore, which he now claimed from the defendants was
£16 1s. 7d.—The plaintiff, in cross-examination by Mr. Cufaude, admitted
that £39 of the whole amount was for — —.—Mr. Cufaude contended that if,
as the plaintiff stated, the defendants had given him a guarantee for the
surplus expenses, the guarantee ought to have been in writing.  And,
assuming the evidence was true, which, however, he disputed, it was
impossible for the plaintiff to recover, inasmuch as he himself had
allowed that a large part of the whole of the expenses was for — —, which
was an illegal act.—Mr. Chamberlin contended that the plaintiff, after
receiving the promise from the defendants, acted only upon the faith of
that promise, and that therefore, as they had entered upon an engagement
to pay the money, they were liable.  The money, moreover, had not been
spent by the plaintiff, but by the committee appointed to conduct the
election, and until the election was over, the plaintiff was not aware
that any of the money had been spent in — —.—His Honour said it was clear
the guarantee should have been in writing.  He was of opinion, also, that
the plaintiff was not bound to pay the illegal charges, and consequently
he could not bring his action for the money which he claimed.—The
plaintiff was, accordingly, non-suited.

March 4th.—The “Branch,” a schooner of 150 tons, had been launched from
Messrs. Fellows and Son’s yard.

A distress warrant had been issued against the effects of Mr. James Lawn,
draper, Broad Row, for 5s. 3d. due for Church rate.  Mr. Cufaude, who
appeared for the Churchwardens, stated that the amount of defalcations on
the present rate was “about £14 or £15.”

A meeting of the shareholders in the Yarmouth and Haddiscoe Railway had
been held at the Star Hotel.  R. Hammond, Esq., presided, and there were
present—C. C. Aldred, Esq., (the Mayor), C. J. Palmer, T. Brightwen,
William H. Palmer, E. H. L. Preston, W. C. Reynolds, E. P. Youell, G. G.
Day, H. Danby-Palmer, and William Day, Esqs.

March 11th.—N. Palmer, Esq., (Recorder), had appointed John B. Bales
(late Sergeant-at-Mace) an Inspector of Weights and Measures in the room
of Mr. Wall.

The address of Messrs. Torrens McCullagh and Edward Watkin to the
electors appears in this issue.

March 14th.—The Liberal electors had held a meeting at the Corn Exchange,
J. Shelly, Esq., in the chair, when both candidates delivered addresses,
and a resolution pledging the meeting to support them was unanimously
carried.

Mr. Cufaude had applied for 17 more summonses against Church Rate
defaulters, and Mr. Garson Blake had been summoned for a like default by
the Gorleston Churchwardens.

There had been a high tide, which had dashed over the new Marine Drive
works.

March 16th.—Mr. J. W. Shelly had presided over a meeting at the ‘Star,’
when Messrs. McCullagh and Watkin were adopted as the Liberal candidates.

There was a suggestion of a local gentleman’s name as a candidate, to
which the Editor refers to by the quotation—“and palm to palm is holy
_Palmer’s_ kiss.”

March 18th.—The Liberal electors and non-electors had been addressed by
both the Liberal candidates at the Duke’s Head public-house at Gorleston.
S. Dowson, Esq., presided, and there were present—Messrs. J. H. Fellows,
N. Sterry, A. Markland, Captains Manthorpe, Stanford, and Tunbridge, and
Messrs. J. Page, A. King, J. Ling, G. Reynolds, C. E. Bartram, and J.
Cobb.

The four candidates, Messrs. McCullagh and Watkin and Sir E. H. K. Lacon
and Colonel Vereker, had been invited to attend a meeting of electors at
the Masonic-hall.  None of them were present, but, nevertheless, a
resolution pledging the meeting to support the Liberal candidates was
carried.

The “Venus,” 150 tons register, had been launched from Mr. Rust’s yard.

March 21st.—D. A. Gourlay, Esq., had presided at a great Liberal meeting
held in the Corn Exchange, when Messrs. J. W. Shelly, P. Pullyn, S.
Dowson, F. S. Costerton, W. Briggs, C. Sayers, S. Palmer, C. E. Bartram,
J. D. Chapman, J. Bailey, F. Dendy, J. Cobb and others were present.

The Conservatives had also convened a meeting at Crowe’s Assembly-rooms,
Chapel-denes, when E. H. L. Preston, Esq., presided.  Sir E. H. K. Lacon,
Colonel Vereker, and J. Cherry, Esq., addressed the assembly.

Sir E. N. Buxton, Bart., and Major-General C. A. Windham, the Liberal
candidates for East Norfolk, had held a meeting in the Corn-hall.  Mr. R.
Hammond presided, and was supported by Messrs. Benjamin Dowson, J.
Clowes, C. H. Chamberlin, P. Pullyn, A. W. Biddulph, S. Palmer, T. Burton
Steward, F. Palmer, W. N. Burroughs, C. E. Bartram, E. R. Palmer, J. H.
Harrison, J. Owles, J. Cobb, &c.

George Tewsley, Sergeant in the London Constabulary, had been elected
Superintendent of the Borough Police Force.

The case against Mr. Garson Blake had been heard as to non-payment of
Church Rate and the usual order made.

Mr. S. Waters Spelman had submitted to public competition various
freehold estates, belonging to the late Mrs. Ann Marsh, which realised
£8,672.

March 25th.—The Election was “assuming all the features of a bitter, as
well as a strong contest.”

J. Shelly, Esq., had presided at another Liberal meeting held in the Corn
Hall, and Mr. J. Royal at a meeting of non-electors in the same interest
held at the Masonic Hall.

The Church Rate question had again been before the Justices, when Mr.
Chamberlin appeared for the defaulters, who were Henry Boulter (baker),
4s. 6d.; Joseph Neave (twine-spinner), 1s. 9½d.; George Goodrich
(shoemaker), 3s. 6d.; Henry Blyth (shoemaker), 4s.; George Clowes
(ironmonger), 5s.; William Curtis (cork-cutter), 5s. 1d.; James Rivett
(baker), 4s.; Frederick Starling (shoemaker), 1s. 10½d.; Angelina Cox and
W. P. Brown (brokers), 4s. 2½d.; John Clowes (grocer), 4s.; William
Livingston (draper), 3s.; Robert Browne (gentleman), 2s.; George
Danby-Palmer (Esquire), 8s. 6¾d.; and George Danby-Palmer and Salmon
Palmer (Esquires), 3s. 6d.

Mr. W. Sidney had again opened the Theatre.

March 28th.—A monster meeting of Liberals had been held on the Hall Quay
in front of the Star, when Mr. W. Briggs occupied the chair; 500 Liberals
had attended a meeting at the Globe Inn, Gorleston, where Mr. T. Burton
Steward presided.  Both meetings were very enthusiastic.  It was said the
Tory candidates were “Sir Edmund Lay—on and Colonel Very—queer.”

April 1st.—The polling had resulted as follows;—

                Nine.       Ten.      Eleven.     Twelve.       One.       Two.       Three.      Four.
McCullagh            161        304         416         527         562        587         600         609
Watkin               150        296         405         507         541        568         582         596
Lacon                122        234         335         430         443        481         492         521
Vereker              115        220         305         383         393        419         428         451

Majority for the Liberals: 158.

After the declaration of the poll Messrs. McCullagh and Watkin addressed
from 12,000 to 15,000 persons from the Star leads.

April 8th.—Messrs. W. Green, J. Borking, J. Clayton, and W. Harbord had
been re-appointed overseers of the parish.

April 11th.—At the Election of Haven Commissioners Captain Scott
proposed, and Mr. J. H. Harrison seconded the re-election of George
Danby-Palmer, Esq., “to whom the town was greatly indebted for his long
and valuable services.”  Mr. T. Lettis, junr., proposed, and Mr. Henry
Danby-Palmer seconded Mr. J. Barker.  Mr. F. Palmer proposed and Captain
Briggs seconded H. Hammond Esq.; and Mr. G. Blake proposed, and Captain
Manthorpe seconded Mr. D. A. Gourlay, whereupon the two former were
declared to be elected Commissioners, and the two latter Supernumerary
Commissioners.

Mr. J. Owles had presided at a meeting of the Liberal Registration
Society.

The following was the result of the Guardians’ Election:—_North Ward_:
Messrs. J. Mainprice, S. Nightingale, and E. H. L. Preston re-elected.
_Market Ward_:  Messrs. D. A. Gourlay, C. C. Aldred, and W. Laws,
re-elected.  _Regent Ward_: Messrs. W. Worship, S. C. Marsh, and R. D.
Barber, re-elected.  _St. George’s Ward_: Messrs. B. Fenn and J. G.
Plummer, re-elected, with Mr. T. Foreman in the place of Mr. J. Clark
resigned, and in the _Nelson Ward_ (Mr. J. H. Harrison having resigned)
the polling was—Brightwen 402, Woolverton 431, Reynolds 309, Clark 339,
and Moore 287, Mr. Clark thus taking the place of Mr. Harrison.

April 18th.—At the annual Vestry Meeting there was a large attendance.
The Rev. George Hills presided, and Mr. Hammond proposed, and Mr. T.
Brightwen seconded, the re-election of C. S. D. Steward as Churchwarden.
Mr. Lawn then proposed Mr. George Danby-Palmer, but that gentleman
declined the honour and explained that the reason why he would not pay
the Church Rate was that the Churchwardens, while pressing the poor,
discharged the rich, and especially Mr. Talbot, from payment of that tax.
Mr. B. Fenn proposed, and Mr. S. C. Marsh seconded Mr. Edward Aldred; Mr.
J. H. Harrison and Mr. Neave addressed the meeting amid “great uproar,”
and eventually the appointment of Mr. Steward and Mr. Aldred was carried
by a large majority.  Messrs. Hammond, Fenn, and Harrison were appointed
a Committee to look into the question of the St. Nicholas Estate, and Mr.
R. Hammond was re-appointed Auditor of the Vestry’s accounts.

Measures were being taken by Mr. M. Butcher and others with a view to
establishing a School of Art.

April 22nd.—The Artillery Band was performing on the Hall-quay.

Trade at the Fair “had been brisk.”

April 25th.—The Rope-walks “which had caused such great annoyance” were
to be removed, and the following compensations had been paid to owners of
them:—Mr. Bracey, £750; Mr. T. Lettis, jun., £550; Mr. Green, an annuity
for himself and Mrs. Green equal to £420; and to Mr. R. Barber (who had
refused £200), £615 under the award of C. Evans, Esq., of Norwich.

April 29th.—A meeting had been held at Mr. Paget’s late residence for the
purpose of forming a School of Navigation in connection with the School
of Art.

May 2nd.—A petition in favour of the removal of Jewish Disabilities was
being signed in the town, and the Mayor (C. C. Aldred, Esq.), George
Danby-Palmer, R. Hammond, J. W. Shelly, J. Fenn, D. A. Gourlay, W.
Johnson, P. Pullyn, and R. Steward, Esqs., had supported the movement.

The East Norfolk Militia Band had performed on the Hall-quay.

The Poor’s rate was 1s. 4d. for the quarter.

The Insignia belonging to the Corporation had been sent to the Manchester
Art Exhibition.

May 6th.—The entire Police force (with the exception of the
Superintendent) had received one month’s notice to quit the force, with
liberty to apply for re-appointment.

May 16th.—A petition, signed by E. H. L. Preston and R. Ferrier, Esqs.,
(Mr. C. Moore being surety for the required £1,000), was about to be
lodged against the return of Messrs. McCullagh and Watkin.

May 20th.—This petition had been presented to the House of Commons.

May 23rd.—A young woman, residing in the Star and Garter Row, had been
charged before the Justices “with illegally detaining a silver mace, the
property of the Corporation.”  Defendant said that she did not know where
it was, but that her mother, who had been dead three years, “wished it to
be buried with her.”  The case was adjourned for a week, when the
defendant “bounced out of Court.”

May 27th.—Several friends of the sitting Members had received Speaker’s
warrants, as also had Sir E. H. K. Lacon, who was served as he was about
to start on a Continental tour; Messrs. B. Powell and George Byford had
also been served.

May 30th.—The guarantee fund for opposing the petition had reached the
sum of £2,400.

Two Russian guns had been received by the Corporation.

It was proposed to carry on the trawl fishery by means of “iron screw
welled smacks of 150 tons burden.”

June 3rd.—The police had been re-modelled.  Originally the force
consisted of 4 sergeants, 16 privates, beside 4 non-permanent men who
formed the “river watch.”  Of these a sergeant and six privates had been
discharged, and in their stead a sergeant and 13 privates appointed; the
force, therefore, then consisted of a Superintendent, four sergeants, and
23 privates.

The “small silver mace” above referred to had been delivered up by the
Carter family to the Corporation.

June 6th.—Fourteen hundred persons had visited the town by excursion
train from Norwich on Whit-Monday.

June 10th.—Contains an obituary notice of Mr. Rumbold, who had died at
Brighton on the 31st. ult., aged 69.  It was stated that he had “not left
behind him _one enemy_.”

The _Yarmouth Standard_, started three months since as an advocate “of
Conservative and true Christian principles,” had ceased to exist.

June 13th.—The mackerel fishery had improved, Mr. Mainprice’s Company of
14 boats had sent in 12,000, and Mr. Shuckford’s 10,000 fish.

June 20th.—Mackerel were selling from 31s. to 32s. per 100.  The
“Fisherman” (Mr. James Woolverton) being the “head boat.”

June 24th.—The “Russian guns” were to be placed either on the Marine
Parade, Hall Quay, or Chapel Denes.

One thousand silver penny pieces of the reign of King John, the two first
Edwards, and Alexander I. of Scotland had been found at a depth of about
17 feet in Mr. Ambrose Palmer’s dry dock.

The “Eastern Unitarian Christian Society” had celebrated its 44th
Anniversary at Great Yarmouth.  The Rev. Dr. Sadler preached from 1 Cor.
xii., 27.  At the subsequent meeting, Sir Thomas Beevor, Bart., presided,
and Mr. J. W. Dowson, Mr. Mills (Norwich), Mr. W. N. Burroughs, the Rev.
H. Squint, Mr. S. Dowson, Rev. D. Davis, Mr. Welham and Mr. C. Freeman
took part in the proceedings, afterwards 70 members partook of a cold
collation at the Victoria Hotel.

At the quarterly meeting of the Primitive Methodist Society, it was
stated that their members had increased by 100 during the last quarter.

One boat had brought in 6 lasts of herring, selling at from £20 to £28
per last.

July 1st.—A cricket match had been played on Gunton-denes between the
Yarmouth and Lowestoft Clubs, in which the latter was victorious.  The
Yarmouth team consisted of Messrs. Graystone, Jennings, G. Clarke, Reeve,
J. S. Browne, Young, R. Clarke, Vaughan, E. Clarke, Steward, and C.
Diver.

Mr. T. Lettis, jun., had been found dead in his counting-house, and the
Jury had returned a verdict “That deceased destroyed himself while in a
state of temporary insanity.”

July 8th.—Mr. C. E. Bartram had been elected a Councillor for the
Nelson-ward in the room of the late Mr. Lettis, the polling being—

C. E. Bartram             112
J. H. Harrison             84

July 11th.—The Lord Bishop had laid the corner-stone of St. John’s
Church.  Mr. J. A. Hakewell was the architect.  Mr. A. W. Morant
supervised the erection, and Mr. R. Steward was the contractor for the
entire work at £1,246.

The Bishop preached from Col. iii., 1, 2, 3 and 4.

July 18th.—There was to be no Regatta this year.

Mr. Harmer’s coloured photographic portraits were much admired.

Mackerel had been scarce, owing, it was supposed, to the coldness of the
weather.

July 25th.—A detachment of Royal Artillery, about 145 strong, was
encamped on the North-denes.

James Ablett a pauper nurse at the Workhouse, had been committed for
trial at the Assizes for the wilful murder of Angus Steward.

July 29th.—The Committee (which consisted of the Earl of March, chairman,
Mr. H. M. Clifford, Mr. C. J. Dupre, Mr. W. J. Garnet, and Colonel
Maxwell), was sitting upon the petition against the return of Messrs.
McCullagh and Watkin as M.P.’s for the Borough.

Aug. 1st.—This Committee had unseated both those gentlemen.

At the Water Frolic for the first match the following entries were made:—

Kathleen             Messrs. Diver and Chamberlin
Belvidere                       Mr. T. Read, jun.
Victorine                           Mr. J. Fiddes
Ontario                              Mr. F. Frere
Pysche                          Mr. J. Fenn, jun.
Iris                              Mr. A. D. Stone

At the finish the Kathleen beat the Belvidere by some 300 yards.

The second match was won by Mr. Green’s “Enchantress” (latteen.)

Aug. 5th.—There had been a monstre Liberal Demonstration, when Mr. A. W.
Young and Mr. J. Mellor, Q.C., were accepted as the candidates of that
party.  Some 10,000 to 12,000 persons were present.

Aug. 8th.—Among the Tories “vacillation, uncertainty, and lukewarmness
prevailed.”  Sir Samuel Hogg, Mr. Mackenzie, and Sir Henry Stracey had
been tried without avail.

The Hon. Ernest Duncombe had visited the Borough, and left without taking
further action; so Sir Edmund Lacon was still alone in the field as a
Conservative candidate.

Aug. 13th.—Sir E. Lacon had retired from the contest.

The nomination had taken place outside the Town Hall, when Mr. J. W.
Shelly proposed, and Mr. H. Danby-Palmer seconded Mr. A. W. Young; and
Mr. R. Hammond proposed, and Mr. P. Pullyn seconded Mr. J. Mellor, Q.C.,
and there being no other nomination, those gentlemen were declared duly
elected.

Messrs. McCullagh and Watkin subsequently addressed the electors from the
Star Hotel.

Aug. 23rd.—About 90 ladies and gentlemen had attended the Race Ball at
the Town Hall.

Mr. Allen’s tender of £3,156 11s. 5d. for the erection of the Britannia
Pier, and Mr. Thompson’s tender of £200 for making the approaches to it,
had been accepted.

Herrings were selling at from £20 to £26 per last.

Sept. 12th.—A new organ had been built for St. Peter’s Church at a cost
of £400.

Sept. 23rd.—The Mayor had convened a meeting for the purpose of raising a
fund for the relief of the sufferers by the Indian Mutiny.  Among those
present were—Sir Eaton Travers, the Revs. G. Hills, J. S. Russell, J. B.
Brampton, B. Vaux and D. Oliver, Dr. Dunne, and Messrs. J. W. Shelly, S.
Tolver, P. Pullyn, J. G. Fisher, R. Ferrier, sen., S. Dowson, A. R.
Palmer, G. Blake, E. P. Youell, C. Preston, E. R. Aldred, W. Davie, &c.;
the sum of £233 17s. was subscribed in the room.

Sept. 30th.—The following shareholders had attended the ordinary general
meeting of the Yarmouth and Haddiscoe Railway Company:—Sir E. H. K. Lacon
(Chairman), Sir M. Peto, R. Hammond, J. Clowes, B. Fenn, C. E. Bartram,
and W. H. Palmer, Esqs., &c., and power was given to the Directors to
raise £25 000 by way of mortgage.

Oct. 3rd.—The Britannia Pier Works were being actively pushed on.

Mr. J. H. Harrison (the Ballast lessee) had called a meeting of 120
masters of vessels at the St. George’s Hall, for the purpose of receiving
a statement from that gentleman, during which he said that he proposed to
give a donation of £8 to the Fishermen’s Hospital, which sum he had
received from a dispute (in which he did not concur) with the
Corporation.  Mr. Harrison was loudly cheered by the meeting, which he
regaled with choice wines and spirits.

The Rev. J. S. Russell had preached his farewell sermon at the King
Street Chapel, where he had laboured for the past 14 years.

Oct. 10th.—The Day of National Fast and Humiliation had been observed in
the town “in a most becoming manner.”

Herring was selling at from £10 to £18 per last.

Oct. 17th.—Three hundred pounds had been collected for the Indian Relief
Fund.

Oct. 21st.—Contains the following report:—“A Vestry meeting was held in
the Town-hall, on Friday, for the purpose of considering the propriety of
making a Church rate.  There was a large attendance; the minister of the
parish (the Rev. G. Hills, B.D.), of course presided.—The Chairman, in
opening the proceedings, stated that the rate which would be proposed
would be, in all respects, a legal one; it would include a charge for St.
Peter’s Church, as the Churchwardens had been advised that that edifice
was chargeable upon the rate in the same way that the Parish Church was.
With regard to the new church of St. John’s, a fund had been raised which
would be invested for keeping it in repair, so that it might never become
chargeable to the parishioners.  The Churchwardens, in order to preserve
as much harmony as possible, would only ask for a rate for the repair of
the fabrics, and for the payment of such legal charges as they were
compelled to include in the rate; the items which would be left out
would, therefore, amount to between £60 and £70, and would have to be
defrayed by voluntary contribution.—Messrs. C. S. D. Steward and E. R.
Aldred, the Churchwardens, moved and seconded that a rate of 1½d. in the
pound be levied for the ensuing year; the amounts which it was estimated
would be required were—for the Parish Church, £142 5s. 4d.; for St.
George’s Chapel, £32 6s. 6d.; for St. Peter’s Church £32; and for general
purposes £35.—Mr. W. T. Fisher moved, and Mr. J. Lawn seconded, “That at
a time when it is expected that the Government will pass a bill for the
abolition of Church rates, it appears to this vestry that it is
inexpedient to increase the rates by including St. Peter’s Church, as it
may ultimately add to increased taxation.”  Mr. Fisher also moved, and
Mr. Joseph Neave seconded, “That time be given for the ratepayers to
examine the estimates, and that the meeting do therefore adjourn for
three weeks for that purpose.”—The Chairman refused to put either of the
above amendments—the first because Mr. Fisher would not alter it by
leaving out the words “By including St. Peter’s Church,” and the second
because he did not consider it to be a _bona fide_ objection.—Mr. Fisher
entered written protests, signed by himself, against the decision of the
chairman, which protests he requested might be entered in the Vestry
Clerk’s minutes of the meeting.—Mr. J. H. Harrison moved, “That until
after the committee, which was appointed in April last to confer with the
Churchwardens relative to the property belonging to the Parish Church,
had made its report to a further vestry, it is inexpedient to make a
rate.”  Mr. F. Starling seconded the amendment.—The Chairman, in
endeavouring to prevail upon Mr. Harrison to withdraw his amendment,
stated that in March next, property which now let at from £29 to £30 a
year, and that in September, 1859, property which now realised £50 per
annum, would fall in; he agreed with them that the greatest care ought to
be taken in properly administering this property, and said he believed
its value would be increased threefold.—The amendment was carried by an
immense majority, and the meeting, therefore, was adjourned _sine die_.

Oct. 28th.—Many vessels had been lost, and amongst them the “Betsy” (G.
D. Palmer, Esq., owner), on Palling Beach.  (N.B.—She was at that time
the oldest vessel afloat hailing from the port, and had belonged to the
Palmer family for more than 100 years.)

Oct. 31st.—The Liberal electors had held a grand soireè at the Town Hall,
Messrs. A. W. Young, M.P., and J. Mellor, Q.C., M.P., being present; 220
persons attended, amongst whom were R. Hammond, Esq., (Chairman), and
Messrs. G. D. Palmer, J. W. Shelley, W. N. Burroughs, P. Pullyn, C. E.
Bartram, D. A. Gourlay, J. Clowes, G. Blake, W. T. Clarke, F. Palmer, H.
D. Palmer, D. B. Palmer, W. T. Fisher, J. Cobb, J. Mainprice, W. Briggs,
J. H. Harrison, J. Owles, J. Neave, &c.  Mr. McCullagh was unable to
attend, but the meeting was addressed by Messrs. Young, Mellor, and
Watkin, and the utmost unanimity prevailed.

Nov. 4th.—Some 2,000 persons had attended an open-air Liberal
Demonstration on the Hall-quay, at which G. Danby-Palmer, Esq., presided,
and which was addressed by Mr. Watkin.

At the Municipal Election the Tories had been successful, the Liberals
“not going in to win.”  At the close of the poll the Conservative
procession, consisting of a band of music, some flags, bearing such
inscriptions as “Cheap Bread and Economy,” and about four or five cabs
formed and paraded through the principal thoroughfares.  The returns
were—

            _Regent Ward_.
Sir E. H. K. Lacon, (C)            118
J. Cherry, (C)                     114
J. Owles, (L)                       82
F. Palmer, (L)                      78
            _Market Ward_.
J. E. Barnby, (C)                  128
J. Fenn, (C)                       126
J. Scott, (L)                      110
G. W. Clowes, (L)                  107
         _St. George’s Ward_.
W. J. Foreman, (C)                 121
H. Jay, (C)                        117
A. D. Stone, (L)                    85
J. Fill, (L)                        80
            _Nelson Ward_.
S. V. Moore, (L)                   211
J. Clark, (C)                      151
J. Clowes, (L)                     127
            _North Ward_.
S. Nightingale, (C)                144
W. H. Bessey, (C)                  132
J. Mainprice, (L)                  126
J. Cobb, (L)                       109
         _St. Andrew’s Ward_.
J. Hammond, (C)                    185
William H. Palmer, (C)             174
Henry Danby-Palmer, (L)            164
J. Barker, (L)                     150

Mr. J. Clowes had entered a protest against the return in the Nelson Ward
“on the ground of the presiding alderman having left his post during the
election.”

Nov. 7th.—The first general meeting of the Shareholders of the Britannia
Pier Company had been held, the accounts showing £1,365 received, and
£781 12s. 6d expended.

Nov. 11th.—At the Council Meeting, Mr. E. H. L. Preston proposed, and Mr.
Palmer (Deputy-Mayor) seconded, Mr. Francis Worship for the office of
Mayor.  Mr. R. Steward then proposed Mr. W. H. Bessey, who declining the
honour, Mr. Steward suggested the name of Mr. Plummer, who also refusing
to serve, the Mayor declared Mr. Worship unanimously elected to the
office.

The Poor’s rate was 1s. 4d. in the £.

Nov. 14th.—Thirty-six gentlemen had attended the dinner given to the
Ex-Mayor at the Town Hall.

Herring was selling at from £12 to £20 a last.

The adjourned Vestry Meeting for the purpose of considering the propriety
of making a Church rate had been held in the Town Hall.  There was a
large attendance of ratepayers, who were, of course, presided over by the
minister of the parish.  The Committee appointed to consider the value of
the Church property recommended that that which had fallen in, and which
would fall in on the 25th of March next, should be re-let on repairing
leases of 14 years’ duration, at a rental of £76 16s.—Mr. J. H. Harrison,
one of the committee, gave a detailed account of all the Church property,
both of that which fell in in September last, and that which will fall in
during next year and 1859 and 1860.  He had no doubt, whatever, that if
the property was properly managed, there would be no necessity for asking
for a Church rate after 1860.—Mr. C. S. D. Steward and Mr. E. R. Aldred,
the Churchwardens, moved and seconded respectively, “That in consequence
of the increased rental of the estate belonging to St. Nicholas’ Church
not being available for the current year, a rate of 1½d in the pound be
now made and assessed.”—Mr. J. H. Harrison thought that St. Peter’s
Church ought not to be included in the rate, and moved as an amendment,
“That St. Peter’s Church having been erected by voluntary contributions,
with an understanding that it should be maintained and supported by its
pew rents, and should in no way become a charge upon the parish, this
Vestry deems it advisable to refuse making a rate until the Churchwardens
do exclude the said Church of St. Peter wholly from their estimate.”—Mr.
J. Lawn seconded the amendment, but the Chairman refused to put it, on
the ground that he could not consistently with his duty do so.—After
considerable discussion, in the course of which the Clerk stated that St.
Peter’s Church could be legally included in the rate, Mr. W. T. Fisher
moved, and Mr. J. Lawn seconded, on the ground that the Church property,
if re-let at its full value, would realize more than sufficient for the
necessary repairs of the Parish Church, and that money, which could
afterwards be repaid out of the surplus, could be borrowed to defray the
expenses for the next two years,—“That this meeting resolves to adjourn
for four weeks, to obtain the necessary amount and thereby to avoid the
necessity of making a Church rate.”—The Chairman conscientiously refused
to put this amendment on the ground that it was not a _bona fide_ one,
and also the following amendment, which was likewise moved by Mr. W. T.
Fisher, “That in order to give the Churchwardens time to prepare a proper
estimate, the Vestry to adjourn for three weeks.”—Mr. J. H. Harrison then
moved, “That it is inexpedient and inadvisable to make a Church rate at
this meeting.”—The Chairman, however, refused to put this, as also
another amendment by Mr. J. H. Harrison to the effect, “That a Church
rate of a farthing in the pound be levied.”—After a great deal of uproar,
the motion of the Churchwardens was lost by a considerable majority.  A
poll was then demanded, when the Chairman appointed Mr. J. L. Cufaude to
be the assessor, and the meeting adjourned.  The following numbers were
polled during the afternoon:—For the rate 225, against it 195.

Nov. 18th.—The polling of the Vestry had been concluded as follows:—

For the Rate            651
Against                 771

and at 10 o’clock on Saturday, Mr. Hills stated that the poll would not
be re-opened.

On the following day (Sunday) the clocks at the Parish Church and St.
George’s Chapel were stopped, and the bells “tolled” at the hour for
performance of divine service.

Nov. 21st.—Mr. D. Tomkins, of the British School, had again satisfied the
Government Inspector.

R. Hammond, Esq., had presented 40 cwt. of coal to the inmates of the
Fisherman’s Hospital.

Nov. 28th.—It was calculated that there were 400 boats then engaged in
the Herring Fishing belonging to Yarmouth.

Dec. 12th.—The Mayor’s “feast” had been held at the Town Hall, 120
gentlemen being present, including Lord Sondes (High Steward), Sir E. N.
Buxton, Bart., M.P., Sir H. Stracey, Bart., Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart.,
Colonel Elmhirst, Colonel Sankey, Major Taylor, Captain Nugent, Captain
Dunt, the Revs. B. Vaux, J. Gunn, M. Waters and J. B. Bampton, Messrs. R.
Hammond, W. N. Burroughs, C. J. Palmer, C. Cory, E. H. L. Preston, E. P.
Youell, W. Yetts, R. Steward, B. Jay, C. H. Chamberlin, R. S. Watling, I.
Preston, jun., W. C. Reynolds, R. Ferrier, W. H. Palmer, C. Preston, F.
Palmer, H. D Palmer, J. C. Smith, D. A. Gourlay, &c.

The “recruiting staff” of the 9th Regiment, then at Yarmouth, consisted
of Lieut.-Colonel C. Elmhirst, Brevt-Colonel Sankey, Major A. Taylor,
Captains W. Dunt, H. F. Manton, W. Nugent, D. A. Barnett, R. P. O’Shea,
J. W. MacFarlane, — Carden, and J. Graham, Lieutenants H. G. H. Grubbe,
H. Gipps, and A. F. B. Wright, Adjutant Bolton, Ensigns C. S. Perry, J.
L. Bradshaw, S. Lynne and C. T. Coote, Quarter-Master Arrowsmith, and 19
Sergeants and 10 Corporals.

Dec. 30th.—There were 30 prisoners in the Gaol, and they had been regaled
with a Christmas dinner by the Mayor.

The Clocks at the Parish Church and St. George’s Chapel had been set
going again at the instance of the Town Council.



1858.


Jan. 2nd.—Contains the following article on the Old Year:—“1857 has been
a good year for our port.  Our fisheries have prospered; our mercantile
and shipping report is favourable; and our commercial credit has stood
firm and upright against the pressure of a severe monetary crisis.  We
have proved the elasticity of our resources, and have demonstrated the
strength and stability of our enterprise.  The fashionable season has
also been one on which we have to congratulate ourselves.  During the
summer and autumn of 1857, Yarmouth was full of visitors; our beach was
crowded with company; and our hotels and lodging houses were all full.
In short, on New Year’s Day we find that we can strike a balance on the
right side, and look forward with hope based on the solid foundation of
proved success.  There is but one great drawback to the seasonable
satisfaction such a state of things affords.  Our political divisions
have materially diminished the account in our favour, and have seriously
interfered with the social harmony of the town.  We have suffered
ourselves to be led away into personal altercations, and have so departed
from the straight road of a defined and thought-out principle.  This has
been a grave mistake, as we are now beginning to discover.  But generally
we have yet to learn that political zeal is not inconsistent with the
courtesies of society, and that ill-tempered advocacy is worse than
useless.  Let us hope, however, that the moderate men of both political
opinions, who must, we are sure, see the error of this course, will for
the future guard against indiscretions, which are as inherently wrong as
they are manifestly prejudicial to any cause that stands upon Principle
and is supported by its own Truth.  We know we express the opinion of the
thinking portion of the constituency in advising an abstinence from the
littleness of factious strife, and in suggesting a more elevated view of
political verities, we are satisfied we are answering to the wish of the
most respectable members of the opposing parties, and are explaining what
is only wanting to consolidate the established prosperity of Yarmouth.”

The Hospital meeting showed a deficit of from £40 to £50 on the annual
accounts.

Jan. 6th.—It was rumoured than an addition would shortly be made to the
local Magistracy.

Jan. 9th.—Mr. C. J. Palmer occupied the chair at the annual Library
Meeting.  It was stated that there were then nearly 10,000 volumes
belonging to that Institution, of which about 22 were circulated daily.

Jan. 13th.—Mr. Roach (Station-master) was, much to the regret of the
inhabitants, leaving Yarmouth.

Jan. 16th.—Mr. George Danby-Palmer had presided at a dinner given to B.
Fenn, Esq., when that gentleman was presented with 203 oz. of plate
(value £100) by the Great Yarmouth Provident Fisherman’s Society, of
which he had acted as Hon. Sec. for 30 years.

The Russian guns were to be placed at the South end of the Hall Quay.

Court “Star of the East,” A.O.F., had held its anniversary at the Regent
Tavern.

Jan. 23rd.—The Rev. F. W. Johnson had been appointed minister at St.
John’s Church.

A meeting of the Town Council had been held to consider the question of
the proposed appointment of Justices, when Mr. E. H. L. Preston moved,
and Mr. B. Fenn seconded, the adoption of a memorial to the Lord
Chancellor, deprecating the proposed appointment of Messrs. P. Pullyn, D.
A. Gourlay, Frederick Palmer, William T. Clarke, John Barker, and John
Owles, and Mr. George Danby-Palmer moved, and Mr. Chapman seconded, an
amendment in favour of such appointments, which, on a division, was lost
by 25 to 5 votes.  The Mayor made some warm remarks of a personal nature,
which brought a similar retort from Mr. Chapman, and it was stated that
“the last portion of these remarks was given amid applause in the gallery
and laughter of the members, the meeting breaking up in great confusion.”

Feb. 6th.—The same question had been discussed at a meeting of
Magistrates, when the Clerk was directed to apply to the Lord Chancellor
for the correspondence with regard to the proposed appointments.

Feb. 10th.—This request had been declined by his Lordship, and it
appeared that the Roll had been sent for, which led to a discussion of a
personal character.

Feb. 13th.—The Town Council, on the motion of Mr. C. J. Palmer, seconded
by Mr. Burroughs, had voted an address to the Queen on the occasion of
the marriage of the Princess Royal.

A letter was read at the same meeting, stating that the Lord Chancellor
had added the names of the six before mentioned gentlemen to the
Commission of the Peace.

Feb. 20th.—It was proposed to extend the Marine Parade.

The 9th Regiment of Foot had left Yarmouth for Bradford.  During its stay
here some 200 recruits had been obtained.

Mr. Frederick Palmer had qualified as a Justice of the Peace.

St. John’s Church had been opened for service, when the Revs. F. W.
Johnson and George Hills preached in the morning and afternoon
respectively.

Feb. 24th.—The cost of the maintenance of the poor of the parish had
increased since the passing of the 9th and 10th Vic. cap. 56 from about
£9,000 to £10,376 per annum.

Messrs. J. Barker and P. Pullyn had qualified as Magistrates.

Feb. 27th.—The 24-pounders at the Batteries were to be replaced by 74
pound guns.

March 6th.—Records the death of Rear-Admiral Sir Eaton Travers, K.H.,
aged 70.  The dates of his appointments were—Lieutenant 1804, Commander
1814, Captain 1829, Rear-Admiral 1855.  He had seen much service, and was
nominated a K.H. on 4th of February, 1834.  He possessed the silver naval
medal with one clasp, had a good service pension, and was a D.L. for the
county.  Sir Eaton married in April, 1815, Anne Palmer, eldest daughter
of William Steward, Esq., by whom he had issue five sons and two
daughters.

It was hoped that the Yarmouth and Haddiscoe Railway would be opened by
the 1st of September next.

March 13th.—A dispute had arisen between the Local Board of Health and
George Danby-Palmer, Esq., with regard to certain land at the south-end
of the town, and Mr. Chamberlin, acting as Mr. Palmer’s solicitor, had
complained to the Bench of having been assaulted by Mr. Morant (Town
Surveyor), upon the “locus in quo,” and what was described as a “scene”
had ensued.

March 20th.—The Naval Hospital was being fitted up for the reception of
sick and wounded men from India; it was noticed that although fitted up
in a similar way during the Russian war, it had never then been used.

Complaint was made of the “niggardly” way in which the Southtown Road was
lighted.

March 24th.—Lord Sondes had presented a petition from the Town Council to
the House of Lords on the subject of the Magisterial appointments, but
after an explanation by the Lord Chancellor, who justified his action,
“the subject dropped.”

March 27th.—Mr. J. S. Cobb had delivered a lecture on “Chemistry.”

April 3rd.—Mr. R. Steward had protested against the Senior Magistrate
taking the chair in Petty Session as a matter of right.

April 7th.—Ten publicans had been fined for keeping their houses open at
illegal hours.

April 10th.—At the appointment of Overseers, Mr. E. H. L. Preston moved
the appointment of Messrs. William Green, James Borking, John Clayton,
and William Harbord; and Mr. Owles proposed Mr. James H. Harrison in the
place of Mr. Green.  Upon the votes being taken, there appeared: For Mr.
Preston’s list—The Mayor and Messrs. William Danby-Palmer, E. H. L.
Preston, J. C. Smith, W. Yetts, W. Thurtell, B. Jay, W. H. Bessey, J.
Fenn, William Hurry Palmer, J. Cherry, R. Steward, C. C. Aldred, J. G.
Plummer, and B. Fenn; and for Mr. Owles’ list—Messrs. Geo. Danby-Palmer,
J. W. Shelley, W. Johnson, R. Hammond, P. Pullyn, D. A. Gourlay,
Frederick Palmer, W. T. Clarke, J. Barker, and J. Owles.

April 17th.—From 3,000 to 4,000 persons had witnessed the launch of the
“Froderica,” of 600 tons burthen, from Mr. Branford’s yard.

April 24th.—St. John’s Church had been consecrated by the Lord Bishop of
Norwich.

H.M.S. “Edinburgh,” 74 tons, and two gun-boats had passed through the
Roads.

April 28th.—Mr. John Clowes had been returned as a Councillor for the
Nelson Ward without opposition in the place of Mr. Samuel V. Moore,
deceased.

May 1st.—Ninety ladies and gentlemen had attended a ball at the Town
Hall.

The sum of £137 had been collected at the Consecration Services at St.
John’s Church.  The Communion plate and stone pulpit in this church had
been paid for from the proceeds arising from the sale of the second
edition of the “Story of John Brock.”

May 5th.—Reference is made to the drowning of the only son of Captain
Ellis, R.N., at Southwold.

The Poor’s rate was 1s. 4d. in the £.

The Summer excursion trains had commenced running, and had brought many
visitors from Norwich.

May 8th.—Seventy invalids from Colchester camp were under treatment at
the Naval Hospital.  The officers in charge were Captain Jervois,
Commandant; Captain Naylor, Pay-master; Staff-Surgeons, Bradford and Joy,
and Mr. Rippon, Purveyor.

May 15th.—Disturbances had taken place between some of the Fermanagh
Militia and townsmen at Southtown, and the conduct of the Mayor was
impugned with regard to his desire to repress the report of this, when
Mr. de Caux vindicated the reports sent by him to the newspapers he
represented.

May 22nd.—The mackerel fleet (about 100 sail) were nearly all at sea, and
prices had varied from 35s. to 45s. per hundred.

The “Nil Desperandum” (500 tons) had been launched from Mr. Rust’s yard.

June 12th.—Records the death of Sir E. N. Buxton, Bart., one of the
M.P’s. for East Norfolk.

June 16th.—Sir Henry Stracey, a candidate for the seat thus vacant, had
met the Conservative electors at the Angel-hotel, when Mr. E. H. L.
Preston occupied the chair.  It was stated that “Sir Henry is a favourite
in Yarmouth from the interest he has taken in all that relates to the
interest of the town.”

June 19th.—The Liberals had met at the Star Hotel, Mr. B. Dowson in the
chair, when a resolution accepting the Hon. Wenman Clarence Walpole Coke
as the candidate in the Whig interest had been adopted.

John Berry had committed suicide by shooting himself on the South Denes.

June 26th.—Mr. Falcke (a gentleman whose father formerly lived in the
town) had given subscriptions to the Hospital and the Ragged and British
Schools.

June 30th.—At the County election, Mr. E. Fellowes, M.P., proposed, and
Colonel Fitzroy seconded Sir H. J. Stracey, Bart., and Mr. Bulwer
proposed, and Mr. Upcher seconded the Hon. Wenman C. W. Coke; the show of
hands was in favour of Sir H. J. Stracey, whereupon Mr. Bulwer demanded a
poll on behalf of the Hon. Mr. Coke.

July 3rd.—The poll had been declared as follows:—

The Hon. W. C. W. Coke            2933
Sir H. J. Stracey                 2720
                   Majority        213

An analysis of the polling at Yarmouth showed—

                        Coke.       Stracey.
Yarmouth Voters              288            301
E&W. Flegg ,,                150            195
Out ,,                        36             58
Gorleston ,,                   6              4
Southtown ,,                  14             14

Mr. Isaac Shuckford had been elected an Alderman in the place of Alderman
T. Foreman deceased.

A fight had taken place on the North Denes between Plumb (of Bungay) and
Swash (of Yarmouth) for £10 a side.  It lasted 1 h. and 35 min., and 93
rounds were fought.  Ultimately Swash was beaten.

July 10th.—The “Minstrel” had been launched from Mr. Symonds’ and the
“Success” from Mr. Chapman’s yard.

July 14th.—“Frequent collisions” were taking place between the Irish
Militia and the inhabitants.

July 17th.—Britannia Pier had been opened.  The Mayor attended with the
“civic authorities;” on his arrival two rockets were let off and cannon
were discharged.  At the “dejeuner” subsequently held, C. C. Aldred and
C. Cory, Esqs., presided at the tables, faced by D. A. Gourlay, and G. B.
Palmer, Esqs.

A “Marine Horticultural Fête” had been held on this pier.

July 21st.—A Provincial Grand Lodge of Norfolk Freemasons had been held
at the Priory Hall, which 150 brethren attended.  Subsequently a banquet
was held at the Town Hall, when P.G.M. Bro. B. Bond Cabbell presided,
Bros. Sir H. J. Stracey and C. H. Chamberlin occupying the vice-chairs.

July 24th.—Fifty-seven sick and wounded soldiers, mostly Indian
sufferers, had arrived at the Royal Naval Hospital.

July 28th.—It was computed that there were between 8,000 and 9,000
visitors then in the town.

There had been a heavy gale from the S.W.

July 31st.—At the Regatta, which was held from the Wellington
Pier,—umpires, Lieut.-Col. Beckham and Mr. M. Butcher; hon. secretary,
Mr. Henry R. Harmer;—in the first yacht race the “Violet” (J. E. Kirby)
beat the “Aretion” (J. Goodson, Esq.), and the “Silver Star” (— Mann,
Esq.).  The following yawls competed as under:—

                                         Came in
                                  H.       M.       S.
Eclipse            54 ft.             6        0       32
Royal Standard     49 ft.             5       58       40
Queen Victoria     63 ft.             5       50       20
Lady Hume          59 ft.             5       54       30
Young Prince       47 ft.               withdrew
Glance             47 ft.             6        3       23

In the next race (for small yachts) the “Kestrel” (W. Butcher) beat the
“Belvidere” (T. Read), “Isabella” (O. Diver), “Rover” (T. Palmer), and
“Gipsy Queen” (Harcourt); there were several other races.  On this
occasion 1,700 persons visited the Wellington Pier, upwards of £40 was
taken at the gates, and it was computed that some 12,000 persons were on
the Beach; 3,000 persons visited the Victoria Gardens, where “Sam
Collins” performed, and Mr. Coe had the management of the display of
fireworks.

Aug. 4th.—The acting Charity Trustees, Messrs. George Danby-Palmer and
Thomas Brightwen, had selected the following additional Trustees of the
Town Charity Estate:—The Rev. George Hills, Sir E. H. K. Lacon, and
Messrs. C. J. Palmer, J. Brightwen, B. Jay, E. H. L. Preston, C. C.
Aldred, Charles Cory, William H. Palmer, R. Hammond, W. P. Dowson, W. N.
Burroughs, and J. W. Shelley.  Objection had been taken to the names of
Sir E. H. K. Lacon and Messrs. Aldred, Cory, C. J. Palmer, E. H. L.
Preston, and W. P. Dowson, and the names of Messrs. Pullyn, C. Miller, G.
Blake and J. Fenn proposed as Trustees.

Aug. 7th.—At the Water Frolic, Mr. O. Diver acted as hon. secretary, and
in the first match the following yachts competed:—

Endora        (latteen)     Cooke         Horstead      13 feet
Nautilus      (cutter)      —             Bungay        12 ,,
Clara         (cutter)      C. Smith      Aylsham       14 ,,
Fairy Queen   (latteen)     R. Morton          ,,       13 ,,
Unique        (cutter)      W. Teasdel    Gorleston     14 ,,

The Endora won.  In the second race the entries were:—

Belvidere       T. Read            Yarmouth       28 feet
Victorine       J. Fiddes               ,,        —
Iris            A. D. Stone             ,,        27 „
Tantivy         Messrs. Morgan     Norwich        19 ,,

The Belvidere won.  The third contest was for a cup, presented by D.
Falcke, Esq., for shrimp boats; the “Smack” won.

During the sports Mr. Gardiner (editor of the _Yarmouth Independent_) was
knocked overboard by the boom of Mr. Diver’s boat, but, being a swimmer,
escaped with a “good ducking.”

Aug. 14th.—A meeting had been held for the purpose of establishing a
“Beachman’s Institute.”  The Mayor occupied the chair, and G. Harcourt,
Esq., addressed the meeting at some length; Mr. Fisher and the Rev. G.
Hills also took part in these proceedings.

A mirage had been seen off the coast, presenting the appearance of a
number of ships sailing between two chalk cliffs, thought by some to
pourtray the Isle of Wight.  Nothing of a similar kind had been seen in
Yarmouth for 75 years.  It was noticed the weather had been close and
sultry and the tides low.

Aug. 18th.—The sum of £139 18s. 6d. had been contributed for the
Beachman’s Institute.

Aug. 25th.—The Norfolk Hotel, Marine Drive, had been purchased by Messrs.
Hills and Underwood for the sum of £2,160.

Sept. 1st.—The sum of £448 had been subscribed for the restoration of the
Nelson Monument.

About 100 vessels were then engaged in the North Sea herring fishing, the
fish realising from £12 15s. to £26 per last.

George Wells Holt, Esq., who had officiated as Magistrates’ Clerk for
more than 22 years, had resigned that appointment.

Mr. W. Holt (son of the late Clerk), Mr. H. R. Harmer and Mr. Costerton
were candidates for the office.

Sept. 8th.—The following Magistrates attended on the appointment being
filled up:—F. Worship, Esq., (Mayor), R. Hammond, B. Fenn, J. G. Plummer,
W. Johnson, P. Pullyn, F. Palmer, R. Steward, D. A. Gourlay, W. T.
Clarke, J. Fenn, E. H. L. Preston, B. Jay, W. H. Palmer, W. Yetts, C. C.
Aldred, W. H. Bessey, G. D. Palmer, W. Thurtell, T. Brightwen, J. Owles,
and J. C. Smith, Esqs., and on the motion of Mr. Hammond, seconded by Mr.
Steward, Mr. William Holt was unanimously elected.

The emoluments of the office were then about £375 per annum.

Messrs. Mellor and Young, the M.P’s. for the town, had arrived, the
former at the Norfolk, and the latter at the Royal Hotel.

The Artillery Militia had assembled for 21 days’ drill.

There had been further disturbances between the Fermanagh Militia and the
townspeople, which had led to a conference between the Magistrates and
the officer commanding that Regiment, since which the soldiers had not
been allowed to enter the town after 6.30 p.m., and a picket had been
stationed on the Bridge.

A fancy fair in aid of the Sailors’ Institute was being held in three
marquees fronting the Norfolk Hotel.

H.M.S. “Pembroke,” 60 guns, had sailed for Harwich, after remaining in
the Roads 14 days.  During her stay 40 volunteers had been entered upon
her books.

The King of Prussia’s yacht “Grille” had arrived in the Harbour; she was
of 400 tons, and rigged as a three-masted schooner.  The officers on
board were Captain baron Bothwell, Lieutenants Baron St. Paul, Baron
Dobenack, and Count Moate.

Sept. 15th.—The Fermanagh Militia had left Yarmouth for Bradford, and
were to be succeeded by the Louth Rifles.

The comet (visible with the naked eye) was getting brighter every night.

Sept. 22nd.—One of a recently-arrived advance party of the Louth Rifles
named John Carret had been found drowned in the Yare.

Sept. 25th.—Herring were selling at from £3 to £4 per last for manure.

Sept. 29th.—The subscriptions to the Races amounted to only £289 18s.
6d., leaving the balance to be raised by sale of race-cards, &c.

Mr. Colley was acting as House Surgeon at the Hospital.

Oct. 2nd.—The East Norfolk Militia had been inspected by Colonel Lewis
prior to being disbanded.

The Louth Rifles, 500 strong, had arrived, and marched into the Southtown
Barracks.  The officers were Colonel Lord Bellew, Lieut.-Colonel Sir J.
Robinson, Bart.; Major Taaffe, Adjutant Bellingham, Surgeon Dixon,
Quarter-Master Edward Burke, Paymaster J. Burke, Captains O’Reiley,
Smith, Singleton, and Murray, Lieutenants Evans, Osborne, Townley,
Murphy, and Cormack, and Ensigns Mason, Lindsay, Standidge, O’Donald and
Twentyman.

Oct. 6th.—The mortality in the town was then 23 in 1,000 persons.

Oct. 9th.—The fishing had improved, and herring was selling at from £19
5s. to £22 per last.

William Holt, Esq., had given a dinner at the Crown and Anchor to the
officials connected with the Police Court.

Mr. S. J. F. Stafford had been elected Surgeon for the North District.

Oct. 16th.—The County Revision had been held before Mr. R. Couch at the
Tolhouse, Mr. Clowes appearing for the Liberals and Mr. Cufaude for the
Tories; also for the Borough, when Mr. Costerton appeared for the
Liberals, and Mr. Cufaude for the Tories.  The Liberals claimed gains on
both these registers.

Oct. 20th.—It was understood that R. Steward, Esq., would be Mayor for
the ensuing year.

The Mayor (with Messrs. Pilgrim and Cooper as assessors) had held the
Municipal Revision, Mr. Costerton appearing for the Liberals and Mr.
Cufaude for the Conservatives; the former claimed a gain of 73 on the
proceedings.

Oct. 27th.—Lieutenant Mends, R.N., had been presented with a handsome
gold pencil-case by the crew of H.M.S. “Dolphin,” (Revenue cruiser on
this station), on his resigning his command.

Oct. 30th.—The Bishop of Norwich had confirmed 115 persons at St.
Nicholas’ Church.

Nov. 3rd.—The following Councillors had been elected without
opposition:—_North Ward_: Messrs. W. Worship and J. B. Hylton.  _Market
Ward_: Messrs. E. R. Aldred and D. A. Gourlay.  _Regent Ward_: Messrs. R.
D. Barber and R. R. B. Norman.  _St. George’s Ward_: Messrs. R. Ferrier
and B. Jay.  _Nelson Ward_: Messrs. Charles J. Palmer and Charles
Woolverton.  _St. Andrew’s Ward_: Messrs. Robert Steward and William T.
Clarke.

Captain Ryder, R.N., Government Inspector, had examined 42 pupils at the
School of Navigation.

Nov. 6th.—It was “confidently reported” that the Vicar (the Rev. G.
Hills) had been appointed Bishop of British Columbia.

Nov. 10th—A claim had been made by a person whose father had served in
the army from 1802 to 1816, to sell excisable articles without a license,
under the 56 George III. cap. 67.

Nov. 13th.—At the Council meeting held on the 9th, Mr. William H. Palmer
proposed, and Mr. Hylton seconded, Robert Steward, Esq., as Mayor for the
ensuing year, and he was declared unanimously elected, but as “the late
Mayor was about to invest him with the chain of office, His Worship
rather prematurely took hold of the chain and placed it on the seat.”

A complimentary dinner had been given by the Council to the ex-Mayor, at
which C. J. Palmer, Esq., presided.

Nov. 17th.—The Mayor had dispensed with the formality of being preceded
by the maces and other insignia of the Corporation in attending divine
service and taking his seat on the Bench.  He had also declined wearing
the gold chain on the same occasions.

Nov. 20th.—Attention was directed to the “Wonders of the Microscope,
published by Mr. Harmer, the photographist of Great Yarmouth.”

Dec. 4th.—The Royal National Lifeboat Institution had sent one of its 30
foot single-banked boats to this station.

The Mayor had issued invitations for a dinner at the Town Hall to 170
gentlemen connected with the town and district.

The Rev. R. H. Nevill had been appointed to the Vicarage, which was
supposed to be worth some £350 per annum.

Dec. 11th.—Mr. J. H. Harrison had lent the St. George’s Hall to the
tradesmen, who were getting up a concert for the benefit of the Hospital.

Dec. 15th.—The Mayor, Sir John Robinson, Bart., S. C. Marsh and C. J.
Palmer, Esqs., had acted as Stewards of the first Subscription Ball, and
there were also present—the Mayoress, Captain Winyard, R.N., Captain
O’Reiley, Dr. Dixon, Captain Smith, Mr., Mrs. and Miss Harcourt, Mrs. and
Miss Gwynne, Mrs. C. J. Palmer, Mr. Cubitt and family, Mr. and Mrs.
Ferrier, Mr. W. Travers, Mr. E. and Miss Preston, Mrs. S. C. Marsh and
family, Mr. H. Lacon, Mr. and Mrs. Barber and family, Mr. Jolly, Mr. F.
Danby-Palmer, Mr. Bullock, Mrs. A. Thompson, Mr., Mrs. and Miss Venning,
Mrs. and Miss Pearson, Dr. Button, Mr. and Mrs. Biddulph, Mrs. R.
Steward, Rev. Mr. Gott and family, Mr. Harmer, &c.

Mr. J. Petts had been promoted to be Chief Coastguard Officer at
Yarmouth.

Dec. 11th.—It was proposed to present Bishop Hills with a silver
Communion Service.



1859.


Jan. 5th.—A meeting had been held (C. J. Palmer, Esq., in the chair) for
the purpose of raising a fund with a view to presenting a testimonial to
the Rev. George Hills.  Sir E. H. K. Lacon, and Messrs. R. Hammond, T.
Brightwen, C. C. Aldred, E. H. L. Preston, C. S. D. Steward, and C. Cory,
took part in the proceedings, and £145 was raised in the room.

The Mayor (R. Steward, Esq.), had given away 300 cwts. of coal to poor
persons.

Jan. 12th.—It was reported that 20 missionary clergymen would accompany
the Rev. G. Hills to his new mission, and that Mr. Lupson, Scripture
Reader, should be ordained and go as one of these.

Jan. 15th.—The members of the Ship Insurance Society, to the number of
30, had held their annual dinner at the “Crown and Anchor”; Mr. D. A.
Gourlay occupied the chair, and Mr. D. B. Palmer the vice-chair.

Jan. 22nd.—The East Suffolk Railway was to be opened on the 1st March.

Jan. 29th.—The Rev. G. Hills had preached his farewell sermon.

The Mayor had given a Juvenile Ball to 130 children at the Town Hall.
Among those present were members of the following families:—Reynolds,
Youell, Harcourt, Cufaude, Marsh, Impey, Tompson, Clarke, Donald, Norman,
Bond, Aldred, Lettis, Woolverton, Butcher, Barnby, Ayers, Reeve, Laws,
Bayly, Chamberlin, Dashwood, Bracey, Palmer, Shuckford, Smith, Smyth,
Plummer, Barber, &c.

Bro. John Cobb had been installed W.M. of Lodge “Friendship” by Bros. O.
Diver and J. W. Bunn, and he had appointed the following officers:—Bros.
W. Wright, S.W.; G. Harley, J.W.; C. L. Chipperfield, S.D.; J. H. Bly,
J.D.; and George Knox, I.G.

Feb. 5th.—The ladies had presented plate to the value of 50 guineas to
the Rev. G. Hills.

Mrs. Gray had given a “ball and reception” at the Town Hall.

Feb. 9th.—About 100 Foresters had attended the funeral of Bro. Hatch, at
Gorleston, on Sunday, which proceeding had been objected to by the Vicar.

Feb. 12th.—A “Reform” Meeting had been held, Mr. Livingston in the chair.

Feb. 16th.—Mr. Boning, of Cambridge, had accidentally injured himself
while shooting on the Caister Marshes.  Dr. Smyth, Mr. F. Palmer, Mr.
Skinner and Mr. Colley (Hospital) were attending the sufferer.

Feb. 19th.—Mr. Nevill, the new Incumbent, had arrived, and was going “to
read himself in” on the next Sunday.

Feb. 23rd.—This ceremony had been duly performed by him.

A Reading-room had been established in connection with the Subscription
Library on the Quay.

Mr. J. C. Smith had presided at Mrs. Sizeland’s annual dinner at the
Royal Hotel.

A high tide had washed over the Beach up to the Marine Drive wall.

Feb. 26th.—The Foresters had held a dinner at the Corn Hall; 100 brethren
attended.  The Chief Ranger (Bro. Franklin) presided, and Bros. Steele,
Horne, E. Stagg, Dr. Smyth, Dumbleton and Thompson took part in the
proceedings.

March 2nd.—Dr. Hills had been consecrated Bishop of British Columbia at
Westminster Abbey.

The first train from Yarmouth had run over the East Suffolk line.

March 5th.—A search for treasure had been made at the “Stone Cairn” on
the North Denes, it seems from the report, without effect.

The old Jetty was to be repaired.

The officers of the Louth Rifles had given a Ball at the Town Hall, for
which about 180 invitations were issued.

March 19th.—Messrs. Mellor and Young had attended a Reform Meeting at the
Corn Hall; from 1,000 to 1,200 persons were present.  Among the gentlemen
accompanying the M.P.’s were Messrs. R. Hammond, P. Pullyn, Gourlay, F.
Palmer, Clowes, Briggs, Barker, &c.

March 23rd—There was a “rage” for new buildings in the town.

March 30th.—A Court of Foresters had been opened at Hasbro’, the
officiating officers being D.C.R.  Stratford and C.R.  Franklin (of Court
“Crown and Anchor.”)

April 2nd.—The question as to who were to be the Liberal candidates for
the Borough was being “mooted”; it was reported that Mr. McCullagh was to
be put on one side, that Mr. Mellor would withdraw, and that Messrs.
Watkin and Young would take the field.

A new Coastguard Station was being erected at a cost of £3,500.  Mr.
Norfor, contractor.

April 6th.—The action of “Morant _v._ Chamberlin” had been referred to
Mr. Barstow.

April 9th.—Both parties had been waiting for notice of the Dissolution of
Parliament.  Sir E. H. K. Lacon and Sir H. J. Stracey were making a
house-to-house canvas, accompanied by Messrs. W. Yetts, W. Thurtell, R.
Ferrier, C. Cory, S. C. Marsh, W. Worship, E. H. L. Preston, J. G.
Plummer, F. Ferrier, J. Fenn, &c.

The Liberals had held a meeting on the Hall Plain, which 3,000 persons
attended.  Mr. Briggs occupied the chair, and Messrs. J. Clowes, R.
Hammond, J. Owles, J. W. Shelly, and P. Pullyn took part in the
proceedings, which eventuated in the selection of Messrs. Watkin and
Young as the Liberal candidates.

April 13th.—Both parties had held meetings, the Liberals at the “Star”
and the Conservatives at the “Fish Stall House.”

April 16th.—Both parties expressed themselves confident of success, but
it was supposed that Gorleston would turn the scale; the voters there
were described as “dangerous men.”

The barque “Athelstan” (Captain John Bracey) was to be launched from
Fellows’ yard on the 19th.

April 20th.—The Liberal electors “and their wives” had met at the Corn
Exchange, while the Conservatives had held a meeting at the Victoria
Gardens.

April 23rd.—Contains the following report as to

                               “THE ELECTION.”

    The greatest activity prevails on both sides, and as the decisive day
    approaches, the feelings of partizanship are becoming greatly
    intensified.  The printers have had a lively time of it, and turn out
    a great quantity of matter, an opinion appearing to be prevalent that
    quality is a secondary consideration.  During the last few days,
    songs, parodies upon songs, speeches, and gross personal abuse have
    been issued by the supporters of Mr. Watkin, (for it must be admitted
    that Mr. Young holds himself aloof from this scurrility) with the
    object, we suppose, of doing that gentleman some good.  In our
    opinion they will have a contrary effect, as we have heard many
    respectable Liberal electors express themselves disgusted with such
    unnecessary vulgarity.  It may be very true, that in addressing the
    people, it is necessary to call a spade a spade, but it cannot be at
    all requisite that the minds of the people should be attempted to be
    influenced by strong specimens of the Billingsgate vocabulary.  Where
    wit is lacking, silence is preferable to blackguardism.  On the
    Conservative side there has also been a fair number of coloured bills
    and printed addresses issued; but the writers in this interest have
    abstained from attempting to be funny.  In printed abuse, however,
    they endeavour to rival their opponents.  Betting, if that may be
    considered a piece of electioneering business, is decidedly in favour
    of the Conservative candidates.  Each party attributes motives of the
    most improper kind to the other, and it will be seen that Mr. Watkin
    fears that his opponents may indulge in “corruption.”  On the other
    hand, Sir E. Lacon says voters had told him they dare not support
    him, as they should be inclined to do, in consequence of persons on
    the Liberal side having put the “screw” upon them.  Tradesmen
    generally will be glad when the contest is over, as it is daily
    creating much personal animosity.

The “Athelstan” had been launched; she was of 500 tons burden, and was to
take out Bishop Hills’ effects to British Columbia.

The “Haddiscoe Swamp” had caused a great difficulty on the East Suffolk
line, which was consequently still not open for traffic.

William Howlett, “Red” bill-poster, and Robert Crisp, “Blue” bill-poster,
had been before the Magistrates owing to a dispute arising out of the
election placards.

April 30th.—Both parties had been holding nightly meetings of a
“convivial character.”  On Wednesday some 300 to 400 persons had paraded
the town shouting “Down with Lacon and Stracey,” and had broken the
windows of the Red Committee rooms in the Market-place.

                               “THE NOMINATION”

    took place on the Hall Plain; the platform, in the centre of which
    was reserved a place for the Mayor and the Candidates and friends,
    being on the Crown and Anchor “leads.”  The Blues were to the left of
    the Mayor and the Reds to his right; and in front of the house there
    was at the time proceedings commenced an assemblage numbering 4,000
    or 5,000, including a number of females.  The Liberals were the first
    to arrive on the “leads,” and on Mr. Watkin showing himself to the
    crowd, he was loudly cheered, a compliment which the candidate duly
    acknowledged.  Shortly afterwards the approach of the Conservative
    party was indicated by the deep groans of the crowd, who manifested
    some indications of hostility: but on its being discovered that the
    Conservative cavalcade was headed by a party of very
    pugilistic-looking persons, decorated with red ribbon, the
    threatening attitude of the crowd was somewhat modified, and the two
    Baronets, with their friends, were allowed to ascend to the “leads”
    unmolested.  When the two parties had taken their places on the
    balcony, the Liberals proposed three cheers, which were given by the
    great majority, accompanied by the groans of the minority.  A number
    of “beery” individuals struggled to the front, and were a source of
    annoyance to the speakers throughout.  A few minutes before three
    o’clock the Mayor arrived in state, preceded by his
    sergeants-at-mace, and accompanied in his carriage by Mr. C. J.
    Palmer, who acted as his solicitor for the occasion.  When his
    Worship appeared in the balcony the Blues, for some reason, commenced
    hissing him, much to the disgust of several of the leading gentlemen
    of the Liberal party, who protested against such unseemly
    proceedings.  We may state, before attempting to report the numerous
    speeches that were delivered, that during the whole of the
    proceedings—more especially when it was the turn of the Conservatives
    to speak—the crowd was exceedingly disorderly, and by their loud
    shouting and groaning rendered most of the speakers inaudable to
    persons a few yards distant from them.  The Mayor was grossly
    insulted at the commencement, and as the proceedings progressed
    several fights were got up, and the interference of the police was
    frequently required.  Anything more unreasonable and unreasoning than
    the majority of the crowd it would be impossible to conceive, and
    when the nomination closed there did not seem to be any person in the
    balcony opposed to the opinion of the Mayor—that the “whole thing was
    a farce.”  One side of the question was not heard at all, and the
    majority shouted without knowing what about.  This was singularly
    illustrated during the speech of Mr. Watkin, when that gentleman took
    upon himself the functions of the returning-officer, by calling upon
    the crowd for a show of hands, which, singularly enough, was against
    him.  Mr. Watkin said, “All those that don’t want me to go to the
    poll, hold up their hands.”  A forest of hands was exhibited to the
    great amusement of the Conservatives, who cheered the result.  Mr.
    Watkin then told his friends that they were mistaken, and having
    explained the mistake to them, assuring them that they were too
    intelligent to vote him down, he took another show of hands, which
    was in his favour.  We shall be excused for commenting upon the
    proceedings here; but the disorder and noise was so great that, as
    most of the speakers could not be heard, we are necessitated to do
    it, in order to make our report intelligible.  From the beginning to
    the end “noise” had it in numbers; but in fighting the honour seemed
    to be with the Reds, who exhibited considerable proficiency in the
    pugilistic art.  The crowd, which was very closely packed, was
    divided into two sections, the Blue and the Red, the former having
    about ten to one of the latter.  At times both sections were very
    ill-behaved, but their misconduct was kindly overlooked by the whole
    of the speakers except Mr. Watkin, who took the liberty of
    designating the minority of the “people” as “scoundrels” and
    “ruffians.”  These polite designations appeared likely to stir up the
    ill-blood of the people, inasmuch as four or five fights immediately
    commenced, in one of which an unfortunate fellow sustained a severe
    fracture of the proboscis, and it was not until the Mayor had, to use
    a significant local word, “checked” Mr. Watkin, and warned him
    against the violent nature of his harangue, that comparative order
    was restored.  The fights in question are deserving of notice.  One
    began between a female, whose bonnet was trimmed with yellow ribbon,
    and a stout man in a blue guernsey.  Gallant Reds and Blues rushed
    into the affray, doubtless with the object of protecting the woman,
    and there was every probability of a general set-to.  The Mayor,
    however, directed the police to interfere, and the contest was
    suppressed, with apparently no worse results than the infliction of a
    few disagreeable blows on the frontispieces of the combatants.  The
    other fights were of less importance; but altogether this display of
    pugnacity had the effect of causing the outside portion of the crowd
    to run away from what they considered to be danger.  Other fights, as
    will be seen from the report, also occurred.  One feature in the
    general noise was much remarked by the gentlemen on the balcony, and
    as it was amusing we notice it.  A half drunken beachman or
    fisherman, just so far gone as to be witty, but who was unmistakeably
    a Blue, planted himself in front of the balcony, and by his
    extraordinary shouting succeeded in making himself heard above the
    surrounding tumult.  There was some natural humour about this fellow,
    and the way in which he shouted excited the laughter of the Mayor and
    both parties on the balcony.  The man shouted until the veins grew
    large in his forehead; he jumped and screamed—he laughed and waved
    his hat, and others laughed with him—indeed, for a time all laughed
    with him; he was in a state of ecstacy or violent enthusiasm.  It was
    difficult for a time to make out what the man meant, but at length he
    was understood, and his fun was appreciated.  Sir E. Lacon wears a
    full moustache, and so does Sir H. Stracey, and those hirsute
    ornaments were the objects of this excited individual’s enthusiasm.
    He laughed and shouted—his voice being heard above the murmur of the
    crowd,—for fully an hour,—“The beard! the beard! will nobody shave
    him?  A shave! a shave!  Fetch a barber! fetch a barber!—(Loud
    laughter.)—A clean shave!  A shilling for a razor! a razor! a razor!
    O Lord, a clean shave,” &c.  Ultimately the man climbed to the top of
    a post, and threw his hat into the face of a railway porter; the
    porter ran to him and struck him in the mouth two or three times,
    with a force that evidently astonished him, and as his scream then
    became somewhat distressing, he was ignominiously removed to the
    outside of the crowd.  Many other noticeable incidents occurred,
    which will be found mentioned in our report.  But there is one
    circumstance which did not altogether develop itself at the meeting,
    that we feel compelled to notice.  Society, from experience, knows
    that the prude is the loudest and severest advocate of virtue; but,
    as Josephus has remarked, “Every man will think of this as it seemeth
    good unto him.”  We have noticed the Gorleston voters, we have
    recorded the boastings and professions on both sides, and we have
    ventilated rumours which have been so far well founded.  The incident
    we are about to mention we can vouch for; it is possible, should
    circumstances necessitate it, of being proved.  On the Wednesday
    evening, mob law, intimidation, corruption, “the screw,” and all the
    worst elements of electioneering were resorted to; and we regret to
    say that the parties who most publicly exhibited themselves as
    disorderlies were persons whom we won’t classify, but who cried out,
    “Down with Lacon and Stracey” and “Three cheers for Watkin.”

                           “THE TIN CANISTER.”

A report had been “current that a mysterious old gentleman had arrived
from somewhere with a tin canister full of sovereigns, and from the way
in which he was dressed it was generally supposed that he was either a
Russian or a Shrewsbury man come for the purpose of bribery.  “Said
person,” as the Yankees say, was seen in the rear of the balcony at the
Crown and Anchor, defying anybody to penetrate the secret of his
identity, but occasionally winking and ejaculating, with an occasionally
eructory sound, the words, “All right—in for Watkin.”  This strange
gentleman departed in the evening, minus, it is said, the canister.  We
will now pass over the irregularities of the story, and give you the
words of our informant, whose high standing and character place him
beyond suspicion:—“I had attended the Yarmouth nomination, and took my
railway seat, at 8.40 p.m. for Norwich.  There were two or three
gentlemen in the first-class compartment in which I had placed myself;
and one gentleman was a peculiar sort of mysterious individual.  After
eyeing the party well, the gentleman gravely said, “Both sides are
buying, I’m afraid, at Yarmouth.”  One of the party doubted the
assertion, but the ancient traveller smiled and said, “No, no.”  Further
explanations took place, until at length our interesting fellow-traveller
volunteered this remark, after a feeler from one of the party, “You know
I came down from Manchester yesterday, to see my particular friend W—.
Deuced clever fellow—one of the best railway men in the country.  He did
wonders for the Manchester and Lincolnshire line, and if we get him in we
shall expect him to be one of the best railway men we have.”  One of the
party asked, “Are you a Yarmouth voter, sir?”  Old Traveller: “No, but I
wished to see my friend W— on very particular business, and so I just
came down to Yarmouth to see how his election was getting on _as well_,
and to add my mite of influence.”  This, perhaps, will account for the
story of the tin canister.  The rest we shall leave to the report.”

Mr. J. Cherry proposed, and Mr. R. Dumbleton seconded Sir E. H. K. Lacon.

Mr. R. Hammond proposed, and Mr. J. Owles seconded Mr. Watkin.

Mr. E. H. L. Preston proposed, and Mr. S. C. Marsh seconded Sir H. J.
Stracey,

And Mr. J. W. Shelly proposed and Mr. P. Pullyn seconded Mr. Young.

The show of hands was in favour of Messrs. Watkin and Young, whereupon a
poll was demanded for Sir E. H. K. Lacon and Sir H. J. Stracey.

May 4th.—The poll had been taken in Wards as follows:—

                  Lacon.       Stracey.      Watkin.       Young.
St. Nicholas’            97            89            76           71
Market                  117           113           100           99
Regent                  112           108            91           88
St. George’s            102            94            89           84
Nelson                  166           153           119          106
St. Andrew’s            105           102            93           88
         Total          699           659           568          536

But it was stated that “there were many cases of bribery, and the
defeated party threatened a petition against this ‘return.’”

May 7th.—Between £500 and £600 had been promised as subscriptions to that
end.

There had been a fashionable ball at the Town Hall.

The Norfolk Artillery Militia had left for Sheerness.

Miles Swiney had been shot in the side by one of the Louth Rifles on the
North Denes.

May 11th.—It had been proposed to raise a Yacht Club, Mr. H. Morgan
acting as Treasurer, and £100 had been subscribed for the purpose.
(N.B.—This was the starting of the Norfolk and Suffolk Yacht Club.)

Meetings of electors had been held to promote the petition.

May 18th.—The petition was “likely to reveal a ‘_high_ state of political
morality in the Borough.’”

May 21st.—Contains the Lord Lieutenant’s proclamation as to the formation
of Rifle Corps.

May 25th.—A few persons were talking of raising one of such corps at
Yarmouth, but no active steps had been taken in regard thereto.

May 28th.—On the Queen’s Birthday, the Mayor had given a luncheon and
ball at the Town Hall.

The testimonial “consisting of silver candelabra, &c.,” and the
Corporation address had been presented to Bishop Hills at the Town Hall.
Some 250 persons were present, amongst whom were—Messrs. C. J. Palmer
(who presided at the luncheon), Brightwen, C. Aldred, S. Aldred, Sir E.
Lacon, M.P., Reynolds, Nash, C. Cory, R. Hammond, F. Worship, W. Worship,
E. Frere, F. Palmer, F. Ferrier, T. Brightwen, Captain Holmes, Dr. Smith,
Rev. Nevill, Johnson, &c.

June 1st.—Contains the following report of a

               “MEETING TO ESTABLISH A VOLUNTEER RIFLE CORPS.”

    On Friday, a meeting, called by the Mayor, was held at the Town Hall,
    to take into consideration certain communications which his worship
    had received from General Peel, the Secretary at War, and Lord
    Leicester, the Lord Lieutenant of the County.  There was a very
    numerous attendance.  Amongst the gentlemen present were—Sir E.
    Lacon, Bart., M.P., Lieutenant Colonel Beckham, Captain Naylor,
    Captain Holmes, Rev. J. B. Bampton, Rev. T. Lowe, Messrs. J. H. Orde,
    F. Worship, W. Worship, W. Yetts, S. C. Marsh, C. C. Aldred, C. J.
    Palmer, E. H. L. Preston, J. Clowes, Foreman, &c.

    The Mayor stated that he had called the meeting in consequence of
    communications he had received from General Peel and the Lord
    Lieutenant, and in compliance with a requisition which he had
    received, and which was signed by seventy gentlemen.  He read General
    Peel’s letter and the requisition.  He had prepared no resolution or
    anything of that sort, but should leave the gentlemen assembled to
    propose anything they might think proper.

    Mr. W. Worship said the subject upon which they had been called
    together was one upon which there could be no difference of
    opinion—(hear, hear)—and in order to put the proceedings into a
    practical form, he should move that a committee be appointed, which
    would include Sir E. Lacon and Mr. Orde.

    Mr. R. Ferrier said he had much pleasure in seconding the motion, and
    he hoped it would be understood that, although they were forming a
    military corps, such men as himself might be allowed to contribute to
    the expenses which would be incurred in its formation.  There were,
    doubtless, many men in the town who could afford to pay for the
    accoutrements and give up the necessary time; but there was also in
    the town a fine class of men, in every way eligible, who could not
    afford that.  It was, therefore, in assisting the latter class that
    such men as himself could be useful.  (Hear, hear.)  He should be
    glad himself to pay the annual expenses of some man who could not
    afford to do it himself; and had no objection to put his name down at
    once for £10 a year.  (Hear, hear.)

    Mr. S. C. Marsh said he did not wish to interrupt the proceedings;
    but before they formed the committee he thought they should, by some
    resolution, declare it desirable to form a Rifle Corps.  (Hear,
    hear.)  Having decided to form a corps, the next step would be to
    form a committee to carry out the necessary arrangements.  He was
    sure Englishmen would respond to the offer that had been made them to
    allow themselves to form volunteer corps for the defence of the
    country.  Norfolk had never been behindhand in the manifestation of
    patriotic feeling, and he hoped that would not be the case on this
    occasion.  Yarmouth had before shown what she could do for the
    Governments of England and the defence of the country, and he hoped
    she was prepared to do something now.  (Hear, hear.)  He begged to
    move “That it is expedient to establish a Volunteer Rifle Corps for
    Great Yarmouth and its vicinity.”

    Mr. Ferrier seconded.—Carried unanimously.

    Sir E. Lacon, M.P. said he thought it highly essential that a town
    like Yarmouth should take a stand and come forward at once in
    obedience to the proclamation that had been issued by the Queen.
    They must all put their shoulders to the wheel, and wherever they saw
    a fine young fellow who was a likely man for the corps, if he did not
    come forward they must ask him to do so.  The duty they had to do
    that day was very slight indeed, but for his own part, he would say
    that he should give the movement all the encouragement that he
    possibly could.  (Hear, hear.)  He should now move that a committee
    be appointed, with power to appoint a sub-committee, and with
    directions to go round the town and see what force could be got up.
    (Hear, hear.)  Yarmouth was a large town it was true, but there were
    also districts around it out of which to draw much assistance; but he
    certainly thought it would be desirable to take in the Flegg Hundreds
    and the Island.

    Mr. J. Clowes said there were many men in the town who, from age and
    other causes, would be unable to serve in a rifle corps, but who
    would be very desirous of taking part in the defence of our
    shores—men who were too old to sleep all night in the marsh ditches,
    or under hedges.  (Laughter.)  For that class of men, he thought
    there should be an Artillery Corps, as many of them, though not fit
    to take the field, would be ready to man a gun or work a battery.

    The Mayor said it was out of the scope of the present meeting to
    discuss an Artillery Corps.

    Mr. Orde said Government had intended that they would sanction and
    approve the formation of Artillery Corps.

    Mr. Marsh’s motion was then put and carried.

    Sir E. Lacon, in answer to Dr. Stephenson, said it would, no doubt,
    be a desirable thing to have a mounted Rifle Corps, only they could
    not get the horses, and if they could get them, many would be unable
    to keep them, besides which he should object, unless he wished to see
    some of them killed, to their mounting horses.  (Loud laughter.)  But
    he might say that, at an agricultural dinner, where he was the other
    day, he heard the farmers express themselves strongly in favour of a
    mounted force in the Fleggs and the Island.

    Mr. C. J. Palmer suggested that all who wished to support the corps,
    either by serving in it or by their subscriptions, should come
    forward and put down their names at once.  (Hear, hear.)

    The Mayor said he would take down the names of any gentlemen who
    wished to join the corps.  When they saw who were willing to join,
    they might name a committee, and appoint some gentleman to act as
    secretary.  That being done, the future conduct of the movement would
    remain with the committee.

    The following gentlemen then gave in their names as members of the
    corps:—Sir E. H. K. Lacon, M.P., Sir H. Stracey, M.P.,
    Lieutenant-Colonel Beckham, S. C. Marsh, C. J. Palmer, B. Jay, R.
    Ferrier, W. Worship, F. Palmer, F. Worship, W. J. Foreman, W. C.
    Reynolds, S. Aldred, Dr. Stephenson, J. H. Orde, G. Harvey, G. Baker,
    Rev. J. B. Bampton, H. Teasdel, J. W. Bunn, Captain Holmes, C. Brown,
    J. Tomlinson, H. R. Harmer, G. Diver, H. H. Barber, J. Franklin, E.
    Fyson, J. B. Stevens, J. Playford, G. B. Costerton, H. Teasdel, T. P.
    Burroughs, Ambrose Palmer, A. W. Morant, Rev. T. Lowe, and J. Clowes.

    Mr. R. Ferrier moved that the foregoing be appointed a committee to
    carry out the arrangements for establishing the corps, with power to
    appoint a sub-committee; and that Colonel Beckham be requested to act
    as honorary secretary.

    The motion was carried unanimously, and the book containing the list
    of names was ordered to be left at the Police-station during the
    ensuing week, to give persons desirous of joining the corps an
    opportunity of entering their names.

    The proceedings then concluded.

June 8th.—The Norfolk and Suffolk Yacht Club had held its first meeting
on Breydon Water, and subsequently the members (who appeared in Club
uniform) dined at the Club House (Norfolk Hotel), when the healths of
Colonel Wilson, Commodore; F. Brown, Esq., Vice-Commodore; Mr. Everitt,
of Cove Hall, (father of the Club); Mr. Scott, Aylsham, and others were
duly honoured.

Mr. Bradnum’s shop at Gorleston had been struck by lightning.

June 11th.—Mr. Mellor, Q.C., M.P. for Nottingham, had presented the
petition against the return of the M.Ps.

June 15th.—The Mayor and the Town Clerk had had a serious “difference of
opinion,” and the former gentleman had declined to accept the “_amende
honorable_” tendered him by the latter.

It was stated that some 60 persons were ready to join the Rifle Corps.

June 18th.—The paper had opened a branch office at No. 31, King Street,
Great Yarmouth, with Mr. Clarke as correspondent.

Lord Chelmsford, before resigning the seals, had appointed Mr. Francis
Worship, Mr. John Clarke, and Mr. E. P. Youell, Magistrates for the
Borough.

June 22nd.—A meeting had been held at St. George’s Hall, (Mr. Harrison in
the chair), for the purpose of taking steps to advertise the town.

Forty invalid soldiers had arrived at the Royal Naval Hospital.

June 29th.—There now appeared to be two petitions lodged against the
return of Sir E. H. K. Lacon and Sir H. J. Stracey, one signed by Mr.
John Clowes (solicitor), and the other by Mr. Bayly (surgeon) and Mr.
Pilgrim (draper).

A meeting of the first Company of Volunteers had been held at Crowe’s
Sale-rooms.  This body now numbered 90 men, the second Company having 56
members.  Mr. Dumbleton occupied the chair, and Mr. Marsh having
explained the position of affairs, the following gentlemen were elected
officers:—Mr. Marsh (captain), and Mr. Foreman (first), Mr. Brown
(second), and Mr. Preston (third) Lieutenants.

July 2nd.—The second Company had met at the Angel.  Major Nesbitt
presided, and the following officers were elected:—Mr. Orde (captain),
Mr. E. P. Youell (Lieutenant), and Mr. J. Tomlinson, jun., (ensign).

There were from 8,000 to 10,000 persons on the Piers, Drive, &c., on
Sunday evening.

July 6th.—Mr. Mellor had given notice that he should call attention to
the state of the Yarmouth Bench of Magistrates.

The following cricket match had been played on the South Denes:—

      MR. OVEREND’S SIDE.               MR. WILLIS’ SIDE.
Mr. Lawry                     7  Mr. Ling                      1
Mr. Jackson                   3  Mr. Borlase                   5
Mr. Fenner                    1  Mr. Ellis                     0
Lieutenant Townley           12  Mr. Larke                     0
Mr. Ablitt                    7  Mr. Clarke                    2
Mr. Overend                   7  Mr. Willis                    1
Mr. Cocks                     0  Mr. Davey                     8
Mr. Edwards                   0  Mr. T. B. Stevenson          17
Mr. Baker                     0  Mr. Tewsley                   4
Dr. Stephenson                4  Mr. Stolworthy                0
Mr. Wright                    4  Mr. Green                     0
   Byes                       2     Byes                       5
   Wides                      2     Wides                      5
                 Total       41                   Total       48

Afterwards the players dined at the Crown and Anchor Hotel.

July 16th.—Owing to his altercation with the Town Clerk, the Mayor
declined to attend the meetings of the Council.

July 20th.—One of the petitions against the M.Ps’ return had been
withdrawn.

The Rifle Companies numbered over 200.  Mr. Orde’s Company mustered 80 at
their first drill in the Barrack Square.

There were then on the Parish Books 272 indoor and 1,247 outdoor paupers,
as against 1,134 in the preceding year.

July 27th.—Lieutenant-Colonel Mason had retired from the command of the
East Norfolk Militia.

The Foresters had held a “gala” at the Vauxhall Gardens.

Aug. 3rd.—A very large number of Speaker’s Warrants had been issued in
connection with the Election Petition.

Aug. 13th.—Eliza, second daughter of S. C. Marsh, Esq., had been married
to Captain Burke, of the Louth Rifles, at the Roman Catholic and St.
Nicholas’ Churches.  The bridesmaids were Miss Marsh, the Misses
Victoria, Louisa and Emily Marsh and Miss Waters; the bridegroom’s men
were Major Taafe and the officers of the Louth Rifles, and the carriages
of Mr. and Mrs. S. C. Marsh, Mr. and Mrs. Palmer Kemp, Mr. and Mrs. W.
Danby-Palmer, Mr. and Mrs. W. Walpole, Mr. and Mrs. Dashwood and others
were present on the occasion.

The Donegal Regiment was to succeed the Louth Rifles at Yarmouth.

Aug. 17th.—The transport “Himalaya” had brought the former, and taken
away the latter regiment; the Louth Rifles had given a ball on board that
ship.

Aug. 20th.—The porch of the Parish Church was being restored.

There had been a great deal of rain, but the town was very full of
visitors.

Aug. 24th.—It was reported that the shock of an earthquake had been felt
at Hopton.

One hundred and fifty Horse Artillery had been encamped on the North
Denes.

Mr. Marsh’s Company of Volunteers were to be equipped as Artillery.

Mr. Orde’s Company had drilled on the South Denes in public for the first
time.

The expenses of the Borough Election had been returned by the auditor as
follows:—Conservatives, £809 15s.; Liberals, £603 17s. 4d.

Visitors were flocking to the town, and it was supposed that the standard
population had thus been doubled; beds were fetching the “highest
prices.”

The “Prophet Jack” was preaching on the Beach.

Sept. 3rd.—Among the company present at the Races were Count Batthyany,
Lord W. Powlett, the Hon. Harbord Harbord, Colonel Wilson, Sir E. H. K.
Lacon, M.P., and Sir H. J. Stracey, M.P.

Sept. 7th.—Colonel Henderson had attended at Yarmouth to report on the
proposed Artillery Corps, and had informed the Mayor and Mr. Marsh that
it “would have every encouragement from the Government.”

William Ingram, a labourer, had been scalded to death in Mr. Frosdick’s
Tanning Copper.

Sept. 10th.—The Magistrates had had another “warm” discussion on
Licensing Day, as to the granting of new licenses.

There were 400 cases of appeal against the Poor’s Rate from the St.
George’s Ward.  The Overseers proposed to compound up to a rental of £6
10s. per annum.

The Rev. W. Griffiths had been “ordained” at the King Street Chapel.

Two or three “Dutch schuyts” had visited the port.

The officers of Mr. Orde’s Company had received their commissions.

The Donegal Militia had marched out for their first drill on the Denes
under the command of Major Todd.

Sept. 17th.—The 6th annual meeting of the Elocution Society had been
held, Mr. W. Gill in the chair, when Mr. Lovewell Blake, the Secretary,
brought up a favourable report of the proceedings of the Society.

There were a great number of Rate appeals from the North Ward.

The Mayor having determined to commit a prisoner named Angel, (in which
course the other Justices did not concur) left the Bench, and had
intimated by letter “That he should not sit again as a Magistrate.”  Next
day His Worship again informed the Bench that he had been misled by Mr.
Holt, and that he should not sit.

Sept. 21st.—Three “gents” having hired a house in Brandon Terrace, had
been victimising the tradesmen.

Sept. 24th.—Two of these persons, who gave the names of Thomas T. George,
and William Arnall, had been before the Bench and ordered to find two
sureties for the peace in £50 each, themselves being bound for £100 each;
subsequently George was bailed out by his stepfather, a London gentleman,
who stated that the prisoner was an articled clerk in receipt of £200 a
year from his mother.

The North Sea herring voyage was “fairly alive,” as much as £30 a last
having been realised for some of the fish.

Sept. 28th.—The following were the tenders for the Ballast dues:—James
Pumfrey. £405; D. S. Bayfield, £375; and Jacob Preston, £600.  The late
lessee, Mr. J. H. Harrison, did not send in a tender.

Mr. Preston, however, subsequently threw up his tender, and the dues were
offered to Mr. Smith (an ex-lessee) for £550 per annum.

There had been a “fine illustration of the Northern Lights.”

Oct. 1st.—A special meeting of the Council had been held as to the
Ballast question, when Mr. C. C. Aldred stated “they had been called
together through Mr. Preston’s tomfoolery.”

Captain Marsh and Lieutenant Foreman had received their commissions, and
thereupon taken the oaths before the Magistrates.

Oct. 5th.—The Revision of the Voters’ Lists had been proceeded with
before Mr. Couch, Mr. W. C. Reynolds representing the Tories and Mr.
Costerton the Liberals.  The latter claimed a gain of four votes as the
result of the proceedings.

Fifty members of the 1st Norfolk Artillery Volunteers had been sworn in
by B. Fenn, Esq., and were subsequently entertained by their officers at
the Crown and Anchor Hotel.

A Poor’s Rate of 1s. 4d. in the £ (to raise £3,365 3s.) had been signed.

One Corporal and three Privates of the Donegal Militia had been heavily
fined by the Justices for assaulting Mr. Nall (printer) and several
policemen.

Oct. 22nd.—Lord Claude Hamilton and officers of the Donegal Militia had
entertained the officers of the French steamer “Galilee.”

Oct. 26th.—The appointment of officers and non-commissioned officers in
the Volunteer Companies had been made, as follows:—

Artillery Company: Captain: S. C. Marsh; Lieutenant: Foreman;
Sergeant-Major: Franklin; Sergeants: Dumbleton, Moody, and Stolworthy;
Corporals: Suffling, Clarke, and Clements; Armoury-Sergeant: Offord;
Orderly Clerk: Sergeant Crowe.

Rifle Company: Captain: J. H. Orde; Lieutenant: Youell; Ensign: J.
Tomlinson, junr.; Sergeants: Harmer, Bunn, Preston, and James; Corporals:
Dick, Willis, Fellows, and Pearson.

Oct. 29th.—Sixty feet of the Britannia Pier had been carried away by a
vessel during a gale which prevailed on the coast.

Mr. Chapman had retired from the representation of the Regent Ward.

Nov. 2nd.—The “Shipping Interest” was in a distressed state.

The Herring Fishing was going on satisfactorily, £15 per last being given
for fish.

Nov. 5th.—Five wards had been contested.  In the _Regent Ward_ Mr. S. B.
Cory beating Mr. F. Palmer by one vote.  The following were the
Councillors elected:—_North_: W. N. Burroughs and H. Boulter.  _Market_:
C. C. Aldred and F. Worship.  _Regent_: S. C. Marsh and S. B. Cory.  _St.
George_: J. G. Plummer and J. C. Smith.  _Nelson_: G. D. Palmer and C. E.
Bartram.  _Gorleston_: E. H. L. Preston and H. Teasdel.

Among the company present at a Ball held at the Town Hall, were—The Mayor
and Miss Steward, Lieut.-Colonel Lord Hamilton, M.P., and Lady Hamilton,
the Hon. Harbord Harbord, Sir H. Stracey, Bart., M.P., and Lady Stracey,
Lady Plumridge, Mr. and Mrs. I. Preston and the Misses Preston, Mr. and
Mrs. C. J. Palmer, Mr. and Mrs. E. H. L. Preston, Mr. and Mrs. A.
Steward, and the Misses Steward, Captain and Mrs. Marsh, Captain J. H.
Orde, Mr. and Mrs. Reynolds, Mr. F. Danby-Palmer, Dr. Smith, Mr. Tilson,
&c.

Herring was making from £18 to £20 per last.

Bribery had been practised (it was stated) in the Regent Ward, “to a
disgraceful extent.”

A drinking fountain was being erected at the north end of the Town Hall.

On Tuesday, the gale which had commenced on the previous Tuesday abated,
and the weather since that day, had continued to improve.

The Regatta Committee Accounts showed a balance in hand of about £60.

Nov. 12th.—At the Council Meeting, Mr. R. Ferrier proposed, and Mr.
Nightingale seconded, Mr. William Worship as Mayor, and he was
unanimously elected to that office.

The retiring Aldermen were Messrs. T. Bunn, G. S. Shingles, W. C.
Reynolds, J. G. Rivett, I. Shuckford, and E. P. Youell, the following
Aldermen were elected:—Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart., M.P., T. Bunn, G. S.
Shingles, I. Shuckford, E. P. Youell, and R. Purdy.

Nov. 16th.—Owing to the damage sustained by the structure, it had been
determined to shorten the Britannia Pier by about 100 feet.

                            “ON ALDERMANIC SIXES.”

    “At Norwich, Tories loud complain,
       ’Cause Liberals are elected;
    At Yarmouth, he’s alleged _insane_
       Who growls that they’re rejected.”

Nov. 23rd.—The Municipal Elections on November 21st had been held as
follows:—

          _Regent Ward_.
Mr. W. C. Reynolds              110
Mr. Frederick Palmer             77
       _St. Andrew’s Ward_.
Mr. Richmond elected without
opposition.

Nov. 26th.—A dinner had been held at the Town Hall in honour of R.
Steward, Esq., the ex-Mayor.  Sir E. H. K. Lacon presided, and C. J.
Palmer and J. B. Hylton occupied the vice-chairs.

It was proposed to raise, by shares, £8,000 for the purpose of building
Assembly-rooms on the Marine Drive.

Nov. 30th.—The Rifle Company had met “in full dress at the
Victoria-gardens,” mustering between 80 and 90 strong on this occasion.

Dec. 3rd.—The foundation-stone of the “Wherryman’s Church” had been laid
by W. Worship, Esq., the Mayor.

The Mayor had presented rich window hangings and carpets to the Town
Hall.

Dec. 7th.—It was proposed to form a second Company of Artillery
Volunteers.

The Rifle Corps had dined at the Corn Hall, when Captain Orde presided,
and the Mayor, Lord C. Hamilton, Captain Marsh, Lieutenant Foreman, and
Dr. Stephenson (1st N.A.V.), had been present.

Dec. 17th.—At the Mayor’s Inaugural Dinner, 150 gentlemen had attended,
the Volunteer Officers appearing in full uniform.  The following took
part in the after-dinner proceedings:—The Mayor, Lord C. Hamilton, Rev.
H. Nevill, Lord Sondes, Mr. E. Howes, M.P., Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart.,
M.P., Stracey, Bart., M.P., the Recorder, (Mr. N. Palmer), Captain Orde,
Captain Marsh, Mr. F. Worship, the Town Clerk, Mr. R. Ferrier, and
Captain Donelly.

Mr. E. R. Palmer had offered a prize of £3 3s., to be shot for by the 1st
N.A.V.

The Mayor had presented £50 to the District Visiting Society.

About 100 Rate Summonses had been issued.

Dec. 21st.—The Rifle Volunteers had attended St. Nicholas’ Church on
Sunday in uniform.

The Magistrates were discussing the question as to who was entitled, in
the absence of the Mayor, to the chair at the Petty Sessions.

Dec. 24th.—The Rev. F. W. Johnson, Minister of St. John’s, had died in
London somewhat suddenly.



1860.


Jan. 4th.—The Artillery Company had secured the services of a band, and
armed the trumpeters “with swords.”

Several herring boats had again proceeded to sea.

Jan. 7th.—Mr. Hulley and Sergeant Cattermole were playing in the N.A.V.
Band.

Jan. 11th.—The “canard” that one of the M.Ps. intended to retire was
denied.

Petitions were being largely signed in favour of marriage with a deceased
wife’s sister.

About 30 gentlemen had attended the dinner of the Amicable Shipping Club,
including Mr. Gourlay (who presided), the Mayor, Mr. R. Hammond, Mr.
Burroughs, Mr. Martin, &c.

Jan. 14th.—It was stated that Mr. French (whose smacks had been sold
under a deed of assignment) had lost his wife’s stays, in which a sum of
£400 was sewn up, and that the reward offered was £50 or £100.

Jan. 18th.—The daughter of Mr. R. Guthrie (aged 6 years) had been run
over by a cart.

Mr. Bowgin’s house at Southtown had been broken into and several articles
stolen therefrom.

Court “Bear of the Forest,” 3187, had celebrated its first anniversary at
the Bear Inn, Southtown.  Fifty members sat down to dinner, Bros.
Mitchell and Palmer occupying the chair and vice-chair respectively.

Several houses had been broken into by thieves.

Jan. 25th.—The Rev. H. Nevill had “politely requested” well dressed
persons not to frequent the Beachman’s Church.

“Ghosts” were said to haunt Southtown, and had specially amazed one
Macdonald, an engine cleaner at the Southtown Station.

Jan. 28th.—The following further appointments had been made in the
N.A.V.:—Corporal: W. Marsh.  Bombardiers: Rees, J. Fish, J. Taylor, and
J. Myhill.  Acting ditto.: J. Bartram, R. Dumbleton, T. W. Larke, and W.
Hunt.

Feb. 4th.—At a meeting of the N.A.V., held at the Victoria Gardens,
Lieut. Foreman and Gunner Morant were recommended to the Lord Lieutenant
as Captain and Lieutenant of the second Battery which it was proposed to
raise.

The Donegal Militia had given an entertainment at the Town Hall from 2.30
to 6.30 o’clock; the Band attended, and the company enjoyed a dance.

A second Company of Volunteers was being raised.

Bro. W. Wright had been installed W.M. of Lodge “Friendship.”

Feb. 8th.—It was supposed that the Prince of Orange was likely to become
the husband of the Princess Alice.

Wild rifle practice was being indulged in at Cobholm Island and other
parts of the town, to the danger of the inhabitants.

Feb. 11th.—W. Rising, Esq. had presided at the annual Market Dinner at
the White Horse, when Mr. Mortlock Lacon had repudiated the suggestion
that Sir Edmund intended to retire from the representation of the town.

The Medical Staff of the Military Hospital had given a ball to 120 guests
at the Town Hall.

Mr. C. Melly had erected a drinking fountain in front of the Port Dues
Office.

“Tom Sayers” was reported to be about to spend three weeks in the town
previous to his “set to” with Heenan, the American.

Feb. 15th.—W. Worship, Esq., (Mayor and Chairman of the Board of
Guardians) had given a treat to 293 inmates of the Workhouse.

Feb. 18th.—An amateur performance had been given at the Theatre in aid of
the Hospital.  In the first piece _Used Up_, Captain Hayes, Mr. Robert
Harmer, Dr. Kingdom, Sergeant-Major Greaves, Captain Darcus, J.
McCormick, Esq., Ensign Lecky and two professional ladies appeared.
Sergeant Bonner then danced an Irish jig, after which the _Irish
Attorney_ was given, in which the parts of the Attorney and Hawk were
taken by Mr. Courtenay and Mr. Burton Steward, and the performance
terminated with _Done on both sides_.  About £25 was thus realised for
the charity.

There had been a “great fire” on the Middle Market Road.

Many persons who had promised to subscribe to the “Petition Fund” were
“backing out.”

E. P. Youell, Esq., was to be Captain of the 2nd Company of Rifle
Volunteers.

On Valentine’s Day the ladies took great advantage of the fact of its
being “Leap Year” in sending these missives to the gentlemen.

Feb. 22nd.—The Donegal Militia had given a second afternoon dance at the
Town Hall.

Mr. T. M. Read had been elected second Lieutenant in the N.A.V.

“Monday was Cock (antique) or Orange Fair, when the Market Place was
thronged by the usual ‘fair’ attractions.”

March 3rd.—“A most violent and destructive hurricane” had visited the
town and country.

The petition had been heard, and the members retained their seats, which
news had caused great rejoicing amongst the Tories, while “the money”
question was likely to cause some trouble to the petitioners.

Captain Foreman and Lieutenant Morant had been gazetted to the first
N.A.V.

The following had been elected officers of the second Company of
Rifles:—Captain, Mr. Youell; Lieutenant, Mr. Harmer; Ensign, Mr. E.
Preston.

An untanned leather bag, containing 70 coins of the reign of Henry VIII.
had been found on the Beach after a great thickness of sand had been
blown away by the late westerly gale.

March 10th.—Lieutenant Read and 70 members of the N.A.V. had escorted
Captain Marsh, Captain Foreman, Lieutenant Morant, and Dr. Stephenson to
the Railway Station on their proceeding to the Leveè; the other officers
then present were Captain Orde, Lieutenant Youell, Ensign Tomlinson, and
Surgeon Frederick Palmer, of the Rifles.

March 24th.—The “Donegals” had celebrated St. Patrick’s Day, beginning at
five o’clock in the morning.  In the afternoon the Officers gave another
dance at the Town Hall and entertained a numerous party of friends at
their mess at the Southtown Barracks.

April 7th.—Mr. J. Lee-Barber had been elected a Second Lieutenant in the
N.A.V.

In the Rifle Corps, Corporals Dick and Pearson and Privates Barber and
Cobb had been elected Sergeants.

April 11th.—On Good Friday both Volunteer Corps had “fraternised” and
drilled together on the Denes; it was estimated that on this occasion,
which was the first “turn out” of the kind, from 8,000 to 10,000
spectators, including Sir E. Lacon, M.P., Captain Holmes, Major Todd, and
many ladies and gentlemen, were present.

April 14th.—There had been a grand Conservative banquet at the Theatre,
at which 350 persons were present.  Mr. R. Dumbleton occupied the chair,
and was supported by Sir E. Lacon, Bart., M.P., Sir H. Stracey, Bart.,
M.P., the Mayor (W. Worship, Esq.), F. Worship, C. Cory, and C. J.
Palmer, Esqs., Captain Marsh, Captain Mansfield, and Officers of the
Donegal Militia and others; Mr. W. Wright and Mr. R. Breeze occupied the
vice-chairs; Mr. Franklin catered for the party.

Messrs. Steward and Aldred had been re-elected Churchwardens by the
Vestry.

April 25th.—The following Volunteer officers had been entertained at the
Donegal Mess:—Captain Marsh, Lieutenants Burton Steward, A. W. Morant,
John Lee Barber, and T. M. Read, and Dr. Stephenson (1st N.A.V.), and
Captain Youell, Lieutenants Tomlinson, and Harmer, Ensigns Preston and
Brown, and Surgeon Frederick Palmer (4th N.R.V.).

April 28th.—Great complaint was made as to the mode of levying the Poor’s
Rate.

In the Divorce Court, James Cherry, Esq., had obtained a decree for the
restitution of conjugal rites against his wife, who was entitled to the
income derived from a sum of £8,000.

May 5th.—The Mayor had given a grand Ball at the Town Hall, when dancing
was kept up until four o’clock in the morning.

The E.N.M. had been inspected on the Denes by Major-General Douglas.  The
Rifle Volunteers were also on the ground.

Bro. Hanworth, Secretary of the “Good Samaritan” Lodge, M.U.O.F., had
been presented with an ornamental silver inkstand.

May 9th.—A Ball “of a very elegant character” had taken place at the Town
Hall.

The E.N.M. had been disembodied, when “many of the men celebrated the
event by getting drunk.”

The 1st N.A.V. had received 19,000 cartridges and 23,000 percussion caps.

A fine porpoise had been gambolling in the river, near the Haven Bridge.

May 16th.—The first lot of mackerel (300 fish) had been landed, and
realised £4 per hundred.

May 23rd.—On the Queen’s Birthday, the 1st N.A.V. had fired a salute from
the South Star Battery.

There was a scarcity of labour in the town.

May 26th.—The “launching foy” of the “Caroline” had been held in the Town
Hall (this vessel had been launched from Powell’s yard, after being
repaired at the expense of £5,000.)

May 30th.—From 40 to 50 lives had been lost off Yarmouth in a “fearful
hurricane,” during which one of the pinnacles had been blown off St.
Peter’s Church and damage done to the fabric to the extent of some £200.

June 2nd.—Sixty recruits were drilling for the Rifle Corps.

Mr. Watkin had addressed a “Reform” meeting at the Corn Hall.

The Roman Catholic Bishop of Northampton had confirmed 50 children and
adults at St. Mary’s Church, Regent Road.

June 7th.—It was now stated that eleven fishing luggers had been lost
with all hands.

Twelve fishermen out of the village of Horsey alone had been drowned.

The 1st. N.A.V. were forming a 3rd Company, of which Lieutenant
Lee-Barber was to be Captain, Mr. Trafford 1st Lieutenant, and Mr. Green
2nd Lieutenant.

June 13th.—Fayerman (one of the witnesses at the hearing of the Election
Petition) had been charged by Sir E. Lacon with perjury, while arising
out of this charge actions for slander were being brought against that
gentleman by some aggrieved “Blues.”

June 16th.—A meeting had been held at the Town Hall to raise a fund for
the relief of the widows and children of the fishermen lost in the recent
gales.  About £500 was raised in the room.

June 20th.—The Mackerel voyage was only a “moderate success.”  This fish
was making 36s., and herring 12s. 6d., per hundred.

June 23rd.—Henry Fayerman had been committed for trial on a charge of
perjury.

The Rifle Volunteers had shown themselves “remarkably well instructed in
the theory and practice of the rifle.”

£2,240 had been raised for the families of the drowned fishermen.

“The actions against Sir E. Lacon for libelling the Liberal Committee had
been postponed to next term.”

July 4th contains the following account of the

                         VISIT OF THE CHANNEL FLEET.

    The Channel Fleet has at length visited our Roads, much to the
    gratification of thousands of the Queen’s lieges, as well as to the
    galling disappointment of thousands of the same excellent body.  The
    squadron came in in the open day, clear to the gaze of multitudes,
    but disappeared like a majestic phantom in the night.  A little more
    than a week ago we were informed that the Channel Fleet had, after an
    anchorage of sixteen days in St. Margaret’s Hope, Frith of Forth,
    left its moorings under canvas, with auxiliary steam power, and
    proceeded down the Frith and out to sea, destined for the Yarmouth
    Roads.  As we stated in our last impression, the consequence of that
    information being diffused was to put all the speculators and
    quidnuncs of the town and neighbourhood on the alert.  Leaving St.
    Margaret’s Hope on the Saturday, the fleet would certainly, it was
    argued, be here on the Tuesday, on which day the Marine Parade and
    the Beach were literally swarmed with expectant people, whose glasses
    were searching the waters in every direction; but, owing either to
    the perversity of Admiral Neptune, the weather office, or the
    Vice-Admiral in command (who is admitted by everyone to be a pleasant
    and courteous gentleman), the fleet did not arrive.  Much
    disappointment and innumerable prophecies followed, and while some
    knowing individuals averred positively, and “on undoubted authority”
    that the fleet had passed and would not come in here, others were
    equally confident, on the strength of telegrams and “unquestionable
    information,” that the great ships would be seen, on the “next
    flood.”  As, however, they put in no appearance up to Friday evening,
    the conviction that they had omitted us began to be pretty general,
    especially when “undoubted authority” satisfied us that the squadron
    had been seen some distance to the south of this port, namely, in the
    Wold.  A few persons held out, notwithstanding their belief that the
    ships would visit us, and were stirring early on Saturday morning to
    catch the latest intelligence, when lo! the rumour spread that the
    fleet was in sight.  People began hurrying to the Beach, which,
    between 8 and 10 o’clock a.m. presented, as to throng and bustle, an
    appearance equal to that of Tuesday, with the single exception that
    the fair sex had not had time to put on the gay attire in which they
    looked so well on that day.  As the Royal Albert, three decker, flag
    ship of Vice-Admiral Freemantle, came in sight, the cry was, “There
    they are!” and as the magnificent vessel steamed up into the gat
    there appeared something so triumphant and majestic in her appearance
    as to make every one who saw her feel proud of the “wooden walls,”
    which have so long defied all the enemies of Old England.  Britannia
    from the top of the lofty pedestal in front of the gatway might look
    down with pride upon the splendid ship which marched in stately
    grandeur “o’er the mountain waves.”  The Royal Albert was seen to be
    followed by a long dark line of smoke, and every few minutes other
    great ships came in sight moving apparently with ease and
    controllable but irresistible force.  As the flagship came through
    the gat of St. Nicholas, the dense masses of people who lined the
    shore expressed in a variety of forms their admiration of the
    dimensions and commanding aspect of this great three decker.  The
    seafaring people looked at the matter with a professional eye, and
    amongst them might frequently be heard such expressions as “Old
    Rounce (the Gorleston pilot) is bringing her in stunnin!”  On came
    the great ship,—as gracefully and as gently as a swan would move upon
    the surface of an untroubled lake,—until she was surprisingly near
    the shore for a ship of her size.  She then glided round in a most
    beautiful manner, as if looking for the best place to drop her
    anchor, a point which was soon decided, when it was found that she
    was in about an exact line with the Victoria Hotel.  The sight in the
    gatway had now become grand in the extreme, as all the line of battle
    ships were in sight, moving majestically forward by the aid of power
    unseen, while the flagship was actively engaged in signalling to the
    various ships as they came up as to the respective positions they
    were to take.  The ships seemed to be managed with perfect ease, and
    could be turned or moved in any direction with surprising celerity.
    The scene while they were taking up their positions and dropping
    their anchors was beautiful and will not soon be forgotten by those
    who saw it.

    The Locust, steam tender, had arrived in the Roads previously, and
    the ships that arrived with the Royal Albert, which has 121 guns, and
    carries 1,100 men, were the Edgar, 91, flagship of the Rear-Admiral
    Erskine, the Mersey frigate, 40; the Donegal, 101; the Trafalgar, 91;
    the Conqueror, the Centurion, the Mars, the Diadem, the Algiers, the
    Aboukir, and the Greyhound corvette, 17, acting as tender to the
    Royal Albert.  The fleet anchored in two lines, and presented a most
    gratifying spectacle to the inhabitants, who felt what a security it
    must be in a time of war, while at the same time they could not
    refrain from reflecting on the terrible havoc that must be committed
    were those quiet-looking ships to unbosom their thunders, and vent
    their indignation upon the town for a space of about five minutes.
    Soon after the Vice-Admiral’s flag ship had anchored, the Volunteer
    Artillery fired a salute of 15 guns, but owing to the regulations of
    the service, the ship was precluded from returning the compliment.
    The band of the Artillery subsequently played on the Drive, and gave
    a festive character to the morning.  Reports rapidly got afloat as to
    how long the fleet would stay, some contending that it would not go
    till Wednesday, as the Admiral and officers had accepted an
    invitation to a ball which the Mayor purposed giving at the Town Hall
    on Tuesday evening; while, on the other hand, it was asserted that
    the fleet would depart in the course of the night, as during the day
    they received five or six despatches from the Admiralty, and thus
    disappoint the thousands who it was expected would come into the town
    by rail on Sunday.  Neither of the predictions turned out to be true.
    Had the ships not been detained at sea by the contrary winds, which
    caused them to keep steam up even to the last, they would have been
    here for four or five days.  Before coming in they had for two or
    three days been within 60 miles of us, trying to reach here with
    their sails alone.  They had not been long at anchor before sundry
    mariners and bare-footed frolicsome and reckless tars, were seen
    ashore, lugging away immense baskets of fresh bread, butter, &c., and
    diversifying this duty by fraternising with as many of the girlhood
    of the place as they happened to come in contact with.  The Blue
    Jackets are decided favourites ashore, and few people seem disposed
    to prevent them doing as they please.  It would give great
    satisfaction to the inhabitants of this town, if, in their annual
    cruises, the Channel Squadron would occasionally drop in here, for we
    are sure that their present visit, besides being advantageous to the
    town, will obtain many seamen; for who would wander about in a rotten
    and miserable old collier when he might lead a worthy and a jolly
    life amongst excellent fellows, on board a floating tower and mansion
    equal to the most convenient and best regulated establishments
    ashore?  It is a long time since a fleet was seen in our Roads,
    although there is probably no point upon the coast where so much
    shipping passes as this.  The last fleet that was in the Roads was in
    1810, under the command of Admiral Somers, whose flagship was the
    Victory (Nelson’s old ship), and that fleet passed here on its way to
    the Baltic, the ports of which it was going to blockade.  There were
    then in the fleet besides the Admiral’s ship of 98 guns, the
    Formidable, 98; the St. George, 98; the Dreadnought, 98, now a
    hospital ship, and a number of 74’s, making together fourteen sail,
    some of which were with Admiral Sir John Ross, at the blockade of
    Dantzic, in 1812 (and frozen up there in 1813).  In 1801, Nelson was
    in here on his way to Copenhagen, and in 1807, Admiral Gambier’s
    fleet was bound for the same place, and sailing hence fetched in the
    ships and stores of the Danes.  In the time of those fleets, the
    North Sea and Baltic Pilots of this port were of great service—a
    class of men of whom, we believe, only one remains.  His name is
    Richard Webb.  He was frozen up in the Baltic in 1812, while acting
    as pilot (wintered there during the burning of Moscow), and was
    altogether engaged for 15 years in piloting government vessels in the
    wars of that time, important services for which the old boy alleges
    he has received nothing but unfulfilled promises from the “great
    guns” aloft.  One would think that an old sailor who had served in
    the “battle and the breeze” for so long a period, and in such
    momentous times, ought to have received some substantial recognition
    of his services.

    The fleet and the officers and men from it who came ashore during the
    day have been closely scrutinized and gazed at, parties having been
    on board the flagship, it became a question of interest as to what
    they would do at night.  At sunset a gun was fired from the Admiral’s
    ship, at the sound of which, as if by magic, the flags dropped from
    the stern of every vessel at the same instant, though the topyards
    did not go down as was expected.  That was about half-past eight
    o’clock, and at nine bang went another gun from the Admiral’s ship
    followed by the rattle of musketry on board the others, and seamen
    said, ‘There’s the old Admiral a-fallen down the main hatchway,’ that
    being the correct nautical form of indicating that the hands were
    ordered to ‘turn in.’  At about the same time lights were shown in
    front and at the sterns of the ships, producing a brilliant and
    lively spectacle, taken in conjunction with the hundreds of lights on
    small craft lying at anchor, and as shown by the screw colliers which
    were ever and anon passing through the fleet and flowing out dark
    volumes of smoke.  With Saturday Mr. Swann’s contract to supply beef
    at 4½d. per lb., luckily for him, expired, and he agreed, we believe,
    to execute the orders of the fleet at 6½d.

    Sunday morning, as had been anticipated by the Yarmouth innkeepers
    and others, brought an immense number of people into the town, the
    trains from Norwich being very lengthy.  The weather was fine, and as
    the fleet still remained in the Roads, there was every prospect of
    enjoyment.  As the excursionists came into the town they proceeded,
    after refreshing the inner man at the earliest opportunity, either to
    the beach or on board the three steamers of Fill and Co. (Chesapeake,
    Volunteer and Florence Nightingale), which were ready, as soon as
    filled, to start for a journey round the fleet.  The Chesapeake was
    the first to start, and as she steamed down the harbour the
    excursionists had a good view of the quays and shipping, and also of
    the hamlet of Gorleston.  As soon as the bar was crossed, the great
    ships were all plainly visible, their sides bristling with guns, and
    alive with seamen, who, on the visitors approaching, exchanged a few
    friendly shouts with them.  From the middle of the two lines in which
    they were moored, the ships had a noble and awe-inspiring effect upon
    those who had not before seen such wonders of the sea—they were, in
    fact, so many towers of strength filled with dauntless warriors.  The
    Mersey, the smartest, the swiftest, and most powerful frigate of the
    fleet, was greatly admired, as was also the Royal Albert, and many
    thought—

    “How proud must be our Admiral
    Of such a bonny barque.”

    Officers and men were at nearly all parts of the ship, and cordially
    invited the excursionists to go on board, an offer which the steamer
    declined, out of regard to the safety of the passengers.  Small
    pleasure boats from the beach, however, were running to the fleet in
    large numbers, cutting and plunging through the sea that might have
    made some persons timid.  The steamers disembarked their freight at
    the Britannia Pier (which found Sunday the most prosperous day of its
    existence) and continued throughout the day to run to and from that
    Pier without intermission.  Indeed, in the afternoon the Britannia
    Pier, which was crowded almost from end to end, presented a
    remarkable spectacle.  The beef, potatoes, and greens for the fleet
    were brought to the pier-head in carts, and were stacked for
    conveyance to the ships in the ships’ boats.  The sailors, amongst
    whom was the usual per centage of black fellows, tossed the beef and
    cabbages into the boats in a manner not at all ceremonious, and one
    quarter to a certainty, though some say three or four, was pitched
    into Davey Jones’s locker.  This scene of conveying away the carcases
    of about 60 bullocks (so the number was stated, though we think over
    the mark), of a few sheep, and goodness only knows how many cabbages
    and loaves, was very interesting to the public, and kept the pier
    crowded with spectators till six or seven o’clock.  There was in the
    afternoon and evening the largest assemblage of people on the parade
    and beach that the oldest inhabitant remembers to have seen in the
    town, and it was not till a late hour that the last disappeared.  The
    effect of so many strangers being in the town was to effect an entire
    demolition of most of the eatable stores in the hands of the
    innkeepers; and it is sufficient to say that a great thirst
    prevailed.  The Jacks and officers who were ashore in some force in
    the afternoon preferred wandering into the town and outskirts; and
    the former, who as a rule were shoeless, seemed to pick up a good
    deal of fun.  Besides the usual mode of conveyance of pouring in
    visitors, we observed several original vehicles from the country
    arrive in the afternoon, laden to excess and to the evident
    inconvenience of the passengers.  The day passed off so well that the
    majority of the inhabitants retired, hoping, we have no doubt, that
    the Channel Fleet might remain a week.  Sinister rumours, however,
    were at work, and some fears were secretly entertained.  Great bags
    of letters had been taken from and sent to the Post Office, and
    report was that despatches had been received ordering the fleet off
    to Spithead at once.

    When the general bulk of the population awoke on Monday morning,
    alas! the fleet—with the exception of the Mars, which had lost an
    anchor and was waiting to endeavour to regain it—were off!  They left
    us between five and six o’clock; and many have a firm opinion that
    the Mars was detained by some Providential influence, so that the
    thousands of excursionists who came in on Monday, in the hope of
    seeing the Channel Fleet, might not be utterly disappointed.  May a
    British Fleet honour us again with its presence, at the earliest
    opportunity.

The following Commissions had been issued:—“Great Yarmouth Rifle
Volunteer Corps—Frederick Palmer, Esq., to be Surgeon; Henry Ralph Nevill
to be Hon. Chaplain.”

The trident had been struck by lightning from the hand of Britannia on
the Nelson Column.

July 7th.—The “Good Samaritan” Lodge, M.U.O.F., had voted £5 5s. to the
Fishermen’s Fund.

Mr. Job Smith had presided at a Working Man’s Reform Meeting, held in
Crowe’s Assembly Rooms.

July 21st.—The Fisherman’s Widows and Orphans’ Fund exceeded £7,300.

The new building for the Sailors’ Home was progressing rapidly.

“The hot weather had brought large numbers of excursionists to the
sea-side.”

July 25th.—The Donegal Militia had left the town for Ireland, where they
were to be disembodied.

Aug. 1st.—“Benjamin Hollis, a fine young man belonging to the Artillery
Volunteers,” had been buried with Military honours.

Aug. 4th.—The 3rd and 4th Companies of the Rifle Volunteers had appeared
for the first time in uniform.

A “young lady about twenty years of age had disappeared” at the same time
as the Militia left the town.

Aug. 8th.—At the Water Frolic the “Iris” won the cutter match, and the
“Enchantress” the latteen match.

“A reward of £100 had been offered for the apprehension of John D.
Chapman, late of this town.”

At the Regatta the following had been the result of the matches:—

                              FIRST GLASS YAWLS.

    A Purse of £30, to be sailed for by yawls from all parts; of not less
    than 45 feet in length, manned by the beachmen engaged in saving life
    from shipwreck.  First prize, £15; second, £10; third, £5.  No
    entrance fee.  The first yawl to pay £1, the second 15s., and the
    third 7s. 6d. to the Regatta Fund.

Queen Victoria, Yarmouth            1
Eclipse, Lowestoft                  2
Gipsy Queen, Winterton              3

A Purse of £50, to be sailed for by Yachts belonging to any Royal Yacht
Club in Great Britain, above 20 tons and not exceeding 50 tons register.
No restrictions as to sails or men.  The winner to pay five guineas to
the second yacht.

Belvidere, (T. M. Read,) Yarmouth          1
Kestrel, (W. Butcher), Norwich             2

                             SECOND CLASS YAWLS.

A purse of £20, to be sailed for by yawls from all parts, of not more
than 45 feet in length, manned by beachmen.  First prize, £12; second
prize, £5; third prize, £3.  First yawl to pay £1, second yawl 10s.,
third yawl 5s. to the Regatta Fund.

Good Tidings, California            1
Volunteer, Yarmouth                 2
Flying Fish, ditto                  3

A Rowing Match for £15, by six-oared gigs, single banked, from any part.
To be contended for in heats.  Four to start or no race.  No entrance
fee.  First boat to receive £8; second boat, £5; third boat, £2; manned
by those who usually work as beachmen.

Shooting Star, Winterton       1
Champion, Yarmouth             2
Quebec, Pakefield              3

Some more rowing by ships’ boats, sculling, and a duck hunt brought the
programme to a close.

The following were among the persons present at the Regatta Ball:—The
Mayor, Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart., M.P., Lady Plumridge, Miss Plumridge,
Lieut.-Colonel Astley, Major and Mrs. Rushbrooke, Major Penrice, Miss
Penrice, Captain the Hon. R. Harbord, Count Melchoir de Weazle, Captain
Longe, Mr. Stracey, Mr. Bedingfield, Mr. and Mrs. A. Steward and the
Misses Steward, Mrs. F. Steward, Mr. and Mrs. Postle, Mr. and Mrs.
Palmer, Mr. Waters and the Misses Waters, Captain and Mrs. Wynyard, Major
Wodehouse, the Rev. G. Hawes and the Misses Hawes, Mrs. Patridge, Mr.
Molyneux Steel, Mr. D’Eye, Mr. and Mrs. W. C. Reynolds, Mrs. Mends, Miss
Pearson, Miss Hubbard, Mrs. Foster, Miss Foster, Miss Gwynn, the Misses
Cubitt, Mr. E. Frere, Mr. and Mrs. Orde, Captain and Mrs. Ives, Miss
Lennard, Captain Jervoise, &c.

Aug. 22nd.—The E.N.M. (which had been embodied since the 5th April, 1857)
had been disembodied.

Gipsies “infested the Beach” to the annoyance of the public.

Aug. 25th.—The N.A.M. had been disembodied at Yarmouth.

Sept. 1st.—Only 58 persons had attended the Race Ball, among whom were
the Mayor, the Hon. H. Harbord, Captain Bedingfield, Captain Holmes, Mr.
Orde, Mr. Marsh, Mr. Palmer, &c.

Colonel Sir Thomas Troubridge had inspected the Rifle Volunteers.

Sept. 5th.—The Rifle Corps was holding its first prize shooting matches
on the North Denes, the E.N.M. Band being on the ground and playing
during the firing.  Mr. Fenner had won the Borough Members’ Prize, having
at the 500 yards scored 8 against Lieutenant Brown’s 6 points.

A hare had been hunted from the South Denes by “men, dogs, and boys” to
Adam and Eve Gardens, and had been “transferred to a bake office before
12 o’clock.”

A roulette table had been an attraction in the town, and several
gentlemen had “dropped” their money at that game.

Sept. 18th.—The following had been the result of the Prize Shooting:—

1.—Borough Members’ Prize of £10, shot for at ranges of 300, 400, and 500
yards.  Winner, Fenner.

2.—Officers’ Cup, value £5, shot for at ranges of 200 and 300 yards.
Winner, Davis.

3.—A “Turner” Rifle, presented by Major Orde, shot for at ranges of 500
and 600 yards, for which Pearson and Leman tied, upon shooting off Leman
was the winner.

4.—Ladies’ Challenge Cup, value £35, shot for at ranges of 650, 700, 800,
and 900 yards, the firing for which was not concluded, but Boreham and
Boulton had the highest scores in this contest.

Sept. 12th.—The Prize Shooting had been completed by Mr. Bly,
(ironmonger) making 12 points out of 20 shots, 5 at each of the distances
of 650, 700, 800, and 900 yards, in the Challenge Cup competition, and he
was declared to be the winner, and the champion shot of the corps.

The pugilist Mace was training at Yarmouth previous to his fighting Bob
Brettle.

Sept. 19th.—The prizes had been presented to the several winners in the
recent Rifle Corps Competition by the Mayor at the Town Hall, when
amongst those present were Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Lady and Miss Lacon, Major
and Mrs. Orde, Captain Holmes, the Officers of the Rifle Corps, Major
Todd, E. R. Palmer, Esq., Captain Jervoise, C. C. Aldred, Esq., Rev. M.
Waters, C. J. Palmer, Esq., &c., &c.

After this, the Mayor invited those present to dance, himself leading off
with Lady Lacon.

Mr. E. R. Aldred had supplied the cups, and champion’s medal.

The Volunteer Artillery had appeared in “busbies” for the first time.

Sept. 22nd.—The Yarmouth Volunteers had attended the Review of the County
Corps held on Mousehold Heath, Norwich, by the Lord Lieutenant, who was
accompanied by Major-General Wood, Lord Suffield, Colonel Astley, and the
Hon. Harbord Harbord as aides-de-camp, and a brilliant staff.  The
Yarmouth Rifles numbered 1 Field Officer, 4 Captains, 4 Lieutenants, and
4 Ensigns, 1 Staff Officer, 11 Sergeants, 4 Drummers, and 172 Privates,
total 201.  The total number of Volunteers on the field being between
1,100 and 1,200.  The spectators are stated to have said as the
Volunteers marched past—“These with the Hussar hats on are the Yarmouth
Artillery,” and “These are the Yarmouth Rifles—well done Yarmouth.”

Sept. 26th.—The number of the Volunteer Artillery present at the Review
was stated to have been 156.

Herring was selling at from £23 to £30 per last.

Sept. 29th.—“Several hundreds of vessels had passed through the Roads for
the North in full sail, and one close fleet.”

Oct. 3rd.—James Denny Chapman had absconded and been declared bankrupt,
with debts estimated at £30,000.

Oct. 6th.—At the Revision Court Mr. Costerton had appeared for the
Liberals and Mr. Reynolds for the Tories; the former claimed a gain of 88
votes.

Oct. 20th.—St. Andrew’s Church had been consecrated by the Bishop of
Norwich.

Nov. 3rd.—At the Municipal Election there was a contest in the _Regent
Ward_, resulting as follows:—

Reynolds (C.)             106
Wright (C.)               101
Livingston (L)             61

For the other wards the following gentlemen were returned without
opposition:—

_North_—William H. Bessey and Samuel Nightingale (C’s.)

_Market_—John Fenn and John E. Barnby (C’s).

_St. George’s_—William J. Foreman and Charles Palmer (C’s).

_Nelson_—John Clarke (C.) and John Clowes (L).

_Gorleston_—Samuel C. Richmond and Thomas W. Gooda (C’s).

It was “darkly hinted” that Mr. S. Nightingale would be the next Mayor.

Nov. 10th.—The Mayor, the Rev. Mr. Peade, Messrs. C. S. Marsh, R. S.
Watling, S. Nightingale, T. Brightwen, B. Dowson, and Mr. W. C. Reynolds
had been nominated by a Public Meeting as a Committee for the purpose of
founding a “Public Hall and Assembly Room.”  Mr. Palmer and Mr. Falcke
had each offered to take 20 shares of £10 in the undertaking.

Nov. 14th.—At the Council Meeting on the 9th, Mr. Charles J. Palmer
proposed, and Mr. F. Worship seconded, the election of Mr. Samuel
Nightingale as Mayor of the Borough, and, there being no opposition, he
was elected to that office accordingly.

The “Eleanor,” brig of 300 tons register, had been launched “in full rig”
from Messrs. Beechings’s yard.  She was to proceed to the Mediterranean
with herring.

Nov. 17th.—“A nocturnal exploit of some Volunteer youths had been much
talked of for several days past,” and a “dashing junior officer” had
nearly fallen into the hands of the police.

Nov. 24th.—“Practical jokes” prevailed, one “joker” finding next morning
that he had been over night “cracking his own panes.”

The “political actions at law” against Sir E. Lacon were “in course of
settlement.”

Dec. 8th.—An explosion had taken place on board the “Tonning” steamer at
sea, and inquests on several bodies of the men killed held at Yarmouth.

Dec. 22nd.—The Volunteer Artillery had given a concert at the Corn Hall,
when Messrs. John Franklin, W. Offord, Clements, J. Bartram, J. Cocks, W.
C. Mack and the Masters Nutman took part in the performance.

The following was the form of apology upon which the actions against Sir
E. Lacon had been settled, upon his payment of plaintiff’s costs:—

                                                          “Great Yarmouth,
                                                         “Nov. 29th, 1860.

    “Dear Sir,—Upon full enquiry, I find that the statements made by me
    in a speech at the dinner at the Theatre in April last, and
    complained of by you as reflecting on yourself as a member of the
    committee therein referred to, were made under an erroneous
    impression of the facts of the case, as far as yourself and the
    committee are concerned.

    “Under these circumstances, I have no hesitation in withdrawing the
    imputations you and the committee complain of, and the plea of
    justification, and in expressing my regret that legal proceedings
    were deemed necessary, which, being now ended, no difference will, I
    trust, henceforth be made in the friendly feeling that has previously
    existed between us.

                                                             “Yours truly,
                                                       “EDM. H. K. LACON.”

    W. T. Clarke, Esq.”

At the Police Court, Mr. Owles again called attention to the “practical”
joking question, when Sergeant Barnes stated that the jokers “were
attired in cloaks, and one wore a uniform cap.”

Dec. 29th.—The Rifle Corps, 180 strong, had marched to Hopton, where
Major Orde “regaled them on bread and cheese, hot sausage rolls, and
plenty of old ale.”




FOURTH SERIES, 1861–1872.


    “When found, make a note of”—

                                                             CAPT. CUTTLE.



1861.


Jan. 2nd.—The poor rate assessment had been raised some £14,000, and a
1s. 2d. rate thereon made.

Mr. F. Ferrier (Deputy Coroner) had held an inquest on the body of Thomas
Algar, the clown who had expired at the Theatre immediately after the
performance on the previous Friday.  The deceased was 34 years of age,
and left a widow and one child.  The verdict was that deceased died from
“natural causes”; Mr. C. C. Aldred (the Surgeon) and the Jury gave their
fees to the family.

Jan. 5th.—The Revenue cutter, in attempting to run for the harbour, had
fouled the pier and was sunk.

Jan. 12th.—“The strong frost had literally stopped the river traffic.”

It had been decided to give £124 worth of coal to the poor.

Jan. 19th.—A public meeting had been held to raise funds for that
purpose.  The Mayor presided, and the following gentlemen took part in
the proceedings:—Mr. W. Worship, the Rev. B. Vaux, Mr. R. Steward, Mr. C.
C. Aldred, Mr. R. Hammond, Mr. T. Brightwen, Mr. C. Cory, Mr. L. Blake,
and Mr. E. H. L. Preston.  Sir E. Lacon sent a cheque for £50, and £350
was subscribed in the room.

Jan. 26th.—Dr. Stephenson had been appointed Surgeon for the South
District.

The “Racehorse” (belonging to George Danby-Palmer, Esq.), had been
abandoned near Cape Horn.  There had been a mutiny on board her, and a
naval Court was inquiring into the affair at Calloa.

Jan. 30th.—The Guardians were calling attention to the “Compulsory
Vaccination Act.”

Feb. 2nd.—The annual Sailors’ Home meeting had been held in the new
building on the Drive.

Mr. Henry R. Harmer had been appointed a Chancery Commissioner.

Feb. 6th.—At a Vestry meeting it had been determined to take a poll of
the parish as to whether the Vestry Act (13 and 14 Vic. cap. 57) should
be applied to the parish.

Feb. 9th.—Two hundred and eighty-eight appeals had been lodged against
the Poor’s Rate.

Feb. 16th—“Costerton _v._ Lacon” had been tried.  In this action the
plaintiff, a solicitor at Yarmouth, complained of having been slandered
by the defendant, who was M.P. for the town, and who ultimately consented
to a verdict against him for 40s. and costs.

Feb. 20th.—The poll of the parish had closed as under:—

For applying the Vestry Act            737
Against                                414
                        Majority       323

Mr. Clowes then proposed, and Mr. Livingston seconded, a resolution to
the effect that a Vestry Clerk be appointed at a salary of £100 per
annum, and ultimately this was carried, and a vote of thanks to the Vicar
and his assessor (C. J. Palmer, Esq.), terminated the proceedings.

Feb. 23rd.—The Conservatives had adopted Mr. C. H. Chamberlin (a Liberal)
as their candidate for the office of Vestry Clerk, the other candidate
being Mr. S. B. Cory.

Feb. 27th.—The case of Morant v. Chamberlin (which involved the right of
user of part of the Quay by George Danby-Palmer, Esq.), had been decided
as follows: “Verdict for plaintiff, issue on the 4th plea for defendant.”

March 2nd.—The Prince of Wales had visited the town “incog.”

March 6th.—One Cox, “a magician of Friars’ Lane,” had been before the
Justices.

March 9th.—The Hon. Harbord Harbord had been hunting the district with
his pack of harriers during the week.

Part of a house had been blown down on the Regent Road.

March 13th.—The Artillery Corps had adopted white (in lieu of blue)
facings to their uniform.

March 16th.—The Fitzroy storm signals had been hoisted in the town.

March 23rd.—“Iconoclast” proposed to deliver lectures at the Theatre.
This had been stopped by the Mayor, and an action was threatened against
the proprietor of that building.  The following is a copy of the Bill
issued:—“Theatre Royal, Great Yarmouth.  Iconoclast the well-known
advocate of Secularism, and co-editor with Mr. Joseph Barker, &c., will
deliver three lectures in the above place, on the 25th, 26th, and 27th of
March, 1861.  Subjects—Monday, “Were Adam and Eve our first parents?”
Tuesday, “The History of the Crucifixion, self-contradictory and
incredible.”  Wednesday, “The Atonement and its relation to sin and
pardon.”  Admission—Lower boxes, 6d.; upper ditto, 4d.; pit, 3d.,
gallery, 2d.  Iconoclast respectfully invites the clergy and ministers of
Yarmouth to discuss his lectures; especially those who claim to have
refuted him during his absence.”

Major Orde, Mr. Chamberlin, and Captain Holmes had given readings from
Dickens’ works in the saloon of the Victoria gardens before the members
of the Rifle Corps and their friends; Captain Holmes was expected to be
appointed adjutant of this corps.

March 30th.—“Cufaude _v_ Cory” had been heard at the Assizes.  In this
action damages were claimed by the plaintiff, Clerk to the Guardians
against the defendant, Mr. S. B. Cory, for an alleged libel, he having
stated in a handbill that Mr. Cufaude “cooked” the parish accounts.  Mr.
O’Malley, Q.C., Mr. Power, Q.C., Mr. Keene and Mr. Cherry were for the
plaintiff, and Mr. Palmer and Mr. Hotson for the defendant.  The Jury
found for the plaintiff with £500 damages.

April 3rd.—“The nocturnal jokes” were again the subject of inquiry; Mr.
E. O. Johnson (a Volunteer Sergeant) had been discovered by a policeman
taking away Dr. Smyth’s bell, but as that gentleman would not prosecute,
the charge dropped.

Mr. J. H. Harrison then made a complaint to the Court of damages to his
property by these “jokers.”

At the Vestry Meeting, Mr. R. Hammond proposed, and Mr. W. Worship
seconded, the re-election of Mr. S. C. D. Steward as one of the
Churchwardens, and Mr. Fenn proposed, and Mr. Laws seconded, the
re-election of Mr. E. R. Aldred as the other warden, “and the Minister
accepted the second nomination as his warden.”

N.B.—This was the first attempt by a Vicar to take action of this sort,
(the right of election of both Churchwardens being vested in the Vestry
of the parish.)

The following gentlemen had been elected Guardians:—

_North Ward_—S. Nightingale, E. H. L. Preston, and J. B. Hylton.

_Market Ward_—C. C. Aldred, W. Laws, and J. Fenn.

_Regent Ward_—W. Worship, R. D. Barber, and D. A. Gourlay.

_St. George’s Ward_—J. G. Plummer, C. E. Bartram, and C. Miller.

_Nelson Ward_—T. Brightwen, C. Woolverton, W. C. Reynolds, and J. Clarke.

It was stated that only 7s. 6d. had been subscribed by the lodging-house
keepers to the Race Fund.

April 10th.—It was understood that the Chairman and a majority of the
Board of Guardians were favourable to the admission of Reporters to the
Board meetings.

“Great reductions” had been made upon the Poor’s Rate appeals.

April 13th.—Captain Holmes had been appointed Adjutant to the Rifle
Volunteers.

Sir J. Walsham had held an inquiry as to the allegations with regard to
the parish accounts, which had been alluded to in the recent action of
“Cufaude _v._ Cory.”  Mr. Hotson attended it on behalf of Mr. Cory.

April 17th.—Two batteries of Royal Artillery had arrived in the town.

April 20th.—A gunboat, with the men of the Revenue cutter on board, had
run into the pier-head.

An illuminated clock had been placed at the Sailors’ Home.

A rule “nisi” had been granted in the action of “Cufaude _v._ Cory” on
the ground of excessive damages.

April 27th.—The “Harmony,” missionary ship, had been launched from
Messrs. Fellows’ yard.

There had been “numerous” arrivals of invalids from India at the R.N.
Hospital.

May 1st.—Solomon Levy, a converted Jew, had been baptised at St. Peter’s
Church, F. Worship, Esq., standing “as witness to the Baptism.”
Afterwards the Rev. Bowyer Vaux preached from Titus iii, 5.

May 4th.—The Rifle Volunteers had held a “Mess” at the Star Hotel, when
Host Diver catered for them.

May 8th.—The following “Census” returns had been made for the parish:—

                  Males.       Females.      Total.      Excess of
                                                          Females.
North Ward             3620          4330         7950           710
Market Ward            2211          2706         4917           485
Regent Ward            1553          2382         3935           829
St. George’s           1777          2419         4196           632
Ward
Nelson Ward            3873          4885         8758          1002
         Total       13,034        16,722       29,756          3658
     Workhouse          173           159          332
                     13,207        16,881       30,088
Estimate Gorleston & Southtown & afloat          6,000
                                                36,088

The Rifle Volunteers, 200 strong, had attended St. Nicholas’ Church.  The
leading fish-merchants proposed to purchase two fast steamers as carriers
to the London markets.

May 11th.—Mr. Evans was sitting at the Town Hall to take evidence on the
claims of the Ormesby and Scratby people to exemption from payment of
Market Tolls at Yarmouth.

May 18th.—So few mackerel had been brought in, that they were selling at
1s. each.

May 22nd.—A very old house (formerly part of the Convent) had fallen down
in Friars’ lane.

There had been two military rows between the Royal Artillery and the E.N.
Militiamen.

May 25th.—The Mayor and Magistrates had met Major Martin (E.N.M.) and
Colonel Bruce (R.A.) on this subject, and steps had been taken to prevent
the men meeting again.

May 29th.—“Mace,” the local pugilist, (being known in the neighbourhood)
was being heavily “backed” for the fight for the championship.

June 1st.—Sergeant Seeley (E.N.M.) had died from the effects of choking
himself by swallowing a piece of meat.

A “handsome new schooner” had been launched by Mr. Brandford.

A “considerable number” of new fishing and pleasure boats were being
built at the port.

Shops were being opened in Regent Street, under the Board of Health Act,
which had overruled the old local act under which the houses there, were
not to be so used.

June 8th.—The mackerel voyage had been very unsuccessful.

A “Turkish” bath was to be opened in a few week’s time.

June 15th—Mr. Frederick Danby-Palmer had passed the legal examination (in
honors.)

A case of alleged “Witchcraft” at Gorleston had occupied the Bench.

June 19th.—At a meeting of the Ratepayers Mr. J. Clowes proposed, and Mr.
Burroughs seconded, Mr. S. B. Cory as a proper person to fill the office
of Vestry Clerk.  Mr. Livingstone, Mr. Neave and Mr. Royal also took part
in these proceedings.

June 22nd.—At the Vestry meeting, held for the election of that officer,
Mr. George Danby-Palmer proposed and Mr. Livingstone seconded Mr. S. B.
Cory, and Mr. Charles Cory proposed, and Mr. G. A. Clarke seconded, Mr.
C. H. Chamberlin.  The proceedings were of a most disorderly character,
terminating “in a talk of many tongues, which accused each other of being
‘liars’ and so on.”

June 24th.—At 12 o’clock the poll stood—

Cory                         270
Chamberlin                   194
And closed—
Cory                         366
Chamberlin                   269
June 25th.—it closed—
Cory                         701
Chamberlin                   512
June 26th.—It finally closed—
Cory                         848
Chamberlin                   620
     Majority for Cory       228

Mr. Cory and Mr. George Danby-Palmer then addressed the electors, and
votes of thanks to the Vicar (Rev. H. Nevill) and his assessor (Mr. C. J.
Palmer) terminated the proceedings.

June 29th.—The election for, and meeting of, the “Eastern Counties Asylum
of Idiots” had taken place at the Town Hall.  The Mayor presided, and
there were also present, Sir Thomas Beevor, Bart., Rev. T. Bailey, Rev.
R. M. Bingley, Rev. Thos. Quintin, Rev. E. Postle, and Messrs. W.
Worship, T. Brightwen, F. Palmer, John Crisp (Mayor of Beccles), J. H.
Bly, &c.

July 3rd.—M. Desfongerais had been appointed Consul for the French
Government at Yarmouth, and had appeared for a French vessel in an
adjudication case, held before F. Worship and F. Palmer, Esqs.

July 10th.—Mr. S. B. Cory had commenced his duties of Vestry Clerk.

The mackerel fishing was a failure, and the Summer fishing “very slow.”

July 17th.—At the Water Frolic, the “Red Rover” won the cutter, and the
“Vampire” the lateen, prize.

The Rev. H. Squire had, after a pastorate of 30 years, resigned the
Unitarian Chapel Ministry.

July 20th.—Messrs. C. J. Palmer, C. C. Aldred.  W. Johnson, C. Cory, and
J. Brightwen had been appointed a Committee to carry on the proposal to
found a Grammar School in the town.

A “furious tempest, including thunder, whirlwind, and lightning” had
burst over the town.

July 31st.—Mr. Lane had claimed £300 damages for libel against the Free
Press Newspaper Company, but under the advice of the Chief Justice, a
Juror was withdrawn, each party paying their own costs.

Aug. 7th.—The Vestry Clerk and the Overseers could not “gee” together.

Aug. 10th.—At the Regatta, the “Queen Victoria” and “Volunteer” won the
yawl matches, and the “Red Rover” and the “Belvidere,” the pleasure-boat
matches.  The yacht match fell through in consequence of only two vessels
being prepared to sail in it.

Aug. 14th.—A number of noisy women outside the Police Court, on the
hearing of the claims to be excused payment of the Poor’s Rate, had
“mobbed” the Vestry Clerk and had in short “taken possession of the Court
and its entrance.”

Aug. 17th.—The Rifle Volunteers were holding their Prize Shooting Match
on the North Denes.  Messrs. Wilshak, Ferrier, and Swann had won prizes.

A great shoal of dog-fish had visited the Eastern coast.

Mr. S. B. Cory had been presented with a sum of money to cover his
expenses occasioned by the contest for the office of Vestry Clerk.

Aug. 24th.—The Mayor, Lord William Powlett, Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart.,
M.P., Lieut.-Colonel Baker (10th Hussars), Captain Lane, and C. J.
Palmer, Esq., had been nominated Stewards of the Race Ball.

The old Dutch Clock on the South Quay was “to go.”  It had been stated
that the custom prevailed of winding it up “with a hammer.”

Aug. 28th.—Two ladies had been robbed of their watches on the Wellington
Pier.

Sept. 7th.—The Volunteers were drilling for the review at Holkham.

The Race Ball had been attended by the Mayor, Lady and Miss Lacon, Mr. M.
Lacon, Mr. Blake Humphrey, Mr. Blofeld, Captain and Mrs. Warren, Captain
and Mrs. Dods, Lieut. Daveney, Captain Travers, Mr. Bedingfield, Mr. and
Mrs. C. J. Palmer, Captain Dunne, Mr. Magnay, Captain Jervois, Mr.
Stracey, Captain Turnour, R.N., Captain Ensor, Miss Wilson, Mr. and Mrs.
F. Frere, Mr. and Mrs. H. Frere, Mr. and Mrs. Falcke and party, Mr. and
Mrs. Brown, Mr. F. Danby-Palmer, Mr. Button, Mr. Martin, Mr. and Mrs.
Gosnall, Mr. Rising, Mr. Waters, &c.

The Drapers (with one exception) had agreed to close on Thursdays at four
o’clock.

Sep. 18th.—The Volunteer Corps under the command of Major Marsh and Major
Orde, had attended the Review at Holkham.

Sept. 18th.—The Volunteers had, after their return from Holkham, “annoyed
and disturbed the inhabitants by an irregular firing of musketry” in the
streets.

A young actor, having gone mad through love for a lady in the town, had
been taken to the Workhouse, where the lady’s portrait and letters were
found upon him.

Sept. 25th—Capt. Tomlinson had won the cup in the Volunteer Officers’
Shooting Match with 10 points, Captains Youell and Holt making 8 points
each.  The following also competed:—Captain Barber, Lieutenants Harmer
and Moore, and Ensigns Brown and Aldred.

Sept. 28th.—The Rev. C. Voysey had been presented with a private
Communion Service by the poor attendants at the Wherrymen’s Church upon
his leaving Yarmouth.

A grand bowling match had been held on the Bear Green between the bowlers
of Yarmouth and Lowestoft.  The latter won by 9 to 6 games.

Oct. 2nd.—Mr. E. P. Youell was mentioned as the next Mayor.  He was
described as “not a prejudiced partizan on either side.”

Oct. 5th.—The Shooting Prizes had been distributed to the Rifle
Volunteers at the Town Hall, when about 240 officers and members were
present, and a number of ladies and gentlemen who had been invited by the
Mayor, who entertained them with champagne on the occasion.

The following was the list of winners:—

“Tradesmen’s Cup,” Mr. Fyson; 2nd prize, Mr. Hudspith.

“A Neck Pin,” Captain Youell; “A Cup,” Mr. Wilshak; and other prizes
Messrs. Gunton, Teasdel, Banham, Osborn, Kennett, and Swann.

“The Ladies’ Challenge Cup,” Mr. Fenner; and “The Officers’ Cup,” Captain
Tomlinson.

Oct. 12th.—Extensive repairs were being carried on at the Southtown
Barracks.

Oct. 23rd.—It was stated that Mr. Palmer was to be the new Mayor.

Mr. D. Hogarth (Postmaster) had died.

Oct. 26th.—The Lord Bishop had held a Confirmation in the Parish Church.

Eleven hundred persons had been excused from payment of the Poor’s Rate.

Oct. 30th.—Mr. Neave and Mr. Livingston (Radicals) were going to contest
the North and Regent Wards respectively.

In St. Andrew’s Ward, a meeting of electors had determined to again
nominate Mr. R. Steward (Tory) and Mr. W. T. Clarke (Liberal) in a “if
ye’ll claw me, I’ll claw ye; style of pastime.”

An alarming fire had happened in Row 145, the centre of a thickly
populated district; Mr. Self’s premises chiefly suffered, his damage
being estimated at £300.

The Justices had signed a 1s. 2d. Poor’s Rate.

Nov. 2nd.—The trawling business was increasing, 100 smacks then hailing
from the port.

Two new vessels had been launched at Southtown, one for Mr. Womack and
one for Mr. Powell.

Mr. Todd had also built a new smack called the “Christiana.”

Nov. 6th.—Alarming and destructive gales had raged along the whole coast
on the 1st of November, and 27 shipwrecked seamen had been received at
the Sailors’ Home.

                             MUNICIPAL ELECTION.

    The following account is given of this:—“With the exception of two or
    three of the candidates who came forward as Liberals, the aspirants
    for Municipal honours did not this year favour the public with any
    printed expositions of their views, or any explanations of the
    grounds upon which they came forward.  The elections of Friday,
    however did not cause much excitement, although at the eleventh hour
    the Conservatives found themselves opposed in all the wards except
    St. Andrew’s, in which Messrs. W. T. Clarke, and R. Steward were
    elected unopposed.  In the Market Ward, Mr. Gourlay (L) and Mr. E.
    Aldred (C) sought re-election, and the new candidate was Mr. Lawn,
    Liberal.  The result of the voting was—Gourlay, 60; Aldred, 59; Lawn,
    20.  The two former, of course, were elected.  In the Regent Ward,
    Mr. Barber, Conservative, sought re-election, and in the place of Mr.
    Norman, surgeon (C), who retired, Dr. Stephenson (C) was put forward.
    The candidates on the other side were Messrs. Livingston and de Caux.
    The ward again showed its partiality for medicine, and polled as
    follows:—Barber, 109; Stephenson, 106; Livingston, 81; de Caux,
    69.—In St. George’s Ward, the Conservative candidates, who sought
    re-election, were Messrs. R. Ferrier and B. Jay, opposed by Messrs.
    Scott and Palmer.  The poll—Ferrier, 101; Jay 101; Palmer, 39; Scott,
    37.—Nelson Ward: C. J. Palmer (C), 93, C. Woolverton (C), 93; G.
    Moore (L), 3; Playford (L), 3.  North Ward: W. Worship (C), 118; J.
    B. Hylton (C), 118; S. W. Bly (L), 83; J. Neave (L), 84.—It was
    rumoured that during the day some bribery was effected by such
    moderate sums as half-a-crown and five shillings per man.

Nov. 13th.—At the Council meeting Mr. C. C. Aldred proposed, and Mr.
Shingles seconded, Mr. Robert Steward as Mayor, and he was elected
accordingly.

Nov. 20th.—There were between 200 and 300 fishing vessels at sea during
the recent gales, of which only 30 luggers were then unaccounted for.
About 100 lasts of fish had been delivered on the Quay on the previous
Saturday, when prices ranged from £15 upwards.

A new Lifeboat had been stationed near the Britannia Pier.

Nov. 23rd.—Among the smacks which had been injured in the gale was Mr.
Todd’s new vessel the “Christiana;” some of this owner’s other vessels
had suffered damage, and his loss was estimated altogether at £1,000.

Nov. 27th.—Mr. Downing’s fish-offices had been destroyed by fire.

Nov. 30th.—In the Town Council, Messrs. Gooda, Burroughs, Clowes, S. B.
Cory, and another had voted against the question of the Mayor being
“decorated by the wearing of a gown;” 17 members had, however, voted that
the question be referred to the Lands Committee.

The Artillery Volunteers had salved a boat and obtained £7 salvage money
to the annoyance of the Beachmen

The Parish Authorities “remained at loggerheads” with the Vestry Clerk.

In the opinion of the inhabitants the “robes question” seemed only a plan
to run up a bill for another “folly.”

The Police had been furnished with “Southwester” hats.

Dec. 4th.—It was stated that the robe business had cropped up, as the
Mayor was going to Court, and it was felt

    “That if, this year, the Mayor’s not knighted,
    The Corporate ‘status’ will be blighted.”

Herring was making £35 per last, and 1,000 packages of trawl fish had
been forwarded to the market.

Dec. 11th.—The Lands Committee had decided that the Mayor, Town-clerk,
and Messrs. Collins, Ellis and Thompson (the officers) should wear gowns,
but no head gear had been decided upon for them.

Dec. 14th.—“Deerfoot,” an American runner, had been performing in the
town, when he accomplished 10 miles in 53 minutes.

The Treasurer to the Rifle Corps (Mr. Clarke) and the Quarter-Master (Mr.
C. Diver) were about to be appointed Supernumerary Lieutenants.

Dec. 18th.—Owing to the death of the Prince Consort, the paper appeared
in mourning.

The flags had been hoisted at half-mast on the Town Hall and other public
buildings on receipt of this mournful news.

Dec. 21st.—The Artillery Volunteers had given an entertainment at the
Theatre.

Dec. 25th.—There had been a Special Service at St. Nicholas’ Church on
the occasion of the funeral of the Prince Consort, when the Vicar
preached from the text, “And the King said unto his servants, know ye not
that there is a Prince and a great man fallen this day in Israel.”  Sam.
iii., 38.  At the close of the service the “Dead March” in _Saul_ was
played, and the Rifle Volunteers returned with muffled drums, the bells
ringing at the same time.

The Artillery Corps fired minute guns from the South Battery for an hour,
and from twelve to two the shops throughout the town were closed.

The Town Council met and voted an address of condolence to Her Majesty.

Dec. 28th.—A special service had also been held at the Synagogue,
commencing with Psalms 13, 19, 15, and 85, and concluding with a prayer
for the Queen and the Royal Family, after which, on the motion of Mr.
Pyke, an address of condolence to the Queen and Royal Family was adopted.

The Rifle Corps had again on the invitation of Major Orde visited Hopton.



1862.


Jan. 4th.—Parcels containing Christmas fare “had fallen among thieves” on
the Railway.

Jan. 8th.—Up to the 30th ult., 9,257 offers had been received and 8,229
Volunteers enrolled in the Royal Naval Reserve; of this number 24 held
Masters’ Certificates, 116 Mates’ Certificates, and the force embraced
1,148 petty officers in the Merchant Service.

Jan. 15th.—Two pugilists named Foxall and Chambers, (who were
occasionally employed as Beachmen), had engaged in a prize fight.
“Ducky” Chambers was the winner.

Jan. 18th.—Major Orde, Captain Youell, and C. H. Chamberlin, Esq., had
been entertaining the Rifle Volunteers at the Drill Hall with “Readings
from Modern Authors.”

It was again proposed to start a Conservative Newspaper in Yarmouth.

Jan. 25th.—At the Gorleston Vestry Meeting the Church Rate was not
pressed for.

Feb. 8th.—The Corporation’s costs in “Morant _v._ Chamberlin” amounted to
£1,402 17s. 6d.

Feb. 19th.—Mr. A. W. Morant had resigned his commission in the Artillery
Volunteers.

A cargo of pickled herrings had arrived from Norway.

Feb. 22nd.—Messrs. Hewett and Co. were about to transfer the greater part
of their trawling business to Gorleston; thus about 100 families would be
transferred from Barking to that village.

The Anniversary Dinner of the “Pioneer” Lodge, No. 262 M.U.I.O.F., had
been held at the Foundry Arms, Bro. Wells in the chair.

March. 5th.—The Town Council had determined to oppose the “Railway
Amalgamation Bill.”

March 12th.—Private H. Fenner (Champion Rifle Volunteer Shot) had been
elected a Sergeant.

March 15th.—The Anniversary Dinner of the “Prince of Wales” Lodge,
M.U.I.O.F., had been held at the Fish-Stall House, P.G. Robins in the
chair and P.G. Crome vice-chair.

In the Divorce Court, the case of “Burroughs _v_ Burroughs and Silcock”
had resulted in the jury finding that the charges made against each party
by the other were groundless; consequently the petitioner failed in his
suit.

March 22nd.—Mr. Henry Danby-Palmer had died suddenly.

April 2nd.—The Mayor had called a meeting to forward the proposal for
holding a Volunteer Review at Yarmouth.  The Mayor (Mr. R. Steward), Mr.
R. Ferrier, Mr. D. R. Fowler, Mr. C. J. Palmer, Mr. W. Worship, Mr. J.
Clowes, and Mr. S. Nightingale took part in the proceedings, and about
£250 was subscribed in the room.

April 16th.—The East Suffolk Artillery Militia was stationed at the
Southtown Barracks.

April 26th.—Colonel Adair (commanding that Regiment) had delivered a
lecture at the Corn Hall “On the land defences of the Eastern Counties.”

Upon this Regiment leaving; the Norfolk Artillery Militia, under Colonel
Astley, were to occupy the Barracks for five weeks.

At the Vestry Meeting, Mr. R. Hammond proposed, and Mr. Bracey seconded,
the re-election of Mr. C. S. D. Steward; and Mr. Hylton proposed, and Mr.
Shingles seconded, the re-election of Mr. E. R. Aldred.

April 30th.—Colonel Pippon had inspected the E.N.M. on the South Denes,
when the Regiment mustered 700 rank and file.

“Tom Sayers’” Circus had attended the Fair.

May 3rd.—Owing to want of funds the Parish Beadle at Gorleston had been
discharged.

May 7th.—The first stone of the New Bethel had been laid.  This building
was to replace the old Bethel which for so many years had been held in
the ancient house, belonging for several generations to the Palmer
family, near the Sailors’ Home.

May 14th.—It was proposed to erect a Memorial to the late Prince Consort
in the town.

Practical joking still continued in the Borough.

May 17th.—C. J. Palmer, Esq., had presented the Corporation with a
scarlet silk gown and black gown formerly worn by the Mayors as robes of
office.

The following table of precedence had been drawn up by the Council:—

1.—The Mayor.

2.—The Recorder.

3.—The Town Clerk.

4.—The M.P.’s for the Borough.

5.—The Members of the Council who had served the office of Mayor
according to priority of election.

6.—The Aldermen and Councillors according to priority of election, the
former in Wards in which they resided, the latter in the Wards for which
they were elected, commencing with the North Ward.

At the Parish Audit, the Auditor remarked that “in some instances the
amount (of the rate) excused exceeded the sum collected.”

May 17th.—The following appears as to the Corporate Robes of Office:—

                            “THE ROBES OF OFFICE.”

    The Committee as to the Wearing of Robes of Office reported that Mr.
    C. J. Palmer, had liberally presented to the Council a scarlet silk
    gown, and a black gown formerly worn by the Mayors as their Robes of
    Office; and the said were accepted by the Committee, and the thanks
    of the Committee were voted to Mr. Palmer for the _handsome_
    donation.  The Committee had resolved that the Mayor should wear the
    black gown as a Robe of Office on all “Ordinary” occasions and the
    scarlet gown on all “extraordinary” occasions.

    The “Robes” or “Gown” movement, which was so much spoken of six
    months ago, has at length—through the exertions of the Committee to
    whom it was referred—come to maturity, and the Mayor now has a second
    hand best gown for “extraordinary” occasions, and a second-hand
    second best gown for “ordinary” occasions.  The old people about Gaol
    Street, who caught a sight of the Mayor in his gown on Tuesday last,
    look upon the revived _costume_ as a “degenerate resurrection;” for,
    instead of there being completeness and congruity in the “fit out,”
    there is a burlesque mixture of the ancient and modern.  The gown
    which erst harmonised with the glorious cocked hat, short tights, and
    silver buckled shoes, appears decidedly “at sea” in company with the
    modern hat (or “4s. and 9d.”) and “peg-top” trousers.  Art critics
    would object to so close a mixture of the mediæval and the modern, on
    the ground of the same not being “in keeping.”  Perhaps, however,
    when we see the style of dress on one of the “extraordinary”
    occasions so judiciously and so elaborately provided for by the
    Council, we may have something presented to notice which will not
    cause every Councillor to grin on beholding it, and to talk, as an
    old writer says, “most consumedly” about it afterwards.  Dressed as
    he was on Tuesday, the Mayor of Yarmouth might, without difficulty,
    have been mistaken (had he been away from home) for Shylock, for one
    of the Japanese Embassy, or for an Arch Druid, so remarkably unusual
    was his appearance.  Experience may, it is true, tone down the
    angularities of the affair; but at the onset the revival of the use
    of robes does not carry with it either the appearance of gravity or
    wisdom.  On entering the Council Room on Tuesday, the Mayor was
    preceded by four officials wearing, in addition to the ordinary
    attire of various colours, gowns, and carrying the sword and two
    maces as usual, with, on this occasion, the very handsome oar—a part
    of the regalia which had, for some very “extraordinary” reason no
    doubt, been disused.  Following the officers were the Mayor, who wore
    in addition to his every day clothing a black robe, of somewhat
    fierce cut, having a sort of fur or bear skin epulet at each
    shoulder, ornamented with a description of rough filagree; and over
    this finery his worship wore (we believe for the first time) the gold
    chain of office.  After the Mayor, entered the Town Clerk in a black
    robe of a more modest character.  For some little time there was much
    winking and smiling amongst the Aldermen and Councillors.  The
    business then proceeded, and, as will be seen from our report of the
    meeting, arrangements were made (in spite of Mr. Richard Ferrier’s
    “chaffing”) for the order of processions.  It was also decided to
    give the Town Hall and the inhabitants the benefit of a public clock,
    of which the Corporation are owners.  It was also jocularly suggested
    that the Gas Company would be most willing gratuitously to illuminate
    the dial, and through it the inhabitants.

May 21st.—There had been an “Uproarious Vestry Meeting,” held for the
object of passing a vote of censure on the Vestry Clerk; Mr. S. C Marsh
presided, and in the result, the meeting being in favour of the Vestry
Clerk, a poll was demanded.

May 29th.—This poll had, after a protest by Mr. J. Clowes as to the
regularity of the proceedings, been taken by Mr. C. Diver (acting as
Assessor).  It closed on the first day—

For the Vestry Clerk             143
Against him                       61
                  Majority        82

And next morning Mr. Marsh attended and declared the poll closed.

May 28th.—Five vessels of war (part of the Channel fleet) were in the
Roads.

May 31st.—The following ships were anchored abreast of the
Jetty:—“Trafalgar” (86), Captain Dickson; the “Revenge” (91), Captain
Fellowes; the “Emerald” (51), Captain Caning; the “Chanticleer” (17),
Captain Sterling; and the “Porpoise” (tender to the “Revenge.”)

June 4th.—This issue contains the following account of

                    “THE CHANNEL FLEET AND PRINCE ALFRED.”

    For several days after Wednesday last, a number of persons in this
    town were almost in a fever of expectation as to the arrival of
    Prince Alfred, in the “St. George;” and in spite of official
    intimation that the Prince is to be considered on business when with
    the fleet, and, as a consequence, exempt from municipal honours and
    popular demonstrations, it was determined to make the most of him
    here.  The forerunners of the “St. George” were boarded and teased by
    all sorts of enquiries; bills were posted about with the words “the
    arrival of Prince Alfred” upon them, and all imaginable measures
    taken to get up excitement.  All, however, failed to draw a large
    number of strangers to the town; and we do not exceed the fact when
    we say that the visit of the Channel Squadron for a much briefer
    period in 1860, brought to the town ten times the number of strangers
    who have come on this occasion.  The Mayor of Yarmouth, soon after
    the fleet arrived, offered to give the officers a dinner if they
    would accept the invitation; but it was declined.  A ball was then
    offered to be got up, and it was promised that such of the officers
    as could attend would do so if the ships still remained in the Roads
    and provided it were got up for the earliest possible day—Monday.  A
    ball was, therefore, decided on for that evening.  But some
    uneasiness was felt as to the non-arrival of the “St. George” with
    Prince Alfred; and when, on Saturday, the ship did not appear, it
    began to be feared that she would not come, and the people consoled
    themselves with such information as that the Admiral—a jolly tar—had
    amused himself by playing a game of bowls at the Vauxhall Green, &c.
    Although Admiral Smart and the officers declined to dine with the
    Mayor on shore, they invited his worship and other gentlemen to dine
    with them afloat, which the Mayor accepted for Saturday night.  On
    Sunday morning the “St. George” came quietly into the Roads through
    the Cockle Gat, and anchored at the northern end of the line of
    ships, abreast of the town, at about half-past eight o’clock.  It was
    reported for some time that the ship which had just arrived was the
    “Donegal,” but as it became known that it really was the “St.
    George,” flags were run up in all directions, and persons went to
    work with their spy glasses, apparently hoping to catch a sight of
    the Prince.  The steamtugs, which ran as passenger boats round the
    fleet, at once got better freights, and many who took trips in them
    returned under the impression that they had seen the Prince in the
    maintop of the “St. George.”  Others would have it that the Prince
    was one of the young officers who was ashore on Sunday afternoon,
    walking leisurely up and down the drive and elsewhere; this turned
    out to be correct.  But as the Prince was, happily for him, not
    recognised whilst ashore, he walked about unmolested.  Few persons
    believed that so large a ship as the “St. George” (Captain Egerton)
    would venture to enter the Roads through the Cockle, but to the
    surprise of many local nautical authorities she sailed through as
    cleanly as any fishing cutter, and dropped anchor in as familiar a
    manner as might have been expected from an old visitant of these
    waters.  Soon after she had anchored the “St. George” was boarded by
    Mr. Watson, secretary of the Sailors’ Home, who brought off messages
    and letters.  Prince Alfred went on shore, _incognito_, in the
    afternoon, as did also a large number of other midshipmen and older
    officers.  On Monday morning, the town authorities, and sightseers
    generally, were on the alert—all being in search of the Prince.  But
    again, as few individuals had a personal knowledge of his Royal
    Highness, he escaped without recognition, and with Major Cowell (and,
    we believe, other gentlemen) he drove out into the country.  As to
    this and other proceedings of the Prince during the day, there were
    scores of different reports; but we believe we are correct in saying
    that, after his trip inland, His Royal Highness went from the Beach,
    in the boat of which he is midshipman, on board the “St. George.”  On
    board the ship the Mayor and Town Clerk were, we understand,
    introduced to the Prince, and courteously received.  Between two and
    three o’clock p.m., the Prince, Admiral Smart, Major Cowell, and the
    Hon. Manners Sutton (with whom the Prince had consented to partake of
    luncheon, at Kimberley Terrace), came on shore, accompanied in the
    boat by the Mayor and Town Clerk.  His Royal Highness, the Hon.
    Manners Sutton, and Major Cowell, then walked down to the Cricket
    Ground at the South Denes, where a party of officers from the fleet
    were playing a game of cricket with the members of the Yarmouth Club.
    It had been reported that the Prince would visit the Cricket Ground,
    and the consequence was that a large number of persons (probably
    2,000) congregated there about two o’clock, over and above those
    individuals who had been previously attracted to the spot by the
    match itself, and by the two bands—one from the fleet, and that of
    the East Norfolk Militia.  As soon as His Royal Highness was
    recognised upon the ground, the crowd rapidly closed in around him,
    and had it not been for the protection afforded him by the two
    gentlemen by whom he was accompanied, he would in all likelihood have
    undergone an unpleasant jostling.  So pressing and eager did the
    inquisitive public become that in a few minutes the Royal sailor and
    Mr. Sutton commenced a retrograde movement, whereupon the people
    began running and pushing frantically—going in some instances as the
    saying hath it, “head over heels.”  Remarks such as “That is he!”
    with comments upon the Prince’s personal appearance, were loud and
    frequent; and much surprise appeared to be felt that the “Duke of
    York” should go abroad in the ordinary unassuming attire of a
    midshipman.  Some faint attempts at cheering were assayed, but the
    clamour of the “hunt” which was got up, overpowered everything but
    the dust.  The Prince took all this good humouredly, and with his two
    protectors walked sharply on to Kimberley Terrace, pursued all the
    way up the drive by an immense crowd.  Most of the persons going
    southward, and who met the crowd, had no idea what all the row was
    about until they were told.  His Royal Highness got safely to Mr.
    Sutton’s house, and in two or three minutes there was in front of the
    house, close from the area railing to the coping-stones of the drive
    on the eastward, a dense assemblage, which continued to increase up
    to five o’clock, when we observed it still standing there.

    Lunch over, the Prince, a little after five o’clock, escaped from the
    back door, unobserved by the crowd, and was enabled to stroll into
    the town.  He went up St. George’s Road, through King Street, down
    Regent Street, and along the Quay, but did not venture into the
    Market Row.  He then visited Mrs. Onslow, who son is chaplain on
    board the “St. George,” and, we believe, a tutor of the Prince.

    The cricket match terminated in favour of the naval men, who had, we
    hear, 69 runs to spare.  In the first innings the Yarmouth players
    had the best of it, but in the second the bowling of Midshipman
    Lawson made sad havoc among the batsmen.

    The Ball at the Town Hall was well attended, and went off with great
    _éclat_.  The Prince, of course, was not present; but in the course
    of the evening Admiral Smart and a party of naval officers—who were
    brought up to the Quay-side, opposite the Hall, in the “Porpoise”
    gunboat—joined the assembly and remained until after midnight.

    The number of visitors to the ships increased considerably on Tuesday
    (this) morning, when it became known that an order had been received
    for the ships to hold themselves in readiness for sailing next day.

    Altogether the visit of the fleet on this occasion has been a
    brilliant affair; and the public have had ample time to inspect the
    ships, some of which might much oftener, with advantage, find a berth
    in Yarmouth Roads.

    The town has not, we believe, been visited by a Royal personage since
    the time that Prince William (afterwards King) and the Princess
    Adelaide landed here, and remained for the night at the Angel Hotel.

June 7th.—At the Channel Fleet Ball among those present were the Mayor,
the Town Clerk, Sir E. Lacon, M.P., Admiral Smart, Captain Fellowes,
R.N., Captain Egerton, R.N., Lieutenant the Hon. F. Gordon, Mr. and Miss
I. Preston, Lord W. Kerr and other naval officers, Mr. and Mrs. E. H. L.
Preston, Mr. and Mrs. C. C. Aldred, Misses Cubitt, Mr. A. and Misses
Steward, &c.  Next day a large number of persons visited the fleet, and
dancing took place on the ships’ decks.

Colonel Ibetson had inspected the Rifle Volunteers on the Denes.

The “Ino” (a pleasure boat) had capsized when alongside the “St. George,”
but all the people in her were saved.

June 11th.—At the Vestry Meeting, the “Small Tenements Act” was proposed
to be applied to the parish.

Several houses and men had been struck by lightning during a
thunderstorm.

June 14th.—The programme for the Volunteer Review had been published; it
was expected that 3,324 men would take part in it.

June 18th.—The Dinner to the Volunteers on this occasion was to take
place on St. George’s Denes; there were to be 17 tables, and the dining
room to cover 7,550 feet of ground.  One quart of beer per man had been
offered by Sir E. Lacon to the Volunteers.

June 21st.—The Review had taken place and proved a great success: there
were 3,324 men actually on the Denes.  At the Dinner held on St. George’s
Denes, the Mayor presided, and after giving the toasts of “The Queen” and
“The Royal Family,” he gave “The Army, Navy, and Militia,” to which
Colonel Grey, C.B., Captain Lacon, R.N., and Colonel Adair responded.
The Mayor then gave “The Volunteers,” to which Colonel Brett replied, and
“The Lord Lieutenants of Norfolk and Suffolk,” which was acknowledged by
Lord Suffield (Vice-Lieutenant of Norfolk) and Colonel Adair.  The Mayor
then gave “The High Sheriff,” who responded.  The Mayor then gave “The
Lord High Steward,” responded to by Lord Sondes, and “The health of
Colonel Grey,” to which that officer replied; also “The Brigadiers of the
Day,” replied to by Colonels Custance, Sir E. Lacon, and Astley.  The
High Sheriff then proposed “The Mayor,” to which his Worship responded,
and the healths of the Rev. H. Nevill, of the Noblemen and Gentlemen “who
had honoured us with their presence,” of “Mr. Charles J. Palmer” and “The
Ladies” were also given and responded to.  It was considered that “The
Mayor and gentlemen who formed the Committee of Management, and
particularly Mr. Charles J. Palmer, well deserved the thanks of the
public and the Volunteers.”

June 28th.—Major Marsh (of the artillery) had resigned his commission.

July 2nd.—It was stated that Major Marsh would be succeeded in his
command by Capt. John Lee Barber of the 1st Company, but Mr. Trafford was
stated to have also resigned, and it was rumoured that the Artillery was
likely to be amalgamated with the Rifle Corps.

July 9th.—The Midsummer herring voyage was a failure.  Some attributed
this to the 130 smacks then fishing from the port, and others to the
early catches of immature fish.

July 12th.—“Blondin” had been performing at the Victoria Gardens.

July 16th.—Commissioner Cane had been holding an inquiry at the Workhouse
to “ascertain the nature of the duties of the various public officers and
method of their discharge.”

July 19th.—Mr. Henry R. Harmer had been appointed an Admiralty
Commissioner.

July 23rd.—There had been a poll at Gorleston upon the Church Rate
question, which had resulted in a majority of 142 against that impost.

The Caister Lifeboat had been struck by lightning while on the Beach and
several persons who were taking shelter under her bow injured.

July 26th.—At the Regatta the “Audax,” J. H. Johnson, R.T.Y.C. won the
yacht prize.  In the yawl race the “Star of the East,” the “Queen
Victoria,” and the “Glance” competed, and the former won.  The “Wanderer”
(Mr. J. L. Barber) won the River Yachts’ match, and the “Volunteer” the
small Yawl match.

Aug. 6th.—Contains the following notice of “The Water Frolic:—This event,
which was formerly important from the fact of the ‘new’ Mayor being then
chosen, and the official barge of the Mayor and Corporation being
present, came off on Monday afternoon, at that part of the Waveney
opposite Burgh Castle.  No official patronage was given to the affair,
and consequently it was not, municipally, of any weight.  But as the
weather was fine and sunny, with a ‘spanking’ southerly breeze, the
yachts, which had arranged to attend and compete in two races, were sure
of good sport, and the large crowds of persons who assembled early in the
day on the North Quay, augured well for the steamboats which Mr. Fill—a
worthy man of enterprise—always offers for the accommodation of the
public (pay or not pay) either for trips to Cromer and Southwold, or even
to Rotterdam fair, an event which East Anglians of old were wont to
delight in.  At Burgh there was a large assemblage of craft—wherries,
ships’ boats, punts, yachts, and, in fact, anything that would safely
float.  Two matches were announced to take place, each for a stake value
at £10, and the ordinary river yachts were the competitors, with the
exception of the new and mischievous-looking boat of the High Sheriff of
Norfolk—a boat which, although it could not out-run Mr. Barber’s ‘Flying
Wanderer,’ will yet do credit to her build.  The ‘public-house wherries,’
the pie stalls, the acrobats, and the rest of the contributors to the
day’s fun were all active and appeared to do a good business.  The
yachting competition—which the public ought to have considered the best
business of the day—began with a match for £10, in which five
cutter-rigged yachts sailed, viz., Mr. Barber’s ‘Wanderer,’ Mr.
Nightingale’s ‘Red Rover,’ Mr. Read’s ‘Belvidere,’ Mr. R. J. H. Harvey’s
‘Lady in White,’ and Mr. Morgan’s ‘Bittern.’  The Wanderer had the
advantage throughout, and won—although she was occasionally closely
pressed by the Red Rover.  The match extended over four rounds.  In the
second match for a similar stake by latteens the ‘Vampire’ (Mr. Everett),
the ‘Enchantress’ (Mr. Green), and the ‘Merlin’ (Mr. Humfrey) started,
and continued in the order named to the close.  The ‘frolicers’ then
commenced their homeward journey, and in the midst of music and song all
arrived safely, we believe, at the Bridge Foot, after spending a
convivial, if not a dignified, half day on the stream.  The frolic,
however, in the absence of official support, is shorn of its ancient
splendour.”

August 13th.—The “Order of Precedence of the members of the Council” had
been printed.  The Mayor had requested the members of that body to
accompany him to church on Sundays, Good Friday, and Christmas Day.

Mr. S. Nightingale had backed his “Red Rover” against Mr. Barber’s
“Wanderer” for four matches at £50 aside.

Thieves had “drank the Sacramental wine and robbed the Poor’s box” at the
Independent Chapel, Gorleston.

August 16th.—At the Races, none of the Stewards (who were Lord W.
Powlett, Count Batthyany, and Sir H. J. Stracey, Bart., M.P.,) had
attended, and the usual Ball at the Town Hall had not been held through
lack of patronage.

August 20th.—The Yarmouth Cricket Club had played the “Visitors.”  The
score was:—First Innings: Yarmouth, 29; Visitors, 15.  Second Innings:
Yarmouth, 89; Visitors, 32.  Grand Totals: Yarmouth, 118; Visitors, 47.

August 23rd.—It was proposed to raise a Rifle Corps at Ormesby.

August 27th.—Sir H. Stracey, had invited the members of the Corporation
to spend a day at Rackheath.

August 30th.—Sir E. Lacon, Bart., had been gazetted Major of the N.A.V.,
(vice Marsh resigned.)

Sept. 3rd.—It was, at the Corporation’s visit to Rackheath, distinctly
understood that Sir H. Stracey would offer himself again as a candidate
for the Borough, and that Mr. Watkin was pledged to come forward again in
the Liberal interest.

The Council had determined to place an illuminated clock on the Town
Hall.

The Southtown Barracks had been repaired at considerable expense.

Sept. 6th.—At the rifle prize shooting, Colour-Sergeant Chipperfield had
taken the ladies’ challenge cup from Sergeant Fenner by one point.
Corporal Denew had won the Chief Officers’ prize, and Sergeant Dick the
Borough Members’ prize.

Sept. 10th.—This shooting had been continued, and prizes won by Sergeant
Pearson, Sergeant Swann, and Volunteer Barrett.

Sept. 17th.—The High Sheriff of Norfolk had given a grand Volunteer
Review and Fête at Crown Point, the Norfolk Artillery (Norwich and
Yarmouth), mustered on the field 7 Officers, 42 Non-Commissioned
Officers, 105 Gunners, and 23 Band, total 178; the Yarmouth Rifles (4
Companies) were 235 strong, viz., one field Officer, 4 Captains, 8
Subalterns, 5 Staff, 12 Sergeants, 4 Drummers, 185 rank and file, and 16
Band.

In the afternoon, the Volunteers and some 2,000 guests were entertained
at dinner in marquees erected for the purpose, and various amusements
provided.  The following Yarmouth names appear in the list of the
competitors for the prizes:—Major Orde, Lieut. C. Diver, and Privates
Mark Waters, Isaac Preston, J. B. Pearce, and C. Marsh, while among the
guests were the following ladies and gentlemen from this locality:—Col.
and Mrs. Baddeley, Mr. and Mrs. J. Brown, junr., Mr. B. Button, Mr. and
Mrs. F Clowes, Capt. and Mrs. Cubitt, Mr. and Mrs. Daniel, Mr. and Mrs.
Frere, Mr. and Mrs. Harmer, Sir E. H. K. Lacon and Lady Lacon, Capt. and
Mrs. Lacon, Mr. T. Matravers, the Mayor of Yarmouth, Lieut. G. W. and
Mrs. Moore, Lieut. and Mrs. Morant, Mr. Nightingale, Mr. and Mrs. C. J.
Palmer, Mr. and Mrs. W. Danby-Palmer, Mr. and Mrs. F. Palmer, Mr. F.
Danby-Palmer, Mr. and Miss I. Preston, the Rev. J. J. and Mrs. Raven, Mr.
W. C. Reynolds, Mr. R. Rising, Capt. Rivers, Mr. and Mrs. S. Reeve, Capt.
Turnour, Ensign and Mrs. Watling, Mr. W. and Mrs. Worship, Lieut. and
Mrs. Wynyard, and Mr. E. P. and Mrs. Youell.

Next day the High Sheriff also entertained upwards of 4,000 poor people
at Crown Point.

Sept. 20th.—Mr. Fenner and Mr. Chipperfield had been shooting well at the
County Association Meeting.

Messrs. Youell and Co., (Florists) had won two prizes at the Kensington
Autumn Flower Show.

Sept. 27th.—The Liberals claimed a gain of 50 upon the revision of the
Borough Voters’ List, and it was stated the “the Liberal cause was much
indebted to Mr. J. Eagleton, their Yarmouth agent, whose exertions in the
Registration Court, in which the late Sir R. Peel said elections were to
be won, had been unceasing.”

Mr. G. V. Brooke was attracting crowded houses at the Theatre.

Oct. 4th.—A French and an English corvette were on this station to
protect the fisheries.

Mr. Chamberlin had appeared before the Justices in support of an
application against the form of the Poor’s Rate, but the Court had
overruled his objections.

Oct. 8th.—At the Municipal Revision Court, Mr. John Clowes and the Vestry
Clerk, accused Mr. John Cooper of tampering with the latter gentleman’s
papers, and a warm discussion ensued thereon.

Oct. 15th.—At the Quarter Sessions, the Recorder (N. Palmer, Esq.) made
an order quashing the Poor’s Rate.  Mr. C. Cooper appeared on behalf of
Mr. J. Clowes as appellant, against the Churchwardens and Overseers,
respondents in this case.

At the Police Court, Mr. Gardiner, Editor of the _Yarmouth Independent_,
craved sureties of the peace against Mr. J. H. Harrison, when, although
the defendant called no evidence to rebut the charge made against him,
the Bench (by a majority of two) decided against calling upon him to find
sureties.  The complainant said he expected this when he saw such a “drum
up” of Magistrates “who had been brought there as on Licensing day.”

Oct. 18th.—A narrative of the proceedings at the Volunteer Review had
been prepared by Mr. C. J. Palmer, and published.

Oct. 22nd.—There had been disastrous storms at sea, and it was known that
four vessels had foundered in the roads.

The retiring Councillors were—North Ward: H. Boulter and W. N. Burroughs.
Market Ward: F. Worship and C. C. Aldred.  Regent Ward: S. C. Marsh and
S. B. Cory.  St. George’s Ward: J. G. Plummer and J. C. Smith.  Nelson
Ward: G. Danby Palmer and C. E. Bartram.  St. Andrew’s Ward: E. H. L.
Preston and H. Teasdel.

One thousand persons had visited the Exhibition (London) by a cheap
train.

Oct. 25th.—The Mayor had entertained a large party of invited guests at
the Town Hall.

The Dutchmen had already arrived “in the schuyts or sea-tubs” for the
fishing.

Nov. 1st.—Several shipments of herring had been made for the
Mediterranean.

Nov. 5th.—At the Municipal election Mr. Mainprice had taken the place of
Mr. Burroughs (who retired), and Mr. Rose had ousted Mr. S. B. Cory, who
refused “to the curb to yield.”

Nov. 8th.—Line fishing from boats and the Britannia Pier had become a
fashionable amusement.

Nov. 12th.—The Town Council had voted an address of loyalty to the Queen,
and to the Prince of Wales, upon the latter attaining his majority.

Sir E. H. K. Lacon proposed, and C. J. Palmer, Esq., seconded, the
re-election of the Mayor, which motion was carried _nem. dis._, and the
retiring aldermen, Messrs. J. T. Bracey, J. Bunn, B. Fenn, H. R. Harmer,
W. Laws, and W. Mabson were re-elected.

Nov. 19th.—The prizes recently shot for by the Rifle Volunteers had been
distributed at the Victoria Gardens by the Mayor.

Nov. 22nd.—The local Charity Trustees’ scheme for the establishment of a
Grammar School had been approved by the Charity Commissioners.

The Lancashire Relief Committee was in full work, and the following
articles had been forwarded to Manchester:—63 coats, 70 cloaks and
shawls, 21 dresses, 20 children’s frocks, 20 blankets and quilts, 28
pairs of boots, 42 flannel waistcoats and shirts, 34 pairs of trousers,
36 hats, and 361 other articles of clothing.

In one day 1,500 lasts of herring had been brought into the harbour.

Nov. 26th.—A public meeting in aid of the Lancashire Relief Fund had been
held (the Mayor in the chair), and £160 subscribed in the room.

Dec. 13th.—Two hundred barrels of herring had been sent to Manchester for
the Relief Fund by the fish merchants.

Dec. 17th.—The following rota of magistrates for salvage purposes had
been appointed:—R. Hammond, E. H. L. Preston, J. W. Shelly, R. Steward.
B. Jay, J. Clark, J. Fenn, and P. Pullyn.

Dec. 20th.—During the week more than 600 articles of wearing apparel had
been forwarded to Manchester for the Relief Fund.

The fishing had proved a “successful and profitable season.”

Dec. 24th.—Mr. Rust had launched a fine new brig for the Mediterranean
trade.

Dec. 27th.—£850 had been raised for the Lancashire Relief Fund.

The town tolls had let as follows:—Market, £550 per annum; Fish Market,
£55; and Ballastage, £660; the lessees being Messrs. Bowen and Co. of
Leeds.

Dec. 31st.—Steps were being taken to induce the Norfolk Agricultural
Association to visit Yarmouth.

The Rev. B. Vaux had presided at the Hospital meeting.

The Artillery and Rifle Volunteers had been brigaded together on the
South Denes.



1863.


Jan. 10th.—An inquiry was being held in respect of certain charges
against the crew of the lifeboat.

Mr. B. Fenn had presided at the annual library meeting.

Jan. 14th.—At the lifeboat inquiry, after hearing evidence, the Rev. Mr.
Steward moved, and Mr. Fellows seconded, “That the Beachmen were in no
way culpable on the occasion, and that, on the contrary, their conduct
was all that it ought to have been,” which motion was carried
unanimously.

Mr. E. P. Youell had executed some sleight-of-hand tricks _a la Frickel_
with neatness and dexterity at the Priory Entertainment.

Jan. 17th.—Four hundred persons sat down to tea at the Tract Lenders’
Festival.

A prize fight had taken place near the town, on a marsh next the Acle
Road.

Jan. 24th.—There had been a “tremendous gale.”

Jan. 28th.—The following Charity Trustees had met for the purpose of
appointing a head master of the Grammar School—Messrs. Charles J. Palmer
(chairman), C. Cory, R. Hammond, W. N. Burroughs, E. H. L. Preston, B.
Jay, and C. C. Aldred, when the Rev. H. J. Evans was elected; the other
candidates being the Revs. Merryman, W. Algar, J. Partridge, C. Bachelor,
and S. Eld.

Jan. 31st.—Sad accounts continued to arrive from the Fishing Fleet,
inconsequence of the late gales, “scarcely a smack arriving without
bearing some marks of its fury, and the loss of spars and gear, while
many of the crews have tales of horror to recount of vessels foundering,
and all hands perishing before their eyes without the possibility of
rescue.”

Feb. 4th.—A meeting of the inhabitants had been held to consider what
steps should be taken to celebrate the marriage of the Prince of Wales.

Feb. 14th.—Harriet Cattermole had jumped into the river, but had been
floated by her crinoline until rescued by the police.

Feb. 21st.—P.G. J. C. Smith, Surgeon, had presided at the annual dinner
of the “Prince of Wales’” Lodge, M.U.O.F., held at the Market Tavern, 46
members and friends being present on the occasion.

Feb. 25th.—C. J. Palmer, Esq., (the President), had taken the chair at
the meeting of the Shipwrecked Mariners’ Society, when it appeared that
215 seamen and widows had been relieved during the past year, and that
the income was £177 18s. 4d., as against an expenditure of £219 14s. 4d.

Feb. 28th.—At the revision of the Proxy Book, it appeared that a number
of persons claiming to act as proxies for the owners of property, were
not authorised to do so by such owners, and Mr. Neave intimated that “the
loss of his election last year was due to the scandalous manner in which
the proxies had been worked against him.”

March 16th.—The town had been _en fete_ upon the occasion of the marriage
of the Prince of Wales, when the Corporation had attended St. Nicholas’
Church; a special sermon had been preached by the Rev. H. R. Nevill, the
Artillery had fired a salute of 21 guns from the South Battery, and the
Rifles a _feu de joie_ in the Market-place.

A Council meeting had also been held, when loyal addresses were moved,
and seconded to the Queen and to the Prince and Princess of Wales by
Messrs. E. H. L. Preston and John Clowes, and C. J. Palmer and W. Worship
respectively.

A volunteer banquet had been held on this occasion at Messrs. Lacon and
Co.’s stores, when the following arrangements were made:—First table,
Nos. 1 and 2 companies Artillery, (Captains J. L. Barber and W. Foreman);
second table, 1 and 2 companies Rifles, (Captain Tomlinson and Lieutenant
Harmer); third table, 3 and 4 companies Artillery, (Captains Green and
Brown); fourth table, 3 and 4 Companies Rifles, (Captains W. Holt and H.
Barber); the fifth table, Staffs of E.N.M., and N.M.A. Regiments.  In
addition to the Volunteers, the following gentlemen were present as
guests of Sir E. H. K. Lacon, the Mayor (R. Steward, Esq.), Rev. H.
Nevill, Rev. B. Vaux, Captain Long, Major Penrice, Major Orde, Adjutant
Gilbertson, Adjutant Smith, J. C. Smith, Esq., E.N.M., C. C. Aldred,
Esq., Captain Dods, Lieutenant W. Danby-Palmer, E.N.M., Mr. Petts,
Quarter-Masters Smith and Hardiment, &c.

In the evening “the illuminations were on a most extensive scale,
scarcely a house without a transparency or device.  The designs on the
Town Hall and Hospital School were very beautiful, while many others on
private houses were greatly admired.  On the Town Hall, facing the north,
was fixed the principal illumination, consisting of a magnificent plume
of feathers, having the letters “A. A.” on either side, and partly
encircled with a wreath of oak leaves and acorns.  The height of the
design was 18 feet by 30 feet in width, and was drawn by Mr. Morant, Town
Surveyor, and manufactured by Mr. Doughty, of Gaol Street.  The fireworks
were continued to a late hour, and we are happy to record that,
notwithstanding the pressure of the crowd, no accident occurred to mar
the pleasure of the day.  The arrangements of the police throughout were
most satisfactory, and to the credit of our townsmen it must be stated
that at the Police Court the following morning, the magistrates’ business
was finished in two minutes and a half, the only charge being a case of
drunkenness, which was graciously forgiven.  The ball at the Town Hall
was fashionably and numerously attended and dancing was kept up to the
music of Hulley’s quadrille band with unflagging spirit until an early
hour the following morning.  During the day the inmates of the Workhouse
and Gaol were regaled, the former at the expense of the Guardians, and
the latter by the Mayor.  The inmates of the Fishermen’s Hospital were
also regaled with plum pudding and roast beef, each man having, in
addition, a pipe of tobacco, with a liberal supply of stout.  The women
also partook of tea, with a plentiful supply of cake.  The inmates
expressed themselves deeply grateful to the trustees of the charity for
thus enabling them to participate in the festivities of the day.”

March 18th.—A project had been suggested for the amalgamation of the two
local Volunteer Corps, under the command of Lieut.-Col. Sir E. Lacon,
Bart.

March 21st.—At an adjourned meeting of the Rifle Corps this question was
introduced by Major Orde, who advocated the suggestion, which was opposed
by Ensigns Watling and Cobb, and the project was thereupon rejected by a
majority of nearly 100; consequently the officers, (who were generally in
favour of the movement), threatened to resign their commissions.

March 28th.—The Poor’s Rate, (which had been 1s. 8d.), was reduced to 1s.
2d. in the £.

W. Yetts, Esq., had died at the age of 68; he had been for many years a
member of the Corporation, and a Justice for the Borough.  “Mr. Yetts was
possessed of considerable talent as an artist, and as a musician, and was
at all times a liberal patron of the fine arts.”

April 1st.—The action of “Bayly v. Woodrow” had been tried at the
Assizes, the charge being one of slander upon the plaintiff, who was a
surgeon, by the defendant, a baker in the town.  The verdict being for
40s. and costs.

Mr. Coxon, postmaster, had died somewhat suddenly.

April 11th.—Messrs. Steward and Aldred had been re-elected Churchwardens;
and Messrs. G. Danby-Palmer and J. Barker, Haven Commissioners, with
Messrs. R. Hammond and D. A. Gourlay as supernumeraries.

April 18th.—The East Norfolk Militia had mustered 780 strong at their
annual training.

The Election of Guardians had resulted in no change being made in the
Board except as regarded the election of Frederick Palmer, Esq., a
scrutiny of votes was threatened by the defeated candidates.

April 22nd.—An otter had been captured on the Hall-quay and remained “in
charge of the police,” and was the only “prisoner” before the Justices.

May 2nd.—The Corporation addresses to the Prince and Princess of Wales
had been presented by the Mayor, Lord Sondes, and Sir E. Lacon, Bart.

J. G. Plummer, Esq., J.P., and a member of the Council, had died.

May 9th.—The first ball of the season had been held at the new
Assembly-rooms, South Beach, the Stewards being the Mayor, Sir E. H. K.
Lacon, Bart., M.P., Major Marcon, Captain Ensor, Captain Longe, and Mr.
C. J. Palmer.

May 13th.—Mr. J. Scott had been elected a Councillor for the St. George’s
ward in the place of the late Mr. Plummer without opposition, Mr. R.
Norman (who had issued an address in the Conservative interest) having
retired on the eve of the election.

H.M.S. “Porcupine” was in the Roads.

An “Old Crome” late the property of Mr. Hunt, had been sold for £110 to
Mr. J. J. Colman.

May 16th.—The Mayor had distributed prizes to the following members of
the Norfolk Artillery Volunteers:—Sergeant-Major Stolworthy, Sergeant
Sparrow, Sergeant Cocks, Corporal Page, Bombardiers Bullimore, Greenwood,
Nutman, Self, and C. Bartram, and Corporal Baker.

The Norfolk Artillery Militia, under command of Colonel Astley, had
assembled, 600 strong, for its annual training.

Mr. Marsh’s wine and spirit stores at the corner of Regent and King
Streets, had been sold by auction for £3,210.

The death of W. T. Clarke, Esq., J.P., had caused a vacancy for the St.
Andrew’s Ward, and Mr. W. J. Brand had issued an address to the electors.

May 27th.—This contest terminated for:—

W. J. Brand            150
W. Rivett              145

And an amusing scene had taken place at the close of the poll between the
Mayor and Mr. Rivett, the latter taunting his Worship for not coming up
in time to record his vote, and “vowing in not the most correct English a
fearful retaliation when his Worship’s term of office should expire.”

June 3rd.—The Bishop had ordained five deacons and four priests at St.
Nicholas’ Church.

June 6th.—The following were the six best shots for the Wimbledon
competition:—Corporal Wilshak, 105 points; Private Barrett, 101 points;
Colour-Sergeant Chipperfield, 99 points; Sergeant Hudspith, 97 points;
Captain Youell, 90 points; and Corporal Davey, 89 points.

June 10th.—The “Red Rover” had reached Sheerness in nine hours on her way
to compete at Erith for the Prince of Wales’ Cup.

The deliveries of mackerel had been “very small.”

June 17th.—The Bill for incorporating the Yarmouth Gas Company was before
the Committee of the House of Commons.

June 20th.—Mr. Jeremiah Barnes had passed the Legal Examination.

June 24th.—The Norfolk Agricultural Society had held its annual show at
Yarmouth in the Militia Barrack Square (with a considerable extra space
which was boarded in to form the show yard) there was a great display of
bunting, Messrs. Owles, Bond, Hylton, Parsons, Barnard, Mabson, Palmer,
Fyson, Garratt, and Starling being chiefly noticeable in that respect;
100 members and friends afterwards dined at the Town Hall under the
presidency of the Mayor, when, in addition to his Worship, the following
were the speakers:—The Hon. Wenman Coke, M.P., Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart.,
M.P., Sir Thomas W. P. Beauchamp, Bart., the Rev. B. Vaux, Sir W. Jones,
Bart., Lord Walsingham, Lord Sondes, Mr. W. Burroughs, Mr. Field, Mr.
Thomas Browne, Mr. Badham, and Mr. Blyth.

D. Falcke, W. Briggs, and J. Scott, Esqs., had been appointed Justices in
the place of W. Yetts, J. G. Plummer, and W. T. Clarke, Esqs., deceased.

Miss Caroline Fellows (Mrs. Tomkins) had obtained the National Medallion
for drawing at the Kensington competition.

The Committee of the Commons had declared the preamble of the Gas Bill
proved.

June 27th.—Major Penrice had been installed W.M. of Lodge “United
Friends,” and appointed J. Tomlinson, junr., S.W., F. W. Ferrier, J.W.,
William Danby-Palmer, S.D., E. P. Youell, J.D., R. Rising, I.G., and C.
Diver, Secretary.  The banquet was served at the Star by Host George
Diver.

Messrs. Youell, florists, were displaying beautiful specimens of the
“Lilium Giganteum.”

July 4th.—The “Egbert,” barque, of 410 tons register, had been launched
from Messrs. Fellows’ yard.

The new Assembly Rooms were proving a great attraction to visitors; the
Artillery Band had been engaged by the directors.

July 8th.—The “Red Rover” had beaten Mr. Trafford’s new boat the
“Alabama,” at the Water Frolic, and Mr. Harvey’s “Myth” had taken the
prize in the second match.  The “Vindex” had been sailed in a foul manner
by her crew, much to the disgust of her owner, Mr. J. Tomlinson, junr.,
who was acting as Hon. Secretary to the sports on the Committee-boat at
the time.

During these sports a frightful accident had happened in consequence of
the hatches of the “Ruby” wherry falling upon two men, who were thereby
crushed to death.

July 11th.—Mr. Morant had resigned the Town Surveyorship.

The magistrates on the salvage rota had been restrained from charging, as
heretofore, fees of £2 2s. by the Secretary of State.

July 15th.—Charles Rushmer, one of the men killed at the Water Frolic,
who was a member of the Norfolk Artillery Volunteers, had been buried
with military honours; it was stated that “this was the only death that
had occurred among the Volunteers” since the formation of the corps in
the town.

Three thousand excursionists had arrived in one day from East Suffolk.

July 18th.—The Channel Fleet, consisting of the following ships (under
the command of Rear-Admiral Dacres) was in the Roads:—“Edgar” (flagship),
71 guns, 800 men, 600 horse-power, Captain Church; “Emerald” (frigate),
35 guns, 510 men, 600 horse-power, Captain Cummings; “Liverpool,” 39
guns, 540 men, 600 horse-power, Captain Lambert; “Black Prince” (armour
plated), 40 guns, 726 men, 1,200 horse-power, Captain Wainwright; “Royal
Oak,” 35 guns, 547 men, 800 horse-power, Captain Campbell; “Resistance,”
16 guns, 482 men, 600 horse-power, Captain Chamberlin; “Warrior,” 40
guns, 706 men, 1,200 horse-power, Captain Cochrane; “Defence,” 16 guns,
468 men, 600 horse-power, Captain Phillimore; “Trinculo,” (tender), 2
guns, 20 men.  It was nearly dark by the time the last vessel of the
squadron took up her moorings; numbers of persons, nevertheless, remained
on the Beach to a late hour, watching the lights displayed by the vessels
as they laid at their anchorage.

At eight o’clock on Wednesday morning, a salute of eleven guns was fired
from the Admiral’s ship, in acknowledgment of the salute by the
Volunteers the previous evening.  During the whole of Wednesday the fleet
was inspected by large numbers of visitors, who left the Britannia Pier
in steamers plying to and from the squadron at reasonable fares, while
the pier itself was the resort of many interested in watching the
constant arrival and departure of men-of-war boats, freighted with
provisions and stores, or in bringing officers on shore on leave.  At one
o’clock, the Mayor, and a party on board, left the bridge in the
steamboat “Emperor,” to pay an official visit to the Admiral.  The Mayor
was accompanied on the occasion by C. J. Palmer, W. Nightingale, C. C.
Aldred, W. Holt, G. S. Shingles, W. T. Foreman, W. Johnson, J. Clarke, B.
Fenn, E. P. Youell, W. Laws, J. H. Orde, J. Stephenson, and J. Bunn,
Esqs.  On arriving at the flag-ship the party were most courteously
received by Captain Hornby, in the absence of the Admiral, who,
unfortunately, was on shore.  After remaining a short time inspecting the
“Edgar,” the party proceeded to the “Warrior,” where they were received
by the Hon. Captain Cochrane, who escorted them over the ship.  This was
by far the most interesting feature of the excursion the powerful
armament and splendid construction of this truly noble vessel exciting
the admiration of all.  The crew, numbering upwards of 700, were all
found busily engaged at their varied avocations, some intent upon their
drill at the huge Armstrong guns, while others were pursuing more
peaceful avocations.  The interior arrangements of the “Warrior,” as a
ship of war, have been so frequently and fully described, that it is
unnecessary to allude further to them, suffice it to say that, after
viewing all parts of the vessel, one could but feel that England had but
little to fear from foreign invasion, while guarded by such bulwarks of
defence.  The Mayor, with his friends, having made the tour of the fleet,
returned to the Britannia Pier and disembarked.  The Mayor then proceeded
to the Victoria Hotel, where the Admiral was understood to be staying,
but was again unsuccessful in having an interview with him, as he had
just previously left to go on board his flag-ship.  Under these
circumstances, the Mayor addressed a letter to the gallant officer,
expressing his regret at not meeting him, and tendering on behalf of the
town an invitation to himself and officers to attend a ball at the Town
Hall, on Monday evening, expressing a hope that his arrangements would
enable him to accept it.”

The Fleet were, however, compelled to leave on the Sunday afternoon.

July 25th.—A Bazaar in aid of the Town Charities had been held, when Mrs.
Nevill, Mrs. A. B. Crosse, Mrs. C. J. Palmer, Mrs. J. Brown, Mrs. G.
Palmer, Mrs. Rivers, Mrs. F. Frere, and Mrs. Harmer had stalls.

July 29th.—Captain William Alfred Glasspoole had been appointed A.D.C. to
Major-General Honner, C.B., commanding the Scinde Division of the Indian
Army.

Aug. 1st.—At the Regatta the “Gipsy Queen,” of Winterton, had won the
yawl race, and the “Little Yankee” (Captain Cholmondley) and the
“Belvidere” (T. M. Read, Esq.,) the small yacht races.

And at the Water Frolic, the “Red Rover” (S. Nightingale, Esq.,) had
beaten the “Wanderer” (R. Harvey, Esq.,) and the “Little Yankee” (Captain
Cholmondley).

The Regatta Dinner had been held at the Norfolk Hotel, (Winder,
proprietor).

£80 had been realised at the Bazaar.

Aug. 5th.—The Volunteers had been inspected on the South Denes by Colonel
Ibbetson.

Aug. 8th.—A ring bearing the inscription “Maria Costerton, obit 18,
October, 1788, aged 14 years,” had been dredged up on Breydon, and
claimed by John Fisher Costerton, Esq., who had lost it some 60 years
previously at a water party.

Aug. 12th.—It was noted that the two drinking fountains were not used by
the public.

Aug. 19th—Bishop Hills had preached at St. Nicholas’ Church in aid of the
Columbia Mission.

The Mayor had refused the Bishop the use of the Town-hall for a meeting
on the same subject, and it consequently had been held at the
Priory-hall.  £90 was thus raised for the Fund.

The Artillery Volunteers (170 strong) had been inspected by Colonel Knox.

Aug. 22nd.—One thousand excursionists had arrived from Newmarket and
Bury.

The Town Clerk stated in Council that the costs of the Corporation in
opposing the Gas Bill would amount to £800.

The “Sir Edmund Lacon” Lodge, N.I.U.O.F., had been opened at the
Volunteer Tavern, when Sir E. Lacon and H. R. Harmer, Esq., were invested
with the respective offices of P.S.F. and P.G. and speeches delivered by
those gentlemen and Dr. Stephenson.

Aug. 26th.—Sir John Walsham was holding an inquiry as to the Guardians’
election for the North Ward, where Mr. J. F. Neave claimed Mr. Hylton’s
seat; there appeared to be grave irregularities in the Proxy List of
Voters.

Aug. 29th.—The memorial stone of the new Baptist Chapel on the Denes had
been laid by J. J. Colman, Esq.

Sept. 2nd.—Records the death of Samuel C. Marsh, Esq., “after a prolonged
and grievous affliction.”

Sept. 5th.—Mr. Falcke was suggested as a candidate for the Regent Ward to
fill the late Mr. Marsh’s place in the Council.

Sept. 9th.—The “Justice Roll” could not be found, and there was a “scene”
on the Bench in consequence.

Sept. 16th.—On Licensing Day there had been the usual “drum up” of
Justices, who were classed as follows by the editor:—

Regular Attendants—The Mayor, J. Fenn, J. Owles, B. Fenn, J. C. Smith, F.
Palmer, E. Preston, P. Pullyn, R. Hammond, and J. Barker, Esqs.

Occasional but useful attendants—J. Costerton, C. C. Aldred, W. Bessey,
W. Thurtell, E. Youell, B. Jay, J. Clark, F. Worship and T. Brightwen,
Esqs.

Three hundred lasts of herring had been landed in one day, “but proving
of inferior quality,” had scarcely realised £10 per last.

Sept. 19th.—The alterations at the Naval Asylum, amounting to some £2,000
or £3,000, had been entrusted to Mr. George Tyrell, of this town.

At the Registration Court, Mr. Clowes appeared for the Liberals, and Mr.
W. C. Reynolds for the Tories.

The Elocution Society (Mr. Lovewell Blake, Secretary) had held its annual
meeting and reunion at the Corn-hall, when 200 members sat down to tea.

Sept. 23rd.—The Churchwardens (Messrs. Steward and Aldred) had been
presented with silver tea services, as testimonials of the esteem and
regard in which they were held by the parishioners.

Mr. Falcke not being qualified to be elected a Councillor, Mr.
Livingston, (Liberal) and Mr. Stagg (Tory) were before the electors in
the Regent Ward.

Sep. 26th.—The following noblemen and gentlemen had acted as Stewards of
the Races:—Lord William Powlett, Lord Hastings, Sir E. H. K. Lacon,
Bart., Edward Howes, Esq., M.P., Lieut.-Colonel the Hon. W. C. W. Coke,
M.P., and Colonel Shafto Adair, A.D.C.  Mr. J. F. Clarke, as usual,
officiated as Judge, and Mr. Samuel Clarke as Starter.

The Regent Ward Election had terminated—

For Stagg                83
,, Livingston            57

Sept. 30th.—James Scott and William Briggs, Esqs., had qualified as
Justices.

Oct. 3rd.—Corporal H. H. Baker had won the Champion Medal at the
Artillery Volunteer Prize Shooting.

Oct. 7th.—The Market had been “glutted” with fish, and the prices
consequently remained very low.

Oct. 17th.—The Mayor (R. Steward, Esq.,) had given his third banquet at
the Town Hall, the Members for the Borough (Sir E. Lacon and Sir H.
Stracey), the Recorder (N. Palmer, Esq.), and many others being present.

Oct. 21st.—Mr. Newcomb had been appointed Postmaster.

Oct. 24th.—At a dinner, given by Sir E. Lacon, to the members of the
Conservative party, it had been determined to again offer the Mayoralty
to R. Steward, Esq.

The Bishop had confirmed 180 young persons at St. Nicholas’ Church.

The prospects of the fishing were “of a most gloomy character.”  Two
vessels, the “Leda” and “Isis” had left for Ancona, the former with 2,900
and the latter with 2,550 barrels of fish, and several thousand barrels
had been despatched by steamships trading with the Italian ports.

Oct. 28th.—Three hundred lasts of herring had been landed on the Quay on
Sunday, which had caused a great disturbance there, and the Magistrates
proposed to take steps to prevent a recurrence of such scenes on the
Lord’s day.

Nov. 4th.—The following had been the result of the Municipal Election:—

                 _North Ward_.
Messrs. Bessey and Nightingale (Cons.) not
opposed.
                _Regent Ward_.
Messrs. W. C. Reynolds and W. Wright (Cons.)
not opposed.
             _St. George’s Ward_.
Messrs. Palmer and Foreman (Cons.) not
opposed.
                _Nelson Ward_.
J. H. Harrison (politics doubtful)          148
J. Clark (Con.)                             129
J. Clowes (Lib.)                             81
                _Market Ward_.
J. Barnby (Con.)                            121
C. Nuthall (Con.)                           121
J. Bivett (Lib.)                             82
G. W. Clowes (Lib.)                          70
             _St. Andrew’s Ward_.
Richmond (Con.)                             251
Gooda(Con.)                                 220
Rivett (Lib.)                               100

There had been a very heavy gale from the N.N.W.

Messrs. Savage and de Caux had been proceeded against for placing swills
on the South Quay, and Mr. Savage fined 40s. and costs, but the case
against Mr. de Caux was not proceeded with.

Nov. 7th.—Mr. C. J. Palmer had proposed and Mr. J. C. Smith seconded in
the Council that £2.000 be expended in the further extension of the
Marine Drive, which resolution was carried _nem dis_.

The Government had purchased the waste ground between the R.N. Hospital
and the Drive, and were about to enclose it.

Nov. 11th.—Mr. R. Steward had, upon the nomination of Mr. Ferrier,
seconded by Mr. Nightingale, been re-elected Mayor, and in returning
thanks mentioned “his acknowledgments to C. J. Palmer, Esq., to whose
advice much of the success that had followed his mayoralty was justly
due, and he had pleasure in taking that opportunity of publicly thanking
him for the valuable assistance he had at all times so cheerfully
rendered.”

Nov. 25th.—Five corn stacks, valued at upwards of £600, had been burnt on
Mr. Hammond’s premises at Gorleston.

Nov. 28th.—The sum of £135 had been raised for the purpose of presenting
a testimonial to the Mayor.

The price of gas had been reduced to 4s. 6d. per 1,000 cubic feet.

Mr. Critten had launched a new lifeboat, named “The Friend of all
Nations.”

Dec. 5th.—Tremendous gales from the S.S.W. had visited the coast and much
damage done to the shipping.

Dec. 12th.—The new Methodist Chapel at Burgh had been partly blown down
by the gale.

Dec. 16th.—The following smacks were reported to be missing:—“Driving
Mist” (Mr. Yaxley), “Leveret” and “Three Sisters” (Mr. Nockolds),
“Ranger” (Mr. Norton), “Rhine” (Mr. Symonds), “Osprey” (Mr. Harrison),
“Temperance Star” (Mr. Simlett), “Essex” (Mr. Carter), “Rainbow” (Mr.
Moore), “Twilight” and “North Star” (Mr. Shuckford), “Gihon” (Mr. Todd),
and the “Volunteer” (Mr. Veale.)

The “Volunteer” steamtug, belonging to Mr. S Fill had been lost, owing to
her having sprung a leak when about 40 miles from the land, while
cruising about to find the missing smacks, and the crew reported that
they had left her in a sinking state.

Dec. 19th.—The following had been the winners of prizes in the N.A.V.
competition:—Corporal Baker, and gunners Manship, Riches, Bartram,
Shrimpling, Rainer; sergeant Steward; gunners Watson, Davy, Wetherell;
sergeants Cocks and Robinson; corporal Beevor; bombardiers Greenwood,
Nutman, Self; and gunners Stringer, Thompson, R. Cory and Howes.

The presentation took place at the Drill-room, Regent-street, when the
Mayor presided, and Captains Foreman and Barber also addressed the
Volunteers.

Dec. 23rd.—The thirteen smacks above-named were still missing.

Dec. 26th.—C. J. Palmer, Esq. (President of the Institution) had read a
paper upon the history of the building occupied as the Public Library and
the Port Dues Office, at a Conversazione held therein.

The Mayor’s Testimonial Fund had reached the sum of £200.

The “Medusa” frigate was searching for the missing smacks.

Dec. 30th.—There was a warm discussion going on as to the use of one of
the Town fire engines at the burning of a vessel named the “Spray,” Mr.
C. C. Aldred holding that it should not have been so used, while Mr.
Falcke warmly supported the opposite view of the case.

The following gentlemen then held commissions in the local Volunteer
Corps.

Artillery.—Major, Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart.; Captains, W. J. Foreman,
John Lee Barber, and H. P. Green; First Lieutenants, A. W. Morant and J.
W. C. Ewart; Second Lieutenants, T. M. Read, J. W. D. Gosnall, Robert
Rising and John Brown; Hon. Chaplain, Rev. B. Vaux.

Rifles—Major, James Henry Orde; Adjutant, R. C. Holmes (late Captain 10th
Hussars); Captains, E. P. Youell, H. H. Barber, W. Holt, and J.
Tomlinson; Lieutenants, H. R. Harmer, G. Moore, F. W. Ferrier, and S. W.
Spelman; Ensigns, John Cobb, S. Aldred, E. Fyson, and R. Watling;
Surgeon, Frederick Palmer; Hon. Chaplain, Rev. H. R. Nevill;
Supernumerary Lieutenants, John Clark and Charles Diver.

             _N.B.—The file for the Year_ 1864 _is missing_.



1865.


Jan. 7th.—A man, 60 years of age, had attended the Guardians, with a view
to obtaining a wife out of the Workhouse.  He was referred back by the
Board to his own parish (Clippesby).

Jan. 11th.—Benjamin Dowson, Esq., had died in his 77th year; he was much
respected, and the flags on the shipping and the public buildings had
been hoisted at half-mast.

Jan. 14th.—The Haven was in a bad state, and there was so little water on
the bar that the “Rainbow” steamer had landed her passengers on the
Beach.

Jan. 18th.—John Barker, Esq., one of the Borough Magistrates and a Haven
Commissioner, had died in his 69th year.

Jan. 28th.—The Great Yarmouth Building Society had held its first meeting
(Major Foreman in the chair), when Mr. Chipperfield was elected
secretary, and the following gentlemen directors:—H. Buston, J.
Stephenson, R. Dumbleton, E. Stagg, and J. Isaac.

The “Antelope” cutter had been launched from Mr. Winter’s yard, for
Messrs. Smith and Son.

Feb. 4th.—Mr. C. J. Palmer had presided at the annual Sailors’ Home
Meeting, when Captain Rivers, D. Falcke, W. Worship, S. Dowson, C. Rose,
R. Norman, and J. Scott, Esqrs., Majors Orde and Foreman, and the Revs.
Hurst and Harrison were present.

A public meeting, over which Mr. E. H. L. Preston presided, had been held
in opposition to the “Haven and Port Bill” which was being promoted by
the Corporation, and the following committee appointed to watch that
measure:—Messrs. E. H. L. Preston, W. N. Burroughs, R. Dumbleton, J. W.
de Caux, James Scott, Robert Barber, and John Owles.

Feb. 15th.—A “very violent storm” had arisen at the meeting of the
Corporation Committee sitting upon the Haven and Port Bill.

Feb. 22nd.—The shipowners had met (Mr. R. S. Watling in the chair), to
consider the Bill, and had passed a resolution moved by Mr. G. Blake and
seconded by Mr. J. B. Hylton, in favour of the measure.

The fishing interest had held a meeting (Mr. B. Fenn in the chair), and
condemned the proposed Corporation Fishwharf scheme.

Feb. 25th.—At the Council meeting, Mr. E. H. L. Preston and Mr. C. C.
Aldred had been “at loggerheads” with regard to the Haven Bill.

March 11th.—Mr. H. Boulter, for many years one of the Councillors for the
North Ward, had died.

March 22nd.—There had been a heavy gale from the S.E., which had
occasioned great damage to the shipping; Mr. Petts and the coastguard had
done much good service with Manby’s apparatus, in saving life.

March 25th.—At the contest in the North Ward, consequent on the death of
Mr. Boulter, the numbers were—

J. H. Bly (Con.)              121
J. F. Neave (Lib.)             76

Hopton Church, which had recently been destroyed by fire, was to be
rebuilt on a new site at a cost of £2,500.

April 1st.—During a heavy gale the vessels “Jenny R” and “Londonderry”
had been stranded on the Beach.

April 8th.—Reports the death of George Danby-Palmer, Esq., as
follows:—“We regret to record the decease of this gentleman, who expired
at his residence, South Quay, on Tuesday evening last.  Mr. Palmer was
born July 5th, 1787, and was therefore in his 78th year.  He was a member
of the old Corporation, and since the passing of the Municipal Reform
Act, had continued in the new Corporation, although of late years illness
had prevented him from taking any active part in the administration of
municipal matters.  He was a Justice of the Peace for the County of
Norfolk as well as the Borough, and also filled the office of Haven
Commissioner.  Mr. Palmer throughout his long connection with the town
was closely identified with the trade and commerce of the port, being a
large shipowner, and deeply interested in the fisheries.  His loss will
be felt by many, particularly among the poor, to whom he was a true
friend.  As a tribute of respect to his memory, the flags have been
hoisted on the shipping and principal buildings in the town during the
week.”  In politics Mr. Palmer was a Whig, and possessed great influence
in the town.

April 15th.—Mr. H. H. Barber (Lib.) and Mr. S. K. Smith (Con.) were
candidates for the seat thus rendered vacant in the Nelson Ward.

The following Guardians had been elected:—North Ward: Messrs. S.
Nightingale, J. B. Hylton, and I. Shuckford.  Market Ward: Messrs. J.
Laws, C. C. Aldred, and J. Fenn.  Regent Ward: Messrs. W. Worship, R. D.
Barber, and C. Diver.  St. George’s Ward: Messrs. F. Palmer, J. Scott,
and B. Fenn.  Nelson Ward: Messrs. J. Clowes, W. T. Fisher, C.
Woolverton, and G. W. Moore.

The shipwrights, who had been on strike, had returned to their
employment.

April 22nd.—The debt on St. Nicholas’ Church was then £6,700.

The contest in the Nelson Ward had resulted as follows:—

H. H. Barber (Lib.)            150
S. K. Smith (Con.)             117

And “the proceedings throughout the day had all the characteristics of a
general election.”

Messrs. C. S. D. Steward and E. R. Aldred had been re-elected
Churchwardens by the Vestry.

May 13th.—The “George” schooner had been launched from Mr. Rust’s yard.

May 27th.—There had been no special demonstration of loyalty on the
Queen’s birthday.

The Dowager Lady Lacon had bequeathed £200 to the Hospital.

A “French Club,” of which M. Butel was the tutor, was meeting at the
Norfolk Hotel.

June 7th.—A meeting of the Conservative party had been held at the Star
Hotel, which was attended by Sir E. H. K. Lacon and Mr. Goodson, and an
active canvass had been commenced on behalf of those gentlemen, as the
Conservative candidates for the Borough.

June 10th.—The Liberals had met at the Angel Hotel, when Mr. E. W.
Watkin, by letter, strongly recommended Mr. A. Brogden, and Mr. J. C.
Marshman to the electors, and those gentlemen were, on the motion of Mr.
Livingston, seconded by Mr. Moore, requested to visit the Borough with
Mr. Watkin.

June 17th.—H.M.S. “Dauntless,” 31 guns, was anchored in the Roads.

Mr. S. Barge had obtained the contract for enclosing the land to the east
of the Naval Hospital.

Mr. H. R. Harmer had been presented with an elegant silver salver upon
the occasion of his resigning his commission of Lieutenant in the Rifle
Volunteers.

June 21st.—The Liberals had held a monster meeting in the Market Place,
when Mr. J. Clowes occupied the chair, and the Liberal candidates
(Messrs. Brogden and Marshman) had delivered addresses.

The Conservatives had also held a meeting, convened by circular, which
had been addressed by Sir E. H. K. Lacon and Mr. Goodson.

July 1st.—Both parties had held meetings at Gorleston, which had been
addressed by their respective candidates; each of the candidates spoke of
“certain success, with fair play.”

July 5th.—The Editor states “that it is evident from the numbers who hold
back their promises, that there is a great expectancy that the value of
votes will rise in the market.”

July 8th.—The Liberals had been holding meetings in each of the Wards,
and it was stated that “both parties are professedly confident of
achieving a victory.”

July 12th.—Mr. Marshman had suddenly and unexpectedly retired from the
contest, and Mr. Brogden had issued an address stating that Mr. Vanderbyl
would take Mr. Marshman’s place as a candidate for the Borough; it was
evident that “the struggle would be one of no ordinary character.”

The farmers in East Norfolk were agitating for a repeal of the Malt Tax,
and had adopted Mr. Clare Sewell Read as their candidate.

July 15th.—Sir Thomas B. P. Beauchamp, Bart., had been selected as a
colleague of the Hon. Colonel Coke, the sitting Liberal Member for that
Division of the County.

At the Borough nomination the appearance of the Liberal candidates “was
the signal for a regular ovation.”  When something like a hearing could
be obtained, Mr. E. H. L. Preston proposed, and Mr. Dumbleton seconded,
Sir Edmund Henry Knowles Lacon, Bart., Mr. R. Hammond proposed, and Mr.
J. Scott seconded, Alexander Brogden, Esq.; Mr. W. Worship proposed, and
Mr. C. Woolverton seconded, James Goodson, Esq.; and Mr. G. Blake
proposed, and Mr. J. Owles seconded, Philip Vanderbyl, Esq.

The show of hands was by an “immense majority” found in favour of Messrs.
Brogden and Vanderbyl.

The polling took place on the following day, and this description is
given of

                               “THE ELECTION.”

    The very general expectation that prevailed as to the severity of the
    contest drew early together large numbers of persons, who thronged
    the vicinity of the polling places and the streets throughout the
    day.  The polling from eight to nine o’clock was very rapid, both
    parties striving their utmost to bring up men so as to head the poll.
    The popular feeling, which manifested itself unmistakeably in favour
    of the Liberal cause, was sadly damped between the hours of nine and
    ten o’clock by the appearance of a placard bearing the state of the
    poll, and showing that the Conservatives, notwithstanding the
    activity displayed by the other side, had stolen a march upon them,
    and meant winning.  The result of the next hour’s polling had
    considerably increased the Conservative majority, and, as a large
    proportion of the electors had voted, it became evident that the
    battle, as far as Liberal interests were concerned, was all but lost.
    As the day advanced, the position of the Liberals on the poll became
    worse, and all chance of retrieving their position was hopeless.  The
    excitement was very great in the town, but the crowd continued to
    conduct themselves pretty quietly, contenting themselves with venting
    their disappointment by groaning heartily at every vehicle bearing
    placards of “Vote for Lacon and Goodson.”

   State of the Poll.
     Nine o’clock.
Lacon                298
Goodson              294
Brogden              235
Vanderbyl            226
      Ten o’clock.
Lacon                541
Goodson              526
Brogden              447
Vanderbyl            425
    Eleven o’clock.
Lacon                608
Goodson              574
Brogden              506
Vanderbyl            481
    Twelve o’clock.
Lacon                746
Goodson              712
Brogden              595
Vanderbyl            557
      One o’clock.
Lacon                758
Goodson              708
Brogden              610
Vanderbyl            571
      Two o’clock.
Lacon                798
Goodson              757
Brogden              618
Vanderbyl            573
     Four o’clock.
Lacon                828
Goodson              784
Brogden              634
Vanderbyl            589

    The following detail is given of the polling in the various Wards.

                 Lacon.       Goodson.      Brogden.     Vanderbyl.
St.                     91            86            78            74
Nicholas’
Market                 146           140           120           109
Regent                 152           146           106            99
St. George’s           104           100            96            91
Nelson                 189           173           138           130
Southtown              146           139            96            86
        Total          828           784           634           589

    July 19th.—At the Nomination for East Norfolk, Sir T. B. P. Beauchamp
    (failing to satisfy the Malt-tax Repeal party), Mr. Clare Sewell Read
    was proposed as a candidate for the Division, as also were Colonel
    Coke, Mr. Howes, and Sir Thomas; the show of hands being in favour of
    Howes and Read, a poll was demanded for the Whig candidates (the Hon.
    Colonel Clarence Wenman Walpole Coke and Sir Thomas Brograve
    Proctor-Beauchamp, Bart.,) who proceeded to Yarmouth, where their
    agent (Mr. F. Danby-Palmer) at once organised a meeting of 6,000
    persons in the Market-place, Mr. R. Hammond presided, and General Sir
    Charles A. Windham, Colonel Coke, Viscount Bury, and Sir Thomas
    Beauchamp addressed the assembly.

    The Tories also held a meeting in front of the Crown and Anchor
    Hotel, which was addressed by the Mayor (R. Steward, Esq.), Mr. C. S.
    Read, and Mr. E. H. L. Preston; the crowd then, however, gave “three
    cheers for Brogden and Vanderbyl, and as many groans for Howes and
    Read.”

July 22nd.—The voting in the town of Yarmouth had been, with regard to
this contest, as follows:—

Coke                 340
Beauchamp            314
Howes                297
Read                 267

But the general return was—

Howes                3,100
Read                 2,985
Beauchamp            2,150
Coke                 1,994

July 29th.—The Regatta had, owing to the exertions of F. Harmer, Esq.,
been very successfully conducted.

A Swimming Association had been formed in the town, and Mr. George
Archard had won the 1,000 yards match.

Sir John Walsham had opened an inquiry at the Tolhouse as to the election
of Messrs. I. Shuckford, W. J. Foreman, and C. Diver, (Guardians for the
parish), whose seats were claimed by Messrs. J. F. Neave, C. Steward, and
J. Clowes (grocer), respectively.

Mr. J. Clowes, (solicitor), appeared for the appellants, and Mr. C.
Diver, for the respondents.

Aug. 26th.—The Race Ball had been numerously attended, and amongst those
present were Lord Suffield, the Hon. Mrs. Harbord and party, Major and
Mrs. Orde and party, Mrs. Cubitt and party, Mr. E. H. L. Preston, Miss
Preston, Mr. E. S. Preston, Mr. I. Preston, Mr. F. Danby-Palmer and Miss
Palmer, Captain and Mrs. Scott, Mr. and Mrs. W. Danby-Palmer, Mr. T. M.
Baker, Mr. T. Burton Steward, Mr. E. Frere, Mr. and Mrs. F. Ferrier, Mr.
C. J. Palmer, Mr. Tompson, Mr. Penrice, Mr. Trafford, &c.

Aug. 30th.—The Rifle Volunteers were competing for prizes.

Sept. 6th.—The Volunteer Rifle Corps had mustered 230 strong when
inspected by Colonel Deshon.

Mr. Shales, of the Star-hotel, had been thrown from his horse on the
Drive, and fractured his collar-bone.

Sept. 9th.—The Band of the Coldstream Guards had been performing at the
Victoria Gardens, and on the Wellington Pier.

Sept. 20th.—The Haven Commissioners had drafted certain clauses to be
inserted in the New Haven Bill.

Owing to the high prices of provision, strikes were threatened by the
working men.

Sept. 23rd.—The Band of the 13th Hussars had given two concerts at the
Victoria Gardens.

Sept. 30th.—Herring was selling at from £23 to £25 per last.

Oct. 7th.—Mr. W. J. Foreman had been declared a duly elected Guardian for
the St. George’s Ward, but nothing had yet transpired as to the result of
the petitions against Messrs. Shuckford and Diver.

A ball in honour of the French and English steamers now in the port, had
been given in the Assembly Rooms.  Among those present were the Mayor,
Mayoress and Miss Steward, Major and Mrs. Orde and party, Captain and
Mrs. Cubitt, the Misses Cubitt, Mr. and Mrs. C. J. Palmer and Miss Tapp,
Mrs. Gott, the Misses Gott and party, Miss Maitland, Mrs. and Miss
Seppings, Mr. and Mrs. E. H. L. Preston, Miss Preston, the Misses
Larkman, Mr. and Mrs. Gosnall, Miss Pearson, Miss Poole, Mr. and Mrs. J.
Brown, Mr. F. Danby and Miss Palmer, the officers of the English and
French ships, Mr. A. Steward, Mr. T. M. Baker, Mr. E. S. Preston, Mr.
Frere, Mr. W. Danby-Palmer, Mr. M. Waters, Mr. T. B. Steward, &c.

A large ferry boat, while delivering ice to a smack in the roads, had
been upset, but fortunately none of the men in her had been drowned.

Oct. 1st.—Albert Hensman had been killed by Henrich Erenschinsen at the
City of London tavern.

Oct. 21st.—The Poor Law Inquiry had been resumed, and was proceeding at
the Tolhouse before Sir J. Walsham.

Prime herring was fetching £35 per last.

Oct. 25th.—There had been a heavy gale from the N.E.

Oct. 28th.—One hundred and thirty young persons had been confirmed by the
Bishop of Norwich.

Nov. 1st.—It was reported that 21 lives had been lost in the recent gale.

Nov. 4th.—There had only been contests in the Nelson Ward, where Mr. de
Caux opposed the re-election of Messrs. Bartram and Barber (Libs.), and
in the St. Andrew’s Ward, where Mr. Downing opposed the re-election of
Messrs. Preston and Teasdel (Cons.), but in both cases the “opposition
proved fruitless.”

Sixteen and a half lasts of fish delivered from the “Ethelbert,” (Messrs.
Smith and Son) had realised £377 14s., and 8 lasts from the “Secret” had
made £182 15s. 3d.

Nov. 11th.—At the Council Meeting on the 9th, Mr. F. Worship proposed,
and Mr. C. Woolverton seconded, Mr. C. C. Aldred as Mayor, who upon his
election left the Court with Mr. Steward in order to be invested with the
robe and chain, when “considerable surprise was manifested” at Mr.
Steward declining to return to the Council Chamber with the newly-elected
Mayor.

Nov. 18th.—The demand for herring continued very great, and prices ranged
up to £28 per last.

Mr. Neave had been declared to be elected a Guardian (in the place of Mr.
Shuckford) by the Poor Law Board.

Nov. 25th.—The Rifle Volunteer Shooting prizes had been presented (the
Mayor presiding) at the Town Hall.

The Ladies’ Challenge Cup was on this occasion handed over to Private
Pestell.

B. Fenn, Esq., (one of the Justices, and formerly an Alderman of the
Borough) had died at the age of 73 years.

Dec. 6th.—J. T. Birch, Esq., had presided for the last time as Judge of
the Yarmouth County Court, having exchanged that appointment with J.
Worlledge, Esq. (the Judge of the Suffolk Courts), for part of his
district.

Dec. 13th.—The cattle plague had attacked the cows in Mr. Fox’s and Mr.
Thacker’s dairies.

Dec. 20th.—It had been determined to lodge a petition against the return
of Sir E. H. K. Lacon and Mr. Goodson on the ground of “gross bribery and
corruption.”

Dec. 23rd.—An Art Exhibition was being held at the Town Hall, where J.
Owles, Esq’s. china was much admired.

Dec. 30th.—There had been a meeting of farmers to consider a proposed
Cattle Plague Rate of 2d. in the £.

             _N.B.—The file for the Year_ 1866 _is missing_.



1867.


Jan. 2nd.—An attack had been made upon the Recorder (N. Palmer, Esq.),
whose ill-health had caused his absence from the Quarter Sessions, by
Messrs. R. Steward and C. C. Aldred, and the Mayor (Mr. E. P. Youell) by
his casting vote, gave effect to this action.

David Falcke, Esq., had died; his widow had sent £5 for the poor of the
town.

Jan. 12th.—The “South-end Mission,” which had been erected at a cost of
£500, had been opened: the Corporation attended this ceremony.

Jan. 16th.—The attempt to deprive Mr. Palmer of the Recordership was
“strongly condemned,” and it was believed that the Secretary of State
would not entertain the Magistrates’ application.

Jan. 19th.—This proved to be true, and the Mayor (Mr. E. P. Youell) had
been considerably snubbed by that official in his reply to the letter
forwarded by him.

There had been heavy gales; much damage sustained by the shipping; the
Railway traffic had been impeded by the snowdrifts.

Jan. 26th.—A meeting had been held to relieve the distress of the poor,
when £289 was raised in the room.

Dr. Moxon had presided at the anniversary meeting of the “Sir Edmund
Lacon” Lodge, N.I.O.F., held at the Volunteer tavern.

Feb. 23rd.—The Corporation had held a meeting for the purpose of electing
two Haven Commissioners under the recently passed Haven Act, when the
voting was—

For Mr. Charles Cory (Town-clerk)          25
,, ,, Robert Steward                       24
,, ,, E. H. L. Preston                     22

Mr. Preston thus losing his seat on the Board, and that gentleman, after
regretting that Mr. Youell, (the Mayor) and others should have “put such
an insult upon him,” stated “that he severed himself from such a
disgraceful party.”

Feb. 27th.—Mr. Rumbold had been unanimously elected (in the place of
Harbert retired), one of the relieving officers.

March 2nd.—The Norfolk and Suffolk Building Society had held a meeting at
the Oddfellows’-hall, Gorleston, when Mr. W. J. Brand presided, and
addresses were delivered by Messrs. F. Palmer, L. Blake, J. F. Neave,
Ling, Sacret, and W. S. Page.

On the revision of the Proxy Book, Mr. C. Diver had appeared for the
Conservatives and Mr. F. Danby-Palmer for the Liberals.

Mr. Copeman, of Long Stratton, had purchased No. 4, South-quay, (the
Elizabethan mansion restored by the late John Danby-Palmer, Esq.), for
£1,150 and £60 for fixtures.

Eighteen hundred and sixty-seven changes had been rung on St. Nicholas’
bells on the 1st and 2nd inst., by the Parish ringers.

March 6th.—The proposal of the Government to disfranchise the Borough was
the subject of general comment.

W. H. Bessey, Esq., J.P. and Town Councillor, had died in his 68th year.

March 9th.—The Town Council had adopted a petition to Parliament
deprecating the proposed disfranchisement of the Borough.

Lord Bury (accompanied by Mr. F. Danby-Palmer) was sounding the
constituency of East Norfolk with a view to contesting the division upon
the next vacancy.

The seat on the newly constructed Haven Board held by the shipowners had
been contested with the following result:—

For Mr. Watling            191
„ Mr. Scott                 91

And the former was consequently elected.

March 13th.—The Conservative electors had met at the “Star” (W. Worship,
Esq., in the chair), and proposed, if disfranchisement could be avoided,
a compromise as to the future representation of the Borough.

March 16th.—The Liberals had also held a meeting at the “Angel,” when the
majority of those present repudiated the suggested compromise; Mr. R.
Hammond (chairman), Mr. J. Clowes, Mr. J. Lawn, Mr. R. Barber, Mr. J.
Garratt, Mr. L. Blake, Mr. J. W. de Caux, Mr. W. Livingston, Sir Thomas
Beevor, and Mr. J. Scott took part in this discussion.

April 6th.—There had been a “Magisterial field-day” for the appointment
of Overseers, when the following Justices were present:—Conservatives—The
Mayor and Messrs. R. Steward, C. C. Aldred, J. Fenn, B. Jay, J. C. Smith,
J. C. Clark, and F. Worship; and Liberals—Messrs. R. Hammond, P. Pullyn,
F. Palmer, J. Owles and J. Scott.  The Tory nominees were appointed after
a warm altercation, in which Mr. Steward, Mr. Hammond, Mr. Palmer and Mr.
Aldred took prominent parts.

The following Guardians had been elected:—

_North Ward_: Messrs. S. Nightingale, J. T. Buston, and J. F. Neave.

_Market Ward_: Messrs. W. Laws, C. C. Aldred, and J. Rivett.

_Regent Ward_: Messrs. W. Worship, R. D. Barber, and C. Diver.

_St. George’s Ward_: Messrs. W. T. Foreman, C. Moore, and E. Stagg.

_Nelson Ward_: Messrs. G. W. Moore, J. Clowes, C. Woolverton, and H. H.
Barber.

The following tenders had been accepted for the new Fish
Wharves:—Bricklaying.  Norfor, £533; masonry, Bartram, £1,780; paviour,
Chappel, £1,866 7s. 1d.; slater, Dawber, £530; carpenter, Norfor, £1,820;
smith, Barnes, £700; plumber, Wright, £600; total, £7,899 7s. 1d.

April 24th.—Messrs. Spence, Everard, Moore, Fenner, Veale, Neave,
Harrison, Douglas and Silvers had been upset on Ormesby Broad and
narrowly escaped drowning.

April 27th.—The bell-ringers had “struck,” owing to their not being
allowed to ring a peal on the occasion of a marriage which took place in
Passion week.

May 4th.—The East Norfolk Militia had been inspected by Colonel Ross, and
the Officers had given a ball at the Town Hall.

May 11th.—Some Races, called “The Spring Meeting,” had been held on the
Denes under the management of Messrs. D. R. Fowler, E. Stagg, A. Watling,
C. Steward, J. T. Savage, and H. Crowe, Mr. Cufaude acting as judge and
Mr W. Crowe as starter.

May 22nd.—Mr. Edmond Beales had attended a Reform Demonstration held on
the Hall Quay, when the Rev. Shelley occupied the chair.

May 29th.—The first stone of the Volunteer Drill Hall (Ensign F.
Danby-Palmer, hon. secretary) had been laid by the Mayor (Captain
Youell), after the Rev. B. Vaux had offered up a prayer.  Major Orde and
Lord Suffield then addressed the corps, which fired several volleys, the
band playing “God Save the Queen.”

The Ringers being still “on strike,” the Church bells were silent on this
occasion.

June 5th.—The House of Commons had passed the clause disfranchising the
Borough.

A halibut had been caught by one of the fishing craft, measuring 6 feet
long, 30 inches broad, and weighing 161 lbs.

June 8th.—The marriage of Joseph Tomlinson, Esq., to Miss Ellen Larkman,
had been celebrated, with much rejoicing, at Belton Church.

June 12th.—There had been an alarming fire on Mr. Barnes’ and Mr. Gooda’s
premises at Southtown.

June 29th.—And another fire at Gorleston on Mr. Kemp’s premises, where
the damage was estimated at from £1,200 to £1,500.

Captain Smyth, R.N. (Pier Master) had been granted a Greenwich Hospital
out-pension of £65 a year.

July 6th.—Bro. William Danby-Palmer had been installed W.M. of Lodge
“United Friends” 313, and during the subsequent banquet at the Star
Hotel, the band of the Rifle Volunteers had performed on the “leads.”

E. H. L. Preston, Esq., had been nominated a Knight of the Belgian Order
of Leopold.

July 13th.—The “Hermit” (smack) had been launched for Mr. H. K. Swann,
from Mr. Ambrose J. Palmer’s yard.

July 24th.—Mr. I. Preston, jun., acted as secretary at the “Water Frolic”
(vice Tomlinson resigned), when the following yachts competed:—“Spray,” 8
tons, F. Foster, Esq.; “Iris,” 7, Messrs. Harrison and Veale;
“Fleur-de-Lis,” 5, P. Gandy, Esq.; “Fleetwing,” 9, Messrs. Hart and
Asker; “Warrior,” 9, H. K. Thompson, Esq.; “Blue Bell,” 6, J. E. Preston,
Esq.; “Syren,” 4, Press Bros.; “Vixen,” 10, P. S. Millard, Esq.; and
“Enchantress,” 10, H. H. Barber, Esq.  The “Blue Bell” won.

Aug. 3rd.—At the Regatta, the “Red Rover” declined to try conclusions
with the “Satanella” and the “Eva,” the former of which yachts won the
prize.

Only three yawls competed with the following results:—

                         H.       M.       S.
“Glance”                     2       58       30
“Star of the East”           3        4       46
“Eclipse”                    3        5       30

It was remarked that no Yarmouth yawl was entered for the match.  On this
occasion Mr. F. Harmer acted as starter, and Mr. J. H. Bly as Hon.
Secretary.

Aug. 24th.—The Mayor had given a ball at his residence at Gorleston, when
about 60 ladies and gentlemen were present.

Aug. 28th.—The town was full of visitors.  It was estimated that from
15,000 to 20,000 persons were at one time on the Marine Drive on the
preceding Sunday.

Sep. 7th.—The Mortuary Chapel at the Roman Catholic Cemetery, Caister
Road, had been consecrated by the Roman Catholic Bishop of Demerara.

The Corporation land at and near “Norfolk Square” had been offered for
sale, and several lots sold to Messrs. H. Teasdel, J. Clowes, J. Isaac,
C. Woolverton, and E. Stagg.

Sep. 11th.—The Fish Wharves and Market were nearly completed and would
shortly be opened; they had cost about £12,000.

The fire engines had been condemned and were about to be replaced by more
powerful ones constructed by Messrs. Shand and Mason.

Sep. 14th.—Herring was selling at from £12 to £15 per last.

The Corporation had been selling sites near the Naval Hospital, and Grout
& Co.’s Factory, which had realised an average rent of £1 2s. 5d. per
site.

Sep. 21st.—Prime herring was selling at £30 per last.

Sep. 25th.—J. T. Abdy, Esq., had attended as Revising Barrister for East
Norfolk, when Mr. I. O. Howard Taylor and Mr. F. Danby-Palmer represented
the Liberals, and Mr. Charles Diver and Mr. Eagleton the Conservatives,
each party had made 56 claims and lodged 130 objections.

Oct. 16th.—Owing to a glut of fish, some herring were selling so low as
£6 per last.

Oct. 26th.—The following were the retiring Councillors:—Messrs. W.
Worship, J. D. Hilton, C. J. Palmer, C. Woolverton, R. Ferrier, B. Jay,
R. D. Barber, J. Tomlinson, D. A. Gourlay, E. R. Aldred, R. Steward, and
W. J. Brand; all of whom (except Mr. C. J. Palmer) proposed to seek
re-election.

Nov. 2nd.—Mr. de Caux had appeared as a candidate in the South Ward and
Messrs. Neave and Frosdick in the St. George’s Ward.

A small steam boat, the property of Mr. Laurie, had been launched from
Mr. Blyth’s iron works at Cobholm.

Nov. 9th.—The Drill Hall had been opened, when the Volunteers and a large
number of guests were entertained by the officers of the Corps, (Major
Orde, Captains Youell, H. H. Barber, W. Holt, J. Tomlinson, Lieutenants
G. W. Moore, S. Aldred, R. E. Dowson, Fyson, C. Diver; Ensigns, Ambrose
J. Palmer, F. Danby-Palmer, and Adjutant F. A. Cubitt), among whom were
the Rev. H. Nevill, Major Foreman, and the Officers of the Norfolk
Artillery Volunteers, Captain James, Captain Cubitt, Captain Gilbertson,
Captain Calthorpe, Captain Ensor, Captain Rivers, and Messrs. Brightwen,
R. Steward, C. H. Chamberlin, S. Dowson, S. Nightingale, C. C. Aldred, J.
Baumgartner, C. Cory, A. Steward, W. Danby-Palmer, Frederick Palmer, F.
Worship, J. Starling, R. D. Fowler, T. George, T. P. Burroughs, T. Olley,
C. Rose, J. Dumbleton, J. Bracey, E. Stagg, G. W. Giles, T. Moore,
Maclean, Shales, Barge, E. Cooke, J. Mainprice, Boning, &c., and there
were also a number of ladies present.

Nov. 13th.—At the Council meeting, on the motion of Sir E. H. K. Lacon,
Bart., seconded by Mr. C. Woolverton, William Worship, Esq., had been
elected Mayor.

James Sharman, a Trafalgar veteran and keeper of the Nelson Monument, had
died at the age of 82 years.

Nov. 25th.—There had been a contest in the Regent Ward, consequent upon
Mr. W. C. Reynolds’ retirement from the Council, when the polling was as
follows:—

T. George (Con.)             124
T. Todd (Ind.)               114
Livingston (Lib.)             26

Nov. 27th.—A detachment from the 35th, 90th, and 96th Regiments had
arrived at the Southtown Barracks under the following officers:—Captain
Caldecott (35th), Ensigns Cooper and Aldridge (35th), Lieut. Jones
(96th), and Ensign Blockwell (96th).

Dec. 4th.—There had been a “tremendous gale and tide,” and Southtown was
flooded.

Dec. 7th.—The “Rescuer” Gorleston lifeboat had been upset at the
Harbour’s mouth and 25 lives lost.

Dec. 11th.—In the action of “Henderson v. Lacon, Bart.,” the directors of
the late Royal Hotel Company had been held personally liable for
mis-statements contained in that Company’s prospectus.

Dec. 25th.—The Rifle Volunteer Officers had invited 1,100 ladies and
gentleman to an entertainment at the Drill Hall, when Major Orde, Captain
Youell, the Rev. J. J. Raven, Mr. C. H. Chamberlin, Mr. H. R. Harmer, and
Mr. E. H. Combe took part in the performances and readings.



1868.


Jan. 1st.—A. Brogden, Esq., had given 20 tons of coals to the poor of the
borough.

Jan. 8th.—“Fenian scare.”  The Magistrates had held a private Meeting,
which was attended by Major Jones and Captain Scovell, (96th Regiment)
with a view to adopting measures for the more efficient protection of
property within the borough.

The ammunition stores had been removed from the Batteries to the Barracks
and the Military had paraded and marched to Church with muskets and side
arms.

Jan. 11th.—The “United Brothers” Lodge, A.I.O.F., had held its 4th annual
festival in St. John’s Schoolroom.

Jan. 15th.—Mr. Matthew Butcher, junr., had been appointed Consular Agent
to the Italian Government at Yarmouth.

Jan. 25th.—The Norfolk and Suffolk Building Society had held its first
annual general meeting, Frederick Palmer, Esq., in the chair; the report
was a very favourable one, and, being laid before the meeting by Mr. L.
Blake (the Secretary), was unanimously adopted.

Jan. 29th.—A fatal fire had occurred at Mr. Pigg’s shop and
dwelling-house in the Market Row.  Mrs. Pigg and two children had been
burned to death, and damage sustained to the estimated amount of some
£3,000.

Feb. 12th.—The lugger “Flying Fish” had struck upon a sunken wreck, and
immediately foundered.

The “North Sand” had dried to a very considerable extent.

Feb. 19th.—There had been a fracas in the hunting field at Toft Monks,
consequent upon Mr. Colman causing a hare to be shot during a run of the
Norfolk and Suffolk Harriers, and thereupon having been assaulted by one
of the sportsmen.

Feb. 26th.—Contains the account of the presentation, at the Cape, of a
watch and address to Captain F. Diver, of the “Roman.”

March 7th.—Mr. S. Aldred had been appointed treasurer to the Race
Committee (vice Mr. C. Steward, deceased.)

Mr. C. C. Newcomb, post-master, had died.

March 11th.—The Quarter Sessions could not be held, as neither the
Recorder, or a deputy on his behalf, appeared on the day fixed for
holding this Court.

    “THE CIGAR SHIP.—This novel specimen of marine architecture, known as
    the ‘cigar ship,’ put into this harbour on Friday last, and has since
    continued to be an object of great curiosity among our seafaring
    population.  The vessel, which is named the ‘Walter S. Winans,’ was
    built by the firm of Messrs. Winans, American contractors, and is
    stated to be on an experimental cruise, with the view of thoroughly
    testing her sea-going qualities.  She is fitted with a screw
    propeller, the fans of which are entirely submerged.  Her engines are
    of 35 horse power, but can be worked up to 50, and it is stated she
    has attained a speed of 14 miles an hour.  The peculiarity of her
    build gives her a singular appearance, her cone-shaped bow projecting
    for some distance clear of the water, while her stern is more
    depressed.  This gives her a very unsightly look, and it is evident
    that her builders have sacrificed everything in her construction to
    attain a high rate of speed, her berthing and general accommodation
    being of an inferior character compared with other sea-going
    steamers.”

April 4th.—The question of purchasing the Ferries had been considered by
the Town Council, the price asked for them being £9,500, and the
Committee of the Council had recommended the purchase, but on division
the motion to do this was lost by 11 to 10 votes.

April 8th—Messrs. Ellis, Pestell, Skoulding, and Harbord had been
re-appointed overseers.

April 15th.—The following Guardians had been elected:—North Ward: Messrs.
Nightingale, Neave, and Buston.  Market Ward: Messrs. Laws, Aldred, and
Fenn.  Regent Ward: Messrs. Worship, Barber, and Diver.  St. George’s
Ward: Messrs. Scott, Foreman, and Palmer.  Nelson Ward: Messrs.
Woolverton, Moore, Bracey, and Clowes.

April 22nd.—Large numbers of codling, plaice, and whiting were being
taken in the dykes near the Acle New Road.  It was supposed that these
salt-water fish were left there by the floods of the previous December,
when the Breydon Wall had been broken.

May 2nd.—The “Everette” had foundered at her anchors in the Roads.

The Fish Wharf was to be extended 1,100 feet, for which work Mr.
Parmenter’s tender of £1,375 had been accepted.

May 23rd.—The property “without the Walls” had been for the first time
assessed to the land tax.

May 27th.—The Queen’s Birthday had been observed as a general holiday,
and a salute of 21 guns fired from the South Battery by the Norfolk
Artillery Militia, under the command of Colonel Lord Suffield.

May 30th,—That Regiment had been inspected by Colonel Knox.

June 6th.—Mr. Shuckford, Master of the Workhouse, had died.

June 10th.—A meeting, convened by Messrs. O. Diver and H. Brand, had been
held for the purpose of organising an opposition Steam-packet Service.

June 27th.—The following had taken part in an Amateur performance at the
Regent Hall for the benefit of the Hospital:—Miss Lawes, Miss T. Lawes,
Messrs. Colley, Meadows, Lawes, Cattermole, Fenn, Watson, Godfrey, Cooke,
Spence, H. Baker, J. Franklin, and Mr. and Mrs. J. F. Young.

July 4th.—Mr. and Mrs. Blyth had been elected Master and Matron of the
Workhouse.

The British Medical Association had held a meeting at the Town Hall, Dr.
Vores in the chair; the following Yarmouth medical men were also
present:—Dr. Macleod, R.N., Dr. Smyth, and Messrs. J. C. Smith, Frederick
Palmer, Charles Palmer, D. Meadows, T. Moxon, R. R. B. Norman, Bately and
C. B. Rose.

July 11th.—Fifty thousand mackerel had been landed in one day and sold at
from 10s. to 12s. per 120.

July 22nd.—Messrs. E. R. Wodehouse and R. T. Gurdon had been accepted as
Liberal, and Sir E. H. K. Lacon and Major Walpole as Tory, candidates for
the then newly-constituted division of North Norfolk.

Messrs. C. Woolverton, E. R. Aldred, C. E. Bartram, and R. D. Barber had
been “secretly” appointed Justices by the Lord Chancellor.

July 30th.—Contains the following as to the coming contest:—“The Liberal
candidates are announced to address the electors at the Angel Hotel,
Market Place, on Wednesday evening next.  Mr. Wodehouse arrived on
Saturday last, and there is little doubt of both the candidates receiving
an enthusiastic welcome on their first public appearance before the
Liberal portion of the constituency.  The selection of Messrs. Wodehouse
and Gurdon for the Northern Division of the County has been regarded with
general satisfaction here, even among Liberals of the more advanced
school of politics, and the coming contest promises to see the Liberal
party of this borough thoroughly united and more than usually perfect in
its electoral organisation.”

Aug. 1st.—The Liberal electors had been addressed by their candidates in
the Long Room, Angel Hotel, J. Clowes, Esq., presiding, and among those
present were Sir T. Beevor, Bart., Messrs. J. Scott, F. Palmer, P.
Pullyn, C. E. Bartram, H. Brand, W. T. Fisher, Revs. Shelley, Tritton,
&c.

Mr. Simmons had made a successful balloon ascent from the Victoria
Gardens.

Aug. 5th.—The Tories had held a meeting at the “Star,” E. H. L. Preston,
Esq., in the chair, and amongst those present were Messrs. T. Brightwen,
I. Preston, W. Holt, E. H. H. Combe, C. Diver, Captain Dods, J. C. Smith,
W. J. Foreman, G. S. Shingles, R. Gorell, T. George, B. Dumbleton, J. T.
Bracey, J. Bracey, F. Ferrier, H. Cowl, B. Jay, C. Preston, E. Stagg, T.
Todd, T. W. Doughty, J. Bunn, J. Cooper, J. Buston, J. G. Ellis, G. Beck,
E. Boult, W. Mabson, J. H. Bly, T. C. Foreman, Burgess, &c., &c.

Aug. 8th.—At the Regatta the “Ariel” (T. M. Read), won the prize for
schooner yachts, and the “Red Rover” (Nightingale) and the “Belvidere”
(H. Teasdel), the other yacht prizes.  Mr. I. Preston acted as secretary,
Messrs. J. Clowes and Petts as umpires, Mr. F. Harmer as starter, and Mr.
J. Cobb as time-keeper on this occasion.

Aug. 19th.—Gorleston had been made one of the polling places for East
Suffolk.

Aug. 29th.—The Races had been held, the Stewards being the Mayor (W.
Worship, Esq.), Lord Hastings, Baron Rothschild, J. Goodson, Esq., M.P.,
and F. Barne, Esq.

Sep. 5th.—A number of persons had been victimized by the advertisement of
a “Trip to Cromer by Steamer,” which was to call for them at the Jetty;
no steamboat, however, appeared, and the promoters ran off with the
passengers’ fares.

Sep. 12th.—Messrs. Wodehouse and Gurdon, with Mr. McCullagh Torrens,
M.P., had addressed the electors from the Angel Hotel; amongst those
present were Sir Thomas Beevor, Bart., and Messrs. J. J. Colman, R.
Hammond, Bircham, Rev. Shelley, J. Scott, J. Clowes, C. E. Bartram, F.
Palmer, F. Danby-Palmer, J. Mainprice, G. Blake, L. Blake, S. C. Blake,
J. Fellows, A. Davie, W. T. Fisher, S. Page, J. Humphries, D. R. Fowler,
W. J. Brand, W. Livingston, &c., &c.

Sep. 19th.—Dr. Abdy had held the County Revision Court at the Tolhouse,
when Mr. I. O. Howard Taylor and Mr. F. Danby-Palmer appeared for the
Liberals and Mr. C. Diver for the Conservatives.

Sept. 23rd.—The Liberals claimed a gain of 81 on the revision, and it was
stated “that great credit was due to the Liberal agents, Messrs. I. O.
Taylor (Norwich) and F. Danby-Palmer (Yarmouth) for the care bestowed in
preparing the claim and objection lists.”

Sept. 26th.—The B Battery of the C Brigade, R.H.A., under Colonel Bishop,
had arrived at the Southtown Barracks; it was composed of 180 men, with
140 horses, and six nine-pound Armstrong guns.

The “Sultana” (brig of 301 tons) had been launched from Messrs. Fellows’
yard for Messrs. Stone and Company.

Oct. 7th.—The Mayor, with Messrs. W. T. Fisher and R. B. Ellis as
assessors, had held the Municipal Revision Court at the Tolhouse, when
Mr. F. Danby-Palmer appeared for the Liberals and Mr. C. Diver for the
Conservatives.

Oct. 10th.—The following were the retiring Councillors:—North Ward:
Messrs. J. Mainprice and J. H. Bly.  Market Ward: Messrs. F. Worship and
C. C. Aldred.  Regent Ward: Messrs. C. B. Rose and E. Stagg.  St.
George’s Ward: Messrs. J. C. Smith and J. Scott.  Nelson Ward: Messrs. C.
E. Bartram and H. H. Barber.  St. Andrew’s Ward: Messrs. E. H. L. Preston
and H. Teasdel.

Oct. 17th.—A vestry meeting had been held with a view to the removal of
the organ from the west end of St. Nicholas’ Church, the Rev. H. Nevill
presided, and Messrs. E. H. Preston, W. Mabson, C. S. D. Steward, R.
Hammond, and C. Cory took part in the proceedings.

There was a glut of herring, and prices “ruled low.”

Oct. 21st.—This state of affairs continued, and prices only averaged from
£7 to £8 per last.

Oct. 28th.—There had been heavy gales, with loss of life at sea, which
had interrupted the fishing.

Nov. 4th.—James Coleby had escaped from the Borough Gaol.

The polling in the contested Wards had terminated as follows:—

            _Regent Ward_.
E. Stagg (Con.)                     177
J. Burton (Con)                     128
T. Todd (Ind.)                       92
            _Market Ward_.
C. C. Aldred (Con.)                 174
E. Fyson (Con.)                     158
J. F. Neave (Lib.)                  133
J. G. Overend (Lib.)                119
         _St. Andrew’s Ward_.
J. P. Baumgartner (Lib.)            276
F. Dendy (Lib.)                     274
H. Teasdel (Con.)                   173
R. Dumbleton (Con.)                 176

The Liberals thus gaining two seats at Gorleston.

Nov. 7th.—Mr. Lane (Rate Collector) and Mr. R. Page (Bill poster), had
been before the Justices in consequence of a row arising out of the
election.

Nov. 14th.—At the Council meeting, S. Nightingale, Esq., had been on the
motion of Mr. C. C. Aldred, seconded by Mr. Woolverton, elected Mayor.

And Mr. H. Teasdel (the recently defeated candidate at Southtown) was
appointed an Alderman in the place of Mr. John Brown.

Nov. 18th.—There had been heavy gales from the N.N.W., and a schooner had
been driven through the Britannia Pier.

Nov. 25th.—The nomination for North Norfolk had taken place at Aylsham,
when the Rev. H. Lombe proposed, and Mr. E. H. L. Preston seconded, Sir
E. H. K. Lacon, Bart.; Mr. H. R. Upcher proposed, and Mr. J. W. Shelly
seconded, Mr. Edmond Robert Wodehouse; Mr. E. Fellowes, M.P., proposed,
and Mr. R. Leaman seconded, the Hon. Frederick Walpole; Mr. Bulwer
proposed, and Mr. Richard England seconded, Mr. Robert T. Gurdon; and the
High Sheriff (Lord Ranelagh) having declared the show of hands equally
divided between the candidates, a poll was demanded on behalf of all of
them.

Nov. 28th.—The poll had been declared as under:—

Walpole              2,642
Lacon                2,574
Wodehouse            2,237
Gurdon               2,081

At Yarmouth it was stated that:—

    “the proceedings throughout the day in connection with the polling
    for this part of the district were characterised by considerable
    excitement.  The Conservatives from the opening of the poll took a
    prominent position, and as hour by hour passed away their majority
    steadily increased, until by three o’clock they were, according to
    their published returns, nearly 400 ahead.  No statement of the poll
    was made during the day by the Liberals, but every exertion was made
    to reduce the Conservative majority.  Cabs and carriages bearing
    placards of “Vote for Wodehouse and Gurdon” were dashing about in all
    directions, keeping up the excitement; but, despite every effort, the
    influence of the local candidate proved too strong to be successfully
    resisted, and at four the Conservative declaration of numbers showed
    the following result:—

Lacon                948
Walpole              890
Wodehouse            505
Gurdon               469

    The polling at Ormesby for the Hundreds of East and West Flegg was
    also, as might have been anticipated, greatly in favour of the
    Conservative candidates.  Despite these adverse returns, the Liberal
    agents were sanguine of better results in other parts of the
    district, but their majorities at Cromer, Wells, and Holt, failed to
    make any material change, so far as the issue of the election was
    concerned, and it became at length apparent that the hopes of the
    Liberal majority in North Norfolk were at an end.  Notwithstanding
    the excitement engendered by the contest, the election was conducted
    throughout with great good humour.  During the day the streets and
    approaches to the polling places were thronged by persons who amused
    themselves by cheering and shouting in favour of their respective
    candidates, but there was, during the afternoon, an entire absence of
    the drunkenness and violence that characterised previous borough
    elections.  If the numbers polled be examined, it will be found that
    in the county (excluding Yarmouth) Mr. Wodehouse and Mr. Gurdon are
    in a slight majority.  It was in Yarmouth where the majority was
    obtained, and which, we hear, will yet be found to have been obtained
    by illegal practices.”

Dec. 12th.—Mr. Nutman (Relieving Officer for the North District) had
died.

It was alleged that an “aged imbecile pauper,” had been taken out of
Rollesby Workhouse by a Guardian to vote for the Tory candidates.

Dec. 19th.—The directors of the Britannia Pier Company had decided to
hand over that structure to Mr. Isaac in consideration of his taking over
the mortgage upon it.

Admiralty Jurisdiction had been conferred on the Yarmouth County Court.

Dec. 30th, contains the following notice of the death of Richard Ferrier,
Esq.:—“We regret to announce the death of Mr. R. Ferrier, who expired at
his residence, Trafalgar Road, on Sunday morning, after a protracted
illness.  The deceased gentleman represented St. George’s Ward for many
years in the Town Council, though for some time past his ill health had
incapacitated him from the discharge of his public duties.  He was a man
of sound judgment and excellent business habits, and his opinion on all
practical matters had great weight with the Council.  Mr. Ferrier was in
politics a Conservative, and in his younger days was distinguished by the
zeal and energy with which, at all times, he worked for his party.  In
respect to his memory the flags were hoisted half-mast high on the Town
Hall.”



1869.


Jan. 2nd.—The average price of herring during the fishing had been £8
17s. 6d. per last, and the money thus expended had amounted to £146,000.

Jan. 6th.—Mr. J. D. Hayes had been elected one of the Relieving Officers
in the place of Mr. Nutman deceased.

John Coleby alias “Jack Sheppard,” who had recently broken out of gaol,
had been re-captured.

Jan. 16th.—There had been a contest in St. George’s Ward to fill the
vacancy caused by Mr. R. Ferrier’s death; when the following was the
poll:—

Mr. T. W. Doughty (Con.)            104
Mr. H. Hammond (Lib.)                82

Jan. 27th.—A faculty had been obtained for the removal of St. Nicholas’
organ from the west end of that church to the North Transept; this had
been strongly opposed by Mr. E. H. L. Preston.

Feb. 17th.—There had been severe gales from the Eastward, causing much
damage to shipping.

Feb. 21st.—Mr. John L. Cufaude (Clerk to the Guardians) had been arrested
in respect of a claim “for which (as he stated to that Board) he had no
right in justice to be arrested”; subsequently he made himself a
bankrupt, when it appeared that he had been involved in racing
transactions, where he had figured as Mr. De La-Cè.

Feb. 27th—The boiler of the “Bold Buccleugh,” Hull steamer, had exploded
while that vessel was at her Yarmouth Wharf.

March 13th.—Mr. Williams, of Cardiff, had been given the “St. Nicholas’
Church Contract,” although his price (£4,755) exceeded that of Mr. Hood
(Norwich), which was £4,194.

The following gentlemen (out of 27 candidates) had been elected members
of the newly-formed Gorleston Board of Health:—Messrs. Dendy,
Baumgartner, Gooda, J. Hammond, Beevor, Gambling, Teasdel, W. Nelson and
J. Nelson.

Mr. Chipperfield (the late Secretary) had been presented with a
testimonial by the Yarmouth Building Society.

Two otters had, during a run of the harriers, been captured in a field
near Thrigby Hall.

March 20th.—Mr. S. B. Cory had been elected Clerk to the Gorleston Board
at a salary of £50 per annum, and Mr. F. Dendy chairman of that body.

April 7th.—The following Guardians had been elected:—North Ward: S.
Nightingale, J. T. Buston, and J. F. Neave.  Market Ward: C. C. Aldred
and W. Laws (with a tie between J. A. Norman and R. Tunbridge).  Regent
Ward: W. Worship, R. D. Barber and C. Diver.  St. George’s Ward: J. W. de
Caux, J. Scott, and J. Rivett.  Nelson Ward: C. Woolverton, J. T. Bracey,
J. H. Harrison, and G. W. Moore.

Messrs. C. S. D. Steward and E. R. Aldred had been re-elected
Churchwardens.

April 14th.—Mr. J. A. Norman had been seated as a Guardian for the Market
Ward; there were then 9 Conservatives and 7 Liberals upon the Board.

The Rifle Corps had held a Church parade.

April 17th.—William Danby-Palmer, Esq., had accepted the command of the
local batteries of Artillery Volunteers.



Major Orde had presided at the soireé of the Norfolk and Suffolk Building
Society held in the Corn Hall.

May 1st.—The Rifle Corps had given a series of amateur dramatic
representations at the Drill Hall, in which Messrs. Wiltshire, Youell,
Applewaite, Giles, Watson, Chipperfield, and others had taken part.

The Duke’s Head had been purchased by Mr. Davey for £1,520.

May 12th.—The Officers of the East Norfolk Militia had given a ball to
200 persons at the Town Hall.

June 5th.—Mr. E. H. L. Preston had presided at a meeting called for the
purpose of presenting a testimonial to Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart., M.P.
Captain Dods, and Messrs. William Mabson, William Danby-Palmer, C.
Woolverton, R. D. Barber, and Dumbleton took part in the proceedings.

June 12th.—Mr. Charles Cory (Town Clerk) had died of gastric fever in
Italy in his 57th year.

June 16th.—Messrs. Charles J. Palmer, C. Diver, and H. R. Harmer were
candidates for the office thus rendered vacant.

June 23rd.—At the Council meeting Mr. C. Diver (being the only person
nominated), was unanimously elected Town Clerk, and a vacancy in the
Aldermen being thus caused, the following voting took place:—

Mr. J. H. Orde                  25
Mr. E. H. L. Preston             3

July 14th.—The 1st Norfolk Artillery Volunteers (under command of Captain
W. Danby-Palmer) had attended St. Peter’s Church.

July 24th.—The following appointments had been made in the 2nd Norfolk
Rifle Volunteers:—W. P. P. Matthews to be Captain, B. Wilson to be
Lieutenant, William H. Palmer to be Ensign, W. E. Wyllys to be Surgeon,
and T. W. Doughty to be Hon. Assistant Quarter-Master.

July 31st.—At the Council meeting, Mr. C. C. Aldred was very abusive to
Mr. J. C. Smith during the election of a Haven Commissioner in the place
of the late Mr. Cory; the voting was as follows:—For Mr. W. Worship: The
Mayor, and Messrs. Purdy, Shingles, Orde, Watling, Bunn, Teasdel,
Worship, Hilton, Barnby, Nuthall, E. R. Aldred, C. C. Aldred, R. D.
Barber, Tomlinson, Foreman, Doughty, Jay, Woolverton, Bartram, and
Steward; total 21.  For Mr. E. H. L. Preston: Messrs. Youell, Harmer,
Laws, Mabson, Bly, Fyson, Wright, George, Stagg, J. Burton, W. D. Palmer,
Smith, Scott, Veale, J. T. Bracey, Stone, Barber, Richmond, Gooda, Brand,
Dendy, and Baumgartner; total 22.  Absent, Sir E. H. K. Lacon, and
Messrs. Mainprice, J. Bracey, Gourlay and Shuckford.

Aug. 4th.—The late P. Stead, Esq., had bequeathed £1,000 to the Hospital.

Aug. 28th.—The corner-stone of the Grammar School on Trafalgar Road had
been laid by S. Nightingale, Esq.  (Mayor).

Sept. 11th.—Upwards of 300 lasts of herring had been landed at the Fish
Wharf, and prices ranged from £10 to £25 per last.

Sept. 25th.—Dr. Hills (Bishop of Columbia) had addressed two public
meetings at the Town Hall, and preached at St. Nicholas’ in aid of that
Mission; the total sum thus realised was £64 11s.

Oct. 2nd.—Mr. R. H. Palmer (Revising Barrister) had been holding Courts
at Yarmouth, Ormesby, and Gorleston, when Messrs. C. Diver, F.
Danby-Palmer, and F. W. Ferrier were the agents appearing before him.

Mr. Wm. Jas. Palmer had been elected House Surgeon at the Hospital in the
place of Mr. Colley resigned.

Nov. 6th.—The following had been the result of the Municipal Election:—

          _St. Nicholas’ Ward_.
Mr. S. Nightingale (Con.)              266
Mr. E. H. L. Preston (Con.)            228
Mr. J. F. Neave (Lib.)                 176
              _Market Ward_.
Mr. J. E. Barnby (Con.)                246
Mr. Nuthall (Con.)                     209
Mr. J. A. Norman (Lib.)                195
              _Regent Ward_.
Mr. T. George (Con.)                   158
Mr. W. Wright (Con.)                   156
Mr. F. Danby-Palmer (Lib.)              82
Mr. John Clowes (Lib.)                  72
           _St. George’s Ward_.
Mr. J. W. de Caux (Lib.)               156
Mr. W. J. Foreman (Con.)               151
Mr. Chas. Palmer (Con.)                137
Mr. H. Hammond (Lib.)                  132
              _Nelson Ward_.
Messrs. Veale and Bracey (Con.)
unopposed.
           _St. Andrew’s Ward_.
Messrs. Gooda and Richmond (Con.)
unopposed.

Nov. 10th.—Charles Woolverton, Esq., had been unanimously elected Mayor.

Owing to the recent gales, the following fishing smacks were reported as
missing:—The “Prince Albert,” “Thomas and Fanny,” “Armada,” “Echo,”
“Royal Diadem,” “Lord Raglan,” “Eugene,” “Garland,” and “Pursuit.”

1,500 wind-bound vessels had sailed through the Roads northwards.

Dec. 4th.—The Justices had dismissed a summons for payment of rate in
consequence of the action of the Overseers in not placing the rated
person on the Municipal list, Mr. F. Danby-Palmer arguing the case for
the ratepayer, and the Vestry-Clerk appearing for the Overseers.  As this
raised a large question on the Register, it had caused some excitement in
political circles, and further action was threatened.



1870.


Jan. 1st.—Charles Dashwood, Esq., had given a ball at the Assembly Rooms.

Jan. 12th.—Thomas Brightwen, Esq., had died at the age of 59.

Damage had been occasioned to several houses in the town by a heavy gale.

Jan. 26th.—Another wrecked vessel had been in contact with the Britannia
Bier.

Jan. 29th.—Mr. J. H. Orde had been elected Borough Treasurer in the place
of Mr. T. Brightwen deceased.

Two vessels had been in collision with the Newarp lightship.

Feb. 12th.—J. Tomlinson, Esq., had been elected Commodore of the Norfolk
and Suffolk Yacht Club.

There had been a boiler explosion at Messrs. Bracey and Son’s Ropery.

Feb. 16th.—There had been very heavy gales and much loss to the shipping.

During one of these gales the Assembly Rooms had been discovered to be on
fire, and this building thus sustained damage to the extent of £700 or
£800.

Feb. 19th.—A meeting had been held at the Town Hall for the relief of the
poor.  The Mayor presided, and the Rev. Canon Nevill, Mr. Hammond, Major
Orde, Mr. W. N. Burroughs, Mr. Gorell, Mr. John Clowes, Mr. Neave, and
Mr. Laws took part in the proceedings.  Between £200 and £300 was raised
in the room.

Feb. 26th.—The organ in the Parish Church had been re-opened.  This
instrument appears from the report then issued to have been built by
Jordan in 1732, and previously repaired in 1812 and 1840; the repairs
this time costing £820.

March 12th.—Mr. Longley had been holding an Inquiry at the Tolhouse with
regard to the alleged neglect of a pauper patient by Mr. Stafford
(Surgeon for the North District).

March 19th.—Messrs. Blott had been prosecuted by the Haven Commissioners
for obstructing the North River, when they were defended by Mr. F.
Danby-Palmer, and the case adjourned in order to effect a settlement.

March 26th.—The Rifle Corps had attended Gorleston Church, and afterwards
marched round that village.  This was the first time such a parade had
taken place.

April 9th.—Captain Smyth, R.N., and Captain Dent, R.N., had been promoted
to the rank of Admiral.

April 13th.—The following had been the polling of the elected Guardians
(there being in all 32 candidates).—North: S. Nightingale (C), 356; J. F.
Neave (L), 308; J. D. Hilton (C), 292; S. Barge (C), 248.  In this ward
Mr. Cufaude had decided that Mr. Neave was disqualified, and had
consequently declined to declare that gentleman elected, Mr. Neave’s
solicitor (Mr. F. Danby-Palmer) had, however, taken a different view of
the affair, and this question was to form the subject of further
proceedings.  Market: J. A. Norman (L), 429; C. C. Aldred (C), 365; W.
Laws (C), 345.  Regent: R. D. Barber, W. Worship, and C. Diver (no
figures given.)  St. George’s: J. W. de Caux (L), 356; J. Scott (L), 312;
W. J. Foreman (C), 284.  Nelson: G. Woolverton (C), 615.; J. Bracey (C),
548; F. Palmer (L), 392; J. Clowes (L), 345.

April 16th.—Mr. Cufaude had submitted an elaborate statement upon Mr.
Neave’s case to the Local Government Board.

The constitution of the Guardians was then 10 Tories and 6 Liberals.

April 23rd.—“Yachting Items”: Mr. Palmer was building a schooner yacht.
Mr. Preston had purchased the “Otter.”  The “Red Rover” (Nightingale) was
being altered, as was also the “Syren.”

Messrs. Mills and Blake had launched a new barge.

Mrs. Bowyer Vaux, her son, and a friend, had been upset in a sailing boat
on Breydon.

April 30th.—At a sale of Gas Shares, those of £30 realised £45 per share,
and those of £7 10s., £11 10s. per share.  It was stated that the maximum
dividend of 8½ per cent. was regularly paid on this stock.

May 4th.—Sir Alexander Shafto Adair, Bart., (Lib.), and Lord Mahon (Con.)
were candidates for East Suffolk.

May 14th.—Mr. J. Fenn had caught a perch weighing 3½ lbs. and 18 inches
in length.

May 18th.—There was a report current of a fracas having taken place
between two leading members of the Tory party during a meeting at the
Star Hotel.

May 21st.—The Norfolk and Suffolk Yacht Club Dinner had taken place at
the Town Hall.

May 25th.—“It is stated that the gallant gentleman, (Major Foreman) who
figured in the _melée_ that arose at the late conference of the
Conservative party is about to seek legal redress for the attack made
upon him (by Mr. E. H. L. Preston.)”

The 1st Norfolk Artillery Volunteers (under the command of Captain
Commandant William Danby-Palmer) had attended St. Peter’s Church.

May 28th.—On Her Majesty’s Birthday, the Rifle Volunteers under the
command of Major Orde had fired a _feu de joie_ in the Market Place, and
the Artillery, under the command of Captain William Danby-Palmer, had
fired a salute of 21 guns from the South Battery.  In the evening the
officers messed at the Crown and Anchor, when the following were among
the guests present—The Mayor (C. Woolverton, Esq.), the Deputy-Mayor (S.
Nightingale, Esq.), Rev. B. Vaux, J. C. Smith, Esq., E.N.M., C. Diver,
Esq., (Town Clerk), Captain Cubitt, Captain Alderson, N.M.A., Major
Foreman, C. J. Palmer, Esq., and I. Preston, Esq.

June 4th.—The following had been the result of the East Suffolk
Election:—

Lord Mahon (Con.)                        3,456
Sir A. S. Adair, Bart. (Lib.)            3,285

Captain Alderson and Lieutenant Partridge, of the Norfolk Artillery
Militia, had given a Ball at the Town Hall.

June 11th.—The Nottingham Order of Odd Fellows had held its annual
festival at the Corn Hall, Bro. Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart., M.P., P.I.F.,
taking the chair, supported by Bros. Moxon, E. P. Youell, W. Laws, W. J.
Foreman, W. T. Fisher, J. H. Fellows, J. Bracey, and Mr. Wiltshire.

Mr. Cattermole (Librarian) had been presented with a testimonial in the
shape of a watch of the value of £25 and a cheque for £31 10s.

June 15th.—Admiral Smyth, R.N., had resigned the office of Pier-Master
after 35 years service.

June 18th.—The decision of the Local Government Board being in favour of
Mr. F. Danby-Palmer’s contention, and against that of Mr. Cufaude,
consequent thereon Mr. Neave was entitled to his seat at the Board of
Guardians.

June 22nd.—The brigantine “Ethel” had been launched from Mr. Rust’s yard.

June 25th.—The officers of the Norfolk Artillery Militia had given a
grand Military Ball at the Assembly Rooms.

Mr. C. S. D. Steward and party had caught 10 perch on Ormesby Broad, four
of which weighed 12lbs.

The Yarmouth Co-operative Society was in liquidation, and Mr. Lovewell
Blake, the liquidator, had summoned several of the contributors for
arrears of call.

July 2nd.—Quarter-Master Doughty, Colour-Sergeant Chipperfield, Sergeants
Lay and Wilshak and Privates Harpour and Wales had been selected to go to
Wimbledon.

Mr. I. Preston, accompanied by his friend, Mr. T. M. Baker, had sailed
for Holland in the river yacht “Otter.”

July 16th.—The opening services in connection with the New Middlegate
Congregational Church had taken place.  The Rev. J. C. Harrison preached
from Psalm cxvi., 12 and 13; the cost of this building, &c., (less sale
of old material) had amounted to £3,515 8s. 8d.; the architect was Mr. J.
T. Bottle, the contractor Mr. William Hood, and the sub-contractors
Messrs. Burgess, Dumbleton, Sargeson, and Barge.

The luncheon, in connection with the event, was held at the “Crown and
Anchor,” when the Rev. W. Tritton presided; about 250 persons were
present, addresses were delivered by the Chairman, the Rev. J. C.
Harrison, the Rev. Dr. Mellor, and Messrs. S. W. Spelman, J. Crossley, J.
T. Bottle and others.

July 23rd.—The D Troop B Brigade of the Royal Horse Artillery had arrived
at the Southtown Barracks under the command of Colonel Mitchell,
comprising 150 officers and men with 120 horses and 6 guns.

July 27th.—Upon Mr. Neave attending to take his seat at the Board of
Guardians a “scene” took place, several members accusing Mr. Cufaude of
partiality, which that gentleman indignantly denied.

August 13th.—Mr. Attwood had been returned as a Councillor for the St.
Andrew’s Ward without opposition, in the place of Mr. Richmond deceased.

August 20th.—The following officers and men of the 1st Norfolk Artillery
Volunteers had gone to Shoeburyness:—Captain Commandant William
Danby-Palmer, Lieutenants T. Burton Steward and T. M. Baker, Sergeant
Smith, Corporals Harrison and Sadd, Bombardiers Steward and Sayer,
Gunners Allcock, Millican, and Woodhouse.

Captain Youell had (after eleven years’ service) retired from the Rifles.

Sept. 3rd.—A meeting had been held to raise a fund for the sufferers by
the Franco-German war.  The Mayor, the Vicar, Dr. Vores, Mr. J. H. Orde,
Mr. C. C. Aldred, the Rev. W. Griffiths, and Mr. S. W. Spelman took part
in the proceedings, and upwards of £100 was raised in the room.

Sept. 17th.—Mrs. Gray had bequeathed by will £100 to the Hospital, £19
19s. to the Sailors’ Home, and £10 to the Lying-in Charity.

Upwards of 60 boats had delivered fish at the Wharf, the price being £16
to £22 per last for fresh fish.

Sept. 24th.—The Queen’s bounty had been forwarded to Mrs. Spurge.

Oct. 5th.—At a meeting held at the Turk’s Head, J. Scott, Esq., in the
chair, Mr. F. Danby-Palmer and Mr. Hinchman Hammond had been selected as
candidates to contest the St. George’s Ward in the Liberal interest.

Mr. J. Petts, R.N., had resigned his command in the Coastguard after 40
years’ service, twelve of which had been spent in Yarmouth.

Oct. 15th.—No minister had attended at St. Peter’s Church to perform
service in the afternoon of Sunday.

The old Jetty had been lengthened 60 feet.

Mr. E. Stagg (one of the Councillors for the Regent Ward) had died.

£149 13s. 6d. had been raised for the purpose of presenting a testimonial
to Sergeant Berry (of the Police).

Mr. S. K. Smith had landed from one of his boats 24 lasts of herrings,
which sold for £264.

It was calculated that some 2,000 French fishermen were then in
Gorleston.

Oct. 26th.—Mr. Robert Rising (of Horsey) had been elected a Haven and
Pier Commissioner in the place of Mr. Burroughes resigned.

Nov. 5th.—Owing to the extension of the franchise and the “split” in the
Conservative camp, the Municipal Election had excited a good deal of
attention, as the following report shows:—

                            “MUNICIPAL ELECTION.”

    As was expected, these elections were fought out with considerable
    spirit, the town throughout the day presenting all the aspects of a
    contested general election, cabs duly placarded with the names and
    claims of the candidates rushing about the streets in all directions
    _en route_ to the various polling-places or committee-rooms.

    In the North Ward the Conservatives were early at work, and were
    enabled to put their candidates considerably ahead, Messrs. Worship
    and Hilton counting a formidable majority at an early stage of the
    contest.  The friends of Messrs. Neave and Blyth were, however, far
    from dismayed, and worked with a degree of zeal that certainly
    deserved if it did not ensure success.  In the course of the
    afternoon the Conservative majority had been greatly reduced, and it
    looked at one time as if Mr. Neave’s return would have been secured.
    The aspect of things nerved the Conservatives to renewed efforts and
    enabled them to keep ahead of their opponents, the result being the
    return of their candidates, Messrs. Worship and Hilton.

    In the Market Ward the greatest excitement prevailed, popular feeling
    being in favour of Mr. J. Norman (L) and Mr. I. Preston.  The latter,
    although a Conservative, came forward on independent grounds, and as
    opposed to the compromise that has been entered into for the return
    of Messrs. Norman and Combe.  The last-named gentleman was brought
    out under the auspices of that section of the Conservative party,
    better known as the “clique,” which evoked the determined opposition
    of the “independent” portion of the party.  There was another
    candidate in the person of Mr J. Garratt (L), but that gentleman
    retired at an early stage of the contest in favour of Mr. Combe.
    Soon after the commencement of the polling, it became evident that
    Mr. Norman’s election would be safe, and that the real fight would be
    between Messrs. Combe and Preston.  The last-named had a large staff
    of energetic supporters, and he was soon placed in a majority which
    no efforts on the part of his opponents could break down.  The
    result, therefore, in this ward was the return of Messrs. Norman and
    Preston, which must be regarded as a great blow to the dominant
    section of the Conservative party, who strained every nerve to carry
    their man.

    The contest in the Regent Ward was of diminished interest as compared
    with the other parts of the town, and resulted in the return of the
    Conservative candidates, Messrs. Barber and Tomlinson.  Against these
    gentlemen were arrayed Messrs. Woodger and Page; but the candidature
    of the two last-named was carried on in a sort of guerilla fashion
    that evinced little confidence in a successful result, and their
    respective chances will be found very fully illustrated in the
    returns given at the close of the poll.

    In the St. George’s Ward the battle was between Messrs. Doughty and
    Baker, (C), and Messrs. Palmer and Hammond (L).  Here a most
    determined fight was made, the Liberals commencing the business of
    the day in a style that evidently meant winning.  Soon after the
    first hour’s polling, Messrs. Palmer and Hammond took a commanding
    lead, and although the utmost zeal was evinced on the part of their
    opponents, they kept increasing their majority until by noon it had
    assumed such proportions as to place the issue of the contest beyond
    all question.  The result was unexpected, and created quite a
    sensation among the Conservatives, who chagrined at the turn of
    affairs in the Market Ward, were little prepared for this fresh
    source of annoyance and discomfiture.

    In the Nelson Ward there was no contest, Messrs. Woolverton, (C), and
    Stone (L) being unopposed.

    The election in the Southtown or St. Andrew’s Ward was provocative of
    the usual excitement, the Gorlestonians coming out in considerable
    force, and testifying their Conservative or Liberal proclivities in
    the liveliest manner.  The candidates were Messrs. Steward and
    Hammond, (C), as opposed to Messrs. Beevor and Nelson.  The contest
    was well fought throughout, and resulted in the election of the
    Conservative candidates.

    In celebration of the victory in the St. George’s Ward, the Liberals
    paraded a band, which did honour to the occasion by playing a
    selection of popular music through the principal streets.

                            OFFICIAL DECLARATION.

    The official swearing-in of the newly-elected members took place on
    Thursday afternoon, the proceedings creating more than their wonted
    interest from the expectation of a “scene.”  These anticipations were
    fully realised.  Previous to the commencement of the usual routine,
    Mr. J. F. Neave, one of the defeated Liberal candidates in the North
    Ward, addressed Mr. S. Nightingale, and, in a tone of considerable
    vehemence, charged that gentleman and his supporters with having
    secured the election by unfair practices by bringing forward
    individuals to personate voters who were dead or at sea, or by other
    means equally discreditable.  The scene which ensued was of the most
    lively character, some half-dozen Councillors speaking at once.
    Those in the body of the Court showed their enjoyment by encouraging
    shouts of “Go it Neave,” “Give it them,” an appeal, however, which
    was scarcely necessary, as the North Ward champion appeared in fine
    mettle, and continued his address, although the greater part of it
    was lost in the general turmoil.  Referring to the result, Mr.
    Nightingale was understood to say that Mr. Neave would never be so
    near winning again, which elicited a rejoinder from the latter that
    he had been told he should never be elected a Guardian, but he had
    shown them what he could do, and if he were spared he would yet be in
    the Council.  This declaration of future hostilities was received
    with great uproar, which was with difficulty quelled sufficiently to
    enable the business of the meeting to be proceeded with.  This having
    been brought to a termination, after sundry interruptions, the
    newly-elected hastily quitted the Court, the proceedings having
    afforded a singular exhibition of political amenities, from a
    Yarmouth point of view.

The following is the official return:—

             _North Ward_.
Mr. Hilton (C)                      395
,, Worship (C)                      384
„ Neave (L)                         371
„ Blyth (L)                         287
            _Market Ward_.
Mr. J. A. Norman (L)                402
,, I. Preston, Junr. (C)            376
,, Combe, (C)                       336
,, Garratt (L)                        4
            _Regent Ward_.
Mr. J. Tomlinson (C)                281
„ R. D. Barber (C)                  261
,, Woodger (L)                       86
„ R. Page (L)                         7
         _St. George’s Ward_.
Mr. F. Danby-Palmer (L)             292
,, H. Hammond (L)                   291
,, Baker (C)                        164
,, Doughty (C)                      142
            _Nelson Ward_.
Messrs. Woolverton (C) and Stone (L)
unopposed.
   _Southtown or St. Andrew’s Ward_.
Mr. R. Steward (C)                  365
,, Hammond (C)                      358
,, Beevor (L)                       309
,, Nelson (L)                       300

As the result of this election, it was believed that Mr. E. H. L. Preston
would be Mayor for the ensuing year.

Mr. F. Ferrier had been returned in the place of Mr. Stagg, deceased, for
the Regent Ward.

An effort was being made to restore St. George’s Chapel.

Nov. 12th.—At the Council meeting, Mr. J. C. Smith proposed, and Mr.
Bracey seconded, Mr. E. H. L. Preston, as Mayor, and this was carried
_nem. dis._

There had been an enormous catch of herring; Messrs. Smith’s “Ocean Wave”
had taken 29 lasts, and on the Thursday it was computed that 1,409 lasts
of fish had been landed at the Wharf.

Nov. 16th.—C. E. Bartram, Esq., J.P. and Councillor for the South Ward
had died.

Nov. 19th.—The Volunteers had received “Snider Rifles.”

Mr. J. H. Fellows had presided at a meeting at the “New Royal Standard”
to select a candidate for the South Ward, when Mr. Fredk. Palmer was
brought forward, the other candidates named being Mr. I. Hill, Mr. G.
Harvey, and Mr. J. H. Harrison.

Nov. 23rd.—Commissions signed by the Lord Lieutenant:—2nd N.R.V., Lieut.
A. J. Palmer to be Captain, vice Youell resigned; Ensign E. H. H. Combe
to be Lieut., vice Palmer promoted.

Nov. 26th.—The following had been the result of the election in the
Nelson Ward:—

Mr. Fredk. Palmer (L.)            447
„ Isaac Hill (C.)                 269

After the declaration of the poll a procession, headed by a band, had
paraded the principal streets.

Twelve vessels had already cleared with 28,390 barrels of herring for
Italian ports.

Dec. 3rd.—A petition alleging bribery at St. George’s Ward Election, had
been presented to the Town Council, and supported there by Mr. J. W. Bunn
(one of the Aldermen).  Mr. F. Danby-Palmer repudiated the charge on
behalf of Mr. Hammond and himself, and, ultimately, on the motion of Mr.
Harmer, the document was ordered to be laid “under the table.”

The death of Mr. H. H. Barber (one of the Councillors for the South Ward,
and a Captain in the 2nd N.R.V.) is recorded.

In the Nelson Ward Mr. H. Fenner (C.) had been returned in his place,
having beaten Mr. Woodger (L.) by 85 votes.

The fishing-boats were “making up” after a very successful voyage.

It was proposed to lay down a tramway from Yarmouth to Lowestoft.

Dec. 17th.—The Mayor had presented the testimonial to Inspector Berry; it
consisted of a 20 guinea watch and a purse of £145.

One fishing boat had caught 142 lasts of herring during the season.

It was estimated that £40,000 would be paid to the fishermen in wages.

Messrs. Woolverton and George had opened a Stock Sale at Acle, the former
gentleman acting as auctioneer.  There were a large number of entries,
and fat stock had realised 10s. 6d. per stone.

Dec. 21st.—Miss Emma Pearson (daughter of the late Captain Pearson, R.N.)
had written a letter from the seat of war at Orleans, where she was
nursing the sick and wounded.

Dec. 24th.—Records the death of Mr. Henry Fellows, shipbuilder, aged 70.

Herring had averaged £10 per last during the season, and it was computed
that the money value of the fish caught during the season was £180,000.

Dec. 28th.—Mr. Wyllys’ sledge had upset at the corner of Regent Street,
and knocked over a woman, but no serious damage had been sustained.

Dec. 31st.—Mr. J. H. Want had obtained the contract for the erection of a
new Post Office in Regent Street.



1871.


Jan. 4th.—Records the abandonment of what was known as the “Ordering up
system,” under which complainants had been accustomed, on payment of a
fee of 2s. (without summons), to have persons brought before the
Magistrates by the police.

A young Danish girl had been discovered working as a sailor on board a
vessel.

Jan. 10th.—One Thacker, a veteran gunner, generally known as “Old Stork”
had brought down five swans at one shot on Breydon.

Jan. 14th.—The Mayor (E. H. L. Preston, Esq.), had given a ball at the
Town-hall; about 180 guests were present; Mr. Sturge led the band; and
Mr. Collins provided the refreshments.

A large otter, measuring 4¾ feet and weighing 30 lbs., had been shot near
the North River; it had previously been pursued by a skater, who had
seized it by the tail, when it turned upon him and inflicted a
considerable wound on his wrist.

Jan. 15th.—The Magistrates had refused to convict in a vaccination case,
which conduct was greatly exercising the Board of Guardians.

Jan. 25th.—The schooner “Starling” had foundered in the fair way of the
harbour between the piers, and thus blocked the navigation.

Feb. 1st.—The first subscription ball was advertised with the following
list of stewards:—The Mayor, Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart., M.P., Henry E.
Buxton, Charles Sharpe Sharpe, and William Danby-Palmer, Esqs.

Feb. 4th.—Bro. Edward Howes had been installed W.M. of Lodge
“Friendship,” the members of which lodge had presented a testimonial to
Bro. C. L. Chipperfield.

Mr. W. J. Foreman had presided at the meeting of the Great Yarmouth
Building Society, and Mr. Frederick Palmer at the meeting of the Norfolk
and Suffolk Building Society.  Each institution published a favourable
report of its proceedings and declared bonuses of £15 and £16 13s. 4d.
respectively.

Mr. Woodger had given 20 tons of coal to the poor in the South Ward.

Feb. 8th.—Contains the following account of the death of Robert Steward,
Esq.:—

    “We regret to record the death of this gentleman who expired suddenly
    at his residence in Cambridge, on Saturday evening.  Mr. Steward for
    a number of years occupied a very prominent position in this borough,
    having filled the office of Chief Magistrate on five occasions.  He
    was until recently an active member of the Town Council, having
    represented the Southtown or St. Andrew’s Ward for a lengthened
    period, during which time he exhibited a warm interest in all that
    related to the welfare of the borough.  Mr. Steward was one of the
    first to associate himself with the Volunteer movement, and was ever
    ready with his purse to aid the cause.  It was the occasion of his
    fifth election to the Mayoralty that his fellow-townsmen determined
    to present him with a testimonial in recognition of his public
    services, and so heartily was the appeal responded to, that a sum was
    soon raised sufficient for the purchase of a handsome service of
    plate, which was publicly presented at the Town Hall.  Latterly Mr.
    Steward had been suffering from failing health, and had taken up his
    residence at Cambridge, but on all occasions when anything of public
    interest was under discussion he was at his accustomed post in the
    Town Council.  Mr. Steward was a Justice of the Peace for the
    Borough, and also for the County of Suffolk.  As a public man his
    loss will be much felt, for though occasionally overbearing and
    impetuous, his faults were overlooked in the thorough earnestness
    with which he applied himself to the promotion of those measures
    which he considered for the general good.  Out of respect the flags
    on the Town Hall and shipping have been hoisted half-mast.”

A quantity of human remains had been discovered in a vault in Row 112.

Feb. 11th.—A fine hare had been captured in the Market Place, after an
exciting chase.

Feb. 15th.—Mr. E. H. H. Combe and Mr. Nelson had been nominated to fill
the vacancy, created by Mr. Steward’s death, in the Southtown Ward.

J. C. Smith, Esq., had presided at the anniversary of the “Loyal Prince
of Wales Lodge,” M.U.O.F., at the Market Tavern, when about sixty
brethren were present.

Feb. 25th.—There were 900 boats then engaged in the fishing, of the gross
tonnage of 14,788 tons, manned by 4051 men and 531 boys.

Mr. E. H. H. Combe had been returned as a member of the Council for the
Southtown Ward.

March 8th.—Police-constable Shreeve had met with a fatal accident by
falling from the fire escape.

The pauper lunatics, 18 in number, had been removed from London to the
Ipswich Asylum.

An old house in Row 132 had fallen down.

March 11th.—The late R. Steward, Esq., had bequeathed a legacy of £19
19s. to each of the following charities:—The Great Yarmouth Hospital, the
Priory, St. Peter’s, and Gorleston National Schools, the Norfolk and
Norwich Hospital, the Norwich Blind Institution, the National School
Society, the Boys’ Hospital School (Norwich), the C. M. Society, and the
S. P. G. Society.

March 22nd.—A fine pike, weighing upwards of 25lbs., had been shot in one
of the neighbouring Broads.

April 18th.—At the Guardians’ Election the new and largely augmented
constituency was polled for the first time.  There was a regular party
fight, Mr. John Cooper acting as Conservative agent, and Mr. F.
Danby-Palmer for the Liberals, the following being the result:—

             _North Ward_.
J. F. Neave (L)                      844
H. Blyth (L)                         662
S. Nightingale (C)                   662
J. T. Buston (C)                     567
J. Rant (L)                          542
S. Barge (C)                         478
             _Market Ward_.
J. A. Norman (L)                     621
Wm. Laws (C)                         476
J. G. Overend (L)                    427
R. Dumbleton (C)                     418
R. B. Ellis (C)                      397
             _Regent Ward_.
R. D. Barber (C)                     470
W. Worship (C)                       426
J. H. Norman (L)                     375
C. Diver (C)                         367
J. Clowes (Grocer) (L)               289
R. Bryant (L)                        198
          _St. George’s Ward_.
J. W. de Caux (L)                    557
J. Scott (L)                         478
J. Rivett (L)                        371
W. J. Foreman (C)                    298
W. Harrison (C)                      248
D. Gooch (C)                         244
T. Todd (C)                          115
             _Nelson Ward_.
F. Palmer (L)                        966
C. Woolverton (C)                    934
J. Bracey (C)                        766
J. Clowes (Solicitor) (L)            678
W. T. Fisher (L)                     534
T. C. Foreman (N)                    376
G. Harvey (C)                        267
J. H. Harrison (N)                     8

    Previous to the declaration of the numbers by the returning officer,

    Mr. John Cooper, on behalf of the Conservative candidates, who had
    met the previous night, announced his intention not to proceed with
    the scrutiny before the returning officer, who had no authority to
    call witnesses, but stated that the whole conduct of the election
    would be laid before the Poor Law Board with a view to a thorough
    enquiry being instituted.  The election had been conducted in a
    fraudulent manner.  Mr. Cooper, in support of his assertion,
    instanced the case of Hurr, one of the collectors, who, he alleged,
    had only returned 113 papers out of 300.  Names had also been put on
    various papers without authority, while the collector (Hurr) had
    taken his papers to the house of one of the candidates, where they
    were examined and sorted.  Another collector in the Liberal interest,
    named Norman, had been convicted and sentenced to twelve months’
    imprisonment for robbery.  Mr. Cooper went on to say that in the
    Market Ward (Hurr’s district) upwards of twenty papers had never been
    called for, and he understood that there were upwards of 50 which had
    been signed by one person.  The election had been conducted in such
    an unfair and scandalous manner, that the Conservatives had resolved
    upon demanding a Poor Law enquiry.

    Mr. Livingston said it would be for Mr. Cooper and his friends to
    make good the allegations just made.  He hoped if there had been any
    irregularity it would be fully enquired into.

    Mr. J. A. Norman (who headed the poll for the Market Ward) supposed
    that Mr. Cooper had suspected the Liberals had been adopting the
    former tactics of their opponents, and had taken a leaf out of their
    book.  (Laughter.)

    Mr. Overend (another successful candidate for the Market Ward) denied
    that the papers had been sorted in the shop as alleged, and said the
    collector called for information.

    Mr. Cufaude (the Returning-officer) said the collector ought not to
    have done this, as it was most irregular and contrary to the
    instructions given to the collectors.  He then gave the return as
    above, and the proceedings closed.

    The result has caused considerable heart-burning among the
    Conservatives, who have so long held the sway in all matters
    pertaining to local administration, and they cannot be expected to
    view with equanimity the storming of one of their chief strongholds
    by the enemy.

April 22nd.—Mr. Bowgin, who had died at the age of 90, had left a
considerable sum of money to local charities.

April 26th.—At the first meeting of the recently elected Board of
Guardians, Mr. Frederick Palmer and Mr. John A. Norman were respectively
elected chairman and vice-chairman, in the place of Mr. C. Woolverton and
Mr. W. Laws.

The smack “Sevastopol” (belonging to Mr. H. Fenner) had been destroyed by
fire on the fishing grounds.

Judge Worlledge had been appointed Chancellor of the Diocese in the place
of Mr. Howes, deceased.

May 6th.—The _Free Lance_, a notorious local newspaper, had been
proceeded against for libelling Mr. King, of Gorleston.

May 10th.—Records the death of Richard Hammond, Esq., as follows:—“It is
with deep regret that we announce the death of this much respected
gentleman, who expired at his residence, Regent Road, on Saturday morning
last, after a rather lengthened illness.  Mr. Hammond during his long
career has occupied so prominent a position, and has ranked so high in
the opinion of all classes of his fellow-townsmen, that his death,
although regarded as imminent, created much sensation.  The deceased, who
was born in 1792, and was consequently at the time of his decease in his
79th year, was one of the oldest Magistrates of the borough, having been
called to the Bench in 1841.  During the long period that Mr. Hammond was
associated with the administration of justice he was remarkable for his
uprightness and thorough independence of character.  Wealthy, but yet
conspicuous for his unostentatious mode of life, he was at all times
accessible to those of his poorer fellow townsmen, many of whom were wont
to seek his counsel, and advice.  In the exercise of his magisterial
functions, he was ever disposed to temper justice with mercy, and in his
death there must be many who must feel that they have lost a true and
valued friend.  The deceased for many years occupied a leading position
as among the most prominent, forward, yet consistent members of the
Liberal party, and although he had of late ceased to take any active part
in political controversies, he was always deeply interested in everything
that pertained to the advancement of the cause which he had so greatly at
heart.  Mr. Hammond, who was largely connected at one time with the
fisheries, had also a considerable stake in the shipping of the port, and
accumulated a large property, the bulk of which will, doubtless, have
been bequeathed to his three nieces, as he was unmarried.  Out of respect
to the deceased, the flags on the Town Hall, public buildings, and
shipping have been hoisted half-mast, while many private families have
shown similar marks of regard to the memory of the deceased.”

The Guardians had decided to allow Nonconformist Ministers to visit at
the Workhouse.

May 17th.—One boat had landed 1,000 mackerel, and that fish was selling
at from 20s. to 25s. per hundred.

May 20th.—The late Mr. Hammond had left the following charitable
legacies:—Hospital, £50; Sailors’ Home, £19 19s.; Priory schools, £50;
and St. John’s, St. Andrew’s, St. Peter’s and Primitive Methodist
schools, £19 19s. each.

The cost of taking the census had amounted to £110 15s.

June 3rd.—Records the death of David A. Gourlay, Esq., as follows:—“We
regret to record the death of this gentleman, who expired at his
residence on Wednesday, at the advanced age of 89 years.  During his long
connection with the town, Mr. Gourlay contrived to amass considerable
wealth, having been largely connected with the shipping interest of the
port.  The deceased was a much respected member of the Liberal party in
the borough, and in 1849 filled the office of Mayor.  He was also a
Magistrate, having been placed on the roll of Justices in 1858, and for
many years represented the Market Ward in the Town Council, which
position he only resigned last year.  Mr. Gourlay was of a singularly
quiet habit, devoting his entire time to business pursuits, which he
continued until advancing years and infirmities compelled retirement.
The deceased was deeply interested in the educational movements of the
town, and a few years since presented the magnificent donation of £1,000
towards the Wesleyan Schools.  As a mark of respect to his memory the
flags on the Town Hall and shipping have been hoisted half mast.  The
number of borough magistrates who have died since 1863 has now reached
15.”

June 10th.—There had been a stormy discussion in the Council with regard
to the proposal to appoint Messrs. Salmon Palmer, Garson Blake, and John
W. de Caux, Justices for the Borough, when Mr. James W. Bunn moved, and
Mr. C. Woolverton seconded a resolution to the effect that such
appointments “would be objectionable”; and Mr. F. Danby-Palmer moved, and
Mr. James Scott seconded an amendment approving such appointments, which
was lost by 25 to 7 votes, those voting in the minority being Messrs. F.
Danby-Palmer, J. Scott, Frederick Palmer, J. W. de Caux, T. W. Attwood,
H. Hammond, and J. A. Norman.

Mr. I. Preston’s “Otter” had made a passage from Yarmouth to Harwich, a
distance of 52 miles in four and a half hours.

June 14th.—Mr. Stafford had resigned the surgeonship for the North
District, his salary being £100; he stated that he had 2,093 paupers on
his books.

June 17th.—One hundred and twenty-seven men of the R.H.A. were encamped
on the North Denes, the officers being Captains Fox-Strangeways and
Scott; Lieutenants Rothe, Hardinge-Brown, and P. F. Blackwood;
Surgeon-Major Lewer, and Vet.-Surgeon Walker.

Messrs. J. Tolver Waters, Frank Burton, and F. W. Dendy had passed the
Legal examination.

June 21st.—Mr. A. D. Stone had been elected a Haven Commissioner in the
place of Mr. Hammond, deceased, without opposition, owing to Mr. de
Caux’s nomination paper having been left at the wrong office.

June 24th.—The “Oleander,” a barque of 440 tons had been launched from
Messrs. Fellows and Son’s yard.

July 12th.—At the Water Frolic the “Halcyon” won the first match, and the
“Vivid” the second match; Mr. I. Preston, junr., acted as Secretary.

There had been a destructive fire at Mr. Bland’s premises on the Queen’s
Road.

July 26th.—There had been a Volunteer Encampment on the North Denes with
a brigade field day, when the troops were under the command of
Major-General Murray.

The Yarmouth Corps had entertained the Officers of the Norfolk and
Suffolk Battalions, the Mayor, Major-General Murray, Brigade Major
Ogilvie, Captain Alderson, N.A.M., and several other guests at the Royal
Hotel.

There had been a proposal made to abolish the Fair.

The newly-appointed Magistrates, Messrs. Palmer, Blake, and de Caux had
qualified.

Aug. 19th.—The Council had voted an address of congratulation to Sir
James Paget upon his being created a Baronet.

The Prince of Wales had consented to accept the Hon. Colonelcy of the
Norfolk Artillery Militia, vacant through the death of Lord Hastings.

Aug. 26th.—Tomlinson’s Brewery and the houses attached to it had been
sold in lots by public auction.

Sept. 2nd.—St. George’s Denes had been for the first time enclosed for a
“Floral Fete,” when Mr. James H. Harrison “with rather a rough element at
the back” appeared as a champion of public rights.

Sept. 6th.—The following Rifle Volunteer Officers had received
certificates of proficiency under the new regulations:—Captains Holt,
Matthews, and Palmer, and Lieutenants Buxton, Diver, Palmer and Wilson.

Sept. 27th.—M. Desfongerais (the re-called French Consul) had been
presented with a testimonial before leaving Yarmouth.

Sept. 30th.—Heavy gales had prevailed from the E. and S.E.

“Low prices and heavy deliveries” continued to characterise the fishing.

Mr. W. B. Neslin, an eccentric character, who had accumulated hundreds,
if not thousands of notes of various epitaphs, had died at the age of 70
years.

Oct. 18th.—E. P. Youell, Esq., had presided at a meeting called to
consider the restoration of Gorleston Church.

Oct. 21st.—The New Corn Hall in Howard Street had been opened with a
public dinner, when about 200 gentlemen attended, the chair being taken
by H. S. Grimmer, Esq., and the vice-chairs by Messrs. G. M. Beck, E. H.
H. Combe, E. Press, and J. W. Bunn.

Nov. 4th.—Five of the Wards had been contested, with the following
result:—

        _North Ward_.
Neave (L)                 565
Bly(C)                    541
Buston (C)                464
Blyth (L)                 432
       _Market Ward_.
Fyson (C)                 394
Baker (C)                 374
Garratt (L)               349
Clowes (L)                321
       _Regent Ward_.
Burton (C)                239
Ferrier (C)               212
Goodwin (L)               137
Livingston (L)            117
    _St. George’s Ward_.
Todd (I)                  385
Scott (L)                 324
Smith (C)                 150
       _Nelson Ward_.
Woodger (L)               742
Fenner (C)                467
Palmer (L)                407
    _St. Andrew’s Ward_.
Dendy (L) and Baumgartner
(L), unopposed.

Mr. Edward S. Preston, who had been in the field, having retired at the
eleventh hour.

The general result was a gain of one to the Liberal party.

Nov. 11th.—Mr. S Nightingale had proposed, and Mr. J. Scott seconded, the
re-election of the Mayor (Mr. E. H. L. Preston) and he was re-elected
accordingly.

The following Aldermen had been re-appointed:—Sir E. H. K. Lacon, and
Messrs. R. Purdy, G. S. Shingles, E. P. Youell, R. S. Watling, and W.
Danby-Palmer.

Rear-Admiral Thomas L. Gooch had been promoted to be a retired
Vice-Admiral.

The Rifle Volunteers shed on the North Denes had been burnt with the
stores contained in it, “and no clue yet obtained to the perpetrator of
this wanton piece of mischief.”

Nov. 18th.—Mr. Woodger had entertained 40 of his friends at a dinner
given by him at St. George’s Tavern, King Street.

The Liberals were organising Working Men’s Associations in the several
Wards.

Nov. 22nd.—The “Reliance,” steamtug, had struck a piece of wreck near the
Cross Sand, and become a total wreck.  She was valued at £2,500.

Nov. 29th.—Three companies of the 33rd Regiment had arrived at the
Southtown Barracks.

Captain Harvey was making experiments with his sea torpedoes in the
Roads, accompanied by Baron de Grancy and M. Vavasseur.

Dec. 6th.—There had been disastrous gales, causing great destruction of
shipping property and loss of life.

Dec. 16th.—A meeting had been held at Gorleston with a view to the
restoration of the Church; the Mayor presided, and Sir E. H. K. Lacon,
Bart., M.P., the Revs. H. Nevill, T. Allnutt (Vicar), J. Walker, S. N.
Vowler, and Messrs. E. P. Youell, H. E. Buxton, C. J. Palmer, E. H. H.
Combe, W. Teasdel, G. B. Palmer, Stanier, Wilton, Holt, Baumgartner,
Bottle, S. Bately, Bellamy, Ling, S. Dowson, W. S. Sandford, Dr. Bately,
Capt. Matthews, Capt. Aldrich, &c., were present.

Dee. 30th.—Reference is made to the “New Law of Merchant Shipping”
(Plimsoll’s Act.)

The Prince of Wales being restored to health, it was expected that he
would visit Yarmouth with the N.A.M., of which Regiment he was Hon.
Colonel, during their training in the Spring.

Mrs. Walpole, of Southtown, had bequeathed legacies of £50 to the
Hospital and £19 19s. to the Sailors’ Home.

It was estimated that the 600 boats hailing from Yarmouth paid “something
like £4000 for towage to the Tug Companies.”

Mr. J. F. Neave had erected a new Primitive Methodist Chapel at Bradwell.



1872.


Jan. 6th.—Mr. J. T. Clarke had been appointed an Admiralty Commissioner.

Jan. 20th.—The Town Council had voted congratulatory addresses to the
Queen, and the Prince and Princess of Wales, upon the occasion of the
recovery of the Prince from his serious illness.

There had been a heavy gale from the S.S.W.

Jan. 27th.—It was stated that within 12 years five penny newspapers had
been started in Yarmouth, all of which had ceased to exist.

Jan. 31st.—Mr. John L. Cufaude, Clerk of the Peace, Clerk to the
Guardians, and Superintendent Registrar had died at the age of 61 years.

Feb. 3rd.—Messrs. Chamberlin, I. Preston, junr., H. R. Harmer and F. W
Ferrier were candidates for the first and Messrs. F. Danby-Palmer and F.
S. Costerton for the two latter of these appointments.

Feb. 7th.—Mr. F. Danby-Palmer had been elected Superintendent Registrar
by “a large majority,” the other candidates being Messrs. S. C. Burton
and H. Cowl.

Bro. James Carter had been installed W.M. of Lodge “Friendship.”

A new route (the loop line) was being constructed between Yarmouth and
Lowestoft at a cost of £15,000.

Feb. 14th.—Mr. F. Danby-Palmer had been unanimously elected Clerk to the
Board of Guardians.

Feb. 17th.—At the Council meeting Mr. W. Laws proposed, and Mr. T. M.
Baker seconded, Mr. I. Preston, junr.’s appointment as Clerk of the
Peace, and Mr. J. W. Foreman proposed, and Mr. J. Bracey seconded, Mr. H.
R. Harmer for that office.

The voting was—For Mr. Preston: The Mayor and Messrs. J. T. Bracey, Laws,
Mabson, Teasdel, Purdy, Nightingale, Bly, Barnby, Norman, Preston (Isaac
junr.), Baker, Wright, George, Woolverton, Burton, Ferrier, Todd, Veale,
Fenner, Gooda, and W. Hammond (22),

And for Mr. Harmer: Messrs. Bunn, Harmer, Youell, William Danby-Palmer,
Worship, Hilton, Neave, Nuthall, Fyson, Barber, Tomlinson, Foreman, do
Caux, F. Danby-Palmer, Scott, J. Bracey, Stone, Woodger, Combe and
Baumgartner (20).

Mr. Attwood declined to vote.  After the voting the following “scene”
took place between the Mayor and Mr. Harmer:—

    Mr. Harmer said he had come forward as a candidate, considering his
    long connection with the party entitled him to their support.  He
    could not let that opportunity pass without expressing his thanks to
    those gentleman who had accorded him their votes.  He could but think
    if the Mayor had fought a ‘manly and open game’—(cries of ‘no, no,’
    and uproar)—and postponed his canvassing from the Saturday to the
    Monday, he should have been in a very different position there that
    day.  (Renewed cheers and uproar.)  He believed he should have had
    most of those promises which the Mayor had obtained on the Sunday.
    (Cries of ‘no, no,’ and general uproar.)  He felt certain that a
    great many of his friends in the Council whom he had known many
    years, and who had been induced to vote against him, were sorry for
    it, and had only been led to do so by the promise given the Mayor on
    Sunday.  (Cries and groans and general tumult in the gallery.)  He
    met an old friend the other day, and on asking him for his vote, he
    replied, ‘I am very sorry I cannot give it you, as I promised the
    Mayor on Sunday—(cheers and laughter)—but you have my sympathy, and I
    hope you may win.’  He (Mr. Harmer) could not help replying, ‘Hang
    your sympathy; give me your vote.’

    The Mayor said he could not let Mr. Harmer’s remarks upon himself
    pass without comment.  Coming home quietly from church on the Sunday
    morning referred to following the mace-bearers, Mr. Harmer came up to
    him and canvassed him for the Clerkship of the Peace, Mr. Cufaude not
    being then dead.  (Hear, hear, and uproar.)  He told Mr. Harmer that
    Mr. Cufaude was not dead and (he might as well tell them all that
    passed), said he hoped to God he might live till after March, so that
    they (the Conservatives) might have the opportunity of fighting the
    Guardians.  (Cheers and counter cheers.)  In walking down to the
    Station-house he said to Mr. Harmer, if that should be the case, and
    they should get a majority at the Board of Guardians, Mr. Harmer
    could go in for the Clerk of the Guardians, and he (the Mayor) for
    the Clerk of the Peace,—(loud laughter)—and that they could work
    together.  Mr. Harmer replied by saying that he should go in for both
    appointments—(cheers and laughter)—and he (the Mayor) replied that he
    could not do so, but if he (the Mayor) won one, he would support Mr.
    Harmer in the other, and if Mr. Harmer was successful in one, he
    could give him his help in trying to obtain the other appointment for
    his son.  (Hear, hear.)  In the afternoon of that day Mr. Cufaude
    died, and as he knew Mr. Harmer was canvassing, did they think he was
    such a fool as to let him outstep him.  (Cheers and uproar.)

    Mr. Harmer rose to reply, but the confusion became so great owing to
    the shouting and recrimination, backed up by the adherents of the
    respective parties in the gallery, that scarcely anything could be
    heard amid the din of words.  During a temporary lull in the storm,

    Mr. Harmer, who was still speaking excitedly, was understood to say
    that he did not go between the bark and the tree, but that he wished
    to tell the whole truth about the conversation between him and the
    Mayor.  He asked the Mayor how Mr. Cufaude was, and he replied that
    he was very bad indeed, and not expected to live.  (At this juncture
    of Mr. Harmer’s reply several of the Councillors vacated their seats,
    and left the room, and the disorder which had calmed down a little
    again broke out.  Mr. Harmer, thus interrupted, stopped in his
    speech, but in response to cries of ‘go on, go on,’ from the public,
    he turned himself to the gallery, and addressing the occupants of
    that place, continued his remarks.)  He said he observed to the
    Mayor—‘In case anything happens, what do you intend to do?’  The
    Mayor replied ‘If my son comes forward I must support him,’ to which
    he (Mr. Harmer) replied ‘very naturally, too.’  He then told the
    Mayor that he should be a candidate for the Clerkship of the Peace,
    and as they walked down Regent-street the Mayor remarked to him, ‘If
    we can only keep the poor fellow alive till after the next election
    of Guardians, then we must all put our hands into our pockets and
    turn them (the Liberals) out.’  (Cries of ‘Shame,’ ‘Bribery,’ and
    general uproar.)  The Mayor then said ‘I will propose that you shall
    be Clerk of the Peace and Isaac, Clerk of the Guardians.’  (Cheers
    and laughter.)  His answer to that generous proposition was, ‘I shall
    not stand that; I shall expect the better berth of the two.’
    (Renewed laughter, and cries of ‘Go in Harmer.’)  The Mayor said
    ‘Well, after all, perhaps Isaac would rather have the Clerkship of
    the Peace, as there is not much to do, and as he is going to be
    married, and will be very well off, he won’t want it.’  (Loud
    laughter.)

    Here the confusion became so great that nothing could be heard, and
    as by this time the majority of the Councillors had dispersed, the
    proceedings closed amid wild uproar.

Feb. 24th.—Mr. Henry E. Buxton had been elected Commodore and Mr. I.
Preston, jun., Vice-Commodore of the Norfolk and Suffolk Yacht Club.  Mr.
T. M. Read was building a new yacht at Beccles.

Feb. 28th.—Mr. I. Preston, jun., the newly-elected Clerk of the Peace,
had entertained the Recorder and Bar at the Sessions.

In the Market Ward, Mr. R. Dumbleton and Mr. J. Garratt had been
candidates for the seat vacated by Mr. Preston, when the former gentleman
was elected by a majority of 191.

April 6th.—Mr. C. S. D. Steward and Captain Gilbertson had been
re-appointed Churchwardens, and Messrs. Ellis, Skoulding, Lay and
Pestell, Overseers.

April 3rd.—Nathaniel Palmer, Esq., Recorder, had died at Coltishall, aged
79; it was stated that “The deceased was at one period of his career a
prominent member of the Whig party, and was generally known as ‘Orator
Palmer.’  He acted with the other members of the Palmer family and their
cousins—the Stewards and Hurrys—and was with them instrumental in opening
the borough of Great Yarmouth in 1818.”

The following officers were then with the E.N.M. at its annual
training:—Colonel Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart., Lieutenant-Colonel Glover,
Major Matthew, Captains Dods, Ensor, Applewaite, Ambrose, and McEnry, and
Lieutenants Haly, Howes, Long, Lacon, Haggard, Fryer, Barber and Napier.
Captain Lacon being absent.

April 13th.—The following had been the result of the Guardians’
Election.—

         _North Ward_.
Stafford (C.)             1,163
Neave (L.)                  861
Skoulding (C.)              758
Buston(C)                   664
Blyth (L.)                  562
Rant (L.)                   365
        _Market Ward_.
Norman (L.)                 679
Dumbleton (C.)              675
Laws (C.)                   599
Overend (L.)                524
Ellis (C.)                  515
Brand (L.)                  472
        _Regent Ward_.
Barber (C.)                 540
Norman (L.)                 486
Diver (C.)                  428
Preston (C.)                426
Bryant (L.)                 337
Rant (L.)                   299
     _St. George’s Ward_.
de Caux (L.)                613
Scott (L.)                  522
Rivett (L.)                 400
Foreman (C.)                266
Bunn (C.)                   250
Todd (I.)                   214
Gooch (C.)                  204
        _Nelson Ward_.
Palmer (L.)               1,166
Woodger (L.)              1,090
Clowes (L.)                 921
Fisher (L.)                 770

Woolverton (C) and Bracey (C) (numbers not given.)

The result was that 10 Liberals to 4 Tories had been elected.

The Town Council had recommended Mr. Mills for the office of Recorder, he
having acted for several years as the late Mr. Palmer’s deputy in that
office.

April 24th.—The first week in June had been fixed for the Prince of
Wales’ visit to the town.

Mr. Frederick Palmer had been re-appointed chairman, and Messrs. J. A.
Norman and J. F. Neave, vice-chairmen of the Board of Guardians.

Mr. Simms Reeve had been appointed Recorder in the place of Mr. Palmer
deceased; it was stated that he was called to the Bar in 1850 and was a
member of the Norfolk Circuit.

May 8th.—Funds were being raised for the purpose of decorating the town
on the occasion of the Prince of Wales’ visit.

May 11th.—The Town Council had formed itself into a committee to consider
the public steps to be taken with regard to that event.

May 25th.—Simms Reeve, Esq., had been appointed Judge of the Borough
Court of Record.

May 29th.—Mr. de Caux had met with an accident through falling from a
cart on the Drive.

June 1st.—James Scott, Esq., J.P., and one of the Councillors for the St.
George’s Ward, had died.

June 8th.—Records the first visit of H.R.H. the Prince of Wales to the
town, when he lodged at Mr. Cuddon’s house (Shaddingfield Lodge).  The
town was very handsomely decorated, and His Royal Highness was received
at the Southtown Railway Station by the Reception Committee which
consisted of Lord Sondes, the Mayor, the Recorder, the Town Clerk, and
Messrs. William Mabson, W. T. Attwood, R. D. Barber, F. Dendy, H. R.
Harmer, Frederick Ferrier, E. H. H. Combe, F. Danby-Palmer, E. P. Youell,
S. Nightingale, R. S. Watling, and Bessey.  After the Recorder had
presented the Corporate address, His Royal Highness and the Committee
proceeded to the Town Hall, where 200 guests were entertained.
Subsequently His Royal Highness proceeded to the Grammar School and
opened the newly-erected hall there.  In the evening the town was
illuminated.

June 15th.—Mr. S. K. Smith had been elected a Councillor for St. George’s
Ward in the place of Mr. J. Scott deceased.

June 19th.—“Notes and Queries” contained a notice of Palmer’s
“Perlustration of Great Yarmouth,” 400 pages of which had then been
issued from the press.

A man named Howes had been killed through the bursting of a rocket at the
Coastguard Station during the Prince’s visit.

June 22nd records the funeral of the late Mr. Edward Fyson, a member of
the Town Council and Captain in the Rifle Volunteers.

The Rev. J. J. Raven had had the degree of D.D. conferred upon him by the
University of Cambridge.

June 26th.—Mr. Simms Reeve had sat as Recorder for the first time at the
Quarter Sessions.

The Town was filling rapidly with visitors.

June 29th.—The polling in the Market Ward had resulted as follows:—

Mr. John Garratt (L)            418
Mr. Tyrrell (C)                 168
                 Majority       250

The marriage of Miss Watling (only daughter of Robert S. Watling, Esq.)
and Mr. Samuel Nightingale (nephew of Samuel Nightingale, Esq.) had been
celebrated “amid great rejoicing.”

July 6th.—The late Mr. E. Fyson had left legacies of £250 each to the
Sailors’ Home and the Hospital.

The new organ at St. Mary’s, Southtown, was estimated to cost £250.

Mural paintings had been discovered in Gorleston Church.

July 13th.—A ghost was reported to be frequenting the Churchyard; upwards
of 1,000 persons attended at one time to see it.

July 20th.—It was stated that in the year 1871, 19,781 lasts of fish,
weighing 39,562 tons, had been conveyed by rail from Yarmouth.

Coal had advanced to 32s. per ton.

Mr. Palmer had returned from his cruise along the Dutch coast in the
yacht “Oasis.”

July 31st.—The men at Lacon’s Brewery had struck for and obtained an
advance of 3s. a week in their wages.

Aug. 10th.—The observance of the Bank Holiday Act had resulted in an
“enormous influx” of excursionists.

Aug. 17th.—Messrs. Fellows, Dendy, and Spelman had been appointed Borough
Justices.

The following had been the result of the polling for a Guardian to supply
the place of the late Mr. Scott in St. George’s Ward:—

Mr. T. Green (L)                 401
Mr. S. K. Smith (C)              281
Mr. T. C. Foreman (N)            126

Aug. 21st.—The Mayor (E. H. L. Preston, Esq.,) had died in the 66th year
of his age.

Aug. 31st.—Mr. C. Woolverton had, on the motion of Mr. Worship, seconded
by Mr. Bunn, been elected Mayor for the residue of the year of office in
the place of the late Mr. Preston deceased.

Aug. 31st.—The Channel Fleet—consisting of the “Achilles,” flagship of
Rear-Admiral Randolph, C.B., (Captain Hamilton), 6,121 tons, 1,250 horse
power, 26 guns; “Hector,” (Captain Cochran), 4,019 tons, 800 horse power,
18 guns; “Penelope,” (Captain Wake), 3,096 tons, 600 horse power, 11
guns; “Audacious,” (Captain Hope), 3,774 tons, 800 horse power, 14 guns;
“Vanguard,” (Captain Spain), 3,774 tons, 800 horse power, 14 guns; “Black
Prince,” (Captain Lacey), 6,109 tons, 1,125 horse power, 28 guns;
“Resistance” (Captain Montgomery), 3,710 tons, 600 horse power, 16 guns;
“Favorite,” (Captain Ross), 2,094 tons, 400 horse power, 10 guns—had
arrived in the Roads.  The Artillery Volunteers fired a salute of 13 guns
from the South Battery in honour of the Fleet, and the Mayor, accompanied
by Messrs. J. E. Barnby, W. Mabson, H. Teasdel, T. W. Attwood, C. Diver,
R. Dumbleton, T. Todd, Major Orde, F. Danby-Palmer, F. Ferrier, Admiral
Smyth, C. E. Nuthall, J. Tomlinson, J. Bracey, W. Laws, H. Hammond, Geo.
Watson, and E. H. H. Combe, had visited the flagship.

Sept. 4th.—Records the departure of the Fleet.

Sept. 11th.—The first Election under the Ballot Act had been held.  This
took place in the North Ward, upon the decease of the Mayor, and resulted
in the return of the Conservative candidate, the numbers being for

Mr. Skoulding (C.)            434
Mr. H. Blyth (L.).            190

Thus, upon a register of some 1,300 voters, only 629 persons polled.

Sept. 14th.—Mr. Bunn had been elected a Haven Commissioner by the Council
in the place of the late Mr. Preston.

Gas had been increased from 4s. to 5s. per 1000 feet “owing to the
increased cost of coal and labour.”

Oct. 5th.—Mr. Leach’s oil and lamp shop and warehouse in the Market Place
had been destroyed by fire.  Mr. Leach’s stock alone thus burnt was
valued at £1,000; the house belonging to Mrs. Ellis; both these items
were, however, covered by insurance.

Oct. 12th.—The fish merchants were urging their grievances against the
Railway Company.

Oct. 16th.—The first rail of the tramway on the Southtown Road had been
laid and fixed by Sir E. H. K. Lacon, Bart., M.P.

In the evening a dinner had been given at the Town Hall in connection
with the ceremony.  Jas. Goodson, Esq., presided, and there were also
present—the Mayor, the Recorder, the Mayor of Beccles, Captain Penrice,
C.B., Mr. Garnham and Mr. Cotching (Directors of the Tramway Company) and
Messrs. E. P. Youell, E. H. H. Combe, W. H. Chambers, R. H. Harmer, H. B.
Rathbone, Browne, F. Danby-Palmer, J. Hudspith, Jewson, Fox, Underwood,
Geard, Brooks, Harrison, G. Billington, Davidson, Cooke, J. H. Bly,
Bales, Light, C. J. Palmer, H. Martin, H. Fenn, Dickson, Brown, junr., J.
W. Cockrill, May, Filby, J. Thomas, Leathes, A. Nelson, H. Catton,
Shipley, &c.

The town had been visited by a heavy gale from the S.W.

Oct. 26th.—Coal was reduced in price from 34s. to 27s. per ton.

Prices for herring had ruled from £7 to £13 for salted, and from £8 to
£20 for fresh fish; 3,454 lasts had been landed.

Nov. 2nd.—Mr. J. Owles’ collection of china had been sold in 1,800 lots.

Nov. 6th.—The Municipal Election had resulted as follows:—

         _North Ward_.
Nightingale, (C)            558
Skoulding, (C)              503
Livingston, (L)             240
Woodger, (L)                200
Foreman, (N)                 18
        _Market Ward_.
Barnby, (C)                 258
Martins, (C)                216
Reeder, (L)                  99
Lawn, (L)                    53
Tyrrell, (C)                 53
        _Regent Ward_.
Burton, (L)                 213
Blake, (L)                  186
George, (C)                 181
Wright, (C)                 173
     _St. George’s Ward_.
Foreman, (C)                276
de Caux, (L)                257
Wiltshire, (C)              241
Green, (L)                  220
        _Nelson Ward_.
Bracey, (C)                 613
Veale, (C)                  538
Palmer, (L)                 375
Clowes, (L)                 306
     _St. Andrew’s Ward_.
Gooda, (C), and Attwood, (L),
unopposed.

Subsequently a meeting of Liberals was held in the Regent-ward to
congratulate Messrs. Burton and Blake upon their “victory” there.  Mr.
Lovewell Blake (chairman), and Messrs. F. Palmer, J. Woodger, J. F.
Neave, T. Green, Frank Burton, and J. H. Norman took part in this
proceeding.

Nov. 10th.—Upon the motion of Mr. E. P. Youell, seconded by Mr J. T.
Bracey, Mr. C. Woolverton had been elected Mayor of the Borough.  The
following were at that time the Ward Aldermen:—North, William Mabson;
Market, W. Laws; Regent, William Danby-Palmer; St. George’s, G. S.
Shingles; Nelson, H. R. Harmer; St. Andrews’, R. Purdy.

Nov. 16th.—Mr. William Worship had been injured in an accident which had
happened on the Great Eastern line near Kelvedon.

Nov. 30th.—Mr. A. E. Cowl had passed the Legal Examination.

Dec. 4th.—A Mrs. Harvey had died at Rollesby at the age of 104 years.

A very heavy gale, almost rivalling that of 1860, had visited this coast.

The following Income Tax Commissioners had been nominated:—The Mayor, and
Messrs. S. C. Burton, E. P. Youell, W. Mabson, F. Danby-Palmer, J. W. de
Caux, and J. T. Bracey.

Dec. 18th.—Garson Blake, Esq. had been appointed Belgian Consul in
succession to the late Mr. Preston.

Dec. 28th.—The following gentlemen then held commissions in the Rifle
Volunteers:—Major, James Henry Orde; Captains, William Holt, W. P. P.
Matthews, A. J. Palmer, and G. W. Moore; Lieutenants, S. Aldred, C.
Diver, B. Wilson, W. H. Palmer, and H. E. Buxton; Ensigns, F.
Danby-Palmer, J. T. Clarke, W. Brown, and R. Stanier; Adjutant, F. A.
Cubitt; Surgeon, W. E. Wyllys; Chaplain, H. R. Nevill; Quarter-Master, T.
W. Doughty.



With this year ends the file of the _Norwich Mercury_, which was
preserved by the late Robert Palmer-Kemp, Esq., that gentleman dying at
his seat, Coltishall Manor (which was devised to him by his grandfather,
William Danby-Palmer, Esq.), on 11th May, 1873.  Mr. Kemp was for many
years an active County Magistrate; and in the earlier part of his life,
prior to leaving Yarmouth, took part, with his half-brother, Major Samuel
Charles Marsh, and other members of his family, in our local politics;
later on, however (although in the Commission of the Peace for our
borough) he rarely visited his native town.  Leaving no issue, he devised
his estates to his cousin, George William Danby-Palmer, Esq. (who
subsequently assumed the name of Kerrison, under the provisions of the
will of the late Charles Kerrison, Esq.), and that gentleman still holds
the Coltishall property.