936 AH.-SEP. 5TH 1529 TO AUGUST 25TH 1530 AD.


(_a. Rahim-dad's affairs._)

(_Sep. 7th_) On Wednesday the 3rd of Muharram, Shaikh Muhammad
_Ghaus_[2691] came in from Gualiar with Khusrau's (son) Shihabu'd-din
to plead for Rahim-dad. As Shaikh Muhammad _Ghaus_ was a pious and
excellent person, Rahim-dad's faults were forgiven for his sake. Shaikh
Guran and Nur Beg were sent off for Gualiar, so that the place having
been made over to their charge....[2692]


TRANSLATOR'S NOTE ON 936 TO 937 AH.-1529 TO 1530 AD.

It is difficult to find material for filling the _lacuna_ of some 15
months, which occurs in Babur's diary after the broken passage of
Muharram 3rd 936 AH. (Sept. 7th 1529 AD.) and down to the date of his
death on Jumada 1. 6th 937 AH. (Dec. 26th 153O AD.). The known original
sources are few, their historical matter scant, their contents mainly
biographical. Gleanings may yet be made, however, in unexpected places,
such gleanings as are provided by Ahmad-i-yadgar's interpolation of
Timurid history amongst his lives of Afghan Sultans.

The earliest original source which helps to fill the gap of 936 AH. is
Haidar Mirza's _Tarikh-i-rashidi_, finished as to its Second Part which
contains Babur's biography, in 948 AH. (1541 AD.), 12 years therefore
after the year of the gap 936 AH. It gives valuable information about
the affairs of Badakhshan, based on its author's personal experience at
30 years of age, and was Abu'l-fazl's authority for the _Akbar-nama_.

The next in date of the original sources is Gul-badan Begim's
_Humayun-nama_, a chronicle of family affairs, which she wrote in
obedience to her nephew Akbar's command, given in about 995 AH. (1587
AD.), some 57 years after her Father's death, that whatever any person
knew of his father (Humayun) and grandfather (Babur) should be written
down for Abu'l-fazl's use. It embodies family memories and traditions,
and presumably gives the recollections of several ladies of the royal
circle.[2693]

The _Akbar-nama_ derives much of its narrative for 936-937 AH. from
Haidar Mirza and Gul-badan Begim, but its accounts of Babur's
self-surrender and of his dying address to his chiefs presuppose the
help of information from a contemporary witness. It is noticeable that
the _Akbar-nama_ records no public events as occurring in Hindustan
during 936-937 AH., nothing of the sequel of rebellion by
Rahim-dad[2694] and 'Abdu'l-'aziz, nothing of the untiring Biban and
Bayazid. That something could have been told is shown by what
Ahmad-i-yadgar has preserved (_vide post_); but 50 years had passed
since Babur's death and, manifestly, interest in filling the _lacunae_ in
his diary was then less keen than it is over 300 years later. What in
the _Akbar-nama_ concerns Babur is likely to have been written somewhat
early in the _cir._ 15 years of its author's labours on it,[2695] but,
even so, the elder women of the royal circle had had rest after the
miseries Humayun had wrought, the forgiveness of family affection would
veil his past, and certainly has provided Abu'l-fazl with an
over-mellowed estimate of him, one ill-assorting with what is justified
by his Babur-nama record.

The contribution made towards filling the gap of 936-937 AH. in the body
of Nizamu-'d-din Ahmad's _Tabaqat-i-akbari_ is limited to a curious and
doubtfully acceptable anecdote about a plan for the supersession of
Humayun as Padshah, and about the part played by Khwaja Muqim _Harawi_
in its abandonment. A further contribution is made, however, in Book VII
which contains the history of the Muhammadan Kings of Kashmir, namely,
that Babur despatched an expedition into that country. As no such
expedition is recorded or referred to in surviving Babur-nama writings,
it is likely to have been sent in 936 AH. during Babur's tour to and
from Lahor. If it were made with the aim of extending Timurid authority
in the Himalayan borderlands, a hint of similar policy elsewhere may be
given by the ceremonious visit of the Raja of Kahlur to Babur,
mentioned by Ahmad-i-yadgar (_vide post_).[2696] The T.-i-A. was
written within the term of Abu'l-fazl's work on the _Akbar-nama_, being
begun later, and ended about 9 years earlier, in 1002 AH.-1593 AD. It
appears to have been Abu'-l-fazl's authority for his account of the
campaign carried on in Kashmir by Babur's chiefs (_Ayin-i-akbari_ vol.
ii, part i, Jarrett's trs. p. 389).

An important contribution, seeming to be authentic, is found
interpolated in Ahmad-i-yadgar's _Tarikh-i-salatin-i-afaghana_, one
which outlines a journey made by Babur to Lahor in 936 AH. and gives
circumstantial details of a punitive expedition sent by him from Sihrind
at the complaint of the Qazi of Samana against a certain Mundahir
Rajput. The whole contribution dovetails into matters found elsewhere.
Its precision of detail bespeaks a closely-contemporary written
source.[2697] As its fullest passage concerns the Samana Qazi's affair,
its basis of record may have been found in Samana. Some considerations
about the date of Ahmad-i-yadgar's own book and what Niamatu'l-lah says
of Haibat Khan of Samana, his own generous helper in the
_Tarikhi-Khan-i-jahan Ludi_, point towards Haibat Khan as providing the
details of the Qazi's wrongs and avenging. The indication is
strengthened by the circumstance that what precedes and what follows the
account of the punitive expedition is outlined only.[2698]
Ahmad-i-yadgar interpolates an account of Humayun also, which is a frank
plagiarism from the _Tabaqat-i-akbari_. He tells too a story purporting
to explain why Babur "selected" Humayun to succeed him, one parallel
with Nizamu'd-din Ahmad's about what led Khalifa to abandon his plan of
setting the Mirza aside. Its sole value lies in its testimony to a
belief, held by its first narrator whoever he was, that choice was
exercised in the matter by Babur. Reasons for thinking Nizamu'd-din's
story, as it stands, highly improbable, will be found later in this
note.

Muhammad Qasim Hindu Shah _Firishta's Tarikh-i-firishta_ contains an
interesting account of Babur but contributes towards filling the gap in
the events of 936-937 AH. little that is not in the earlier sources. In
M. Jules Mohl's opinion it was under revision as late as 1623 AD.
(1032-3 AH.).


(_a. Humayun and Badakhshan._)

An occurrence which had important results, was the arrival of Humayun in
Agra, unsummoned by his Father, from the outpost station of Badakhshan.
It will have occurred early in 936 AH. (autumn 1529 AD.), because he was
in Kabul in the first ten days of the last month of 935 AH. (_vide
post_). Curiously enough his half-sister Gul-badan does not mention his
coming, whether through avoidance of the topic or from inadvertence; the
omission may be due however to the loss of a folio from the only known
MS. of her book (that now owned by the British Museum), and this is the
more likely that Abu'l-fazl writes, at some length, about the arrival
and its motive, what the Begim might have provided, this especially by
his attribution of filial affection as Humayun's reason for coming to
Agra.

Haidar Mirza is the authority for the Akbar-nama account of Humayun's
departure from Qila'-i-zafar and its political and military sequel. He
explains the departure by saying that when Babur had subdued Hindustan,
his sons Humayun and Kamran were grown-up; and that wishing to have one
of them at hand in case of his own death, he summoned Humayun, leaving
Kamran in Qandahar. No doubt these were the contemporary impressions
conveyed to Haidar, and strengthened by the accomplished fact before he
wrote some 12 years later; nevertheless there are two clear indications
that there was no royal order for Humayun to leave Qila'-i-zafar, _viz._
that no-one had been appointed to relieve him even when he reached Agra,
and that Abu'l-fazl mentions no summons but attributes the Mirza's
departure from his post to an overwhelming desire to see his Father.
What appears probable is that Mahim wrote to her son urging his coming
to Agra, and that this was represented as Babur's wish. However little
weight may be due to the rumour, preserved in anecdotes recorded long
after 935 AH., that any-one, Babur or Khalifa, inclined against
Humayun's succession, that rumour she would set herself to falsify by
reconciliation.[2699]

When the Mirza's intention to leave Qila'-i-zafar became known there,
the chiefs represented that they should not be able to withstand the
Auzbeg on their frontier without him (his troops implied).[2700] With
this he agreed, said that still he must go, and that he would send a
Mirza in his place as soon as possible. He then rode, in one day, to
Kabul, an item of rapid travel preserved by Abu'l-fazl.

Humayun's departure caused such anxiety in Qila'-i-zafar that some (if
not all) of the Badakhshi chiefs hurried off an invitation to Sa'id Khan
_Chaghatai_, the then ruler in Kashghar in whose service Haidar Mirza
was, to come at once and occupy the fort. They said that Faqir-i-'ali
who had been left in charge, was not strong enough to cope with the
Auzbeg, begged Sa'id to come, and strengthened their petition by
reminding him of his hereditary right to Badakhshan, derived from Shah
Begim _Badakhshi_. Their urgency convincing the Khan that risk
threatened the country, he started from Kashghar in Muharram 936 AH.
(Sept-Oct. 1529 AD.). On reaching Sarigh-chupan which by the annexation
of Aba-bakr Mirza _Dughlat_ was now his own most western territory[2701]
but which formerly was one of the upper districts of Badakhshan, he
waited while Haidar went on towards Qila'-i-zafar only to learn on his
road, that Hind-al (_aet._ 10) had been sent from Kabul by Humayun and
had entered the fort 12 days before.

The Kashgharis were thus placed in the difficulty that the fort was
occupied by Babur's representative, and that the snows would prevent
their return home across the mountains till winter was past.
Winter-quarters were needed and asked for by Haidar, certain districts
being specified in which to await the re-opening of the Pamir routes. He
failed in his request, "They did not trust us," he writes, "indeed
suspected us of deceit." His own account of Sa'id's earlier invasion of
Badakhshan (925 AH.-1519 AD.) during Khan Mirza's rule, serves to
explain Badakhshi distrust of Kashgharis. Failing in his negotiations,
he scoured and pillaged the country round the fort, and when a few days
later the Khan arrived, his men took what Haidar's had left.

Sa'id Khan is recorded to have besieged the fort for three months, but
nothing serious seems to have been attempted since no mention of
fighting is made, none of assault or sally, and towards the end of the
winter he was waited on by those who had invited his presence, with
apology for not having admitted him into the fort, which they said they
would have done but for the arrival of Hind-al Mirza. To this the Khan
replied that for him to oppose Babur Padshah was impossible; he reminded
the chiefs that he was there by request, that it would be as hurtful for
the Padshah as for himself to have the Auzbeg in Badakhshan and,
finally, he gave it as his opinion that, as matters stood, every man
should go home. His view of the general duty may include that of
Badakhshi auxiliaries such as Sultan Wais of Kul-ab who had reinforced
the garrison. So saying, he himself set out for Kashghar, and at the
beginning of Spring reached Yarkand.


_b. Humayun's further action._

Humayun will have reached Kabul before Zu'l-hijja 10th 935 AH. (Aug.
26th 1529 AD.) because it is on record that he met Kamran on the Kabul
'Id-gah, and both will have been there to keep the 'Idu'l-kabir, the
Great Festival of Gifts, which is held on that day. Kamran had come from
Qandahar, whether to keep the Feast, or because he had heard of
Humayun's intended movement from Badakhshan, or because changes were
foreseen and he coveted Kabul, as the _Babur-nama_ and later records
allow to be inferred. He asked Humayun, says Abu'l-fazl, why he was
there and was told of his brother's impending journey to Agra under
overwhelming desire to see their Father.[2702] Presumably the two Mirzas
discussed the position in which Badakhshan had been left; in the end
Hind-al was sent to Qila'-i-zafar, notwithstanding that he was under
orders for Hindustan.

Humayun may have stayed some weeks in Kabul, how many those familiar
with the seasons and the routes between Yarkand and Qila'-i-zafar,
might be able to surmise if the date of Hind-al's start northward for
which Humayun is likely to have waited, were found by dovetailing the
Muharram of Sa'id's start, the approximate length of his journey to
Sarigh-chupan, and Haidar's reception of news that Hind-al had been 12
days in the fort.

Humayun's arrival in Agra is said by Abu'l-fazl to have been cheering to
the royal family in their sadness for the death of Alwar (end of 935
AH.) and to have given pleasure to his Father. But the time is all too
near the date of Babur's letter (f.348) to Humayun, that of a
dissatisfied parent, to allow the supposition that his desertion of his
post would fail to displease.

That it was a desertion and not an act of obedience seems clear from the
circumstance that the post had yet to be filled. Khalifa is said to have
been asked to take it and to have refused;[2703] Humayun to have been
sounded as to return and to have expressed unwillingness. Babur then did
what was an honourable sequel to his acceptance in 926 AH. of the charge
of the fatherless child Sulaiman, by sending him, now about 16, to take
charge where his father Khan Mirza had ruled, and by still keeping him
under his own protection.

Sulaiman's start from Agra will not have been delayed, and (accepting
Ahmad-i-yadgar's record,) Babur himself will have gone as far as Lahor
either with him or shortly after him, an expedition supporting Sulaiman,
and menacing Sa'id in his winter leaguer round Qila'-i-zafar. Meantime
Humayun was ordered to his fief of Sambhal.

After Sulaiman's appointment Babur wrote to Sa'id a letter of which
Haidar gives the gist:--It expresses surprise at Sa'id's doings in
Badakhshan, says that Hind-al has been recalled and Sulaiman sent, that
if Sa'id regard hereditary right, he will leave "Sulaiman Shah
Mirza"[2704] in possession, who is as a son to them both,[2705] that
this would be well, that otherwise he (Babur) will make over
responsibility to the heir (Sulaiman);[2706] and, "The rest you
know."[2707]


_c. Babur visits Lahor._

If Ahmad-i-yadgar's account of a journey made by Babur to Lahor and the
Panj-ab be accepted, the _lacuna_ of 936 AH. is appropriately filled. He
places the expedition in the 3rd year of Babur's rule in Hindustan,
which, counting from the first reading of the _khutba_ for Babur in
Dihli (f. 286), began on Rajab 15th 935 AH. (March 26th 1529 AD.). But
as Babur's diary-record for 935 AH. is complete down to end of the year,
(minor _lacunae_ excepted), the time of his leaving Agra for Lahor is
relegated to 936 AH. He must have left early in the year, (1) to allow
time, before the occurrence of the known events preceding his own death,
for the long expedition Ahmad-i-yadgar calls one of a year, and (2)
because an early start after Humayun's arrival and Sulaiman's departure
would suit the position of affairs and the dates mentioned or implied by
Haidar's and by Ahmad-i-yadgar's narratives.

Two reasons of policy are discernible, in the known events of the time,
to recommend a journey in force towards the North-west; first, the
sedition of 'Abdu'l-'aziz in Lahor (f. 381), and secondly, the invasion
of Badakhshan by Sa'id Khan with its resulting need of supporting
Sulaiman by a menace of armed intervention.[2708]

In Sihrind the Raja of Kahlur, a place which may be one of the Simla
hill-states, waited on Babur, made offering of 7 falcons and 3
_mans_[2709] of gold, and was confirmed in his fief.[2710]

In Lahor Kamran is said to have received his Father, in a garden of his
own creation, and to have introduced the local chiefs as though he were
the Governor of Lahor some writers describe him as then being. The best
sources, however, leave him still posted in Qandahar. He had been
appointed to Multan (f. 359) when 'Askari was summoned to Agra (f. 339),
but whether he actually went there is not assured; some months later
(Zu'l-hijja 10th 935 AH.) he is described by Abu'l-fazl as coming to
Kabul from Qandahar. He took both Multan[2711] and Lahor by force from
his (half-)brother Humayun in 935 AH. (1531 AD.) the year after their
Father's death. That he should wait upon his Father in Lahor would be
natural, Hind-al did so, coming from Kabul. Hind-al will have come to
Lahor after making over charge of Qila'-i-zafar to Sulaiman, and he went
back at the end of the cold season, going perhaps just before his Father
started from Lahor on his return journey, the gifts he received before
leaving being 2 elephants, 4 horses, belts and jewelled daggers.[2712]

Babur is said to have left Lahor on Rajab 4th (936 AH.)-(March 4th, 1530
AD.). From Ahmad-i-yadgar's outline of Babur's doings in Lahor, he, or
his original, must be taken as ill-informed or indifferent about them.
His interest becomes greater when he writes of Samana.


_d. Punishment of the Mundahirs._

When Babur, on his return journey, reached Sihrind, he received a
complaint from the Qazi of Samana against one Mohan _Mundahir_ (or
_Mundhar_)[2713] _Rajput_ who had attacked his estates, burning and
plundering, and killed his son. Here-upon 'Ali-quli of Hamadan[2714] was
sent with 3000 horse to avenge the Qazi's wrongs, and reached Mohan's
village, in the Kaithal _pargana_, early in the morning when the cold
was such that the archers "could not pull their bows."[2715] A marriage
had been celebrated over-night; the villagers, issuing from warm houses,
shot such flights of arrows that the royal troops could make no stand;
many were killed and nothing was effected; they retired into the jungle,
lit fires, warmed themselves(?), renewed the attack and were again
repulsed. On hearing of their failure, Babur sent off, perhaps again
from Sihrind, Tarsam Bahadur and Naurang Beg with 6000 horse and many
elephants. This force reached the village at night and when marriage
festivities were in progress. Towards morning it was formed into three
divisions,[2716] one of which was ordered to go to the west of the
village and show itself. This having been done, the villagers advanced
towards it, in the pride of their recent success. The royal troops, as
ordered beforehand, turned their backs and fled, the Mundahirs pursuing
them some two miles. Meantime Tarsam Bahadur had attacked and fired the
village, killing many of its inhabitants. The pursuers on the west saw
the flames of their burning homes, ran back and were intercepted on
their way. About 1000 men, women and children were made prisoner; there
was also great slaughter, and a pillar of heads was raised. Mohan was
captured and later on was buried to the waist and shot to death with
arrows.[2717] News of the affair was sent to the Padshah.[2718]

As after being in Sihrind, Babur is said to have spent two months
hunting near Dihli, it may be that he followed up the punitive
expedition sent into the Kaithal _pargana_ of the Karnal District, by
hunting in Nardak, a favourite ground of the Timurids, which lies in
that district.

Thus the gap of 936 AH. with also perhaps a month of 937 AH. is filled
by the "year's" travel west of Dihli. The record is a mere outline and
in it are periods of months without mention of where Babur was or what
affairs of government were brought before him. At some time, on his
return journey presumably, he will have despatched to Kashmir the
expedition referred to in the opening section of this appendix.
Something further may yet be gleaned from local chronicles, from
unwritten tradition, or from the witness of place-names commemorating
his visit.


_e. Babur's self-surrender to save Humayun._

The few months, perhaps 4 to 5, between Babur's return to Agra from his
expedition towards the North-west, and the time of his death are filled
by Gul-badan and Abu'l-fazl with matters concerning family interests
only.

The first such matter these authors mention is an illness of Humayun
during which Babur devoted his own life to save his son's.[2719] Of this
the particulars are, briefly:--That Humayun, while still in Sambhal, had
had a violent attack of fever; that he was brought by water to Agra, his
mother meeting him in Muttra; and that when the disease baffled medical
skill, Babur resolved to practise the rite believed then and now in the
East to be valid, of intercession and devotion of a suppliant's most
valued possession in exchange for a sick man's life. Rejecting counsel
to offer the Koh-i-nur for pious uses, he resolved to supplicate for the
acceptance of his life. He made intercession through a saint his
daughter names, and moved thrice round Humayun's bed, praying, in
effect, "O God! if a life may be exchanged for a life, I, who am Babur,
give my life and my being for Humayun." During the rite fever surged
over him, and, convinced that his prayer and offering had prevailed, he
cried out, "I have borne it away! I have borne it away!"[2720] Gul-badan
says that he himself fell ill on that very day, while Humayun poured
water on his head, came out and gave audience; and that they carried her
Father within on account of his illness, where he kept his bed for 2 or
3 months.

There can be no doubt as to Babur's faith in the rite he had practised,
or as to his belief that his offering of life was accepted; moreover
actual facts would sustain his faith and belief. Onlookers also must
have believed his prayer and offering to have prevailed, since Humayun
went back to Sambhal,[2721] while Babur fell ill at once and died in a
few weeks.[2722]


_f. A plan to set Babur's sons aside from the succession._

Reading the _Akbar-nama_ alone, there would seem to be no question about
whether Babur ever intended to give Hindustan, at any rate, to Humayun,
but, by piecing together various contributory matters, an opposite
opinion is reached, _viz._ that not Khalifa only whom Abu'l-fazl names
perhaps on Nizamu'd-din Ahmad's warrant, but Babur also, with some
considerable number of chiefs, wished another ruler for Hindustan. The
starting-point of this opinion is a story in the _Tabaqat-i-akbari_
and, with less detail, in the _Akbar-nama_, of which the gist is that
Khalifa planned to supersede Humayun and his three brothers in their
Father's succession.[2723]

[Illustration: BABUR IN PRAYER, DEVOTING HIMSELF FOR HIS SON.

   _To face p. 702._]

The story, in brief, is as follows:--At the time of Babur's death
Nizamu'd-din Ahmad's father Khwaja Muhammad Muqim _Harawi_ was in the
service of the Office of Works.[2724] Amir Nizamu'd-din 'Ali Khalifa,
the Chief of the Administration, had dread and suspicion about Humayun
and did not favour his succession as Padshah. Nor did he favour that of
Babur's other sons. He promised "Babur Padshah's son-in-law (_damad_)"
Mahdi Khwaja who was a generous young man, very friendly to himself,
that he would make him Padshah. This promise becoming known, others made
their _salam_ to the Khwaja who put on airs and accepted the position.
One day when Khalifa, accompanied by Muqim, went to see Mahdi Khwaja in
his tent, no-one else being present, Babur, in the pangs of his disease,
sent for him[2725] when he had been seated a few minutes only. When
Khalifa had gone out, Mahdi Khwaja remained standing in such a way that
Muqim could not follow but, the Khwaja unaware, waited respectfully
behind him. The Khwaja, who was noted for the wildness of youth, said,
stroking his beard, "Please God! first, I will flay thee!" turned round
and saw Muqim, took him by the ear, repeated a proverb of menace, "The
red tongue gives the green head to the wind," and let him go. Muqim
hurried to Khalifa, repeated the Khwaja's threat against him, and
remonstrated about the plan to set all Babur's sons aside in favour of a
stranger-house.[2726] Here-upon Khalifa sent for Humayun,[2727] and
despatched an officer with orders to the Khwaja to retire to his house,
who found him about to dine and hurried him off without ceremony.
Khalifa also issued a proclamation forbidding intercourse with him,
excluded him from Court, and when Babur died, supported Humayun.

As Nizamu'd-din Ahmad was not born till 20 years after Babur died, the
story will have been old before he could appreciate it, and it was some
60 years old when it found way into the _Tabaqat-i-akbari_ and, with
less detail, into the _Akbar-nama_.

Taken as it stands, it is incredible, because it represents Khalifa, and
him alone, planning to subject the four sons of Babur to the suzerainty
of Mahdi Khwaja who was not a Timurid, who, so far as well-known sources
show, was not of a ruling dynasty or personally illustrious,[2728] and
who had been associated, so lately as the autumn of 1529 AD., with his
nephew Rahim-dad in seditious action which had so angered Babur that,
whatever the punishment actually ordered, rumour had it both men were to
die.[2729] In two particulars the only Mahdi Khwaja then of Babur's
following, does not suit the story; he was not a young man in 1530
AD.,[2730] and was not a _damad_ of Babur, if that word be taken in its
usual sense of son-in-law, but he was a _yazna_, husband of a Padshah's
sister, in his case, of Khan-zada Begim.[2731] Some writers style him
Sayyid Mahdi Khwaja, a double title which may indicate descent on both
sides from religious houses; one is suggested to be that of Tirmiz by
the circumstance that in his and Khan-zada Begim's mausoleum was buried
a Tirmiz sayyid of later date, Shah Abu'l-ma'ali. But though he were of
Tirmiz, it is doubtful if that religious house would be described by the
word _khanwada_ which so frequently denotes a ruling dynasty.

His name may have found its way into Nizamu'd-din Ahmad's story as a
gloss mistakenly amplifying the word _damad_, taken in its less usual
sense of brother-in-law. To Babur's contemporaries the expression "Babur
Padshah's _damad_" (son-in-law) would be explicit, because for some 11
years before he lay on his death-bed, he had one son-in-law only, _viz._
Muhammad-i-zaman Mirza _Bai-qara_,[2732] the husband of Ma'suma Sultan
Begim. If that Mirza's name were where Mahdi Khwaja's is entered, the
story of an exclusion of Babur's sons from rule might have a core of
truth.

It is incredible however that Khalifa, with or without Babur's
concurrence, made the plan attributed to him of placing any man not a
Timurid in the position of Padshah over all Babur's territory. I suggest
that the plan concerned Hindustan only and was one considered in
connection with Babur's intended return to Kabul, when he must have left
that difficult country, hardly yet a possession, in charge of some man
giving promise of power to hold it. Such a man Humayun was not. My
suggestion rests on the following considerations:--

(1) Babur's outlook was not that of those in Agra in 1587 AD. who gave
Abu'l-fazl his Baburiana material, because at that date Dihli had become
the pivot of Timurid power, so that not to hold Hindustan would imply
not to be Padshah. Babur's outlook on his smaller Hindustan was
different; his position in it was precarious, Kabul, not Dihli, was his
chosen centre, and from Kabul his eyes looked northwards as well as to
the East. If he had lost the Hindustan which was approximately the
modern United Provinces, he might still have held what lay west of it to
the Indus, as well as Qandahar.

(2) For several years before his death he had wished to return to Kabul.
Ample evidence of this wish is given by his diary, his letters, and some
poems in his second _Diwan_ (that found in the Rampur MS.). As he told
his sons more than once, he kept Kabul for himself.[2733] If, instead
of dying in Agra, he had returned to Kabul, had pushed his way on from
Badakhshan, whether as far as Samarkand or less, had given Humayun a
seat in those parts,--action foreshadowed by the records--a reasonable
interpretation of the story that Humayun and his brothers were not to
govern Hindustan, is that he had considered with Khalifa the
apportionment of his territories according to the example of his
ancestors Chingiz Khan, Timur and Abu-sa'id; that by his plan of
apportionment Humayun was not to have Hindustan but something
Tramontane; Kamran had already Qandahar; Sulaiman, if Humayun had moved
beyond the out-post of Badakhshan, would have replaced him there; and
Hindustan would have gone to "Babur Padshah's _damad_".

(3) Muhammad-i-zaman had much to recommend him for
Hindustan:--Timurid-born, grandson and heir of Sl. Husain Mirza, husband
of Ma'suma who was a Timurid by double descent,[2734] protected by Babur
after the Bai-qara _debacle_ in Herat, a landless man leading such other
exiles as Muhammad Sultan Mirza,[2735] 'Adil Sultan, and Qasim-i-husain
Sultan, half-Timurids all, who with their Khurasani following, had been
Babur's guests in Kabul, had pressed on its poor resources, and thus had
helped in 932 AH. (1525 AD.) to drive him across the Indus. This
Bai-qara group needed a location; Muhammad-i-zaman's future had to be
cared for and with his, Ma'suma's.

(4) It is significant of intention to give Muhammad-i-zaman ruling
status that in April 1529 AD. (Sha'ban 935 AH.) Babur bestowed on him
royal insignia, including the umbrella-symbol of sovereignty.[2736] This
was done after the Mirza had raised objections, unspecified now in the
_Babur-nama_ against Bihar; they were overcome, the insignia were given
and, though for military reasons he was withheld from taking up that
appointment, the recognition of his royal rank had been made. His next
appointment was to Junpur, the capital of the fallen Sharqi dynasty. No
other chief is mentioned by Babur as receiving the insignia of royalty.

(5) It appears to have been within a Padshah's competence to select his
successor; and it may be inferred that choice was made between Humayun
and another from the wording of more than one writer that Khalifa
"supported" Humayun, and from the word "selected" used in
Ahmad-i-yadgar's anecdote.[2737] Much more would there be freedom of
choice in a division of territory such as there is a good deal to
suggest was the basis of Nizamu'd-din Ahmad's story. Whatever the extent
of power proposed for the _damad_, whether, as it is difficult to
believe, the Padshah's whole supremacy, or whether the limited
sovereignty of Hindustan, it must have been known to Babur as well as to
Khalifa. Whatever their earlier plan however, it was changed by the
sequel of Humayun's illness which led to his becoming Padshah. The
_damad_ was dropped, on grounds it is safe to believe more impressive
than his threat to flay Khalifa or than the remonstrance of that high
official's subordinate Muqim of Herat.

Humayun's arrival and continued stay in Hindustan modified earlier
dispositions which included his remaining in Badakhshan. His actions may
explain why Babur, when in 936 AH. he went as far as Lahor, did not go
on to Kabul. Nothing in the sources excludes the surmise that Mahim knew
of the bestowal of royal insignia on the Bai-qara Mirza, that she
summoned her son to Agra and there kept him, that she would do this the
more resolutely if the _damad_ of the plan she must have heard of, were
that Bai-qara, and that but for Humayun's presence in Agra and its
attendant difficulties, Babur would have gone to Kabul, leaving his
_damad_ in charge of Hindustan.

Babur, however, turned back from Lahor for Agra, and there he made the
self-surrender which, resulting in Humayun's "selection" as Padshah,
became a turning point in history.

Humayun's recovery and Babur's immediate illness will have made the
son's life seem Divinely preserved, the father's as a debt to be paid.
Babur's impressive personal experience will have dignified Humayun as
one whom God willed should live. Such distinction would dictate the
bestowal on him of all that fatherly generosity had yet to give. The
imminence of death defeating all plans made for life, Humayun was
nominated to supreme power as Padshah.


_g. Babur's death._

Amongst other family matters mentioned by Gul-badan as occurring shortly
before her Father's death, was his arrangement of marriages for Gul-rang
with Aisan-timur and for Gul-chihra with Tukhta-bugha _Chaghatai_. She
also writes of his anxiety to see Hind-al who had been sent for from
Kabul but did not arrive till the day after the death.

When no remedies availed, Humayun was summoned from Sambhal. He reached
Agra four days before the death; on the morrow Babur gathered his chiefs
together for the last of many times, addressed them, nominated Humayun
his successor and bespoke their allegiance for him. Abu'l-fazl thus
summarizes his words, "Lofty counsels and weighty mandates were
imparted. Advice was given (to Humayun) to be munificent and just, to
acquire God's favour, to cherish and protect subjects, to accept
apologies from such as had failed in duty, and to pardon transgressors.
And, he (Babur) exclaimed, the cream of my testamentary dispositions is
this, 'Do naught against your brothers, even though they may deserve
it.' In truth," continues the historian, "it was through obedience to
this mandate that his Majesty Jannat-ashiyani suffered so many injuries
from his brothers without avenging himself." Gul-badan's account of her
Father's last address is simple:--"He spoke in this wise, 'For years it
has been in my heart to make over the throne to Humayun and to retire to
the Gold-scattering Garden. By the Divine grace I have obtained in
health of body everything but the fulfilment of this wish. Now that
illness has laid me low, I charge you all to acknowledge Humayun in my
stead. Fail not in loyalty towards him. Be of one heart and mind towards
him. I hope to God that he, for his part, will bear himself well towards
men. Moreover, Humayun, I commit you and your brothers and all my
kinsfolk and your people and my people to God's keeping, and entrust
them all to you.'"

It was on Monday Jumada 1. 5th 937 AH. (Dec. 26th 153O AD.) that Babur
made answer to his summons with the _Adsum_ of the Musalman, "Lord! I am
here for Thee."

"Black fell the day for children and kinsfolk and all," writes his
daughter;

   "Alas! that time and the changeful heaven should exist without thee;
    Alas! and Alas! that time should remain and thou shouldst be gone;"

mourns Khwaja Kalan in the funeral ode from which Badayuni quoted these
lines.[2738]

The body was laid in the Garden-of-rest (_Aram-bagh_) which is opposite
to where the Taj-i-mahall now stands. Khwaja Muhammad 'Ali _'asas_[2739]
was made the guardian of the tomb, and many well-voiced readers and
reciters were appointed to conduct the five daily Prayers and to offer
supplication for the soul of the dead. The revenues of Sikri and 5
_laks_ from Biana were set aside for the endowment of the tomb, and
Mahim Begim, during the two and a half years of her remaining life, sent
twice daily from her own estate, an allowance of food towards the
support of its attendants.

In accordance with the directions of his will, Babur's body was to be
conveyed to Kabul and there to be laid in the garden of his choice, in a
grave open to the sky, with no building over it, no need of a
door-keeper.

Precisely when it was removed from Agra we have not found stated. It is
known from Gul-badan that Kamran visited his Father's tomb in Agra in
1539 AD. (946 AH.) after the battle of Chausa; and it is known from
Jauhar that the body had been brought to Kabul before 1544 AD. (952
AH.), at which date Humayun, in Kabul, spoke with displeasure of
Kamran's incivility to "Bega Begim", the "Bibi" who had conveyed their
Father's body to that place.[2740] That the widow who performed this
duty was the Afghan Lady, Bibi Mubarika[2741] is made probable by
Gul-badan's details of the movements of the royal ladies. Babur's family
left Agra under Hind-al's escort, after the defeat at Chausa (June 7th,
1539 AD.); whoever took charge of the body on its journey to Kabul must
have returned at some later date to fetch it. It would be in harmony
with Sher Shah's generous character if he safe-guarded her in her task.

The terraced garden Babur chose for his burial-place lies on the slope
of the hill Shah-i-Kabul, the Sher-darwaza of European writers.[2742] It
has been described as perhaps the most beautiful of the Kabul gardens,
and as looking towards an unsurpassable view over the Char-dih plain
towards the snows of Paghman and the barren, rocky hills which have been
the hunting-grounds of rulers in Kabul. Several of Babur's descendants
coming to Kabul from Agra have visited and embellished his
burial-garden. Shah-i-jahan built the beautiful mosque which stands near
the grave; Jahangir seems to have been, if not the author, at least the
prompter of the well-cut inscription adorning the upright slab of white
marble of Maidan, which now stands at the grave-head. The tomb-stone
itself is a low grave-covering, not less simple than those of relations
and kin whose remains have been placed near Babur's. In the thirties of
the last century [the later Sir] Alexander Burnes visited and admirably
described the garden and the tomb. With him was Munshi Mohan Lal who
added to his own account of the beauties of the spot, copies of the
inscriptions on the monumental slab and on the portal of the
Mosque.[2743] As is shown by the descriptions these two visitors give,
and by Daniel's drawings of the garden and the tomb, there were in their
time two upright slabs, one behind the other, near the head of the
grave. Mr. H. H. Hayden who visited the garden in the first decade of
the present century, shows in his photograph of the grave, one upright
stone only, the place of one of the former two having been taken by a
white-washed lamp holder (_chiraghdan_).

The purport of the verses inscribed on the standing-slab is as follows:--

   A ruler from whose brow shone the Light of God was that[2744]
   Back-bone of the Faith (_zahiru'd-din_) Muhammad Babur
   Padshah. Together with majesty, dominion, fortune, rectitude,
   the open-hand and the firm Faith, he had share in prosperity,
   abundance and the triumph of victorious arms. He won the
   material world and became a moving light; for his every
   conquest he looked, as for Light, towards the world of souls.
   When Paradise became his dwelling and Ruzwan[2745] asked me
   the date, I gave him for answer, "Paradise is forever Babur
   Padshah's abode."


_h. Babur's wives and children._[2746]

Babur himself mentions several of his wives by name, but Gul-badan is
the authority for complete lists of them and their children.

1. 'Ayisha Sultan Begim, daughter of Sl. Ahmad Mirza _Miran-shahi_ was
betrothed, when Babur was _cir._ 5 years old, in 894 AH. (1488-89 AD.),
bore Fakhru'n-nisa' in 906 AH. [who died in about one month], left Babur
before 909 AH. (1503 AD.).

2. Zainab Sl. Begim, daughter of Sl. Mahmud Mirza _Miran-shahi_, was
married in 910 AH. (1504-5 AD.), died childless two or three years
later.

3. Mahim Begim, whose parentage is not found stated, was married in 912
AH. (1506 AD.), bore Bar-bud, Mihr-jan, Aisan-daulat, Faruq [who all
died in infancy], and Humayun.

4. Ma'suma Sl. Begim, daughter of Sl. Ahmad Mirza _Miran-shahi_, was
married in 913 AH. (1507 AD.), bore Ma'suma and died at her birth,
presumably early in the _lacuna_ of 914-925 AH. (1508-19 AD.).

5. Gul-rukh Begim, whose parentage is not found stated, was perhaps a
Begchik Mughul, was married between 914 AH. and 925 AH. (1508-19 AD.),
probably early in the period, bore Shah-rukh, Ahmad [who both died
young], Gul'izar [who also may have died young], Kamran and 'Askari.

6. Dil-dar Begim, whose parentage is not found stated, was married in
the same period as Gul-rukh, bore Gul-rang, Gul-chihra, Hind-al,
Gul-badan and Alwar, [who died in childhood].

7. The Afghan Lady (Afghani Aghacha), Bibi Mubarika _Yusufzai_, was
married in 925 AH. (1519 AD.), and died childless.

The two Circassian slaves Gul-nar Aghacha and Nar-gul Aghacha of whom
Tahmasp made gift to Babur in 933 AH. (f. 305), became recognized
ladies of the royal household. They are mentioned several times by
Gul-badan as taking part in festivities and in family conferences under
Humayun. Gul-nar is said by Abu'l-fazl to have been one of Gul-badan's
pilgrim band in 983 AH. (1575 AD.).

The above list contains the names of three wives whose parentage is not
given or is vaguely given by the well-known sources,--namely, Mahim,
Gul-rukh and Dil-dar. What would sufficiently explain the absence of
mention by Babur of the parentage of Gul-rukh and Dil-dar is that his
record of the years within which the two Begims were married is not now
with the _Babur-nama_. Presumably it has been lost, whether in diary or
narrative form, in the _lacuna_ of 914-25 AH. (1508-19 AD.). Gul-rukh
appears to have belonged to the family of Begchik Mughuls described by
Haidar Mirza[2747]; her brothers are styled Mirza; she was of good but
not royal birth. Dil-dar's case is less simple. Nothing in her daughter
Gul-badan's book suggests that she and her children were other than of
the highest rank; numerous details and shades of expression show their
ease of equality with royal personages. It is consistent with
Gul-badan's method of enumerating her father's wives that she should not
state her own mother's descent; she states it of none of her "mothers".
There is this interest in trying to trace Dil-dar's parentage, that she
may have been the third daughter of Sl. Mahmud Mirza and Pasha Begim,
and a daughter of hers may have been the mother of Salima Sultan Begim
who was given in marriage by Humayun to Bairam Khan, later was married
by Akbar, and was a woman of charm and literary accomplishments. Later
historians, Abu'l-fazl amongst their number, say that Salima's mother
was a daughter of Babur's wife Salha Sultan Begim, and vary that
daughter's name as Gul-rang-rukh-barg or -'izar (the last form being an
equivalent of _chihra_, face). As there cannot have been a wife with her
daughter growing up in Babur's household, who does not appear in some
way in Gul-badan's chronicle, and as Salima's descent from Babur need
not be questioned, the knot is most readily loosened by surmising that
"Salha" is the real name of Gul-badan's "Dildar". Instances of double
names are frequent, _e.g._ Mahim, Mah-chicham, Qara-guz, Aq, (My Moon,
My Moon sister, Black-eyed, Fair). "Heart-holding" (Dil-dar) sounds like
a home-name of affection. It is the _Ma'asir-i-rahimi_ which gives Salha
as the name of Babur's wife, Pasha's third daughter. Its author may be
wrong, writing so late as he did (1025 AH.-1616 AD.), or may have been
unaware that Salha was (if she were) known as Dil-dar. It would not war
against seeming facts to take Pasha's third daughter to be Babur's wife
Dil-dar, and Dil-dar's daughter Gul-chihra to be Salima's mother.
Gul-chihra was born in about 1516 AD., married to Tukhta-bugha in 1530
AD., widowed in cir. 1533 AD., might have remarried with Nuru'd-din
_Chaqaniani_ (Sayyid Amir), and in 945 AH. might have borne him Salima;
she was married in 1547 AD. (954 AH.) to 'Abbas Sultan _Auzbeg_.[2748]
Two matters, neither having much weight, make against taking Dil-dar to
be a _Miran-shahi_; the first being that the anonymous annotator who
added to the archetype of Kehr's Codex what is entered in Appendix
L.--_On Mahim's adoption of Hind-al_, styles her Dil-dar Aghacha; he,
however, may have known no more than others knew of her descent; the
second, that Mahim forcibly took Dil-dar's child Hind-al to rear; she
was the older wife and the mother of the heir, but could she have taken
the upper hand over a Miran-shahi? A circumstance complicating the
question of Salima's maternal descent is, that historians searching the
_Babur-nama_ or its Persian translation the _Waqi'at-i-baburi_ for
information about the three daughters of Mahmud _Miran-shahi_ and Pasha
_Baharlu Turkman_, would find an incomplete record, one in which the
husbands of the first and second daughters are mentioned and nothing is
said about the third who was Babur's wife and the grandmother of Salima.
Babur himself appears to have left the record as it is, meaning to fill
it in later; presumably he waited for the names of the elder two sisters
to complete his details of the three. In the Haidarabad Codex, which
there is good ground for supposing a copy of his original manuscript,
about three lines are left blank (f. 27) as if awaiting information; in
most manuscripts, however, this indication of intention is destroyed by
running the defective passage on to join the next sentence. Some chance
remark of a less well-known writer, may clear up the obscurity and show
that Salha was Dil-dar.

Mahim's case seems one having a different cause for silence about her
parentage. When she was married in Herat, shortly after the death of Sl.
Husain Mirza, Babur had neither wife nor child. What Abu'l-fazl tells
about her is vague; her father's name is not told; she is said to have
belonged to a noble Khurasan family, to have been related
(_nisbat-i-khwesh_) to Sl. Husain Mirza and to have traced her descent
to Shaikh Ahmad of Jam. If her birth had been high, even though not
royal, it is strange that it is not stated by Babur when he records the
birth of her son Humayun, incidentally by Gul-badan, or more precisely
by Abu'l-fazl. Her brothers belonged to Khost, and to judge from a
considerable number of small records, seem to have been quiet, unwarlike
Khwajas. Her marriage took place in a year of which a full record
survives; it is one in the composed narrative, not in the diary. In the
following year, this also being one included in the composed narrative,
Babur writes of his meeting with Ma'suma _Miran-shahi_ in Herat, of
their mutual attraction, and of their marriage. If the marriage with
Humayun's mother had been an equal alliance, it would agree with Babur's
custom to mention its occurrence, and to give particulars about Mahim's
descent.[2749]


_i. Mr. William Erskine's estimate of Babur._

"Zahiru'd-din Muhammad Babur was undoubtedly one of the most
illustrious men of his age, and one of the most eminent and accomplished
princes that ever adorned an Asiatic throne. He is represented as having
been above the middle size, of great vigour of body, fond of all field
and warlike sports, an excellent swordsman, and a skilful archer. As a
proof of his bodily strength, it is mentioned, that he used to leap from
one pinnacle to another of the pinnacled ramparts used in the East, in
his double-soled boots; and that he even frequently took a man under
each arm and went leaping along the rampart from one of the pointed
pinnacles to another. Having been early trained to the conduct of
business, and tutored in the school of adversity, the powers of his mind
received full development. He ascended the throne at the age of twelve,
and before he had attained his twentieth year, had shared every variety
of fortune; he had not only been the ruler of subject provinces but had
been in thraldom to his own ambitious nobles, and obliged to conceal
every sentiment of his heart; he had been alternately hailed and obeyed
as a conqueror and deliverer by rich and extensive kingdoms, and forced
to lurk in the deserts and mountains of Farghana as a houseless
wanderer. Down to the last dregs of life, we perceive in him strong
feelings of affection for his early friends and early enjoyments. * * *
He had been taught betimes, by the voice of events that cannot lie, that
he was a man dependent on the kindness and fidelity of other men; and,
in his dangers and escapes with his followers, had learned that he was
only one of an association. * * * The native benevolence and gaiety of
his disposition seems ever to overflow on all around him; * * * of his
companions in arms he speaks with the frank gaiety of a soldier. * * *
Ambitious he was and fond of conquest and glory in all its shapes; the
enterprise in which he was for a season engaged, seems to have absorbed
his whole soul, and all his faculties were exerted to bring it to a
fortunate issue. His elastic mind was not broken by discomfiture, and
few who have achieved such glorious conquests, have suffered more
numerous or more decisive defeats. His personal courage was conspicuous
during his whole life. Upon the whole, if we review with impartiality
the history of Asia, we find few princes entitled to rank higher than
Babur in genius and accomplishments. * * * In activity of mind, in the
gay equanimity and unbroken spirit with which he bore the extremes of
good and bad fortune, in the possession of the manly and social virtues,
in his love of letters and his success in the cultivation of them, we
shall probably find no other Asiatic prince who can justly be placed
beside him."


THE END.




APPENDICES.


A.--THE SITE AND DISAPPEARANCE OF OLD AKHSI.

Some modern writers, amongst whom are Dr. Schuyler, General Nalivkine
and Mr. Pumpelly, have inferred from the Babur-nama account of Akhsi,
(in its translations?) that the landslip through which Babur's father
died and the disappearance of old Akhsi were brought about by erosion.
Seen by the light of modern information, this erosion theory does not
seem to cover the whole ground and some other cause seems necessary in
explanation of both events.

For convenience of reference, the Babur-nama passages required, are
quoted here, with their translations.

   Hai. MS. f. 4b. _Saihun darya-si qurghani astidin aqar.
   Qurghani baland jar austida waqi' bulub tur. Khandaqi-ning
   aurunigha 'umiq jarlar dur. 'Umar Shaikh M. kim muni pay-takht
   qildi, bir iki martaba tashraq-din yana jarlar saldi._

   Of this the translations are as follows:--

   (_a_) Pers. trans. (I.O. 217, f. 3_b_): _Darya-i Saihun az
   payha qila'-i o mirezad u qila'-i o bar jar balandi waqi'
   shuda ba jay khandaq jarha-i 'umiq uftada. 'U. Sh. M. kah anra
   pay-takht sakhta, yak du martaba az birun ham baz jarha
   andakht._

   (_b_) Erskine (p. 5, translating from the Persian): 'The river
   Saihun flows under the walls of the castle. The castle is
   situated on a high precipice, and the steep ravines around
   serve instead of a moat. When U. Sh. M. made it his capital
   he, in one or two instances, scarped the ravines outside the
   fort.'

   (_c_) De Courteille (i, 8, translating from Ilminsky's
   imprint, p. 6): 'Le Seihoun coule au pied de la fortresse qui
   se dresse sur le sommet d'un ravin, dont les profondeurs lui
   tiennent lieu d'un fosse. 'U. Sh. M. a l'epoque ou il en avait
   fait son capitale, avait augmente a une ou deux reprises, les
   escarpements qui la ceignent naturellement.'

Concerning 'Umar Shaikh's death, the words needed are (f. 6_b_);--

   _Mazkur bulub aidi kim Akhsi qurghani buland jar austida waqi'
   bulub tur. 'Imaratlar jar yaqasida airdi.... Mirza jardin
   kabutar u kabutar-khana bila auchub shunqar buldi_;--'It has been
   mentioned that the walled-town of Akhsi is situated above
   ravine(s). The royal dwellings are along a ravine. The Mirza,
   having flown with his pigeons and their house from the ravine,
   became a falcon (_i.e._ died).'

A few particulars about Akhsi will shew that, in the translations just
quoted, certain small changes of wording are dictated by what, amongst
other writers, Kostenko and von Schwarz have written about the oases of
Turkistan.

The name Akhsi, as used by Ibn Haukal, Yaqut and Babur, describes an
oasis township, _i.e._ a walled-town with its adjacent cultivated lands.
In Yaqut's time Akhsi had a second circumvallation, presumably less for
defence than for the protection of crops against wild animals. The oasis
was created by the Kasan-water,[2750] upon the riverain loess of the
right and higher bank of the Saihun (Sir), on level ground west of the
junction of the Narin and the Qara-darya, west too of spurs from the
northern hills which now abut upon the river. Yaqut locates it in the
12th century, at one _farsakh_ (_circa_ 4 m.) north of the river.[2751]
Depending as it did solely on the Kasan-water, nothing dictated its
location close to the Sir, along which there is now, and there seems to
have been in the 12th century, a strip of waste land. Babur says of
Akhsi what Kostenko says (i, 321) of modern Tashkint, that it stood
above ravines (_jarlar_). These were natural or artificial channels of
the Kasan-water.[2752]

To turn now to the translations;--Mr. Erskine imaged Akhsi as a castle,
high on a precipice in process of erosion by the Sir. But Babur's word,
_qurghan_ means the walled-town; his word for a castle is _ark_,
citadel; and his _jar_, a cleft, is not rendered by 'precipice.'
Again;--it is no more necessary to understand that the Sir flowed close
to the walls than it is to understand, when one says the Thames flows
past below Richmond, that it washes the houses on the hill.

The key to the difficulties in the Turki passage is provided by a
special use of the word _jar_ for not only natural ravines but
artificial water-cuts for irrigation. This use of it makes clear that
what 'Umar Shaikh did at Akhsi was not to make escarpments but to cut
new water-channels. Presumably he joined those 'further out' on the
deltaic fan, on the east and west of the town, so as to secure a
continuous defensive cleft round the town[2753] or it may be, in order
to bring it more water.

Concerning the historic pigeon-house (f. 6_b_), it can be said safely
that it did not fall into the Sir; it fell from a _jar_, and in this
part of its course, the river flows in a broad bed, with a low left
bank. Moreover the Mirza's residence was in the walled-town (f. 110_b_)
and there his son stayed 9 years after the accident. The slip did not
affect the safety of the residence therefore; it may have been local to
the birds' house. It will have been due to some ordinary circumstance
since no cause for it is mentioned by Babur, Haidar or Abu'l-fazl. If it
had marked the crisis of the Sir's approach, Akhsi could hardly have
been described, 25 years later, as a strong fort.


Something is known of Akhsi, in the 10th, the 12th, the 15th and the
19th centuries, which testifies to saecular decadence. Ibn Haukal and
Yaqut give the township an extent of 3 _farsakh_ (12 miles), which may
mean from one side to an opposite one. Yaqut's description of it
mentions four gates, each opening into well-watered lands extending a
whole _farsakh_, in other words it had a ring of garden-suburb four
miles wide.

Two meanings have been given to Babur's words indicating the status of
the oasis in the 15th century. They are, _mahallati qurghan-din bir
shar'i yuraqraq tushub tur_. They have been understood as saying that
the suburbs were two miles from their _urbs_. This may be right but I
hesitate to accept it without pointing out that the words may mean, 'Its
suburbs extend two miles farther than the walled-town.' Whichever verbal
reading is correct, reveals a decayed oasis.

In the 19th century, Nalivkine and Ujfalvy describe the place then
bearing the name Akhsi, as a small village, a mere winter-station, at
some distance from the river's bank, that bank then protected from
denudation by a sand-bank.

Three distinctly-marked stages of decadence in the oasis township are
thus indicated by Yaqut, Babur and the two modern travellers.


It is necessary to say something further about the position of the
suburbs in the 15th century. Babur quotes as especially suitable to
Akhsi, the proverbial questions, 'Where is the village?'[2754] (qy.
Akhsi-kint.) 'Where are the trees?' and these might be asked by some-one
in the suburbs unable to see Akhsi or _vice versa_. But granting that
there were no suburbs within two miles of the town, why had the whole
inner circle, two miles of Yaqut's four, gone out of cultivation?
Erosion would have affected only land between the river and the town.

Again;--if the Sir only were working in the 15th century to destroy a
town standing on the Kasan-water, how is it that this stream does not
yet reach the Sir?


Various ingatherings of information create the impression that failure
of Kasan-water has been the dominant factor in the loss of the Akhsi
township. Such failure might be due to the general desiccation of
Central Asia and also to increase of cultivation in the Kasan-valley
itself. There may have been erosion, and social and military change may
have had its part, but for the loss of the oasis lands and for, as a
sequel, the decay of the town, desiccation seems a sufficient cause.

The Kasan-water still supports an oasis on its riverain slope, the large
Auzbeg town of Tupa-qurghan (Town-of-the-hill), from the modern castle
of which a superb view is had up the Kasan-valley, now thickly studded
with villages.[2755]


B.--THE BIRDS, QIL QUYIRUGH AND BAGHRI QARA.

Describing a small bird (_qush-qina_), abundant in the Qarshi district
(f. 49_b_), Babur names it the _qil-quyirugh_, horse-tail, and says it
resembles the _baghri qara_.

Later on he writes (f. 280) that the _baghri qara_ of India is smaller
and more slender than 'those' _i.e._ of Transoxiana (f. 49_b_, n. 1),
the blackness of its breast less deep, and its cry less piercing.

We have had difficulty in identifying the birds but at length conclude
that the _baghri qara_ of Transoxiana is _Pterocles arenarius_, Pallas's
black-bellied sand-grouse and that the Indian one is a smaller
sand-grouse, perhaps a _Syrrhaptes_. As the _qil quyirugh_ resembles the
other two, it may be a yet smaller _Syrrhaptes_.

Muh. Salih, writing of sport Shaibaq Khan had in Qarshi
(_Shaibani-nama_, Vambery, p. 192) mentions the 'Little bird (_murghak_)
of Qarshi,' as on all sides making lament. The Sang-lakh[2756] gives its
Persian name as _khar-pala_, ass-hair, says it flies in large flocks
and resembles the _baghri qara_. Of the latter he writes as abundant in
the open country and as making noise (_baghir_).

The Sang-lakh (f. 119) gives the earliest and most informing account we
have found of the _baghri qara_. Its says the bird is larger than a
pigeon, marked with various colours, yellow especially, black-breasted
and a dweller in the stony and waterless desert. These details are
followed by a quotation from 'Ali-sher _Nawa'i_, in which he likens his
own heart to that of the bird of the desert, presumably referring to the
gloom of the bird's plumage. Three synonyms are then given; Ar. _qita_,
one due to its cry (Meninsky); Pers. _sang-shikan_, stone-eating,
(Steingass, _sang-khwara_, stone-eating); and Turki _baghir-tilaq_ which
refers, I think, to its cry.

Morier (Haji Baba) in his _Second journey through Persia_ (Lond. 1818,
p. 181), mentions that a bird he calls the black-breasted partridge,
(_i.e._ _Francolinus vulgaris_) is known in Turkish as _bokara kara_ and
in Persian as _siyah-sina_, both names, (he says), meaning black-breast;
that it has a horse-shoe of black feathers round the forepart of the
trunk, more strongly marked in the female than in the male; that they
fly in flocks of which he saw immense numbers near Tabriz (p. 283), have
a soft note, inhabit the plains, and, once settled, do not run. Cock and
hen alike have a small spur,--a characteristic, it may be said,
identifying rather with _Francolinus vulgaris_ than with _Pterocles
arenarius_. Against this identification, however, is Mr. Blandford's
statement that _siyah-sina_ (Morier's _bokara kara_) is _Pterocles
arenarius_ (Report of the Persian Boundary Commission, ii, 271).

In Afghanistan and Bikanir, the sand-grouse is called _tuturak_ and
_boora kurra_ (Jerdon, ii, 498). Scully explains _baghitaq_ as
_Pterocles arenarius_.


Perhaps I may mention something making me doubt whether it is correct to
translate _baghri qara_ by _black-liver_ and _gorge-noir_ or other names
in which the same meaning is expressed. To translate thus, is to
understand a Turki noun and adjective in Persian construction, and to
make exception to the rule, amply exemplified in lists of birds, that
Turki names of birds are commonly in Turki construction, _e.g._ _qara
bash_ (black-head), _aq-bash_ (white-head), _sarigh-sunduk_
(yellow-headed wagtail). _Baghir_ may refer to the cry of the bird. We
learn from Mr. Ogilvie Grant that the Mongol name for the sand-grouse
_njupterjun_, is derived from its cry in flight, _truck_, _truck_, and
its Arabic name _qita_ is said by Meninsky to be derived from its cry
_kaetha_, _kaetha_. Though the dissimilarity of the two cries is against
taking the _njupterjun_ and the _qita_ to be of one class of
sand-grouse, the significance of the derivation of the names remains,
and shows that there are examples in support of thinking that when a
sand-grouse is known as _baghri qara_, it may be so known because of its
cry (_baghir_).

The word _qara_ finds suggestive interpretation in a B. N. phrase (f.
72_b_) _Tambal-ning qara-si_, Tambal's blackness, _i.e._ the dark mass
of his moving men, seen at a distance. It is used also for an indefinite
number, _e.g._ 'family, servants, retainers, followers, _qara_,' and I
think it may imply a massed flock.

Babur's words (f. 280) _baghri-ning qara-si ham kam dur_, [its belly
(lit. liver) also is less black], do not necessarily contradict the view
that the word _baghri_ in the bird's name means crying. The root _bagh_
has many and pliable derivatives; I suspect both Babur (here) and Muh.
Salih (l. c.) of ringing changes on words.


We are indebted for kind reply to our questions to Mr. Douglas
Carruthers, Mr. Ogilvie Grant and to our friend, Mr. R. S. Whiteway.


C.--ON THE GOSHA-GIR.

I am indebted to my husband's examination of two Persian MSS. on
archery for an explanation of the word _gosha-gir_, in its technical
sense in archery. The works consulted are the Cyclopaedia of
Archery (_Kulliyatu'r-rami_ I. O. 2771) and the Archer's Guide
(_Hidayatu'r-rami_ I. O. 2768).

It should be premised that in archery, the word _gosha_ describes, in
the arrow, the notch by which it grips and can be carried on the string,
and, in the bow, both the tip (horn) and the notch near the tip in which
the string catches. It is explained by Vullers as _cornu et crena arcus
cui immititur nervus_.

Two passages in the Cyclopaedia of Archery (f. 9 and f. 36_b_) shew
_gosha_ as the bow-tip. One says that to bend the bow, two men must
grasp the two _gosha_; the other reports a tradition that the Archangel
Gabriel brought a bow having its two _gosha_ (tips) made of ruby. The
same book directs that the _gosha_ be made of seasoned ivory, the
Archer's Guide prescribing seasoned mulberry wood.

The C. of A. (f. 125_b_) says that a bowman should never be without two
things, his arrows and his _gosha-gir_. The _gosha-gir_ may be called an
item of the repairing kit; it is an implement (f. 53) for making good a
warped bow-tip and for holding the string into a displaced notch. It is
known also as the _chapras_, brooch or buckle, and the _kardang_; and is
said to bear these names because it fastens in the string. Its shape is
that of the upper part of the Ar. letter _jim_, two converging lines of
which the lower curves slightly outward. It serves to make good a warped
bow, without the use of fire and it should be kept upon the bow-tip till
this has reverted to its original state. Until the warp has been
straightened by the _gosha-gir_, the bow must be kept from the action of
fire because it, (composite of sinew and glutinous substance,) is of the
nature of wax.

The same implement can be used to straighten the middle of the bow, the
_kaman khana_. It is then called _kar-dang_. It can be used there on
condition that there are not two _daur_ (curves) in the bow. If there
are two the bow cannot be repaired without fire. The _halal daur_ is
said to be characteristic of the Turkish bow. There are three _daur_. I
am indebted to Mr. Inigo Simon for the suggestions that _daur_ in this
connection means _warp_ and that the three twists (_daur_) may be those
of one horn (_gosha_), of the whole bow warped in one curve, and of the
two horns warped in opposite directions.

Of repair to the _kaman-khana_ it is said further that if no _kardang_
be available, its work can be done by means of a stick and string, and
if the damage be slight only, the bow and the string can be tightly tied
together till the bow comes straight. 'And the cure is with God!'

Both manuscripts named contain much technical information. Some parts of
this are included in my husband's article, _Oriental Crossbows_ (A. Q.
R. 1911, p. 1). Sir Ralph Payne-Gallwey's interesting book on the
Cross-bow allows insight into the fine handicraft of Turkish bow-making.


D.--ON THE RESCUE PASSAGE.

I have omitted from my translation an account of Babur's rescue from
expected death, although it is with the Haidarabad Codex, because closer
acquaintance with its details has led both my husband and myself to
judge it spurious. We had welcomed it because, being with the true
Babur-nama text, it accredited the same account found in the
Kehr-Ilminsky text, and also because, however inefficiently, it did
something towards filling the gap found elsewhere within 908 AH.

It is in the Haidarabad MS. (f. 118_b_), in Kehr's MS. (p. 385), in
Ilminsky's imprint (p. 144), in _Les Memoires de Babour_ (i, 255) and
with the St. P. University Codex, which is a copy of Kehr's.

On the other hand, it is not with the Elphinstone Codex (f. 89_b_); that
it was not with the archetype of that codex the scribe's note shews (f.
90); it is with neither of the _Waqi'at-i-baburi_ (Pers. translations)
nor with Leyden and Erskine's _Memoirs_ (p. 122).[2757]

Before giving our grounds for rejecting what has been offered to fill
the gap of 908 AH. a few words must be said about the lacuna itself.
Nothing indicates that Babur left it and, since both in the Elphinstone
Codex and its archetype, the sentence preceding it lacks the terminal
verb, it seems due merely to loss of pages. That the loss, if any, was
of early date is clear,--the Elph. MS. itself being copied not later than
1567 AD. (JRAS. 1907, p. 137).

Two known circumstances, both of earlier date than that of the
Elphinstone Codex, might have led to the loss,--the first is the storm
which in 935 AH. scattered Babur's papers (f. 376_b_), the second, the
vicissitudes to which Humayun's library was exposed in his exile.[2758]
Of the two the first seems the more probable cause.

The rupture of a story at a point so critical as that of Babur's danger
in Karnan would tempt to its completion; so too would wish to make good
the composed part of the Babur-nama. Humayun annotated the archetype of
the Elphinstone Codex a good deal but he cannot have written the Rescue
passage if only because he was in a position to avoid some of its
inaccuracies.


CONTEXT AND TRANSLATION OF THE RESCUE PASSAGE.

To facilitate reference, I quote the last words preceding the gap
purported to be filled by the Rescue passage, from several texts;--

(_a_) Elphinstone MS. f. 89_b_,--_Quptum. Bagh gosha-si-gha bardim. Auzum
bila andesha qildim. Didim kim kishi agar yuz u agar ming yashasa, akhir
hech...._

(_b_) The Hai. MS. (f. 118_b_) varies from the Elphinstone by omitting
the word _hech_ and adding _aulmak kirak_, he must die.

(_c_) Payanda-hasan's _Waqi'at-i-baburi_ (I. O. 215, f.
96_b_),--_Barkhwastam u dar gosha-i bagh raftam. Ba khud andesha karda,
guftam kah agar kase sad sal ya hazar sal 'umr dashta bashad, akhir hech
ast._ (It will be seen that this text has the _hech_ of the Elph. MS.)

(_d_) 'Abdu'r-rahim's _Waqi'at-i-baburi_ (I. O. 217, f.
79),--_Barkhwastam u ba gosha-i-bagh raftam. Ba khud andeshidam u guftam
kah agar kase sad sal u agar hazar sal 'umr bayabad akhir...._

(_e_) Muh. _Shirazi's_ lith. ed. (p. 75) finishes the sentence with
_akhir khud bayad murd_, at last one must die,--varying as it frequently
does, from both of the _Waqi'at_.

(_f_) Kehr's MS. (p. 383-454), Ilminsky, p. 144,--_Qupub baghning bir
burji-gha barib, khatirim-gha kilturdim kim agar adam yuz yil u agar
ming yil tirik bulsa, akhir aulmak din auzka chara yuq tur._ (I rose.
Having gone to a tower of the garden, I brought it to my mind that if a
person be alive 100 years or a thousand years, at last he has no help
other than to die.)


The Rescue passage is introduced by a Persian couplet, identified by my
husband as from Nizami's _Khusrau u Shirin_, which is as follows;--

     If you stay a hundred years, and if one year,
     Forth you must go from this heart-delighting palace.

   I steadied myself for death (_qarar birdim_). In that garden a stream
   came flowing;[2759] I made ablution; I recited the prayer of two
   inclinations (_ra'kat_); having raised my head for silent prayer, I
   was making earnest petition when my eyes closed in sleep.[2760] I am
   seeing[2761] that Khwaja Yaq'ub, the son of Khwaja Yahya and
   grandson of His Highness Khwaja 'Ubaidu'l-lah, came facing me,
   mounted on a piebald horse, with a large company of piebald horsemen
   (_sic_).[2762] He said: 'Lay sorrow aside! Khwaja _Ahrar_ (_i.e._
   'Ubaidu'l-lah) has sent me to you; he said, "We, having asked help
   for him (_i.e._ Babur), will seat him on the royal throne;[2763]
   wherever difficulty befalls him, let him look towards us (lit. bring
   us to sight) and call us to mind; there will we be present." Now, in
   this hour, victory and success are on your side; lift up your head!
   awake!'

   At that time I awoke happy, when Yusuf and those with him[2764] were
   giving one another advice. 'We will make a pretext to deceive; to
   seize and bind[2765] is necessary.' Hearing these words, I said,
   'Your words are of this sort, but I will see which of you will come
   to my presence to take me.' I was saying this when outside the garden
   wall[2766] came the noise of approaching horsemen. Yusuf _darogha_
   said, 'If we had taken you to Tambal our affairs would have gone
   forward. Now he has sent again many persons to seize you.' He was
   certain that this noise might be the footfall of the horses of those
   sent by Tambal. On hearing those words anxiety grew upon me; what to
   do I did not know. At this time those horsemen, not happening to find
   the garden gate, broke down the wall where it was old (and) came in.
   I saw (_kursam_, lit. might see) that Qutluq Muh. _Barlas_ and Baba-i
   _Parghari_, my life-devoted servants, having arrived [with], it may
   be, ten, fifteen, twenty persons, were approaching. Having flung
   themselves from their horses,[2767] bent the knee from afar and
   showed respect, they fell at my feet. In that state (_hal_) such
   ecstasy (_hal_) came over me that you might say (_goya_) God gave me
   life from a new source (_bash_). I said, 'Seize and bind that Yusuf
   _darogha_ and these here (_turghan_) hireling mannikins.' These same
   mannikins had taken to flight. They (_i.e._ the rescuers), having
   taken them, one by one, here and there, brought them bound. I said,
   'Where do you come from? How did you get news?' Qutluq Muh. _Barlas_
   said: 'When, having fled from Akhsi, we were separated from you in
   the flight, we went to Andijan when the Khans also came to Andijan. I
   saw a vision that Khwaja 'Ubaidu'l-lah said, "Babur _padshah_[2768]
   is in a village called Karnan; go and bring him, since the royal seat
   (_masnad_) has become his possession (_ta'alluq_)." I having seen
   this vision and become happy, represented (the matter) to the Elder
   Khan (and) the Younger Khan. I said to the Khans, "I have five or six
   younger brothers (and) sons; do you add a few soldiers. I will go
   through the Karnan side and bring news." The Khans said, "It occurs
   to our minds also that (he) may have gone that same road (?)." They
   appointed ten persons; they said, "Having gone in that direction
   (_sari_) and made very sure, bring news. Would to God you might get
   true news!" We were saying this when Baba-i _Parghari_ said, "I too
   will go and seek." He also having agreed with two young men, (his)
   younger brothers, we rode out. It is three days to-day that we are
   on the road. Thank God! we have found you.' They said (_didilar_, for
   _dib_). They spoke (_aitilar_), 'Make a move! Ride off! Take these
   bound ones with you! To stay here is not well; Tambal has had news of
   your coming here; go, in whatever way, and join yourself to the
   Khans!' At that time we having ridden out, moved towards Andijan. It
   was two days that we had eaten no food; the evening prayer had come
   when we found a sheep, went on, dismounted, killed, and roasted. Of
   that same roast we ate as much as a feast. After that we rode on,
   hurried forward, made a five days' journey in a day and two nights,
   came and entered Andijan. I saluted my uncle the Elder Khan (and) my
   uncle the Younger Khan, and made recital of past days. With the Khans
   I spent four months. My servants, who had gone looking in every
   place, gathered themselves together; there were more than 300
   persons. It came to my mind (_kim_), 'How long must I wander, a
   vagabond (_sar-gardan_),[2769] in this Farghana country? I will make
   search (_talab_) on every side (_dib_).' Having said, I rode out in
   the month of Muharram to seek Khurasan, and I went out from the
   country of Farghana.[2770]


REASONS AGAINST THE REJECTION OF THE RESCUE PASSAGE.

Two circumstances have weight against rejecting the passage, its
presence with the Haidarabad Codex and its acceptance by Dr. Ilminsky
and M. de Courteille.

That it is with the Codex is a matter needing consideration and this the
more that it is the only extra matter there found. Not being with the
Persian translations, it cannot be of early date. It seems likely to owe
its place of honour to distinguished authorship and may well be one of
the four portions (_juzwe_) mentioned by Jahangir in the
Tuzuk-i-jahangiri,[2771] as added by himself to his ancestor's book. If
so, it may be mentioned, it will have been with Babur's autograph MS.
[now not to be found], from which the Haidarabad Codex shews signs of
being a direct copy.[2772]

[The incongruity of the Rescue passage with the true text has been
indicated by foot-notes to the translation of it already given. What
condemns it on historic and other grounds will follow.]


On linguistic grounds it is a strong argument in its favour that Dr.
Ilminsky and M. de Courteille should have accepted it but the argument
loses weight when some of the circumstances of their work are taken into
account.

In the first place, it is not strictly accurate to regard Dr. Ilminsky
as accepting it unquestioned, because it is covered by his depreciatory
remarks, made in his preface, on Kehr's text. He, like M. de Courteille,
worked with a single Turki MS. and neither of the two ever saw a
complete true text. When their source (the Kehr-Ilminsky) was able to be
collated with the Elph. and Hai. MSS. much and singular divergence was
discovered.


I venture to suggest what appears to me to explain M. de Courteille's
acceptance of the Rescue passage. Down to its insertion, the
Kehr-Ilminsky text is so continuously and so curiously corrupt that it
seems necessary to regard it as being a re-translation into Turki from
one of the Persian translations of the _Babur-nama_. There being these
textual defects in it, it would create on the mind of a reader initiated
through it, only, in the book, an incorrect impression of Babur's style
and vocabulary, and such a reader would feel no transition when passing
on from it to the Rescue passage.

In opposition to this explanation, it might be said that a wrong
standard set up by the corrupt text, would or could be changed by the
excellence of later parts of the Kehr-Ilminsky one. In words, this is
sound, no doubt, and such reflex criticism is now easy, but more than
the one defective MS. was wanted even to suggest the need of such reflex
criticism. The _Babur-nama_ is lengthy, ponderous to poise and grasp,
and work on it is still tentative, even with the literary gains since
the Seventies.

Few of the grounds which weigh with us for the rejection of the Rescue
passage were known to Dr. Ilminsky or M. de Courteille;--the two good
Codices bring each its own and varied help; Teufel's critique on the
'Fragments,' though made without acquaintance with those adjuncts as
they stand in Kehr's own volume, is of much collateral value; several
useful oriental histories seem not to have been available for M. de
Courteille's use. I may add, for my own part, that I have the great
advantage of my husband's companionship and the guidance of his wide
acquaintance with related oriental books. In truth, looking at the
drawbacks now removed, an earlier acceptance of the passage appears as
natural as does today's rejection.


GROUNDS FOR REJECTING THE RESCUE PASSAGE.

The grounds for rejecting the passage need here little more than
recapitulation from my husband's article in the JASB. 1910, p. 221, and
are as follows;--

   i. The passage is in neither of the _Waqi'at-i-baburi_.

   ii. The dreams detailed are too a propos and marvellous for
   credence.

   iii. Khwaja Yahya is not known to have had a son, named
   Ya'qub.

   iv. The _Babur-nama_ does not contain the names assigned to
   the rescuers.

   v. The Khans were not in Andijan and Babur did not go there.

   vi. He did not set out for Khurasan after spending 4 months
   with The Khans but after Ahmad's death (end of 909 AH.), while
   Mahmud was still in Eastern Turkistan and after about a year's
   stay in Sukh.

   vii. The followers who gathered to him were not 'more than
   300' but between 2 and 300.

   viii. The '3 days,' and the 'day and two nights,' and the '5
   days' journey was one of some 70 miles, and one recorded as
   made in far less time.

   ix. The passage is singularly inadequate to fill a gap of 14
   to 16 months, during which events of the first importance
   occurred to Babur and to the Chaghatai dynasty.

   x. Khwaja _Ahrari's_ promises did nothing to fulfil Babur's
   wishes for 908 AH. while those of Ya'qub for immediate victory
   were closely followed by defeat and exile. Babur knew the
   facts; the passage cannot be his. It looks as though the
   writer saw Babur in Karnan across Timurid success in
   Hindustan.

   xi. The style and wording of the passage are not in harmony
   with those of the true text.

Other reasons for rejection are marked change in choice of the details
chosen for commemoration, _e.g._ when Babur mentions prayer, he does so
simply; when he tells a dream, it seems a real one. The passage leaves
the impression that the writer did not think in Turki, composed in it
with difficulty, and looked at life from another view-point than
Babur's.


On these various grounds, we have come to the conclusion that it is no
part of the _Babur-nama_.


[APPENDICES TO THE KABUL SECTION.]

E.--NAGARAHAR, AND NING-NAHAR

Those who consult books and maps about the riverain tract between the
Safed-koh (Spin-ghur) and (Anglice) the Kabul-river find its name in
several forms, the most common being Nangrahar and Nangnahar (with
variant vowels). It would be useful to establish a European book-name
for the district. As European opinion differs about the origin and
meaning of the names now in use, and as a good deal of interesting
circumstance gathers round the small problem of a correct form (there
may be two), I offer about the matter what has come into the restricted
field of my own work, premising that I do this merely as one who drops a
casual pebble on the cairn of observation already long rising for
scholarly examination.

_a. The origin and meaning of the names._

I have met with three opinions about the origin and meaning of the names
found now and earlier. To each one of them obvious objection can be
made. They are:--

   1. That all forms now in use are corruptions of the Sanscrit
   word Nagarahara, the name of the Town-of-towns which in the
   _du-ab_ of the Baran-su and Surkh-rud left the ruins Masson
   describes in Wilson's _Ariana Antigua_. But if this is so, why
   is the Town-of-towns multiplied into the nine of Na-nagrahar
   (Nangrahar)?[2773]

   2. That the names found represent Sanscrit _nawa vihara_, nine
   monasteries, an opinion the Gazetteer of India of 1907 has
   adopted from Bellew. But why precisely nine monasteries? Nine
   appears an understatement.

   3. That Nang (Ning or Nung) -nahar verbally means nine
   streams, (Babur's Tuquz-rud,) an interpretation of long
   standing (Section _b infra_). But whence _nang_, _ning_,
   _nung_, for nine? Such forms are not in Persian, Turki or
   Pushtu dictionaries, and, as Sir G. A. Grierson assures me, do
   not come into the Linguistic Survey.


_b. On nang, ning, nung for nine._

Spite of their absence from the natural homes of words, however, the
above sounds have been heard and recorded as symbols of the number nine
by careful men through a long space of time.

The following instances of the use of "Nangnahar" show this, and also
show that behind the variant forms there may be not a single word but
two of distinct origin and sense.

   1. In Chinese annals two names appear as those of the district
   and town (I am not able to allocate their application with
   certainty). The first is Na-kie-lo-ho-lo, the second
   Nang-g-lo-ho-lo and these, I understand to represent
   Nagara-hara and Nang-nahar, due allowance being made for
   Chinese idiosyncrasy.[2774]

   2. Some 900 years later (1527-30 AD.) Babur also gives two
   names, Nagarahar (as the book-name of his _tuman_) and
   Ning-nahar.[2775] He says the first is found in several
   histories (B.N. f. 131_b_); the second will have been what he
   heard and also presumably what appeared in revenue accounts;
   of it he says, "it is nine torrents" (_tuquz-rud_).

   3. Some 300 years after Babur, Elphinstone gives two names
   for the district, neither of them being Babur's book-name,
   "Nangrahaur[2776] or Nungnahaur, from the nine streams which
   issue from the Safed-koh, _nung_ in Pushtoo signifying _nine_,
   and _nahaura_, a stream" (_Caubul_, i, 160).

   4. In 1881 Colonel H. S. Tanner had heard, in Nur-valley on
   the north side of the Kabul-water, that the name of the
   opposite district was Ning-nahar and its meaning Nine-streams.
   He did not get a list of the nine and all he heard named do
   not flow from Safed-koh.

   5. In 1884 Colonel H. G. McGregor gives two names with their
   explanation, "Ningrahar and Nungnihar; the former is a
   corruption of the latter word[2777] which in the Afghan
   language signifies nine rivers or rivulets." He names nine,
   but of them six only issue from Safed-koh.

   6. I have come across the following instances in which the
   number nine is represented by other words than _na_ (_ni_ or
   _nu_); _viz._ the _nenhan_ of the Chitrali Kafir and the
   _noun_ of the Panjabi, recorded by Leech,--the _nyon_ of the
   Khowari and the _huncha_ of the Boorishki, recorded by Colonel
   Biddulph.

The above instances allow opinion that in the region concerned and
through a long period of time, nine has been expressed by _nang_ (_ning_
or _nung_) and other nasal or high palatal sounds, side by side with
_na_ (_ni_ or _nu_). The whole matter may be one of nasal
utterance,[2778] but since a large number of tribesmen express nine by a
word containing a nasal sound, should that word not find place in lists
of recognized symbols of sounds?


_c. Are there two names of distinct origin?_

1. Certainly it makes a well-connected story of decay in the Sanscrit
word Nagarahara to suppose that tribesmen, prone by their organism to
nasal utterance, pronounced that word Nangrahar, and by force of their
numbers made this corruption current,--that this was recognized as the
name of the town while the Town-of-towns was great or in men's memory,
and that when through the decay of the town its name became a
meaningless husk, the wrong meaning of the Nine-streams should enter
into possession.

But as another and better one can be put together, this fair-seeming
story may be baseless. Its substitute has the advantage of explaining
the double sequence of names shown in Section _b_.

The second story makes all the variant names represent one or other of
two distinct originals. It leaves Nagrahar to represent Nagarahara, the
dead town; it makes the nine torrents of Safed-koh the primeval sponsors
of Ning-nahar, the name of the riverain tract. Both names, it makes
contemporary in the relatively brief interlude of the life of the town.
For the fertilizing streams will have been the dominant factors of
settlement and of revenue from the earliest times of population and
government. They arrest the eye where they and their ribbons of
cultivation space the riverain waste; they are obvious units for
grouping into a sub-government. Their name has a counterpart in adjacent
Panj-ab; the two may have been given by one dominant power, how long
ago, in what tongue matters not. The riverain tract, by virtue of its
place on a highway of transit, must have been inhabited long before the
town Nagarahara was built, and must have been known by a name. What
better one than Nine-streams can be thought of?

2. Bellew is quoted by the Gazetteer of India (ed. 1907) as saying, in
his argument in favour of _nawa vihara_, that no nine streams are found
to stand sponsor, but modern maps shew nine outflows from Safed-koh to
the Kabul-river between the Surkh-rud and Daka, while if affluents to
the former stream be reckoned, more than nine issue from the
range.[2779]

Against Bellew's view that there are not nine streams, is the long
persistence of the number nine in the popular name (Sect. _b_).

It is also against his view that he supposes there were nine
monasteries, because each of the nine must have had its fertilizing
water.

Babur says there were nine; there must have been nine of significance;
he knew his _tuman_ not only by frequent transit but by his revenue
accounts. A supporting point in those accounts is likely to have been
that the individual names of the villages on the nine streams would
appear, with each its payment of revenue.

3. In this also is some weight of circumstance against taking Nagarahara
to be the parent of Ning-nahar:--An earlier name of the town is said to
be Udyanapura, Garden town.[2780] Of this Babur's Adinapur is held to be
a corruption; the same meaning of garden has survived on approximately
the same ground in Bala-bagh and Rozabad.

Nagarahara is seen, therefore, to be a parenthetical name between others
which are all derived from gardens. It may shew the promotion of a
"Garden-town" to a "Chief-town". If it did this, there was relapse of
name when the Chief-town lost status. Was it ever applied beyond the
delta? If it were, would it, when dead in the delta, persist along the
riverain tract? If it were not, _cadit quaestio_; the suggestion of two
names distinct in origin, is upheld.

Certainly the riverain tract would fall naturally under the government
of any town flourishing in the delta, the richest and most populous part
of the region. But for this very reason it must have had a name older
than parenthetical Nagarahara. That inevitable name would be
appropriately Ning-nahar (or Na-nahar) Nine-streams; and for a period
Nagarahara would be the Chief-town of the district of Na-nahar
(Nine-streams).[2781]


_d. Babur's statements about the name._

What the cautious Babur says of his _tuman_ of Ning-nahar has weight:--

   1. That some histories write it Nagarahar (Haidarabad Codex,
   f. 131_b_);

   2. That Ning-nahar is nine torrents, _i.e._ mountain streams,
   _tuquz-rud_;

   3. That (the) nine torrents issue from Safed-koh (f. 132_b_).

Of his first statement can be said, that he will have seen the book-name
in histories he read, but will have heard Ning-nahar, probably also have
seen it in current letters and accounts.

Of his second,--that it bears and may be meant to bear two senses, (_a_)
that the _tuman_ consisted of nine torrents,--their lands implied; just
as he says "Asfara is four _buluks_" (sub-divisions f. 3_b_)--(_b_) that
_tuquz rud_ translates _ning-nahar_.

Of his third,--that in English its sense varies as it is read with or
without the definite article Turki rarely writes, but that either sense
helps out his first and second, to mean that verbally and by its
constituent units Ning-nahar is nine-torrents; as verbally and by its
constituents Panj-ab is five-waters.


_e. Last words._

Detailed work on the Kabul section of the _Babur-nama_ has stamped two
impressions so deeply on me, that they claim mention, not as novel or as
special to myself, but as set by the work.

The first is of extreme risk in swift decision on any problem of words
arising in North Afghanistan, because of its local concourse of tongues,
the varied utterance of its unlettered tribes resident or nomad, and the
frequent translation of proper names in obedience to their verbal
meanings. Names lie there too in _strata_, relics of successive
occupation--Greek, Turki, Hindi, Pushtu and tribes _galore_.

The second is that the region is an exceptionally fruitful field for
first-hand observation of speech, the movent ocean of the uttered word,
free of the desiccated symbolism of alphabets and books.


The following books, amongst others, have prompted the above note:--

   Ghoswara Inscription, Kittoe, JASB., 1848, and Kielhorn,
   _Indian Antiquary_, 1888, p. 311.

   H. Sastri's _Ramacarita_, Introduction, p. 7 (ASB. Memoirs).

   Cunningham's _Ancient India_, vol. i.

   Beal's _Buddhist Records_, i, xxxiv, and cii, 91.

   Leech's Vocabularies, JASB., 1838.

   The writings of Masson (_Travels_ and _Ariana Antiqua_), Wood,
   Vigne, etc.

   Raverty's _Tabaqat-i-nasiri_.

   Jarrett's _Ayin-i-akbari_.

   P.R.G.S. for maps, 1879; Macnair on the Kafirs, 1884; Tanner's
   _On the Chugani and neighbouring tribes of Kafiristan_, 1881.

   Simpson's _Nagarahara_, JASB., xiii.

   Biddulph's _Dialects of the Hindu-kush_, JRAS.

   Gazette of India, 1907, art. Jalalabad.

   Bellew's _Races of Afghanistan_.


F.--ON THE NAME DARA-I-NUR

Some European writers have understood the name Dara-i-nur to mean Valley
of Light, but natural features and also the artificial one mentioned by
Colonel H. G. Tanner (_infra_), make it better to read the component
_nur_, not as Persian _nur_, light, but as Pushtu _nur_, rock. Hence it
translates as Valley of Rocks, or Rock-valley. The region in which the
valley lies is rocky and boulder-strewn; its own waters flow to the
Kabul-river east of the water of Chitral. It shews other names composed
with _nur_, in which _nur_ suits if it means rock, but is inexplicable
if it means light, _e.g._ Nur-lam (Nur-fort), the master-fort in the
mouth of Nur-valley, standing high on a rock between two streams, as
Babur and Tanner have both described it from eye-witness,--Nur-gal
(village), a little to the north-west of the valley,--Aulugh-nur (great
rock), at a crossing mentioned by Babur, higher up the Baran-water,--and
Koh-i-nur (Rocky-mountains), which there is ground for taking as the
correct form of the familiar "Kunar" of some European writers (Raverty's
_Notes_, p. 106). The dominant feature in these places dictates reading
_nur_ as rock; so too the work done in Nur-valley with boulders, of
which Colonel H. G. Tanner's interesting account is subjoined (P.R.G.S.
1881, p. 284).

"Some 10 miles from the source of the main stream of the Nur-valley the
Dameneh stream enters, but the waters of the two never meet; they flow
side by side about three-quarters of a mile apart for about 12 miles and
empty themselves into the Kunar river by different mouths, each torrent
hugging closely the foot of the hills at its own side of the valley.
Now, except in countries where terracing has been practised continuously
for thousands of years, such unnatural topography as exists in the
valley of Nur is next to impossible. The forces which were sufficient to
scoop out the valley in the first instance, would have kept a water-way
at the lowest part, into which would have poured the drainage of the
surrounding mountains; but in the Nur-valley long-continued terracing
has gradually raised the centre of the valley high above the edges. The
population has increased to its maximum limit and every available inch
of ground is required for cultivation; the people, by means of
terrace-walls built of ponderous boulders in the bed of the original
single stream, have little by little pushed the waters out of their true
course, until they run, where now found, in deep rocky cuttings at the
foot of the hills on either side" (p. 280).

"I should like to go on and say a good deal more about boulders; and
while I am about it I may as well mention one that lies back from a
hamlet in Shulut, which is so big that a house is built in a fault or
crack running across its face. Another pebble lies athwart the village
and covers the whole of the houses from that side."


G.--ON THE NAMES OF TWO DARA-I-NUR WINES.

From the two names, Arat-tashi and Suhan (Suhar) -tashi, which Babur
gives as those of two wines of the Dara-i-nur, it can be inferred that
he read _nur_ to mean rock. For if in them Turki _tash_, rock, be
replaced by Pushtu _nur_, rock, two place-names emerge, Arat (-nuri) and
Suhan (-nuri), known in the Nur-valley.

These may be villages where the wines were grown, but it would be quite
exceptional for Babur to say that wines are called from their villages,
or indeed by any name. He says here not where they grow but what they
are called.

I surmise that he is repeating a joke, perhaps his own, perhaps a
standing local one, made on the quality of the wines. For whether with
_tash_ or with _nur_ (rock), the names can be translated as Rock-saw and
Rock-file, and may refer to the rough and acid quality of the wines,
rasping and setting the teeth on edge as does iron on stone.

The villages themselves may owe their names to a serrated edge or
splintered pinnacle of weathered granite, in which local people, known
as good craftsmen, have seen resemblance to tools of their trade.


H.--ON THE COUNTERMARK BIH BUD ON COINS.

As coins of Sl. Husain Mirza _Bai-qara_ and other rulers do actually
bear the words _Bih bud_, Babur's statement that the name of Bihbud Beg
was on the Mirza's coins acquires a numismatic interest which may make
serviceable the following particulars concerning the passage and the
beg.[2782]

   _a. The Turki passage_ (Elph. MS. f. 135_b_; Haidarabad Codex
   f. 173_b_; Ilminsky p. 217).

For ease of reference the Turki, Persian and English version are
subjoined:--

(1) _Yana Bihbud Beg aidi. Burunlar chuhra-jirga-si-da khidmat qilur
aidi. Mirza-ning qazaqliqlarida khidmati baqib Bihbud Beg-ka bu
'inayatni qilib aidi kim tamgha u sikka-da aning ati aidi._

(2) The Persian translation of 'Abdu'r-rahim (Muh. Shirazi's lith. ed.
p. 110):--

_Digar Bihbud Beg bud. Auwalha dar jirga-i-chuhraha khidmat mikard. Chun
dar qazaqiha Mirzara khidmat karda bud u anra mulahaza namuda, ainra
'inayat karda bud kah dar tamghanat sikka_[2783] _nam-i-au bud._

(3) A literal English translation of the Turki:--

Another was Bihbud Beg. He served formerly in the _chuhra-jirga-si_
(corps of braves). Looking to his service in the Mirza's guerilla-times,
the favour had been done to Bihbud Beg that his name was on the stamp
and coin.[2784]


_b. Of Bihbud Beg._

We have found little so far to add to what Babur tells of Bihbud Beg and
what he tells we have not found elsewhere. The likely sources of his
information are Daulat Shah and Khwand-amir who have written at length
of Husain _Bai-qara_. Considerable search in the books of both men has
failed to discover mention of signal service or public honour connected
with the beg. Babur may have heard what he tells in Harat in 912 AH.
(1506 AD.) when he would see Husain's coins presumably; but later
opportunity to see them must have been frequent during his campaigns and
visits north of Hindu-kush, notably in Balkh.

The sole mention we have found of Bihbud Beg in the _Habibu's-siyar_ is
that he was one of Husain's commanders at the battle of Chikman-sarai
which was fought with Sl. Mahmud Mirza _Miranshahi_ in Muharram 876 AH.
(June-July 1471 AD.).[2785] His place in the list shews him to have had
importance. "Amir Nizamu'd-din 'Ali-sher's brother Darwesh-i-'ali the
librarian (_q.v._ Hai. Codex Index), and Amir Bihbud, and Muh. 'Ali
_ataka_, and Bakhshika and Shah Wali _Qipchaq_, and Dost-i-muhammad
_chuhra_, and Amir Qul-i-'ali, and" (another).

The total of our information about the man is therefore:--

(1) That when Husain[2786] from 861 to 873 AH. (1457 to 1469 AD.) was
fighting his way up to the throne of Harat, Bihbud served him well in
the corps of braves, (as many others will have done).

(2) That he was a beg and one of Husain's commanders in 876 AH. (1471
AD.).

(3) That Babur includes him amongst Husain's begs and says of him what
has been quoted, doing this _circa_ 934 AH. (1528 AD.), some 56 years
after Khwand-amir's mention of him _s.a._ 876 AH. (1471 AD.).


_c. Of the term chuhra-jirga-si used by Babur._

Of this term Babur supplies an explicit explanation which I have not
found in European writings. His own book amply exemplifies his
explanation, as do also Khwand-amir's and Haidar's.

He gives the explanation (f. 15_b_) when describing a retainer of his
father's who afterwards became one of his own begs. It is as follows:--

"'Ali-darwesh of Khurasan served in the Khurasan _chuhra-jirga-si_, one
of two special corps (_khasa tabin_) of serviceable braves (_yarar
yigitlar_) formed by Sl. Abu-sa'id Mirza when he first began to arrange
the government of Khurasan and Samarkand and, presumably, called by him
the Khurasan corps and the Samarkand corps."

This shews the circle to have consisted of fighting-men, such
serviceable braves as are frequently mentioned by Babur; and his words
"_yarar yigit_" make it safe to say that if instead of using a Persian
phrase, he had used a Turki one, _yigit_, brave would have replaced
_chuhra_, "young soldier" (Erskine). A considerable number of men on
active service are styled _chuhra_, one at least is styled _yigit_, in
the same way as others are styled _beg_.[2787]

Three military circles are mentioned in the _Babur-nama_, consisting
respectively of braves, household begs (under Babur's own command), and
great begs. Some men are mentioned who never rose from the rank of brave
(_yigit_), some who became household-begs, some who went through the
three grades.

Of the corps of braves Babur conveys the information that Abu-sa'id
founded it at a date which will have lain between 1451 and 1457 AD.;
that 'Umar Shaikh's man 'Ali-darwesh belonged to it; and that Husain's
man Bihbud did so also. Both men, 'Ali-darwesh and Bihbud, when in its
circle, would appropriately be styled _chuhra_ as men of the beg-circle
were styled beg; the Dost-i-muhammad _chuhra_ who was a commander, (he
will have had a brave's command,) at Chikman-sarai (_see_ list _supra_)
will also have been of this circle. Instances of the use by Babur of the
name _khasa-tabin_ and its equivalent _buitikini_ are shewn on f. 209
and f. 210_b_. A considerable number of Babur's fighting men, the braves
he so frequently mentions as sent on service, are styled _chuhra_ and
inferentially belong to the same circle.[2788]


_d. Of Bih bud on Husain Bai-qara's coins._

So far it does not seem safe to accept Babur's statement literally. He
may tell a half-truth and obscure the rest by his brevity.

Nothing in the sources shows ground for signal and public honour to
Bihbud Beg, but a good deal would allow surmise that jesting allusion to
his name might decide for _Bih bud_ as a coin mark when choice had to be
made of one, in the flush of success, in an assembly of the begs, and,
amongst those begs, lovers of word-play and enigma.

The personal name is found written Bihbud, as one word and with medial
_h_; the mark is _Bih bud_ with the terminal _h_ in the _Bih_. There
have been discussions moreover as to whether to read on the coins _Bih
bud_, it was good, or _Bih buvad_, let it be, or become, good (valid for
currency?).

The question presents itself; would the beg's name have appeared on the
coins, if it had not coincided in form with a suitable coin-mark?

Against literal acceptance of Babur's statement there is also doubt of a
thing at once so _ben trovato_ and so unsupported by evidence.

Another doubt arises from finding _Bih bud_ on coins of other rulers,
one of Iskandar Khan's being of a later date,[2789] others, of Timur,
Shahrukh and Abu-sa'id, with nothing to shew who counterstruck it on
them.

On some of Husain's coins the sentence _Bih bud_ appears as part of the
legend and not as a counterstrike. This is a good basis for finding a
half-truth in Babur's statement. It does not allow of a whole-truth in
his statement because, as it is written, it is a coin-mark, not a name.

An interesting matter as bearing on Husain's use of _Bih bud_ is that in
865 AH. (1461 AD.) he had an incomparable horse named Bihbud, one he
gave in return for a falcon on making peace with Mustapha Khan.[2790]


_e. Of Babur's vassal-coinage._

The following historical details narrow the field of numismatic
observation on coins believed struck by Babur as a vassal of Isma'il
_Safawi_. They are offered because not readily accessible.

The length of Babur's second term of rule in Transoxiana was not the
three solar years of the B.M. Coin Catalogues but did not exceed eight
months. He entered Samarkand in the middle of Rajab 917 AH. (_c._ Oct.
1st, 1511 AD.). He returned to it defeated and fled at once, after the
battle of Kul-i-malik which was fought in Safar 918 AH. (mid-April to
mid-May 1512 AD.). Previous to the entry he was in the field, without a
fixed base; after his flight he was landless till at the end both of 920
AH. and of 1514 AD. he had returned to Kabul.

He would not find a full Treasury in Samarkand because the Auzbegs
evacuated the fort at their own time; eight months would not give him
large tribute in kind. He failed in Transoxiana because he was the ally
of a Shi'a; would coins bearing the Shi'a legend have passed current
from a Samarkand mint? These various circumstances suggest that he could
not have struck many coins of any kind in Samarkand.

The coins classed in the B.M. Catalogues as of Babur's vassalage, offer
a point of difficulty to readers of his own writings, inasmuch as
neither the "Sultan Muhammad" of No. 652 (gold), nor the "Sultan Babur
Bahadur" of the silver coins enables confident acceptance of them as
names he himself would use.


I.--ON THE WEEPING-WILLOWS OF f. 190_b_.

The passage omitted from f. 190_b_, which seems to describe something
decorative done with weeping willows, (_bed-i-mawallah_) has been
difficult to all translators. This may be due to inaccurate pointing in
Babur's original MS. or may be what a traveller seeing other willows at
another feast could explain.

The first Persian translation omits the passage (I.O. 215 f. 154_b_);
the second varies from the Turki, notably by changing _sach_ and _saj_
to _shakh_ throughout (I.O. 217 f. 150_b_). The English and French
translations differ much (_Memoirs_ p. 206, _Memoires_ i, 414), the
latter taking the _mawallah_ to be _mula_, a hut, against which much is
clear in the various MSS.

Three Turki sources[2791] agree in reading as follows:--

_Mawallahlar-ni_ (or _muwallah_ Hai. MS.) _kilturdilar. Bilman
sachlari-ning ya 'amli sachlari-ning aralarigha k:msan-ni_ (Ilminsky,
_kaman_) _shakh-ning_ (Hai. MS. _sakh_) _auzunlughi bila ainjiga ainjiga
kisib, quiub turlar._

The English and French translations differ from the Turki and from one
another:--

(_Memoirs_, p. 206) They brought in branching willow-trees. I do not
know if they were in the natural state of the tree, or if the branches
were formed artificially, but they had small twigs cut the length of the
ears of a bow and inserted between them.

(_Memoires_ i, 434) On faconna des huttes (_mouleh_). Ils les
etablissent en taillant des baguettes minces, de la longeur du bout
recourbe de l'arc, qu'on place entre des branches naturelles ou
faconnees artificiellement, je l'ignore.

The construction of the sentence appears to be thus:--_Mawal-lahlar-ni
kilturdilar_, they brought weeping-willows; _k:msan-ni_ _quiubturlar_,
they had put _k:msan-ni_; _ainjiga ainjiga kisib_, cut very fine (or
slender); _shakh_ (or _sakh_)_-ning auzunlughi_, of the length of a
_shakh_, bow, or _sakh_ ...; _bilman sachlari-ning ya 'amli
sachlari-ning aralarigha_, to (or at) the spaces of the _sachlar_
whether their (_i.e._ the willows') own or artificial _sachlar_.

These translations clearly indicate felt difficulty. Mr. Erskine does
not seem to have understood that the trees were _Salix babylonica_. The
crux of the passage is the word _k:msan-ni_, which tells what was placed
in the spaces. It has been read as _kaman_, bow, by all but the scribes
of the two good Turki MSS. and as in a phrase _horn of a bow_. This
however is not allowed by the Turki, for the reason that _k:msan-ni_ is
not in the genitive but in the accusative case. (I may say that Babur
does not use _ni_ for _ning_; he keeps strictly to the prime uses of
each enclitic, _ni_ accusative, _ning_ genitive.) Moreover, if
_k:msan-ni_ be taken as a genitive, the verbs _quiub-turlar_ and _kisib_
have no object, no other accusative appearing in the sentence than
_k:msan-ni_.

A weighty reason against changing _sach_ into _shakh_ is that Dr.
Ilminsky has not done so. He must have attached meaning to _sach_ since
he uses it throughout the passage. He was nearer the region wherein the
original willows were seen at a feast. Unfortunately nothing shows how
he interpreted the word.

_Sachmaq_ is a tassel; is it also a catkin and were there decorations,
_kimsan-ni_ (things _kimsa_, or flowers Ar. _kim_, or something shining,
_kimcha_, gold brocade) hung in between the catkins?

Ilminsky writes _mu'lah_ (with _hamza_) and this de Courteille
translates by hut. The Hai. MS. writes _muwallah_ (marking the _zamma_).

In favour of reading _mawallah_ (_mulah_) as a tree and that tree _Salix
babylonica_ the weeping-willow, there are annotations in the Second
Persian translation and, perhaps following it, in the Elphinstone MS. of
_nam-i-dirakht_, name of a tree, _didan-i-bed_, sight of the willow,
_bed-i-mawallah_, mournful-willow. Standing alone _mawallah_ means
weeping-willow, in this use answering to _majnun_ the name Panj-abis
give the tree, from Leila's lover the distracted _i.e._ Majnun
(Brandis).

The whole question may be solved by a chance remark from a traveller
witnessing similar festive decoration at another feast in that
conservative region.


J.--ON BABUR'S EXCAVATED CHAMBER AT QANDAHAR (f. 208_b_).

Since making my note (f. 208_b_) on the wording of the passage in which
Babur mentions excavation done by him at Qandahar, I have learned that
he must be speaking of the vaulted chamber containing the celebrated
inscriptions about which much has been written.[2792]

The primary inscription, the one commemorating Babur's final possession
of Qandahar, gives the chamber the character of a Temple of Victory and
speaks of it as _Rawaq-i-jahan namai_, World-shewing-portal,[2793]
doubtless because of its conspicuous position and its extensive view,
probably also in allusion to its declaration of victory. Mir Ma'sum
writes of it as a Pesh-taq, frontal arch, which, coupled with Mohan
Lall's word arch (_taq_) suggests that the chamber was entered through
an arch pierced in a parallelogram smoothed on the rock and having
resemblance to the _pesh-taq_ of buildings, a suggestion seeming the
more probable that some inscriptions are on the "wings" of the arch. But
by neither of the above-mentioned names do Mohan Lall and later
travellers call the chamber or write of the place; all describe it by
its approach of forty steps, Chihil-zina.[3]

The excavation has been chipped out of the white-veined limestone of the
bare ridge on and below which stood Old Qandahar.[2794] It does not
appear from the descriptions to have been on the summit of the ridge;
Bellew says that the forty steps start half-way up the height. I have
found no estimate of the height of the ridge, or statement that the
steps end at the chamber. The ridge however seems to have been of
noticeably dominating height. It rises steeply to the north and there
ends in the naze of which Babur writes. The foot of the steps is guarded
by two towers. Mohan Lall, unaccustomed to mountains, found their ascent
steep and dizzy. The excavated chamber of the inscriptions, which Bellew
describes as "bow-shaped and dome-roofed", he estimated as 12 feet at
the highest point, 12 feet deep and 8 feet wide. Two sculptured beasts
guard the entrance; Bellew calls them leopards but tigers would better
symbolize the watch and ward of the Tiger Babur. In truth the whole
work, weary steps of approach, tiger guardians, commemorative chamber,
laboriously incised words, are admirably symbolic of his long-sustained
resolve and action, taken always with Hindustan as the goal.

There are several inscriptions of varying date, within and without the
chamber. Mohan Lall saw and copied them; Darmesteter worked on a copy;
the two English observers Lumsden and Bellew made no attempt at correct
interpretation. In the versions all give there are inaccuracies, arising
from obvious causes, especially from want of historical _data_. The last
word has not been said; revision awaits photography and the leisured
expert. A part of the needed revision has been done by Beames, who deals
with the geography of what Mir Ma'sum himself added under Akbar after he
had gone as Governor to Qandahar in 1007 AH. (1598 AD.). This
commemorates not Babur's but Akbar's century of cities.

It is the primary inscription only which concerns this Appendix. This is
one in relief in the dome of the chamber, recording in florid Persian
that Abu'l-ghazi Babur took possession of Qandahar on Shawwal 13th 928
AH. (Sep. 1st 1522 AD.), that in the same year he commanded the
construction of this _Rawaq-i-jahan-namai_, and that the work had been
completed by his son Kamran at the time he made over charge of Qandahar
to his brother 'Askari in 9 ... (mutilated). After this the gravure
changes in character.

In the above, Babur's title Abu'l-ghazi fixes the date of the
inscription as later than the battle of Kanwaha (f. 324_b_), because it
was assumed in consequence of this victory over a Hindu, in March 1527
(Jumada II 933 AH.).

The mutilated date 9 ... is given by Mohan Lall as 952 AH. but this does
not suit several circumstances, _e.g._ it puts completion too far beyond
the time mentioned as consumed by the work, nine years,--and it was not
that at which Kamran made over charge to 'Askari, but followed the
expulsion of both full-brothers from Qandahar by their half-brother
Humayun.

The mutilated date 9 ... is given by Darmesteter as 933 AH. but this
again does not fit the historical circumstance that Kamran was in
Qandahar after that date and till 937 AH. This date (937 AH.) we suggest
as fitting to replace the lost figures, (1) because in that year and
after his father's death, Kamran gave the town to 'Askari and went
himself to Hindustan, and (2) because work begun in 928 AH. and recorded
as occupying 70-80 men for nine years would be complete in 937 AH.[2795]
The inscription would be one of the last items of the work.


The following matters are added here because indirectly connected with
what has been said and because not readily accessible.


_a. Birth of Kamran._

Kamran's birth falling in a year of one of the _Babur-nama_ gaps, is
nowhere mentioned. It can be closely inferred as 914 or 915 AH. from the
circumstances that he was younger than Humayun born late in 913 AH.,
that it is not mentioned in the fragment of the annals of 914 AH., and
that he was one of the children enumerated by Gul-badan as going with
her father to Samarkand in 916 AH. (Probably the children did not start
with their father in the depth of winter across the mountains.) Possibly
the joyful name Kamran is linked to the happy issue of the Mughul
rebellion of 914 AH. Kamran would thus be about 18 when left in charge
of Kabul and Qandahar by Babur in 932 AH. before the start for the fifth
expedition to Hindustan.

A letter from Babur to Kamran in Qandahar is with Kehr's Latin version
of the _Babur-nama_, in Latin and entered on the lining of the cover. It
is shewn by its main topic _viz._ the despatch of Ibrahim _Ludi_'s son
to Kamran's charge, to date somewhere close to Jan. 3rd 1527
(Rabi'u'l-awwal 29th 933 AH.) because on that day Babur writes of the
despatch (Hai. Codex f. 306_b_ foot).

Presumably the letter was with Kamran's own copy of the _Babur-nama_.
That copy may have reached Humayun's hands (JRAS 1908 p. 828 _et
seq._). The next known indication of the letter is given in St.
Petersburg by Dr. Kehr. He will have seen it or a copy of it with the
B.N. Codex he copied (one of unequaled correctness), and he, no doubt,
copied it in its place on the fly-leaf or board of his own transcript,
but if so, it has disappeared.

Fuller particulars of it and of other items accompanying it are given in
JRAS 1908 p. 828 _et seq._


K.--AN AFGHAN LEGEND.

My husband's article in the Asiatic Quarterly Review of April 1901
begins with an account of the two MSS. from which it is drawn, _viz._
I.O. 581 in Pushtu, I.O. 582 in Persian. Both are mainly occupied with
an account of the Yusuf-zai. The second opens by telling of the power of
the tribe in Afghanistan and of the kindness of Malik Shah Sulaiman, one
of their chiefs, to Aulugh Beg Mirza _Kabuli_, (Babur's paternal uncle,)
when he was young and in trouble, presumably as a boy ruler.

It relates that one day a wise man of the tribe, Shaikh 'Usman saw
Sulaiman sitting with the young Mirza on his knee and warned him that
the boy had the eyes of Yazid and would destroy him and his family as
Yazid had destroyed that of the Prophet. Sulaiman paid him no attention
and gave the Mirza his daughter in marriage. Subsequently the Mirza
having invited the Yusuf-zai to Kabul, treacherously killed Sulaiman and
700 of his followers. They were killed at the place called Siyah-sang
near Kabul; it is still known, writes the chronicler in about 1770 AD.
(1184 AH.), as the Grave of the Martyrs. Their tombs are revered and
that of Shaikh 'Usman in particular.

Shah Sulaiman was the eldest of the seven sons of Malik Taju'd-din; the
second was Sultan Shah, the father of Malik Ahmad. Before Sulaiman was
killed he made three requests of Aulugh Beg; one of them was that his
nephew Ahmad's life might be spared. This was granted.

Aulugh Beg died (after ruling from 865 to 907 AH.), and Babur defeated
his son-in-law and successor M. Muqim (_Arghun_, 910 AH.). Meantime the
Yusuf-zai had migrated to Pashawar but later on took Sawad from Sl. Wais
(Hai. Codex ff. 219, 220_b_, 221).

When Babur came to rule in Kabul, he at first professed friendship for
the Yusuf-zai but became prejudiced against them through their enemies
the Dilazak[2796] who gave force to their charges by a promised subsidy
of 70,000 _shahrukhi_. Babur therefore determined, says the Yusuf-zai
chronicler, to kill Malik[2797] Ahmad and so wrote him a friendly
invitation to Kabul. Ahmad agreed to go, and set out with four brothers
who were famous musicians. Meanwhile the Dilazak had persuaded Babur to
put Ahmad to death at once, for they said Ahmad was so clever and
eloquent that if allowed to speak, he would induce the Padshah to pardon
him.

On Ahmad's arrival in Kabul, he is said to have learned that Babur's
real object was his death. His companions wanted to tie their turbans
together and let him down over the wall of the fort, but he rejected
their proposal as too dangerous for him and them, and resolved to await
his fate. He told his companions however, except one of the musicians,
to go into hiding in the town.

Next morning there was a great assembly and Babur sat on the
dais-throne. Ahmad made his reverence on entering but Babur's only
acknowledgment was to make bow and arrow ready to shoot him. When Ahmad
saw that Babur's intention was to shoot him down without allowing him to
speak, he unbuttoned his jerkin and stood still before the Padshah.
Babur, astonished, relaxed the tension of his bow and asked Ahmad what
he meant. Ahmad's only reply was to tell the Padshah not to question him
but to do what he intended. Babur again asked his meaning and again got
the same reply.

Babur put the same question a third time, adding that he could not
dispose of the matter without knowing more. Then Ahmad opened the mouth
of praise, expatiated on Babur's excellencies and said that in this
great assemblage many of his subjects were looking on to see the
shooting; that his jerkin being very thick, the arrow might not pierce
it; the shot might fail and the spectators blame the Padshah for missing
his mark; for these reasons he had thought it best to bare his breast.
Babur was so pleased by this reply that he resolved to pardon Ahmad at
once, and laid down his bow.

Said he to Ahmad, "What sort of man is Buhlul _Ludi_?" "A giver of
horses," said Ahmad.

"And of what sort his son Sikandar?" "A giver of robes."

"And of what sort is Babur?" "He," said Ahmad, "is a giver of heads."

"Then," rejoined Babur, "I give you yours."

The Padshah now became quite friendly with Ahmad, came down from his
throne, took him by the hand and led him into another room where they
drank together. Three times did Babur have his cup filled, and after
drinking a portion, give the rest to Ahmad. At length the wine mounted
to Babur's head; he grew merry and began to dance. Meantime Ahmad's
musician played and Ahmad who knew Persian well, poured out an eloquent
harangue. When Babur had danced for some time, he held out his hands to
Ahmad for a reward (_bakhshish_), saying, "I am your performer." Three
times did he open his hands, and thrice did Ahmad, with a profound
reverence, drop a gold coin into them. Babur took the coins, each time
placing his hand on his head. He then took off his robe and gave it to
Ahmad; Ahmad took off his own coat, gave it to Adu the musician, and put
on what the Padshah had given.

Ahmad returned safe to his tribe. He declined a second invitation to
Kabul, and sent in his stead his brother Shah Mansur. Mansur received
speedy dismissal as Babur was displeased at Ahmad's not coming. On his
return to his tribe Mansur advised them to retire to the mountains and
make a strong _sangur_. This they did; as foretold, Babur came into
their country with a large army. He devastated their lands but could
make no impression on their fort. In order the better to judge of its
character, he, as was his wont, disguised himself as a Qalandar, and
went with friends one dark night to the Mahura hill where the stronghold
was, a day's journey from the Padshah's camp at Diarun.

It was the 'Id-i-qurban and there was a great assembly and feasting at
Shah Mansur's house, at the back of the Mahura-mountain, still known as
Shah Mansur's throne. Babur went in his disguise to the back of the
house and stood among the crowd in the courtyard. He asked servants as
they went to and fro about Shah Mansur's family and whether he had a
daughter. They gave him straightforward answers.

At the time Musammat Bibi Mubaraka, Shah Mansur's daughter was sitting
with other women in a tent. Her eye fell on the qalandars and she sent a
servant to Babur with some cooked meat folded between two loaves. Babur
asked who had sent it; the servant said it was Shah Mansur's daughter
Bibi Mubaraka. "Where is she?" "That is she, sitting in front of you in
the tent." Babur Padshah became entranced with her beauty and asked the
woman-servant, what was her disposition and her age and whether she was
betrothed. The servant replied by extolling her mistress, saying that
her virtue equalled her beauty, that she was pious and brimful of
rectitude and placidity; also that she was not betrothed. Babur then
left with his friends, and behind the house hid between two stones the
food that had been sent to him.

He returned to camp in perplexity as to what to do; he saw he could not
take the fort; he was ashamed to return to Kabul with nothing effected;
moreover he was in the fetters of love. He therefore wrote in friendly
fashion to Malik Ahmad and asked for the daughter of Shah Mansur, son of
Shah Sulaiman. Great objection was made and earlier misfortunes accruing
to Yusuf-zai chiefs who had given daughters to Aulugh Beg and Sl. Wais
(Khan Mirza?) were quoted. They even said they had no daughter to give.
Babur replied with a "beautiful" royal letter, told of his visit
disguised to Shah Mansur's house, of his seeing Bibi Mubaraka and as
token of the truth of his story, asked them to search for the food he
had hidden. They searched and found. Ahmad and Mansur were still
averse, but the tribesmen urged that as before they had always made
sacrifice for the tribe so should they do now, for by giving the
daughter in marriage, they would save the tribe from Babur's anger. The
Maliks then said that it should be done "for the good of the tribe".

When their consent was made known to Babur, the drums of joy were beaten
and preparations were made for the marriage; presents were sent to the
bride, a sword of his also, and the two Maliks started out to escort
her. They are said to have come from Thana by M'amura (?), crossed the
river at Chakdara, taken a narrow road between two hills and past
Talash-village to the back of Tiri (?) where the Padshah's escort met
them. The Maliks returned, spent one night at Chakdara and next morning
reached their homes at the Mahura _sangur_.

Meanwhile Runa the nurse who had control of Malik Mansur's household,
with two other nurses and many male and female servants, went on with
Bibi Mubaraka to the royal camp. The bride was set down with all honour
at a large tent in the middle of the camp.

That night and on the following day the wives of the officers came to
visit her but she paid them no attention. So, they said to one another
as they were returning to their tents, "Her beauty is beyond question,
but she has shewn us no kindness, and has not spoken to us; we do not
know what mystery there is about her."

Now Bibi Mubaraka had charged her servants to let her know when the
Padshah was approaching in order that she might receive him according to
Malik Ahmad's instructions. They said to her, "That was the pomp just
now of the Padshah's going to prayers at the general mosque." That same
day after the Mid-day Prayer, the Padshah went towards her tent. Her
servants informed her, she immediately left her divan and advancing,
lighted up the carpet by her presence, and stood respectfully with
folded hands. When the Padshah entered, she bowed herself before him.
But her face remained entirely covered. At length the Padshah seated
himself on the divan and said to her, "Come Afghaniya, be seated." Again
she bowed before him, and stood as before. A second time he said,
"Afghaniya, be seated." Again she prostrated herself before him and came
a little nearer, but still stood. Then the Padshah pulled the veil from
her face and beheld incomparable beauty. He was entranced, he said
again, "O, Afghaniya, sit down." Then she bowed herself again, and said,
"I have a petition to make. If an order be given, I will make it." The
Padshah said kindly, "Speak." Whereupon she with both hands took up her
dress and said, "Think that the whole Yusuf-zai tribe is enfolded in my
skirt, and pardon their offences for my sake." Said the Padshah, "I
forgive the Yusuf-zai all their offences in thy presence, and cast them
all into thy skirt. Hereafter I shall have no ill-feeling to the
Yusuf-zai." Again she bowed before him; the Padshah took her hand and
led her to the divan.

When the Afternoon Prayer time came and the Padshah rose from the divan
to go to prayers, Bibi Mubaraka jumped up and fetched him his
shoes.[2798] He put them on and said very pleasantly, "I am extremely
pleased with you and your tribe and I have pardoned them all for your
sake." Then he said with a smile, "We know it was Malik Ahmad taught you
all these ways." He then went to prayers and the Bibi remained to say
hers in the tent.

After some days the camp moved from Diarun and proceeded by Bajaur and
Tanki to Kabul.[2799]...

Bibi Mubaraka, the Blessed Lady, is often mentioned by Gul-badan; she
had no children; and lived an honoured life, as her chronicler says,
until the beginning of Akbar's reign, when she died. Her brother Mir
Jamal rose to honour under Babur, Humayun and Akbar.


L.--ON MAHIM'S ADOPTION OF HIND-AL.

The passage quoted below about Mahim's adoption of the unborn Hind-al we
have found so far only in Kehr's transcript of the _Babur-nama_ (_i.e._
the St. Petersburg Foreign Office Codex). Ilminsky reproduced it (Kasan
imprint p. 281) and de Courteille translated it (ii, 45), both with
endeavour at emendation. It is interpolated in Kehr's MS. at the wrong
place, thus indicating that it was once marginal or apart from the text.

I incline to suppose the whole a note made by Humayun, although part of
it might be an explanation made by Babur, at a later date, of an
over-brief passage in his diary. Of such passages there are several
instances. What is strongly against its being Babur's where otherwise it
might be his, is that Mahim, as he always calls her simply, is there
written of as Hazrat Walida, Royal Mother and with the honorific plural.
That plural Babur uses for his own mother (dead 14 years before 925 AH.)
and never for Mahim. The note is as follows:--

"The explanation is this:--As up to that time those of one birth
(_tuqqan_, womb) with him (Humayun), that is to say a son Bar-bul, who
was younger than he but older than the rest, and three daughters,
Mihr-jan and two others, died in childhood, he had a great wish for one
of the same birth with him.[2800] I had said 'What it would have been if
there had been one of the same birth with him!' (Humayun). Said the
Royal Mother, 'If Dil-dar Aghacha bear a son, how is it if I take him
and rear him?' 'It is very good' said I."

So far doubtfully _might_ be Babur's but it may be Humayun's written as
a note for Babur. What follows appears to be by some-one who knew the
details of Mahim's household talk and was in Kabul when Dil-dar's child
was taken from her.

"Seemingly women have the custom of taking omens in the following
way:--When they have said, 'Is it to be a boy? is it to be a girl?' they
write 'Ali or Hasan on one of two pieces of paper and Fatima on the
other, put each paper into a ball of clay and throw both into a bowl of
water. Whichever opens first is taken as an omen; if the man's, they say
a man-child will be born; if the woman's, a girl will be born. They took
the omen; it came out a man."

"On this glad tidings we at once sent letters off.[2801] A few days
later God's mercy bestowed a son. Three days before the news[2802] and
three days after the birth, they[2803] took the child from its mother,
(she) willy-nilly, brought it to our house[2804] and took it in their
charge. When we sent the news of the birth, Bhira was being taken. They
named him Hind-al for a good omen and benediction."[2805]

The whole may be Humayun's, and prompted by a wish to remove an
obscurity his father had left and by sentiment stirred through
reminiscence of a cherished childhood.

Whether Humayun wrote the whole or not, how is it that the passage
appears only in the Russian group of Baburiana?

An apparent answer to this lies in the following little mosaic of
circumstances:--The St. Petersburg group of Baburiana[2806] is linked to
Kamran's own copy of the _Babur-nama_ by having with it a letter of
Babur to Kamran and also what _may be_ a note indicating its passage
into Humayun's hands (JRAS 1908 p. 830). If it did so pass, a note by
Humayun may have become associated with it, in one of several obvious
ways. This would be at a date earlier than that of the Elphinstone MS.
and would explain why it is found in Russia and not in Indian MSS.[2807]



[APPENDICES TO THE HINDUSTAN SECTION.]

M.--ON THE TERM _BAHRI QUTAS_.

That the term _bahri qutas_ is interpreted by Meninski, Erskine, and de
Courteille in senses so widely differing as _equus maritimus_,
mountain-cow, and _boeuf vert de mer_ is due, no doubt, to their writing
when the _qutas_, the yak, was less well known than it now is.

The word _qutas_ represents both the yak itself and its neck-tassel and
tail. Hence Meninski explains it by _nodus fimbriatus ex cauda seu
crinibus equi maritimi_. His "sea-horse" appears to render _bahri
qutas_, and is explicable by the circumstance that the same purposes are
served by horse-tails and by yak-tails and tassels, namely, with both,
standards are fashioned, horse-equipage is ornamented or perhaps
furnished with fly-flappers, and the ordinary hand-fly-flappers are
made, _i.e._ the _chowries_ of Anglo-India.

Erskine's "mountain-cow" (_Memoirs_ p. 317) may well be due to his
_munshi's_ giving the yak an alternative name, _viz._ _Kosh-gau_ (Vigne)
or _Khash-gau_ (Ney Elias), which appears to mean mountain-cow (cattle,
oxen).[2808]

De Courteille's _Dictionary_ p. 422, explains _qutas_ (_qutas_) as _boeuf
marin_ (_bahri qutas_) and his _Memoires_ ii, 191, renders Babur's
_bahri qutas_ by _boeuf vert de mer_ (f. 276, p. 490 and n. 8).

The term _bahri qutas_ could be interpreted with more confidence if one
knew where the seemingly Arabic-Turki compound originated.[2809] Babur
uses it in Hindustan where the neck-tassel and the tail of the domestic
yak are articles of commerce, and where, as also probably in Kabul, he
will have known of the same class of yak as a saddle-animal and as a
beast of burden into Kashmir and other border-lands of sufficient
altitude to allow its survival. A part of its wide Central Asian habitat
abutting on Kashmir is Little Tibet, through which flows the upper Indus
and in which tame yak are largely bred, Skardo being a place specially
mentioned by travellers as having them plentifully. This suggests that
the term _bahri qutas_ is due to the great river (_bahr_) and that those
of which Babur wrote in Hindustan were from Little Tibet and its great
river. But _bahri_ may apply to another region where also the domestic
yak abounds, that of the great lakes, inland seas such as Pangong,
whence the yak comes and goes between _e.g._ Yarkand and the Hindustan
border.

The second suggestion, _viz._ that "_bahri qutas_" refers to the habitat
of the domestic yak in lake and marsh lands of high altitude (the wild
yak also but, as Tibetan, it is less likely to be concerned here) has
support in Dozy's account of the _bahri_ falcon, a bird mentioned also
by Abu'l-fazl amongst sporting birds (_Ayin-i-akbari_, Blochmann's trs.
p. 295):--"_Bahri, espece de faucon le meilleur pour les oiseaux de
marais. Ce renseignment explique peut-etre l'origine du mot. Marguerite
en donne la meme etymologie que Tashmend et le Pere Guagix. Selon lui ce
faucon aurait ete appele ainsi parce qu'il vient de l'autre cote de la
mer, mais peut-etre deriva-t-il de bahri dans le sens de marais, flaque,
etang._"

Dr. E. Denison Ross' _Polyglot List of Birds_ (_Memoirs of the Asiatic
Society of Bengal_ ii, 289) gives to the _Qara Qirghawal_ (Black
pheasant) the synonym "Sea-pheasant", this being the literal translation
of its Chinese name, and quotes from the Manchu-Chinese "Mirror" the
remark that this is a black pheasant but called "sea-pheasant" to
distinguish it from other black ones.

It may be observed that Babur writes of the yak once only and then of
the _bahri qutas_ so that there is no warrant from him for taking the
term to apply to the wild yak. His cousin and contemporary Haidar
Mirza, however, mentions the wild yak twice and simply as the wild
_qutas_.

The following are random gleanings about "_bahri_" and the yak:--

(1) An instance of the use of the Persian equivalent _darya'i_ of
_bahri_, sea-borne or over-sea, is found in the _Akbar-nama_ (Bib. Ind.
ed. ii, 216) where the African elephant is described as _fil-i-darya'i_.

(2) In Egypt the word _bahri_ has acquired the sense of northern,
presumably referring to what lies or is borne across its northern sea,
the Mediterranean.

(3) Vigne (_Travels in Kashmir_ ii, 277-8) warns against confounding the
_quch-qar_ _i.e._ the gigantic _moufflon_, Pallas' _Ovis ammon_, with
the _Kosh-gau_, the cow of the Kaucasus, _i.e._ the yak. He says,
"Kaucasus (_hodie_ Hindu-kush) was originally from Kosh, and Kosh is
applied occasionally as a prefix, _e.g._ _Kosh-gau_, the yak or ox of
the mountain or Kaucasus." He wrote from Skardo in Little Tibet and on
the upper Indus. He gives the name of the female yak as _yak-mo_ and of
the half-breeds with common cows as _bzch_, which class he says is
common and of "all colours".

(4) Mr. Ney Elias' notes (_Tarikh-i-rashidi_ trs. pp. 302 and 466) on
the _qutas_ are of great interest. He gives the following synonymous
names for the wild yak, _Bos Poephagus_, _Khash-gau_, the Tibetan yak or
Dong.

(5) Hume and Henderson (_Lahor to Yarkand_ p. 59) write of the numerous
black yak-hair tents seen round the Pangong Lake, of fine saddle yaks,
and of the tame ones as being some white or brown but mostly black.

(6) Olufsen's _Through the Unknown Pamirs_ (p. 118) speaks of the large
numbers of _Bos grunniens_ (yak) domesticated by the Kirghiz in the
Pamirs.

(7) Cf. Gazetteer of India _s.n._ yak.

(8) Shaikh Zain applies the word _bahri_ to the porpoise, when
paraphrasing the _Babur-nama_ f. 281_b_.


N.--NOTES ON A FEW BIRDS.

In attempting to identify some of the birds of Babur's lists difficulty
arises from the variety of names provided by the different tongues of
the region concerned, and also in some cases by the application of one
name to differing birds. The following random gleanings enlarge and, in
part, revise some earlier notes and translations of Mr. Erskine's and my
own. They are offered as material for the use of those better acquainted
with bird-lore and with Himalayan dialects.


_a._ _Concerning the lukha_, _luja_, _lucha_, _kuja_ (f.135 and
f.278_b_).

The nearest word I have found to _lukha_ and its similars is _likkh_, a
florican (Jerdon, ii, 615), but the florican has not the chameleon
colours of the _lukha_ (var.). As Babur when writing in Hindustan, uses
such "book-words" as Ar. _bahri_ (_qutas_) and Ar. _bu-qalamun_
(chameleon), it would not be strange if his name for the "_lukha_" bird
represented Ar. _awja_, very beautiful, or connected with Ar. _loh_,
shining splendour.

The form _kuja_ is found in Ilminsky's imprint p.361 (_Memoires_ ii,
198, _koudjeh_).

What is confusing to translators is that (as it now seems to me) Babur
appears to use the name _kabg-i-dari_ in both passages (f.135 and
f.278_b_) to represent two birds; (1) he compares the _lukha_ as to size
with the _kabg-i-dari_ of the Kabul region, and (2) for size and colour
with that of Hindustan. But the bird, of the Western Himalayas known by
the name _kabg-i-dari_ is the Himalayan snow-cock, _Tetraogallus
himalayensis_, Turki, _aular_ and in the Kabul region, _chiurtika_
(f.249, Jerdon, ii, 549-50); while the _kabg-i-dari_ (syn. _chikor_) of
Hindustan, whether of hill or plain, is one or more of much smaller
birds.

The snow-cock being 28 inches in length, the _lukha_ bird must be of
this size. Such birds as to size and plumage of changing colour are the
_Lophophori_ and _Trapagons_, varieties of which are found in places
suiting Babur's account of the _lukha_.

It may be noted that the Himalayan snow-cock is still called
_kabg-i-dari_ in Afghanistan (Jerdon, ii, 550) and in Kashmir (Vigne's
_Travels in Kashmir_ ii, 18). As its range is up to 18,000 feet, its
Persian name describes it correctly whether read as "of the mountains"
(_dari_), or as "royal" (_dari_) through its splendour.


I add here the following notes of Mr. Erskine's, which I have not quoted
already where they occur (cf. f. 135 and f. 278_b_):--

   On f. 135, "_lokheh_" is said to mean _hill-chikor_.

   On f. 278_b_, to "_lujeh_", "The Persian has _lukheh_."

         "     to "_kepki durri_", "The _kepki deri_, or _durri_ is
               much larger than the common _kepk_ of Persia
               and is peculiar to Khorasan. It is said to be
               a beautiful bird. The common _kepk_ of Persia
               and Khorasan is the _hill-chikor_ of India."

         "     to "higher up", "The _lujeh_ may be the _chikor_
               of the plains which Hunter calls bartavelle or
               Greek partridge."

The following corrections are needed about my own notes:--(1) on f. 135
(p. 213) n. 7 is wrongly referred; it belongs to the first word, _viz._
_kabg-i-dari_, of p. 214; (2) on f. 279 (p. 496) n. 2 should refer to
the second _kabg-i-dari_.


_b. Birds called munal (var. monal and moonaul)._

Yule writing in _Hobson Jobson_ (p. 580) of the "_moonaul_" which he
identifies as _Lophophorus Impeyanus_, queries whether, on grounds he
gives, the word _moonaul_ is connected etymologically with Sanscrit
_muni_, an "eremite". In continuation of his topic, I give here the
names of other birds called _munal_, which I have noticed in various
ornithological works while turning their pages for other information.

Besides _L. Impeyanus_ and _Trapagon Ceriornis satyra_ which Yule
mentions as called "_moonaul_", there are _L. refulgens_, _munal_ and
_Ghur_ (mountain)-_munal_; _Trapagon Ceriornis satyra_, called _munal_
in Nipal; _T. C. melanocephalus_, called _sing_ (horned)-_munal_ in the
N.W. Himalayas; _T. himalayensis_, the _jer_- or _cher-munal_ of the
same region, known also as _chikor_; and _Lerwa nevicola_, the
snow-partridge known in Garhwal as _Quoir_- or _Qur-munal_. Do all these
birds behave in such a way as to suggest that _munal_ may imply the
individual isolation related by Jerdon of _L. Impeyanus_, "In the
autumnal and winter months numbers are generally collected in the same
quarter of the forest, though often so widely scattered that each bird
appears to be alone?" My own search amongst vocabularies of
hill-dialects for the meaning of the word has been unsuccessful, spite
of the long range _munals_ in the Himalayas.


_c. Concerning the word chiurtika, chourtka._

Jerdon's entry (ii, 549, 554) of the name _chourtka_ as a synonym of
_Tetraogallus himalayensis_ enables me to fill a gap I have left on f.
249 (p. 491 and n. 6),[2810] with the name Himalayan snow-cock, and to
allow Babur's statement to be that he, in January 1520 AD. when coming
down from the _Bad-i-pich_ pass, saw many snow-cocks. The _Memoirs_
(p.282) has "_chikors_", which in India is a synonym for _kabg-i-dari_;
the _Memoires_ (ii, 122) has _sauterelles_, but this meaning of
_chiurtika_ does not suit wintry January. That month would suit for the
descent from higher altitudes of snow-cocks. Griffith, a botanist who
travelled in Afghanistan _cir._ 1838 AD., saw myriads of _cicadae_
between Qilat-i-ghilzai and Ghazni, but the month was July.

_d._ _On the qutan_ (f. 142, p. 224; _Memoirs_, p. 153; _Memoires_ ii,
313).

Mr. Erskine for _qutan_ enters _khawasil_ [gold-finch] which he will
have seen interlined in the Elphinstone Codex (f. 109_b_) in explanation
of _qutan_.

Shaikh Effendi (Kunos' ed., p. 139) explains _qutan_ to be the
gold-finch, _Steiglitz_.

Ilminsky's _qutan_ (p. 175) is translated by M. de Courteille as
_pelicane_ and certainly some copies of the 2nd Persian translation
[Muh. _Shirazi's_ p. 90] have _hawasil_, pelican.

The pelican would class better than the small finch with the

herons and egrets of Babur's trio; it also would appear a more likely
bird to be caught "with the cord".

That Babur's _qutan_ (_hawasil_) migrated in great numbers is however
against supposing it to be _Pelicanus onocrotatus_ which is seen in
India during the winter, because it appears there in moderate numbers
only, and Blanford with other ornithologists states that no western
pelican migrates largely into India.

Perhaps the _qutan_ was Linnaeus' _Pelicanus carbo_ of which one synonym
is _Carbo comoranus_, the cormorant, a bird seen in India in large
numbers of both the large and small varieties. As cormorants are not
known to breed in that country, they will have migrated in the masses
Babur mentions.

A translation matter falls to mention here:--After saying that the
_auqar_ (grey heron), _qarqara_ (egret), and _qutan_ (cormorant) are
taken with the cord, Babur says that this method of bird-catching is
unique (_bu nuh qush tutmaq ghair muqarrar dur_) and describes it. The
Persian text omits to translate the _tutmaq_ (by _P. giriftan_); hence
Erskine (_Mems._ p. 153) writes, "The last mentioned fowl" (_i.e._ the
_qutan_) "is rare," notwithstanding Babur's statement that all three of
the birds he names are caught in masses. De Courteille (p. 313) writes,
as though only of the _qutan_, "_ces derniers toutefois ne se prennent
qu'accidentelment_," perhaps led to do so by knowledge of the
circumstance that _Pelicanus onocrotatus_ is rare in India.


O.--NOTES BY HUMAYUN ON SOME HINDUSTAN FRUITS.

The following notes, which may be accepted as made by Humayun and in the
margin of the archetype of the Elphinstone Codex, are composed in Turki
which differs in diction from his father's but is far closer to that
classic model than is that of the producer [Jahangir?] of the
"Fragments" (Index _s.n._). Various circumstances make the notes
difficult to decipher _verbatim_ and, unfortunately, when writing in
Jan. 1917, I am unable to collate with its original in the Advocates
Library, the copy I made of them in 1910.


_a._ _On the kadhil_, _jack-fruit_, _Artocarpus integrifolia_ (f.
283_b_, p. 506; Elphinstone MS. f. 235_b_).[2811]

The contents of the note are that the strange-looking pumpkin (_qar'_,
which is also Ibn Batuta's word for the fruit), yields excellent white
juice, that the best fruit grows from the roots of the tree,[2812] that
many such grow in Bengal, and that in Bengal and Dihli there grows a
_kadhil_-tree covered with hairs (_Artocarpus hirsuta_?).


_b._ _On the amrit-phal_, _mandarin-orange_, _Citrus aurantium_ (f. 287,
p. 512; Elphinstone Codex, f. 238_b_, l. 12).

The interest of this note lies in its reference to Babur.

A Persian version of it is entered, without indication of what it is or
of who was its translator, in one of the volumes of Mr. Erskine's
manuscript remains, now in the British Museum (Add. 26,605, p. 88).
Presumably it was made by his Turkish _munshi_ for his note in the
Memoirs (p. 329).

Various difficulties oppose the translation of the Turki note; it is
written into the text of the Elphinstone Codex in two instalments,
neither of them in place, the first being interpolated in the account of
the _amil-bid_ fruit, the second in that of the _jasun_ flower; and
there are verbal difficulties also. The Persian translation is not
literal and in some particulars Mr. Erskine's rendering of this differs
from what the Turki appears to state.

The note is, tentatively, as follows:[2813]--"His honoured Majesty
Firdaus-makan[2814]--may God make his proof clear!--did not
favour the _amrit-phal_;[2815] as he considered it insipid,[2816] he
likened it to the mild-flavoured[2817] orange and did not make choice of
it. So much was the mild-flavoured orange despised that if any person
had disgusted (him) by insipid flattery(?) he used to say, 'He is like
orange-juice.'"[2818]

"The _amrit-phal_ is one of the very good fruits. Though its juice is
not relishing (? _chuchuq_), it is extremely pleasant-drinking. Later
on, in my own time, its real merit became known. Its tartness may be
that of the orange (_naranj_)and _lemu_."[2819]

The above passage is followed, in the text of the Elphinstone Codex, by
Babur's account of the _jasun_ flower, and into this a further
instalment of Humayun's notes is interpolated, having opposite its first
line the marginal remark, "This extra note, seemingly made by Humayun
Padshah, the scribe has mistakenly written into the text." Whether its
first sentence refer to the _amrit-phal_ or to the _amil-bid_ must be
left for decision to those well acquainted with the orange-tribe. It is
obscure in my copy and abbreviated in its Persian translation;
summarized it may state that when the fruit is unripe, its acidity is
harmful to the digestion, but that it is very good when ripe.--The note
then continues as below:--


_c. The kamila, H. kaunla, the orange._[2820]

"There are in Bengal two other fruits of the acid kind. Though the
_amrit-phal_ be not agreeable, they have resemblance to it (?)."

"One is the _kamila_ which may be as large as an orange (_naranj_); some
took it to be a large _narangi_ (orange) but it is much pleasanter
eating than the _narangi_ and is understood not to have the skin of that
(fruit)."


_d. The samtara._[2821]

"The other is the _samtara_ which is larger than the orange (_naranj_)
but is not tart; unlike the _amrit-phal_ it is not of poor flavour (_kam
maza_) or little relish (_chuchuk_). In short a better fruit is not
seen. It is good to see, good to eat, good to digest. One does not
forget it. If it be there, no other fruit is chosen. Its peel may be
taken off by the hand. However much of the fruit be eaten, the heart
craves for it again. Its juice does not soil the hand at all. Its skin
separates easily from its flesh. It may be taken during and after food.
In Bengal the _samtara_ is rare (_gharib_) (or excellent, _'asiz_). It
is understood to grow in one village Sanargam (Sonargaon) and even
therein a special quarter. There seems to be no fruit so entirely good
as the _samtara_ amongst fruits of its class or, rather, amongst fruits
of all kinds."


_Corrigendum_:--In my note on the _turunj bajauri_ (p. 511, n. 3) for
_bijaura_ read _bijaura_; and on p. 510, l. 2, for _palm_ read
_fingers_.

_Addendum_:--p. 510, l. 5. After _yusunluk_ add:--"The natives of
Hindustan when not wearing their ear-rings, put into the large ear-ring
holes, slips of the palm-leaf bought in the bazars, ready for the
purpose. The trunk of this tree is handsomer and more stately than that
of the date."


P.--REMARKS ON BABUR'S REVENUE LIST (fol. 292).

_a. Concerning the date of the List._

The Revenue List is the last item of Babur's account of Hindustan and,
with that account, is found _s.a._ 932 AH., manifestly too early, (1)
because it includes districts and their revenues which did not come
under Babur's authority until subdued in his Eastern campaigns of 934
and 935 AH., (2) because Babur's statement is that the "countries" of
the List "are _now_ in my possession" (_in loco_ p. 520).

The List appears to be one of revenues realized in 936 or 937 AH. and
not one of assessment or estimated revenue, (1) because Babur's wording
states as a fact that the revenue was 52 _krurs_; (2) because the
Persian heading of the (Persian) List is translatable as "Revenue
(_jama'_)[2822] of Hindustan from what has so far come under the
victorious standards".


_b. The entry of the List into European Literature._

Readers of the L. and E. _Memoirs of Babur_ are aware that it does not
contain the Revenue List (p. 334). The omission is due to the absence of
the List from the Elphinstone Codex and from the 'Abdu'r-rahim Persian
translation. Since the _Memoirs of Babur_ was published in 1826 AD., the
List has come from the _Babur-nama_ into European literature by three
channels.

Of the three the one used earliest is Shaikh Zain's _Tabaqat-i-baburi_
which is a Persian paraphrase of part of Babur's Hindustan section. This
work provided Mr. Erskine with what he placed in his _History of India_
(London 1854, i, 540, Appendix D), but his manuscript, now B.M. Add.
26,202, is not the best copy of Shaikh Zain's book, being of far less
importance than B.M. Or. 1999, [as to which more will be said.][2823]

The second channel is Dr. Ilminsky's imprint of the Turki text (Kasan
1857, p. 379), which is translated by the _Memoires de Baber_ (Paris
1871, ii, 230).

The third channel is the Haidarabad Codex, in the English translation of
which [_in loco_] the List is on p. 521.

Shaikh Zain may have used Babur's autograph manuscript for his
paraphrase and with it the Revenue List. His own autograph manuscript
was copied in 998 AH. (1589-90 AD.) by Khwand-amir's grandson
'Abdu'l-lah who may be the scribe "Mir 'Abdu'l-lah" of the
_Ayin-i-akbari_ (Blochmann's trs. p. 109). 'Abdu'l-lah's transcript
(from which a portion is now absent,) after having been in Sir Henry
Elliot's possession, has become B.M. Or. 1999. It is noticed briefly by
Professor Dowson (_l.c._ iv, 288), but he cannot have observed that the
"old, worm-eaten" little volume contains Babur's Revenue List, since he
does not refer to it.


_c. Agreement and variation in copies of the List._

The figures in the two copies (Or. 1999 and Add. 26,202) of the
_Tabaqat-i-baburi_ are in close agreement. They differ, however, from
those in the Haidarabad Codex, not only in a negligible unit and a ten
of _tankas_ but in having 20,000 more _tankas_ from Oudh and Baraich and
30 _laks_ of _tankas_ more from Trans-sutlej.

The figures in the two copies of the _Babur-nama_, _viz._ the Haidarabad
Codex and the Kehr-Ilminsky imprint are not in agreement throughout, but
are identical in opposition to the variants (20,000 _t._ and 30 _l._)
mentioned above. As the two are independent, being collateral
descendants of Babur's original papers, the authority of the Haidarabad
Codex in the matter of the List is still further enhanced.


_d. Varia._

(1) The place-names of the List are all traceable, whatever their varied
forms. About the entry L:knu [or L:knur] and B:ks:r [or M:ks:r] a
difficulty has been created by its variation in manuscripts, not only in
the List but where the first name occurs _s.a._ 934 and 935 AH. In the
Haidarabad List and in that of Or. 1999 L:knur is clearly written and
may represent (approximately) modern Shahabad in Rampur. Erskine and de
Courteille, however, have taken it to be Lakhnau in Oudh. [The
distinction of Lakhnaur from Lakhnau in the historical narrative is
discussed in Appendix T.]

(2) It may be noted, as of interest, that the name Sarwar is an
abbreviation of Sarjupar which means "other side of Sarju" (Saru,
Goghra; E. and D.'s H. of I. i, 56, n.4).

(3) Rup-nara[:i]n (Deo or Dev) is mentioned in Ajodhya Prasad's short
history of Tirhut and Darbhanga, the _Gulzar-i-Bihar_ (Calcutta 1869,
Cap. v, 88) as the 9th of the Brahman rulers of Tirhut and as having
reigned for 25 years, from 917 to 942 _Fasli_(?). If the years were
Hijri, 917-42 AH. would be 1511-1535.[2824]

(4) Concerning the _tanka_ the following modern description is quoted
from Mr. R. Shaw's _High Tartary_ (London 1871, p. 464) "The _tanga_"
(or _tanka_) "is a nominal coin, being composed of 25 little copper
cash, with holes pierced in them and called _dahcheen_. These are strung
together and the quantity of them required to make up the value of one
of these silver ingots" ("_kooroos_ or _yamboo_, value nearly _L_17")
"weighs a considerable amount. I once sent to get change for a
_kooroos_, and my servants were obliged to charter a donkey to bring it
home."

(5) The following interesting feature of Shaikh Zain's
_Tabaqat-i-baburi_ has been mentioned to me by my husband:--Its author
occasionally reproduces Babur's Turki words instead of paraphrasing them
in Persian, and does this for the noticeable passage in which Babur
records his dissatisfied view of Hindustan (f. 290_b_, _in loco_ p.
518), prefacing his quotation with the remark that it is best and will
be nearest to accuracy not to attempt translation but to reproduce the
Padshah's own words. The main interest of the matter lies in the motive
for reproducing the _ipsissima verba_. Was that motive deferential? Did
the revelation of feeling and opinion made in the quoted passage clothe
it with privacy so that Shaikh Zain reserved its perusal from the larger
public of Hindustan who might read Persian but not Turki? Some such
motive would explain the insertion untranslated of Babur's letters to
Humayun and to Khwaja Kalan which are left in Turki by 'Abdu'r-rahim
Mirza.[2825]


Q.--CONCERNING THE "RAMPUR DIWAN".

Pending the wide research work necessary to interpret Babur's Hindustan
poems which the Rampur manuscript preserves, the following comments,
some tentative and open to correction, may carry further in making the
poems publicly known, what Dr. E. Denison Ross has effected by
publishing his Facsimile of the manuscript.[2826] It is legitimate to
associate comment on the poems with the _Babur-nama_ because many of
them are in it with their context of narrative; most, if not all,
connect with it; some without it, would be dull and vapid.


_a. An authorized English title._

The contents of the Rampur MS. are precisely what Babur describes
sending to four persons some three weeks after the date attached to the
manuscript,[2827] _viz._ "the Translation and whatnot of poems made on
coming to Hindustan";[2828] and a similar description may be meant in
the curiously phrased first clause of the colophon, but without mention
of the Translation (of the _Walidiyyah-risala_).[2829] Hence, if the
poems, including the Translation, became known as the _Hindustan Poems_
or _Poems made in Hindustan_, such title would be justified by their
author's words. Babur does not call the Hindustan poems a _diwan_ even
when, as in the above quotation, he speaks of them apart from his
versified translation of the Tract. In what has come down to us of his
autobiography, he applies the name _Diwan_ to poems of his own once
only, this in 925 AH. (f. 237_b_) when he records sending "my _diwan_"
to Pulad Sl. _Auzbeg_.


_b. The contents of the Rampur MS._

There are three separate items of composition in the manuscript, marked
as distinct from one another by having each its ornamented frontispiece,
each its scribe's sign (_mim_) of Finis, each its division from its
neighbour by a space without entry. The first and second sections bear
also the official sign [_sah[h.]_] that the copy has been inspected and
found correct.

(1) The first section consists of Babur's metrical translation of Khwaja
'Ubaidu'l-lah _Ahrari's Parental Tract_ (_Walidiyyah-risala_), his
prologue in which are his reasons for versifying the Tract and his
epilogue which gives thanks for accomplishing the task. It ends with the
date 935 (Hai. MS. f. 346). Below this are _mim_ and _sah[h.]_, the
latter twice; they are in the scribe's handwriting, and thus make
against supposing that Babur wrote down this copy of the Tract or its
archetype from which the official _sah[h.]_ will have been copied.
Moreover, spite of bearing two vouchers of being a correct copy, the
Translation is emended, in a larger script which may be that of the
writer of the marginal quatrain on the last page of the [Rampur] MS. and
there attested by Shah-i-jahan as Babur's autograph entry. His also may
have been the now expunged writing on the half-page left empty of text
at the end of the Tract. Expunged though it be, fragments of words are
visible.[2830]

(2) The second section has in its frontispiece an inscription illegible
(to me) in the Facsimile. It opens with a _masnawi_ of 41 couplets which
is followed by a _ghazel_ and numerous poems in several measures, down
to a triad of rhymed couplets (_matla'_?), the whole answering to
descriptions of a _Diwan_ without formal arrangement. After the last
couplet are _mim_ and _sah[h.]_ in the scribe's hand-writing, and a
blank quarter-page. Mistakes in this section have been left uncorrected,
which supports the view that its _sah[h.]_ avouches the accuracy of its
archetype and not its own.[2831]

(3) The third section shows no inscription on its frontispiece. It opens
with the _masnawi_ of eight couplets, found also in the _Babur-nama_ (f.
312), one of earlier date than many of the poems in the second section.
It is followed by three _ruba'i_ which complete the collection of poems
made in Hindustan. A prose passage comes next, describing the
composition and transposition-in-metre of a couplet of 16 feet, with
examples in three measures, the last of which ends in l. 4 of the
photograph.--While fixing the date of this metrical game, Babur
incidentally allows that of his _Treatise on Prosody_ to be inferred
from the following allusive words:--"When going to Sambhal (f. 330_b_) in
the year (933 AH.) after the conquest of Hindustan (932 AH.), two years
after writing the _'Aruz_, I composed a couplet of 16 feet."--From this
the date of the Treatise is seen to be 931 AH., some two years later
than that of the _Mubin_. The above metrical exercise was done about the
same time as another concerning which a Treatise was written, viz. that
mentioned on f. 330_b_, when a couplet was transposed into 504 measures
(Section _f_, p. lxv).--The Facsimile, it will be noticed, shows
something unusual in the last line of the prose passage on Plate XVIII
B, where the scattering of the words suggests that the scribe was trying
to copy page _per_ page.

The colophon (which begins on l. 5 of the photograph) is curiously
worded, as though the frequent fate of last pages had befallen its
archetype, that of being mutilated and difficult for a scribe to make
good; it suggests too that the archetype was verse.[2832] Its first
clause, even if read as _Hind-stan janibi 'azimat qilghani_ (i.e. not
_qilghali_, as it can be read), has an indirectness unlike Babur's
corresponding "after coming to Hindustan" (f. 357_b_), and is not
definite; (2) _bu airdi_ (these were) is not the complement suiting _aul
durur_ (those are); (3) Babur does not use the form _durur_ in prose;
(4) the undue space after _durur_ suggests connection with verse; (5)
there is no final verb such as prose needs. The meaning, however, may be
as follows:--The poems made after resolving on (the)

[Illustration]

Hindustan parts (_janibi_?) were these I have written down (_tahrir
qildim_), and past events are those I have narrated (_taqrir_) in the
way that (_ni-chuk kim_) (has been) written in these folios (_auraq_)
and recorded in those sections (_ajza'_).--From this it would appear that
sections of the _Babur-nama_ (f. 376_b_, p. 678) accompanied the
Hindustan poems to the recipient of the message conveyed by the
colophon.

Close under the colophon stands _Harara-hu Babur_ and the date Monday,
Rabi' II. 15th 935 (Monday, December 27th 1528 AD.), the whole
presumably brought over from the archetype. To the question whether a
signature in the above form would be copied by a scribe, the Elphinstone
Codex gives an affirmative answer by providing several examples of
notes, made by Humayun in its archetype, so-signed and brought over
either into its margin or interpolated in its text. Some others of
Humayun's notes are not so-signed, the scribe merely saying they are
Humayun Padshah's.--It makes against taking the above entry of Babur's
name to be an autograph signature, (1) that it is enclosed in an
ornamented border, as indeed is the case wherever it occurs throughout
the manuscript; (2) that it is followed by the scribe's _mim_. [See end
of following section.]


_c. The marginal entries shown in the photograph._

The marginal note written length-wise by the side of the text is signed
by Shah-i-jahan and attests that the _ruba'i_ and the signature to which
it makes reference are in Babur's autograph hand-writing. His note
translates as follows:--This quatrain and blessed name are in the actual
hand-writing of that Majesty (_an hazrat_) _Firdaus-makani_ Babur
Padshah _Ghazi_--May God make his proof clear!--Signed (_Harara-hu_),
Shah-i-jahan son of Jahangir Padshah son of Akbar Padshah son of Humayun
Padshah son of Babur Padshah.[2833]

The second marginal entry is the curiously placed _ruba'i_, which is now
the only one on the page, and now has no signature attaching to it. It
has the character of a personal message to the recipient of one of more
books having identical contents. That these two entries are there while
the text seems so clearly to be written by a scribe, is open to the
explanation that when (as said about the colophon, p. lx) the rectangle
of text was made good from a mutilated archetype, the original margin
was placed round the _rifacimento_? This superposition would explain the
entries and seal-like circles, discernible against a strong light, on
the reverse of the margin only, through the _rifacimento_ page. The
upper edge of the rectangle shows sign that the margin has been adjusted
to it [so far as one can judge from a photograph]. Nothing on the face
of the margin hints that the text itself is autograph; the words of the
colophon, _tahrir qildim_ (_i.e._ I have written down) cannot hold good
against the cumulative testimony that a scribe copied the whole
manuscript.--The position of the last syllable [_ni_] of the _ruba'i_
shows that the signature below the colophon was on the margin before the
diagonal couplet of the _ruba'i_ was written,--therefore when the margin
was fitted, as it looks to have been fitted, to the _rifacimento_. If
this be the order of the two entries [_i.e._ the small-hand signature
and the diagonal couplet], Shah-i-jahan's "blessed name" may represent
the small-hand signature which certainly shows minute differences from
the writing of the text of the MS. in the name Babur (_q.v. passim_ in
the Rampur MS.).


_d. The Baburi-khatt_ (_Babur's script_).

So early as 910 AH. the year of his conquest of Kabul, Babur devised
what was probably a variety of _nakhsh_, and called it the
_Baburi-khatt_ (f. 144_b_), a name used later by Haidar Mirza,
Nizamu'd-din Ahmad and 'Abdu'l-qadir _Badayuni_. He writes of it again
(f. 179) _s.a._ 911 AH. when describing an interview had in 912 AH. with
one of the Harat Qazis, at which the script was discussed, its
specialities (_mufradat_) exhibited to, and read by the Qazi who there
and then wrote in it.[2834] In what remains to us of the _Babur-nama_
it is not mentioned again till 935 AH. (fol. 357_b_) but at some
intermediate date Babur made in it a copy of the Qoran which he sent to
Makka.[2835] In 935 AH. (f. 357_b_) it is mentioned in significant
association with the despatch to each of four persons of a copy of the
Translation (of the _Walidiyyah-risala_) and the Hindustan poems, the
significance of the association being that the simultaneous despatch
with these copies of specimens of the _Baburi-khatt_ points to its use
in the manuscripts, and at least in Hind-al's case, to help given for
reading novel forms in their text. The above are the only instances now
found in the _Babur-nama_ of mention of the script.

The little we have met with--we have made no search--about the character
of the script comes from the _Abushqa_, _s.n._ _sighnaq_, in the
following entry:--

_Sighnaq ber nu'ah khatt der Chaghataida khatt Baburi u ghairi kibi
ki Babur Mirza ash'ar'nda kilur bait_

   _Khublar khatti nasib'ng bulmasa Babur ni tang?_

   _Baburi khatti aimas dur khatt sighnaqi mu dur?_[2836]

The old Osmanli-Turkish prose part of this appears to mean:--"_Sighnaq_
is a sort of hand-writing, in Chaghatai the _Baburi-khatt_ and others
resembling it, as appears in Babur Mirza's poems. Couplet":--

Without knowing the context of the couplet I make no attempt to
translate it because its words _khatt_ or _khat_ and _sighnaq_
lend themselves to the kind of pun (_iham_) "which consists
in the employment of a word or phrase having more than one appropriate
meaning, whereby the reader is often left in doubt as to the real
significance of the passage."[2837] The rest of the _ruba'i_ may be
given [together with the six other quotations of Babur's verse now known
only through the _Abushqa_], in early _Tazkiratu 'sh-shu'ara_ of date
earlier than 967 AH.

The root of the word _sighnaq_ will be _siq_, pressed together, crowded,
included, _etc._; taking with this notion of compression, the
explanations _feine Schrift_ of Shaikh Effendi (Kunos) and Vambery's
_petite ecriture_, the Sighnaqi and Baburi Scripts are allowed to have
been what that of the Rampur MS. is, a small, compact, elegant
hand-writing.--A town in the Caucasus named Sighnakh, "_situee a peu pres
a 800 metres d'altitude, commenca par etre une forteresse et un lieu de
refuge, car telle est la signification de son nom tartare_."[2838]
_Sighnaqi_ is given by de Courteille (Dict. p. 368) as meaning a place
of refuge or shelter.

The _Baburi-khatt_ will be only one of the several hands Babur is
reputed to have practised; its description matches it with other
niceties he took pleasure in, fine distinctions of eye and ear in
measure and music.


_e. Is the Rampur MS. an example of the Baburi-khatt?_

Though only those well-acquainted with Oriental manuscripts dating
before 910 AH. (1504 AD.) can judge whether novelties appear in the
script of the Rampur MS. and this particularly in its head-lines, there
are certain grounds for thinking that though the manuscript be not
Babur's autograph, it may be in his script and the work of a specially
trained scribe.

I set these grounds down because although the signs of a scribe's work
on the manuscript seem clear, it is "locally" held to be Babur's
autograph. Has a tradition of its being in the _Baburi-khatt_ glided
into its being in the _khatt-i-Babur_? Several circumstances suggest
that it may be written in the _Baburi-khatt:_--(1) the script is
specially associated with the four transcripts of the Hindustan poems
(f. 357_b_), for though many letters must have gone to his sons, some
indeed are mentioned in the _Babur-nama_, it is only with the poems that
specimens of it are recorded as sent; (2) another matter shows his
personal interest in the arrangement of manuscripts, namely, that as he
himself about a month after the four books had gone off, made a new
ruler, particularly on account of the head-lines of the Translation, it
may be inferred that he had made or had adopted the one he superseded,
and that his plan of arranging the poems was the model for copyists; the
Rampur MS. bearing, in the Translation section, corrections which may be
his own, bears also a date earlier than that at which the four gifts
started; it has its headlines ill-arranged and has throughout 13 lines
to the page; his new ruler had 11; (3) perhaps the words _tahrir qildim_
used in the colophon of the Rampur MS. should be read with their full
connotation of careful and elegant writing, or, put modestly, as saying,
"I wrote down in my best manner," which for poems is likely to be in the
_Baburi-khatt_.[2839]

Perhaps an example of Babur's script exists in the colophon, if not in
the whole of the _Mubin_ manuscript once owned by Berezine, by him used
for his _Chrestomathie Turque_, and described by him as "unique". If
this be the actual manuscript Babur sent into Ma wara'u'n-nahr
(presumably to Khwaja Ahrari's family), its colophon which is a personal
message addressed to the recipients, is likely to be autograph.


_f. Metrical amusements._

(1) Of two instances of metrical amusements belonging to the end of 933
AH. and seeming to have been the distractions of illness, one is a
simple transposition "in the fashion of the circles" (_dawa'ir_) into
three measures (Rampur MS. Facsimile, Plate XVIII and p. 22); the other
is difficult because of the high number of 504 into which Babur says (f.
330_b_) he cut up the following couplet:--

   _Guz u qash u soz u tilini mu di?
   Qad u khadd u saj u bilini mu di?_

All manuscripts agree in having 504, and Babur wrote a tract (_risala_)
upon the transpositions.[2840] None of the modern treatises on Oriental
Prosody allow a number so high to be practicable, but Maulana Saifi of
Bukhara, of Babur's own time (f. 180_b_) makes 504 seem even moderate,
since after giving much detail about _ruba'i_ measures, he observes,
"Some say there are 10,000" (_Aruz-i-Saifi_, Ranking's trs. p. 122).
Presumably similar possibilities were open for the couplet in question.
It looks like one made for the game, asks two foolish questions and
gives no reply, lends itself to poetic license, and, if permutation of
words have part in such a game, allows much without change of sense. Was
Babur's cessation of effort at 504 capricious or enforced by the
exhaustion of possible changes? Is the arithmetical statement 9 x 8 x 7
= 504 the formula of the practicable permutations?

(2) To improvise verse having a given rhyme and topic must have demanded
quick wits and much practice. Babur gives at least one example of it (f.
252_b_) but Jahangir gives a fuller and more interesting one, not only
because a _ruba'i_ of Babur's was the model but from the circumstances
of the game:[2841]--It was in 1024 AH. (1615 AD.) that a letter reached
him from Mawara'u'n-nahr written by Khwaja Hashim _Naqsh-bandi_ [who by
the story is shown to have been of Ahrari's line], and recounting the
long devotion of his family to Jahangir's ancestors. He sent gifts and
enclosed in his letter a copy of one of Babur's quatrains which he said
Hazrat Firdaus-makani had written for Hazrat Khwajagi (Ahrari's eldest
son; f. 36_b_, p. 62 n. 2). Jahangir quotes a final hemistich only,
"_Khwajagira manda'im, Khwajagira banda'im_" and thereafter made an
impromptu verse upon the one sent to him.

A curious thing is that the line he quotes is not part of the quatrain
he answered, but belongs to another not appropriate for a message
between _darwesh_ and _padshah_, though likely to have been sent by
Babur to Khwajagi. I will quote both because the matter will come up
again for who works on the Hindustan poems.[2842]

(1) The quatrain from the _Hindustan Poems_ is:--

   _Dar hawa'i nafs gumrah 'umr zai' karda'im_ [_kanda'im_?];
   _Pesh ahl-i-allah az af'al-i-khud sharmanda'im;
   Yak nazr ba mukhlasan-i-khasta-dil farma ki ma
   Khwajagira manda'im u Khwajagira banda'im._

(2) That from the _Akbar-nama_ is:--

   _Darweshanra agarcha nah as khweshanim,
   Lek az dil u jan mu'taqid eshanim;
   Dur ast magu'i shahi az darweshi,
   Shahim wali banda-i-darweshanim._

The greater suitability of the second is seen from Jahangir's answering
impromptu for which by sense and rhyme it sets the model; the meaning,
however, of the fourth line in each may be identical, namely, "I remain
the ruler but am the servant of the _darwesh_." Jahangir's impromptu is
as follows:--

   _Ai anki mara mihr-i-tu besh az besh ast,
   Az daulat yad-i-budat ai darwesh ast;
   Chandanki'z muzh dahat dilam shad shavad
   Shadim az anki latif az hadd besh ast._

He then called on those who had a turn for verse to "speak one" _i.e._
to improvise on his own; it was done as follows:--

   _Darim agarcha shaghal-i-shahi dar pesh,
   Har lahza kunim yad-i-darweshan besh;
   Gar shad shavad'z ma dil-i-yak darwesh,
   Anra shumarim hasil-i-shahi khwesh._


R.--CHANDIRI AND GUALIAR.

The courtesy of the Government of India enables me to reproduce from the
_Archaeological Survey Reports_ of 1871, Sir Alexander Cunningham's plans
of Chandiri and Gualiar, which illustrate Babur's narrative on f. 333,
p. 592, and f. 340, p. 607.


[Illustration: MAP of the FORT and CITY of CHANDERI]


[Illustration: MAP of the FORT and CITY of CHANDERI]


[Illustration: FORTRESS OF GWALIOR]


S.--CONCERNING THE BABUR-NAMA DATING OF 935 AH.

The dating of the diary of 935 AH. (f. 339 _et seq._) is several times
in opposition to what may be distinguished as the "book-rule" that the
12 lunar months of the Hijra year alternate in length between 30 and 29
days (intercalary years excepted), and that Muharram starts the
alternation with 30 days. An early book stating the rule is Gladwin's
_Bengal Revenue Accounts_; a recent one, Ranking's ed. of Platts'
_Persian Grammar_.

As to what day of the week was the initial day of some of the months in
935 AH. Babur's days differ from Wuestenfeld's who gives the full list of
twelve, and from Cunningham's single one of Muharram 1st.

It seems worth while to draw attention to the flexibility, within
limits, of Babur's dating, [not with the object of adversely criticizing
a rigid and convenient rule for common use, but as supplementary to that
rule from a somewhat special source], because he was careful and
observant, his dating was contemporary, his record, as being _de die in
diem_, provides a check of consecutive narrative on his dates, which,
moreover, are all held together by the external fixtures of Feasts and
by the marked recurrence of Fridays observed. Few such writings as the
Babur-nama diaries appear to be available for showing variation within a
year's limit.

In 935 AH. Babur enters few full dates, _i.e._ days of the week and
month. Often he gives only the day of the week, the safest, however, in
a diary. He is precise in saying at what time of the night or the day an
action was done; this is useful not only as helping to get over
difficulties caused by minor losses of text, but in the more general
matter of the transference of a Hijra night-and-day which begins after
sunset, to its Julian equivalent, of a day-and-night which begins at 12
a.m. This sometimes difficult transference affords a probable
explanation of a good number of the discrepant dates found in
Oriental-Occidental books.

Two matters of difference between the Babur-nama dating and that of some
European calendars are as follows:--


_a. Discrepancy as to the day of the week on which Muh 935_ AH. _began._

This discrepancy is not a trivial matter when a year's diary is
concerned. The record of Muh. 1st and 2nd is missing from the
_Babur-nama_; Friday the 3rd day of Muharram is the first day specified;
the 1st was a Wednesday therefore. Erskine accepted this day; Cunningham
and Wuestenfeld give Tuesday. On three grounds Wednesday seems right--at
any rate at that period and place:--(1) The second Friday in Muharram was
'Ashur, the 10th (f. 240); (2) Wednesday is in serial order if reckoning
be made from the last surviving date of 934 AH. with due allowance of an
intercalary day to Zu'l-hijja (Gladwin), _i.e._ from Thursday Rajab 12th
(April 2nd 1528 AD. f. 339, p. 602); (3) Wednesday is supported by the
daily record of far into the year.


_b. Variation in the length of the months of 935_ AH.

There is singular variation between the _Babur-nama_ and Wuestenfeld's
_Tables_, both as to the day of the week on which months began, and as
to the length of some months. This variation is shown in the following
table, where asterisks mark agreement as to the days of the week, and
the capital letters, quoted from W.'s _Tables_, denote A, Sunday;
B, Tuesday, _etc._ (the bracketed names being of my entry).

             _Babur-nama._               _Wuestenfeld_
                           Days.            Days.
   Muharram             29  Wednesday    30  C (Tuesday)
   Safar                30  Thursday*    29  E (Thursday)*
   Rabi'  I.            30  Saturday     30  F (Friday)
     "   II.            29  Monday       29  A (Sunday)
   Jumada I.            30  Tuesday      30  B (Monday)
     "   II.            29  Thursday     29  D (Wednesday)
   Rajab                29  Friday       30  E (Thursday)
   Sha'ban              30  Saturday*    29  G (Saturday)*
   Ramzan               29  Monday       30  A (Sunday)
   Shawwal              30  Tuesday*     29  C (Tuesday)*
   Zu'l-qa'da           29  Thursday     30  D (Wednesday)
   Zu'l-hijja           30  Friday*      29  T (Friday)*

The table shows that notwithstanding the discrepancy discussed in
section _a_, of Babur's making 935 AH. begin on a Wednesday, and
Wuestenfeld on a Tuesday, the two authorities agree as to the initial
week-day of four months out of twelve, _viz._ Safar, Sha'ban, Shawwal
and Zu'l-hijja.

Again:--In eight of the months the _Babur-nama_ reverses the "book-rule"
of alternative Muharram 30 days, Safar 29 days _et seq._ by giving
Muharram 29, Safar 30. (This is seen readily by following the initial
days of the week.) Again:--these eight months are in pairs having
respectively 29 and 30 days, and the year's total is 364.--Four months
follow the fixed rule, _i.e._ as though the year had begun Muh. 30 days,
Safar 29 days--namely, the two months of Rabi' and the two of
Jumada.--Ramzan to which under "book-rule" 30 days are due, had 29 days,
because, as Babur records, the Moon was seen on the 29th.--In the other
three instances of the reversed 30 and 29, one thing is common, _viz._
Muharram, Rajab, Zu'l-qa'da (as also Zu'l-hijja) are "honoured"
months.--It would be interesting if some expert in this Musalman matter
would give the reasons dictating the changes from rule noted above as
occurring in 935 AH.


_c. Varia._

(1) On f. 367 Saturday is entered as the 1st day of Sha'ban and
Wednesday as the 4th, but on f. 368_b_ stands Wednesday 5th, as suits
the serial dating. If the mistake be not a mere slip, it may be due to
confusion of hours, the ceremony chronicled being accomplished on the
eve of the 5th, Anglice, after sunset on the 4th.

(2) A fragment only survives of the record of Zu'l-hijja 935 AH. It
contains a date, Thursday 7th, and mentions a Feast which will be that
of the _'Idu'l-kabir_ on the 10th (Sunday). Working on from this to the
first-mentioned day of 936 AH. _viz._ Tuesday, Muharram 3rd, the month
(which is the second of a pair having 29 and 30 days) is seen to have 30
days and so to fit on to 936 AH. The series is Sunday 10th, 17th, 24th
(Sat. 30th) Sunday 1st, Tuesday 3rd.

Two clerical errors of mine in dates connecting with this Appendix are
corrected here:--(1) On p. 614 n. 5, for Oct. 2nd read Oct. 3rd; (2) on
p. 619 penultimate line of the text, for Nov. 28th read Nov. 8th.


T.--ON L:KNU (LAKHNAU) AND L:KNUR (LAKHNUR, NOW SHAHABAD IN RAMPUR).

One or other of the above-mentioned names occurs eight times in the
_Babur-nama_ (_s.a._ 932, 934, 935 AH.), some instances being shown by
their context to represent Lakhnau in Oudh, others inferentially and by
the verbal agreement of the Haidarabad Codex and Kehr's Codex to stand
for Lakhnur (now Shahabad in Rampur). It is necessary to reconsider the
identification of those not decided by their context, both because there
is so much variation in the copies of the 'Abdu'r-rahim Persian
translation that they give no verbal help, and because Mr. Erskine and
M. de Courteille are in agreement about them and took the whole eight to
represent Lakhnau. This they did on different grounds, but in each case
their agreement has behind it a defective textual basis.--Mr. Erskine, as
is well known, translated the 'Abdu'r-rahim Persian text without access
to the original Turki but, if he had had the Elphinstone Codex when
translating, it would have given him no help because all the eight
instances occur on folios not preserved by that codex. His only sources
were not-first-rate Persian MSS. in which he found casual variation from
terminal _nu_ to _nur_, which latter form may have been read by him as
_nuu_ (whence perhaps the old Anglo-Indian transliteration he uses,
Luknow).[2843]--M. de Courteille's position is different; his uniform
_Lakhnau_ obeyed the same uniformity in his source the Kasan Imprint,
and would appear to him the more assured for the concurrence of the
_Memoirs_. His textual basis, however, for these words is Dr. Ilminsky's
and not Kehr's. No doubt the uniform _Lakhnu_ of the Kasan Imprint is
the result of Dr. Ilminsky's uncertainty as to the accuracy of his
single Turki archetype [Kehr's MS.], and also of his acceptance of Mr.
Erskine's uniform _Luknow_.[2844]--Since the Haidarabad Codex became
available and its collation with Kehr's Codex has been made, a better
basis for distinguishing between the L:knu and L:knur of the Persian
MSS. has been obtained.[2845] The results of the collation are entered
in the following table, together with what is found in the Kasan Imprint
and the _Memoirs_. [N.B. The two sets of bracketed instances refer each
to one place; the asterisks show where Ilminsky varies from Kehr.]

                 _Hai. MS._ _Kehr's MS._ _Kasan Imprint._ _Memoirs._
   1. {f. 278_b_   L:knur      L:knu      L:knu, p. 361     Luknow.
   2. {f. 338      L:knu       "             "   p. 437        "

   3.  f. 292_b_   L:knur      L:knur        "   p. 379*    not entered.

   4.  f. 329      L:knur      L:knur        "   p. 362*    Luknow.
   5.  f. 334      L:knu       L:knu         "   p. 432*       "

   6. {f. 376      L:knu       L:knur        "   p. 486*       "
   7. {f. 376_b_   L:knur        "           "   p. 487*       "
   8. {f. 377_b_   L:knu         "           "   p. 488*       "

The following notes give some grounds for accepting the names as the two
Turki codices agree in giving them:--

The first and second instances of the above table, those of the Hai.
Codex f. 278_b_ and f. 338, are shown by their context to represent
Lakhnau.

The third (f. 292_b_) is an item of Babur's Revenue List. The Turki
codices are supported by B.M. Or. 1999, which is a direct copy of Shaikh
Zain's autograph _Tabaqat-i-baburi_, all three having L:knur. Kehr's
MS. and Or. 1999 are descendants of the second degree from the original
List; that the Hai. Codex is a direct copy is suggested by its
pseudo-tabular arrangement of the various items.--An important
consideration supporting _L:knur_, is that the List is in Persian and
may reasonably be accepted as the one furnished officially for the
Padshah's information when he was writing his account of Hindustan (cf.
Appendix P, p. liv). This official character disassociates it from any
such doubtful spelling by the foreign Padshah as cannot but suggest
itself when the variants of _e.g._ Dalmau and Bangarmau are considered.
L:knur is what three persons copying independently read in the official
List, and so set down that careful scribes _i.e._ Kehr and 'Abdu'l-lah
(App. P) again wrote L:knur.[2846]--Another circumstance favouring L:knur
(Lakhnur) is that the place assigned to it in the List is its
geographical one between Sambhal and Khairabad.--Something for [or
perhaps against] accepting Lakhnur as the _sarkar_ of the List may be
known in local records or traditions. It had been an important place,
and later on it paid a large revenue to Akbar [as part of Sambhal].--It
appears to have been worth the attention of Biban _Jalwani_ (f.
329).--Another place is associated with L:knur in the Revenue List, the
forms of which are open to a considerable number of interpretations
besides that of Baksar shown _in loco_ on p. 521. Only those well
acquainted with the United Provinces or their bye-gone history can offer
useful suggestion about it. Maps show a "Madkar" 6 m. south of old
Lakhnur; there are in the United Provinces two Baksars and as many other
Lakhnurs (none however being so suitable as what is now Shahabad).
Perhaps in the archives of some old families there may be help found to
interpret the entry _L:knur u B:ks:r_ (var.), a conjecture the less
improbable that the _Gazetteer of the Province of Oude_ (ii, 58)
mentions a _farman_ of Babur Padshah's dated 1527 AD. and upholding a
grant to Shaikh Qazi of Bilgram.

The fourth instance (f. 329) is fairly confirmed as Lakhnur by its
context, _viz._ an officer received the district of Badayun from the
Padshah and was sent against Biban who had laid siege to L:knur on which
Badayun bordered.--At the time Lakhnau may have been held from Babur by
Shaikh Bayazid _Farmuli_ in conjunction with Aud. Its estates are
recorded as still in Farmuli possession, that of the widow of "Kala
Pahar" _Farmuli_.--(_See infra._)

The fifth instance (f. 334) connects with Aud (Oudh) because royal
troops abandoning the place L:knu were those who had been sent against
Shaikh Bayazid in Aud.

The remaining three instances (f. 376, f. 376_b_, f. 377_b_) appear to
concern one place, to which Biban and Bayazid were rumoured to intend
going, which they captured and abandoned. As the table of variants
shows, Kehr's MS. reads Lakhnur in all three places, the Hai. MS. once
only, varying from itself as it does in Nos. 1 and 2.--A circumstance
supporting _Lakhnur_ is that one of the messengers sent to Babur with
details of the capture was the son of Shah Muh. _Diwana_ whose record
associates him rather with Badakhshan, and with Humayun and Sambhal
[perhaps with Lakhnur itself] than with Babur's own army.--Supplementing
my notes on these three instances, much could be said in favour of
reading Lakhnur, about time and distance done by the messengers and by
'Abdu'l-lah _kitabdar_, on his way to Sambhal and passing near Lakhnur;
much too about the various rumours and Babur's immediate counter-action.
But to go into it fully would need lengthy treatment which the
historical unimportance of the little problem appears not to
demand.--Against taking the place to be Lakhnau there are the
considerations (_a_) that Lakhnur was the safer harbourage for the Rains
and less near the westward march of the royal troops returning from the
battle of the Goghra; (_b_) that the fort of Lakhnau was the renowned
old Machchi-bawan (cf. _Gazetteer of the Province of Oude_, 3 vols.,
1877, ii, 366).--So far as I have been able to fit dates and transactions
together, there seems no reason why the two Afghans should not have gone
to Lakhnur, have crossed the Ganges near it, dropped down south [perhaps
even intending to recross at Dalmau] with the intention of getting back
to the Farmulis and Jalwanis perhaps in Sarwar, perhaps elsewhere to
Bayazid's brother Ma'ruf.


U.--THE INSCRIPTIONS ON BABUR'S MOSQUE IN AJODHYA (OUDH).

Thanks to the kind response made by the Deputy-Commissioner of Fyzabad
to my husband's enquiry about two inscriptions mentioned by several
Gazetteers as still existing on "Babur's Mosque" in Oudh, I am able to
quote copies of both.[2847]

_a._ The inscription inside the Mosque is as follows:--

[Illustration: 3 lines of Arabic script]

   1. _Ba farmuda-i-Shah Babur ki 'adilash
         Bana'ist ta kakh-i-gardun mulaqi_,

   2. _Bana kard in muhbit-i-qudsiyan
         Amir-i-sa'adat-nishan Mir Baqi_

   3. _Bavad khair baqi! chu sal-i-bana'ish
         'Iyan shud ki guftam_,--_Buvad khair baqi_ (935).

The translation and explanation of the above, manifestly made by a
Musalman and as such having special value, are as follows:--[2848]

1. By the command of the Emperor Babur whose justice is an edifice
reaching up to the very height of the heavens,

2. The good-hearted Mir Baqi built this alighting-place of angels;[2849]

3. _Bavad khair baqi!_ (May this goodness last for ever!)[2850]

The year of building it was made clear likewise when I said, _Buvad
khair baqi_ ( = 935).[2851]

The explanation of this is:--

1st couplet:--The poet begins by praising the Emperor Babur under whose
orders the mosque was erected. As justice is the (chief) virtue of
kings, he naturally compares his (Babur's) justice to a palace reaching
up to the very heavens, signifying thereby that the fame of that justice
had not only spread in the wide world but had gone up to the heavens.

2nd couplet:--In the second couplet, the poet tells who was entrusted
with the work of construction. Mir Baqi was evidently some nobleman of
distinction at Babur's Court.--The noble height, the pure religious
atmosphere, and the scrupulous cleanliness and neatness of the mosque
are beautifully suggested by saying that it was to be the abode of
angels.

3rd couplet:--The third couplet begins and ends with the expression
_Buvad khair baqi_. The letters forming it by their numerical values
represent the number 935, thus:--

   _B_ = 2, _v_ = 6, _d_ = 4                  total  12
   _Kh_ = 600, _ai_ = 10, _r_ = 200             "   810
   _B_ = 2, _a_ = 1, _q_ = 100, _r_ = 10        "   113
                                                    ___
                                            Total   935

The poet indirectly refers to a religious commandment (_dictum_?) of the
Qoran that a man's good deeds live after his death, and signifies that
this noble mosque is verily such a one.

_b._ The inscription outside the Mosque is as follows:--

[Illustration: 3 lines of Arabic script]

   1. _Ba nam-i-anki dana hast akbar
         Ki khaliq-i-jamla 'alam la-makani_

   2. _Durud Mustafa ba'd az sitayish
         Ki sarwar-i-ambiya' du jahani_

   3. _Fasana dar jahan Babur qalandar
         Ki shud dar daur giti kamrani._[2852]

The explanation of the above is as follows:--

In the first couplet the poet praises God, in the second Muhammad, in
the third Babur.--There is a peculiar literary beauty in the use of the
word _la-makani_ in the 1st couplet. The author hints that the mosque is
meant to be the abode of God, although He has no fixed abiding-place.--In
the first hemistich of the 3rd couplet the poet gives Babur the
appellation of _qalandar_, which means a perfect devotee, indifferent to
all worldly pleasures. In the second hemistich he gives as the reason
for his being so, that Babur became and was known all the world over as
a _qalandar_, because having become Emperor of India and having thus
reached the summit of worldly success, he had nothing to wish for on
this earth.[2853]

The inscription is incomplete and the above is the plain interpretation
which can be given to the couplets that are to hand. Attempts may be
made to read further meaning into them but the language would not
warrant it.


V.--BABUR'S GARDENS IN AND NEAR KABUL.

The following particulars about gardens made by Babur in or near Kabul,
are given in Muhammad Amir of Kazwin's _Padshah-nama_ (Bib. Ind. ed. p.
585, p. 588).

Ten gardens are mentioned as made:--the Shahr-ara (Town-adorning) which
when Shah-i-jahan first visited Kabul in the 12th year of his reign
(1048 AH.-1638 AD.) contained very fine plane-trees Babur had planted,
beautiful trees having magnificent trunks,[2854]--the Char-bagh,--the
Bagh-i-jalau-khana,[2855]--the Aurta-bagh (Middle-garden),--the
Saurat-bagh,--the Bagh-i-mahtab (Moonlight-garden),--the Bagh-i-ahu-khana
(Garden-of-the-deer-house),--and three smaller ones. Round these gardens
rough-cast walls were made (renewed?) by Jahangir (1016 AH.).

The above list does not specify the garden Babur made and selected for
his burial; this is described apart (_l.c._ p. 588) with details of its
restoration and embellishment by Shah-i-jahan the master-builder of his
time, as follows:--

The burial-garden was 500 yards (_gaz_) long; its ground was in 15
terraces, 30 yards apart(?). On the 15th terrace is the tomb of Ruqaiya
Sultan Begam[2856]; as a small marble platform (_chabutra_) had been
made near it by Jahangir's command, Shah-i-jahan ordered (both) to be
enclosed by a marble screen three yards high.--Babur's tomb is on the
14th terrace. In accordance with his will, no building was erected over
it, but Shah-i-jahan built a small marble mosque on the terrace
below.[2857] It was begun in the 17th year (of Shah-i-jahan's reign) and
was finished in the 19th, after the conquest of Balkh and Badakhshan, at
a cost of 30,000 _rupis_. It is admirably constructed.--From the 12th
terrace running-water flows along the line (_rasta_) of the
avenue;[2858] but its 12 water-falls, because not constructed with
cemented stone, had crumbled away and their charm was lost; orders were
given therefore to renew them entirely and lastingly, to make a small
reservoir below each fall, and to finish with Kabul marble the edges of
the channel and the waterfalls, and the borders of the reservoirs.--And
on the 9th terrace there was to be a reservoir 11 x 11 yards, bordered
with Kabul marble, and on the 10th terrace one 15 x 15, and at the
entrance to the garden another 15 x 15, also with a marble border.--And
there was to be a gateway adorned with gilded cupolas befitting that
place, and beyond (_pesh_) the gateway a square station,[2859] one side
of which should be the garden-wall and the other three filled with
cells; that running-water should pass through the middle of it, so that
the destitute and poor people who might gather there should eat their
food in those cells, sheltered from the hardship of snow and rain.[2860]


FOOTNOTES


   [1] From Atkinson's _Sketches in Afghanistan_ (I.O. Lib. &
   B.M.).

   [2] _See_ p. 710 (where for "Daniels" read Atkinson).

   [3] _See_ Gul-badan Begim's _Humayun-nama_ Index III, _in
   loco_.

   [4] Cf. Cap. II, PROBLEMS OF THE MUTILATED BABUR-NAMA and
   _Tarikh-i-rashidi_, trs. p. 174.

   [5] The suggestion, implied by my use of this word, that Babur
   may have definitely closed his autobiography (as Timur did
   under other circumstances) is due to the existence of a
   compelling cause _viz._ that he would be expectant of death as
   the price of Humayun's restored life (p. 701).

   [6] Cf. p. 83 and n. and Add. Note, P. 83 for further
   emendation of a contradiction effected by some malign
   influence in the note (p. 83) between parts of that note, and
   between it and Babur's account of his not-drinking in Herat.

   [7] Teufel held its title to be _waqi'_ (this I adopted in
   1908), but it has no definite support and in numerous
   instances of its occurrence to describe the acts or doings of
   Babur, it could be read as a common noun.

   [8] It stands on the reverse of the frontal page of the
   Haidarabad Codex; it is Timur-pulad's name for the Codex he
   purchased in Bukhara, and it is thence brought on by Kehr
   (with Ilminski), and Klaproth (Cap. III); it is used by Khwafi
   Khan (d. _cir._ 1732), _etc._

   [9] That Babur left a complete record much indicates beyond
   his own persistence and literary bias, _e.g._ cross-reference
   with and needed complements from what is lost; mention by
   other writers of Babur's information, notably by Haidar.

   [10] App. H, xxx.

   [11] p. 446, n. 6. Babur's order for the cairn would fit into
   the lost record of the first month of the year (p. 445).

   [12] Parts of the Babur-nama sent to Babur's sons are not
   included here.

   [13] The standard of comparison is the 382 fols. of the
   Haidarabad Codex.

   [14] This MS. is not to be confused with one Erskine
   misunderstood Humayun to have copied (_Memoirs_, p. 303 and
   JRAS. 1900, p. 443).

   [15] For precise limits of the original annotation _see_ p.
   446 n.--For details about the E. Codex _see_ JRAS. 1907, art.
   _The Elph. Codex_, and for the colophon AQR. 1900, July, Oct.
   and JRAS. 1905, pp. 752, 761.

   [16] _See_ Index _s.n._ and III _ante_ and JRAS. 1900-3-5-6-7.

   [17] Here speaks the man reared in touch with European
   classics; (pure) Turki though it uses no relatives (Radloff)
   is lucid. Cf. Cap. IV The Memoirs of Babur.

   [18] For analysis of a retranslated passage _see_ JRAS. 1908,
   p. 85.

   [19] _Tuzuk-i-jahangiri_, Rogers & Beveridge's trs. i, 110;
   JRAS. 1900, p. 756, for the Persian passage, 1908, p. 76 for
   the "Fragments", 1900, p. 476 for Ilminski's Preface (a second
   translation is accessible at the B.M. and I.O. Library and
   R.A.S.), _Memoirs_ Preface, p. ix, Index _s.nn._ de
   Courteille, Teufel, Bukhara MSS. and Part iii _eo cap._

   [20] For Shah-i-jahan's interest in Timur _see_ sign given in
   a copy of his note published in my translation volume of
   Gul-badan Begim's _Humayun-nama_, p. xiii.

   [21] JRAS. 1900 p. 466, 1902 p. 655, 1905 art. _s.n._, 1908
   pp. 78, 98; Index _in loco s.n._

   [22] Cf. JRAS. 1900, Nos. VI, VII, VIII.

   [23] Ilminski's difficulties are foreshadowed here by the same
   confusion of identity between the _Babur-nama_ proper and the
   Bukhara compilation (Preface, Part iii, p. li).

   [24] Cf. Erskine's Preface _passim_, and _in loco_ item XI,
   cap. iv. _The Memoirs of Baber_, and Index _s.n._

   [25] The last blow was given to the phantasmal reputation of
   the book by the authoritative Haidarabad Codex which now can
   be seen in facsimile in many Libraries.

   [26] But for present difficulties of intercourse with
   Petrograd, I would have re-examined with Kehr's the collateral
   Codex of 1742 (copied in 1839 and now owned by the Petrograd
   University). It might be useful; as Kehr's volume has lost
   pages and may be disarranged here and there.

   The list of Kehr's items is as follows:--

     1 (_not in the Imprint_). A letter from Babur to Kamran the
     date of which is fixed as 1527 by its committing Ibrahim
     _Ludi's_ son to Kamran's charge (p. 544). It is heard of again
     in the Bukhara Compilation, is lost from Kehr's Codex, and
     preserved from his archetype by Klaproth who translated it.
     Being thus found in Bukhara in the first decade of the
     eighteenth century (our earliest knowledge of the Compilation
     is 1709), the inference is allowed that it went to Bukhara as
     loot from the defeated Kamran's camp and that an endorsement
     its companion Babur-nama (proper) bears was made by the Auzbeg
     of two victors over Kamran, both of 1550, both in
     Tramontana.(1)

     2 (_not in Imp._). Timur-pulad's memo. about the purchase of
     his Codex in cir. 1521 (_eo cap. post_).

     3 (_Imp. 1_). Compiler's Preface of Praise (JRAS. 1900, p.
     474).

     4 (_Imp. 2_). Babur's Acts in Farghana, in diction such as to
     seem a re-translation of the Persian translation of 1589. How
     much of Kamran's MS. was serviceable is not easy to decide,
     because the Turki fettering of 'Abdu'r-rahim's Persian lends
     itself admirably to re-translation.(2)

     5 (_Imp. 3_). The "Rescue-passage" (App. D) attributable to
     Jahangir.

     6 (_Imp. 4_). Babur's Acts in Kabul, seeming (like No. 4) a
     re-translation or patching of tattered pages. There are also
     passages taken verbatim from the Persian.

     7 (_Imp. omits_). A short length of Babur's Hindustan Section,
     carefully shewn damaged by dots and dashes.

     8 (_Imp. 5_). Within 7, the spurious passage of App. L and
     also scattered passages about a feast, perhaps part of 7.

     9 (_Imp. separates off at end of vol._). Translated passage
     from the _Akbar-nama_, attributable to Jahangir, briefly
     telling of Kanwa (1527), Babur's latter years (both changed to
     first person), death and court.(3)

     [Babur's history has been thus brought to an end, incomplete
     in the balance needed of 7. In Kehr's volume a few pages are
     left blank except for what shews a Russian librarian's opinion
     of the plan of the book, "Here end the writings of Shah
     Babur."]

     10 (_Imp. omits_). Preface to the history of Humayun,
     beginning at the Creation and descending by giant strides
     through notices of Khans and Sultans to "Babur Mirza who was
     the father of Humayun Padshah". Of Babur what further is said
     connects with the battle of Ghaj-davan (918-1512 _q.v._). It
     is ill-informed, laying blame on him as if he and not Najm
     Sani had commanded--speaks of his preference for the counsel of
     young men and of the numbers of combatants. It is noticeable
     for more than its inadequacy however; its selection of the
     Ghaj-davan episode from all others in Babur's career supports
     circumstantially what is dealt with later, the Ghaj-davani
     authorship of the Compilation.

     11 (_Imp. omits_). Under a heading "Humayun Padshah" is a
     fragment about (his? Accession) Feast, whether broken off by
     loss of his pages or of those of his archetype examination of
     the P. Univ. Codex may show.

     12 (_Imp. 6_). An excellent copy of Babur's Hindustan Section,
     perhaps obtained from the Ahrari house. [This Ilminski places
     (I think) where Kehr has No. 7.] From its position and from
     its bearing a scribe's date of completion (which Kehr brings
     over), _viz._ _Tamt shud 1126_ (Finished 1714), the compiler
     may have taken it for Humayun's, perhaps for the account of
     his reconquest of Hind in 1555.

     [The remaining entries in Kehr's volume are a quatrain which
     may make jesting reference to his finished task, a librarian's
     Russian entry of the number of pages (831), and the words
     _Etablissement Orientale, Fr. v. Adelung_, 1825 (the Director
     of the School from 1793).(4)]

   [27] That Babur-nama of the "Kamran-docket" is the mutilated
   and tattered basis, allowed by circumstance, of the compiled
   history of Babur, filled out and mended by the help of the
   Persian translation of 1589. Cf. Kehr's Latin Trs. fly-leaf
   entry; Klaproth _s.n._; A.N. trs. H.B., p. 260; JRAS. 1908,
   1909, on the "Kamran-docket" where are defects needing
   Klaproth's second article (1824).

   [28] For an analysis of an illustrative passage _see_ JRAS.
   1906; for facilities of re-translation _see_ _eo cap._ p.
   xviii, where Erskine is quoted.

   [29] _See_ A.N. trans., p. 260; Prefaces of Ilminski and de
   Courteille; ZDMG. xxxvii, Teufel's art.; JRAS. 1906.

   [30] For particulars about Kehr's Codex see Smirnov's
   Catalogue of the School Library and JRAS. 1900, 1906. Like
   others who have made statements resting on the mistaken
   identity of the Bukhara Compilation, many of mine are now
   given to the winds.

   [31] _See_ Gregorief's "Russian policy regarding Central
   Asia", quoted in Schuyler's Turkistan, App. IV.

   [32] The Mission was well received, started to return to
   Petrograd, was attacked by Turkmans, went back to Bukhara, and
   there stayed until it could attempt the devious route which
   brought it to the capital in 1725.

   [33] One might say jestingly that the spirit in the book had
   rebelled since 1725 against enforced and changing masquerade
   as a phantasm of two other books!

   [34] Neither Ilminski nor Smirnov mentions another
   "Babur-nama" Codex than Kehr's.

   [35] A Correspondent combatting my objection to publishing a
   second edition of the _Memoirs_, backed his favouring opinion
   by reference to 'Umar Khayyam and Fitzgerald. Obviously no
   analogy exists; Erskine's redundance is not the flower of a
   deft alchemy, but is the prosaic consequence of a secondary
   source.

   [36] The manuscripts relied on for revising the first section
   of the Memoirs, (_i.e._ 899 to 908 AH.-1494 to 1502 AD.) are
   the Elphinstone and the Haidarabad Codices. To variants from
   them occurring in Dr. Kehr's own transcript no authority can
   be allowed because throughout this section, his text appears
   to be a compilation and in parts a retranslation from one or
   other of the two Persian translations (_Waqi'at-i-baburi_) of
   the _Babur-nama_. Moreover Dr. Ilminsky's imprint of Kehr's
   text has the further defect in authority that it was helped
   out from the Memoirs, itself not a direct issue from the Turki
   original.

   Information about the manuscripts of the _Babur-nama_ can be
   found in the JRAS for 1900, 1902, 1905, 1906, 1907 and 1908.

   The foliation marked in the margin of this book is that of the
   Haidarabad Codex and of its facsimile, published in 1905 by
   the Gibb Memorial Trust.

   [37] Babur, born on Friday, Feb. 14th. 1483 (Muharram 6, 888
   AH.), succeeded his father, 'Umar Shaikh who died on June 8th.
   1494 (Ramzan 4, 899 AH.).

   [38] _pad-shah_, protecting lord, supreme. It would be an
   anachronism to translate _padshah_ by King or Emperor,
   previous to 913 AH. (1507 AD.) because until that date it was
   not part of the style of any Timurid, even ruling members of
   the house being styled Mirza. Up to 1507 therefore Babur's
   correct style is Babur Mirza. (_Cf._ f. 215 and note.)

   [39] See _Ayin-i-akbari_, Jarrett, p. 44.

   [40] The Hai. MS. and a good many of the W.-i-B. MSS. here
   write Autrar. [Autrar like Taraz was at some time of its
   existence known as Yangi (New).] Taraz seems to have stood
   near the modern Auliya-ata; Almaligh,--a Metropolitan see of
   the Nestorian Church in the 14th. century,--to have been the
   old capital of Kuldja, and Almatu (var. Almati) to have been
   where Vernoe (Vierny) now is. Almaligh and Almatu owed their
   names to the apple (_alma_). _Cf._ Bretschneider's Mediaeval
   Geography p. 140 and T.R. (Elias and Ross) _s.nn._

   [41] _Mughul u Auzbeg jihatdin._ I take this, the first
   offered opportunity of mentioning (1) that in transliterating
   Turki words I follow Turki lettering because I am not
   competent to choose amongst systems which _e.g._ here,
   reproduce Auzbeg as Uzbeg, Oezbeg and Euzbeg; and (2) that
   style being part of an autobiography, I am compelled, in
   pressing back the Memoirs on Babur's Turki mould, to retract
   from the wording of the western scholars, Erskine and de
   Courteille. Of this compulsion Babur's bald phrase _Mughul u
   Auzbeg jihatdin_ provides an illustration. Each earlier
   translator has expressed his meaning with more finish than he
   himself; 'Abdu'r-rahim, by _az jihat 'ubur-i_ (_Mughul u_)
   _Auzbeg_, improves on Babur, since the three towns lay in the
   tideway of nomad passage (_'ubur_) east and west; Erskine
   writes "in consequence of the incursions" etc. and de C.
   "_grace aux ravages commis_" etc.

   [42] Schuyler (ii, 54) gives the extreme length of the valley
   as about 160 miles and its width, at its widest, as 65 miles.

   [43] Following a manifestly clerical error in the Second
   W.-i-B. the _Akbar-nama_ and the Mems. are without the
   seasonal limitation, "in winter." Babur here excludes from
   winter routes one he knew well, the Kindirlik Pass; on the
   other hand Kostenko says that this is open all the year round.
   Does this contradiction indicate climatic change? (_Cf._ f.
   54b and note; A.N. Bib. Ind. ed. i, 85 (H. Beveridge i, 221)
   and, for an account of the passes round Farghana, Kostenko's
   _Turkistan Region_, Tables of Contents.)

   [44] Var. Banakat, Banakas, Fiakat, Fanakand. Of this place
   Dr. Rieu writes (Pers. cat. i, 79) that it was also called
   Shash and, in modern times, Tashkint. Babur does not identify
   Fanakat with the Tashkint of his day but he identifies it with
   Shahrukhiya (_cf._ Index _s.nn._) and distinguishes between
   Tashkint-Shash and Fanakat-Shahrukhiya. It may be therefore
   that Dr. Rieu's Tashkint-Fanakat was Old Tashkint,--(Does
   Fana-kint mean Old Village?) some 14 miles nearer to the
   Saihun than the Tashkint of Babur's day or our own.

   [45] _ hech darya qatilmas._ A gloss of _digar_ (other) in the
   Second W.-i-B. has led Mr. Erskine to understand "meeting with
   no other river in its course." I understand Babur to contrast
   the destination of the Saihun which he [erroneously] says
   sinks into the sands, with the outfall of _e.g._ the Amu into
   the Sea of Aral.

   _Cf._ First W.-i-B. I.O. MS. 215 f. 2; Second W.-i-B. I.O. MS.
   217 f. 1b and Ouseley's Ibn Haukal p. 232-244; also Schuyler
   and Kostenko _l.c._

   [46] Babur's geographical unit in Central Asia is the township
   or, with more verbal accuracy, the village _i.e._ the
   fortified, inhabited and cultivated oasis. Of frontiers he
   says nothing.

   [47] _i.e._ they are given away or taken. Babur's interest in
   fruits was not a matter of taste or amusement but of food.
   Melons, for instance, fresh or stored, form during some months
   the staple food of Turkistanis. _Cf._ T.R. p. 303 and (in
   Kashmir) 425; Timkowski's _Travels of the Russian Mission_ i,
   419 and Th. Radloff's _Receuils d'Itineraires_ p. 343.

   N.B. At this point two folios of the Elphinstone Codex are
   missing.

   [48] Either a kind of melon or the pear. For local abundance
   of pears _see_ _Ayin-i-akbari_, Blochmann p. 6; Kostenko and
   Von Schwarz.

   [49] _qurghan_, _i.e._ the walled town within which was the
   citadel (_ark_).

   [50] _Tuquz tarnau su kirar, bu 'ajab tur kim bir yirdin ham
   chiqmas._ Second W.-i-B. I.O. 217 f. 2, _nuh ju'i ab dar qila'
   dar mi ayid u in 'ajab ast kah hama az yak ja ham na mi bar
   ayid_. (_Cf._ Mems. p. 2 and _Mems._ i, 2.) I understand Babur
   to mean that all the water entering was consumed in the town.
   The supply of Andijan, in the present day, is taken both from
   the Aq Bura (_i.e._ the Aush Water) and, by canal, from the
   Qara Darya.

   [51] _khandaqning tash yani._ Second W.-i-B. I.O. 217 f. 2
   _dar kinar sang bast khandaq_. Here as in several other
   places, this Persian translation has rendered Turki _tash_,
   outside, as if it were Turki _tash_, stone. Babur's adjective
   _stone_ is _sangin_ (f. 45b l. 8). His point here is the
   unusual circumstance of a high-road running round the outer
   edge of the ditch. Moreover Andijan is built on and of loess.
   Here, obeying his Persian source, Mr. Erskine writes
   "stone-faced ditch"; M. de C. obeying his Turki one, "_bord
   exterieur_."

   [52] _qirghawal ash-kinasi bila. Ash-kina_, a diminutive of
   _ash_, food, is the rice and vegetables commonly served with
   the bird. Kostenko i, 287 gives a recipe for what seems
   _ash-kina_.

   [53] b. 1440; d. 1500 AD.

   [54] Yusuf was in the service of Bai-sunghar Mirza _Shahrukhi_
   (d. 837 AH.-1434 AD.). _Cf._ Daulat Shah's _Memoirs of the
   Poets_ (Browne) pp. 340 and 350-1. (H.B.)

   [55] _guzlar ail bizkak kub bulur._ Second W.-i-B. (I.O. 217
   f. 2) here and on f. 4 has read Turki _guz_, eye, for Turki
   _guz_ or _goz_, autumn. It has here a gloss not in the
   Haidarabad or Kehr's MSS. (_Cf_. Mems. p. 4 note.) This gloss
   may be one of Humayun's numerous notes and may have been
   preserved in the Elphinstone Codex, but the fact cannot now be
   known because of the loss of the two folios already noted.
   (_See_ Von Schwarz and Kostenko concerning the autumn fever of
   Transoxiana.)

   [56] The Pers. trss. render _yighach_ by _farsang_; Ujfalvy
   also takes the _yighach_ and the _farsang_ as having a common
   equivalent of about 6 _kilometres_. Babur's statements in
   _yighach_ however, when tested by ascertained distances, do
   not work out into the _farsang_ of four miles or the
   _kilometre_ of 8 _kil._ to 5 miles. The _yighach_ appears to
   be a variable estimate of distance, sometimes indicating the
   time occupied on a given journey, at others the distance to
   which a man's voice will carry. (_Cf._ Ujfalvy _Expedition
   scientifique_ ii, 179; Von Schwarz p. 124 and de C.'s Dict.
   _s.n._ _yighach_. In the present instance, if Babur's 4 y.
   equalled 4 f. the distance from Aush to Andijan should be
   about 16 m.; but it is 33 m. 1-3/4 fur. _i.e._ 50 _versts_.
   Kostenko ii, 33.) I find Babur's _yighach_ to vary from about
   4 m. to nearly 8 m.

   [57] _aqar su_, the irrigation channels on which in Turkistan
   all cultivation depends. Major-General Gerard writes, (Report
   of the Pamir Boundary Commission, p. 6,) "Osh is a charming
   little town, resembling Islamabad in Kashmir,--everywhere the
   same mass of running water, in small canals, bordered with
   willow, poplar and mulberry." He saw the Aq Bura, the _White
   wolf_, mother of all these running waters, as a "bright,
   stony, trout-stream;" Dr. Stein saw it as a "broad, tossing
   river." (Buried Cities of Khotan, p. 45.) _Cf_. Reclus vi,
   cap. Farghana; Kostenko i, 104; Von Schwarz _s.nn._

   [58] _Aushning fazilatida khaili ahadis warid dur._ Second
   W.-i-B. (I.O. 217 f. 2) _Fazilat-i-Aush ahadis warid ast._
   Mems. (p. 3) "The excellencies of Ush are celebrated even in
   the sacred traditions." _Mems._ (i, 2) "_On cite beaucoup de
   traditions qui celebrent l'excellence de ce climat._" Aush may
   be mentioned in the traditions on account of places of
   pilgrimage near it; Babur's meaning may be merely that its
   excellencies are traditional. _Cf._ Ujfalvy ii, 172.

   [59] Most travellers into Farghana comment on Babur's account
   of it. One much discussed point is the position of the Bara
   Koh. The personal observations of Ujfalvy and Schuyler led
   them to accept its identification with the rocky ridge known
   as the Takht-i-sulaiman. I venture to supplement this by the
   suggestion that Babur, by Bara Koh, did not mean the whole of
   the rocky ridge, the name of which, Takht-i-sulaiman, an
   ancient name, must have been known to him, but one only of its
   four marked summits. Writing of the ridge Madame Ujfalvy says,
   "_Il y a quatre sommets dont le plus eleve est le troisieme
   comptant par le nord_." Which summit in her sketch (p. 327) is
   the third and highest is not certain, but one is so shewn that
   it may be the third, may be the highest and, as being a peak,
   can be described as symmetrical _i.e._ Babur's _mauzun_. For
   this peak an appropriate name would be Bara Koh.

   If the name Bara Koh could be restricted to a single peak of
   the Takht-i-sulaiman ridge, a good deal of earlier confusion
   would be cleared away, concerning which have written, amongst
   others, Ritter (v, 432 and 732); Reclus (vi. 54); Schuyler
   (ii, 43) and those to whom these three refer. For an excellent
   account, graphic with pen and pencil, of Farghana and of Aush
   _see_ Madame Ujfalvy's _De Paris a Samarcande_ cap. v.

   [60] _rud._ This is a precise word since the Aq Bura (the
   White Wolf), in a relatively short distance, falls from the
   Kurdun Pass, 13,400 ft. to Aush, 3040 ft. and thence to
   Andijan, 1380 ft. _Cf._ Kostenko i, 104; Huntingdon in
   Pumpelly's _Explorations in Turkistan_ p. 179 and the French
   military map of 1904.

   [61] Whether Babur's words, _baghat_, _baghlar_ and _baghcha_
   had separate significations, such as orchard, vineyard and
   ordinary garden _i.e._ garden-plots of small size, I am not
   able to say but what appears fairly clear is that when he
   writes _baghat u baghlar_ he means _all sorts of gardens_,
   just as when he writes _begat u beglar_, he means _begs of all
   ranks_.

   [62] Madame Ujfalvy has sketched a possible successor.
   Schuyler found two mosques at the foot of Takht-i-sulaiman,
   perhaps Babur's Jauza Masjid.

   [63] _aul shah-ju'idin su quyarlar._

   [64] Ribbon Jasper, presumably.

   [65] Kostenko (ii, 30), 71-3/4 versts _i.e._ 47 m. 4-1/2 fur.
   by the Postal Road.

   [66] Instead of their own kernels, the Second W.-i-B. stuffs
   the apricots, in a fashion well known in India by _khubani_,
   with almonds (_maghz-i badam_). The Turki wording however
   allows the return to the apricots of their own kernels and Mr.
   Rickmers tells me that apricots so stuffed were often seen by
   him in the Zar-afshan Valley. My husband has shewn me that
   Nizami in his Haft Paikar appears to refer to the other
   fashion, that of inserting almonds:--

     "I gave thee fruits from the garden of my heart,
     Plump and sweet as honey in milk;
     Their substance gave the lusciousness of figs,
     In their hearts were the kernels of almonds."

   [67] What this name represents is one of a considerable number
   of points in the _Babur-nama_ I am unable to decide. _Kiyik_
   is a comprehensive name (_cf._ Shaw's Vocabulary); _aq kiyik_
   might mean _white sheep_ or _white deer_. It is rendered in
   the Second W.-i-B., here, by _ahu-i-wariq_ and on f. 4, by
   _ahu-i-safed_. Both these names Mr. Erskine has translated by
   "white deer," but he mentions that the first is said to mean
   _argali_ _i.e._ _ovis poli_, and refers to _Voyages de Pallas_
   iv, 325.

   [68] Concerning this much discussed word, Babur's testimony is
   of service. It seems to me that he uses it merely of those
   settled in towns (villages) and without any reference to tribe
   or nationality. I am not sure that he uses it always as a
   noun; he writes of a _Sart kishi_, a Sart person. His Asfara
   Sarts may have been Turki-speaking settled Turks and his
   Marghinani ones Persian-speaking Tajiks. _Cf._ Shaw's
   Vocabulary; _s.n._ Sart; Schuyler i, 104 and note; Nalivkine's
   _Histoire du Khanat de Khokand_ p. 45 n. Von Schwarz _s.n._;
   Kostenko i, 287; Petzbold's _Turkistan_ p. 32.

   [69] Shaikh Burhanu'd-din 'Ali _Qilich_: b. _circa_ 530 AH.
   (1135 AD.) d. 593 AH. (1197 AD.). _See_ Hamilton's _Hidayat_.

   [70] The direct distance, measured on the map, appears to be
   about 65 m. but the road makes _detour_ round mountain spurs.
   Mr. Erskine appended here, to the "_farsang_" of his Persian
   source, a note concerning the reduction of Tatar and Indian
   measures to English ones. It is rendered the less applicable
   by the variability of the _yighach_, the equivalent for a
   _farsang_ presumed by the Persian translator.

   [71] Hai. MS. _Farsi-gu'i_. The Elph. MS. and all those
   examined of the W.-i-B. omit the word _Farsi_; some writing
   _kohi_ (mountaineer) for _gu'i_. I judge that Babur at first
   omitted the word _Farsi_, since it is entered in the Hai. MS.
   above the word _gu'i_. It would have been useful to Ritter
   (vii, 733) and to Ujfalvy (ii, 176). _Cf._ Kostenko i, 287 on
   the variety of languages spoken by Sarts.

   [72] Of the Mirror Stone neither Fedtschenko nor Ujfalvy could
   get news.

   [73] Babur distinguishes here between Tashkint and
   Shahrukhiya. _Cf._ f. 2 and note to Fanakat.

   [74] He left the hill-country above Sukh in Muharram 910 AH.
   (mid-June 1504 AD.).

   [75] For a good account of Khujand _see_ Kostenko i, 346.

   [76] Khujand to Andijan 187 m. 2 fur. (Kostenko ii, 29-31)
   and, helped out by the time-table of the Transcaspian Railway,
   from Khujand to Samarkand appears to be some 154 m. 5-1/4 fur.

   [77] Both men are still honoured in Khujand (Kostenko i, 348).
   For Khwaja Kamal's Life and _Diwan_, _see_ Rieu ii, 632 and
   Ouseley's Persian Poets p. 192. _Cf._ f. 83b and note.

   [78] _kub artuq dur_, perhaps brought to Hindustan where Babur
   wrote the statement.

   [79] Turkish arrow-flight, London, 1791, 482 yards.

   [80] I have found the following forms of this name,--Hai. MS.,
   M:nugh:l; Pers. trans. and Mems., Myoghil; Ilminsky, M:tugh:l;
   _Mems._ Mtoughuil; Reclus, Schuyler and Kostenko, Mogul Tau;
   Nalivkine, "d'apres Fedtschenko," Mont Mogol; Fr. Map of 1904,
   M. Muzbek. It is the western end of the Kurama Range (Kindir
   Tau), which comes out to the bed of the Sir, is 26-2/3 miles
   long and rises to 4000 ft. (Kostenko, i, 101). Von Schwarz
   describes it as being quite bare; various writers ascribe
   climatic evil to it.

   [81] Pers. trans. _ahu-i-safed_. _Cf._ f. 3b note.

   [82] These words translate into _Cervus maral_, the Asiatic
   Wapiti, and to this Babur may apply them. Dictionaries explain
   _maral_ as meaning _hind_ or _doe_ but numerous books of
   travel and Natural History show that it has wider application
   as a generic name, _i.e._ deer. The two words _bughu_ and
   _maral_ appear to me to be used as _e.g._ drake and duck are
   used. _Maral_ and duck can both imply the female sex, but also
   both are generic, perhaps primarily so. _Cf._ for further
   mention of _bughu-maral_ f. 219 and f. 276. For uses of the
   word _maral_, _see_ the writings _e.g._ of Atkinson, Kostenko
   (iii, 69), Lyddeker, Littledale, Selous, Ronaldshay, Church
   (Chinese Turkistan), Biddulph (Forsyth's Mission).

   [83] _Cf._ f. 2 and note.

   [84] Schuyler (ii, 3), 18 m.

   [85] Hai. MS. _Hamesha bu deshtta yil bar dur. Marghinangha
   kim sharqi dur, hamesha mundin yil barur; Khujandgha kim
   gharibi dur, da'im mundin yil kilur._

   This is a puzzling passage. It seems to say that wind always
   goes east and west from the steppe as from a generating
   centre. E. and de C. have given it alternative directions,
   east or west, but there is little point in saying this of wind
   in a valley hemmed in on the north and the south. Babur limits
   his statement to the steppe lying in the contracted mouth of
   the Farghana valley (_pace_ Schuyler ii, 51) where special
   climatic conditions exist such as (_a_) difference in
   temperature on the two sides of the Khujand narrows and
   currents resulting from this difference,--(_b_) the heating of
   the narrows by sun-heat reflected from the Mogol-tau,--and
   (_c_) the inrush of westerly wind over Mirza Rabat. Local
   knowledge only can guide a translator safely but Babur's
   directness of speech compels belief in the significance of his
   words and this particularly when what he says is unexpected.
   He calls the Ha Darwesh a whirling wind and this it still is.
   Thinkable at least it is that a strong westerly current (the
   prevailing wind of Farghana) entering over Mirza Rabat and
   becoming, as it does become, the whirlwind of Ha Darwesh on
   the hemmed-in steppe,--becoming so perhaps by conflict with the
   hotter indraught through the Gates of Khujand--might force that
   indraught back into the Khujand Narrows (in the way _e.g._
   that one Nile in flood forces back the other), and at Khujand
   create an easterly current. All the manuscripts agree in
   writing to (_gha_) Marghinan and to (_gha_) Khujand. It may be
   observed that, looking at the map, it appears somewhat strange
   that Babur should take, for his wind objective, a place so
   distant from his (defined) Ha Darwesh and seemingly so
   screened by its near hills as is Marghinan. But that westerly
   winds are prevalent in Marghinan is seen _e.g._ in
   Middendorff's _Einblikke in den Farghana Thal_ (p. 112). _Cf._
   Reclus vi, 547; Schuyler ii, 51; Cahun's _Histoire du Khanat
   de Khokand_ p. 28 and Sven Hedin's _Durch Asien's Wuesten s.n.
   buran_.

   [86] _badiy__a_; a word perhaps selected as punning on _bad_,
   wind.

   [87] _i.e._ Akhsi Village. This word is sometimes spelled
   Akhsikis but as the old name of the place was Akhsi-kint, it
   may be conjectured at least that the _sa'i masallasa_ of
   Akhsikis represents the three points due for the _nun_ and
   _ta_ of _kint_. Of those writing Akhsikit may be mentioned the
   Hai. and Kehr's MSS. (the Elph. MS. here has a lacuna) the
   _Zafar-nama_ (Bib. Ind. i, 44) and Ibn Haukal (Ouseley p.
   270); and of those writing the word with the _sa'i
   musallasa_ (_i.e._ as Akhsikis), Yaqut's Dict, i, 162,
   Reinaud's Abu'l-feda I. ii, 225-6, Ilminsky (p. 5) departing
   from his source, and I.O. Cat. (Ethe) No. 1029. It may be
   observed that Ibn Haukal (Ouseley p. 280) writes Banakas for
   Banakat. For Asiru'd-din _Akhsikiti_, _see_ Rieu ii, 563;
   Daulat Shah (Browne) p. 121 and Ethe I.O. Cat. No. 1029.

   [88] Measured on the French military map of 1904, this may be
   80 kil. _i.e._ 50 miles.

   [89] Concerning several difficult passages in the rest of
   Babur's account of Akhsi, _see_ Appendix A.

   [90] The W.-i-B. here translates _bughu-maral_ by _gazawn_ and
   the same word is entered, under-line, in the Hai. MS. _Cf._ f.
   3b and note and f. 4 and note.

   [91] _postin pesh b:r:h._ This obscure Persian phrase has been
   taken in the following ways:--

     (_a_) W.-i-B. I.O. 215 and 217 (_i.e._ both versions) reproduce
             the phrase.
     (_b_) W.-i-B. MS., quoted by Erskine, p. 6 note,
             (_postin-i mish burra_).
     (_c_) Leyden's MS. Trs., a sheepskin mantle of five lambskins.
     (_d_) Mems., Erskine, p. 6, a mantle of five lambskins.
     (_e_) The Persian annotator of the Elph. MS., underlining _pesh_,
             writes, _panj_, five.
     (_f_) Klaproth (Archives, p. 109), _pustini pisch breh, d.h. gieb
             den vorderen Pelz_.
     (_g_) Kehr, p. 12 (Ilminsky p. 6) _postin bish b:r:h_.
     (_h_) De. C, i, 9, _fourrure d'agneau de la premiere qualite_.

   The "lambskins" of L. and E. carry on a notion of comfort
   started by their having read _sayah_, shelter, for Turki
   _sa'i_, torrent-bed; de C. also lays stress on fur and warmth,
   but would not the flowery border of a mountain stream prompt
   rather a phrase bespeaking ornament and beauty than one
   expressing warmth and textile softness? If the phrase might be
   read as _postin pesh pera_, what adorns the front of a coat,
   or as _postin pesh bar rah_, the fine front of the coat, the
   phrase would recall the gay embroidered front of some leathern
   postins.

   [92] Var. _tabarkhun_. The explanation best suiting its uses,
   enumerated here, is Redhouse's second, the Red Willow. My
   husband thinks it may be the Hyrcanian Willow.

   [93] Steingass describes this as "an arrow without wing or
   point" (barb?) and tapering at both ends; it may be the
   practising arrow, _t'alim auqi_, often headless.

   [94] _tabarrakluq._ Cf. f. 48b foot, for the same use of the
   word.

   [95] _yabruju's-sannam._ The books referred to by Babur may
   well be the _Rauzatu's-safa_ and the _Habibu's-siyar_, as
   both mention the plant.

   [96] The Turki word _ayiq_ is explained by Redhouse as _awake_
   and _alert_; and by Meninski and de Meynard as _sobered_ and
   as _a return to right senses_. It may be used here as a
   equivalent of _mihr_ in _mihr-giyah_, the plant of love.

   [97] Mr. Ney Elias has discussed the position of this group of
   seven villages. (_Cf._ T. R. p. 180 n.) Arrowsmith's map
   places it (as Iti-kint) approximately where Mr. Th. Radloff
   describes seeing it _i.e._ on the Farghana slope of the Kurama
   range. (_Cf. Receuil d'Itineraires_ p. 188.) Mr. Th. Radloff
   came into Yiti-kint after crossing the Kindirlik Pass from
   Tashkint and he enumerates the seven villages as traversed by
   him before reaching the Sir. It is hardly necessary to say
   that the actual villages he names may not be those of Babur's
   Yiti-kint. Wherever the word is used in the _Babur-nama_ and
   the _Tarikh-i-rashidi_, it appears from the context allowable
   to accept Mr. Radloff's location but it should be borne in
   mind that the name Yiti-kint (Seven villages or towns) might
   be found as an occasional name of Alti-shahr (Six towns).
   _See_ T.R. _s.n._ Alti-shahr.

   [98] _kishi_, person, here manifestly fighting men.

   [99] Elph. MS. f. 2b; First W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 4b; Second
   W.-i-B. I.O. 217 f. 4; Mems. p. 6; Ilminsky p. 7; _Mems._ i.
   10.

   The rulers whose affairs are chronicled at length in the
   Farghana Section of the B.N. are, (I) of Timurid Turks,
   (always styled Mirza), (_a_) the three Miran-shahi brothers,
   Ahmad, Mahmud and 'Umar Shaikh with their successors,
   Bai-sunghar, 'Ali and Babur; (_b_) the Bai-qara, Husain of
   Harat: (II) of Chingiz Khanids, (always styled Khan,) (_a_)
   the two Chaghatai Mughul brothers, Mahmud and Ahmad; (_b_) the
   Shaibanid Auzbeg, Muhammad Shaibani (Shah-i-bakht or Shaibaq
   or Shahi Beg).

   In electing to use the name _Shaibani_, I follow not only the
   Hai. Codex but also Shaibani's Boswell, Muhammad Salih Mirza.
   The Elph. MS. frequently uses _Shaibaq_ but its authority down
   to f. 198 (Hai. MS. f. 243b) is not so great as it is after
   that folio, because not till f. 198 is it a direct copy of
   Babur's own. It may be more correct to write "the Shaibani
   Khan" and perhaps even "the Shaibani."

   [100] _bi murad_, so translated because retirement was caused
   once by the overruling of Khwaja 'Ubaidu'l-lah _Ahrari_. (T.R.
   p. 113.)

   [101] Once the Mirza did not wish Yunas to winter in Akhsi;
   once did not expect him to yield to the demand of his Mughuls
   to be led out of the cultivated country (_wilayat_). His own
   misconduct included his attack in Yunas on account of Akhsi
   and much falling-out with kinsmen. (T.R. _s.nn._)

   [102] _i.e._ one made of non-warping wood (Steingass), perhaps
   that of the White Poplar. The _Shah-nama_ (Turner, Macon ed.
   i, 71) writes of a Chachi bow and arrows of _khadang_, _i.e._
   white poplar. (H.B.)

   [103] _i.e._ Rabi'a-sultan, married _circa_ 893 AH.-1488 AD.
   For particulars about her and all women mentioned in the B.N.
   and the T.R. see Gulbadan Begim's _Humayun-nama_, Or. Trs.
   Series.

   [104] _jar_, either that of the Kasan Water or of a
   deeply-excavated canal. The palace buildings are mentioned
   again on f. 110b. _Cf._ Appendix A.

   [105] _i.e._ soared from earth, died. For some details of the
   accident _see_ A.N. (H. Beveridge, i, 220.)

   [106] H.S. ii,-192, Firishta, lith. ed. p. 191 and D'Herbelot,
   sixth.

   It would have accorded with Babur's custom if here he had
   mentioned the parentage of his father's mother. Three times
   (fs. 17b, 70b, 96b) he writes of "Shah Sultan Begim" in a way
   allowing her to be taken as 'Umar Shaikh's own mother.
   Nowhere, however, does he mention her parentage. One even
   cognate statement only have we discovered, _viz._
   Khwand-amir's (H.S. ii, 192) that 'Umar Shaikh was the own
   younger brother (_baradar khurdtar khud_) of Ahmad and Mahmud.
   If his words mean that the three were full-brothers, 'Umar
   Shaikh's own mother was Abu-sa'id's Tarkhan wife. Babur's
   omission (f. 21b) to mention his father with A. and M. as a
   nephew of Darwesh Muhammad Tarkhan would be negative testimony
   against taking Khwand-amir's statement to mean "full-brother,"
   if clerical slips were not easy and if Khwand-amir's means of
   information were less good. He however both was the son of
   Mahmud's wazir (H.S. ii, 194) and supplemented his book in
   Babur's presence.

   To a statement made by the writer of the biographies included
   in Kehr's B.N. volume, that 'U.S.'s family (_aumagh_) is not
   known, no weight can be attached, spite of the co-incidence
   that the Mongol form of _aumagh_, _i.e._ _aumak_ means
   _Mutter-leib_. The biographies contain too many known mistakes
   for their compiler to outweigh Khwand-amir in authority.

   [107] _Cf._ _Rauzatu's-safa_ vi, 266. (H.B.)

   [108] Dara-i-gaz, south of Balkh. This historic feast took
   place at Merv in 870 AH. (1465 AD.). As 'Umar Shaikh was then
   under ten, he may have been one of the Mirzas concerned.

   [109] Khudai-birdi is a Pers.-Turki hybrid equivalent of
   Theodore; _tughchi_ implies the right to use or (as hereditary
   standard-bearer,) to guard the _tugh_; Timur-tash may mean
   _i.a._ Friend of Timur (a title not excluded here as borne by
   inheritance. _Cf._ f. 12b and note), Sword-friend (_i.e._
   Companion-in-arms), and Iron-friend (_i.e._ stanch). _Cf._
   Dict. _s.n._ Timur-bash, a sobriquet of Charles XII.

   [110] Elph. and Hai. MSS. _quba yuzluq_; this is under-lined
   in the Elph. MS. by _ya'ni pur ghosht_. _Cf._ f. 68b for the
   same phrase. The four earlier trss. _viz._ the two W.-i-B.,
   the English and the French, have variants in this passage.

   [111] The apposition may be between placing the turban-sash
   round the turban-cap in a single flat fold and winding it four
   times round after twisting it on itself. _Cf._ f. 18 and
   Hughes _Dict. of Islam s.n._ turban.

   [112] _qazalar_, the prayers and fasts omitted when due,
   through war, travel sickness, etc.

   [113] _rawan sawadi bar idi_; perhaps, wrote a running hand.
   De C. i, 13, _ses lectures courantes etaient...._

   [114] The dates of 'Umar Shaikh's limits of perusal allow the
   Quintets (_Khamsatin_) here referred to to be those of Nizami
   and Amir Khusrau of Dihli. The _Masnawi_ must be that of
   Jalalu'd-din _Rumi_. (H.B.)

   [115] Probably below the Tirak (Poplar) Pass, the caravan
   route much exposed to avalanches.

   Mr. Erskine notes that this anecdote is erroneously told as of
   Babur by Firishta and others. Perhaps it has been confused
   with the episode on f. 207b. Firishta makes another mistaken
   attribution to Babur, that of Hasan of Yaq'ub's couplet.
   (H.B.) _Cf._ f. 13b and Dow's _Hindustan_ ii, 218.

   [116] _yigitlar_, young men, the modern _jighit_. Babur uses
   the word for men on the effective fighting strength. It
   answers to the "brave" of North. American Indian story; here
   de C. translates it by _braves_.

   [117] _ma'jun._ _Cf._ Von Schwarz p. 286 for a recipe.

   [118] _mutaiyam._ This word, not clearly written in all MSS.,
   has been mistaken for _yitim_. _Cf._ JRAS 1910 p. 882 for a
   note upon it by my husband to whom I owe the emendation.

   [119] _na'l u daghi bisyar idi_, that is, he had inflicted on
   himself many of the brands made by lovers and enthusiasts.
   _Cf._ Chardin's _Voyages_ ii, 253 and Lady M. Montague's
   _Letters_ p. 200.

   [120] _tika sikritku_, lit. likely to make goats leap, from
   _sikrimak_ to jump close-footed (Shaw).

   [121] _sikrikan dur._ Both _sikritku_ and _sikrikan dur_,
   appear to dictate translation in general terms and not by
   reference to a single traditional leap by one goat.

   [122] _i.e._ Russian; it is the Arys tributary of the Sir.

   [123] The Fr. map of 1904 shows Kas, in the elbow of the Sir,
   which seems to represent Khwas.

   [124] _i.e._ the Chir-chik tributary of the Sir.

   [125] Concerning his name, _see_ T.R. p. 173.

   [126] _i.e._ he was a head-man of a horde sub-division,
   nominally numbering 10,000, and paying their dues direct to
   the supreme Khan. (T.R. p. 301.)

   [127] _ghunchachi i.e._ one ranking next to the four legal
   wives, in Turki _audaliq_, whence odalisque. Babur and
   Gul-badan mention the promotion of several to Begim's rank by
   virtue of their motherhood.

   [128] One of Babur's quatrains, quoted in the _Abushqa_, is
   almost certainly addressed to Khan-zada. _Cf._ A.Q. Review,
   Jan. 1911, p. 4; H. Beveridge's _Some verses of Babur_. For an
   account of her marriage _see Shaibani-nama_ (Vambery) cap.
   xxxix.

   [129] Kehr's MS. has a passage here not found elsewhere and
   seeming to be an adaptation of what is at the top of Hai. MS.
   f. 88. (Ilminsky, p. 10, _ba wujud ... tapib_.)

   [130] _tushti_, which here seems to mean that she fell to his
   share on division of captives. Muh. Salih makes it a
   love-match and places the marriage before Babur's departure.
   _Cf._ f. 95 and notes.

   [131] _augahlan._ Khurram would be about five when given Balkh
   in _circa_ 911 AH. (1505 AD.). He died when about 12. _Cf._
   H.S. ii, 364.

   [132] This _fatrat_ (interregnum) was between Babur's loss of
   Farghana and his gain of Kabul; the _fursatlar_ were his days
   of ease following success in Hindustan and allowing his book
   to be written.

   [133] _qilaling_, lit. do thou be (setting down), a verbal
   form recurring on f. 227b l. 2. With the same form
   (_ait_)_aling_, lit. do thou be saying, the compiler of the
   _Abushqa_ introduces his quotations. Shaw's paradigm, _qiling_
   only. _Cf._ A.Q.R. Jan. 1911, p. 2.

   [134] Kehr's MS. (Ilminsky p. 12) and its derivatives here
   interpolate the erroneous statement that the sons of Yunas
   were Afaq and Baba Khans.

   [135] _i.e._ broke up the horde. _Cf._ T.R. p. 74.

   [136] _See_ f. 50b for his descent.

   [137] Descendants of these captives were in Kashghar when
   Haidar was writing the T.R. It was completed in 953 AH. (1547
   AD.). _Cf._ T.R. pp. 81 and 149.

   [138] An omission from his Persian source misled Mr. Erskine
   here into making Abu-sa'id celebrate the Khanim's marriage,
   not with himself but with his defeated foe, 'Abdu'l-'aziz who
   had married her 28 years earlier.

   [139] Aisan-bugha was at Aq Su in Eastern Turkistan; Yunas
   Khan's head-quarters were in Yiti-kint. The Sagharichi _tuman_
   was a subdivision of the Kunchi Mughuls.

   [140] _Khan kutardilar._ The primitive custom was to lift the
   Khan-designate off the ground; the phrase became metaphorical
   and would seem to be so here, since there were two upon the
   felt. _Cf._, however, Th. Radloff's _Recueil d'Itineraires_ p.
   326.

   [141] _quyub idi_, probably in childhood.

   [142] She was divorced by Shaibani Khan in 907 AH. in order to
   allow him to make lawful marriage with her niece, Khan-zada.

   [143] This was a prudential retreat before Shaibani Khan.
   _Cf._ f. 213.

   [144] The "Khan" of his title bespeaks his Chaghatai-Mughul
   descent through his mother, the "Mirza," his Timurid-Turki,
   through his father. The capture of the women was facilitated
   by the weakening of their travelling escort through his
   departure. _Cf._ T.R. p. 203.

   [145] Qila'-i-zafar. Its ruins are still to be seen on the
   left bank of the Kukcha. _Cf._ T.R. p. 220 and Kostenko i,
   140. For Mubarak Shah _Muzaffari_ _see_ f. 213 and T.R. _s.n._

   [146] Habiba, a child when captured, was reared by Shaibani
   and by him given in marriage to his nephew. _Cf._ T.R. p. 207
   for an account of this marriage as saving Haidar's life.

   [147] _i.e._ she did not take to flight with her husband's
   defeated force, but, relying on the victor, her cousin Babur,
   remained in the town. _Cf._ T.R. p. 268. Her case receives
   light from Shahr-banu's (f. 169).

   [148] Muhammad Haidar Mirza _Kurkan Dughlat Chaghatai Mughul_,
   the author of the _Tarikh-i-rashidi_; b. 905 AH. d. 958 AH.
   (b. 1499 d. 1551 AD.). Of his clan, the "Oghlat" (Dughlat)
   Muh. salih says that it was called "Oghlat" by Mughuls but
   Qungur-at (Brown Horse) by Auzbegs.

   [149] _Baz garadad ba asl-i-khud hama chiz,
         Zar-i-safi u naqra u airzin._

   These lines are in Arabic in the introduction to the
   _Anwar-i-suhaili_. (H.B.) The first is quoted by Haidar (T.R.
   p. 354) and in Field's _Dict. of Oriental Quotations_ (p.
   160). I understand them to refer here to Haidar's return to
   his ancestral home and nearest kin as being a natural act.

   [150] _ta'ib_ and _tariqa_ suggest that Haidar had become an
   orthodox Musalman in or about 933 AH. (1527 AD.).

   [151] Abu'l-fazl adds music to Haidar's accomplishments and
   Haidar's own Prologue mentions yet others.

   [152] _Cf._ T.R. _s.n._ and Gul-badan's H.N. _s.n._ Haram
   Begim.

   [153] _i.e._ Alexander of Macedon. For modern mention of
   Central Asian claims to Greek descent _see i.a._ Kostenko, Von
   Schwarz, Holdich and A. Durand. _Cf._ Burnes' _Kabul_ p. 203
   for an illustration of a silver _patera_ (now in the V. and A.
   Museum), once owned by ancestors of this Shah Sultan Muhammad.

   [154] _Cf._ f. 6b note.

   [155] _i.e._ Khan's child.

   [156] The careful pointing of the Hai. MS. clears up earlier
   confusion by showing the narrowing of the vowels from _alachi_
   to _alacha_.

   [157] The Elph. MS. (f. 7) writes _Aung_, Khan's son, Prester
   John's title, where other MSS. have Adik. Babur's brevity has
   confused his account of Sultan-nigar. Widowed of Mahmud in 900
   AH. she married Adik; Adik, later, joined Shaibani Khan but
   left him in 908 AH. perhaps secretly, to join his own Qazaq
   horde. He was followed by his wife, apparently also making a
   private departure. As Adik died shortly after 908 AH. his
   daughters were born before that date and not after it as has
   been understood. _Cf._ T.R. and G.B.'s H.N. _s.nn._; also
   Mems. p. 14 and _Mems._ i, 24.

   [158] Presumably by tribal custom, _yinkalik_, marriage with a
   brother's widow. Such marriages seem to have been made
   frequently for the protection of women left defenceless.

   [159] Sa'id's power to protect made him the refuge of several
   kinswomen mentioned in the B.N. and the T.R. This mother and
   child reached Kashghar in 932 AH. (1526 AD.).

   Here Babur ends his [interpolated] account of his mother's
   family and resumes that of his father's.

   [160] Babur uses a variety of phrases to express Lordship in
   the Gate. Here he writes _aishikni bashlatib_; elsewhere,
   _aishik ikhtiyari qilmaq_ and _mining aishikimda sahib
   ikhtiyari qilmaq_. Von Schwarz (p. 159) throws light on the
   duties of the Lord of the Gate (_Aishik Aghasi_). "Das Thuer
   ... fuehrt in eine grosse, vier-eckige, hoehe Halle, deren Boden
   etwa 2 m. ueber den Weg erhoben ist. In dieser Halle, welche
   alle passieren muss, der durch das Thor eingeht, reitet oder
   fahrt, ist die Thorwache placiert. Tagsueber sind die Thore
   bestaendig oeffen, nach Eintritt der Dunkelheit aber werden
   dieselben geschlossen und die Schluessel dem zustaendigen
   Polizeichef abgeliefert.... In den erwaehnten Thorhallen nehmen
   in den hoch unabhaengigen Gebieten an Bazar-tagen haufig die
   Richter Platz, um jedem der irgend ein Anliegen hat, so fort
   Recht zu sprechen. Die zudiktierten Strafen werden auch gleich
   in diesem selben locale vollzogen und eventuell die zum Hangen
   verurteilten Verbrecher an den Deckbalken aufgehaengt, so dass
   die Besucher des Bazars unter den gehenkten durchpassieren
   muessen."

   [161] _bu khabarni 'Abdu'l-wahhab shaghawaldin 'arza-dasht
   qilib Mirzagha chapturdilar._ This passage has been taken to
   mean that the _shaghawal_, _i.e._ chief scribe, was the
   courier, but I think Babur's words shew that the _shaghawal's_
   act preceded the despatch of the news. Moreover the only
   accusative of the participle and of the verb is _khabarni_.
   'Abdu'l-wahhab had been 'Umar Shaikh's and was now Ahmad's
   officer in Khujand, on the main road for Aura-tipa whence the
   courier started on the rapid ride. The news may have gone
   verbally to 'Abdu'l-wahhab and he have written it on to Ahmad
   and Abu-sa'id.

   [162] Measured from point to point even, the distance appears
   to be over 500 miles. Concerning Baba Khaki _see_ H.S. ii.
   224; for rapid riding _i.a._ Kostenko iii, cap. Studs.

   [163] _qushuqlarni yakhshi aitura ikan dur._ Elph. MS. for
   _qushuq_, _tuyuk_. _Qushuq_ is allowed, both by its root and
   by usage, to describe improvisations of combined dance and
   song. I understand from Babur's tense, that his information
   was hearsay only.

   [164] _i.e._ of the military class. _Cf._ Vullers _s.n._ and
   T.R. p. 301.

   [165] The Huma is a fabulous bird, overshadowing by whose
   wings brings good-fortune. The couplet appears to be addressed
   to some man, under the name Huma, from whom Hasan of Yaq'ub
   hoped for benefit.

   [166] _khak-bila_; the _Sanglakh_, (quoting this passage)
   gives _khak-p:l:k_ as the correct form of the word.

   [167] _Cf._ f. 99b.

   [168] One of Timur's begs.

   [169] _i.e._ uncle on the mother's side, of any degree, here a
   grandmother's brother. The title appears to have been given
   for life to men related to the ruling House. Parallel with it
   are Madame Mere, Royal Uncle, Sultan Walida.

   [170] _kim disa bulghai_, perhaps meaning, "Nothing of service
   to me."

   [171] Wais the Thin.

   [172] _Cf._ Chardin ed. Langles v, 461 and ed. 1723 AD. v,
   183.

   [173] n.e. of Kasan. _Cf._ f. 74. Hai MS., erroneously,
   Samarkand.

   [174] An occasional doubt arises as to whether a _tauri_ of
   the text is Arabic and dispraises or Turki and laudatory.
   _Cf._ Mems. p. 17 and _Mems._ i, 3.

   [175] Elph. and Hai. MSS. _aftabachi_, water-bottle bearer on
   journeys; Kehr (p. 82) _aftabchi_, ewer-bearer; Ilminsky (p.
   19) _akhtachi_, squire or groom. Circumstances support
   _aftabachi_. Yunas was town-bred, his ewer-bearer would hardly
   be the rough Mughul, Qambar-'ali, useful as an _aftabachi_.

   [176] Babur was Governor of Andijan and the month being June,
   would be living out-of-doors. _Cf._ H.S. ii. 272 and Schuyler
   ii, 37.

   [177] To the word Sherim applies Abu'l-ghazi's explanation of
   Nurum and Hajim, namely, that they are abbreviations of Nur
   and Haji Muhammad. It explains Sultanim also when used (f. 72)
   of Sl. Muhammad Khanika but of Sultanim as the name is common
   with Babur, Haidar and Gul-badan, _i.e._ as a woman's,
   Busbecq's explanation is the better, namely, that it means My
   Sultan and is applied to a person of rank and means. This
   explains other women's titles _e.g._ Khanim, my Khan and Akam
   (Akim), My Lady. A third group of names formed like the last
   by enclitic _'m_ (my), may be called names of affection,
   _e.g._ Mahim, My Moon, Janim, My Life. (_Cf._ Persian
   equivalents.) Cf. Abu'l-ghazi's _Shajarat-i-Turki_ (Desmaisons
   p. 272); and Ogier Ghiselin de Busbecq's _Life and Letters_
   (Forster and Daniel i, 38.)

   [178] _Namaz-gah_; generally an open terrace, with a wall
   towards the Qibla and outside the town, whither on festival
   days the people go out in crowds to pray. (Erskine.)

   [179] _Beglar (ning) mini u wilayatni tapshurghulari dur_;
   a noticeably idiomatic sentence. _Cf._ f. 16b 1. 6 and 1. 7
   for a repetition.

   [180] Mahmud was in Tashkint, Ahmad in Kashghar or on the
   Aq-su.

   [181] The B.N. contains a considerable number of what are
   virtually footnotes. They are sometimes, as here, entered in
   the middle of a sentence and confuse the narrative; they are
   introduced by _kim_, a mere sign of parenthetical matter to
   follow, and some certainly, known not to be Babur's own, must
   have stood first on the margin of his text. It seems best to
   enter them as Author's notes.

   [182] _i.e._ the author of the Hidayat. _Cf._ f. 3b and note;
   Blochmann _Ayin-i-akbari s.n. qulij_ and note; Bellew's
   _Afghan Tribes_ p. 100, _Khilich_.

   [183] Ar. dead, gone. The precision of Babur's words
   _khanwadalar_ and _yusunluq_ is illustrated by the existence
   in the days of Timur, in Marghinan, (Burhanu'd-din's township)
   of a ruler named Ailik Khan, apparently a descendant of
   Satuq-bughra Khan (b. 384 AH.-994 AD.) so that in Khwaja Qazi
   were united two dynasties, (_khanwadalar_), one priestly,
   perhaps also regal, the other of bye-gone ruling Khans. Cf.
   D'Herbelot p. 433; _Yarkand Mission_, Bellew p. 121;
   _Tazkirat-i Sultan Satuq-bughra Khan Ghazi Padshah_ and
   _Tarikh-i-nasiri_ (Raverty _s.n._)

   [184] _darzi_; H.S. _khaiyat_.

   [185] _bir yirga_ (_quyub_), lit. to one place.

   [186] _i.e._ reconstructed the earthern defences. _Cf._ Von
   Schwarz _s.n._ loess.

   [187] They had been sent, presumably, before 'Umar Shaikh's
   death, to observe Sl. Ahmad M.'s advance. _Cf._ f. 6.

   [188] The time-table of the Andijan Railway has a station,
   Kouwa (Qaba).

   [189] Babur, always I think, calls this man Long Hasan;
   Khwand-amir styles him Khwaja Hasan; he seems to be the
   brother of one of 'Umar Shaikh's fathers-in-law, Khwaja
   Husain.

   [190] _batqaq._ This word is underlined in the Elph. MS. by
   _dil-dil_ and in the Hai. MS. by _jam-jama_. It is translated
   in the W.-i-B. by _ab pur hila_, water full of deceit; it is
   our Slough of Despond. It may be remarked that neither Zenker
   nor Steingass gives to _dil-dil_ or _jam-jama_ the meaning of
   morass; the _Akbar-nama_ does so. (H.B. ii, 112.)

   [191] _tawila tawila atlar yighilib aula kirishti_. I
   understand the word _yighilib_ to convey that the massing led
   to the spread of the murrain.

   [192] _jan taratmaqlar_ _i.e._ as a gift to their over-lord.

   [193] Perhaps, Babur's maternal great-uncle. It would suit the
   privileges bestowed on Tarkhans if their title meant _Khan of
   the Gifts_ (Turki _tar_, gift). In the _Baburnama_, it
   excludes all others. Most of Ahmad's begs were Tarkhans,
   Arghuns and Chingiz Khanids, some of them ancestors of later
   rulers in Tatta and Sind. Concerning the Tarkhans _see_ T.R.
   p. 55 and note; A.N. (H.B. _s.n._) Elliot and Dowson's
   _History of India_, 498.

   [194] _Cf._ f. 6.

   [195] _beg ataka_, lit. beg for father.

   [196] T.R. _s.n._ Aba-bikr.

   [197] _Cf._ f. 6b and note.

   [198] _faqra u masakin_, _i.e._ those who have food for one
   day and those who have none in hand. (Steingass.)

   [199] For fashions of sitting, _see_ _Tawarikh-i-guzida
   Nasrat-nama_ B.M. Or. 3222. Ahmad would appear to have
   maintained the deferential attitude by kneeling and sitting
   back upon his heels.

   [200] _bir sunkak bar ikan dur._ I understand that something
   defiling must have been there, perhaps a bone.

   [201] _Khwajaning ham ayaghlari arada idi._

   [202] _ilbasun_, a kind of mallard (_Abushqa_), here perhaps a
   popinjay. _Cf._ H.S. ii, 193 for Ahmad's skill as an archer,
   and Payne-Gallwey's _Cross-bow_ p. 225.

   [203] _qabaq_, an archer's mark. Abu'l-ghazi (Kasan ed. p.
   181. 5) mentions a hen (_tuquq_) as a mark. _Cf._
   Payne-Gallwey _l.c._ p. 231.

   [204] _qirghicha, astar palumbarius._ (Shaw's Voc. Scully.)

   [205] Perhaps, not quarrelsome.

   [206] The T.R. (p. 116) attributes the rout to Shaibani's
   defection. The H.S. (ii, 192) has a varied and confused
   account. An error in the T.R. trs. making Shaibani plunder the
   Mughuls, is manifestly clerical.

   [207] _i.e._ condiment, _ce qu'on ajoute au pain_.

   [208] _Cf._ f. 6.

   [209] _qazaqlar_; here, if Babur's, meaning his conflicts with
   Tambal, but as the Begim may have been some time in Khujand,
   the _qazaqlar_ may be of Samarkand.

   [210] All the (Turki) Babur-nama MSS. and those examined of
   the W.-i-B. by writing _aulturdi_ (killed) where I suggest to
   read _aulnurdi_ (_devenir comme il faut_) state that Ahmad
   killed Qataq. I hesitate to accept this (1) because the only
   evidence of the murder is one diacritical point, the removal
   of which lifts Ahmad's reproach from him by his return to the
   accepted rules of a polygamous household; (2) because no
   murder of Qataq is chronicled by Khwand-amir or other writers;
   and (3) because it is incredible that a mild, weak man living
   in a family atmosphere such as Babur, Haidar and Gul-badan
   reproduce for us, should, while possessing facility for
   divorce, kill the mother of four out of his five children.

   Reprieve must wait however until the word _tiriklik_ is
   considered. This Erskine and de C. have read, with
   consistency, to mean _life-time_, but if _aulnurdi_ be read in
   place of _aulturdi_ (killed), _tiriklik_ may be read,
   especially in conjunction with Babur's _'ashiqliklar_, as
   meaning _living power_ or _ascendancy_. Again, if read as from
   _tirik_, a small arrow and a consuming pain, _tiriklik_ may
   represent Cupid's darts and wounds. Again it might be taken as
   from _tiramak_, to hinder, or forbid.

   Under these considerations, it is legitimate to reserve
   judgment on Ahmad.

   [211] It is customary amongst Turks for a bride, even amongst
   her own family, to remain veiled for some time after marriage;
   a child is then told to pluck off the veil and run away, this
   tending, it is fancied, to the child's own success in
   marriage. (Erskine.)

   [212] Babur's anecdote about Jani Beg well illustrates his
   caution as a narrator. He appears to tell it as one who
   knowing the point of a story, leads up to it. He does not
   affirm that Jani Beg's habits were strange or that the envoy
   was an athlete but that both things must have been (_ikan
   dur_) from what he had heard or to suit the point of the
   anecdote. Nor does he affirm as of his own knowledge that
   Auzbegs calls a strong man (his _zor kishi_) a _bukuh_ (bull)
   but says it is so understood (_dir imish_).

   [213] _Cf._ f. 170.

   [214] The points of a _tipuchaq_ are variously stated. If the
   root notion of the name be movement (_tip_), Erskine's
   observation, that these horses are taught special paces, is to
   the point. To the verb _tipramaq_ dictionaries assign the
   meaning of _movement with agitation of mind_, an explanation
   fully illustrated in the B.N. The verb describes fittingly the
   dainty, nervous action of some trained horses. Other meanings
   assigned to _tupuchaq_ are roadster, round-bodied and swift.

   [215] _Cf._ f. 37b.

   [216] _Cf._ f. 6b and note.

   [217] _mashaf kitabat qilur idi._

   [218] _Cf._ f. 36 and H.S. ii. 271.

   [219] _sinkilisi ham munda idi._

   [220] _khana-wadalar_, _viz._ the Chaghatai, the Timurid in
   two Miran-shahi branches, 'Ali's and Babur's and the Bai-qara
   in Harat.

   [221] _aughlaqchi_ _i.e._ player at _kuk-bura_. Concerning the
   game, _see_ Shaw's Vocabulary; Schuyler i, 268; Kostenko iii,
   82; Von Schwarz _s.n. baiga_.

   [222] Zu'l-hijja 910 AH.-May 1505 AD. _Cf._ f. 154. This
   statement helps to define what Babur reckoned his expeditions
   into Hindustan.

   [223] Aiku (Ayagu)-timur _Tarkhan Arghun_ d. _circa_ 793
   AH.-1391 AD. He was a friend of Timur. _See_ Z.N. i, 525 etc.

   [224] _andaq ikhlaq u atawari yuq idi kim disa bulghai._ The
   _Shah-nama_ cap. xviii, describes him as a spoiled child and
   man of pleasure, caring only for eating, drinking and hunting.
   The _Shaibani-nama_ narrates his various affairs.

   [225] _i.e._, _cutlass_, a parallel sobriquet to _qilich_,
   sword. If it be correct to translate by "cutlass," the
   nickname may have prompted Babur's brief following comment,
   _mardana ikan dur_, _i.e._ Quli Muh. must have been brave
   because known as the Cutlass. A common variant in MSS. from
   _Bughda_ is Baghdad; Baghdad was first written in the Hai. MS.
   but is corrected by the scribe to _bughda_.

   [226] So pointed in the Hai. MS. I surmise it a clan-name.

   [227] _i.e._ to offer him the succession. The mountain road
   taken from Aura-tipa would be by Ab-burdan, Sara-taq and the
   Kam Rud defile.

   [228] _irildi._ The departure can hardly have been open
   because Ahmad's begs favoured Mahmud; Malik-i-Muhammad's party
   would be likely to slip away in small companies.

   [229] This well-known Green, Grey or Blue palace or
   halting-place was within the citadel of Samarkand. _Cf._ f.
   37. It served as a prison from which return was not expected.

   [230] _Cf._ f. 27. He married a full-sister of Bai-sunghar.

   [231] _Gulistan_ Part I. Story 27. For "steaming up," _see_
   Tennyson's Lotus-eaters Choric song, canto 8 (H.B.).

   [232] Elph. MS. f. 16b; First W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 19; Second
   W.-i-B. I.O. 217 f. 15b; Memoirs p. 27.

   [233] He was a _Dughlat_, uncle by marriage of Haidar Mirza
   and now holding Khost for Mahmud. _See_ T.R. s.n. for his
   claim on Aisan-daulat's gratitude.

   [234] _tash qurghan da chiqar da._ Here (as _e.g._ f. 110b l.
   9) the Second W.-i-B. translates _tash_ as though it meant
   _stone_ instead of outer. _Cf._ f. 47 for an adjectival use of
   _tash_, stone, with the preposition (_tash_) _din_. The places
   contrasted here are the citadel (_ark_) and the walled-town
   (_qurghan_). The _chiqar_ (exit) is the fortified Gate-house
   of the mud circumvallation. _Cf._ f. 46 for another example of
   _chiqar_.

   [235] Elph. Hai. Kehr's MSS., _aning bila bar kishi bar
   beglarni tuturuldi_. This idiom recurs on f. 76b l. 8. A
   palimpsest entry in the Elph. MS. produces the statement that
   when Hasan fled, his begs returned to Andijan.

   [236] Hai. MS. _awi munkuzi_, underlined by _sagh-i-gau_,
   cows' thatched house. [_T. munkuz_, lit. horn, means also
   cattle.] Elph. MS., _awi munkush_, underlined by _dar ja'i
   khwab alfakhta_, sleeping place. [T. _munkush_, retired.]

   [237] The first _qachar_ of this pun has been explained as
   _gurez-gah_, _sharm-gah_, hinder parts, _fuite_ and _vertebre
   inferieur_. The H.S. (ii, 273 l. 3 fr. ft.) says the wound was
   in a vital (_maqattal_) part.

   [238] From Nizami's _Khusrau u Shirin_, Lahore lith. ed. p.
   137 l. 8. It is quoted also in the A.N. Bib. Ind. ed. ii, 207
   (H.B. ii, 321). (H.B.).

   [239] _See_ Hughes _Dictionary of Islam s.nn._ Eating and
   Food.

   [240] _Cf._ f. 6b and note. If 'Umar Shaikh were Mahmud's
   full-brother, his name might well appear here.

   [241] _i.e._ "Not a farthing, not a half-penny."

   [242] Here the Mems. enters a statement, not found in the
   Turki text, that Mahmud's dress was elegant and fashionable.

   [243] _n:h:l:m._ My husband has cleared up a mistake (Mems. p.
   28 and _Mems._ i, 54) of supposing this to be the name of an
   animal. It is explained in the A.N. (i, 255. H.B. i, 496) as a
   Badakhshi equivalent of _tasqawal_; _tasqawal_ var.
   _tashqawal_, is explained by the _Farhang-i-azfari_, a
   Turki-Persian Dict. seen in the Mulla Firoz Library of Bombay,
   to mean _rah band kunanda_, the stopping of the road. _Cf._
   J.R.A.S. 1900 p. 137.

   [244] _i.e._ "a collection of poems in the alphabetical order
   of the various end rhymes." (Steingass.)

   [245] At this battle Daulat-shah was present. _Cf._ Browne's
   D.S. for Astarabad p. 523 and for Andikhud p. 532. For this
   and all other references to D.S. and H.S. I am indebted to my
   husband.

   [246] The following dates will help out Babur's brief
   narrative. Mahmud _aet._ 7, was given Astarabad in 864 AH.
   (1459-60 AD.); it was lost to Husain at Jauz-wilayat and
   Mahmud went into Khurasan in 865 AH.; he was restored by his
   father in 866 AH.; on his father's death (873 AH.-1469 AD.) he
   fled to Harat, thence to Samarkand and from there was taken to
   Hisar _aet._ 16. _Cf._ D'Herbelot _s.n._ Abu-sa'ad; H.S. i,
   209; Browne's D.S. p. 522.

   [247] Presumably the "Hindustan the Less" of Clavijo (Markham
   p. 3 and p. 113), approx. Qambar-'ali's districts. Clavijo
   includes Tirmiz under the name.

   [248] Perhaps a Sufi term,--longing for the absent friend. For
   particulars about this man _see_ H.S. ii, 235 and Browne's
   D.S. p. 533.

   [249] Here in the Hai. MS. is one of several blank spaces,
   waiting for information presumably not known to Babur when
   writing. The space will have been in the archetype of the Hai.
   MS. and it makes for the opinion that the Hai. MS. is a direct
   copy of Babur's own. This space is not left in the Elph. MS.
   but that MS. is known from its scribe's note (f. 198) down to
   f. 198 (Hai. MS. f. 243b) to have been copied from "other
   writings" and only subsequent to its f. 198 from Babur's own.
   _Cf._ JRAS 1906 p. 88 and 1907 p. 143.

   [250] The T.R. (p. 330) supplies this name.

   [251] _Cf._ f. 35b. This was a betrothal only, the marriage
   being made in 903 AH. _Cf._ H.S. ii, 260 and Gul-badan's H.N.
   f. 24b.

   [252] Kehr's MS. supplies Ai (Moon) as her name but it has no
   authority. The Elph. MS. has what may be _la nam_, no name, on
   its margin and over _turutunchi_ (4th.) its usual sign of what
   is problematical.

   [253] _See_ H.S. ii, 250. Here Pir-i-Muhammad _Ailchi-bugha_
   was drowned. _Cf._ f. 29.

   [254] Chaghanian is marked in Erskine's (Mems.) map as
   somewhere about the head of (Fr. map 1904) the Ilyak Water, a
   tributary of the Kafir-nighan.

   [255] _i.e._ when Babur was writing in Hindustan.

   [256] For his family _see_ f. 55b note to Yar-'ali _Balal_.

   [257] _ba wujud turkluk muhkam paida kunanda idi._

   [258] Roebuck's _Oriental Proverbs_ (p. 232) explains the
   _five_ of this phrase where _seven_ might be expected, by
   saying that of this Seven days' world (qy. days of Creation)
   one is for birth, another for death, and that thus five only
   are left for man's brief life.

   [259] The cognomen _Ailchi-bugha_, taken with the bearer's
   recorded strength of fist, may mean Strong man of Ailchi (the
   capital of Khutan). One of Timur's commanders bore the name.
   _Cf._ f. 21b for _bughu_ as _athlete_.

   [260] Hazaraspi seems to be Mir Pir Darwesh Hazaraspi. With
   his brother, Mir 'Ali, he had charge of Balkh. _See
   Rauzatu's-safa_ B.M. Add. 23506, f. 242b; Browne's D.S. p.
   432. It may be right to understand a hand-to-hand fight
   between Hazaraspi and Ailchi-bugha. The affair was in 857 AH.
   (1453 AD.).

   [261] _yaraq siz_, perhaps trusting to fisticuffs, perhaps
   without mail. Babur's summary has confused the facts. Muh.
   Ailchi-bugha was sent by Sl. Mahmud Mirza from Hisar with
   1,000 men and did not issue out of Qunduz. (H.S. ii, 251.) His
   death occurred not before 895 AH.

   [262] _See_ T.R. _s.nn._ Mir Ayub and Ayub.

   [263] This passage is made more clear by f. 120b and f. 125b.

   [264] He is mentioned in _'Ali-sher Nawa'i's
   Majalis-i-nafa'is_; _see_ B.M. Add. 7875, f. 278 and Rieu's
   Turkish Catalogue.

   [265] ? full of splits or full handsome.

   [266] This may have occurred after Abu-sa'id Mirza's death
   whose son Aba-bikr was. _Cf._ f. 28. If so, over-brevity has
   obscured the statement.

   [267] _mingligh aildin dur_, perhaps of those whose hereditary
   Command was a Thousand, the head of a Ming (Pers. Hazara),
   _i.e._ of the tenth of a _tuman_.

   [268] _qurghan-ning tashida yangi tam quparib sala dur._ I
   understand, that what was taken was a new circumvallation in
   whole or in part. Such double walls are on record. _Cf._
   Appendix A.

   [269] _bahadurluq aulush_, an actual portion of food.

   [270] _i.e._ either unmailed or actually naked.

   [271] The old English noun _strike_ expresses the purpose of
   the _sar-kob_. It is "an instrument for scraping off what
   rises above the top" (Webster, whose example is grain in a
   measure). The _sar-kob_ is an erection of earth or wood, as
   high as the attacked walls, and it enabled besiegers to strike
   off heads appearing above the ramparts.

   [272] _i.e._ the dislocation due to 'Umar Shaikh's death.

   [273] _Cf._ f. 13. The H.S. (ii, 274) places his son, Mir
   Mughul, in charge, but otherwise agrees with the B.N.

   [274] _Cf._ Clavijo, Markham p. 132. Sir Charles Grandison
   bent the knee on occasions but illustrated MSS. _e.g._ the
   B.M. _Tawarikh-i-guzida Nasrat-nama_ show that Babur would
   kneel down on both knees. _Cf._ f. 123b for the fatigue of the
   genuflection.

   [275] I have translated _kurushub_ thus because it appears to
   me that here and in other places, stress is laid by Babur upon
   the mutual gaze as an episode of a ceremonious interview. The
   verb _kurushmak_ is often rendered by the Persian translators
   as _daryaftan_ and by the L. and E. Memoirs as _to embrace_. I
   have not found in the B.N. warrant for translating it as _to
   embrace_; _quchushmaq_ is Babur's word for this (f. 103).
   _Daryaftan_, taken as to grasp or see with the mind, to
   understand, well expresses mutual gaze and its sequel of
   mutual understanding. Sometimes of course, _kurush_, the
   interview does not imply _kurush_, the silent looking in the
   eyes with mutual understanding; it simply means _se voyer_
   _e.g._ f. 17. The point is thus dwelt upon because the
   frequent mention of an embrace gives a different impression of
   manners from that made by "interview" or words expressing
   mutual gaze.

   [276] _daban._ This word Reclus (vi, 171) quoting from
   Fedschenko, explains as a difficult rocky defile; _art_,
   again, as a dangerous gap at a high elevation; _bel_, as an
   easy low pass; and _kutal_, as a broad opening between low
   hills. The explanation of _kutal_ does not hold good for
   Babur's application of the word (f. 81b) to the Sara-taq.

   [277] _Cf._ f. 4b and note. From Babur's special mention of
   it, it would seem not to be the usual road.

   [278] The spelling of this name is uncertain. Variants are
   many. Concerning the tribe _see_ T.R. p. 165 n.

   [279] Nizamu'd-din 'Ali _Barlas_: _see_ Gul-badan's H.N.
   _s.n._ He served Babur till the latter's death.

   [280] _i.e._ Zu'n-nun or perhaps the garrison.

   [281] _i.e._ down to Shaibani's destruction of Chaghatai rule
   in Tashkint in 1503 AD.

   [282] Elph. MS. f. 23; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 26 and 217 f. 21;
   Mems. p. 35.

   Babur's own affairs form a small part of this year's record;
   the rest is drawn from the H.S. which in its turn, uses
   Babur's f. 34 and f. 37b. Each author words the shared
   material in his own style; one adding magniloquence, the other
   retracting to plain statement, indeed summarizing at times to
   obscurity. Each passes his own judgment on events, _e.g._ here
   Khwand-amir's is more favourable to Husain Bai-qara's conduct
   of the Hisar campaign than Babur's. _Cf._ H.S. ii, 256-60 and
   274.

   [283] This feint would take him from the Oxus.

   [284] Tirmiz to Hisar, 96m. (Reclus vi, 255).

   [285] H.S. Wazr-ab valley. The usual route is up the Kam Rud
   and over the Mura pass to Sara-taq. _Cf._ f. 81b.

   [286] _i.e._ the Hisari mentioned a few lines lower and on f.
   99b. Nothing on f. 99b explains his cognomen.

   [287] The road is difficult. _Cf._ f. 81b.

   [288] Khwand-amir also singles out one man for praise, Sl.
   Mahmud _Mir-i-akhwur_; the two names probably represent one
   person. The sobriquet may refer to skill with a matchlock, to
   top-spinning (_firnagi-baz_) or to some lost joke. (H.S. ii,
   257.)

   [289] This pregnant phrase has been found difficult. It may
   express that Babur assigned the sultans places in their due
   precedence; that he seated them in a row; and that they sat
   cross-legged, as men of rank, and were not made, as inferiors,
   to kneel and sit back on their heels. Out of this last
   meaning, I infer comes the one given by dictionaries, "to sit
   at ease," since the cross-legged posture is less irksome than
   the genuflection, not to speak of the ease of mind produced by
   honour received. _Cf._ f. 18b and note on Ahmad's posture;
   Redhouse _s.nn. baghish_ and _baghdash_; and B.M.
   Tawarikh-i-guzida nasrat-nama, in the illustrations of which
   the chief personage, only, sits cross-legged.

   [290] _siyasat._ My translation is conjectural only.

   [291] _sar-kob._ The old English noun _strike_, "an instrument
   for scraping off what appears above the top," expresses the
   purpose of the wall-high erections of wood or earth (_L.
   agger_) raised to reach what shewed above ramparts. _Cf._
   Webster.

   [292] Presumably lower down the Qunduz Water.

   [293] _auz padshahi u mirzalaridin artib._

   [294] _sic._ Hai. MS.; Elph. MS. "near Taliqan"; some W.-i-B.
   MSS. "Great Garden." Gul-badan mentions a Taliqan Garden.
   Perhaps the Mirza went so far east because, Zu'n-nun being
   with him, he had Qandahar in mind. _Cf._ f. 42b.

   [295] _i.e._ Sayyid Muhammad 'Ali. _See_ f. 15 n. to Sherim.
   Khwaja Changal lies 14 m. below Taliqan on the Taliqan Water.
   (Erskine.)

   [296] f. 27b, second.

   [297] The first was _circa_ 895 AH.-1490 AD. _Cf._ f. 27b.

   [298] Babur's wording suggests that their common homage was
   the cause of Badi'u'z-zaman's displeasure but _see_ f. 41.

   [299] The Mirza had grown up with Hisaris. _Cf._ H.S. ii, 270.

   [300] As the husband of one of the six Badakhshi Begims, he
   was closely connected with local ruling houses. _See_ T.R. p.
   107.

   [301] _i.e._ Muhammad 'Ubaidu'l-lah the elder of _Ahrari's_
   two sons. d. 911 AH. _See Rashahat-i-'ain-alhayat_ (I.O. 633)
   f. 269-75; and _Khizinatu'l-asfiya_ lith. ed. i, 597.

   [302] _Bu yuq tur_, _i.e._ This is not to be.

   [303] d. 908 AH. He was not, it would seem, of the _Ahrari_
   family. His own had provided Pontiffs (_Shaikhu'l-islam_) for
   Samarkand through 400 years. _Cf._ _Shaibani-nama_, Vambery,
   p. 106; also, for his character, p. 96.

   [304] _i.e._ he claimed sanctuary.

   [305] _Cf._ f. 45b and Petis de la Croix's _Histoire de
   Chingiz Khan_ pp. 171 and 227. What Timur's work on the Guk
   Sarai was is a question for archaeologists.

   [306] _i.e._ over the Aitmak Pass. _Cf._ f. 49.

   [307] Hai. MS. _aralighigha_. Elph. MS. _aral_, island.

   [308] _See_ f. 179b for _Bina'i_. Muhammad Salih Mirza
   _Khwarizmi_ is the author of the _Shaibani-nama_.

   [309] Elph. MS. f. 27; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 30b and 217 f. 25;
   Mems. p. 42.

   [310] _i.e._ Circassian. Muhammad Salih (Sh.N. Vambery p. 276
   l. 58) speaks of other Auzbegs using Chirkas swords.

   [311] _airta yazigha._ My translation is conjectural. _Airta_
   implies _i.a._ foresight. _Yazigha_ allows a pun at the
   expense of the sultans; since it can be read both as _to the
   open country_ and as _for their_ (_next_, _airta_) _misdeeds_.
   My impression is that they took the opportunity of being
   outside Samarkand with their men, to leave Bai-sunghar and
   make for Shaibani, then in Turkistan. Muhammad Salih also
   marking the tottering Gate of Sl. 'Ali Mirza, left him now,
   also for Shaibani. (Vambery cap. xv.)

   [312] _aumaq_, to amuse a child in order to keep it from
   crying.

   [313] _i.e._ with Khwaja Yahya presumably. _See_ f. 38.

   [314] This man is mentioned also in the _Tawarikh-i-guzida
   Nasratnama_ B.M. Or. 3222 f. 124b.

   [315] H.S., on the last day of Ramzan (June 28th. 1497 AD.).

   [316] Muhammad _Sighal_ appears to have been a marked man. I
   quote from the T.G.N.N. (_see supra_), f. 123b foot, the
   information that he was the grandson of Ya'qub Beg. Zenker
   explains _Sighali_ as the name of a Chaghatai family. An
   _Ayub-i-Ya'qub Begchik Mughul_ may be an uncle. See f. 43 for
   another grandson.

   [317] _baz'i kirkan-kint-kisakka bash-siz-qilghan Mughullarni
   tutub._ I take the word _kisak_ in this highly idiomatic
   sentence to be a diminutive of _kis_, old person, on the
   analogy of _mir_, _mirak_, _mard_, _mardak_. [The H.S. uses
   _Kisak_ (ii, 261) as a proper noun.] The alliteration in _kaf_
   and the mighty adjective here are noticeable.

   [318] Qasim feared to go amongst the Mughuls lest he should
   meet retaliatory death. _Cf._ f. 99b.

   [319] This appears from the context to be Yam (Jam) -bai and
   not the Djouma (Jam) of the Fr. map of 1904, lying farther
   south. The Avenue named seems likely to be Timur's of f. 45b
   and to be on the direct road for Khujand. _See_ Schuyler i,
   232.

   [320] _bughan buyini._ W.-i-B. 215, _yan_, thigh, and 217
   _gardan_, throat. I am in doubt as to the meaning of _bughan_;
   perhaps the two words stand for joint at the nape of the neck.
   Khwaja-i-kalan was one of seven brothers, six died in Babur's
   service, he himself served till Babur's death.

   [321] _Cf._ f. 48.

   [322] Khorochkine (Radlov's _Receuil d'Itineraires_ p. 241)
   mentions Pul-i-mougak, a great stone bridge thrown across a
   deep ravine, east of Samarkand. _For_ Kul-i-maghak, deep pool,
   or pool of the fosse, _see_ f. 48b.

   [323] From Khwand-amir's differing account of this affair, it
   may be surmised that those sending the message were not
   treacherous; but the message itself was deceiving inasmuch as
   it did not lead Babur to expect opposition. _Cf._ f. 43 and
   note.

   [324] Of this nick-name several interpretations are allowed by
   the dictionaries.

   [325] _See_ Schuyler i, 268 for an account of this beautiful
   Highland village.

   [326] Here Babur takes up the thread, dropped on f. 36, of the
   affairs of the Khurasani mirzas. He draws on other sources
   than the H.S.; perhaps on his own memory, perhaps on
   information given by Khurasanis with him in Hindustan _e.g._
   Husain's grandson. _See_ f. 167b. _Cf._ H.S. ii, 261.

   [327] _baghishlab tur._ _Cf._ f. 34 note to _baghish da_.

   [328] _Bu sozlar aunulung._ Some W.-i-B. MSS., _Faramosh
   bakunid_ for _nakunid_, thus making the Mirza not acute but
   rude, and destroying the point of the story _i.e._ that the
   Mirza pretended so to have forgotten as to have an empty mind.
   Khwand-amir states that 'Ali-sher prevailed at first; his
   tears therefore may have been of joy at the success of his
   pacifying mission.

   [329] _i.e._ B.Z.'s father, Husain, against Mu'min's father,
   B.Z. and Husain's son, Muzaffar Husain against B.Z.'s son
   Mu'min;--a veritable conundrum.

   [330] Garzawan lies west of Balkh. Concerning Pul-i-chiragh
   Col. Grodekoff's _Ride to Harat_ (Marvin p. 103 ff.) gives
   pertinent information. It has also a map showing the
   Pul-i-chiragh meadow. The place stands at the mouth of a
   triply-bridged defile, but the name appears to mean Gate of
   the Lamp (_cf._ Gate of Timur), and not Bridge of the Lamp,
   because the H.S. and also modern maps write _bil_ (_bel_),
   pass, where the Turki text writes _pul_, bridge, narrows,
   pass.

   The lamp of the name is one at the shrine of a saint, just at
   the mouth of the defile. It was alight when Col. Grodekoff
   passed in 1879 and to it, he says, the name is due now--as it
   presumably was 400 years ago and earlier.

   [331] Khwand-amir heard from the Mirza on the spot, when later
   in his service, that he was let down the precipice by help of
   turban-sashes tied together.

   [332] _yikit yilang u yayaq yaling_; a jingle made by due
   phonetic change of vowels; a play too on _yalang_, which first
   means stripped _i.e._ robbed and next unmailed, perhaps
   sometimes bare-bodied in fight.

   [333] _qush-khana._ As the place was outside the walls, it may
   be a good hawking ground and not a falconry.

   [334] The H.S. mentions (ii, 222) a Sl. Ahmad of Char-shamba,
   a town mentioned _e.g._ by Grodekoff p. 123. It also spoils
   Babur's coincidence by fixing Tuesday, Shab'an 29th. for the
   battle. Perhaps the commencement of the Muhammadan day at
   sunset, allows of both statements.

   [335] Elph. MS. f. 30b; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 34 and 217 f. 26b;
   Mems. p. 46.

   The abruptness of this opening is due to the interposition of
   Sl. Husain M.'s affairs between Babur's statement on f. 41
   that he returned from Aurgut and this first of 903 AH. that on
   return he encamped in Qulba.

   [336] _See_ f. 48b.

   [337] _i.e._ Chupan-ata; _see_ f. 45 and note.

   [338] _Aughlaqchi_, the Grey Wolfer of f. 22.

   [339] A sobriquet, the _suppliant_ or perhaps something having
   connection with musk. H.S. ii, 278, son of H.D.

   [340] _i.e._ grandson (of Muhammad Sighal). _Cf._ f. 39.

   [341] This seeming sobriquet may show the man's trade. _Kal_
   is a sort of biscuit; _qashuq_ may mean a spoon.

   [342] The H.S. does not ascribe treachery to those inviting
   Babur into Samarkand but attributes the murder of his men to
   others who fell on them when the plan of his admission became
   known. The choice here of "town-rabble" for retaliatory death
   supports the account of H.S. ii.

   [343] "It was the end of September or beginning of October"
   (Erskine).

   [344] _awi u kipa yirlar._ _Awi_ is likely to represent
   _kibitkas_. For _kipa yir_, _see_ Zenker p. 782.

   [345] Interesting reference may be made, amongst the many
   books on Samarkand, to Sharafu'd-din 'Ali _Yazdi's
   Zafar-nama_ Bib. Ind. ed. i, 300, 781, 799, 800 and ii, 6,
   194, 596 etc.; to Ruy Gonzalves di Clavijo's _Embassy to
   Timur_ (Markham) cap. vi and vii; to Ujfalvy's _Turkistan_ ii,
   79 and Madame Ujfalvy's _De Paris a Samarcande_ p. 161,--these
   two containing a plan of the town; to Schuyler's _Turkistan_;
   to Kostenko's _Turkistan Gazetteer_ i, 345; to Reclus, vi, 270
   and plan; and to a beautiful work of the St. Petersburg
   Archaeological Society, _Les Mosquees de Samarcande_, of which
   the B.M. has a copy.

   [346] This statement is confused in the Elp. and Hai. MSS. The
   second appears to give, by abjad, lat. 40 deg. 6" and long.
   99'. Mr. Erskine (p. 48) gives lat. 39' 57" and long. 99' 16",
   noting that this is according to Ulugh Beg's Tables and that
   the long. is calculated from Ferro. The Ency. Br. of 1910-11
   gives lat. 39' 39" and long. 66' 45".

   [347] The enigmatical cognomen, Protected Town, is of early
   date; it is used _i.a._ by Ibn Batuta in the 14th. century.
   Babur's tense refers it to the past. The town had frequently
   changed hands in historic times before he wrote. The name may
   be due to immunity from damage to the buildings in the town.
   Even Chingiz Khan's capture (1222 AD.) left the place
   well-preserved and its lands cultivated, but it inflicted
   great loss of men. _Cf._ Schuyler i, 236 and his authorities,
   especially Bretschneider.

   [348] Here is a good example of Babur's caution in narrative.
   He does not affirm that Samarkand became Musalman, or
   (_infra_) that Qusam ibn 'Abbas went, or that Alexander
   founded but in each case uses the presumptive past tense,
   resp. _bulghan dur_, _barghan dur_, _bina qilghan dur_, thus
   showing that he repeats what may be inferred or presumed and
   not what he himself asserts.

   [349] _i.e._ of Muhammad. See Z.N. ii, 193.

   [350] _i.e._ Fat Village. His text misleading him, Mr. Erskine
   makes here the useful irrelevant note that Persians and Arabs
   call the place Samar-qand and Turks, Samar-kand, the former
   using _qaf_ (q), the latter _kaf_ (k). Both the Elph. and the
   Hai. MSS. write Samarqand.

   For use of the name Fat Village, _see_ Clavijo (Markham p.
   170), Simesquinte, and Bretschneider's _Mediaeval Geography_
   pp. 61, 64, 66 and 163.

   [351] _qadam._ Kostenko (i, 344) gives 9 m. as the
   circumference of the old walls and 1-2/3m. as that of the
   citadel. _See_ Mde. Ujfalvy p. 175 for a picture of the walls.

   [352] _Ma'lum aimas kim muncha paida bulmish bulghai_; an
   idiomatic phrase.

   [353] d. 333 AH. (944 AD.). _See_ D'Herbelot art. Matridi p.
   572.

   [354] _See_ D'Herbelot art. Aschair p. 124.

   [355] Abu 'Abdu'l-lah bin Isma'ilu'l-jausi b. 194 AH. d. 256
   AH. (810-870 AD.). _See_ D'Herbelot art. Bokhari p. 191, art.
   Giorag p. 373, and art. Sahihu'l-bokhari p. 722. He passed a
   short period, only, of his life in Khartank, a suburb of
   Samarkand.

   [356] _Cf._ f. 3b and n. 1.

   [357] This though 2475 ft. above the sea is only some 300 ft.
   above Samarkand. It is the Chupan-ata (Father of Shepherds) of
   maps and on it Timur built a shrine to the local patron of
   shepherds. The Zar-afshan, or rather, its Qara-su arm, flows
   from the east of the Little Hill and turns round it to flow
   west. Babur uses the name _Kohik Water_ loosely; _e.g._ for
   the whole Zar-afshan when he speaks (_infra_) of cutting off
   the Dar-i-gham canal but for its southern arm only, the
   Qara-su in several places, and once, for the Dar-i-gham canal.
   _See_ f. 49b and Kostenko i. 192.

   [358] _rud._ The Zar-afshan has a very rapid current. _See_
   Kostenko i, 196, and for the canal, i, 174. The name
   Dar-i-gham is used also for a musical note having charm to
   witch away grief; and also for a town noted for its wines.

   [359] What this represents can only be guessed; perhaps 150 to
   200 miles. Abu'l-fida (Reinaud ii, 213) quotes Ibn Haukal as
   saying that from Bukhara up to "Bottam" (this seems to be
   where the Zar-afshan emerges into the open land) is eight
   days' journey through an unbroken tangle of verdure and
   gardens.

   [360] _See_ Schuyler i, 286 on the apportionment of water to
   Samarkand and Bukhara.

   [361] It is still grown in the Samarkand region, and in Mr.
   Erskine's time a grape of the same name was cultivated in
   Aurangabad of the Deccan.

   [362] _i.e._ _Shahrukhi_, Timur's grandson, through Shahrukh.
   It may be noted here that Babur never gives Timur any other
   title than Beg and that he styles all Timurids, Mirza
   (Mir-born).

   [363] Mr. Erskine here points out the contradiction between
   the statements (i) of Ibn Haukal, writing, in 367 AH. (977
   AD.), of Samarkand as having a citadel (_ark_), an outer-fort
   (_qurghan_) and Gates in both circumvallations; and (2) of
   Sharafu'd-din _Yazdi_ (Z.N.) who mentions that when, in
   Timur's day, the Getes besieged Samarkand, it had neither
   walls nor gates. _See_ Ouseley's Ibn Haukal p. 253; Z.N. Bib.
   Ind. ed. i, 109 and Petis de la Croix's Z.N. (_Histoire de
   Timur Beg_) i, 91.

   [364] Here still lies the Ascension Stone, the _Guk-tash_, a
   block of greyish white marble. Concerning the date of the
   erection of the building and meaning of its name, _see_ _e.g._
   Petis de la Croix's _Histoire de Chingiz Khan_ p. 171; Mems.
   p. 40 note; and Schuyler _s.n._

   [365] This seems to be the Bibi Khanim Mosque. The author of
   _Les Mosquees de Samarcande_ states that Timur built Bibi
   Khanim and the Gur-i-amir (Amir's tomb); decorated
   Shah-i-zinda and set up the Chupan-ata shrine. _Cf._ f. 46 and
   note to Jahangir Mirza, as to the Gur-i-amir.

   [366] Cap. II. Quoting from Sale's _Qur'an_ (i, 24) the verse
   is, "And Ibrahim and Isma'il raised the foundations of the
   house, saying, 'Lord! accept it from us, for Thou art he who
   hearest and knowest; Lord! make us also resigned to Thee, and
   show us Thy holy ceremonies, and be turned to us, for Thou art
   easy to be reconciled, and merciful.'"

   [367] or, _buland_, Garden of the Height or High Garden. The
   Turki texts have what can be read as _buldi_ but the Z.N.
   both when describing it (ii, 194) and elsewhere (_e.g._ ii,
   596) writes _buland_. _Buldi_ may be a clerical error for
   _bulandi_, the height, a name agreeing with the position of
   the garden.

   [368] In the Heart-expanding Garden, the Spanish Ambassadors
   had their first interview with Timur. _See_ Clavijo (Markham
   p. 130). Also the Z.N. ii, 6 for an account of its
   construction.

   [369] Judging from the location of the gardens and of Babur's
   camps, this appears to be the Avenue mentioned on f. 39b and
   f. 40.

   [370] _See_ _infra_ f. 48 and note.

   [371] The Plane-tree Garden. This seems to be Clavijo's
   _Bayginar_, laid out shortly before he saw it (Markham p.
   136).

   [372] The citadel of Samarkand stands high; from it the ground
   slopes west and south; on these sides therefore gardens
   outside the walls would lie markedly below the outer-fort
   (_tash-qurghan_). Here as elsewhere the second W.-i-B. reads
   _stone_ for _outer_ (_Cf._ index _s.n._ _tash_). For the
   making of the North garden _see_ Z.N. i, 799.

   [373] Timur's eldest son, d. 805 AH. (1402 AD.), before his
   father, therefore. Babur's wording suggests that in his day,
   the Gur-i-amir was known as the Madrasa. _See_ as to the
   buildings Z.N. i, 713 and ii, 492, 595, 597, 705; Clavijo
   (Markham p. 164 and p. 166); and _Les Mosquees de Samarcande_.

   [374] Hindustan would make a better climax here than Samarkand
   does.

   [375] These appear to be pictures or ornamentations of carved
   wood. Redhouse describes _islimi_ as a special kind of
   ornamentation in curved lines, similar to Chinese methods.

   [376] _i.e._ the Black Stone (_ka'ba_) at Makkah to which
   Musalmans turn in prayer.

   [377] As ancient observatories were themselves the instruments
   of astronomical observation, Babur's wording is correct.
   Aulugh Beg's great quadrant was 180 ft. high; Abu-muhammad
   _Khujandi's_ sextant had a radius of 58 ft. Ja'i Singh made
   similar great instruments in Ja'ipur, Dihli has others. _Cf._
   Greaves Misc. Works i, 50; Mems. p. 51 note; _Aiyin-i-akbari_
   (Jarrett) ii, 5 and note; Murray's Hand-book to Bengal p. 331;
   Indian Gazetteer xiii, 400.

   [378] b. 597 AH. d. 672 AH. (1201-1274 AD.). _See_
   D'Herbelot's art. Nasir-i-din p. 662; Abu'l-fida (Reinaud,
   Introduction i, cxxxviii) and Beale's Biographical Dict.
   _s.n._

   [379] a grandson of Chingiz Khan, d. 663 AH. (1265 AD.). The
   cognomen _Ail-khani_ (_Il-khani_) may mean Khan of the Tribe.

   [380] Harunu'r-rashid's second son; d. 218 AH. (833 AD.).

   [381] Mr. Erskine notes that this remark would seem to fix the
   date at which Babur wrote it as 934 AH. (1527 AD.), that being
   the 1584th. year of the era of Vikramaditya, and therefore at
   three years before Babur's death. (The Vikramaditya era began
   57 BC.)

   [382] _Cf._ index _s.n._ _tash_.

   [383] This remark may refer to the 34 miles between the town
   and the quarries of its building stone. _See_ f. 49 and note
   to Aitmak Pass.

   [384] Steingass, any support for the back in sitting, a low
   wall in front of a house. _See_ Vullers p. 148 and
   _Burhan-i-qati'_; p. 119. Perhaps a _dado_.

   [385] _beg u begat, bagh u baghcha._

   [386] Four Gardens, a quadrilateral garden, laid out in four
   plots. The use of the name has now been extended for any
   well-arranged, large garden, especially one belonging to a
   ruler (Erskine).

   [387] As two of the trees mentioned here are large, it may be
   right to translate _narwan_, not by pomegranate, but as the
   hard-wood elm, Madame Ujfalvy's '_karagatche_' (p. 168 and p.
   222). The name _qara-yighach_ (_karagatch_), dark tree, is
   given to trees other than this elm on account of their deep
   shadow.

   [388] Now a common plan indeed! _See_ Schuyler i, 173.

   [389] _juwaz-i-kaghazlar_ (_ning_) _su'i_, _i.e._ the water of
   the paper-(pulping)-mortars. Owing to the omission from some
   MSS. of the word _su_, water, _juwaz_ has been mistaken for a
   kind of paper. _See_ Mems. p. 52 and _Mems_. i, 102; A.Q.R.
   July 1910, p. 2, art. Paper-mills of Samarkand (H.B.); and
   Madame Ujfalvy p. 188. Kostenko, it is to be noted, does not
   include paper in his list (i, 346) of modern manufactures of
   Samarkand.

   [390] Mine of mud or clay. My husband has given me support for
   reading _gil_, and not _gul_, rose;--(1) In two good MSS. of
   the W.-i-B. the word is pointed with _kasra_, _i.e._ as for
   _gil_, clay; and (2) when describing a feast held in the
   garden by Timur, the Z.N. says the mud-mine became a
   rose-mine, _shuda Kan-i-gil Kan-i-gul_. [Mr. Erskine refers
   here to Petis de la Croix's _Histoire de Timur Beg_ (_i.e._
   Z.N.) i, 96 and ii, 133 and 421.]

   [391] _qurugh._ Vullers, classing the word as Arabic, Zenker,
   classing it as Eastern Turki, and Erskine (p. 42 n.) explain
   this as land reserved for the summer encampment of princes.
   Shaw (Voc. p. 155), deriving it from _qurumaq_, to frighten,
   explains it as a fenced field of growing grain.

   [392] _Cf._ f. 40. There it is located at one _yighach_ and
   here at 3 _kurohs_ from the town.

   [393] _taur._ _Cf._ Zenker _s.n._ I understand it to lie, as
   Khan Yurti did, in a curve of the river.

   [394] 162 m. by rail.

   [395] _Cf._ f. 3.

   [396] _tirisini suiub._ The verb _suimak_, to despoil, seems
   to exclude the common plan of stoning the fruit. _Cf._ f. 3b,
   _danasini alip_, taking out the stones.

   [397] _Min Samarkandta aul (or auwal) aichkanda Bukhara
   chaghirlar ni aichar aidim._ These words have been understood
   to refer to Babur's initial drinking of wine but this reading
   is negatived by his statement (f. 189) that he first drank
   wine in Harat in 912 AH. I understand his meaning to be that
   the wine he drank in Samarkand was Bukhara wine. The time
   cannot have been earlier than 917 AH. The two words _aul
   aichkanda_, I read as parallel to _aul_ (_baghri qara_) (f.
   280) 'that drinking,' 'that bird,' _i.e._ of those other
   countries, not of Hindustan where he wrote.

   It may be noted that Babur's word for wine, _chaghir_, may not
   always represent wine of the grape but may include wine of the
   apple and pear (cider and perry), and other fruits. Cider, its
   name seeming to be a descendant of _chaghir_, was introduced
   into England by Crusaders, its manufacture having been learned
   from Turks in Palestine.

   [398] 48 m. 3 fur. by way of the Aitmak Pass (mod. Takhta
   Qarachi), and, Reclus (vi, 256) Buz-gala-khana, Goat-house.

   [399] The name Aitmak, to build, appears to be due to the
   stone quarries on the range. The pass-head is 34 m. from
   Samarkand and 3000 ft. above it. _See_ Kostenko ii, 115 and
   Schuyler ii, 61 for details of the route.

   [400] The description of this hall is difficult to translate.
   Clavijo (Markham 124) throws light on the small recesses.
   _Cf._ Z.N. i, 781 and 300 and Schuyler ii, 68.

   [401] The Taq-i-kisri, below Baghdad, is 105 ft. high, 84 ft.
   span and 150 ft. in depth (Erskine).

   [402] _Cf._ f. 46. Babur does not mention that Timur's father
   was buried at Kesh. Clavijo (Markham p. 123) says it was
   Timur's first intention to be buried near his father, in Kesh.

   [403] Abu'l-fida (Reinaud II, ii, 21) says that Nasaf is the
   Arabic and Nakhshab the local name for Qarshi. Ibn Haukal
   (Ouseley p. 260) writes Nakhshab.

   [404] This word has been translated _burial-place_ and
   _cimetiere_ but Qarshi means castle, or royal-residence. The
   Z.N. (i, 111) says that Qarshi is an equivalent for Ar.
   _qasr_, palace, and was so called, from one built there by
   Qublai Khan (d. 1294 AD.). Perhaps Babur's word is connected
   with Gurkhan, the title of sovereigns in Khutan, and means
   great or royal-house, _i.e._ palace.

   [405] 94 m. 6-1/2 fur. via Jam (Kostenko i, 115.)

   [406] See Appendix B.

   [407] some 34 m. (Kostenko i, 196). Schuyler mentions that he
   heard in Qara-kul a tradition that the district, in bye-gone
   days, was fertilized from the Sir.

   [408] _Cf._ f. 45.

   [409] By _abjad_ the words _'Abbas kasht_ yield 853. The date
   of the murder was Ramzan 9, 853 AH. (Oct. 27th. 1449 AD.).

   [410] This couplet is quoted in the _Rauzatu's-safa_ (lith.
   ed. vi, f. 234 foot) and in the H.S. ii, 44. It is said, in
   the R.S. to be by Nizami and to refer to the killing by
   Shiruya of his father, Khusrau Parwiz in 7 AH. (628 AD.). The
   H.S. says that 'Abdu'l-latif constantly repeated the couplet,
   after he had murdered his father. [See also Daulat Shah
   (Browne p. 356 and p. 366.) H.B.]

   [411] By _abjad_, _Baba Husain kasht_ yields 854. The death
   was on Rabi' I, 26, 854 AH. (May 9th. 1450 AD.). See R.S. vi,
   235 for an account of this death.

   [412] This overstates the time; dates shew 1 yr. 1 mth. and a
   few days.

   [413] _i.e._ The Khan of the Mughuls, Babur's uncle.

   [414] Elph. MS. _aurmaghailar_, might not turn; Hai. and
   Kehr's MSS. (_sar ba bad_) _birmaghailar_, might not give.
   Both metaphors seem drawn from the protective habit of man and
   beast of turning the back to a storm-wind.

   [415] _i.e._ betwixt two waters, the Miyan-i-du-ab of India.
   Here, it is the most fertile triangle of land in Turkistan
   (Reclus, vi, 199), enclosed by the eastern mountains, the
   Narin and the Qara-su; Rabatik-aurchini, its alternative name,
   means Small Station sub-district. From the uses of _aurchin_ I
   infer that it describes a district in which there is no
   considerable head-quarters fort.

   [416] _i.e._ his own, Qutluq-nigar Khanim and hers,
   Aisan-daulat Begim, with perhaps other widows of his father,
   probably Shah Sultan Begim.

   [417] _Cf._ f. 16 for almost verbatim statements.

   [418] Blacksmith's Dale. _Ahangaran_ appears corrupted in
   modern maps to _Angren_. _See_ H.S. ii, 293 for Khwand-amir's
   wording of this episode.

   [419] _Cf._ f. 1b and Kostenko i, 101.

   [420] _i.e._ Khan Uncle (Mother's brother).

   [421] n.w. of the Sang ferry over the Sir.

   [422] perhaps, messenger of good tidings.

   [423] This man's family connections are interesting. He was
   'Ali-shukr Beg _Baharlu's_ grandson, nephew therefore of Pasha
   Begim; through his son, Saif-'ali Beg, he was the grandfather
   of Bairam Khan-i-khanan and thus the g.g.f. of 'Abdu'r-rahim
   Mirza, the translator of the Second _Waqi'at-i-baburi_. _See_
   Firishta lith. ed. p. 250.

   [424] Babur's (step-)grandmother, co-widow with Aisan-daulat
   of Yunas Khan and mother of Ahmad and Mahmud _Chaghatai_.

   [425] Here the narrative picks up the thread of Khusrau Shah's
   affairs, dropped on f. 44.

   [426] _ming tuman fulus_, _i.e._ a thousand
   sets-of-ten-thousand small copper coins. Mr. Erskine (Mems. p.
   61) here has a note on coins. As here the _tuman_ does not
   seem to be a coin but a number, I do not reproduce it,
   valuable as it is _per se_.

   [427] _ariqlar_; this the annotator of the Elph. MS. has
   changed to _ashliq_, provisions, corn.

   [428] _Saman-chi_ may mean Keeper of the Goods. Tingri-birdi,
   Theodore, is the purely Turki form of the Khudai-birdi,
   already met with several times in the B.N.

   [429] Bast (Bost) is on the left bank of the Halmand.

   [430] _Cf._ f. 56b.

   [431] known as _Kabuli_. He was a son of Abu-sa'id and thus an
   uncle of Babur. He ruled Kabul and Ghazni from a date previous
   to his father's death in 873 AH. (perhaps from the time 'Umar
   Shaikh was _not_ sent there, in 870 AH. _See_ f. 6b) to his
   death in 907 AH. Babur was his virtual successor in Kabul, in
   910 AH.

   [432] Elph. MS. f. 42; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 47b and 217 f. 38;
   Mems. p. 63. Babur here resumes his own story, interrupted on
   f. 56.

   [433] _aish achilmadi_, a phrase recurring on f. 59b foot. It
   appears to imply, of trust in Providence, what the English
   "The way was not opened," does. _Cf._ f. 60b for another
   example of trust, there clinching discussion whether to go or
   not to go to Marghinan.

   [434] _i.e._ _Ahrari_. He had been dead some 10 years. The
   despoilment of his family is mentioned on f. 23b.

   [435] _fatratlar_, here those due to the deaths of Ahmad and
   Mahmud with their sequel of unstable government in Samarkand.

   [436] _Aughlaqchi_, the player of the kid-game, the
   gray-wolfer. Yar-yilaq will have gone with the rest of
   Samarkand into 'Ali's hands in Rajab 903 AH. (March 1498).
   Contingent terms between him and Babur will have been made;
   Yusuf may have recognized some show of right under them, for
   allowing Babur to occupy Yar-yilaq.

   [437] _i.e._ after 933 AH. _Cf._ f. 46b and note concerning
   the Bikramaditya era. See index _s.n._ Ahmad-i-yusuf and H.S.
   ii, 293.

   [438] This plural, unless ironical, cannot be read as
   honouring 'Ali; Babur uses the honorific plural most rarely
   and specially, _e.g._ for saintly persons, for The Khan and
   for elder women-kinsfolk.

   [439] _bir yarim yil._ Dates shew this to mean six months. It
   appears a parallel expression to Pers. _hasht-yak_,
   one-eighth.

   [440] H.S. ii, 293, in place of these two quotations, has a
   _misra'_,--_Na ray safar kardan u na ruy iqamat_, (Nor resolve
   to march, nor face to stay).

   [441] _i.e._ in Samarkand.

   [442] Point to point, some 145 m. but much further by the
   road. Tang-ab seems likely to be one of the head-waters of
   Khwaja Bikargan-water. Thence the route would be by
   unfrequented hill-tracks, each man leading his second horse.

   [443] _tun yarimi naqara waqtida._ _Tun yarimi_ seems to mean
   half-dark, twilight. Here it cannot mean mid-night since this
   would imply a halt of twelve hours and Babur says no halt was
   made. The drum next following mid-day is the one beaten at
   sunset.

   [444] The voluntary prayer, offered when the sun has well
   risen, fits the context.

   [445] I understand that the obeisance was made in the
   Gate-house, between the inner and outer doors.

   [446] This seeming sobriquet may be due to eloquence or to
   good looks.

   [447] _qara tiyaq._ _Cf._ f. 63 where black bludgeons are used
   by a red rabble.

   [448] He was head-man of his clan and again with Shaibani in
   909 AH. (Sh. N. Vambery, p. 272). Erskine (p. 67) notes that
   the Manghits are the modern Nogais.

   [449] _i.e._ in order to allow for the here very swift
   current. The H.S. varying a good deal in details from the B.N.
   gives the useful information that Auzun Hasan's men knew
   nothing of the coming of the Tashkint Mughuls.

   [450] _Cf._ f. 4b and App. A. as to the position of Akhsi.

   [451] _barini qirdilar._ After this statement the five
   exceptions are unexpected; Babur's wording is somewhat
   confused here.

   [452] _i.e._ in Hindustan.

   [453] Tambal would be the competitor for the second place.

   [454] 47 m. 4-1/2 fur.

   [455] Babur had been about two lunar years absent from Andijan
   but his loss of rule was of under 16 months.

   [456] A scribe's note entered here on the margin of the Hai.
   MS. is to the effect that certain words are not in the noble
   archetype (_nashka sharif_); this supports other circumstances
   which make for the opinion that this Codex is a direct copy of
   Babur's own MS. _See_ Index s.n. Hai. MS. and JRAS 1906, p.
   87.

   [457] _Musalman_ here seems to indicate mental contrast with
   Pagan practices or neglect of Musalman observances amongst
   Mughuls.

   [458] _i.e._ of his advisors and himself.

   [459] _Cf._ f. 34.

   [460] _circa_ 933 AH. All the revolts chronicled by Babur as
   made against himself were under Mughul leadership. Long Hasan,
   Tambal and 'Ali-dost were all Mughuls. The worst was that of
   914 AH. (1518 AD.) in which Quli _Chunaq_ disgraced himself
   (T.R. p. 357).

   [461] _Chunaq_ may indicate the loss of one ear.

   [462] _Buqaq_, amongst other meanings, has that of _one who
   lies in ambush_.

   [463] This remark has interest because it shews that (as Babur
   planned to write more than is now with the B.N. MSS.) the
   first gap in the book (914 AH. to 925 AH.) is accidental. His
   own last illness is the probable cause of this gap. _Cf._ JRAS
   1905, p. 744. Two other passages referring to unchronicled
   matters are one about the Bagh-i-safa (f. 224), and one about
   Sl. 'Ali Taghai (f. 242).

   [464] I surmise Ailaish to be a local name of the Qara-darya
   affluent of the Sir.

   [465] _aiki auch naubat chapqulab bash chiqarghali quimas._ I
   cannot feel so sure as Mr. E. and M. de C. were that the man's
   head held fast, especially as for it to fall would make the
   better story.

   [466] Tuqa appears to have been the son of a Taghai, perhaps
   of Sherim; his name may imply blood-relationship.

   [467] For the verb _awimaq_, to trepan, _see_ f. 67 note 5.

   [468] The Fr. map of 1904 shews a hill suiting Babur's
   location of this Hill of Pleasure.

   [469] A place near Kabul bears the same name; in both the name
   is explained by a legend that there Earth opened a refuge for
   forty menaced daughters.

   [470] Elph. MS. f. 47b; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 53 and 217 f. 43;
   Mems. p. 70.

   [471] From Andijan to Aush is a little over 33 miles. Tambal's
   road was east of Babur's and placed him between Andijan and
   Auzkint where was the force protecting his family.

   [472] mod. Mazy, on the main Aush-Kashghar road.

   [473] _ab-duzd_; de C. i, 144, _prise d'eau_.

   [474] This simile seems the fruit of experience in Hindustan.
   _See_ f. 333, concerning Chanderi.

   [475] These two Mughuls rebelled in 914 AH. with Sl. Quli
   _Chunaq_ (T.R. _s.n._).

   [476] _awidi._ The head of Captain Dow, fractured at Chunar by
   a stone flung at it, was trepanned (_Saiyar-i-muta'akhirin_,
   p. 577 and Irvine l .c. p. 283). Yar-'ali was alive in 910 AH.
   He seems to be the father of the great Bairam Khan-i-khanan of
   Akbar's reign.

   [477] _chasht-gah_; midway between sunrise and noon.

   [478] _tauri_; because providing prisoners for exchange.

   [479] _shakh tutulur idi_, perhaps a palisade.

   [480] _i.e._ from Hisar where he had placed him in 903 AH.

   [481] _quba yuzluq_ (f. 6b and note 4). The Turkman features
   would be a maternal inheritance.

   [482] He is "Saifi Maulana 'Aruzi" of Rieu's Pers. Cat. p.
   525. _Cf._ H.S. ii, 341. His book, _'Aruz-i-saifi_ has been
   translated by Blochmann and by Ranking.

   [483] _namaz autar idi._ I understand some irony from this (de
   Meynard's Dict. _s.n._ _autmaq_).

   [484] The _matla'_ of poems serve as an index of first lines.

   [485] _Cf._ f. 30.

   [486] _Cf._ f. 37b.

   [487] _i.e._ scout and in times of peace, huntsman. On the
   margin of the Elph. Codex here stands a note, mutilated in
   rebinding;--_Sl. Ahmad pidr-i-Quch Beg ast * * *
   pidr-i-Sher-afgan u Sher-afgan * * * u Sl. Husain Khan * * *
   Quch Beg ast. Hamesha * * * dar khana Shaham Khan * * *_.

   [488] _pitildi_; W.-i-B. _navishta shud_, words indicating the
   use by Babur of a written record.

   [489] _Cf._ f. 6b and note and f. 17 and note.

   [490] _tuluk_; _i.e._ other food than grain. Fruit, fresh or
   preserved, being a principal constituent of food in Central
   Asia, _tuluk_ will include several, but chiefly melons. "Les
   melons constituent presque seuls vers le fin d'ete, la
   nourriture des classes pauvres" (Th. Radloff. l.c. p. 343).

   [491] _Cf._ f. 6b and note.

   [492] _tulki_ var. _tulku_, the yellow fox. Following this
   word the Hai. MS. has _u dar kamin dur_ instead of _u rangin
   dur_.

   [493] _bi hadd_; with which I.O. 215 agrees but I.O. 217 adds
   _farbih_, fat, which is right in fact (f. 2b) but less
   pertinent here than an unlimited quantity.

   [494] Here a pun on _'ajab_ may be read.

   [495] _Cf._ f. 15, note to Taghai.

   [496] Apparently not the usual Kindir-lik pass but one n.w. of
   Kasan.

   [497] A ride of at least 40 miles, followed by one of 20 to
   Kasan.

   [498] _Cf._ f. 72 and f. 72b. Tilba would seem to have left
   Tambal.

   [499] _Tambalning qarasi._

   [500] _i.e._ the Other (Mid-afternoon) Prayer.

   [501] _atining buinini qatib._ _Qatmaq_ has also the
   here-appropriate meaning of _to stiffen_.

   [502] _ailik qushmaq_, _i.e._ Babur's men with the Kasan
   garrison. But the two W.-i-B. write merely _dast burd_ and
   _dast kardan_.

   [503] The meaning of _Ghazna_ here is uncertain. The Second
   W.-i-B. renders it by ar. _qaryat_ but up to this point Babur
   has not used _qaryat_ for _village_. Ghazna-namangan cannot be
   modern Namangan. It was 2 m. from Archian where Tambal was,
   and Babur went to Bishkharan to be between Tambal and Machami,
   coming from the south. Archian and Ghazna-namangan seem both
   to have been n. or n.w. of Bishkaran (see maps).

   It may be mentioned that at Archian, in 909 AH. the two
   Chaghatai Khans and Babur were defeated by Shaibani.

   [504] _bizlar._ The double plural is rare with Babur; he
   writes _biz_, we, when action is taken in common; he rarely
   uses _min_, I, with autocratic force; his phrasing is largely
   impersonal, _e.g._ with rare exceptions, he writes the
   impersonal passive verb.

   [505] _bashlighlar._ Teufel was of opinion that this word is
   not used as a noun in the B.N. In this he is mistaken; it is
   so used frequently, as here, in apposition. _See_ ZDMG,
   xxxvii, art. Babur und Abu'l-fazl.

   [506] _Cf._ f. 54 foot.

   [507] _Cf._ f. 20. She may have come from Samarkand and 'Ali's
   household or from Kesh and the Tarkhan households.

   [508] _Cf._ f. 26 l. 2 for the same phrase.

   [509] He is the author of the _Shaibani-nama_.

   [510] _dang_ and _fils_ (_infra_) are small copper coins.

   [511] _Cf._ f. 25 l. 1 and note 1.

   [512] Probably the poet again; he had left Harat and was in
   Samarkand (Sh. N. Vambery, p. 34 l. 14).

   [513] From what follows, this Mughul advance seems a sequel to
   a Tarkhan invitation.

   [514] By omitting the word _Mir_ the Turki text has caused
   confusion between this father and son (Index _s.nn._).

   [515] _biz khud kharab bu mu'amla aiduk._ These words have
   been understood earlier, as referring to the abnormal state of
   Babur's mind described under Sec. _r_. They better suit the
   affairs of Samarkand because Babur is able to resolve on
   action and also because he here writes _biz_, we, and not
   _min_, I, as in Sec. _r_.

   [516] For _bulghar_, rendezvous, _see_ also f. 78 l. 2 fr. ft.

   [517] 25 m. only; the halts were due probably to belated
   arrivals.

   [518] Some of his ties would be those of old acquaintance in
   Hisar with 'Ali's father's begs, now with him in Samarkand.

   [519] Point to point, some 90 m. but further by road.

   [520] _Bu waqi' bulghach_, manifestly ironical.

   [521] Sangzar to Aura-tipa, by way of the hills, some 50
   miles.

   [522] The Sh. N. Vambery, p. 60, confirms this.

   [523] _Cf._ f. 74b.

   [524] Macham and Awighur, presumably.

   [525] _guzlar tuz tuti_, _i.e._ he was blinded for some
   treachery to his hosts.

   [526] Muh. Salih's well-informed account of this episode has
   much interest, filling out and, as by Shaibani's Boswell,
   balancing Babur's. Babur is obscure about what country was to
   be given to 'Ali. Payanda-hasan paraphrases his brief
   words;--Shaibani was to be as a father to 'Ali and when he had
   taken 'Ali's father's _wilayat_, he was to give a country to
   'Ali. It has been thought that the gift to 'Ali was to follow
   Shaibani's recovery of his own ancestral camping-ground
   (_yurt_) but this is negatived, I think, by the word,
   _wilayat_, cultivated land.

   [527] Elp. MS. f. 57b; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 63b and I.O. 217 f.
   52; Mems. p. 82.

   Two contemporary works here supplement the B.N.; (1) the
   (_Tawarikh-i-guzida_) _Nasrat-nama_, dated 908 AH. (B.M. Turki
   Or. 3222) of which Berezin's _Shaibani-nama_ is an abridgment;
   (2) Muh. Salih Mirza's _Shaibani-nama_ (Vambery trs. cap. xix
   _et seq._). The H.S. (Bomb. ed. p. 302, and Tehran ed. p. 384)
   is also useful.

   [528] _i.e._ on his right. The H.S. ii, 302 represents that
   'Ali was well-received. After Shaibaq had had Zuhra's
   overtures, he sent an envoy to 'Ali and Yahya; the first was
   not won over but the second fell in with his mother's scheme.
   This difference of view explains why 'Ali slipped away while
   Yahya was engaged in the Friday Mosque. It seems likely that
   mother and son alike expected their Auzbeg blood to stand them
   in good stead with Shaibaq.

   [529] He tried vainly to get the town defended. "Would to God
   Babur Mirza were here!" he is reported as saying, by Muh.
   Salih.

   [530] Perhaps it is for the play of words on 'Ali and 'Ali's
   life (_jan_) that this man makes his sole appearance here.

   [531] _i.e._ rich man or merchant, but _Bi_ (_infra_) is an
   equivalent of Beg.

   [532] Muh. Salih, invoking curses on such a mother, mentions
   that Zuhra was given to a person of her own sort.

   [533] The Sh. N. and _Nasrat-nama_ attempt to lift the blame
   of 'Ali's death from Shaibaq; the second saying that he fell
   into the Kohik-water when drunk.

   [534] Harat might be his destination but the H.S. names Makka.
   Some dismissals towards Khurasan may imply pilgrimage to
   Meshhed.

   [535] Used also by Babur's daughter, Gul-badan (l.c. f. 31).

   [536] Cut off by alien lands and weary travel.

   [537] The Pers. annotator of the Elph. Codex has changed Alai
   to _wilayat_, and _daban_ (pass) to _yan_, side. For the
   difficult route _see_ Schuyler, i, 275, Kostenko, i, 129 and
   Rickmers, JRGS. 1907, art. Fan Valley.

   [538] Amongst Turks and Mughuls, gifts were made by nines.

   [539] Hisar was his earlier home.

   [540] Many of these will have been climbed in order to get
   over places impassable at the river's level.

   [541] Schuyler quotes a legend of the lake. He and Kostenko
   make it larger.

   [542] The second occasion was when he crossed from Sukh for
   Kabul in 910 AH. (fol. 120).

   [543] This name appears to indicate a Command of 10,000
   (Bretschneider's _Mediaeval Researches_, i, 112).

   [544] It seems likely that the cloth was soiled. _Cf._ f. 25
   and Hughes Dict. of Islam _s.n._ Eating.

   [545] As, of the quoted speech, one word only, of three, is
   Turki, others may have been dreamed. Shaikh Maslahat's tomb is
   in Khujand where Babur had found refuge in 903 AH.; it had
   been circumambulated by Timur in 790 AH. (1390 AD.) and is
   still honoured.

   This account of a dream compares well for naturalness with
   that in the seemingly-spurious passage, entered with the Hai.
   MS. on f. 118. For examination of the passage _see_ JRAS, Jan.
   1911, and App. D.

   [546] He was made a Tarkhan by diploma of Shaibani (H.S. ii,
   306, l. 2).

   [547] Here the Hai. MS. begins to use the word _Shaibaq_ in
   place of its previously uniform _Shaibani_. As has been noted
   (f. 5b n. 2), the Elph. MS. writes _Shaibaq_. It may be
   therefore that a scribe has changed the earlier part of the
   Hai. MS. and that Babur wrote _Shaibaq_. From this point my
   text will follow the double authority of the Elph. and Hai.
   MSS.

   [548] In 875 AH. (1470 AD.). Husain was then 32 years old.
   Babur might have compared his taking of Samarkand with Timur's
   capture of Qarshi, also with 240 followers (Z.N. i, 127).
   Firishta (lith. ed. p. 196) ascribes his omission to do so to
   reluctance to rank himself with his great ancestor.

   [549] This arrival shews that Shaibani expected to stay in
   Samarkand. He had been occupying Turkistan under The Chaghatai
   Khan.

   [550] 'Ali-sher died Jan. 3rd. 1501. It is not clear to what
   disturbances Babur refers. He himself was at ease till after
   April 20th. 1502 and his defeat at Sar-i-pul. Possibly the
   reference is to the quarrels between Bina'i and 'Ali-sher.
   _Cf._ Sam Mirza's Anthology, trs. S. de Sacy, _Notices et
   Extraits_ iv, 287 _et seq._

   [551] I surmise a double play-of-words in this verse. One is
   on two rhyming words, _ghala_ and _mallah_ and is illustrated
   by rendering them as _oat_ and _coat_. The other is on pointed
   and unpointed letters, _i.e._ _ghala_ and _'ala_. We cannot
   find however a Persian word _'ala_, meaning garment.

   [552] Babur's refrain is _ghusidur_, his rhymes _bul_,
   _(buyur)ul_ and _tul_. Bina'i makes _bulghusidur_ his refrain
   but his rhymes are not true _viz._ _yir_, _(sa)mar_ and _lar_.

   [553] Shawwal 906 AH. began April 20th. 1501.

   [554] From the _Bu-stan_, Graf ed. p. 55, l. 246.

   [555] Sikiz Yilduz. _See_ Chardin's _Voyages_, v, 136 and
   Table; also Stanley Lane Poole's _Babur_, p. 56.

   [556] In 1791 AD. Muh. Effendi shot 482 yards from a Turkish
   bow, before the R. Tox. S.; not a good shot, he declared.
   Longer ones are on record. _See_ Payne-Gallwey's _Cross-bow_
   and AQR. 1911, H. Beveridge's _Oriental Cross-bows_.

   [557] In the margin of the Elph. Codex, here, stands a Persian
   verse which appears more likely to be Humayun's than Babur's.
   It is as follows:

     Were the Mughul race angels, they would be bad;
     Written in gold, the name Mughul would be bad;
     Pluck not an ear from the Mughul's corn-land,
     What is sown with Mughul seed will be bad.

   This verse is written into the text of the First W.-i-B. (I.O.
   215 f. 72) and is introduced by a scribe's statement that it
   is by _an Hazrat_, much as notes known to be Humayun's are
   elsewhere attested in the Elph. Codex. It is not in the Hai.
   and Kehr's MSS. nor with, at least many, good copies of the
   Second W.-i-B.

   [558] This subterranean water-course, issuing in a flowing
   well (Erskine) gave its name to a bastion (H.S. ii, 300).

   [559] _nawak_, a diminutive of _nao_, a tube. It is described,
   in a MS. of Babur's time, by Muh. Budha'i, and, in a second of
   later date, by Aminu'd-din (AQR 1911, H.B.'s _Oriental
   Cross-bows_).

   [560] Kostenko, i, 344, would make the rounds 9 m.

   [561] _bir yuz atliqning atini nawak auqi bila yakhshi atim._
   This has been read by Erskine as though _buz at_, pale horse,
   and not _yuz atliq_, Centurion, were written. De. C.
   translates by Centurion and a marginal note of the Elph. Codex
   explains _yuz atliq_ by _sad aspagi_.

   [562] The Sh. N. gives the reverse side of the picture, the
   plenty enjoyed by the besiegers.

   [563] He may have been attached to the tomb of Khwaja
   'Abdu'l-lah _Ansari_ in Harat.

   [564] The brusque entry here and elsewhere of _e.g._ Tambal's
   affairs, allows the inference that Babur was quoting from
   perhaps a news-writer's, contemporary records. For a different
   view of Tambal, the Sh. N. cap. xxxiii should be read.

   [565] Five-villages, on the main Khujand-Tashkint road.

   [566] _turk_, as on f. 28 of Khusrau Shah.

   [567] Elph. MS. f. 68b; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 78 and 217 f. 61b;
   Mems. p. 97.

   The Kehr-Ilminsky text shews, in this year, a good example of
   its Persification and of Dr. Ilminsky's dealings with his
   difficult archetype by the help of the Memoirs.

   [568] _tashlab._ The Sh. N. places these desertions as after
   four months of siege.

   [569] It strikes one as strange to find Long Hasan described,
   as here, in terms of his younger brother. The singularity may
   be due to the fact that Husain was with Babur and may have
   invited Hasan. It may be noted here that Husain seems likely
   to be that father-in-law of 'Umar Shaikh mentioned on f. 12b
   and 13b.

   [570] This laudatory comment I find nowhere but in the Hai.
   Codex.

   [571] There is some uncertainty about the names of those who
   left.

   [572] The Sh. N. is interesting here as giving an eye-witness'
   account of the surrender of the town and of the part played in
   the surrender by Khan-zada's marriage (cap. xxxix).

   [573] The first seems likely to be a relation of Nizamu'd-din
   'Ali Khalifa; the second was Mole-marked, a foster-sister. The
   party numbered some 100 persons of whom Abu'l-makaram was one
   (H.S. ii, 310).

   [574] Babur's brevity is misleading; his sister was not
   captured but married with her own and her mother's consent
   before attempt to leave the town was made. _Cf._ Gul-badan's
   H.N. f. 3b and Sh. N. Vambery, p. 145.

   [575] The route taken avoided the main road for Dizak; it can
   be traced by the physical features, mentioned by Babur, on the
   Fr. map of 1904. The Sh. N. says the night was extraordinarily
   dark. Departure in blinding darkness and by unusual ways shews
   distrust of Shaibaq's safe-conduct suggesting that Yahya's
   fate was in the minds of the fugitives.

   [576] The texts differ as to whether the last two lines are
   prose or verse. All four are in Turki, but I surmise a
   clerical error in the refrain of the third, where _bulub_ is
   written for _buldi_.

   [577] The second was in 908 AH. (f. 18_b_); the third in 914
   AH. (f. 216 _b_); the fourth is not described in the B.N.; it
   followed Babur's defeat at Ghaj-diwan in 918 AH. (Erskine's
   _History of India_, i, 325). He had a fifth, but of a
   different kind, when he survived poison in 933 AH. (f. 305).

   [578] Hai. MS. _qaqasraq_; Elph. MS. _yanasraq_.

   [579] _atun_, one who instructs in reading, writing and
   embroidery. _Cf._ Gulbadan's H.N. f. 26. The distance walked
   may have been 70 or 80 m.

   [580] She was the wife of the then Governor of Aura-tipa, Muh.
   Husain _Dughlat_.

   [581] It may be noted here that in speaking of these elder
   women Babur uses the honorific plural, a form of rare
   occurrence except for such women, for saintly persons and
   exceptionally for The supreme Khan. For his father he has
   never used it.

   [582] This name has several variants. The village lies, in a
   valley-bottom, on the Aq-su and on a road. _See_ Kostenko, i,
   119.

   [583] She had been divorced from Shaibani in order to allow
   him to make legal marriage with her niece, Khan-zada.

   [584] Amongst the variants of this name, I select the modern
   one. Macha is the upper valley of the Zar-afshan.

   [585] Timur took Dihli in 801 AH. (Dec. 1398), _i.e._ 103
   solar and 106 lunar years earlier. The ancient dame would then
   have been under 5 years old. It is not surprising therefore
   that in repeating her story Babur should use a tense
   betokening hear-say matter (_barib ikan dur_).

   [586] The anecdote here following, has been analysed in JRAS
   1908, p. 87, in order to show warrant for the opinion that
   parts of the Kehr-Ilminsky text are retranslations from the
   Persian W.-i-B.

   [587] Amongst those thus leaving seem to have been Qambar-'ali
   (f. 99b).

   [588] _Cf._ f. 107 foot.

   [589] The Sh. N. speaks of the cold in that winter (Vambery,
   p. 160). It was unusual for the Sir to freeze in this part of
   its course (Sh. N. p. 172) where it is extremely rapid
   (Kostenko, i, 213).

   [590] _Cf._ f. 4b.

   [591] Point to point, some 50 miles.

   [592] _Ahangaran-julgasi_, a name narrowed on maps to Angren
   (valley).

   [593] _Faut shud Nuyan._ The numerical value of these words is
   907. Babur when writing, looks back 26 years to the death of
   this friend.

   [594] Ab-burdan village is on the Zar-afshan; the pass is
   11,200 ft. above the sea. Babur's boundaries still hold good
   and the spring still flows. _See_ Ujfalvy _l.c._ i. 14;
   Kostenko, i, 119 and 193; Rickmers, JRGS 1907, p. 358.

   [595] From the _Bu-stan_ (Graf's ed. Vienna 1858, p. 561). The
   last couplet is also in the _Gulistan_ (Platts' ed. p. 72).
   The Bombay lith. ed. of the _Bu-stan_ explains (p. 39) that
   the "We" of the third couplet means Jamshid and his
   predecessors who have rested by his fountain.

   [596] _nima._ The First W.-i-B. (I.O. 215 f. 81 l. 8) writes
   _tawarikh_, annals.

   [597] This may be the Khwaja Hijri of the A.N. (index _s.n._);
   and Badayuni's Hasan _Hijri_, Bib. Ind. iii, 385; and Ethe's
   Pers. Cat. No. 793; and Bod. Cat. No. 189.

   [598] The Hai. MS. points in the last line as though punning
   on Khan and Jan, but appears to be wrong.

   [599] For an account of the waste of crops, the Sh. N. should
   be seen (p. 162 and 180).

   [600] I think this refers to last year's move (f. 94 foot).

   [601] In other words, the T. preposition, meaning E. in, at,
   _etc._ may be written with t or d, as _ta(ta)_ or as _da(da)_.
   Also the one meaning E. towards, may be _gha_, _qa_, or _ka_
   (with long or short vowel).

   [602] _dim_, a word found difficult. It may be a derivative of
   root _de_, tell, and a noun with the meaning of English tale
   (number). The First W.-i-B. renders it by _san_, and by _san_,
   Abu'l-ghazi expresses what Babur's _dim_ expresses, the
   numbering of troops. It occurs thrice in the B.N. (here, on f.
   183b and on f. 264b). In the Elphinstone Codex it has been
   written-over into _Ivim_, once resembles _vim_ more than _dim_
   and once is omitted. The L. and E. _Memoirs_ (p. 303) inserts
   what seems a gloss, saying that a whip or bow is used in the
   count, presumably held by the teller to 'keep his place' in
   the march past. The _Siyasat-nama_ (Schefer, trs. p. 22) names
   the whip as used in numbering an army.

   [603] The acclamation of the standards is depicted in B.M.
   W.-i-B. Or. 3714 f. 128b. One cloth is shewn tied to the off
   fore-leg of a live cow, above the knee, Babur's word being
   _aurta ailik_ (middle-hand).

   [604] The libation was of fermented mares'-milk.

   [605] _lit._ their one way.

   [606] _Cf._ T.R. p. 308.

   [607] Elph. MS. f. 74; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 83 and 217 f. 66;
   Mems. p. 104.

   [608] It may be noted that Babur calls his mother's brothers,
   not _taghai_ but _dada_ father. I have not met with an
   instance of his saying 'My taghai' as he says 'My dada.' _Cf._
   index _s.n._ _taghai_.

   [609] _kurunush qilib_, reflective from _kurmak_, to see.

   [610] A rider's metaphor.

   [611] As touching the misnomer, 'Mughul dynasty' for the
   Timurid rulers in Hindustan, it may be noted that here, as
   Babur is speaking to a Chaghatai Mughul, his 'Turk' is left to
   apply to himself.

   [612] Gulistan, cap. viii, Maxim 12 (Platts' ed. p. 147).

   [613] This backward count is to 890 AH. when Ahmad fled from
   cultivated lands (T.R. p. 113).

   [614] It becomes clear that Ahmad had already been asked to
   come to Tashkint.

   [615] _Cf._ f. 96b for his first departure without help.

   [616] Yagha (Yaghma) is not on the Fr. map of 1904, but
   suitably located is Turbat (Tomb) to which roads converge.

   [617] Elph. MS. _tushkucha_; Hai. MS. _yukuncha_. The
   importance Ahmad attached to ceremony can be inferred by the
   details given (f. 103) of his meeting with Mahmud.

   [618] _kurushkailar._ _Cf._ Redhouse who gives no support for
   reading the verb _kurmak_ as meaning _to embrace_.

   [619] _burk_, a tall felt cap (Redhouse). In the adjective
   applied to the cap there are several variants. The Hai. MS.
   writes _muftul_, solid or twisted. The Elph. MS. has
   _muftun-luq_ which has been understood by Mr. Erskine to mean,
   gold-embroidered.

   [620] The wording suggests that the decoration is in
   chain-stitch, pricked up and down through the stuff.

   [621] _tash chantai._ These words have been taken to mean
   whet-stone (_bilgu-tash_). I have found no authority for
   reading _tash_ as whet-stone. Moreover to allow 'bag of the
   stone' to be read would require _tash (ning) chantai-si_ in
   the text.

   [622] lit. bag-like things. Some will have held spare
   bow-strings and archers' rings, and other articles of
   'repairing kit.' With the gifts, it seems probable that the
   _gosha-gir_ (f. 107) was given.

   [623] Vullers, _clava sex foliis_.

   [624] Zenker, _casse-tete_. _Kistin_ would seem to be formed
   from the root, _kis_, cutting, but M. de C. describes it as a
   ball attached by a strap or chain to a handle. _Sanglakh_, a
   sort of mace (_gurz_).

   [625] The _Rauzatu's-safa_ states that The Khans left Tashkint
   on Muharram 15th (July 21st. 1502), in order to restore Babur
   and expel Tambal (Erskine).

   [626] lit. saw the count (_dim_). _Cf._ f. 100 and note
   concerning the count. Using a Persian substitute, the
   Kehr-Ilminsky text writes _san_ (_kurdilar_).

   [627] Elph. MS. _ambarchi_, steward, for Itarchi, a
   tribal-name. The 'Mirza' and the rank of the army-begs are
   against supposing a steward in command. Here and just above,
   the texts write Mirza-i-Itarchi and Mirza-i-Dughlat, thus
   suggesting that in names not ending with a vowel, the _izafat_
   is required for exact transliteration, _e.g._
   Muhammad-i-dughlat.

   [628] _Alai-liq aurchini._ I understand the march to have been
   along the northern slope of the Little Alai, south of Aush.

   [629] As of Almaligh and Almatu (fol. 2b) Babur reports a
   tradition with caution. The name Auz-kint may be read to mean
   'Own village,' independent, as _Auz-beg_, Own-beg.

   [630] He would be one of the hereditary Khwajas of Andijan (f.
   16).

   [631] For several battle-cries _see_ Th. Radloff's _Receuils_
   etc. p. 322.

   [632] _qashqa atliq kishi._ For a parallel phrase _see_ f.
   92b.

   [633] Babur does not explain how the imbroglio was cleared up;
   there must have been a dramatic moment when this happened.

   [634] _Darwana_ (a trap-door in a roof) has the variant
   _dur-dana_, a single pearl; _tuqqai_ perhaps implies
   relationship; _lulu_ is a pearl, a wild cow etc.

   [635] Hai. MS. _sairt kishi_. Muh. 'Ali is likely to be the
   librarian (_cf._ index _s.n._).

   [636] Elph. MS. _ramaqgha u tur-ga_; Hai. MS. _tartatgha u
   tur-ga_. Ilminsky gives no help, varying much here from the
   true text. The archetype of both MSS. must have been difficult
   to read.

   [637] The Hai. MS.'s pointing allows the sobriquet to mean
   'Butterfly.' His family lent itself to nick-names; in it three
   brothers were known respectively as Fat or Lubberly, Fool and,
   perhaps, Butterfly.

   [638] _birk arigh_, doubly strong by its trench and its
   current.

   [639] I understand that time failed to set the standard in its
   usual rest. E. and de C. have understood that the yak-tail
   (_qutas tughi_ f. 100) was apart from the staff and that time
   failed to adjust the two parts. The _tugh_ however is the
   whole standard; moreover if the tail were ever taken off at
   night from the staff, it would hardly be so treated in a mere
   bivouac.

   [640] _aishiklik turluq_, as on f. 113. I understand this to
   mean that the two men were as far from their followers as
   sentries at a Gate are posted outside the Gate.

   [641] So too 'Piero of Cosimo' and 'Lorenzo of Piero of the
   Medici.' _Cf._ the names of five men on f. 114.

   [642] _shashtim._ The _shasht_ (thumb) in archery is the
   thumb-shield used on the left hand, as the _zih-gir_
   (string-grip), the archer's ring, is on the right-hand thumb.

   It is useful to remember, when reading accounts of shooting
   with the Turki (Turkish) bow, that the arrows (_auq_) had
   notches so gripping the string that they kept in place until
   released with the string.

   [643] _sar-i-sabz gosha gir._ The _gosha-gir_ is an implement
   for remedying the warp of a bow-tip and string-notch. For
   further particulars _see_ Appendix C.

   The term _sar-i-sabz_, lit. green-head, occurs in the sense of
   'quite young' or 'new,' in the proverb, 'The red tongue loses
   the green head,' quoted in the _Tabaqat-i-akbari_ account of
   Babur's death. Applied here, it points to the _gosha-gir_ as
   part of the recent gift made by Ahmad to Babur.

   [644] _Tambal aikandur._ By this tense I understand that Babur
   was not at first sure of the identity of the pseudo-sentries,
   partly because of their distance, partly, it may be presumed,
   because of concealment of identity by armour.

   [645] _duwulgha burki_; _i.e._ the soft cap worn under the
   iron helm.

   [646] Nuyan's sword dealt the blow (f. 97b). Gul-badan also
   tells the story (f. 77) a propos of a similar incident in
   Humayun's career. Babur repeats the story on f. 234.

   [647] _yaldaghlamai dur aidim._ The Second W.-i-B. has taken
   this as from _yalturmaq_, to cause to glisten, and adds the
   gloss that the sword was rusty (I.O. 217 f. 70b).

   [648] The text here seems to say that the three men were on
   foot, but this is negatived by the context.

   [649] Amongst the various uses of the verb _tushmak_, to
   descend in any way, the B.N. does not allow of 'falling
   (death) in battle.' When I made the index of the Hai. MS.
   facsimile, this was not known to me; I therefore erroneously
   entered the men enumerated here as killed at this time.

   [650] Elph. MS. _yakhshi_. Zenker explains _bakhshi_
   (pay-master) as meaning also a Court-physician.

   [651] The Hai. Elph. and Kehr's MS. all have _puchqaq taqmaq_
   or it may be _puhqaq taqmaq_. T. _bukhaq_ means bandage,
   _puchaq_, rind of fruit, but the word clear in the three Turki
   MSS. means, skin of a fox's leg.

   [652] The _darya_ here mentioned seems to be the Kasan-water;
   the route taken from Bishkharan to Pap is shewn on the Fr. map
   to lead past modern Tupa-qurghan. Pap is not marked, but was,
   I think, at the cross-roads east of Touss (Karnan).

   [653] Presumably Jahangir's.

   [654] Here his father was killed (f. 6b). _Cf._ App. A.

   [655] 'Ali-dost's son (f. 79b).

   [656] The sobriquet _Khiz_ may mean Leaper, or Impetuous.

   [657] _kuilak_, syn. _kunglak_, a shirt not opening at the
   breast. It will have been a short garment since the under-vest
   was visible.

   [658] _i.e._ when Babur was writing in Hindustan. Exactly at
   what date he made this entry is not sure. 'Ali was in Koel in
   933 AH. (f. 315) and then taken prisoner, but Babur does not
   say he was killed,--as he well might say of a marked man, and,
   as the captor was himself taken shortly after, 'Ali may have
   been released, and may have been in Koel again. So that the
   statement 'now in Koel' may refer to a time later than his
   capture. The interest of the point is in its relation to the
   date of composition of the _Babur-nama_.

   No record of 'Ali's bravery in Aush has been preserved. The
   reference here made to it may indicate something attempted in
   908 AH. after Babur's adventure in Karnan (f. 118b) or in 909
   AH. from Sukh. _Cf._ Translator's note f. 118b.

   [659] _aupchinlik._ Vambery, _gepanzert_; Shaw, four
   horse-shoes and their nails; Steingass, _aupcha-khana_, a
   guard-house.

   [660] Sang is a ferry-station (Kostenko, i, 213). Pap may well
   have been regretted (f. 109b and f. 112b)! The well-marked
   features of the French map of 1904 allows Babur's flight to be
   followed.

   [661] In the Turki text this saying is in Persian; in the
   Kehr-Ilminsky, in Turki, as though it had gone over with its
   Persian context of the W.-i-B. from which the K.-I. text here
   is believed to be a translation.

   [662] _Cf._ f. 96b and Fr. Map for route over the Kindir-tau.

   [663] This account of Muh. Baqir reads like one given later to
   Babur; he may have had some part in Babur's rescue (_cf._
   Translator's Note to f. 118b).

   [664] Perhaps reeds for a raft. Sh. N. p. 258, _Sal auchun bar
   qamish_, reeds are there also for rafts.

   [665] Here the Turki text breaks off, as it might through loss
   of pages, causing a blank of narrative extending over some 16
   months. _Cf._ App. D. for a passage, supposedly spurious,
   found with the Haidarabad Codex and the Kehr-Ilminsky text,
   purporting to tell how Babur was rescued from the risk in
   which the lacuna here leaves him.

   [666] As in the Farghana Section, so here, reliance is on the
   Elphinstone and Haidarabad MSS. The Kehr-Ilminsky text still
   appears to be a retranslation from the _Waqi'at-i-baburi_ and
   verbally departs much from the true text; moreover, in this
   Section it has been helped out, where its archetype was
   illegible or has lost fragmentary passages, from the Leyden
   and Erskine _Memoirs_. It may be mentioned, as between the
   First and the Second _Waqi'at-i-baburi_, that several obscure
   passages in this Section are more explicit in the First
   (Payanda-hasan's) than in its successor ('Abdu-r-rahim's).

   [667] Elph. MS. f. 90b; W.-i-B. I.O. 215, f. 96b and 217, f.
   79; Mems. p. 127. "In 1504 AD. Ferdinand the Catholic drove
   the French out of Naples" (Erskine). In England, Henry VII was
   pushing forward a commercial treaty, the _Intercursus malus_,
   with the Flemings and growing in wealth by the exactions of
   Empson and Dudley.

   [668] presumably the pastures of the "Ilak" Valley. The route
   from Sukh would be over the 'Ala'u'd-din-pass, into the
   Qizil-su valley, down to Ab-i-garm and on to the Ailaq-valley,
   Khwaja 'Imad, the Kafirnigan, Qabadian, and Aubaj on the Amu.
   See T.R. p. 175 and Farghana Section, p. 184, as to the
   character of the journey.

   [669] Amongst the Turki tribes, the time of first applying the
   razor to the face is celebrated by a great entertainment.
   Babur's miserable circumstances would not admit of this
   (Erskine).

   The text is ambiguous here, reading either that Sukh was left
   or that Ailaq-yilaq was reached in Muharram. As the birthday
   was on the 8th, the journey very arduous and, for a party
   mostly on foot, slow, it seems safest to suppose that the
   start was made from Sukh at the end of 909 AH. and not in
   Muharram, 910 AH.

   [670] _charuq_, rough boots of untanned leather, formed like a
   moccasin with the lower leather drawn up round the foot; they
   are worn by Khirghiz mountaineers and caravan-men on journeys
   (Shaw).

   [671] _chapan_, the ordinary garment of Central Asia (Shaw).

   [672] The _alachuq_, a tent of flexible poles, covered with
   felt, may be the _khargah_ (kibitka); Persian _chadar_ seems
   to represent Turki _aq awi_, white house.

   [673] _i.e._ with Khusrau's power shaken by Auzbeg attack,
   made in the winter of 909 AH. (_Shaibani-nama_ cap. lviii).

   [674] Cf. ff. 81 and 81b. The armourer's station was low for
   an envoy to Babur, the superior in birth of the armourer's
   master.

   [675] var. Chaqanian and Saghanian. The name formerly
   described the whole of the Hisar territory (Erskine).

   [676] the preacher by whom the _Khutba_ is read (Erskine).

   [677] _bi baqi_ or _bi Baqi_; perhaps a play of words with the
   double meaning expressed in the above translation.

   [678] Amongst these were widows and children of Babur's uncle,
   Mahmud (f. 27b).

   [679] _aughul._ As being the son of Khusrau's sister, Ahmad
   was nephew to Baqi; there may be in the text a scribe's slip
   from one _aughul_ to another, and the real statement be that
   Ahmad was the son of Baqi's son, Muh. Qasim, which would
   account for his name Ahmad-i-qasim.

   [680] Cf. f. 67.

   [681] Babur's loss of rule in Farghana and Samarkand.

   [682] about 7 miles south of Aibak, on the road to Sar-i-tagh
   (mountain-head, Erskine).

   [683] _viz._ the respective fathers, Mahmud and 'Umar Shaikh.
   The arrangement was made in 895 AH. (1490 AD.).

   [684] _Gulistan_ cap. i, story 3. Part of this quotation is
   used again on f. 183.

   [685] Mahmud's sons under whom Baqi had served.

   [686] Uncles of all degrees are included as elder brethren,
   cousins of all degrees, as younger ones.

   [687] Presumably the ferries; perhaps the one on the main road
   from the north-east which crosses the river at Fort Murgh-ab.

   [688] Nine deaths, perhaps where the Amu is split into nine
   channels at the place where Mirza Khan's son Sulaiman later
   met his rebel grandson Shah-rukh (_Tabaqat-i-akbari_, Elliot
   & Dowson, v, 392, and A.N. Bib. Ind., 3rd ed., 441).
   Tuquz-aulum is too far up the river to be Arnold's "shorn and
   parcelled Oxus".

   [689] Shaibaq himself had gone down from Samarkand in 908 AH.
   and in 909 AH. and so permanently located his troops as to
   have sent their families to them. In 909 AH. he drove Khusrau
   into the mountains of Badakhshan, but did not occupy Qunduz;
   thither Khusrau returned and there stayed till now, when
   Shaibaq again came south (fol. 123). See Sh. N. cap. lviii _et
   seq._

   [690] From Tambal, to put down whom he had quitted his army
   near Balkh (Sh. N. cap. lix).

   [691] This, one of the many Red-rivers, flows from near
   Kahmard and joins the Andar-ab water near Dushi.

   [692] A _gari_ is twenty-four minutes.

   [693] Qoran, _Surat_ iii, verse 25; Sale's Qoran, ed. 1825, i,
   56.

   [694] Cf. f. 82.

   [695] _viz._ Bai-sanghar, bowstrung, and Mas'ud, blinded.

   [696] Muh. Salih is florid over the rubies of Badakhshan he
   says Babur took from Khusrau, but Haidar says Babur not only
   had Khusrau's property, treasure, and horses returned to him,
   but refused all gifts Khusrau offered. "This is one trait out
   of a thousand in the Emperor's character." Haidar mentions,
   too, the then lack of necessaries under which Babur suffered
   (Sh. N., cap. lxiii, and T.R. p. 176).

   [697] Cf. T. R. p. 134 n. and 374 n.

   [698] _Jiba_, so often used to describe the quilted corselet,
   seems to have here a wider meaning, since the _jiba-khana_
   contained both _joshan_ and _kuhah_, _i.e._ coats-of-mail and
   horse-mail with accoutrements. It can have been only from this
   source that Babur's men obtained the horse-mail of f. 127.

   [699] He succeeded his father, Aulugh Beg _Kabuli_, in 907
   AH.; his youth led to the usurpation of his authority by
   Sherim Zikr, one of his begs; but the other begs put Sherim to
   death. During the subsequent confusions Muh. Muqim _Arghun_,
   in 908 AH., got possession of Kabul and married a sister of
   'Abdu'r-razzaq. Things were in this state when Babur entered
   the country in 910 AH. (Erskine).

   [700] var. Upian, a few miles north of Charikar.

   [701] Suhail (Canopus) is a most conspicuous star in
   Afghanistan; it gives its name to the south, which is never
   called Janub but Suhail; the rising of Suhail marks one of
   their seasons (Erskine). The honour attaching to this star is
   due to its seeming to rise out of Arabia Felix.

   [702] The lines are in the Preface to the _Anwar-i-suhaili_
   (Lights of Canopus).

   [703] "Die Kirghis-qazzaq druecken die Sonnen-hoehe in Pikenaus"
   (von Schwarz, p. 124).

   [704] Presumably, dark with shade, as in _qara-yighach_, the
   hard-wood elm (f. 47b and note to _narwan_).

   [705] _i.e._ Sayyid Muhammad 'Ali, the door-ward. These
   _bulaks_ seem likely to have been groups of 1,000 fighting-men
   (Turki _Ming_).

   [706] In-the-water and Water-head.

   [707] Wali went from his defeat to Khwast; wrote to Mahmud
   _Auzbeg_ in Qunduz to ask protection; was fetched to Qunduz by
   Muh. Salih, the author of the _Shaibani-nama_, and forwarded
   from Qunduz to Samarkand (Sh. N. cap. lxiii). Cf. f. 29b.

   [708] _i.e._ where justice was administered, at this time,
   outside Babur's tent.

   [709] They would pass Ajar and make for the main road over the
   Dandan-shikan Pass.

   [710] The clansmen may have obeyed Ahmad's orders in thus
   holding up the families.

   [711] The name may be from Turki _taq_, a horse-shoe, but I.O.
   215 f. 102 writes Persian _naqib_, the servant who announces
   arriving guests.

   [712] Here, as immediately below, when mentioning the
   Char-bagh and the tomb of Qutluq-qadam, Babur uses names
   acquired by the places at a subsequent date. In 910 AH. the
   Taster was alive; the Char-bagh was bought by Babur in 911
   AH., and Qutluq-qadam fought at Kanwaha in 933 AH.

   [713] The Kucha-bagh is still a garden about 4 miles from
   Kabul on the north-west and divided from it by a low
   hill-pass. There is still a bridge on the way (Erskine).

   [714] Presumably that on which the Bala-hisar stood, the
   glacis of a few lines further.

   [715] Cf. f. 130.

   [716] One of Muqim's wives was a Timurid, Babur's
   first-cousin, the daughter of Aulugh Beg _Kabuli_; another was
   Bibi Zarif Khatun, the mother of that Mah-chuchuq, whose anger
   at her marriage to Babur's faithful Qasim Kukuldash has filled
   some pages of history (Gulbadan's H.N. _s.n._ Mah-chuchuq and
   Erskine's B. and H. i, 348).

   [717] Some 9 m. north of Kabul on the road to Aq-sarai.

   [718] The Hai. MS. (only) writes First Rabi but the Second
   better suits the near approach of winter.

   [719] Elph. MS. fol. 97; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 102b and 217 f.
   85; Mems. p. 136. Useful books of the early 19th century, many
   of them referring to the _Babur-nama_, are Conolly's
   _Travels_, Wood's _Journey_, Elphinstone's _Caubul_, Burnes'
   _Cabool_, Masson's _Narrative_, Lord's and Leech's articles in
   JASB 1838 and in Burnes' _Reports_ (India Office Library),
   Broadfoot's _Report_ in RGS Supp. Papers vol. I.

   [720] f. 1b where Farghana is said to be on the limit of
   cultivation.

   [721] f. 131b. To find these _tumans_ here classed with what
   was not part of Kabul suggest a clerical omission of "beyond"
   or "east of" (Lamghanat). It may be more correct to write
   Lamghanat, since the first syllable may be _lam_, fort. The
   modern form Laghman is not used in the _Babur-nama_, nor, it
   may be added is Paghman for Pamghan.

   [722] It will be observed that Babur limits the name
   Afghanistan to the countries inhabited by Afghan tribesmen;
   they are chiefly those south of the road from Kabul to
   Pashawar (Erskine). See Vigne, p. 102, for a boundary between
   the Afghans and Khurasan.

   [723] Al-biruni's _Indika_ writes of both Turk and Hindu-shahi
   Kings of Kabul. See Raverty's _Notes_ p. 62 and Stein's _Shahi
   Kings of Kabul_. The mountain is 7592 ft. above the sea, some
   1800 ft. therefore above the town.

   [724] The Kabul-river enters the Char-dih plain by the
   Dih-i-yaq'ub narrows, and leaves it by those of Durrin. Cf.
   _S.A. War_, Plan p. 288 and Plan of action at Char-asiya
   (Four-mills), the second shewing an off-take which may be Wais
   Ataka's canal. See Vigne, p. 163 and Raverty's _Notes_ pp. 69
   and 689.

   [725] This, the Bala-jui (upper-canal) was a four-mill stream
   and in Masson's time, as now, supplied water to the gardens
   round Babur's tomb. Masson found in Kabul honoured descendants
   of Wais Ataka (ii, 240).

   [726] But for a, perhaps negligible, shortening of its first
   vowel, this form of the name would describe the normal end of
   an irrigation canal, a little pool, but other forms with other
   meanings are open to choice, _e.g._ small hamlet (Pers.
   _kul_), or some compound containing Pers. _gul_, a rose, in
   its plain or metaphorical senses. Jarrett's _Ayin-i-akbari_
   writes Gul-kinah, little rose (?). Masson (ii, 236) mentions a
   similar pleasure-resort, Sanji-taq.

   [727] The original ode, with which the parody agrees in rhyme
   and refrain, is in the _Diwan, s.l. Dal_ (Brockhaus ed. 1854,
   i, 62 and lith. ed. p. 96). See Wilberforce Clarke's literal
   translation i, 286 (H. B.). A marginal note to the Haidarabad
   Codex gives what appears to be a variant of one of the rhymes
   of the parody.

   [728] _aulugh kul_; some 3 m. round in Erskine's time; mapped
   as a swamp in _S.A. War_ p. 288.

   [729] A marginal note to the Hai. Codex explains this name to
   be an abbreviation of Khwaja Shamsu'd-din _Jan-baz_ (or
   _Jahan-baz_; Masson, ii, 279 and iii, 93).

   [730] _i.e_. the place made holy by an impress of saintly
   foot-steps.

   [731] Two eagles or, Two poles, used for punishment. Vigne's
   illustration (p. 161) clearly shows the spur and the detached
   rock. Erskine (p. 137 n.) says that 'Uqabain seems to be the
   hill, known in his day as 'Ashiqan-i-'arifan, which connects
   with Babur Badshah. See Raverty's _Notes_ p. 68.

   [732] During most of the year this wind rushes through the
   Hindu-kush (Parwan)-pass; it checks the migration of the birds
   (f. 142), and it may be the cause of the deposit of the
   Running-sands (Burnes, p. 158). Cf. Wood, p. 124.

   [733] He was Badi'u'z-zaman's _Sadr_ before serving Babur; he
   died in 918 AH. (1512 AD.), in the battle of Kul-i-malik where
   'Ubaidu'l-lah _Auzbeg_ defeated Babur. He may be identical
   with Mir Husain the Riddler of f. 181, but seems not to be
   Mulla Muh. _Badakhshi_, also a Riddler, because the
   _Habibu's-siyar_ (ii, 343 and 344) gives this man a separate
   notice. Those interested in enigmas can find one made by
   Talib on the name Yahya (H.S. ii, 344). Sharafu'd-din 'Ali
   _Yazdi_, the author of the _Zafar-nama_, wrote a book about a
   novel kind of these puzzles (T.R. p. 84).

   [734] The original couplet is as follows:--

     _Bakhur dar arg-i Kabul mai, bagardan kasa pay dar pay,
     Kah ham koh ast, u ham darya, u ham shahr ast, u ham sahra'._

   What Talib's words may be inferred to conceal is the opinion
   that like Badi'u'z-zaman and like the meaning of his name,
   Kabul is the Wonder-of-the-world. (Cf. M. Garcin de Tassy's
   _Rhetorique_ [p. 165], for _ces combinaisons enigmatiques_.)

   [735] All MSS. do not mention Kashghar.

   [736] Khita (Cathay) is Northern China; Chin (_infra_) is
   China; Rum is Turkey and particularly the provinces near
   Trebizond (Erskine).

   [737] 300% to 400% (Erskine).

   [738] Persian _sinjid_, Brandis, _elaeagnus hortensis_; Erskine
   (Mems. p. 138) jujube, presumably the _zizyphus jujuba_ of
   Speede, Supplement p. 86. Turki _yangaq_, walnut, has several
   variants, of which the most marked is _yanghkaq_. For a good
   account of Kabul fruits _see_ Masson, ii, 230.

   [739] a kind of plum (?). It seems unlikely to be a cherry
   since Babur does not mention cherries as good in his old
   dominions, and Firminger (p. 244) makes against it as
   introduced from India. Steingass explains _alu-balu_ by
   "sour-cherry, an armarylla"; if sour, is it the Morello
   cherry?

   [740] The sugar-cane was seen in abundance in Lan-po (Lamghan)
   by a Chinese pilgrim (Beale, p. 90); Babur's introduction of
   it may have been into his own garden only in Ningnahar (f.
   132b).

   [741] _i.e._ the seeds of _pinus Gerardiana_.

   [742] _rawashlar._ The green leaf-stalks (_chukri_) of _ribes
   rheum_ are taken into Kabul in mid-April from the
   Pamghan-hills; a week later they are followed by the blanched
   and tended _rawash_ (Masson, ii, 7). _See_ Gul-badan's H.N.
   trs. p. 188, Vigne, p. 100 and 107, Masson, ii, 230, Conolly,
   i, 213.

   [743] a large green fruit, shaped something like a citron;
   also a large sort of cucumber (Erskine).

   [744] The _sahibi_, a grape praised by Babur amongst
   Samarkandi fruits, grows in Koh-daman; another well-known
   grape of Kabul is the long stoneless _husaini_, brought by
   Afghan traders into Hindustan in round, flat boxes of poplar
   wood (Vigne, p. 172).

   [745] An allusion, presumably, to the renouncement of wine
   made by Babur and some of his followers in 933 AH. (1527 AD.
   f. 312). He may have had 'Umar _Khayyam's_ quatrain in mind,
   "Wine's power is known to wine-bibbers alone" (Whinfield's 2nd
   ed. 1901, No. 164).

   [746] _pustin_, usually of sheep-skin. For the wide range of
   temperature at Kabul in 24 hours, _see_ Ency. Brtt. art.
   Afghanistan. The winters also vary much in severity (Burnes,
   p. 273).

   [747] Index _s.n._ As he fought at Kanwaha, he will have been
   buried after March 1527 AD.; this entry therefore will have
   been made later. The Curriers'-gate is the later Lahor-gate
   (Masson, ii, 259).

   [748] Index _s.n._

   [749] For lists of the Hindu-kush passes _see_ Leech's Report
   VII; Yule's _Introductory Essay_ to Wood's _Journey_ 2nd ed.;
   PRGS 1879, Markham's art. p. 121.

   The highest _cols_ on the passes here enumerated by Babur
   are,--Khawak 11,640 ft.--Tul, height not known,--Parandi 15,984
   ft.--Baj-gah (Toll-place) 12,000 ft.--Walian (Saints) 15,100
   ft.--Chahar-dar (Four-doors) 18,900 ft. and Shibr-tu 9800 ft.
   In considering the labour of their ascent and descent, the
   general high level, north and south of them, should be borne
   in mind; _e.g._ Charikar (Char-yak-kar) stands 5200 ft. and
   Kabul itself at 5780 ft. above the sea.

   [750] _i.e._ the hollow, long, and small-bazar roads
   respectively. Panjhir is explained by Hindus to be Panj-sher,
   the five lion-sons of Pandu (Masson, iii, 168).

   [751] Shibr is a Hazara district between the head of the
   Ghur-bund valley and Bamian. It does not seem to be correct to
   omit the _tu_ from the name of the pass. Persian _tu_, turn,
   twist (syn. _pich_) occurs in other names of local passes; to
   read it here as a _turn_ agrees with what is said of Shibr-tu
   pass as not crossing but turning the Hindu-kush (Cunningham).
   Lord uses the same wording about the Haji-ghat (var. -kak
   etc.) traverse of the same spur, which "turns the extremity of
   the Hindu-kush". _See_ Cunningham's _Ancient Geography_, i,
   25; Lord's _Ghur-bund_ (JASB 1838 p. 528), Masson, iii, 169
   and Leech's _Report_ VII.

   [752] Perhaps through Jalmish into Saighan.

   [753] _i.e._ they are closed.

   [754] It was unknown in Mr. Erskine's day (Mems. p. 140).
   Several of the routes in Raverty's _Notes_ (p. 92 etc.) allow
   it to be located as on the Iri-ab, near to or identical with
   Baghzan, 35 _kurohs_ (70 m.) s.s.e. of Kabul.

   [755] Farmul, about the situation of which Mr. Erskine was in
   doubt, is now marked in maps, Urghun being its principal
   village.

   [756] 15 miles below Atak (Erskine). Mr. Erskine notes that he
   found no warrant, previous to Abu'l-fazl's, for calling the
   Indus the Nil-ab, and that to find one would solve an ancient
   geographical difficulty. This difficulty, my husband suggests,
   was Alexander's supposition that the Indus was the Nile. In
   books grouping round the _Babur-nama_, the name Nil-ab is not
   applied to the Indus, but to the ferry-station on that river,
   said to owe its name to a spring of azure water on its eastern
   side. (Cf. Afzal Khan _Khattak_, R.'s _Notes_ p. 447.)

   I find the name Nil-ab applied to the Kabul-river:--1. to its
   Arghandi affluent (Cunningham, p. 17, Map); 2. through its
   boatman class, the Nil-abis of Lalpura, Jalalabad and Kunar
   (G. of I. 1907, art. Kabul); 3. inferentially to it as a
   tributary of the Indus (D'Herbelot); 4. to it near its
   confluence with the grey, silt-laden Indus, as blue by
   contrast (Sayyid Ghulam-i-muhammad, R.'s _Notes_ p. 34). (For
   Nil-ab (Naulibis?) in Ghur-bund _see_ Cunningham, p. 32 and
   Masson, iii, 169.)

   [757] By one of two routes perhaps,--either by the
   Khaibar-Ningnahar-Jagdalik road, or along the north bank of
   the Kabul-river, through Goshta to the crossing where, in
   1879, the 10th Hussars met with disaster. _See_ _S.A. War_,
   Map 2 and p. 63; Leech's _Reports_ II and IV (Fords of the
   Indus); and R.'s _Notes_ p. 44.

   [758] Haru, Leech's Harroon, apparently, 10 m. above Atak. The
   text might be read to mean that both rivers were forded near
   their confluence, but, finding no warrant for supposing the
   Kabul-river fordable below Jalalabad, I have guided the
   translation accordingly; this may be wrong and may conceal a
   change in the river.

   [759] Known also as Dhan-kot and as Mu'azzam-nagar
   (_Ma'asiru'l-'umra_ i, 249 and A.N. trs. H.B. index _s.n._
   Dhan-kot). It was on the east bank of the Indus, probably near
   modern Kala-bagh, and was washed away not before 956 AH. (1549
   AD. H. Beveridge).

   [760] Chaupara seems, from f. 148b, to be the Chapari of
   Survey Map 1889. Babur's _Dasht_ is modern Daman.

   [761] _aimaq_, used usually of Mughuls, I think. It may be
   noted that Lieutenant Leech compiled a vocabulary of the
   tongue of the Mughul Aimaq in Qandahar and Harat (JASB 1838,
   p. 785).

   [762] The _Ayin-i-akbari_ account of Kabul both uses and
   supplements the _Babur-nama_.

   [763] _viz._ 'Ali-shang, Alangar and Mandrawar (the Lamghanat
   proper), Ningnahar (with its _buluk_, Kama),
   Kunar-with-Nur-gal, (and the two _buluks_ of Nur-valley and
   Chaghan-sarai).

   [764] _See_ Appendix E, _On Nagarahara_.

   [765] The name Adinapur is held to be descended from ancient
   Udyanapura (Garden-town); its ancestral form however was
   applied to Nagarahara, apparently, in the Baran-Surkh-rud
   _du-ab_, and not to Babur's _darogha's_ seat. The Surkh-rud's
   deltaic mouth was a land of gardens; when Masson visited
   Adinapur he went from Bala-bagh (High-garden); this appears to
   stand where Babur locates his Bagh-i-wafa, but he was shown a
   garden he took to be this one of Babur's, a mile higher up the
   Surkh-rud. A later ruler made the Char-bagh of maps. It may be
   mentioned that Bala-bagh has become in some maps Rozabad
   (Garden-town). _See_ Masson, i, 182 and iii, 186; R.'s
   _Notes_; and Wilson's _Ariana Antiqua_, Masson's art.

   [766] One of these _tangi_ is now a literary asset in Mr.
   Kipling's _My Lord the Elephant_. Babur's 13 y. represent some
   82 miles; on f. 137b the Kabul-Ghazni road of 14 y. represents
   some 85; in each case the _yighach_ works out at over six
   miles (Index _s.n._ _yighach_ and Vigne, p. 454). Sayyid
   Ghulam-i-muhammad traces this route minutely (R.'s _Notes_ pp.
   57, 59).

   [767] Masson was shewn "Chaghatai castles", attributed to
   Babur (iii, 174).

   [768] Dark-turn, perhaps, as in Shibr-tu, Jal-tu, _etc._ (f.
   130b and note to Shibr-tu).

   [769] f. 145 where the change is described in identical words,
   as seen south of the Jagdalik-pass. The Badam-chashma pass
   appears to be a traverse of the eastern rampart of the
   Tizin-valley.

   [770] Appendix E, _On Nagarahara_.

   [771] No record exists of the actual laying-out of the garden;
   the work may have been put in hand during the Mahmand
   expedition of 914 AH. (f. 216); the name given to it suggests
   a gathering there of loyalists when the stress was over of the
   bad Mughul rebellion of that year (f. 216b where the narrative
   breaks off abruptly in 914 AH. and is followed by a gap down
   to 925 AH.-1519 AD.).

   [772] No annals of 930 AH. are known to exist; from Safar 926
   AH. to 932 AH. (Jan. 1520-Nov. 1525 AD.) there is a lacuna.
   Accounts of the expedition are given by Khafi Khan, i, 47 and
   Firishta, lith. ed. p. 202.

   [773] Presumably to his son, Humayun, then governor in
   Badakhshan; Bukhara also was under Babur's rule.

   [774] Here, _qari_, yards. The dimensions 10 by 10, are those
   enjoined for places of ablution.

   [775] Presumably those of the _tuquz-rud_, _supra_. Cf.
   Appendix E, _On Nagarahara_.

   [776] White-mountain; Pushtu, Spin-ghur (or ghar).

   [777] _i.e._ the Lamghanat proper. The range is variously
   named; in (Persian) Siyah-koh (Black-mountain), which like
   Turki Qara-tagh may mean non-snowy; by Tajiks, Bagh-i-ataka
   (Foster-father's garden); by Afghans, Kanda-ghur, and by
   Lamghanis Koh-i-bulan,--Kanda and Bulan both being
   ferry-stations below it (Masson, iii, 189; also the Times Nov.
   20th 1912 for a cognate illustration of diverse naming).

   [778] A comment made here by Mr. Erskine on changes of name is
   still appropriate, but some seeming changes may well be due to
   varied selection of land-marks. Of the three routes next
   described in the text, one crosses as for Mandrawar; the
   second, as for 'Ali-shang, a little below the outfall of the
   Tizin-water; the third may take off from the route, between
   Kabul and Tag-au, marked in Col. Tanner's map (PRGS 1881 p.
   180). Cf. R's Route 11; and for Aulugh-nur, Appendix F, _On
   the name Nur_.

   [779] The name of this pass has several variants. Its second
   component, whatever its form, is usually taken to mean _pass_,
   but to read it here as pass would be redundant, since Babur
   writes "pass (_kutal_) of Bad-i-pich". Pich occurs as a place
   name both east (Pich) and west (Pichghan) of the _kutal_, but
   what would suit the bitter and even fatal winds of the pass
   would be to read the name as Whirling-wind (_bad-i-pich_).
   Another explanation suggests itself from finding a
   considerable number of pass-names such as Shibr-tu, Jai-tu,
   Qara-tu, in which _tu_ is a synonym of _pich_, turn, twist;
   thus Bad-i-pich may be the local form of Bad-tu, Windy-turn.

   [780] _See_ Masson, iii, 197 and 289. Both in Pashai and
   Lamghani, _lam_ means fort.

   [781] _See_ Appendix F, _On the name Dara-i-nur_.

   [782] _ghair mukarrar._ Babur may allude to the remarkable
   change men have wrought in the valley-bottom (Appendix F, for
   Col. Tanner's account of the valley).

   [783] f. 154.

   [784] _diospyrus lotus_, the European date-plum, supposed to
   be one of the fruits eaten by the Lotophagi. It is purple, has
   bloom and is of the size of a pigeon's egg or a cherry. See
   Watts' _Economic Products of India_; Brandis' _Forest Trees_,
   Illustrations; and Speede's _Indian Hand-book_.

   [785] As in Lombardy, perhaps; in Luhugur vines are clipped
   into standards; in most other places in Afghanistan they are
   planted in deep trenches and allowed to run over the
   intervening ridges or over wooden framework. In the narrow
   Khulm-valley they are trained up poplars so as to secure them
   the maximum of sun. _See_ Wood's _Report_ VI p. 27; Bellew's
   _Afghanistan_ p. I75 and _Mems_. p. 142 note.

   [786] Appendix G, _On the names of two Nuri wines_.

   [787] This practice Babur viewed with disgust, the hog being
   an impure animal according to Muhammadan Law (Erskine).

   [788] The _Khazinatu'l-asfiya_ (ii, 293) explains how it came
   about that this saint, one honoured in Kashmir, was buried in
   Khutlan. He died in Hazara (Pakli) and there the Pakli Sultan
   wished to have him buried, but his disciples, for some
   unspecified reason, wished to bury him in Khutlan. In order to
   decide the matter they invited the Sultan to remove the bier
   with the corpse upon it. It could not be stirred from its
   place. When, however, a single one of the disciples tried to
   move it, he alone was able to lift it, and to bear it away on
   his head. Hence the burial in Khutlan. The death occurred in
   786 AH. (1384 AD.). A point of interest in this legend is
   that, like the one to follow, concerning dead women, it shews
   belief in the living activities of the dead.

   [789] The MSS. vary between 920 and 925 AH.--neither date seems
   correct. As the annals of 925 AH. begin in Muharram, with
   Babur to the east of Bajaur, we surmise that the Chaghan-sarai
   affair may have occurred on his way thither, and at the end of
   924 AH.

   [790] _karanj_, _coriandrum sativum_.

   [791] Some 20-24 m. north of Jalalabad. The name Multa-kundi
   may refer to the Ram-kundi range, or mean Lower district, or
   mean Below Kundi. _See_ Biddulph's _Khowari Dialect s.n_
   under; R.'s _Notes_ p. 108 and _Dict. s.n. kund_; Masson, i,
   209.

   [792] _i.e._ treat her corpse as that of an infidel (Erskine).

   [793] It would suit the position of this village if its name
   were found to link to the Turki verb _chaqmaq_, to go out,
   because it lies in the mouth of a defile (Dahanah-i-koh,
   Mountain-mouth) through which the road for Kafiristan goes out
   past the village. A not-infrequent explanation of the name to
   mean White-house, Aq-sarai, may well be questioned. _Chaghan_,
   white, is Mughuli and it would be less probable for a Mughuli
   than for a Turki name to establish itself. Another explanation
   may lie in the tribe name Chugani. The two forms _chaghan_ and
   _chaghar_ may well be due to the common local interchange in
   speech of _n_ with _r_. (For Dahanah-i-koh _see_ [some] maps
   and Raverty's Bajaur routes.)

   [794] Nimchas, presumably,--half-bred in custom, perhaps in
   blood--; and not improbably, converted Kafirs. It is useful to
   remember that Kafiristan was once bounded, west and south, by
   the Baran-water.

   [795] Kafir wine is mostly poor, thin and, even so, usually
   diluted with water. When kept two or three years, however, it
   becomes clear and sometimes strong. Sir G. S. Robertson never
   saw a Kafir drunk (_Kafirs of the Hindu-kush_, p. 591).

   [796] Kama might have classed better under Ningnahar of which
   it was a dependency.

   [797] _i.e._ water-of-Nijr; so too, Badr-au and Tag-au.
   Nijr-au has seven-valleys (JASB 1838 p. 329 and Burnes'
   _Report X_). Sayyid Ghulam-i-muhammad mentions that Babur
   established a frontier-post between Nijr-au and Kafiristan
   which in his own day was still maintained. He was an envoy of
   Warren Hastings to Timur Shah _Sadozi_ (R.'s _Notes_ p. 36 and
   p. 142).

   [798] _Kafirwash_; they were Kafirs converted to
   Muhammadanism.

   [799] _Archa_, if not inclusive, meaning conifer, may
   represent _juniperus excelsa_, this being the common local
   conifer. The other trees of the list are _pinus Gerardiana_
   (Brandis, p. 690), _quercus bilut_, the holm-oak, and
   _pistacia mutica_ or _khanjak_, a tree yielding mastic.

   [800] _ruba-i-parwan_, _pteromys inornatus_, the large, red
   flying-squirrel (Blandford's _Fauna of British India_,
   _Mammalia_, p. 363).

   [801] The _giz_ is a short-flight arrow used for shooting
   small birds _etc._ Descending flights of squirrels have been
   ascertained as 60 yards, one, a record, of 80 (Blandford).

   [802] Apparently _tetrogallus himalayensis_, the Himalayan
   snow-cock (Blandford, iv, 143).Burnes (_Cabool_ p. 163)
   describes the _kabg-i-dari_ as the _rara avis_ of the Kabul
   Kohistan, somewhat less than a turkey, and of the _chikor_
   (partridge) species. It was procured for him first in
   Ghur-bund, but, when snow has fallen, it could be had nearer
   Kabul. Babur's _bu-qalamun_ may have come into his vocabulary,
   either as a survival direct from Greek occupation of Kabul and
   Panj-ab, or through Arabic writings. PRGS 1879 p. 251, Kaye's
   art. and JASB 1838 p. 863, Hodgson's art.

   [803] Bartavelle's _Greek-partridge_, _tetrao-_ or
   _perdrix-rufus_ [f. 279 and Mems. p. 320 n.].

   [804] A similar story is told of some fields near
   Whitby:--"These wild geese, which in winter fly in great flocks
   to the lakes and rivers unfrozen in the southern parts, to the
   great amazement of every-one, fall suddenly down upon the
   ground when they are in flight over certain neighbouring
   fields thereabouts; a relation I should not have made, if I
   had not received it from several credible men." See _Notes to
   Marmion_ p. xlvi (Erskine); Scott's _Poems_, Black's ed. 1880,
   vii, 104.

   [805] Are we to infer from this that the musk-rat (_Crocidura
   coerulea_, Lydekker, p. 626) was not so common in Hindustan in
   the age of Babur as it has now become? He was not a careless
   observer (Erskine).

   [806] Index _s.n._ _Babur-nama_, date of composition; also f.
   131.

   [807] In the absence of examples of _bund_ to mean _kutal_,
   and the presence "in those countries" of many in which _bund_
   means _koh_, it looks as though a clerical error had here
   written _kutal_ for _koh_. But on the other hand, the wording
   of the next passage shows just the confusion an author's
   unrevised draft might shew if a place were, as this is, both a
   _tuman_ and a _kutal_ (_i.e._ a steady rise to a traverse). My
   impression is that the name Ghur-bund applies to the embanking
   spur at the head of the valley-_tuman_, across which roads
   lead to Ghuri and Ghur (PRGS 1879, Maps; Leech's Report VII;
   and Wood's VI).

   [808] So too when, because of them, Leech and Lord turned
   back, _re infecta_.

   [809] It will be noticed that these villages are not classed
   in any _tuman_; they include places "rich without parallel" in
   agricultural products, and level lands on which towns have
   risen and fallen, one being Alexandria ad Caucasum. They
   cannot have been part of the unremunerative Ghur-bund _tuman_;
   from their place of mention in Babur's list of _tumans_, they
   may have been part of the Kabul _tuman_ (f. 178), as was
   Koh-daman (Burnes' _Cabool_ p. 154; Haughton's _Charikar_ p.
   73; and Cunningham's _Ancient History_, i, 18).

   [810] Dur-namai, seen from afar (Masson, iii, 152) is not
   marked on the Survey Maps; Masson, Vigne and Haughton locate
   it. Babur's "head" and "foot" here indicate status and not
   location.

   [811] Mems. p. 146 and _Mems_, i, 297, Arabs' encampment and
   _Cellule des Arabes_. Perhaps the name may refer to uses of
   the level land and good pasture by horse _qafilas_, since
   _Kurra_ is written with _tashdid_ in the Haidarabad Codex, as
   in _kurra-taz_, a horse-breaker. Or the _taziyan_ may be the
   fruit of a legend, commonly told, that the saint of the
   neighbouring Running-sands was an Arabian.

   [812] Presumably this is the grass of the millet, the growth
   before the ear, on which grazing is allowed (Elphinstone, i,
   400; Burnes, p. 237).

   [813] Wood, p. 115; Masson, iii, 167; Burnes, p. 157 and JASB
   1838 p. 324 with illustration; Vigne, pp. 219, 223; Lord, JASB
   1838 p. 537; _Cathay and the way thither_, Hakluyt Society
   vol. I. p. xx, para. 49; _History of Musical Sands_, C.
   Carus-Wilson.

   [814] _West_ might be more exact, since some of the group are
   a little north, others a little south of the latitude of
   Kabul.

   [815] Affluents and not true sources in some cases (Col.
   Holdich's _Gates of India_, _s.n._ Koh-i-baba; and PRGS 1879,
   maps pp. 80 and 160).

   [816] The Pamghan range. These are the villages every
   traveller celebrates. Masson's and Vigne's illustrations
   depict them well.

   [817] _Cercis siliquastrum_, the Judas-tree. Even in 1842 it
   was sparingly found near Kabul, adorning a few tombs, one
   Babur's own. It had been brought from Sih-yaran where, as also
   at Charikar, (Char-yak-kar) it was still abundant and still a
   gorgeous sight. It is there a tree, as at Kew, and not a bush,
   as in most English gardens (Masson, ii, 9; Elphinstone, i,
   194; and for the tree near Harat, f. 191 n. to Safar).

   [818] Khwaja Maudud of Chisht, Khwaja Khawand Sa'id and the
   Khwaja of the Running-sands (Elph. MS. f. 104b, marginal
   note).

   [819] The yellow-flowered plant is not _cercis siliquastrum_
   but one called _mahaka_(?) in Persian, a shrubby plant with
   pea-like blossoms, common in the plains of Persia, Biluchistan
   and Kabul (Masson, iii, 9 and Vigne, p. 216).

   [820] The numerical value of these words gives 925 (Erskine).
   F. 246b _et seq._ for the expedition.

   [821] f. 178. I.O. MS. No. 724, _Haft-iqlim_ f. 135 (Ethe, p.
   402); Rieu, pp. 21_a_, 1058_b_.

   [822] of Afghan habit. The same term is applied (f. 139b) to
   the Zurmutis; it may be explained in both places by Babur's
   statement that Zurmutis grow corn, but do not cultivate
   gardens or orchards.

   [823] _aikan dur._ Sabuk-tigin, d. 387 AH.-997 AD., was the
   father of Sl. Mahmud _Ghaznawi_, d. 421 AH.-1030 AD.

   [824] d. 602 AH.-1206 AD.

   [825] Some Musalmans fast through the months of Rajab, Sha'ban
   and Ramzan; Muhammadans fast only by day; the night is often
   given to feasting (Erskine).

   [826] The Garden; the tombs of more eminent Musalmans are
   generally in gardens (Erskine). See Vigne's illustrations, pp.
   133, 266.

   [827] _i.e._ the year now in writing. The account of the
   expedition, Babur's first into Hindustan, begins on f. 145.

   [828] _i.e._ the countries groupable as Khurasan.

   [829] For picture and account of the dam, _see_ Vigne, pp.
   138, 202.

   [830] f. 295b.

   [831] The legend is told in numerous books with varying
   location of the spring. One narrator, Zakariya _Qazwini_,
   reverses the parts, making Jai-pal employ the ruse; hence
   Leyden's note (Mems. p. 150; E. and D.'s _History of India_
   ii, 20, 182 and iv, 162; for historical information, R.'s
   _Notes_ p. 320). The date of the events is shortly after 378
   AH.-988 AD.

   [832] R.'s _Notes_ _s.n._ Zurmut.

   [833] The question of the origin of the Farmuli has been
   written of by several writers; perhaps they were Turks of
   Persia, Turks and Tajiks.

   [834] This completes the list of the 14 _tumans_ of Kabul,
   _viz._ Ningnahar, 'Ali-shang, Alangar, Mandrawar,
   Kunar-with-Nur-gal, Nijr-au, Panjhir, Ghur-bund, Koh-daman
   (with Kohistan?), Luhugur (of the Kabul _tuman_), Ghazni,
   Zurmut, Farmul and Bangash.

   [835] Between Nijr-au and Tag-au (Masson, iii, 165). Mr.
   Erskine notes that Babur reckoned it in the hot climate but
   that the change of climate takes place further east, between
   'Ali-shang and Auzbin (_i.e._ the valley next eastwards from
   Tag-au).

   [836] _bughuzlarigha fursat bulmas_; _i.e._ to kill them in
   the lawful manner, while pronouncing the _Bi'smi'llah_.

   [837] This completes the _buluks_ of Kabul _viz._ Badr-au
   (Tag-au), Nur-valley, Chaghan-sarai, Kama and Ala-sai.

   [838] The _rupi_ being equal to 2-1/2 _shahrukhis_, the
   _shahrukhi_ may be taken at 10_d._ thus making the total
   revenue only L33,333 6_s._ 8_d._ See _Ayin-i-akbari_ ii, 169
   (Erskine).

   [839] _sic_ in all B. N. MSS. Most maps print Khost. Muh.
   Salih says of Khwast, "Who sees it, would call it a Hell"
   (Vambery, p. 361).

   [840] Babur's statement about this fodder is not easy to
   translate; he must have seen grass grow in tufts, and must
   have known the Persian word _buta_ (bush). Perhaps _kah_
   should be read to mean plant, not grass. Would Wood's _bootr_
   fit in, a small furze bush, very plentiful near Bamian?
   (Wood's Report VI, p. 23; and for regional grasses,
   Aitchison's _Botany of the Afghan Delimitation Commission_, p.
   122.)

   [841] _nazu_, perhaps _cupressus torulosa_ (Brandis, p.693).

   [842] f. 276.

   [843] A laborious geographical note of Mr. Erskine's is here
   regretfully left behind, as now needless (Mems. p. 152).

   [844] Here, mainly wild-sheep and wild-goats, including
   _mar-khwar_.

   [845] Perhaps, no conifers; perhaps none of those of the
   contrasted hill-tract.

   [846] While here _dasht_ (plain) represents the eastern skirt
   of the Mehtar Sulaiman range, _duki_ or _dugi_ (desert) seems
   to stand for the hill tracts on the west of it, and not, as on
   f. 152, for the place there specified.

   [847] Mems. p. 152, "A narrow place is large to the
   narrow-minded"; _Mems._ i, 311, "Ce qui n'est pas trop large,
   ne reste pas vide." Literally, "So long as heights are not
   equal, there is no vis-a-vis," or, if _tang_ be read for
   _ting_, "No dawn, no noon," _i.e._ no effect without a cause.

   [848] I have not lighted on this name in botanical books or
   explained by dictionaries. Perhaps it is a Cis-oxanian name
   for the _sax-aol_ of Transoxania. As its uses are enumerated
   by some travellers, it might be _Haloxylon ammodendron_,
   _ta-ghas etc._ and _sax-aol_ (Aitchison, p. 102).

   [849] f. 135b note to Ghur-bund.

   [850] I understand that wild-goats, wild-sheep and deer
   (_ahu_) were not localized, but that the dun-sheep migrated
   through. Antelope (_ahu_) was scarce in Elphinstone's time.

   [851] _qizil kiyik_ which, taken with its alternative name,
   _arqarghalcha_, allows it to be the dun-sheep of Wood's
   _Journey_ p. 241. From its second name it may be _Ovis amnon_
   (_Raos_), or _O. argali_.

   [852] _tusqawal_, var. _tutqawal_, _tusaqawal_ and
   _tushqawal_, a word which has given trouble to scribes and
   translators. As a sporting-term it is equivalent to
   _shikar-i-nihilam_; in one or other of its forms I find it
   explained as _Weg-hueter_, _Fahnen-hueter_, _Zahl-meister_,
   _Schlucht_, _Gefahrlicher-weg_ and _Schmaler-weg_. It recurs
   in the B.N. on f. 197b l. 5 and l. 6 and there might mean
   either a narrow road or a _Weg-hueter_. If its Turki root be
   _tus_, the act of stopping, all the above meanings can follow,
   but there may be two separate roots, the second, _tush_, the
   act of descent (JRAS 1900 p. 137, H. Beveridge's art. _On the
   word nihilam_).

   [853] _qushlik_, _aitlik_. Elphinstone writes (i, 191) of the
   excellent greyhounds and hawking birds of the region; here the
   bird may be the _charkh_, which works with the dogs, fastening
   on the head of the game (Von Schwarz, p. 117, for the same use
   of eagles).

   [854] An antelope resembling the usual one of Hindustan is
   common south of Ghazni (Vigne, p. 110); what is not found may
   be some classes of wild-sheep, frequent further north, at
   higher elevation, and in places more familiar to Babur.

   [855] The Parwan or Hindu-kush pass, concerning the winds of
   which _see_ f. 128.

   [856] _turna u qarqara_; the second of which is the Hindi
   _bugla_, heron, _egret ardea gazetta_, the furnisher of the
   aigrette of commerce.

   [857] The _auqar_ is _ardea cinerea_, the grey heron; the
   _qarqara_ is _ardea gazetta_, the egret. _Qutan_ is explained
   in the Elph. Codex (f. 110) by _khawasil_, goldfinch, but the
   context concerns large birds; Scully (Shaw's Voc.) has
   _qodan_, water-hen, which suits better.

   [858] _giz_, the short-flight arrow.

   [859] a small, round-headed nail with which a whip-handle is
   decorated (Vambery). Such a stud would keep the cord from
   slipping through the fingers and would not check the
   arrow-release.

   [860] It has been understood (Mems. p. 158 and _Mems._ i, 313)
   that the arrow was flung by hand but if this were so,
   something heavier than the _giz_ would carry the cord better,
   since it certainly would be difficult to direct a missile so
   light as an arrow without the added energy of the bow. The
   arrow itself will often have found its billet in the
   closely-flying flock; the cord would retrieve the bird. The
   verb used in the text is _aitmaq_, the one common to express
   the discharge of arrows _etc._

   [861] For Timurids who may have immigrated the fowlers _see_
   Raverty's _Notes_ p. 579 and his Appendix p. 22.

   [862] _milwah_; this has been read by all earlier translators,
   and also by the Persian annotator of the Elph. Codex, to mean
   _shakh_, bough. For decoy-ducks _see_ Bellew's _Notes on
   Afghanistan_ p. 404.

   [863] _qulan quyirughi._ Amongst the many plants used to drug
   fish I have not found this one mentioned. _Khar-zahra_ and
   _khar-faq_ approach it in verbal meaning; the first describes
   colocynth, the second, wild rue. See Watts' _Economic Products
   of India_ iii, 366 and Bellew's _Notes_ pp. 182, 471 and 478.

   [864] Much trouble would have been spared to himself and his
   translators, if Babur had known a lobster-pot.

   [865] The fish, it is to be inferred, came down the fall into
   the pond.

   [866] Burnes and Vigne describe a fall 20 miles from Kabul, at
   "Tangi Gharoi", [below where the Tag-au joins the
   Baran-water,] to which in their day, Kabulis went out for the
   amusement of catching fish as they try to leap up the fall.
   Were these migrants seeking upper waters or were they captives
   in a fish-pond?

   [867] Elph. MS. f. 111; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 116b and 217 f.
   97b; Mems. p. 155; _Mems._ i, 318.

   [868] _mihman-beglar_, an expression first used by Babur here,
   and due, presumably, to accessions from Khusrau Shah's
   following. A parallel case is given in Max Mueller's _Science
   of Language_ i, 348 ed. 1871, "Turkman tribes ... call
   themselves, not subjects, but guests of the Uzbeg Khans."

   [869] _tiyul-dik_ in all the Turki MSS. Ilminsky, de
   Courteille and Zenker, _yitul-dik_, Turki, a fief.

   [870] _Wilayat khud hech birilmadi_; W.-i-B. 215 f. 116b,
   _Wilayat dada na shuda_ and 217 f. 97b, _Wilayat khud hech
   dada na shud_. By this I understand that he kept the lands of
   Kabul itself in his own hands. He mentions (f. 350) and
   Gul-badan mentions (H.N. f. 40b) his resolve so to keep Kabul.
   I think he kept not only the fort but all lands constituting
   the Kabul _tuman_ (f. 135b and note).

   [871] _Saifi dur, qalami aimas_, _i.e._ tax is taken by force,
   not paid on a written assessment.

   [872] _khar-war_, about 700 lbs Averdupois (Erskine). Cf.
   _Ayin-i-akbari_ (Jarrett, ii, 394).

   [873] Nizamu'd-din Ahmad and Badayuni both mention this script
   and say that in it Babur transcribed a copy of the Qoran for
   presentation to Makka. Badayuni says it was unknown in his
   day, the reign of Akbar (_Tabaqat-i-akbari_, lith. ed. p.
   193, and _Muntakhabu't-tawarikh_ Bib. Ind. ed. iii, 273).

   [874] Babur's route, taken with one given by Raverty (_Notes_
   p. 691), allows these Hazaras, about whose location Mr.
   Erskine was uncertain, to be located between the Takht-pass
   (Arghandi-Maidan-Unai road), on their east, and the Sang-lakh
   mountains, on their west.

   [875] The Takht-pass, one on which from times immemorial, toll
   (_nirkh_) has been taken.

   [876] _khatir-khwah chapilmadi_, which perhaps implies mutual
   discontent, Babur's with his gains, the Hazaras' with their
   losses. As the second Persian translation omits the negative,
   the Memoirs does the same.

   [877] Bhira being in Shahpur, this Khan's _darya_ will be the
   Jehlam.

   [878] Babur uses Persian _dasht_ and Hindi _duki_, plain and
   hill, for the tracts east and west of Mehtar Sulaiman. The
   first, _dasht_, stands for Daman (skirt) and Dara-i-jat, the
   second, _duki_, indefinitely for the broken lands west of the
   main range, but also, in one instance for the Duki [Dugi]
   district of Qandahar, as will be noted.

   [879] f. 132. The Jagdalik-pass for centuries has separated
   the districts of Kabul and Ningnahar. Forster (_Travels_ ii,
   68), making the journey the reverse way, was sensible of the
   climatic change some 3m. east of Gandamak. Cf. Wood's _Report_
   I. p. 6.

   [880] These are they whose families Nasir Mirza shepherded out
   of Kabul later (f. 154, f. 155).

   [881] Bird's-dome, opposite the mouth of the Kunar-water
   (_S.A. War_, Map p. 64).

   [882] This word is variously pointed and is uncertain. Mr.
   Erskine adopted "Pekhi", but, on the whole, it may be best to
   read, here and on f. 146, Ar. _fajj_ or pers. _paj_, mountain
   or pass. To do so shews the guide to be one located in the
   Khaibar-pass, a _Fajji_ or _Paji_.

   [883] mod. Jam-rud (Jam-torrent), presumably.

   [884] G. of I. xx, 125 and Cunningham's _Ancient History_ i,
   80. Babur saw the place in 925 AH. (f. 232b).

   [885] Cunningham, p. 29. Four ancient sites, not far removed
   from one another, bear this name, Bigram, _viz._ those near
   Hupian, Kabul, Jalalabad and Pashawar.

   [886] Cunningham, i, 79.

   [887] Perhaps a native of Kamari on the Indus, but _kamari_ is
   a word of diverse application (index _s.n._).

   [888] The annals of this campaign to the eastward shew that
   Babur was little of a free agent; that many acts of his own
   were merciful; that he sets down the barbarity of others as it
   was, according to his plan of writing (f. 86); and that he had
   with him undisciplined robbers of Khusrau Shah's former
   following. He cannot be taken as having power to command or
   control the acts of those, his guest-begs and their following,
   who dictated his movements in this disastrous journey, one
   worse than a defeat, says Haidar Mirza.

   [889] For the route here _see_ Masson, i, 117 and Colquhoun's
   _With the Kuram Field-force_ p. 48.

   [890] The Hai. MS. writes this Dilah-zak.

   [891] _i.e._ raised a force in Babur's name. He took advantage
   of this _farman_ in 911 AH. to kill Baqi _Chagkaniani_ (f.
   159b-160).

   [892] Of the Yusuf-zai and Ranjit-singh, Masson says, (i, 141)
   "The miserable, hunted wretches threw themselves on the
   ground, and placing a blade or tuft of grass in their mouths,
   cried out, "I am your cow." This act and explanation, which
   would have saved them from an orthodox Hindu, had no effect
   with the infuriated Sikhs." This form of supplication is at
   least as old as the days of Firdausi (Erskine, p. 159 n.). The
   _Bahar-i-'ajam_ is quoted by Vullers as saying that in India,
   suppliants take straw in the mouth to indicate that they are
   blanched and yellow from fear.

   [893] This barbarous custom has always prevailed amongst the
   Tartar conquerors of Asia (Erskine). For examples under Timur
   _see_ Raverty's _Notes_ p. 137.

   [894] For a good description of the road from Kohat to Thal
   _see_ Bellew's _Mission_ p. 104.

   [895] F. 88b has the same phrase about the doubtful courage of
   one Sayyidi Qara.

   [896] Not to the mod. town of Bannu, [that having been begun
   only in 1848 AD.] but wherever their wrong road brought them
   out into the Bannu amphitheatre. The Survey Map of 1868, No.
   15, shews the physical features of the wrong route.

   [897] Perhaps he connived at recovery of cattle by those
   raided already.

   [898] Taq is the Tank of Maps; Bazar was s.w. of it. Tank for
   Taq looks to be a variant due to nasal utterance (Vigne, p.
   77, p. 203 and Map; and, as bearing on the nasal, _in loco_,
   Appendix E).

   [899] If return had been made after over-running Bannu, it
   would have been made by the Tochi-valley and so through
   Farmul; if after over-running the Plain, Babur's details shew
   that the westward turn was meant to be by the Gumal-valley and
   one of two routes out of it, still to Farmul; but the extended
   march southward to near Dara-i-Ghazi Khan made the westward
   turn be taken through the valley opening at Sakhi-sawar.

   [900] This will mean, none of the artificial runlets familiar
   where Babur had lived before getting to know Hindustan.

   [901] _sauda-at_, perhaps, pack-ponies, perhaps, bred for sale
   and not for own use. Burnes observes that in 1837 Luhani
   merchants carried precisely the same articles of trade as in
   Babur's day, 332 years earlier (_Report_ IX p. 99).

   [902] Mr. Erskine thought it probable that the first of these
   routes went through Kaniguram, and the second through the
   Ghwaliri-pass and along the Gumal. _Birk_, fastness, would
   seem an appropriate name for Kaniguram, but, if Babur meant to
   go to Ghazni, he would be off the ordinary Gumal-Ghazni route
   in going through Farmul (Aurgun). Raverty's _Notes_ give much
   useful detail about these routes, drawn from native sources.
   For Barak (Birk) _see_ _Notes_ pp. 88, 89; Vigne, p. 102.

   [903] From this it would seem that the alternative roads were
   approached by one in common.

   [904] _tumshuq_, a bird's bill, used here, as in Selsey-bill,
   for the naze (nose), or snout, the last spur, of a range.

   [905] Here these words may be common nouns.

   [906] Nu-roz, the feast of the old Persian New-year (Erskine);
   it is the day on which the Sun enters Aries.

   [907] In the [Turki] Elph. and Hai. MSS. and in some Persian
   ones, there is a space left here as though to indicate a known
   omission.

   [908] _kamari_, sometimes a cattle-enclosure, which may serve
   as a _sangur_. The word may stand in one place of its
   _Babur-nama_ uses for Gum-rahi (R.'s _Notes_ _s.n._
   Gum-rahan).

   [909] Index _s.n._

   [910] Vigne, p. 241.

   [911] This name can be translated "He turns not back" or "He
   stops not".

   [912] _i.e._ five from Bilah.

   [913] Raverty gives the saint's name as Pir Kanun (Ar.
   _kanun_, listened to). It is the well-known Sakhi-sarwar,
   honoured hy Hindus and Muhammadans. (G. of I., xxi, 390; R.'s
   _Notes_ p. 11 and p. 12 and JASB 1855; Calcutta Review 1875,
   Macauliffe's art. _On the fair at Sakhi-sarwar_; Leech's
   _Report_ VII, for the route; _Khazinatu 'l-asfiya_ iv, 245.)

   [914] This seems to be the sub-district of Qandahar, Duki or
   Dugi.

   [915] _khar-gah_, a folding tent on lattice frame-work,
   perhaps a _khibitka_.

   [916] It may be more correct to write Kah-mard, as the Hai.
   MS. does and to understand in the name a reference to the
   grass(_kah_)-yielding capacity of the place.

   [917] f. 121.

   [918] This may mean, what irrigation has not used.

   [919] Mr. Erskine notes that the description would lead us to
   imagine a flock of flamingoes. Masson found the lake filled
   with red-legged, white fowl (i, 262); these and also what
   Babur saw, may have been the China-goose which has body and
   neck white, head and tail russet (Bellew's _Mission_ p. 402).
   Broadfoot seems to have visited the lake when migrants were
   few, and through this to have been led to adverse comment on
   Babur's accuracy (p. 350).

   [920] The usual dryness of the bed may have resulted from the
   irrigation of much land some 12 miles from Ghazni.

   [921] This is the Luhugur (Logar) water, knee-deep in winter
   at the ford but spreading in flood with the spring-rains.
   Babur, not being able to cross it for the direct roads into
   Kabul, kept on along its left bank, crossing it eventually at
   the Kamari of maps, s.e. of Kabul.

   [922] This disastrous expedition, full of privation and loss,
   had occupied some four months (T.R. p. 201).

   [923] f. 145b.

   [924] f. 133b and Appendix F.

   [925] They were located in Mandrawar in 926 AH. (f. 251).

   [926] This was done, manifestly, with the design of drawing
   after the families their fighting men, then away with Babur.

   [927] f. 163. Shaibaq Khan besieged Chin Sufi, Sl. Husain
   Mirza's man in Khwarizm (T. R. p. 204; _Shaibani-nama_,
   Vambery, Table of Contents and note 89).

   [928] Survey Map 1889, Sadda. The Ragh-water flows n.w. into
   the Oxus (Amu).

   [929] _birk_, a mountain stronghold; cf. f. 149b note to Birk
   (Barak).

   [930] They were thus driven on from the Baran-water (f. 154b).

   [931] f. 126b.

   [932] Hisar, presumably.

   [933] Here "His Honour" translates Babur's clearly ironical
   honorific plural.

   [934] These two sultans, almost always mentioned in alliance,
   may be Timurids by maternal descent (Index _s.nn._). So far I
   have found no direct statement of their parentage. My husband
   has shewn me what may be one indication of it, _viz._ that two
   of the uncles of Shaibaq Khan (whose kinsmen the sultans seem
   to be), Quj-kunji and Siunjak, were sons of a daughter of the
   Timurid Aulugh Beg _Samarkandi_ (H.S. ii, 318). _See_
   Vambery's _Bukhara_ p. 248 note.

   [935] For the deaths of Tambal and Mahmud, mentioned in the
   above summary of Shaibaq Khan's actions, _see_ the
   _Shaibani-nama_, Vambery, p. 323.

   [936] H.S. ii, 323, for Khusrau Shah's character and death.

   [937] f. 124.

   [938] Khwaja-of-the-rhubarb, presumably a shrine near
   rhubarb-grounds (f. 129b).

   [939] _yakshi bardilar_, lit. went well, a common expression
   in the _Babur-nama_, of which the reverse statement is
   _yamanlik bila bardi_ (f. 163). Some Persian MSS. make the
   Mughuls disloyal but this is not only in opposition to the
   Turki text, it is a redundant statement since if disloyal,
   they are included in Babur's previous statement, as being
   Khusrau Shah's retainers. What might call for comment in
   Mughuls would be loyalty to Babur.

   [940] Elph. MS. f. 121b: W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 126 and 217 f.
   106b; Mems. p. 169.

   [941] _tagh-damanasi_, presumably the Koh-daman, and the
   garden will thus be the one of f. 136b.

   [942] If these heirs were descendants of Aulugh Beg M. one
   would be at hand in 'Abdu'r-razzaq, then a boy, and another, a
   daughter, was the wife of Muqim _Arghun_. As Mr. Erskine
   notes, Musalmans are most scrupulous not to bury their dead in
   ground gained by violence or wrong.

   [943] The news of Ahmad's death was belated; he died some 13
   months earlier, in the end of 909 AH. and in Eastern
   Turkistan. Perhaps details now arrived.

   [944] _i.e._ the fortieth day of mourning, when alms are
   given.

   [945] Of those arriving, the first would find her
   step-daughter dead, the second her sister, the third, his late
   wife's sister (T. R. p. 196).

   [946] This will be the earthquake felt in Agra on Safar 3rd
   911 AH. (July 5th 1505 AD. Erskine's _History of India_ i, 229
   note). Cf. Elliot and Dowson, iv, 465 and v, 99.

   [947] Raverty's _Notes_ p. 690.

   [948] _bir kitta tash atimi_; var. _bash atimi_. If _tash_ be
   right, the reference will probably be to the throw of a
   catapult.

   [949] Here almost certainly, a drummer, because there were two
   tambours and because also Babur uses _'audi_ & _ghachaki_ for
   the other meanings of _tambourchi_, lutanist and guitarist.
   The word has found its way, as _tambourgi_, into Childe
   Harold's Pilgrimage (Canto ii, lxxii. H. B.).

   [950] Kabul-Ghazni road (R.'s _Notes_ index _s.n._).

   [951] var. Yari. Tazi is on the Ghazni-Qalat-i-ghilzai road
   (R.'s _Notes_, Appendix p. 46).

   [952] _i.e._ in Kabul and in the Trans-Himalayan country.

   [953] These will be those against Babur's suzerainty done by
   their defence of Qalat for Muqim.

   [954] _tabaqa_, dynasty. By using this word Babur shews
   recognition of high birth. It is noticeable that he usually
   writes of an Arghun chief either simply as "Beg" or without a
   title. This does not appear to imply admission of equality,
   since he styles even his brothers and sisters Mirza and Begim;
   nor does it shew familiarity of intercourse, since none seems
   to have existed between him and Zu'n-nun or Muqim. That he did
   not admit equality is shewn on f. 208. The T.R. styles
   Zu'n-nun "Mirza", a title by which, as also by Shah, his
   descendants are found styled (A.-i-a. Blochmann, _s.n._).

   [955] Turki _khachar_ is a camel or mule used for carrying
   personal effects. The word has been read by some scribes as
   _khanjar_, dagger.

   [956] In 910 AH. he had induced Babur to come to Kabul instead
   of going into Khurasan (H.S. iii, 319); in the same year he
   dictated the march to Kohat, and the rest of that disastrous
   travel. His real name was not Baqi but Muhammad Baqir (H.S.
   iii, 311).

   [957] These transit or custom duties are so called because the
   dutiable articles are stamped with a _tamgha_, a wooden stamp.

   [958] Perhaps this word is an equivalent of Persian _goshi_, a
   tax on cattle and beasts of burden.

   [959] Baqi was one only and not the head of the Lords of the
   Gate.

   [960] The choice of the number nine, links on presumably to
   the mystic value attached to it _e.g._ Tarkhans had nine
   privileges; gifts were made by nines.

   [961] It is near Hasan-abdal (A.-i-A. Jarrett, ii, 324).

   [962] For the _farman_, f. 146b; for Gujurs, G. of I.

   [963] var. Khwesh. Its water flows into the Ghur-bund stream;
   it seems to be the Dara-i-Turkman of Stanford and the Survey
   Maps both of which mark Janglik. For Hazara turbulence, f.
   135b and note.

   [964] The repetition of _auq_ in this sentence can hardly be
   accidental.

   [965] _taur_ [_dara_], which I take to be Turki, round,
   complete.

   [966] Three MSS. of the Turki text write _bir simizluq tiwah_;
   but the two Persian translations have _yak shuturluq farbih_,
   a _shuturluq_ being a baggage-camel with little hair
   (Erskine).

   [967] _brochettes_, meat cut into large mouthfuls, spitted and
   roasted.

   [968] Perhaps he was officially an announcer; the word means
   also bearer of good news.

   [969] _yilang_, without mail, as in the common phrase _yigit
   yilang_, a bare brave.

   [970] _aupchin_, of horse and man (f. 113b and note).

   [971] Manifestly Babur means that he twice actually helped to
   collect the booty.

   [972] This is that part of a horse covered by the two
   side-pieces of a Turki saddle, from which the side-arch
   springs on either side (Shaw).

   [973] _Baran-ning ayaghi._ Except the river I have found
   nothing called Baran; the village marked Baian on the French
   Map would suit the position; it is n.e. of Char-yak-kar (f.
   184b note).

   [974] _i.e._ prepared to fight.

   [975] For the Hazara (Turki, Ming) on the Mirza's road _see_
   Raverty's routes from Ghazni to the north. An account given by
   the _Tarikh-i-rashidi_ (p. 196) of Jahangir's doings is
   confused; its parenthetical "(at the same time)" can hardly be
   correct. Jahangir left Ghazni now, (911 AH.), as Babur left
   Kabul in 912 AH. without knowledge of Husain's death (911
   AH.). Babur had heard it (f. 183b) before Jahangir joined him
   (912 AH.); after their meeting they went on together to Heri.
   The petition of which the T. R. speaks as made by Jahangir to
   Babur, that he might go into Khurasan and help the Bai-qara
   Mirzas must have been made after the meeting of the two at
   Saf-hill (f. 184b).

   [976] The plurals _they_ and _their_ of the preceding sentence
   stand no doubt for the Mirza, Yusuf and Buhlul who all had
   such punishment due as would lead them to hear threat in
   Qasim's words now when all were within Babur's pounce.

   [977] These are the _aimaqs_ from which the fighting-men went
   east with Babur in 910 AH. and the families in which Nasir
   shepherded across Hindu-kush (f. 154 and f. 155).

   [978] _yamanlik bila bardi_; cf. f. 156b and n. for its
   opposite, _yakhshi bardilar_; and T. R. p. 196.

   [979] One might be of mail, the other of wadded cloth.

   [980] Chin Sufi was Husain _Bai-qara's_ man (T.R. p. 204). His
   arduous defence, faithfulness and abandonment recall the
   instance of a later time when also a long road stretched
   between the man and the help that failed him. But the Mirza
   was old, his military strength was, admittedly, sapped by
   ease; hence his elder Khartum, his neglect of his Gordon.

   It should be noted that no mention of the page's fatal arrow
   is made by the _Shaibani-nama_ (Vambery, p. 442), or by the
   _Tarikh-i-rashidi_ (p. 204). Chin Sufi's death was on the 21st
   of the Second Rabi 911 AH. (Aug. 22nd 1505 AD.).

   [981] This may be the "Baboulei" of the French Map of 1904, on
   the Heri-Kushk-Maruchaq road.

   [982] Elph. MS. f. 127; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 132 and 217 f.
   111b; Mems. p. 175; _Mems._ i, 364.

   That Babur should have given his laborious account of the
   Court of Heri seems due both to loyalty to a great Timurid,
   seated in Timur Beg's place (f. 122b), and to his own
   interest, as a man-of-letters and connoisseur in excellence,
   in that ruler's galaxy of talent. His account here opening is
   not complete; its sources are various; they include the
   _Habibu's-siyar_ and what he will have learned himself in Heri
   or from members of the Bai-qara family, knowledgeable women
   some of them, who were with him in Hindustan. The narrow scope
   of my notes shews that they attempt no more than to indicate
   further sources of information and to clear up a few
   obscurities.

   [983] Timur's youngest son, d. 850 AH. (1446 AD.). Cf. H.S.
   iii, 203. The use in this sentence of Amir and not Beg as
   Timur's title is, up to this point, unique in the
   _Babur-nama_; it may be a scribe's error.

   [984] Firuza's paternal line of descent was as
   follows:--Firuza, daughter of Sl. Husain _Qanjut_, son of Aka
   Begim, daughter of Timur. Her maternal descent was:--Firuza, d.
   of Qutluq-sultan Begim, d. of Miran-shah, s. of Timur. She
   died Muh. 24th 874 AH. (July 25th 1489 AD. H.S. iii, 218).

   [985] "No-one in the world had such parentage", writes
   Khwand-amir, after detailing the Timurid, Chingiz-khanid, and
   other noted strains meeting in Husain _Bai-qara_ (H.S. iii,
   204).

   [986] The Elph. MS. gives the Begim no name; Badi'u'l-jamal is
   correct (H.S. iii, 242). The curious "Badka" needs
   explanation. It seems probable that Babur left one of his
   blanks for later filling-in; the natural run of his sentence
   here is "Aka B. and Badi'u'l-jamal B." and not the detail,
   which follows in its due place, about the marriage with Ahmad.

   [987] _Diwan bashida hasir bulmas aidi_; the sense of which
   may be that Bai-qara did not sit where the premier retainer
   usually sat at the head of the Court (Pers. trs.
   _sar-i-diwan_).

   [988] From this Wais and Sl. Husain M.'s daughter Sultanim (f.
   167b) were descended the Bai-qara Mirzas who gave Akbar so
   much trouble.

   [989] As this man might be mistaken for Babur's uncle (_q.v._)
   of the same name, it may be well to set down his parentage. He
   was a s. of Mirza Sayyidi Ahmad, s. of Miran-shah, s. of Timur
   (H.S. iii, 217, 241). I have not found mention elsewhere of
   "Ahmad s. of Miran-shah"; the _sayyidi_ in his style points to
   a sayyida mother. He was Governor of Heri for a time, for Sl.
   H.M.; 'Ali-sher has notices of him and of his son, Kichik
   Mirza (_Journal Asiatique_ xvii, 293, M. Belin's art. where
   may be seen notices of many other men mentioned by Babur).

   [990] He collected and thus preserved 'Ali-sher's earlier
   poems (Rieu's Pers. Cat. p. 294). Mu'inu'd-din al Zamji writes
   respectfully of his being worthy of credence in some Egyptian
   matters with which he became acquainted in twice passing
   through that country on his Pilgrimage (_Journal Asiatique_
   xvi, 476, de Meynard's article).

   [991] Kichik M.'s quatrain is a mere plagiarism of Jami's
   which I am indebted to my husband for locating as in the
   _Diwan_ I.O. MS. 47 p. 47; B.M. Add. 7774 p. 290; and Add.
   7775 p. 285. M. Belin interprets the verse as an expression of
   the rise of the average good man to mystical rapture, not as
   his lapse from abstinence to indulgence (l.c. xvii, 296 and
   notes).

   [992] Elph. MS. _younger_ but Hai. MS. _older_ in which it is
   supported by the "also" (_ham_) of the sentence.

   [993] modern Astrakhan. Husain's guerilla wars were those
   through which he cut his way to the throne of Heri. This begim
   was married first to Pir Budagh Sl. (H.S. iii, 242); he dying,
   she was married by Ahmad, presumably by levirate custom
   (_yinkalik_; f. 12 and note). By Ahmad she had a daughter,
   styled Khan-zada Begim whose affairs find comment on f. 206
   and H.S. iii, 359. (The details of this note negative a
   suggestion of mine that Badka was the Rabi'a-sultan of f. 168
   (Gul-badan, App. _s. nn._).)

   [994] This is a felt wide-awake worn by travellers in hot
   weather (Shaw); the Turkman bonnet (Erskine).

   [995] Hai. MS. _yamanlik_, badly, but Elph. MS. _namayan_,
   whence Erskine's _showy_.

   [996] This was a proof that he was then a Shi'a (Erskine).

   [997] The word _perform_ may be excused in speaking of
   Musalman prayers because they involve ceremonial bendings and
   prostrations (Erskine).

   [998] If Babur's 40 include rule in Heri only, it over-states,
   since Yadgar died in 875 AH. and Husain in 911 AH. while the
   intervening 36 years include the 5 or 6 temperate ones. If the
   40 count from 861 AH. when Husain began to rule in Merv, it
   under-states. It is a round number, apparently.

   [999] Relying on the Ilminsky text, Dr. Rieu was led into the
   mistake of writing that Babur gave Husain the wrong pen-name,
   _i.e._ Husain, and not Husaini (Turk. Cat. p. 256).

   [1000] Daulat-shah says that as he is not able to enumerate
   all Husain's feats-of-arms, he, Turkman fashion, offers a gift
   of Nine. The Nine differ from those of Babur's list in some
   dates; they are also records of victory only (Browne, p. 521;
   _Not. et Extr._ iv, 262, de Sacy's article).

   [1001] Wolves'-water, a river and its town at the s.e. corner
   of the Caspian, the ancient boundary between Russia and
   Persia. The name varies a good deal in MSS.

   [1002] The battle was at Tarshiz; Abu-sa'id was ruling in
   Heri; Daulat-shah (l.c. p. 523) gives 90 and 10,000 as the
   numbers of the opposed forces!

   [1003] f. 26b and note; H.S. iii, 209; Daulat-shah p. 523.

   [1004] The loser was the last Shahrukhi ruler. Chanaran
   (variants) is near Abiward, Anwari's birth-place (H.S. iii,
   218; D.S. p. 527).

   [1005] f. 85. D.S. (p. 540) and the H.S. (iii, 223) dwell on
   Husain's speed through three continuous days and nights.

   [1006] f. 26; H.S. iii, 227; D.S. p. 532.

   [1007] Abu-sa'id's son by a Badakhshi Begim (T.R. p. 108); he
   became his father's Governor in Badakhshan and married Husain
   _Bai-qara's_ daughter Begim Sultan at a date after 873 AH. (f.
   168 and note; H.S. iii, 196, 229, 234-37; D.S. p. 535).

   [1008] f. 152.

   [1009] Aba-bikr was defeated and put to death at the end of
   Rajah 884 AH.-Oct. 1479 AD. after flight before Husain across
   the Gurgan-water (H.S. iii, 196 and 237 but D.S. p. 539, Safar
   885 AH.).

   [1010] f. 41, Pul-i-chiragh; for Halwa-spring, H.S. iii, 283
   and Rieu's Pers. Cat. p. 443.

   [1011] f. 33 (p. 57) and f. 57b.

   [1012] In commenting thus Babur will have had in mind what he
   best knew, Husain's futile movements at Qunduz and Hisar.

   [1013] _qalib aidi_; if _qalib_ be taken as Turki, survived or
   remained, it would not apply here since many of Husain's
   children predeceased him; Ar. _qalab_ would suit, meaning
   _begotten_, _born_.

   There are discrepancies between Babur's details here and
   Khwand-amir's scattered through the _Habibu's-siyar_,
   concerning Husain's family.

   [1014] _bi huzuri_, which may mean aversion due to Khadija
   Begim's malevolence.

   [1015] Some of the several goings into 'Iraq chronicled by
   Babur point to refuge taken with Timurids, descendants of
   Khalil and 'Umar, sons of Miran-shah (Lane-Poole's _Muhammadan
   Dynasties_, Table of the Timurids).

   [1016] He died before his father (H.S. iii, 327).

   [1017] He will have been killed previous to Ramzan 3rd 918 AH.
   (Nov. 12th, 1512 AD.), the date of the battle of Ghaj-dawan
   when Nijm Sani died.

   [1018] The _bund_ here may not imply that both were in prison,
   but that they were bound in close company, allowing Isma'il, a
   fervent Shi'a, to convert the Mirza.

   [1019] The _batman_ is a Turkish weight of 13lbs (Meninsky) or
   15lbs (Wollaston). The weight seems likely to refer to the
   strength demanded for rounding the bow (_kaman guroha-si_)
   _i.e._ as much strength as to lift 40 _batmans_. Rounding or
   bending might stand for stringing or drawing. The meaning can
   hardly be one of the weight of the cross-bow itself. Erskine
   read _gurdehieh_ for _guroha_ (p. 180) and translated by
   "double-stringed bow"; de Courteille (i, 373) read
   _guirdhiyeh, arrondi, circulaire_, in this following Ilminsky
   who may have followed Erskine. The Elph. and Hai. MSS. and the
   first W.-i-B. (I.O. 215 f. 113b) have _kaman guroha-si_; the
   second W.-i-B. omits the passage, in the MSS. I have seen.

   [1020] _yakhshilar barib tur_; lit. good things went (on); cf.
   f. 156b and note.

   [1021] Badi'u'z-zaman's son, drowned at Chausa in 946 AH.
   (1539 AD.) A.N. (H. Beveridge, i, 344).

   [1022] Qalat-i-nadiri, in Khurasan, the birth-place of Nadir
   Shah (T.R. p. 209).

   [1023] _bir gina qiz_, which on f. 86b can fitly be read to
   mean daughterling, _Toechterchen, fillette_, but here and
   _i.a._ f. 168, must have another meaning than diminutive and
   may be an equivalent of German _Stueck_ and mean _one only_.
   Gul-badan gives an account of Shad's manly pursuits (H.N. f.
   25b).

   [1024] He was the son of Mahdi Sl. (f. 320b) and the father of
   'Aqil Sl. _Auzbeg_ (A.N. index _s.n._). Several matters
   suggest that these men were of the Shaban Auzbegs who
   intermarried with Husain _Bai-qara's_ family and some of whom
   went to Babur in Hindustan. One such matter is that Kabul was
   the refuge of dispossessed Haratis, after the Auzbeg conquest;
   that there 'Aqil married Shad _Bai-qara_ and that 'Adil went
   on to Babur. Moreover Khafi Khan makes a statement which (if
   correct) would allow 'Adil's father Mahdi to be a grandson of
   Husain _Bai-qara_; this statement is that when Babur defeated
   the Auzbegs in 916 AH. (1510 AD.), he freed from their
   captivity two sons (descendants) of his paternal uncle, named
   Mahdi Sl. and Sultan Mirza. [Leaving the authenticity of the
   statement aside for a moment, it will be observed that this
   incident is of the same date and place as another well-vouched
   for, namely that Babur then and there killed Mahdi Sl.
   _Auzbeg_ and Hamza Sl. _Auzbeg_ after defeating them.] What
   makes in favour of Khafi Khan's correctness is, not only that
   Babur's foe Mahdi is not known to have had a son 'Adil, but
   also that his "Sultan Mirza" is not a style so certainly
   suiting Hamza as it does a Shaban sultan, one whose father was
   a Shaban sultan, and whose mother was a Mirza's daughter.
   Moreover this point of identification is pressed by the
   correctness, according to oriental statement of relationship,
   of Khafi Khan's "paternal uncle" (of Babur), because this
   precisely suits Sl. Husain Mirza with whose family these
   Shaban sultans allied themselves. On the other hand it must be
   said that Khafi Khan's statement is not in the English text of
   the _Tarikh-i-rashidi_, the book on which he mostly relies at
   this period, nor is it in my husband's MS. [a copy from the
   Rampur Codex]; and to this must be added the verbal objection
   that a modicum of rhetoric allows a death to be described both
   in Turki and Persian, as a release from the captivity of a
   sinner's own acts (f. 160). Still Khafi Khan may be right; his
   statement may yet be found in some other MS. of the T. R. or
   some different source; it is one a scribe copying the T. R.
   might be led to omit by reason of its coincidences. The
   killing and the release may both be right; 'Adil's Mahdi may
   be the Shaban sultan inference makes him seem. This little
   _crux_ presses home the need of much attention to the
   _lacunae_ in the _Babur-nama_, since in them are lost some
   exits and some entries of Babur's _dramatis personae_,
   pertinently, mention of the death of Mahdi with Hamza in 916
   AH., and possibly also that of 'Adil's Mahdi's release.

   [1025] A _char-taq_ may be a large tent rising into four domes
   or having four porches.

   [1026] H.S. iii, 367.

   [1027] This phrase, common but not always selected, suggests
   unwillingness to leave the paternal roof.

   [1028] Abu'l-ghazi's _History of the Mughuls_, Desmaisons, p.
   207.

   [1029] The appointment was made in 933 AH. (1527 AD.) and
   seems to have been held still in 934 AH. (ff. 329, 332).

   [1030] This grandson may have been a child travelling with his
   father's household, perhaps Aulugh Mirza, the oldest son of
   Muhammad Sultan Mirza (A. A. Blochmann, p. 461). No mention is
   made here of Sultanim Begim's marriage with 'Abdu'l-baqi Mirza
   (f. 175).

   [1031] Abu'l-qasim Babur _Shahrukhi_ presumably.

   [1032] The time may have been 902 AH. when Mas'ud took his
   sister Bega Begim to Heri for her marriage with Haidar (H.S.
   iii, 260).

   [1033] Khwaja Ahmad _Yasawi_, known as Khwaja Ata, founder of
   the Yasawi religious order.

   [1034] Not finding mention of a daughter of Abu-sa'id named
   Rabi'a-sultan, I think she may be the daughter styled Aq Begim
   who is No. 3 in Gul-badan's guest-list for the Mystic Feast.

   [1035] This man I take to be Husain's grandfather and not
   brother, both because 'Abdu'l-lah was of Husain's and his
   brother's generation, and also because of the absence here of
   Babur's usual defining words "elder brother" (of Sl. Husain
   Mirza). In this I have to differ from Dr. Rieu (Pers. Cat. p.
   152).

   [1036] So-named after his ancestor Sayyid Barka whose body was
   exhumed from Andikhud for reburial in Samarkand, by Timur's
   wish and there laid in such a position that Timur's body was
   at its feet (_Zafar-nama_ ii, 719; H.S. iii, 82). (For the
   above interesting detail I am indebted to my husband.)

   [1037] _Qizil-bash_, Persians wearing red badges or caps to
   distinguish them as Persians.

   [1038] Yadgar-i-farrukh _Miran-shahi_ (H.S. iii, 327). He may
   have been one of those Miran-shahis of 'Iraq from whom came
   Aka's and Sultanim's husbands, Ahmad and 'Abdu'l-baqi (ff.
   164, 175_b_).

   [1039] This should be four (f. 169_b_). The H.S. (iii, 327)
   also names three only when giving Papa Aghacha's daughters
   (the omission linking it with the B.N.), but elsewhere (iii,
   229) it gives an account of a fourth girl's marriage; this
   fourth is needed to make up the total of 11 daughters. Babur's
   and Khwand-amir's details of Papa Aghacha's quartette are
   defective; the following may be a more correct list:--(1) Begim
   Sultan (a frequent title), married to Aba-bikr _Miran-shahi_
   (who died 884 AH.) and seeming too old to be the one [No. 3]
   who married Mas'ud (H.S. iii, 229); (2) Sultan-nizhad, married
   to Iskandar _Bai-qara_; (3) Sa'adat-bakht also known as Begim
   Sultan, married to Mas'ud _Miran-shahi_ (H.S. iii, 327); (4)
   Manauwar-sultan, married to a son of Aulugh Beg _Kabuli_ (H.S.
   iii, 327).

   [1040] This "after" seems to contradict the statement (f. 58)
   that Mas'ud was made to kneel as a son-in-law (_kuyadlik-ka
   yukundurub_) at a date previous to his blinding, but the
   seeming contradiction may be explained by considering the
   following details; he left Heri hastily (f. 58), went to
   Khusrau Shah and was blinded by him,--all in the last two
   months of 903 AH. (1498 AD.), after the kneeling on Zu'l-qa'da
   3rd, (June 23rd) in the Ravens'-garden. Here what Babur says
   is that the Begim was given (_birib_) after the blinding, the
   inference allowed being that though Mas'ud had kneeled before
   the blinding, she had remained in her father's house till his
   return after the blinding.

   [1041] The first W.-i-B. writes "Apaq Begim" (I.O. 215 f. 136)
   which would allow Sayyid Mirza to be a kinsman of Apaq Begim,
   wife of Husain _Bai-qara_.

   [1042] This brief summary conveys the impression that the
   Begim went on her pilgrimage shortly after Mas'ud's death (913
   AH. ?), but may be wrong:--After Mas'ud's murder, by one Bimash
   Mirza, _darogha_ of Sarakhs, at Shaibaq Khan's order, she was
   married by Bimash M. (H.S. iii, 278). How long after this she
   went to Makka is not said; it was about 934 AH. when Babur
   heard of her as there.

   [1043] This clause is in the Hai. MS. but not in the Elph. MS.
   (f. 131), or Kehr's (Ilminsky, p. 210), or in either Persian
   translation. The boy may have been 17 or 18.

   [1044] This appears a mistake (f. 168 foot, and note on Papa's
   daughters).

   [1045] f. 171b.

   [1046] 933 AH.-1527 AD. (f. 329).

   [1047] Presumably this was a _yinkalik_ marriage; it differs
   from some of those chronicled and also from a levirate
   marriage in not being made with a childless wife. (Cf. index
   _s.n._ _yinkalik_.)

   [1048] Khwand-amir says that Bega Begim was jealous, died of
   grief at her divorce, and was buried in a College, of her own
   erection, in 893 AH. (1488 AD. HS. iii, 245).

   [1049] _Gulistan_ Cap. II, Story 31 (Platts, p. 114).

   [1050] _i.e._ did not get ready to ride off if her husband
   were beaten by her brother (f. 11 and note to Habiba).

   [1051] Khadija Begi Agha (H.S. ii, 230 and iii, 327); she
   would be promoted probably after Shah-i-gharib's birth.

   [1052] He was a son of Badi'u'z-zaman.

   [1053] It is singular that this honoured woman's parentage is
   not mentioned; if it be right on f. 168b (_q.v._ with note) to
   read Sayyid Mirza of Apaq Begim, she may be a sayyida of
   Andikhud.

   [1054] As Babur left Kabul on Safar 1st (Nov. 17th 1525 AD.),
   the Begim must have arrived in Muharram 932 AH. (Oct. 18th to
   Nov. 17th).

   [1055] f. 333. As Chandiri was besieged in Rabi'u'l-akhar 934
   AH. this passage shews that, as a minimum estimate, what
   remains of Babur's composed narrative (_i.e._ down to f. 216b)
   was written after that date (Jan. 1528).

   [1056] _Char-shambalar._ Mention of another inhabitant of this
   place with the odd name, Wednesday (Char-shamba), is made on
   f. 42b.

   [1057] Mole-marked Lady; most MSS. style her Bi but H.S. iii,
   327, writes Bibi; it varies also by calling her a Turk. She
   was a purchased slave of Shahr-banu's and was given to the
   Mirza by Shahr-banu at the time of her own marriage with him.

   [1058] As noted already, f. 168b enumerates three only.

   [1059] The three were almost certainly Badi'u'z-zaman, Haidar,
   son of a Timurid mother, and Muzaffar-i-husain, born after
   his mother had been legally married.

   [1060] Seven sons predeceased him:--Farrukh, Shah-i-gharib,
   Muh. Ma'sum, Haidar, Ibrahim-i-husain, Muh. Husain and
   Abu-turab. So too five daughters:--Aq, Bega, Agha, Kichik and
   Fatima-sultan Begims. So too four wives:--Bega-sultan and Chuli
   Begims, Zubaida and Latif-sultan Aghachas (H.S. iii, 327).

   [1061] Chaku, a Barlas, as was Timur, was one of Timur's noted
   men.

   At this point some hand not the scribe's has entered on the
   margin of the Hai. MS. the descendants of Muh. Baranduq down
   into Akbar's reign:--Muh. Faridun, bin Muh. Quli Khan, bin
   Mirza 'Ali, bin Muh. Baranduq _Barlas_. Of these Faridun and
   Muh. Quli are amirs of the _Ayin-i-akbari_ list (Blochmann,
   pp. 341, 342; H.S. iii, 233).

   [1062] Enforced marches of Mughuls and other nomads are
   mentioned also on f. 154b and f. 155.

   [1063] H.S. iii, 228, 233, 235.

   [1064] _beg kishi_, beg-person.

   [1065] Khwand-amir says he died a natural death (H.S. iii,
   235).

   [1066] f. 21. For a fuller account of Nawa'i, _J. Asiatique_
   xvii, 175, M. Belin's article.

   [1067] _i.e._ when he was poor and a beg's dependant. He went
   back to Heri at Sl. Husain M.'s request in 873 AH.

   [1068] Nizami's (Rieu's Pers. Cat. s.n.).

   [1069] Faridu'd-din-'attar's (Rieu l.c. and Ency. Br.).

   [1070] _Ghara'ibu's-sighar_, _Nawadiru'sh-shahab_,
   _Bada'i'u'l-wasat_ and _Fawa'idu'l-kibr_.

   [1071] Every Persian poet has a _takhallus_ (pen-name) which
   he introduces into the last couplet of each ode (Erskine).

   [1072] The death occurred in the First Jumada 906 AH. (Dec.
   1500 AD.).

   [1073] Nizamu'd-din Ahmad bin Tawakkal _Barlas_ (H.S. iii,
   229).

   [1074] This may be that uncle of Timur who made the Haj (T. R.
   p. 48, quoting the _Zafar-nama_).

   [1075] Some MSS. omit the word "father" here but to read it
   obviates the difficulty of calling Wali a great beg of Sl.
   Husain Mirza although he died when that mirza took the throne
   (973 AH.) and although no leading place is allotted to him in
   Babur's list of Heri begs. Here as in other parts of Babur's
   account of Heri, the texts vary much whether Turki or Persian,
   _e.g._ the Elph. MS. appears to call Wali a blockhead (_dunkuz
   dur_), the Hai. MS. writing _n:kuz dur_(?).

   [1076] He had been Babur _Shahrukhi's yasawal_
   (Court-attendant), had fought against Husain for
   Yadgar-i-muhammad and had given a daughter to Husain (H.S.
   iii, 206, 228, 230-32; D.S. in _Not. et Ex._ de Sacy p. 265).

   [1077] f. 29b.

   [1078] _Sic_, Elph. MS. and both Pers. trss. but the Hai. MS.
   omits "father". To read it, however, suits the circumstance
   that Hasan of Ya'qub was not with Husain and in Harat but was
   connected with Mahmud _Miranshahi_ and Tirmiz (f. 24). Nuyan
   is not a personal name but is a title; it implies good-birth;
   all uses of it I have seen are for members of the religious
   family of Tirmiz.

   [1079] He was the son of Ibrahim _Barlas_ and a Badakhshi
   begim (T.R. p. 108).

   [1080] He will have been therefore a collateral of Daulat-shah
   whose relation to Firuz-shah is thus expressed by Nawa'i:--_Mir
   Daulat-shah Firuz-shah Beg-ning 'amm-zada-si Amir
   'Ala'u'd-daula Isfarayini-ning aughuli dur_, _i.e._ Mir
   Daulat-shah was the son of Firuz-shah Beg's paternal uncle's
   son, Amir 'Ala'u'd-daula _Isfarayini_. Thus, Firuz-shah and
   Isfarayini were first cousins; Daulat-shah and
   'Abdu'l-khaliq's father were second cousins; while Daulat-shah
   and Firuz-shah were first cousins, once removed (Rieu's Pers.
   Cat. p. 534; Browne's D.S. English preface p. 14 and its
   reference to the Pers. preface).

   [1081] _Tarkhan-nama_, E. & D.'s _History of India_ i, 303;
   H.S. iii, 227.

   [1082] f. 41 and note.

   [1083] Both places are in the valley of the Heri-rud.

   [1084] Badi'u'z-zaman married a daughter of Zu'n-nun; she died
   in 911 AH. (E. & D. i, 305; H.S. iii, 324).

   [1085] This indicates, both amongst Musalmans and Hindus,
   obedience and submission. Several instances occur in
   Macculloch's _Bengali Household Stories_.

   [1086] T.R. p. 205.

   [1087] This is an idiom expressive of great keenness
   (Erskine).

   [1088] H.S. iii, 250, _kitabdar_, librarian; so too Hai. MS.
   f. 174b.

   [1089] _mutaiyam_ (f. 7b and note). Mir Mughul Beg was put to
   death for treachery in 'Iraq (H.S. iii, 227, 248).

   [1090] Babur speaks as an eye-witness (f. 187b). For a single
   combat of Sayyid Badr, H. S. iii, 233.

   [1091] f. 157 and note to _batman_.

   [1092] A level field in which a gourd (_qabaq_) is set on a
   pole for an archer's mark to be hit in passing at the gallop
   (f. 18b and note).

   [1093] Or possibly during the gallop the archer turned in the
   saddle and shot backwards.

   [1094] Junaid was the father of Nizamu'd-din 'Ali, Babur's
   Khalifa (Vice-gerent). That Khalifa was of a religious house
   on his mother's side may be inferred from his being styled
   both Sayyid and Khwaja neither of which titles could have come
   from his Turki father. His mother may have been a sayyida of
   one of the religious families of Marghinan (f. 18 and note),
   since Khalifa's son Muhibb-i-'ali writes his father's name
   "Nizamu'd-din 'Ali _Marghilani_" (_Marghinani_) in the Preface
   of his _Book on Sport_ (Rieu's Pers. Cat. p. 485).

   [1095] This northward migration would take the family into
   touch with Babur's in Samarkand and Farghana.

   [1096] He was left in charge of Jaunpur in Rabi' I, 933 AH.
   (Jan. 1527 AD.) but exchanged for Chunar in Ramzan 935 AH.
   (June 1529 AD.); so that for the writing of this part of the
   _Babur-nama_ we have the major and minor limits of Jan. 1527
   and June 1529.

   [1097] H.S. iii, 227.

   [1098] _See_ Appendix H, _On the counter-mark Bih-bud on
   coins_.

   [1099] Nizamu'd-din Amir Shaikh Ahmadu's-suhaili was surnamed
   Suhaili through a _fal_ (augury) taken by his spiritual guide,
   Kamalu'd-din Husain _Gazur-gahi_; it was he induced Husain
   _Kashifi_ to produce his _Anwar-i-suhaili_ (Lights of Canopus)
   (f. 125 and note; Rieu's Pers. Cat. p. 756; and for a couplet
   of his, H.S. iii, 242 l. 10).

   [1100] Index _s.n._

   [1101] Did the change complete an analogy between 'Ali
   _Jalair_ and his (perhaps) elder son with 'Ali Khalifa and his
   elder son Hasan?

   [1102] The Qush-begi is, in Central Asia, a high official who
   acts for an absent ruler (Shaw); he does not appear to be the
   Falconer, for whom Babur's name is Qushchi (f. 15 n.).

   [1103] He received this sobriquet because when he returned
   from an embassy to the Persian Gulf, he brought, from Bahrein,
   to his Timurid master a gift of royal pearls (Sam Mirza). For
   an account of Marwarid _see_ Rieu's Pers. Cat. p. 1094 and
   (_re_ portrait) p. 787.

   [1104] Sam Mirza specifies this affliction as _abla-i-farang_,
   thus making what may be one of the earliest Oriental
   references to _morbus gallicus_ [as de Sacy here translates
   the name], the foreign or European pox, the "French disease of
   Shakespeare" (H.B.).

   [1105] Index _s.n._ Yusuf.

   [1106] Ramzan 3rd 918 AH.-Nov. 12th 1512.

   [1107] _i.e._ of the White-sheep Turkmans.

   [1108] His paternal line was, 'Abdu'l-baqi, son of 'Usman,
   son of Sayyidi Ahmad, son of Miran-shah. His mother's people
   were begs of the White-sheep (H.S. iii, 290).

   [1109] Sultanim had married Wais (f. 157) not later than 895
   or 896 AH. (H. S. iii, 253); she married 'Abdu'l-baqi in 908
   AH. (1502-3 AD.).

   [1110] Sayyid Shamsu'd-din Muhammad, Mir Sayyid
   _Sar-i-barahna_ owed his sobriquet of Bare-head to love-sick
   wanderings of his youth (H.S. iii, 328). The H.S. it is clear,
   recognizes him as a sayyid.

   [1111] Rieu's Pers. Cat. p. 760; it is immensely long and
   "filled with tales that shock all probability" (Erskine).

   [1112] f. 94 and note. Sl. Husain M. made him curator of
   Ansari's shrine, an officer represented, presumably, by Col.
   Yate's "Mir of Gazur-gah", and he became Chief Justice in 904
   AH. (1498-99 AD.). _See_ H.S. iii, 330 and 340; JASB 1887,
   art. _On the city of Harat_ (C. E. Yate) p. 85.

   [1113] _mutasauwif_, perhaps meaning not a professed Sufi.

   [1114] He was of high birth on both sides, of religious houses
   of Tabas and Nishapur (D.S. pp. 161, 163).

   [1115] In agreement with its preface, Dr. Rieu entered the
   book as written by Sl. Husain Mirza; in his Addenda, however,
   he quotes Babur as the authority for its being by Gazur-gahi;
   Khwand-amir's authority can be added to Babur's (H.S. 340;
   Pers. Cat. pp. 351, 1085).

   [1116] _Diwan._ The Wazir is a sort of Minister of Finance;
   the Diwan is the office of revenue receipts and issues
   (Erskine).

   [1117] a secretary who writes out royal orders (H.S. iii,
   244).

   [1118] Count von Noer's words about a cognate reform of later
   date suit this man's work, it also was "a bar to the
   defraudment of the Crown, a stumbling-block in the path of
   avaricious chiefs" (_Emperor Akbar_ trs. i, 11). The
   opposition made by 'Ali-sher to reform so clearly to Husain's
   gain and to Husain's begs' loss, stirs the question, "What was
   the source of his own income?" Up to 873 AH. he was for some
   years the dependant of Ahmad Haji Beg; he took nothing from
   the Mirza, but gave to him; he must have spent much in
   benefactions. The question may have presented itself to M.
   Belin for he observes, "'Ali-sher qui sans doute, a son retour
   de l'exil, recouvra l'heritage de ses peres, et depuis occupa
   de hautes positions dans le gouvernement de son pays, avait
   acquis une grande fortune" (_J. Asiatique_ xvii, 227). While
   not contradicting M. Belin's view that vested property such as
   can be described as "paternal inheritance", may have passed
   from father to son, even in those days of fugitive prosperity
   and changing appointments, one cannot but infer, from Nawa'i's
   opposition to Majdu'd-din, that he, like the rest, took a
   partial view of the "rights" of the cultivator.

   [1119] This was in 903 AH. after some 20 years of service
   (H.S. iii, 231; Ethe I.O. Cat. p. 252).

   [1120] Amir Jamalu'd-din 'Ata'u'l-lah, known also as
   Jamalu'd-din Husain, wrote a _History of Muhammad_ (H.S. iii,
   345; Rieu's Pers. Cat. p. 147 & (a correction) p. 1081).

   [1121] Amongst noticeable omissions from Babur's list of Heri
   celebrities are Mir Khwand Shah ("Mirkhond"), his grandson
   Khwand-amir, Husain _Kashifi_ and Muinu'd-din al Zamji, author
   of a _History of Harat_ which was finished in 897 AH.

   [1122] Sa'du'd-din Mas'ud, son of 'Umar, was a native of Taft
   in Yazd, whence his cognomen (Bahar-i-'ajam); he died in 792
   AH.-1390 AD. (H.S. iii, 59, 343; T.R. p. 236; Rieu's Pers.
   Cat. pp. 352, 453).

   [1123] These are those connected with grammar and rhetoric
   (Erskine).

   [1124] This is one of the four principal sects of
   Muhammadanism (Erskine).

   [1125] T.R. p. 235, for Shah Isma'il's murders in Heri.

   [1126] Superintendent of Police, who examines weights,
   measures and provisions, also prevents gambling, drinking and
   so on.

   [1127] f. 137.

   [1128] The rank of Mujtahid, which is not bestowed by any
   individual or class of men but which is the result of slow and
   imperceptible opinion, finally prevailing and universally
   acknowledged, is one of the greatest peculiarities of the
   religion of Persia. The Mujtahid is supposed to be elevated
   above human fears and human enjoyments, and to have a certain
   degree of infallibility and inspiration. He is consulted with
   reverence and awe. There is not always a Mujtahid necessarily
   existing. _See_ Kaempfer, _Amoenitates Exoticae_ (Erskine).

   [1129] _muhaddas_, one versed in the traditional sayings and
   actions of Muhammad.

   [1130] H.S. iii, 340.

   [1131] B.M. Or. 218 (Rieu's Pers. Cat. p. 350). The Commentary
   was made in order to explain the _Nafahat_ to Jami's son.

   [1132] He was buried by the Mulla's side.

   [1133] Amir Burhanu'd-din 'Ata'u'l-lah bin Mahmudu'l-husaini
   was born in Nishapur but known as Mashhadi because he retired
   to that holy spot after becoming blind.

   [1134] f. 144_b_ and note. Qazi Ikhtiyaru'd-din Hasan (H.S.
   iii, 347) appears to be the Khwaja Ikhtiyar of the
   _Ayin-i-akbari_, and, if so, will have taken professional
   interest in the script, since Abu'l-fazl describes him as a
   distinguished calligrapher in Sl. Husain M.'s presence
   (Blochmann, p. 101).

   [1135] Saifu'd-din (Sword of the Faith) Ahmad, presumably.

   [1136] A sister of his, Apaq Bega, the wife of 'Ali-sher's
   brother Darwish-i-'ali _kitabdar_, is included as a poet in
   the _Biography of Ladies_ (Sprenger's Cat. p. 11). Amongst the
   20 women named one is a wife of Shaibaq Khan, another a
   daughter of Hilali.

   [1137] He was the son of Khw. Ni'amatu'l-lah, one of Sl.
   Abu-sa'id M.'s wazirs. When dying _aet._ 70 (923 AH.), he made
   this chronogram on his own death, "With 70 steps he measured
   the road to eternity." The name Asaf, so frequent amongst
   wazirs, is that of Solomon's wazir.

   [1138] Other interpretations are open; _wadi_, taken as
   _river_, might refer to the going on from one poem to another,
   the stream of verse; or it might be taken as _desert_, with
   disparagement of collections.

   [1139] Maulana Jamalu'd-din _Bana'i_ was the son of a
   _sabz-bana_, an architect, a good builder.

   [1140] Steingass's Dictionary allows convenient reference for
   examples of metres.

   [1141] Other jokes made by _Bana'i_ at the expense of Nawa'i
   are recorded in the various sources.

   [1142] Babur saw Bana'i in Samarkand at the end of 901 AH.
   (1496 AD. f. 38).

   Here Dr. Leyden's translation ends; one other fragment which
   he translated will be found under the year 925 AH. (Erskine).
   This statement allows attention to be drawn to the inequality
   of the shares of the work done for the Memoirs of 1826 by
   Leyden and by Erskine. It is just to Mr. Erskine, but a
   justice he did not claim, to point out that Dr. Leyden's share
   is slight both in amount and in quality; his essential
   contribution was the initial stimulus he gave to the great
   labours of his collaborator.

   [1143] So of Lope de Vega (b. 1562; d. 1635 AD.), "It became a
   common proverb to praise a good thing by calling it _a Lope_,
   so that jewels, diamonds, pictures, _etc._ were raised into
   esteem by calling them his" (Montalvan in Ticknor's _Spanish
   Literature_ ii, 270).

   [1144] Maulana Saifi, known as 'Aruzi from his mastery in
   prosody (Rieu's Pers. Cat. p. 525).

   [1145] Here pedantry will be implied in the mullahood.

   [1146] _Khamsatin_ (_infra_ f. 180_b_ and note).

   [1147] This appears to mean that not only the sparse
   diacritical pointing common in writing Persian was dealt with
   but also the fuller Arabic.

   [1148] He is best known by his pen-name Hatifi. The B.M. and
   I.O. have several of his books.

   [1149] _Khamsatin._ Hatifi regarded himself as the successor
   of Nizami and Khusrau; this, taken with Babur's use of the
   word _Khamsatin_ on f. 7 and here, and Saifi's just above,
   leads to the opinion that the _Khamsatin_ of the _Babur-nama_
   are always those of Nizami and Khusrau, _the_ Two Quintets
   (Rieu's Pers. Cat. p. 653).

   [1150] Maulana Mir Kamalu'd-din Husain of Nishapur (Rieu l.c.
   index s.n.; Ethe's I.O. Cat. pp. 433 and 1134).

   [1151] One of his couplets on good and bad fortune is
   striking; "The fortune of men is like a sand-glass; one hour
   up, the next down." _See_ D'Herbelot in his article (Erskine).

   [1152] H.S. iii, 336; Rieu's Pers. Cat. p. 1089.

   [1153] Ahi (sighing) was with Shah-i-gharib before
   Ibn-i-husain and to him dedicated his _diwan_. The words
   _sahib-i-diwan_ seem likely to be used here with double
   meaning _i.e._ to express authorship and finance office.
   Though Babur has made frequent mention of authorship of a
   _diwan_ and of office in the _Diwan_, he has not used these
   words hitherto in either sense; there may be a play of words
   here.

   [1154] Muhammad _Salih_ Mirza _Khwarizmi_, author of the
   _Shaibani-nama_ which manifestly is the poem (_masnawi_)
   mentioned below. This has been published with a German
   translation by Professor Vambery and has been edited with
   Russian notes by Mr. Platon Melioransky (Rieu's Turkish Cat.
   p. 74; H.S. iii, 301).

   [1155] Jami's _Subhatu'l-abrar_ (Rosary of the righteous).

   [1156] The reference may be to things said by Muh. _Salih_ the
   untruth of which was known to Babur through his own part in
   the events. A crying instance of misrepresentation is Salih's
   assertion, in rhetorical phrase, that Babur took booty in
   jewels from Khusrau Shah; other instances concern the affairs
   of The Khans and of Babur in Transoxiana (f. 124b and index
   _s.nn._ Ahmad and Mahmud _Chaghatai_ _etc._; T.R. index
   _s.nn._)

   [1157] The name Fat-land (Tambal-khana) has its parallel in
   Fat-village (Simiz-kint) a name of Samarkand; in both cases
   the nick-name is accounted for by the fertility of irrigated
   lands. We have not been able to find the above-quoted couplet
   in the _Shaibani-nama_ (Vambery); needless to say, the pun is
   on the nick-name (_tambal_, fat) of Sl. Ahmad _Tambal_.

   [1158] Muh. Salih does not show well in his book; he is
   sometimes coarse, gloats over spoil whether in human captives
   or goods, and, his good-birth not-forbidding, is a servile
   flatterer. Babur's word "heartless" is just; it must have had
   sharp prompting from Salih's rejoicing in the downfall of The
   Khans, Babur's uncles.

   [1159] the Longer (H.S. iii, 349).

   [1160] Maulana Badru'd-din (Full-moon of the Faith) whose
   pen-name was Hilali, was of Astarabad. It may be noted that
   two dates of his death are found, 936 and 939 AH. the first
   given by de Sacy, the second by Rieu, and that the second
   seems to be correct (_Not. et Extr._ p. 285; Pers. Cat. p.
   656; Hammer's _Geschichte_ p. 368).

   [1161] B.M. Add. 7783.

   [1162] Opinions differ as to the character of this
   work:--Babur's is uncompromising; von Hammer (p. 369) describes
   it as "_ein romantisches Gedicht, welches eine sentimentale
   Maennerliebe behandelt_"; Sprenger (p. 427), as a mystical
   _masnawi_ (poem); Rieu finds no spiritual symbolism in it and
   condemns it (Pers. Cat. p. 656 and, quoting the above passage
   of Babur, p. 1090); Ethe, who has translated it, takes it to
   be mystical and symbolic (I.O. Cat. p. 783).

   [1163] Of four writers using the pen-name Ahli
   (Of-the-people), _viz._ those of Turan, Shiraz, Tarshiz (in
   Khurasan), and 'Iraq, the one noticed here seems to be he of
   Tarshiz. Ahli of Tarshiz was the son of a locally-known pious
   father and became a Superintendent of the Mint; Babur's '_ami_
   may refer to Ahli's first patrons, tanners and shoe-makers by
   writing for whom he earned his living (Sprenger, p. 319).
   Erskine read _'ummi_, meaning that Ahli could neither read nor
   write; de Courteille that he was _un homme du commun_.

   [1164] He was an occasional poet (H.S. iii, 350 and iv, 118;
   Rieu's Pers. Cat. p. 531; Ethe's I.O. Cat. p. 428).

   [1165] Ustad Kamalu'd-din Bih-zad (well-born; H.S. iii, 350).
   Work of his is reproduced in Dr. Martin's _Painting and
   Painters of Persia_ of 1913 AD.

   [1166] This sentence is not in the Elph. MS.

   [1167] Perhaps he could reproduce tunes heard and say where
   heard.

   [1168] M. Belin quotes quatrains exchanged by 'Ali-sher and
   this man (_J. Asiatique_ xvii, 199).

   [1169] _i.e._ from his own camp to Baba Ilahi.

   [1170] f. 121 has a fuller quotation. On the dual succession,
   _see_ T.R. p. 196.

   [1171] Elph. MS. f. 144; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 148_b_ and 217 f.
   125_b_; Mems. p. 199.

   [1172] News of Husain's death in 911 AH. (f. 163b) did not
   reach Babur till 912 AH. (f. 184_b_).

   [1173] Lone-meadow (f. 195_b_). Jahangir will have come over
   the 'Iraq-pass, Babur's baggage-convoy, by Shibr-tu. Cf. T. R.
   p. 199 for Babur and Jahangir at this time.

   [1174] Servant-of-the-mace; but perhaps, Qilinj-chaq,
   swords-man.

   [1175] One of four, a fourth. Char-yak may be a component of
   the name of the well-known place, n. of Kabul, "Charikar"; but
   also the _Char_ in it may be Hindustani and refer to the
   permits-to-pass after tolls paid, given to caravans halted
   there for taxation. Raverty writes it Charlakar.

   [1176] Amongst the disruptions of the time was that of the
   Khanate of Qibchaq (Erskine).

   [1177] The nearest approach to _kipki_ we have found in
   Dictionaries is _kupaki_, which comes close to the Russian
   _copeck_. Erskine notes that the _casbeke_ is an oval copper
   coin (Tavernier, p. 121); and that a _tuman_ is a myriad
   (10,000). _Cf._ Manucci (Irvine), i, 78 and iv, 417 note;
   Chardin iv, 278.

   [1178] Muharram 912 AH.-June 1506 AD. (H.S. iii, 353).

   [1179] I take Murgh-ab here to be the fortified place at the
   crossing of the river by the main n.e. road; Babur when in
   Dara-i-bam was on a tributary of the Murgh-ab. Khwand-amir
   records that the information of his approach was hailed in the
   Mirzas' camp as good news (H.S. iii, 354).

   [1180] Babur gives the Mirzas precedence by age, ignoring
   Muzaffar's position as joint-ruler.

   [1181] _mubalgha qildi_; perhaps he laid stress on their
   excuse; perhaps did more than was ceremonially incumbent on
   him.

   [1182] _'irq_, to which estrade answers in its sense of a
   carpet on which stands a raised seat.

   [1183] Perhaps it was a recess, resembling a gate-way (W.-i-B.
   I.O. 215 f. 151 and 217 f. 127_b_). The impression conveyed by
   Babur's words here to the artist who in B.M. Or. 3714, has
   depicted the scene, is that there was a vestibule opening into
   the tent by a door and that the Mirza sat near that door. It
   must be said however that the illustration does not closely
   follow the text, in some known details.

   [1184] _shira_, fruit-syrups, sherbets. Babur's word for wine
   is _chaghir_ (_q.v._ index) and this reception being public,
   wine could hardly have been offered in Sunni Heri. Babur's
   strictures can apply to the vessels of precious metal he
   mentions, these being forbidden to Musalmans; from his
   reference to the Tura it would appear to repeat the same
   injunctions. Babur broke up such vessels before the battle of
   Kanwaha (f. 315). Shah-i-jahan did the same; when sent by his
   father Jahangir to reconquer the Deccan (1030 AH.-1621 AD.) he
   asked permission to follow the example of his ancestor Babur,
   renounced wine, poured his stock into the Chambal, broke up
   his cups and gave the fragments to the poor (_'Amal-i-salih_,
   Hughes' _Dict. of Islam_ quoting the _Hidayah_ and _Mishkat_,
   _s.nn._ Drinkables, Drinking-vessels, and Gold; Lane's _Modern
   Egyptians_ p. 125 n.).

   [1185] This may be the Rabat-i-sanghi of some maps, on a near
   road between the "Forty-daughters" and Harat; or Babur may
   have gone out of his direct way to visit Rabat-i-sang-bast, a
   renowned halting place at the Carfax of the Heri-Tus and
   Nishapur-Mashhad roads, built by one Arslan _Jazala_ who lies
   buried near, and rebuilt with great magnificence by 'Ali-sher
   _Nawa'i_ (Daulat-shah, Browne, p. 176).

   [1186] The wording here is confusing to those lacking family
   details. The paternal-aunt begims can be Payanda-sultan
   (named), Khadija-sultan, Apaq-sultan, and Fakhr-jahan Begims,
   all daughters of Abu-sa'id. The Apaq Begim named above (also
   on f. 168_b_ _q.v._) does not now seem to me to be Abu-sa'id's
   daughter (Gul-badan, trs. Bio. App.).

   [1187] _yukunmai._ Unless all copies I have seen reproduce a
   primary clerical mistake of Babur's, the change of salutation
   indicated by there being no kneeling with Apaq Begim, points
   to a _nuance_ of etiquette. Of the verb _yukunmak_ it may be
   noted that it both describes the ceremonious attitude of
   intercourse, _i.e._ kneeling and sitting back on both heels
   (Shaw), and also the kneeling on meeting. From Babur's phrase
   _Begim bila yukunub_ [having kneeled with], it appears that
   each of those meeting made the genuflection; I have not found
   the phrase used of other meetings; it is not the one used when
   a junior or a man of less degree meets a senior or superior in
   rank (_e.g._ Khusrau and Babur f. 123, or Babur and
   Badi'u'z-zaman f. 186).

   [1188] Musalmans employ a set of readers who succeed one
   another in reading (reciting) the Qoran at the tombs of their
   men of eminence. This reading is sometimes continued day and
   night. The readers are paid by the rent of lands or other
   funds assigned for the purpose (Erskine).

   [1189] A suspicion that Khadija put poison in Jahangir's wine
   may refer to this occasion (T.R. p. 199).

   [1190] These are _jharokha-i-darsan_, windows or balconies
   from which a ruler shews himself to the people.

   [1191] Mas'ud was then blind.

   [1192] Babur first drank wine not earlier than 917 AH. (f. 49
   and note), therefore when nearing 30.

   [1193] _aichkilar_, French, _interieur_.

   [1194] The obscure passage following here is discussed in
   Appendix I, _On the weeping-willows of_ f. 190_b_.

   [1195] Here this may well be a gold-embroidered garment.

   [1196] This, the tomb of Khwaja 'Abdu'l-lah _Ansari_ (d. 481
   AH.) stands some 2m. north of Heri. Babur mentions one of its
   numerous attendants of his day, Kamalu'd-din Husain
   _Gazur-gahi_. Mohan Lall describes it as he saw it in 1831;
   says the original name of the locality was Kar-zar-gah,
   place-of-battle; and, as perhaps his most interesting detail,
   mentions that Jalalu'd-din _Rumi's Masnawi_ was recited every
   morning near the tomb and that people fainted during the
   invocation (_Travels in the Panj-ab_ etc. p. 252). Colonel
   Yate has described the tomb as he saw it some 50 years later
   (JASB 1887); and explains the name Gazur-gah (lit.
   bleaching-place) by the following words of an inscription
   there found; "His tomb (Ansari's) is a washing-place
   (_gazur-gah_) wherein the cloud of the Divine forgiveness
   washes white the black records of men" (p. 88 and p. 102).

   [1197] _juaz-i-kaghazlar_ (f. 47_b_ and note).

   [1198] The _Habibu's-siyar_ and Hai. MS. write this name with
   medial "round _ha_"; this allows it to be Kahad-stan, a
   running-place, race-course. Khwand-amir and Daulat-shah call
   it a meadow (_aulang_); the latter speaks of a feast as held
   there; it was Shaibani's head-quarters when he took Harat.

   [1199] _var._ Khatira; either an enclosure (_quruq_?) or a
   fine and lofty building.

   [1200] This may have been a usual halting-place on a journey
   (_safar_) north. It was built by Husain _Bai-qara_, overlooked
   hills and fields covered with _arghwan_ (f. 137_b_) and seems
   once to have been a Paradise (Mohan Lall, p. 256).

   [1201] Jami's tomb was in the 'Id-gah of Heri (H.S. ii, 337),
   which appears to be the Musalla (Praying-place) demolished by
   Amir 'Abdu'r-rahman in the 19th century. Col. Yate was shewn a
   tomb in the Musalla said to be Jami's and agreeing in the age,
   81, given on it, with Jami's at death, but he found a _crux_
   in the inscription (pp. 99, 106).

   [1202] This may be the Musalla (Yate, p. 98).

   [1203] This place is located by the H.S. at 5 _farsakh_ from
   Heri (de Meynard at 25 _kilometres_). It appears to be rather
   an abyss or fissure than a pond, a crack from the sides of
   which water trickles into a small bason in which dwells a
   mysterious fish, the beholding of which allows the attainment
   of desires. The story recalls Wordsworth's undying fish of
   Bow-scale Tarn. (_Cf._ H.S. Bomb. ed. ii, _Khatmat_ p. 20 and
   de Meynard, _Journal Asiatique_ xvi, 480 and note.)

   [1204] This is on maps to the north of Heri.

   [1205] d. 232 AH. (847 AD.). _See_ Yate, p. 93.

   [1206] Imam Fakhru'd-din _Razi_ (de Meynard, _Journal
   Asiatique_ xvi, 481).

   [1207] d. 861 AH.-1457 AD. Guhar-shad was the wife of Timur's
   son Shahrukh. _See_ Mohan Lall, p. 257 and Yate, p. 98.

   [1208] This Marigold-garden may be named after
   Harunu'r-rashid's wife Zubaida.

   [1209] This will be the place n. of Heri from which Maulana
   Jalalu'd-din _Purani_ (d. 862 AH.) took his cognomen, as also
   Shaikh Jamalu'd-din Abu-sa'id _Puran_ (f. 206) who was visited
   there by Sl. Husain Mirza, ill-treated by Shaibani (f. 206),
   left Heri for Qandahar, and there died, through the fall of a
   roof, in 921 AH. (H.S. iii, 345; _Khazinatu'l-asfiya_ ii,
   321).

   [1210] His tomb is dated 35 or 37 AH. (656 or 658 AD.; Yate,
   p. 94).

   [1211] Malan was a name of the Heri-rud (_Journal Asiatique_
   xvi, 476, 511; Mohan Lall, p. 279; Ferrier, p. 261; _etc._).

   [1212] Yate, p. 94.

   [1213] The position of this building between the Khush and
   Qibchaq Gates (de Meynard, l.c. p. 475) is the probable
   explanation of the variant, noted just below, of Kushk for
   Khush as the name of the Gate. The _Tarikh-i-rashidi_ (p.
   429), mentions this kiosk in its list of the noted ones of the
   world.

   [1214] var. Kushk (de Meynard, l.c. p. 472).

   [1215] The reference here is, presumably, to Babur's own
   losses of Samarkand and Andijan.

   [1216] Aka or Aga is used of elder relations; a _yinka_ or
   _yinga_ is the wife of an uncle or elder brother; here it
   represents the widow of Babur's uncle Ahmad _Miran-shahi_.
   From it is formed the word _yinkalik_, levirate.

   [1217] The almshouse or convent was founded here in Timur's
   reign (de Meynard, l.c. p. 500).

   [1218] _i.e._ No smoke without fire.

   [1219] This name may be due to the splashing of water. A
   Langar which may be that of Mir Ghiyas, is shewn in maps in
   the Bam valley; from it into the Heri-rud valley Babur's route
   may well have been the track from that Langar which, passing
   the villages on the southern border of Gharjistan, goes to
   Ahangaran.

   [1220] This escape ought to have been included in the list of
   Babur's transportations from risk to safety given in my note
   to f. 96.

   [1221] The right and wrong roads are shewn by the Indian
   Survey and French Military maps. The right road turns off from
   the wrong one, at Daulat-yar, to the right, and mounts
   diagonally along the south rampart of the Heri-rud valley, to
   the Zirrin-pass, which lies above the Bakkak-pass and carries
   the regular road for Yaka-aulang. It must be said, however,
   that we are not told whether Yaka-aulang was Qasim Beg's
   objective; the direct road for Kabul from the Heri-rud valley
   is not over the Zirrin-pass but goes from Daulat-yar by
   "Aq-zarat", and the southern flank of Koh-i-baba (babar) to
   the Unai-pass (Holdich's _Gates of India_ p. 262).

   [1222] _circa_ Feb. 14th 1507, Babur's 24th birthday.

   [1223] The Hazaras appear to have been wintering outside their
   own valley, on the Ghur-bund road, in wait for travellers
   [_cf._ T.R. p. 197]. They have been perennial highwaymen on
   the only pass to the north not closed entirely in winter.

   [1224] The Ghur-bund valley is open in this part; the Hazaras
   may have been posted on the naze near the narrows leading into
   the Janglik and their own side valleys.

   [1225] Although the verses following here in the text are with
   the Turki Codices, doubt cannot but be felt as to their
   authenticity. They do not fit verbally to the sentence they
   follow; they are a unique departure from Babur's plain prose
   narrative and nothing in the small Hazara affair shews cause
   for such departure; they differ from his usual topics in their
   bombast and comment on his men (_cf._ f. 194 for comment on
   shirking begs). They appear in the 2nd Persian translation
   (217 f. 134) in Turki followed by a prose Persian rendering
   (_khalasa_). They are not with the 1st Pers. trs. (215 f.
   159), the text of which runs on with a plain prose account
   suiting the size of the affair, as follows:--"The braves,
   seeing their (the Hazaras) good soldiering, had stopped
   surprised; wishing to hurry them I went swiftly past them,
   shouting 'Move on! move on!' They paid me no attention. When,
   in order to help, I myself attacked, dismounting and going up
   the hill, they shewed courage and emulation in following.
   Getting to the top of the pass, we drove that band off,
   killing many, capturing others, making their families prisoner
   and plundering their goods." This is followed by "I myself
   collected" _etc._ as in the Turki text after the verse. It
   will be seen that the above extract is not a translation of
   the verse; no translator or even summariser would be likely to
   omit so much of his original. It is just a suitably plain
   account of a trivial matter.

   [1226] _Gulistan_ Cap. I. Story 4.

   [1227] Babur seems to have left the Ghur-bund valley, perhaps
   pursuing the Hazaras towards Janglik, and to have come "by
   ridge and valley" back into it for Ushtur-shahr. I have not
   located Timur Beg's Langar. As has been noted already (_q.v._
   index) the Ghur-bund narrows are at the lower end of the
   valley; they have been surmised to be the fissured rampart of
   an ancient lake.

   [1228] Here this may represent a guard- or toll-house (Index
   _s.n._).

   [1229] As _yurun_ is a patch, the bearer of the sobriquet
   might be Black Ahmad the repairing-tailor.

   [1230] _Second Afghan War_, Map of Kabul and its environs.

   [1231] I understand that the arrival undiscovered was a result
   of riding in single-file and thus shewing no black mass.

   [1232] or _gharbicha_, which Mr. Erskine explains to be the
   four plates of mail, made to cover the back, front and sides;
   the _jiba_ would thus be the wadded under-coat to which they
   are attached.

   [1233] This prayer is composed of extracts from the Qoran
   (_Mems_, i, 454 note); it is reproduced as it stands in Mr.
   Erskine's wording (p. 216).

   [1234] Babur's reference may well be to Sanjar's birth as well
   as to his being the holder of Ningnahar. Sanjar's father had
   been thought worthy to mate with one of the six Badakhshi
   begims whose line traced back to Alexander (T. R. p. 107); and
   his father was a Barlas, seemingly of high family.

   [1235] It may be inferred that what was done was for the
   protection of the two women.

   [1236] Not a bad case could have been made out for now putting
   a Timurid in Babur's place in Kabul; _viz._ that he was
   believed captive in Heri and that Mirza Khan was an effective
   _locum tenens_ against the Arghuns. Haidar sets down what in
   his eyes pleaded excuse for his father Muh. Husain (T.R. p.
   198).

   [1237] _qush_, not even a little plough-land being given
   (_chand qulba dihya_, 215 f. 162).

   [1238] They were sons of Sl. Ahmad Khan _Chaghatai_.

   [1239] f. 160.

   [1240] Haidar's opinion of Babur at this crisis is of the more
   account that his own father was one of the rebels let go to
   the mercy of the "avenging servitor". When he writes of Babur,
   as being, at a time so provoking, gay, generous, affectionate,
   simple and gentle, he sets before us insight and temper in
   tune with Kipling's "If...."

   [1241] Babur's distinction, made here and elsewhere, between
   Chaghatai and Mughul touches the old topic of the right or
   wrong of the term "Mughul dynasty". What he, as also Haidar,
   allows said is that if Babur were to describe his mother in
   tribal terms, he would say she was half-Chaghatai,
   half-Mughul; and that if he so described himself, he would say
   he was half-Timurid-Turk, half-Chaghatai. He might have called
   the dynasty he founded in India Turki, might have called it
   Timuriya; he would never have called it Mughul, after his
   maternal grandmother.

   Haidar, with imperfect classification, divides Chingiz Khan's
   "Mughul horde" into Mughuls and Chaghatais and of this
   Chaghatai offtake says that none remained in 953 _AH._ (1547
   _AD._) except the rulers, _i.e._ sons of Sl. Ahmad Khan (T.R.
   148). Manifestly there was a body of Chaghatais with Babur and
   there appear to have been many near his day in the Heri
   region,--'Ali-sher _Nawa'i_ the best known.

   Babur supplies directions for naming his dynasty when, as
   several times, he claims to rule in Hindustan where the "Turk"
   had ruled (f. 233_b_, f. 224_b_, f. 225). To call his dynasty
   Mughul seems to blot out the centuries, something as we should
   do by calling the English Teutons. If there is to be such
   blotting-out, Abu'l-ghazi would allow us, by his tables of
   Turk descent, to go further, to the primal source of all the
   tribes concerned, to Turk, son of Japhet. This traditional
   descent is another argument against "Mughul dynasty."

   [1242] They went to Qandahar and there suffered great
   privation.

   [1243] Baran seems likely to be the Baian of some maps.
   Gul-i-bahar is higher up on the Panjhir road. Chash-tupa will
   have been near-by; its name might mean _Hill of the heap of
   winnowed-corn_.

   [1244] f. 136.

   [1245] Answer; Visions of his father's sway.

   [1246] Elph. MS. f. 161; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 164 and 217 f.
   139_b_; Mems. p. 220.

   [1247] The narrative indicates the location of the tribe, the
   modern Ghilzai or Ghilzi.

   [1248] Sih-kana lies s.e. of Shorkach, and near Kharbin.
   Sar-i-dih is about 25 or 30 miles s. of Ghazni (Erskine). A
   name suiting the pastoral wealth of the tribe _viz._
   Mesh-khail, Sheep-tribe, is shewn on maps somewhat s. from
   Kharbin. _Cf._ Steingass _s.n._ Masht.

   [1249] _yaghrun_, whence _yaghrunchi_, a diviner by help of
   the shoulder-blades of sheep. The defacer of the Elphinstone
   Codex has changed _yaghrun_ to _yan_, side, thus making Babur
   turn his side and not his half-back to the north, altering his
   direction, and missing what looks like a jesting reference to
   his own divination of the road. The Pole Star was seen,
   presumably, before the night became quite black.

   [1250] From the subsequent details of distance done, this must
   have been one of those good _yighach_ of perhaps 5-6 miles,
   that are estimated by the ease of travel on level lands (Index
   _s.v._ _yighach_).

   [1251] I am uncertain about the form of the word translated by
   "whim". The Elph. and Hai. Codices read _khud d:lma_ (altered
   in the first to _y:lma_); Ilminsky (p. 257) reads _khud l:ma_
   (de C. ii, 2 and note); Erskine has been misled by the Persian
   translation (215 f. 164_b_ and 217 f. 139_b_). Whether
   _khud-dilma_ should be read, with the sense of "out of their
   own hearts" (spontaneously), or whether _khud-yalma_, own pace
   (Turki, _yalma_, pace) the contrast made by Babur appears to
   be between an unpremeditated gallop and one premeditated for
   haste. Persian _dalama_, tarantula, also suggests itself.

   [1252] _chapqun_, which is the word translated by gallop
   throughout the previous passage. The Turki verb _chapmaq_ is
   one of those words-of-all-work for which it is difficult to
   find a single English equivalent. The verb _quimaq_ is
   another; in its two occurrences here the first may be a
   metaphor from the pouring of molten metal; the second
   expresses that permission to gallop off for the raid without
   which to raid was forbidden. The root-notion of _quimaq_ seems
   to be letting-go, that of _chapmaq_, rapid motion.

   [1253] _i.e._ on the raiders' own road for Kabul.

   [1254] f. 198_b_.

   [1255] The Fifth taken was manifestly at the ruler's
   disposition. In at least two places when dependants send gifts
   to Babur the word [_tassaduq_] used might be rendered as
   "gifts for the poor". Does this mean that the _padshah_ in
   receiving this stands in the place of the Imam of the Qoran
   injunction which orders one-fifth of spoil to be given to the
   Imam for the poor, orphans, and travellers,--four-fifths being
   reserved for the troops? (Qoran, Sale's ed. 1825, i, 212 and
   Hidayat, Book ix).

   [1256] This may be the sum of the separate items of sheep
   entered in account-books by the commissaries.

   [1257] Here this comprehensive word will stand for deer, these
   being plentiful in the region.

   [1258] Three Turki MSS. write _sighinib_, but the Elph. MS.
   has had this changed to _yitib_, having reached.

   [1259] _bash-siz_, lit. without head, doubtless a pun on
   Auz-beg (own beg, leaderless). B.M. Or. 3714 shows an artist's
   conception of this _tart-part_.

   [1260] Baba Khaki is a fine valley, some 13 _yighach_ e. of
   Heri (f. 13) where the Heri sultans reside in the heats (_J.
   Asiatique_ xvi, 501, de Meynard's article; H.S. iii, 356).

   [1261] f. 172_b_.

   [1262] _aukhshata almadi._ This is one of many passages which
   Ilminsky indicates he has made good by help of the Memoirs (p.
   261; _Memoires_ ii, 6).

   [1263] They are given also on f. 172.

   [1264] This may be Sirakhs or Sirakhsh (Erskine).

   [1265] _Tushliq tushdin yurdi birurlar._ At least two meanings
   can be given to these words. Circumstances seem to exclude the
   one in which the Memoirs (p. 222) and _Memoires_ (ii, 7) have
   taken them here, _viz._ "each man went off to shift for
   himself", and "chacun s'en alla de son cote et s'enfuit comme
   il put", because Zu'n-nun did not go off, and the Mirzas broke
   up after his defeat. I therefore suggest another reading, one
   prompted by the Mirzas' vague fancies and dreams of what they
   might do, but did not.

   [1266] The encounter was between "Belaq-i-maral and
   Rabat-i-'ali-sher, near Badghis" (Raverty's _Notes_ p. 580).
   For particulars of the taking of Heri _see_ H.S. iii, 353.

   [1267] One may be the book-name, the second the name in common
   use, and due to the colour of the buildings. But Babur may be
   making an ironical jest, and nickname the fort by a word
   referring to the defilement (_ala_) of Auzbeg possession. (Cf.
   H.S. iii, 359.)

   [1268] Mr. Erskine notes that Badi'u'z-zaman took refuge with
   Shah Isma'il _Safawi_ who gave him Tabriz. When the Turkish
   Emperor Salim took Tabriz in 920 AH. (1514 AD.), he was taken
   prisoner and carried to Constantinople, where he died in 923
   AH. (1517 AD.).

   [1269] In the fort were his wife Kabuli Begim, d. of Aulugh
   Beg M. _Kabuli_ and Ruqaiya Agha, known as the Nightingale. A
   young daughter of the Mirza, named the Rose-bud (Chuchak), had
   died just before the siege. After the surrender of the fort,
   Kabuli Begim was married by Mirza Kukuldash (perhaps
   'Ashiq-i-muhammad _Arghun_); Ruqaiya by Timur Sl. _Auzbeg_
   (H.S. iii, 359).

   [1270] The _Khutba_ was first read for Shaibaq Khan in Heri on
   Friday Muharram 15th 913 AH. (May 27th 1507 AD.).

   [1271] There is a Persian phrase used when a man engages in an
   unprofitable undertaking _Kir-i-khar gerift_, _i.e._ _Asini
   nervum deprehendet_ (Erskine). The H.S. does not mention
   Bana'i as fleecing the poets but has much to say about one
   Maulana 'Abdu'r-rahim a Turkistani favoured by Shaibani, whose
   victim Khwand-amir was, amongst many others. Not infrequently
   where Babur and Khwand-amir state the same fact, they
   accompany it by varied details, as here (H.S. iii, 358, 360).

   [1272] _'adat._ Muhammadan Law fixes a term after widowhood or
   divorce within which re-marriage is unlawful. Light is thrown
   upon this re-marriage by H.S. iii, 359. The passage, a
   somewhat rhetorical one, gives the following details:--"On
   coming into Her[i.] on Muharram 11th, Shaibani at once set
   about gathering in the property of the Timurids. He had the
   wives and daughters of the former rulers brought before him.
   The great lady Khan-zada Begim (f. 163_b_) who was daughter of
   Ahmad Khan, niece of Sl. Husain Mirza, and wife of Muzaffar
   Mirza, shewed herself pleased in his presence. Desiring to
   marry him, she said Muzaffar M. had divorced her two years
   before. Trustworthy persons gave evidence to the same effect,
   so she was united to Shaibani in accordance with the glorious
   Law. Mihr-angez Begim, Muzaffar M.'s daughter, was married to
   'Ubaidu'llah Sl. (_Auzbeg_); the rest of the chaste ladies
   having been sent back into the city, Shaibani resumed his
   search for property." Manifestly Babur did not believe in the
   divorce Khwand-amir thus records.

   [1273] A sarcasm this on the acceptance of literary honour
   from the illiterate.

   [1274] f. 191 and note; Pul-i-salar may be an irrigation-dam.

   [1275] Qalat-i-nadiri, the birth-place of Nadir Shah, n. of
   Mashhad and standing on very strong ground (Erskine).

   [1276] This is likely to be the road passing through the
   Carfax of Rabat-i-sangbast, described by Daulat-shah (Browne,
   p. 176).

   [1277] This will mean that the Arghuns would acknowledge his
   suzerainty; Haidar Mirza however says that Shah Beg had higher
   views (T. R. p. 202). There had been earlier negotiations
   between Zu'n-nun with Badi'u'z-zaman and Babur which may have
   led to the abandonment of Babur's expedition in 911 AD. (f.
   158; H.S. iii, 323; Raverty's account (_Notes_ p. 581-2) of
   Babur's dealings with the Arghun chiefs needs revision).

   [1278] They will have gone first to Tun or Qain, thence to
   Mashhad, and seem likely to have joined the Begim after
   cross-cutting to avoid Heri.

   [1279] _yaghi wilayati-gha kiladurghan._ There may have been
   an accumulation of caravans on their way to Herat, checked in
   Qalat by news of the Auzbeg conquest.

   [1280] Jahangir's son, thus brought by his mother, will have
   been an infant; his father had gone back last year with Babur
   by the mountain road and had been left, sick and travelling in
   a litter, with the baggage when Babur hurried on to Kabul at
   the news of the mutiny against him (f. 197); he must have died
   shortly afterwards, seemingly between the departure of the two
   rebels from Kabul (f. 201_b_-202) and the march out for
   Qandahar. Doubtless his widow now brought her child to claim
   his uncle Babur's protection.

   [1281] Persians pay great attention in their correspondence
   not only to the style but to the kind of paper on which a
   letter is written, the place of signature, the place of the
   seal, and the situation of the address. Chardin gives some
   curious information on the subject (Erskine). Babur marks the
   distinction of rank he drew between the Arghun chiefs and
   himself when he calls their letter to him, _'arz-dasht_, his
   to them _khatt_. His claim to suzerainty over those chiefs
   is shewn by Haidar Mirza to be based on his accession to
   Timurid headship through the downfall of the Bai-qaras, who
   had been the acknowledged suzerains of the Arghuns now
   repudiating Babur's claim. Cf. Erskine's _History of India_ i,
   cap. 3.

   [1282] on the main road, some 40 miles east of Qandahar.

   [1283] var. Kur or Kawar. If the word mean _ford_, this might
   well be the one across the Tarnak carrying the road to Qara
   (maps). Here Babur seems to have left the main road along the
   Tarnak, by which the British approach was made in 1880 AD.,
   for one crossing west into the valley of the Argand-ab.

   [1284] Baba Hasan _Abdal_ is the Baba Wali of maps. The same
   saint has given his name here, and also to his shrine east of
   Atak where he is known as Baba Wali of Qandahar. The torrents
   mentioned are irrigation off-takes from the Argand-ab, which
   river flows between Baba Wali and Khalishak. Shah Beg's force
   was south of the torrents (cf. Murghan-koh on S.A.W. map).

   [1285] The narrative and plans of _Second Afghan War_ (Murray
   1908) illustrate Babur's movements and show most of the places
   he names. The end of the 280 mile march, from Kabul to within
   sight of Qandahar, will have stirred in the General of 1507
   what it stirred in the General of 1880. Lord Roberts speaking
   in May 1913 in Glasgow on the rapid progress of the movement
   for National Service thus spoke:--"A memory comes over me which
   turns misgiving into hope and apprehension into confidence. It
   is the memory of the morning when, accompanied by two of
   Scotland's most famous regiments, the Seaforths and the
   Gordons, at the end of a long and arduous march, _I saw in the
   distance the walls and minarets of Qandahar, and knew that the
   end of a great resolve and a great task was near._"

   [1286] _min tash 'imarat qazdurghan tumshughi-ning alida_; 215
   f. l68_b_, _'imarati kah az sang yak para farmuda budim_; 217
   f. 143_b_, _jay kah man 'imarati sakhtam_; Mems. p. 226, where
   I have built a palace; _Mems._ ii, 15, _l'endroit meme ou j'ai
   bati un palais_. All the above translations lose the sense of
   _qazdurghan_, am causing to dig out, to quarry stone. Perhaps
   for coolness' sake the dwelling was cut out in the living
   rock. That the place is south-west of the main _ariqs_, near
   Murghan-koh or on it, Babur's narrative allows. Cf. Appendix
   J.

   [1287] _sic_, Hai. MS. There are two Lakhshas, Little Lakhsha,
   a mile west of Qandahar, and Great Lakhsha, about a mile s.w.
   of Old Qandahar, 5 or 6 m. from the modern one (Erskine).

   [1288] This will be the main irrigation channel taken off from
   the Argand-ab (Maps).

   [1289] _tamam ailikidin--aish-kilur yikitlar_, an idiomatic
   phrase used of 'Ali-dost (f. 14_b_ and n.), not easy to
   express by a single English adjective.

   [1290] The _tawachi_ was a sort of adjutant who attended to
   the order of the troops and carried orders from the general
   (Erskine). The difficult passage following gives the Turki
   terms Babur selected to represent Arabic military ones.

   [1291] Ar. _ahad_ (_Ayin-i-akbari_, Blochmann, index _s.n._).
   The word _bui_ recurs in the text on f. 210.

   [1292] _i.e._ the _bui tikini_ of f. 209_b_, the _khasa
   tabin_, close circle.

   [1293] As Mughuls seem unlikely to be descendants of Muhammad,
   perhaps the title Sayyid in some Mughul names here, may be a
   translation of a Mughul one meaning Chief.

   [1294] _Arghun-ning qarasi_, a frequent phrase.

   [1295] in sign of submission.

   [1296] f. 176. It was in 908 AH. [1502 AD.].

   [1297] This word seems to be from _sanjmaq_, to prick or stab;
   and here to have the military sense of _prick_, _viz._ riding
   forth. The Second Pers. trs. (217 f. 144_b_) translates it by
   _ghauta khurda raft_, went tasting a plunge under water (215
   f. 170; Muh. _Shirazi_'s lith. ed. p. 133). Erskine (p. 228),
   as his Persian source dictates, makes the men sink into the
   soft ground; de Courteille varies much (ii, 21).

   [1298] Ar. _akhmail_, so translated under the known presence
   of trees; it may also imply soft ground (Lane p. 813 col. b)
   but soft ground does not suit the purpose of _ariqs_
   (channels), the carrying on of water to the town.

   [1299] The S.A.W. map is useful here.

   [1300] That he had a following may be inferred.

   [1301] Hai. MS. _qachar_; Ilminsky, p. 268; and both Pers.
   trss. _rukhsar_ or _rukhsara_ (f. 25 and note to _qachar_).

   [1302] So in the Turki MSS. and the first Pers. trs. (215 f.
   170_b_). The second Pers. trs. (217 f. 145_b_) has a gloss of
   _atqu u tika_; this consequently Erskine follows (p. 229) and
   adds a note explaining the punishment. Ilminsky has the gloss
   also (p. 269), thus indicating Persian and English influence.

   [1303] No MS. gives the missing name.

   [1304] The later favour mentioned was due to Sambhal's
   laborious release of his master from Auzbeg captivity in 917
   AH. (1511 AD.) of which Erskine quotes a full account from the
   _Tarikh-i-sind_ (History of India i, 345).

   [1305] Presumably he went by Sabzar, Daulatabad, and Washir.

   [1306] f. 202 and note to _Chaghatai_.

   [1307] This will be for the Ningnahar _tuman_ of Lamghan.

   [1308] He was thus dangerously raised in his father's place of
   rule.

   [1309] ff. 10_b_, 11_b_. Haidar M. writes, "Shah Begim laid
   claim to Badakhshan, saying, "It has been our hereditary
   kingdom for 3000 years; though I, being a woman, cannot myself
   attain sovereignty, yet my grandson Mirza Khan can hold it"
   (T. R. p. 203).

   [1310] _tibradilar._ The agitation of mind connoted, with
   movement, by this verb may well have been, here, doubt of
   Babur's power to protect.

   [1311] _tushluq tushdin taghgha yurukailar._ Cf. 205_b_ for
   the same phrase, with supposedly different meaning.

   [1312] _qangshar_ lit. ridge of the nose.

   [1313] _bir auq ham quia-almadilar_ (f. 203_b_ note to
   _chapqun_).

   [1314] This will have been news both of Shaibaq Khan and of
   Mirza Khan. The Pers. trss. vary here (215 f. 173 and 217 f.
   148).

   [1315] Index _s.n._

   [1316] Mah-chuchuk can hardly have been married against her
   will to Qasim. Her mother regarded the alliance as a family
   indignity; appealed to Shah Beg and compassed a rescue from
   Kabul while Babur and Qasim were north of the Oxus [_circa_
   916 AH.]. Mah-chuchuk quitted Kabul after much hesitation, due
   partly to reluctance to leave her husband and her infant of 18
   months, [Nahid Begim,] partly to dread less family honour
   might require her death (Erskine's _History_, i, 348 and
   Gul-badan's _Humayun-nama_).

   [1317] Erskine gives the fort the alternative name "Kaliun",
   locates it in the Badghis district east of Heri, and quotes
   from Abu'l-ghazi in describing its strong position (_History_
   i, 282). H.S. Tirah-tu.

   [1318] f. 133 and note. Abu'l-fazl mentions that the
   inscription was to be seen in his time.

   [1319] This fief ranks in value next to the Kabul _tuman_.

   [1320] Various gleanings suggest motives for Babur's assertion
   of supremacy at this particular time. He was the only Timurid
   ruler and man of achievement; he filled Husain _Bai-qara_'s
   place of Timurid headship; his actions through a long period
   show that he aimed at filling Timur Beg's. There were those
   who did not admit his suzerainty,--Timurids who had rebelled,
   Mughuls who had helped them, and who would also have helped
   Sa'id Khan _Chaghatai_, if he had not refused to be
   treacherous to a benefactor; there were also the Arghuns,
   Chingiz-khanids of high pretensions. In old times the Mughul
   Khaqans were _padshah_ (supreme); Padshah is recorded in
   history as the style of at least Satuq-bughra Khan Padshah
   Ghazi; no Timurid had been lifted by his style above all
   Mirzas. When however Timurids had the upper hand, Babur's
   Timurid grandfather Abu-sa'id asserted his _de facto_
   supremacy over Babur's Chaghatai grandfather Yunas (T. R. p.
   83). For Babur to re-assert that supremacy by assuming the
   Khaqan's style was highly opportune at this moment. To be
   Babur Supreme was to declare over-lordship above Chaghatai and
   Mughul, as well as over all Mirzas. It was done when his sky
   had cleared; Mirza Khan's rebellion was scotched; the Arghuns
   were defeated; he was the stronger for their lost possessions;
   his Auzbeg foe had removed to a less ominous distance; and
   Kabul was once more his own.

   Gul-badan writes as if the birth of his first-born son Humayun
   were a part of the uplift in her father's style, but his
   narrative does not support her in this, since the order of
   events forbids.

   [1321] The "Khan" in Humayun's title may be drawn from his
   mother's family, since it does not come from Babur. To whose
   family Mahim belonged we have not been able to discover. It is
   one of the remarkable omissions of Babur, Gul-badan and
   Abu'l-fazl that they do not give her father's name. The topic
   of her family is discussed in my Biographical Appendix to
   Gul-badan's _Humayun-nama_ and will be taken up again, here,
   in a final Appendix on Babur's family.

   [1322] Elph. MS. f. 172_b_; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 174_b_ and 217
   f. 148_b_; Mems. p. 234.

   [1323] on the head-waters of the Tarnak (R.'s _Notes_ App. p.
   34).

   [1324] Babur has made no direct mention of his half-brother's
   death (f. 208 and n. to Mirza).

   [1325] This may be Darwesh-i-'ali of f. 210; the Sayyid in his
   title may merely mean chief, since he was a Mughul.

   [1326] Several of these mutineers had fought for Babur at
   Qandahar.

   [1327] It may be useful to recapitulate this Mirza's
   position:--In the previous year he had been left in charge of
   Kabul when Babur went eastward in dread of Shaibani, and, so
   left, occupied his hereditary place. He cannot have hoped to
   hold Kabul if the Auzbeg attacked it; for its safety and his
   own he may have relied, and Babur also in appointing him, upon
   influence his Arghun connections could use. For these, one was
   Muqim his brother-in-law, had accepted Shaibani's suzerainty
   after being defeated in Qandahar by Babur. It suited them
   better no doubt to have the younger Mirza rather than Babur in
   Kabul; the latter's return thither will have disappointed them
   and the Mirza; they, as will be instanced later, stood ready
   to invade his lands when he moved East; they seem likely to
   have promoted the present Mughul uprising. In the battle which
   put this down, the Mirza was captured; Babur pardoned him; but
   he having rebelled again, was then put to death.

   [1328] Bagh-i-yurunchqa may be an equivalent of Bagh-i-safar,
   and the place be one of waiting "up to" (_unchqa_) the journey
   (_yur_). _Yurunchqa_ also means _clover_ (De Courteille).

   [1329] He seems to have been a brother or uncle of Humayun's
   mother Mahim (Index; A. N. trs. i, 492 and note).

   [1330] In all MSS. the text breaks off abruptly here, as it
   does on f. 118_b_ as though through loss of pages, and a blank
   of narrative follows. Before the later gap of f. 251_b_
   however the last sentence is complete.

   [1331] Index _s. n. Babur-nama_, date of composition and gaps.

   [1332] _ibid._

   [1333] Jumada I, 14th 968 AH.-Jan. 31st 1561 AD. Concerning
   the book _see_ Elliot and Dowson's _History of India_ vi, 572
   and JRAS 1901 p. 76, H. Beveridge's art. _On Persian MSS. in
   Indian Libraries_.

   [1334] The T. R. gives the names of two only of the champions
   but Firishta, writing much later gives all five; we surmise
   that he found his five in the book of which copies are not now
   known, the _Tarikh-i Muh. 'Arif Qandahari_. Firishta's five
   are 'Ali _shab-kur_ (night-blind), 'Ali _Sistani_, Nazar
   Bahadur _Auzbeg_, Ya'qub _tez-jang_ (swift in fight), and
   Auzbeg Bahadur. Haidar's two names vary in the MSS. of the T.
   R. but represent the first two of Firishta's list.

   [1335] There are curious differences of statement about the
   date of Shaibani's death, possibly through confusion between
   this and the day on which preliminary fighting began near
   Merv. Haidar's way of expressing the date carries weight by
   its precision, he giving _roz-i-shakk_ of Ramzan, _i.e._ a day
   of which there was doubt whether it was the last of Sha'ban or
   the first of Ramzan (Lane, _yauma'u'l-shakk_). As the sources
   support Friday for the day of the week and on a Friday in the
   year 915 AH. fell the 29th of Sha'ban, the date of Shaibani's
   death seems to be Friday Sha'ban 29th 915 AH. (Friday December
   2nd 1510 AD.).

   [1336] If my reading be correct of the Turki passage
   concerning wines drunk by Babur which I have noted on f. 49
   (_in loco_ p. 83 n. 1), it was during this occupation of Kabul
   that Babur first broke the Law against stimulants.

   [1337] Mr. R. S. Poole found a coin which he took to be one
   struck in obedience to Babur's compact with the Shah (B.M.Cat.
   of the coins of Persian Shahs 1887, pp. xxiv _et seq._; T.R.
   p. 246 n.).

   [1338] It was held by Ahmad-i-qasim _Kohbur_ and is referred
   to on f. 234_b_, as one occasion of those in which Dost Beg
   distinguished himself.

   [1339] Schuyler's _Turkistan_ has a good account and picture
   of the mosque. 'Ubaid's vow is referred to in my earlier
   mention of the _Suluku'l-muluk_. It may be noted here that
   this MS. supports the spelling _Babur_ by making the second
   syllable rhyme to _pur_, as against the form _Babar_.

   [1340] _auruq._ Babur refers to this exodus on f. 12_b_ when
   writing of Daulat-sultan Khanim.

   [1341] It is one recorded with some variation, in Niyaz
   Muhammad _Khukandi's Tarikh-i-shahrukhi_ (Kazan, 1885) and
   Nalivkine's _Khanate of Khokand_ (p. 63). It says that when
   Babur in 918 AH. (1512 AD.) left Samarkand after defeat by the
   Auzbegs, one of his wives, Sayyida Afaq who accompanied him in
   his flight, gave birth to a son in the desert which lies
   between Khujand and Kand-i-badam; that Babur, not daring to
   tarry and the infant being too young to make the impending
   journey, left it under some bushes with his own girdle round
   it in which were things of price; that the child was found by
   local people and in allusion to the valuables amongst which it
   lay, called Altun bishik (golden cradle); that it received
   other names and was best known in later life as Khudayan
   Sultan. He is said to have spent most of his life in Akhsi; to
   have had a son Tingri-yar; and to have died in 952 AH. (1545
   AD.). His grandson Yar-i-muhammad is said to have gone to
   India to relations who was descendants of Babur (JASB 1905 p.
   137 H. Beveridge's art. _The Emperor Babur_). What is against
   the truth of this tradition is that Gul-badan mentions no such
   wife as Sayyida Afaq. Mahim however seems to have belonged to
   a religious family, might therefore be styled Sayyida, and, as
   Babur mentions (f. 220), had several children who did not live
   (a child left as this infant was, might if not heard of, be
   supposed dead). There is this opening allowed for considering
   the tradition.

   [1342] Babur refers to this on f. 265.

   [1343] The _Lubbu't-tawarikh_ would fix Ramzan 7th.

   [1344] Mr. Erskine's quotation of the Persian original of the
   couplet differs from that which I have translated (_History of
   India_ ii, 326; _Tarikh-i-badayuni_ Bib. Ind. ed. f. 444).
   Perhaps in the latter a pun is made on Najm as the leader's
   name and as meaning _fortune_; if so it points the more
   directly at the Shah. The second line is quoted by Badayuni on
   his f. 362 also.

   [1345] Some translators make Babur go "naked" into the fort
   but, on his own authority (f. 106_b_), it seems safer to
   understand what others say, that he went stripped of
   attendance, because it was always his habit even in times of
   peace to lie down in his tunic; much more would he have done
   so at such a crisis of his affairs as this of his flight to
   Hisar.

   [1346] Haidar gives a graphic account of the misconduct of the
   horde and of their punishment (T.R. p. 261-3).

   [1347] One of the mutineers named as in this affair (T.R. p.
   257) was Sl. Quli _chunaq_, a circumstance attracting
   attention by its bearing on the cause of the _lacunae_ in the
   _Babur-nama_, inasmuch as Babur, writing at the end of his
   life, expresses (f. 65) his intention to tell of this man's
   future misdeeds. These misdeeds may have been also at Hisar
   and in the attack there made on Babur; they are known from
   Haidar to have been done at Ghazni; both times fall within
   this present gap. Hence it is clear that Babur meant to write
   of the events falling in the gap of 914 AH. onwards.

   [1348] In 925 AH. (ff. 227 and 238) mention is made of
   courtesies exchanged between Babur and Muhammad-i-zaman in
   Balkh. The Mirza was with Babur later on in Hindustan.

   [1349] Mir Ma'sum's _Tarikh-i-sind_ is the chief authority for
   Babur's action after 913 AH. against Shah Beg in Qandahar; its
   translation, made in 1846 by Major Malet, shews some
   manifestly wrong dates; they appear also in the B. M. MS. of
   the work.

   [1350] f. 216_b_ and note to "Monday".

   [1351] Elph. MS. f. 173_b_; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 178 and 217 f.
   149; Mems. p. 246. The whole of the Hijra year is included in
   1519 AD. (Erskine). What follows here and completes the Kabul
   section of the _Babur-nama_ is a diary of a little over 13
   months' length, supplemented by matter of later entry. The
   product has the character of a draft, awaiting revision to
   harmonize it in style and, partly, in topic with the composed
   narrative that breaks off under 914 AH.; for the diary,
   written some 11 years earlier than that composed narrative,
   varies, as it would be expected _a priori_ to vary, in style
   and topic from the terse, lucid and idiomatic output of
   Babur's literary maturity. A good many obscure words and
   phrases in it, several new from Babur's pen, have opposed
   difficulty to scribes and translators. Interesting as such
   _minutiae_ are to a close observer of Turki and of Babur's
   diction, comment on all would be tedious; a few will be found
   noted, as also will such details as fix the date of entry for
   supplementary matter.

   [1352] Here Mr. Erskine notes that Dr. Leyden's translation
   begins again; it broke off on f. 180_b_, and finally ends on
   f. 223_b_.

   [1353] This name is often found transliterated as Chandul or
   [mod.] Jandul but the Hai. MS. supports Raverty's opinion that
   Chandawal is correct.

   The year 925 AH. opens with Babur far from Kabul and east of
   the Khahr (fort) he is about to attack. Afghan and other
   sources allow surmise of his route to that position; he may
   have come down into the Chandawal-valley, first, from taking
   Chaghan-sarai (f. 124, f. 134 and n.), and, secondly, from
   taking the Gibri stronghold of Haidar-i-'ali _Bajauri_ which
   stood at the head of the Baba Qara-valley. The latter surmise
   is supported by the romantic tales of Afghan chroniclers which
   at this date bring into history Babur's Afghan wife, Bibi
   Mubaraka (f. 220_b_ and note; Mems. p. 250 n.; and Appendix K,
   _An Afghan legend_). (It must be observed here that R.'s
   _Notes_ (pp. 117, 128) confuse the two sieges, _viz._ of the
   Gibri fort in 924 AH. and of the Khahr of Bajaur in 925 AH.)

   [1354] Raverty lays stress on the circumstance that the fort
   Babur now attacks has never been known as Bajaur, but always
   simply as Khahr, the fort (the Arabic name for the place
   being, he says, plain _Shahr_); just as the main stream is
   called simply Rud (the torrent). The name Khahr is still used,
   as modern maps shew. There are indeed two neighbouring places
   known simply as Khahr (Fort), _i.e._ one at the mouth of the
   "Mahmand-valley" of modern campaigns, the other near the
   Malakand (Fincastle's map).

   [1355] This word the Hai. MS. writes, _passim_, Dilah-zak.

   [1356] Either Haidar-i-'ali himself or his nephew, the latter
   more probably, since no name is mentioned.

   [1357] Looking at the position assigned by maps to Khahr, in
   the _du-ab_ of the Charmanga-water and the Rud of Bajaur, it
   may be that Babur's left moved along the east bank of the
   first-named stream and crossed it into the _du-ab_, while his
   centre went direct to its post, along the west side of the
   fort.

   [1358] _su-kirishi_; to interpret which needs local knowledge;
   it might mean where water entered the fort, or where water
   disembogued from narrows, or, perhaps, where water is entered
   for a ford. (The verb _kirmak_ occurs on f. 154_b_ and f. 227
   to describe water coming down in spate.)

   [1359] _diwanawar_, perhaps a jest on a sobriquet earned
   before this exploit, perhaps the cause of the man's later
   sobriquet _diwana_ (f. 245_b_).

   [1360] Text, t:r:k, read by Erskine and de Courteille as Turk;
   it might however be a Turki component in Jan-i-'ali or
   Muhibb-i-'ali. (Cf. Zenker _s.n. tirik_.)

   [1361] _aushul guni_, which contrasts with the frequent
   _aushbu guni_ (this same day, today) of manifestly diary
   entries; it may indicate that the full account of the siege is
   a later supplement.

   [1362] This puzzling word might mean cow-horn (_kau-saru_) and
   stand for the common horn trumpet. Erskine and de Courteille
   have read it as _gau-sar_, the first explaining it as
   _cow-head_, surmised to be a protection for matchlockmen when
   loading; the second, as _justaucorps de cuir_. That the word
   is baffling is shewn by its omission in I.O. 215 (f. 178_b_),
   in 217 (f. 149_b_) and in Muh. _Shirazi_'s lith. ed. (p. 137).

   [1363] or _farangi._ Much has been written concerning the
   early use of gun-powder in the East. There is, however, no
   well-authenticated fact to prove the existence of anything
   like artillery there, till it was introduced from Europe.
   Babur here, and in other places (f. 267) calls his larger
   ordnance Firingi, a proof that they were then regarded as
   owing their origin to Europe. The Turks, in consequence of
   their constant intercourse with the nations of the West, have
   always excelled all the other Orientals in the use of
   artillery; and, when heavy cannon were first used in India,
   Europeans or Turks were engaged to serve them (Erskine). It is
   owing no doubt to the preceding gap in his writings that we
   are deprived of Babur's account of his own introduction to
   fire-arms. _See_ E. & D.'s _History of India_, vi, Appendix
   _On the early use of gunpowder in India_.

   [1364] var. _qutbi_, _quchini_.

   [1365] This sobriquet might mean "ever a fighter", or an
   "argle-bargler", or a brass shilling (Zenker), or (if written
   _jing-jing_) that the man was visaged like the bearded reeding
   (Scully in Shaw's Vocabulary). The _Tabaqat-i-akbari_
   includes a Mirak Khan _Jang-jang_ in its list of Akbar's
   Commanders.

   [1366] _ghul-din (awwal) aul qurghan-gha chiqti._ I suggest to
   supply _awwal_, first, on the warrant of Babur's later
   statement (f. 234_b_) that Dost was first in.

   [1367] He was a son of Maulana Muh. _Sadr_, one of the chief
   men of 'Umar-shaikh M.'s Court; he had six brothers, all of
   whom spent their lives in Babur's service, to whom, if we may
   believe Abu'l-fazl, they were distantly related (Erskine).

   [1368] Babur now returns towards the east, down the Rud. The
   _chashma_ by which he encamped, would seem to be near the
   mouth of the valley of Baba Qara, one 30 miles long; it may
   have been, anglice, a spring [not that of the main stream of
   the long valley], but the word may be used as it seems to be
   of the water supplying the Bagh-i-safa (f. 224), _i.e._ to
   denote the first considerable gathering-place of small
   head-waters. It will be observed a few lines further on that
   this same valley seems to be meant by "Khwaja Khizr".

   [1369] He will have joined Babur previous to Muharram 925 AH.

   [1370] This statement, the first we have, that Babur has
   broken Musalman Law against stimulants (f. 49 and n.), is
   followed by many others more explicit, jotting down where and
   what and sometimes why he drank, in a way which arrests
   attention and asks some other explanation than that it is an
   unabashed record of conviviality such conceivably as a
   non-Musalman might write. Babur is now 37 years old; he had
   obeyed the Law till past early manhood; he wished to return to
   obedience at 40; he frequently mentions his lapses by a word
   which can be translated as "commitment of sin" (_irtqab_); one
   gathers that he did not at any time disobey with easy
   conscience. Does it explain his singular record,--one made in
   what amongst ourselves would be regarded as a private
   diary,--that his sins were created by Law? Had he a balance of
   reparation in his thoughts?

   Detaching into their separate class as excesses, all his
   instances of confessed drunkenness, there remains much in his
   record which, seen from a non-Musalman point of view, is
   venial; _e.g._ his _subuhi_ appears to be the "morning" of the
   Scot, the _Morgen-trank_ of the Teuton; his afternoon cup, in
   the open air usually, may have been no worse than the sober
   glass of beer or local wine of modern Continental Europe. Many
   of these legal sins of his record were interludes in the day's
   long ride, stirrup-cups some of them, all in a period of
   strenuous physical activity. Many of his records are
   collective and are phrased impersonally; they mention that
   there was drinking, drunkenness even, but they give details
   sometimes such as only a sober observer could include.

   Babur names a few men as drunkards, a few as entirely
   obedient; most of his men seem not to have obeyed the Law and
   may have been "temperate drinkers"; they effected work, Babur
   amongst them, which habitual drunkards could not have
   compassed. Spite of all he writes of his worst excesses, it
   must be just to remember his Musalman conscience, and also the
   distorting power of a fictitious sin. Though he broke the law
   binding all men against excess, and this on several confessed
   occasions, his rule may have been no worse than that of the
   ordinarily temperate Western. It cannot but lighten judgment
   that his recorded lapses from Law were often prompted by the
   bounty and splendour of Nature; were committed amidst the
   falling petals of fruit-blossom, the flaming fire of autumn
   leaves, where the eye rested on the _arghwan_ or the orange
   grove, the coloured harvest of corn or vine.

   [1371] As Mr. Erskine observes, there seems to be no valley
   except that of Baba Qara, between the Khahr and the
   Chandawal-valley; "Khwaja Khizr" and "Baba Qara" may be one
   and the same valley.

   [1372] Time and ingenuity would be needed to bring over into
   English all the quips of this verse. The most obvious pun is,
   of course, that on Bajaur as the compelling cause (_ba jaur_)
   of the parting; others may be meant on _guzid_ and _gazid_, on
   _sazid_ and _chara_. The verse would provide the holiday
   amusement of extracting from it two justifiable translations.

   [1373] His possessions extended from the river of Sawad to
   Baramula; he was expelled from them by the Yusuf-zai
   (Erskine).

   [1374] This will be the naze of the n.e. rampart of the Baba
   Qara valley.

   [1375] f. 4 and note; f. 276. Babur seems to use the name for
   several varieties of deer.

   [1376] There is here, perhaps, a jesting allusion to the
   darkening of complexion amongst the inhabitants of countries
   from west to east, from Highlands to Indian plains.

   [1377] In Dr. E. D. Ross' _Polyglot list of birds_ the
   _sarigh(sariq)-qush_ is said to frequent fields of ripening
   grain; this suggests to translate its name as Thief-bird.

   [1378] _Aquila chrysaetus_, the hunting eagle.

   [1379] This _araligh_ might be identified with the "Miankalai"
   of maps (since Soghd, lying between two arms of the Zar-afshan
   is known also as Miankal), but Raverty explains the Bajaur
   Miankalai to mean Village of the holy men (_mian_).

   [1380] After 933 AH. presumably, when final work on the B.N.
   was in progress.

   [1381] Mr. Erskine notes that Pesh-gram lies north of Mahyar
   (on the Chandawal-water), and that he has not found Kahraj (or
   Kohraj). Judging from Babur's next movements, the two valleys
   he names may be those in succession east of Chandawal.

   [1382] There is hardly any level ground in the cleft of the
   Panj-kura (R.'s _Notes_ p. 193); the villages are perched high
   on the sides of the valley. The pass leading to them may be
   Katgola (Fincastle's Map).

   [1383] This account of Hind-al's adoption is sufficiently
   confused to explain why a note, made apparently by Humayun,
   should have been appended to it (Appendix L, _On Hind-al's
   adoption_). The confusion reminds the reader that he has
   before him a sort of memorandum only, diary jottings, apt to
   be allusive and abbreviated. The expected child was Dil-dar's;
   Mahim, using her right as principal wife, asked for it to be
   given to her. That the babe in question is here called Hind-al
   shews that at least part of this account of his adoption was
   added after the birth and naming (f. 227).

   [1384] One would be, no doubt, for Dil-dar's own information.
   She then had no son but had two daughters, Gul-rang and
   Gul-chihra. News of Hind-al's birth reached Babur in Bhira,
   some six weeks later (f. 227).

   [1385] f. 218_b_.

   [1386] Bibi Mubaraka, the Afghani Aghacha of Gul-badan. An
   attractive picture of her is drawn by the
   _Tawarikh-i-hafi-i-rahmat-khani_. As this gives not only one
   of Babur's romantic adventures but historical matter, I append
   it in my husband's translation [(A.Q.R. April 1901)] as
   Appendix K, _An Afghan Legend_.

   [1387] _Bi-sut aili-ning Bajaur-qurghani-da manasabati-bar
   jihati_; a characteristic phrase.

   [1388] Perhaps the end of the early spring-harvest and the
   spring harvesting-year. It is not the end of the campaigning
   year, manifestly; and it is at the beginning of both the solar
   and lunar years.

   [1389] Perhaps, more than half-way between the Mid-day and
   Afternoon Prayers. So too in the annals of Feb. 12th.

   [1390] _til alghali_ (Pers. _zaban-giri_), a new phrase in the
   B.N.

   [1391] _chasht_, which, being half-way between sunrise and the
   meridian, is a variable hour.

   [1392] See n. 2, f. 221.

   [1393] Perhaps Maqam is the Mardan of maps.

   [1394] Bhira, on the Jehlam, is now in the Shahpur district of
   the Panj-ab.

   [1395] This will be the ford on the direct road from Mardan
   for the eastward (Elphin-stone's _Caubul_ ii, 416).

   [1396] The position of Sawati is represented by the Suabi of
   the G. of I. map (1909 AD.). Writing in about 1813 AD. Mr.
   Erskine notes as worthy of record that the rhinoceros was at
   that date no longer found west of the Indus.

   [1397] Elph. MS. _ghura_, the 1st, but this is corrected to
   16th by a marginal note. The Hai. MS. here, as in some other
   places, has the context for a number, but omits the figures.
   So does also the Elph. MS. in a good many places.

   [1398] This is the Harru. Mr. Erskine observes that Babur
   appears to have turned sharp south after crossing it, since he
   ascended a pass so soon after leaving the Indus and reached
   the Suhan so soon.

   [1399] _i.e._ the Salt-range.

   [1400] Mr. Erskine notes that (in his day) a _shahrukhi_ may
   be taken at a shilling or eleven pence sterling.

   [1401] It is somewhat difficult not to forget that a man who,
   like Babur, records so many observations of geographical
   position, had no guidance from Surveys, Gazetteers and Books
   of Travel. Most of his records are those of personal
   observation.

   [1402] In this sentence Mr. Erskine read a reference to the
   Musalman Ararat, the Koh-i-jud on the left bank of the Tigris.
   What I have set down translates the Turki words but, taking
   account of Babur's eye for the double use of a word, and
   Erskine's careful work, done too in India, the Turki may imply
   reference to the Ararat-like summit of Sakeswar.

   [1403] Here Dr. Leyden's version finally ends (Erskine).

   [1404] Bhira, as has been noted, is on the Jehlam; Khush-ab is
   40 m. lower down the same river; Chiniut (Chini-wat?) is 50
   miles south of Bhira; Chin-ab (China-water?) seems the name of
   a tract only and not of a residential centre; it will be in
   the Bar of Kipling's border-thief. Concerning Chiniut _see_ D.
   G. Barkley's letter, JRAS 1899 p. 132.

   [1405] _taur yiri waqi' bulub tur._ As on f. 160 of the valley
   of Khwesh, I have taken _taur_ to be Turki, complete, shut in.

   [1406] _chashma_ (f. 218_b_ and note).

   [1407] The promised description is not found; there follows a
   mere mention only of the garden [f. 369]. This entry can be
   taken therefore as shewing an intention to write what is still
   wanting from Safar 926 AH. to Safar 932 AH.

   [1408] Mir Muh. may have been a kinsman or follower of Mahdi
   Khwaja. The entry on the scene, unannounced by introduction as
   to parentage, of the Khwaja who played a part later in Babur's
   family affairs is due, no doubt, to the last gap of annals. He
   is mentioned in the Translator's Note, _s.a._ 923 AH. (_See_
   Gul-badan's H.N. Biographical Appendix _s.n._)

   [1409] or Sihrind, mod. Sirhind or Sar-i-hind (Head of Hind).
   It may be noted here, for what it may be found worth, that
   Kh(w)afi Khan [i, 402] calls Sar-i-hind the old name, says
   that the place was once held by the Ghazni dynasty and was its
   Indian frontier, and that Shah-jahan changed it to Sahrind.
   The W.-i-B. I.O. 217 f. 155 writes Shahrind.

   [1410] Three krores or crores of dams, at 40 to the rupee,
   would make this 750,000 rupees, or about L75,000 sterling
   (Erskine); a statement from the ancient history of the rupi!

   [1411] This Hindustani word in some districts signifies the
   head man of a trade, in others a landholder (Erskine).

   [1412] In Mr. Erskine's time this sum was reckoned to be
   nearly L20,000.

   [1413] Here originally neither the Elph. MS. nor the Hai. MS.
   had a date; it has been added to the former.

   [1414] This rain is too early for the s.w. monsoon; it was
   probably a severe fall of spring rain, which prevails at this
   season or rather earlier, and extends over all the west of
   Asia (Erskine).

   [1415] _az ghina shor su._ Streams rising in the Salt-range
   become brackish on reaching its skirts (G. of I.).

   [1416] Here this will be the fermented juice of rice or of the
   date-palm.

   [1417] _Rauh_ is sometimes the name of a musical note.

   [1418] a platform, with or without a chamber above it, and
   supported on four posts.

   [1419] so-written in the MSS. Cf. Raverty's _Notes_ and G. of
   I.

   [1420] Anglice, cousins on the father's side.

   [1421] The G. of I. describes it.

   [1422] Elph. MS. f. 183b, _mansub_; Hai. MS. and 2nd W.-i-B.
   _bisut_. The holder might be Baba-i-kabuli of f. 225.

   [1423] The 1st Pers. trs. (I.O. 215 f. 188b) and Kehr's MS.
   [Ilminsky p. 293] attribute Hati's last-recorded acts to Babur
   himself. The two mistaken sources err together elsewhere. M.
   de Courteille corrects the defect (ii, 67).

   [1424] night-guard. He is the old servant to whom Babur sent a
   giant _ashrafi_ of the spoils of India (Gul-badan's H.N.
   _s.n._).

   [1425] The _kiping_ or _kipik_ is a kind of mantle covered
   with wool (Erskine); the root of the word is _kip_, dry.

   [1426] _aulugh chasht_, a term suggesting that Babur knew the
   _chota haziri_, little breakfast, of Anglo-India. It may be
   inferred, from several passages, that the big breakfast was
   taken after 9 a.m. and before 12 p.m. Just below men are said
   to put on their mail at _chasht_ in the same way as, _passim_,
   things other than prayer are said to be done at this or that
   Prayer; this, I think, always implies that they are done after
   the Prayer mentioned; a thing done shortly before a Prayer is
   done "close to" or "near" or when done over half-way to the
   following Prayer, the act is said to be done "nearer" to the
   second (as was noted on f. 221).

   [1427] _Juldu Dost Beg-ning ati-gha buldi._

   [1428] The disarray of these names in the MSS. reveals
   confusion in their source. Similar verbal disarray occurs in
   the latter part of f. 229.

   [1429] Manifestly a pun is made on the guide's name and on the
   _cap-a-pie_ robe of honour the offenders did not receive.

   [1430] _aurdu-ning aldi-gha_, a novel phrase.

   [1431] I understand that the servants had come to do their
   equivalent for "kissing hands" on an appointment _viz._ to
   kneel.

   [1432] spikenard. Speede's _Indian Handbook on Gardening_
   identifies _sambhal_ with _Valeriana jatmansi_ (Sir W. Jones &
   Roxburgh); "it is the real spikenard of the ancients, highly
   esteemed alike as a perfume and as a stimulant medicine;
   native practitioners esteeming it valuable in hysteria and
   epilepsy." Babur's word _dirakht_ is somewhat large for the
   plant.

   [1433] It is not given, however.

   [1434] _i.e._ through the Indus.

   [1435] Perhaps this _aiki-su-arasi_ (_miyan-du-ab_) was the
   angle made by the Indus itself below Atak; perhaps one made by
   the Indus and an affluent.

   [1436] _ma'juni nakliki_, presumably under the tranquillity
   induced by the drug.

   [1437] _massadus_, the six sides of the world, _i.e._ all
   sides.

   [1438] This is the name of one of the five champions defeated
   by Babur in single combat in 914 AH. (Translator's Note _s.a._
   914 AH.).

   [1439] f. 145_b_.

   [1440] Humayun was 12, Kamran younger; one surmises that Babur
   would have walked under the same circumstances.

   [1441] _sabuhi_, the morning-draught. In 1623 AD. Pietro della
   Valle took a _sabuhi_ with Mr. Thomas Rastel, the head of the
   merchants of Surat, which was of hot spiced wine and sipped in
   the mornings to comfort the stomach (Hakluyt ed. p. 20).

   [1442] f. 128 and note.

   [1443] Anglice, in the night preceding Tuesday.

   [1444] f. 106b.

   [1445] This would be the under-corselet to which the four
   plates of mail were attached when mail was worn. Babur in this
   adventure wore no mail, not even his helm; on his head was the
   under cap of the metal helm.

   [1446] Index s.n. _gharicha_.

   [1447] The earlier account helps to make this one clearer (f.
   106b).

   [1448] f. 112 _et seq._

   [1449] Catamite, mistakenly read as _khiz_ on f. 112b
   (_Memoires_ ii, 82).

   [1450] He was acting for Babur (Translator's Note _s.a._; H.S.
   iii, 318; T.R. pp. 260, 270).

   [1451] "Honoured," in this sentence, represents Babur's
   honorific plural.

   [1452] in 921 AH. (Translator's Note _s.a._; T.R. p. 356).

   [1453] _i.e._ Mir Muhammad son of Nasir.

   [1454] _i.e._ after the dethronement of the Bai-qara family by
   Shaibani.

   [1455] He had been one of rebels of 921 AH. (Translator's Note
   _s.a._; T.R. p. 356).

   [1456] f. 137.

   [1457] This is the Adjutant-bird, Pir-i-dang and Hargila
   (Bone-swallower) of Hindustan, a migrant through Kabul. The
   fowlers who brought it would be the Multaenis of f. 142_b_.

   [1458] f. 280.

   [1459] _Memoirs_, p. 267, sycamore; _Memoires_ ii, 84,
   _saules_; f. 137.

   [1460] Perhaps with his long coat out-spread.

   [1461] The fortnight's gap of record, here ended, will be due
   to illness.

   [1462] f. 203_b_ and n. to _Khams_, the Fifth. _Tasadduq_
   occurs also on f. 238 denoting money sent to Babur. Was it
   sent to him as Padshah, as the Qoran commands the _Khams_ to
   be sent to the Imam, for the poor, the traveller and the
   orphan?

   [1463] Rose-water, sherbet, a purgative; English, jalap,
   julep.

   [1464] Mr. Erskine understood Babur to say that he never had
   sat sober while others drank; but this does not agree with the
   account of Harat entertainments [912 AH.], or with the tenses
   of the passage here. My impression is that he said in effect
   "Every-one here shall not be deprived of their wine".

   [1465] This verse, a difficult one to translate, may refer to
   the unease removed from his attendants by Babur's permission
   to drink; the pun in it might also refer to _well_ and _not
   well_.

   [1466] Presumably to aid his recovery.

   [1467] _autkan yil_, perhaps in the last and unchronicled
   year; perhaps in earlier ones. There are several references in
   the B.N. to the enforced migrations and emigrations of tribes
   into Kabul.

   [1468] Pulad (Steel) was a son of Kuchum, the then Khaqan of
   the Auzbegs, and Mihr-banu who may be Babur's half-sister.
   [Index _s.n._]

   [1469] This may be written for Mihr-banu, Pulad's mother and
   Babur's half-sister (?) and a jest made on her heart as
   Pulad's and as steel to her brother. She had not left husband
   and son when Babur got the upper hand, as his half-sister
   Yadgar-sultan did and other wives of capture _e.g._ Haidar's
   sister _Habiba_. Babur's rhymes in this verse are not of his
   later standard, _ai subah, kunkuika, kunkuli-ka_.

   [1470] _Tasadduq_ sent to Babur would seem an acknowledgment
   of his suzerainty in Balkh [Index _s.n._].

   [1471] This is the Girdiz-pass [Raverty's _Notes_, Route 101].

   [1472] Raverty (p. 677) suggests that Patakh stands for
   _batqaq_, a quagmire (f. 16 and n.).

   [1473] the dark, or cloudy spring.

   [1474] _yaqish-liq qul_, an unusual phrase.

   [1475] var. Karman, Kurmah, Karmas. M. de C. read Kir-mas, the
   impenetrable. The forms would give Garm-as, hot embers.

   [1476] _balafre_; marked on the face; of a horse, starred.

   [1477] Raverty's _Notes_ (p. 457) give a full account of this
   valley; in it are the head-waters of the Tochi and the Zurmut
   stream; and in it R. locates Rustam's ancient Zabul.

   [1478] It is on the Kabul side of the Girdiz-pass and stands
   on the Luhugur-water (Logar).

   [1479] f. 143.

   [1480] At this point of the text there occurs in the Elph. MS.
   (f. 195_b_) a note, manifestly copied from one marginal in an
   archetype, which states that what follows is copied from
   Babur's own MS. The note (and others) can be seen in JRAS 1905
   p. 754 _et seq._

   [1481] Masson, iii, 145.

   [1482] A _qulach_ is from finger-tip to finger-tip of the
   outstretched arms (Zenker p. 720 and _Mems._ ii, 98).

   [1483] Neither _interne_ is said to have died!

   [1484] f. 143.

   [1485] or Atun's-village, one granted to Babur's mother's old
   governess (f. 96); Gul-badan's guest-list has also an Atun
   Mama.

   [1486] f. 235_b_ and note.

   [1487] _miswak_; _On les tire principalement de l'arbuste
   epineux appele capparis-sodata_ (de C. ii, 101 n.).

   [1488] Gul-badan's H.N. Index s.n.

   [1489] This being Ramzan, Babur did not break his fast till
   sun-set. In like manner, during Ramzan they eat in the morning
   before sun-rise (Erskine).

   [1490] A result, doubtless, of the order mentioned on f.
   240_b_.

   [1491] Babur's wife Gul-rukh appears to have been his sister
   or niece; he was a Begchik. Cf. Gul-badan's H.N. trs. p. 233,
   p. 234; T.R. p. 264-5.

   [1492] This remark bears on the question of whether we now
   have all Babur wrote of Autobiography. It refers to a date
   falling within the previous gap, because the man went to
   Kashghar while Babur was ruling in Samarkand (T.R. p. 265).
   The last time Babur came from Khwast to Kabul was probably in
   920 AH.; if later, it was still in the gap. But an alternative
   explanation is that looking over and annotating the diary
   section, Babur made this reference to what he fully meant to
   write but died before being able to do so.

   [1493] Anglice, the right thumb, on which the archer's ring
   (_zih-gir_) is worn.

   [1494] a daughter of Yunas Khan, Haidar's account of whom is
   worth seeing.

   [1495] _i.e._ the water of Luhugur (Logar). Tradition says
   that But-khak (Idol-dust) was so named because there Sl.
   Mahmud of Ghazni had idols, brought by him out of Hindustan,
   pounded to dust. Raverty says the place is probably the site
   of an ancient temple (_vahara_).

   [1496] Qasim Beg's son, come, no doubt, in obedience to the
   order of f. 240_b_.

   [1497] The 'Id-i-fitr is the festival at the conclusion of the
   feast of Ramzan, celebrated on seeing the new moon of Shawwal
   (Erskine).

   [1498] f. 133_b_ and Appendix G, _On the names of the wines of
   Nur-valley_.

   [1499] _i.e._ of the new moon of Shawwal. The new moon having
   been seen the evening before, which to Musalmans was Monday
   evening, they had celebrated the 'Id-i-fitr on Monday eve
   (Erskine).

   [1500] Diwan of Hafiz lith. ed. p. 22. The couplet seems to be
   another message to a woman (f. 238); here it might be to Bibi
   Mubaraka, still under Khwaja Kalan's charge in Bajaur (f.
   221).

   [1501] Here and under date Sep. 30th the wording allows a
   ford.

   [1502] This may be what Masson writes of (i, 149) "We reached
   a spot where the water supplying the rivulet (of 'Ali-masjid)
   gushes in a large volume from the rocks to the left. I slaked
   my thirst in the living spring and drank to repletion of the
   delightfully cool and transparent water."

   [1503] Mr. Erskine here notes, "This appears to be a mistake
   or oversight of Babur. The eve of 'Arafa" (9th of Zu'l-hijja)
   "was not till the evening of Dec. 2nd 1519. He probably meant
   to say the 'Id-i-fitr which had occurred only five days
   before, on Sep. 26th."

   [1504] This was an affair of frontiers (T.R. p. 354).

   [1505] Manucci gives an account of the place (Irvine iv, 439
   and ii, 447).

   [1506] Sep. 8th to Oct. 9th.

   [1507] _khush rang-i khizan._ Sometimes Babur's praise of
   autumn allows the word _khizan_ to mean the harvest-crops
   themselves, sometimes the autumnal colouring.

   [1508] This I have taken to mean the Kabul _tuman_. The Hai.
   MS. writes _wilayatlar_ (plural) thus suggesting that _aul_
   (those) may be omitted, and those countries (Transoxiana) be
   meant; but the second Pers. trs. (I.O. 217 f. 169) supports
   _wilayat_, Kabul.

   [1509] joyous, happy.

   [1510] _y:lk:ran._ This word has proved a difficulty to all
   translators. I suggest that it stands for _ailikaran_, what
   came to hand (_ailik see_ de C.'s Dict.); also that it
   contains puns referring to the sheep taken from the road
   (_yulkaran_) and to the wine of the year's yield (_yilkaran_).
   The way-side meal was of what came to hand, mutton and wine,
   probably local.

   [1511] f. 141_b_.

   [1512] f. 217 and n.

   [1513] I think Babur means that the customary announcement of
   an envoy or guest must have reached Kabul in his absence.

   [1514] He is in the T.R. list of the tribe (p. 307); to it
   belonged Sl. Ahmad _Tambal_ (_ib._ p. 316).

   [1515] _Qabil-ning kuri-ning qashi-ka_, lit. to the presence
   of the tomb of Qabil, _i.e._ Cain the eponymous hero of Kabul.
   The Elph. MS. has been altered to "Qabil Beg"!

   [1516] Mr. Erskine surmised that the line was from some
   religious poem of mystical meaning and that its profane
   application gave offence.

   [1517] His sobriquet _khaksar_, one who sits in the dust,
   suits the excavator of a _karez_. Babur's route can be
   followed in Masson's (iii, 110), apparently to the very
   _karez_.

   [1518] In Masson's time this place was celebrated for vinegar.
   To reach it and return must have occupied several hours.

   [1519] Kunos, _aq tuigun_, white falcon; _'Amal-i-salih_ (I.O.
   MS. No. 857, f. 45_b_), _taus tuighun_.

   [1520] f. 246.

   [1521] Nawa'i himself arranged them according to the periods
   of his life (Rieu's Pers. Cat. p. 294).

   [1522] Elph. MS. f. 202_b_; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 175
   (misplaced) and 217 f. 172; Mems. p. 281.

   [1523] _pushta austida_; the Jui-khwush of f. 137.

   [1524] The Hai. MS. omits a passage here; the Elph. MS. reads
   _Qasim Bulbuli ning awi_, thus making "nightingale" a
   sobriquet of Qasim's own. Erskine (p. 281) has "Bulbuli-hall";
   Ilminsky's words translate as, the house of Sayyid Qasim's
   nightingale (p. 321).

   [1525] or Dur-nama'i, seen from afar.

   [1526] _narm-dik_, the opposite of a _qatiq yai_, a stiff bow.
   Some MSS. write _lazim-dik_ which might be read to mean such a
   bow as his disablement allowed to be used.

   [1527] Mr. Erskine, writing early in the 19th century, notes
   that this seems an easy tribute, about 400 _rupis_ _i.e._ L40.

   [1528] This is one of the three routes into Lamghan of f. 133.

   [1529] f. 251_b_ and Appendix F, _On the name Dara-i-nur_.

   [1530] This passage will be the basis of the account on f.
   143_b_ of the winter-supply of fish in Lamghan.

   [1531] This word or name is puzzling. Avoiding extreme detail
   as to variants, I suggest that it is Daur-bin for Dur-nama'i
   if a place-name; or, if not, _dur-bin_, foresight (in either
   case the preposition requires to be supplied), and it may
   refer to foreseen need of and curiosity about Kafir wines.

   [1532] _chiurtika_ or _chiur-i-tika_, whether _sauterelle_ as
   M. de Courteille understood, or _janwar-i-ranga_ and _chikur_,
   partridge as the 1st Persian trs. and as Mr. Erskine
   (explaining _chur-i-tika_) thought, must be left open. Two
   points arise however, (1) the time is January, the place the
   deadly Bad-i-pich pass; would these suit locusts? (2) If
   Babur's account of a splendid bird (f. 135) were based on this
   experience, this would be one of several occurrences in which
   what is entered in the Description of Kabul of 910 AH. is
   found as an experience in the diary of 925-6 AH.

   [1533] Hai. MS. _mahali-da mazkur bulghusidur_, but W.-i-B.
   I.O. 215 f. 176 for _mahali-da_, in its place, has _dar
   majlis_ [in the collection], which may point to an intended
   collection of Babur's musical compositions. Either reading
   indicates intention to write what we now have not.

   [1534] Perhaps an equivalent for _farz-waqt_, the time of the
   first obligatory prayer. Much seems to happen before the sun
   got up high!

   [1535] Koh-i-nur, Rocky-mountains (?). _See_ Appendix F, _On
   the name Dara-i-nur_.

   [1536] Steingass gives _buza_ as made of rice, millet, or
   barley.

   [1537] Is this connected with Arabic _kimiya'_, alchemy,
   chemistry?

   [1538] Turki, a whirlpool; but perhaps the name of an office
   from _aigar_, a saddle.

   [1539] The river on which the rafts were used was the Kunar,
   from Chitral.

   [1540] An uncertain name. I have an impression that these
   waters are medicinal, but I cannot trace where I found the
   information. The visit paid to them, and the arrangement made
   for bathing set them apart. The name of the place may convey
   this speciality.

   [1541] _panahi_, the word used for the hiding-places of
   bird-catchers on f. 140.

   [1542] This will be the basis of the details about fishing
   given on f. 143 and f. 143_b_. The statement that particulars
   have been given allows the inference that the diary was
   annotated after the _Description of Kabul_, in which the
   particulars are, was written.

   [1543] _qanliqlar._ This right of private revenge which forms
   part of the law of most rude nations, exists in a mitigated
   form under the Muhammadan law. The criminal is condemned by
   the judge, but is delivered up to the relations of the person
   murdered, to be ransomed or put to death as they think fit
   (Erskine).

   [1544] Here the text breaks off and a _lacuna_ separates the
   diary of 11 months length which ends the Kabul section of the
   _Babur-nama_ writings, from the annals of 932 AH. which begin
   the Hindustan section. There seems no reason why the diary
   should have been discontinued.

   [1545] Jan. 2nd 1520 to Nov. 17th 1525 AD. (Safar 926 to Safar
   1st 932 AH.).

   [1546] Index _s.nn._ Bagh-i-safa and B.N. _lacunae_.

   [1547] Nominally Balkh seems to have been a Safawi possession;
   but it is made to seem closely dependent on Babur by his
   receipt from Muhammad-i-zaman in it of _tasadduq_ (money for
   alms), and by his action connected with it (_q.v._).

   [1548] _Tarikh-i-sind_, Malet's trs. p. 77 and _in loco_, p.
   365.

   [1549] A chronogram given by Badayuni decides the vexed
   question of the date of Sikandar _Ludi's_
   death--_Jannatu'l-firdus nazla_ = 923 (Bib. Ind. ed. i, 322,
   Ranking trs. p. 425 n. 6). Erskine supported 924 AH. (i, 407),
   partly relying on an entry in Babur's diary (f. 226_b_) _s.d._
   Rabi'u'l-awwal 1st 925 AH. (March 3rd 1519 AD.) which states
   that on that day Mulla Murshid was sent to Ibrahim whose
   father _Sikandar had died five or six months before_.

   Against this is the circumstance that the entry about Mulla
   Murshid is, perhaps entirely, certainly partly, of later entry
   than what precedes and what follows it in the diary. This can
   be seen on examination; it is a passage such as the diary
   section shews in other places, added to the daily record and
   giving this the character of a draft waiting for revision and
   rewriting (fol. 216_b_ n.).

   (To save difficulty to those who may refer to the L. & E.
   _Memoirs_ on the point, I mention that the whole passage about
   Mulla Murshid is displaced in that book and that the date
   March 3rd is omitted.)

   [1550] Shal (the local name of English Quetta) was taken by
   Zu'l-nun in 884 AH. (1479 AD.); Siwistan Shah Beg took, in
   second capture, about 917 AH. (1511 AD.), from a colony of
   Barlas Turks under Pir Wali _Barlas_.

   [1551] Was the attack made in reprisal for Shah Beg's further
   aggression on the Barlas lands and Babur's hereditary
   subjects? Had these appealed to the head of their tribe?

   [1552] Le Messurier writes (_l.c._ p. 224) that at Old
   Qandahar "many stone balls lay about, some with a diameter of
   18 inches, others of 4 or 5, chiselled out of limestone. These
   were said to have been used in sieges in the times of the
   Arabs and propelled from a machine called _manjanic_ a sort of
   balista or catapult." Meantime perhaps they served Babur!

   [1553] "Just then came a letter from Badakhshan saying, 'Mirza
   Khan is dead; Mirza Sulaiman (his son) is young; the Auzbegs
   are near; take thought for this kingdom lest (which God
   forbid) Badakhshan should be lost.' Mirza Sulaiman's mother
   (Sultan-nigar Khanim) had brought him to Kabul" (Gul-badan's
   H. N. f. 8).

   [1554] _infra_ and Appendix J.

   [1555] E. & D.'s _History of India_, i. 312.

   [1556] For accounts of the _Mubin_, _Akbar-nama_ Bib. Ind. ed.
   i. 118, trs. H. Beveridge i. 278 note, Badayuni _ib._ i, 343,
   trs. Ranking p. 450, Sprenger ZDMG. 1862, Teufel _ib._ 1883.
   The _Akbar-nama_ account appears in Turki in the "Fragments"
   associated with Kehr's transcript of the B.N. (JRAS. 1908, p.
   76, A. S. B.'s art. _Babur-nama_). Babur mentions the _Mubin_
   (f. 252_b_, f. 351_b_).

   [1557] JRAS. 1901, _Persian MSS. in Indian Libraries_
   (description of the Rampur _Diwan_); AQR. 1911, _Babur's
   Diwan_ (_i.e._ the Rampur _Diwan_); and _Some verses of the
   Emperor Babur_ (the _Abushqa_ quotations).

   For Dr. E. D. Ross' Reproduction and account of the Rampur
   _Diwan_, JASB. 1910.

   [1558] "After him (Ibrahim) was Babur King of Dihli, who owed
   his place to the Pathans," writes the Afghan poet Khush-hal
   _Khattak_ (Afghan Poets of the XVII century, C. E. Biddulph,
   p. 58).

   [1559] The translation only has been available (E. & D.'s H.
   of I., vol. 1).

   [1560] The marriage is said to have been Kamran's (E. & D.'s
   trs.).

   [1561] Erskine calculated that 'Alam Khan was now well over 70
   years of age (H. of I. i, 421 n.).

   [1562] A. N. trs. H. Beveridge, i, 239.

   [1563] The following old English reference to Isma'il's
   appearance may be quoted as found in a corner somewhat
   out-of-the-way from Oriental matters. In his essay on beauty
   Lord Bacon writes when arguing against the theory that beauty
   is usually not associated with highmindedness, "But this holds
   not always; for Augustus Caesar, Titus Vespasianus, Philip le
   Bel of France, Edward the Fourth of England, Alcibiades of
   Athens, Isma'il the Sophy (Safawi) of Persia, were all high
   and great spirits, and yet the most beautiful men of their
   times."

   [1564] Cf. _s.a._ 928 AH. for discussion of the year of death.

   [1565] Elph. MS. f. 205_b_; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 199_b_ omits
   the year's events on the ground that Shaikh Zain has
   translated them; I.O. 217 f. 174; Mems. p. 290; Kehr's Codex
   p. 1084.

   A considerable amount of reliable textual material for
   revising the Hindustan section of the English translation of
   the _Babur-nama_ is wanting through loss of pages from the
   Elphinstone Codex; in one instance no less than an equivalent
   of 36 folios of the Haidarabad Codex are missing (f. 356 _et
   seq._), but to set against this loss there is the valuable
   _per contra_ that Kehr's manuscript throughout the section
   becomes of substantial value, losing its Persified character
   and approximating closely to the true text of the Elphinstone
   and Haidarabad Codices. Collateral help in revision is given
   by the works specified (_in loco_ p. 428) as serving to fill
   the gap existing in Babur's narrative previous to 932 AH. and
   this notably by those described by Elliot and Dowson. Of these
   last, special help in supplementary details is given for 932
   AH. and part of 933 AH. by Shaikh Zain [_Khawafi_]'s
   _Tabaqat-i-baburi_, which is a highly rhetorical paraphrase
   of Babur's narrative, requiring familiarity with ornate
   Persian to understand. For all my references to it, I am
   indebted to my husband. It may be mentioned as an interesting
   circumstance that the B.M. possesses in Or. 1999 a copy of
   this work which was transcribed in 998 AH. by one of
   Khwand-amir's grandsons and, judging from its date, presumably
   for Abu'l-fazl's use in the _Akbar-nama_.

   Like part of the Kabul section, the Hindustan one is in
   diary-form, but it is still more heavily surcharged with
   matter entered at a date later than the diary. It departs from
   the style of the preceding diary by an occasional lapse into
   courtly phrase and by exchange of some Turki words for Arabic
   and Persian ones, doubtless found current in Hind, _e.g._
   _fauj_, _dira_, _manzil_, _khail-khana_.

   [1566] This is the Logar affluent of the Baran-water
   (Kabul-river). Masson describes this haltingplace (iii, 174).

   [1567] _muhaqqar saughat u bilak or tilak._ A small verbal
   point arises about _bilak_ (or _tilak_). _Bilak_ is said by
   Quatremere to mean a gift (N. et E. xiv, 119 n.) but here
   _muhaqqar saughat_ expresses gift. Another meaning can be
   assigned to _bilak_ here, [one had also by _tilak_,] _viz._
   that of word-of-mouth news or communication, sometimes
   supplementing written communication, possibly secret
   instructions, possibly small domestic details. In _bilak_, a
   gift, the root may be _bil_, the act of knowing, in _tilak_ it
   is _til_, the act of speaking [whence _til_, the tongue, and
   _til tutmak_, to get news]. In the sentence noted, either word
   would suit for a verbal communication. Returning to _bilak_ as
   a gift, it may express the _nuance_ of English _token_, the
   maker-known of friendship, affection and so-on. This
   differentiates _bilak_ from _saughat_, used in its frequent
   sense of ceremonial and diplomatic presents of value and
   importance.

   [1568] With Sa'id at this time were two Khanims Sultan-nigar
   and Daulat-sultan who were Babur's maternal-aunts. Erskine
   suggested Khub-nigar, but she had died in 907 AH. (f. 96).

   [1569] Humayun's non-arrival would be the main cause of delay.
   Apparently he should have joined before the Kabul force left
   that town.

   [1570] The halt would be at But-khak, the last station before
   the Adinapur road takes to the hills.

   [1571] Discussing the value of coins mentioned by Babur,
   Erskine says in his _History of India_ (vol. i, Appendix E.)
   which was published in 1854 AD. that he had come to think his
   estimates of the value of the coins was set too low in the
   _Memoirs_ (published in 1826 AD.). This sum of 20,000
   _shahrukhis_ he put at L1000. Cf. E. Thomas' _Pathan Kings of
   Dihli and Resources of the Mughal Empire_.

   [1572] One of Masson's interesting details seems to fit the
   next stage of Babur's march (iii, 179). It is that after
   leaving But-khak, the road passes what in the thirties of the
   19th Century, was locally known as Babur Padshah's Stone-heap
   (cairn) and believed piled in obedience to Babur's order that
   each man in his army should drop a stone on it in passing. No
   time for raising such a monument could be fitter than that of
   the fifth expedition into Hindustan when a climax of
   opportunity allowed hope of success.

   [1573] _rezandalik._ This Erskine translates, both here and on
   ff. 253, 254, by _defluxion_, but de Courteille by _rhume de
   cerveau_. Shaikh Zain supports de Courteille by writing, not
   _rezandalik_, but _nuzla_, catarrh. De Courteille, in
   illustration of his reading of the word, quotes Burnes'
   account of an affection common in the Panj-ab and there called
   _nuzla_, which is a running at the nostrils, that wastes the
   brain and stamina of the body and ends fatally (_Travels in
   Bukhara_ ed. 1839, ii, 41).

   [1574] Tramontana, north of Hindu-kush.

   [1575] Shaikh Zain says that the drinking days were Saturday,
   Sunday, Tuesday and Wednesday.

   [1576] The Elph. Codex (f. 208_b_) contains the following note
   of Humayun's about his delay; it has been expunged from the
   text but is still fairly legible:--"The time fixed was after
   'Ashura (10th Muharram, a voluntary fast); although we arrived
   after the next-following 10th (_'ashur_, _i.e._ of Safar), the
   delay had been necessary. The purpose of the letters (Babur's)
   was to get information; (in reply) it was represented that the
   equipment of the army of Badakhshan caused delay. If this
   slave (Humayun), trusting to his [father's] kindness, caused
   further delay, he has been sorry."

   Babur's march from the Bagh-i-wafa was delayed about a month;
   Humayun started late from Badakhshan; his force may have
   needed some stay in Kabul for completion of equipment; his
   personal share of blame for which he counted on his father's
   forgiveness, is likely to have been connected with his
   mother's presence in Kabul.

   Humayun's note is quoted in Turki by one MS. of the Persian
   text (B.M. W.-i-B. 16,623 f. 128); and from certain
   indications in Muhammad _Shirazi_'s lithograph (p. 163),
   appears to be in his archetype the Udaipur Codex; but it is
   not with all MSS. of the Persian text _e.g._ not with I.O. 217
   and 218. A portion of it is in Kehr's MS. (p. 1086).

   [1577] Bird's-dome [f. 145_b_, n.] or The pair (_qush_) of
   domes.

   [1578] _gun khud kich bulub aidi_; a little joke perhaps at
   the lateness both of the day and the army.

   [1579] Shaikh Zain's maternal-uncle.

   [1580] Shaikh Zain's useful detail that this man's pen-name
   was Sharaf distinguishes him from Muhammad Salih the author of
   the _Shaibani-nama_.

   [1581] _gosha_, angle (_cf._ _gosha-i-kar_, limits of work).
   Parodies were to be made, having the same metre, rhyme, and
   refrain as the model couplet.

   [1582] I am unable to attach sense to Babur's second line;
   what is wanted is an illustration of two incompatible things.
   Babur's reflections [_infra_] condemned his verse. Shaikh Zain
   describes the whole episode of the verse-making on the raft,
   and goes on with, "He (Babur) excised this choice couplet from
   the pages of his Acts (_Waqi'at_) with the knife of censure,
   and scratched it out from the tablets of his noble heart with
   the finger-nails of repentance. I shall now give an account of
   this spiritual matter" (_i.e._ the repentance), "by presenting
   the recantations of his Solomon-like Majesty in his very own
   words, which are weightier than any from the lips of Aesop."
   Shaikh Zain next quotes the Turki passage here translated in
   _b. Mention of the Mubin_.

   [1583] The _Mubin_ (_q.v._ Index) is mentioned again and
   quoted on f. 351_b_. In both places its name escaped the
   notice of Erskine and de Courteille, who here took it for
   _min_, I, and on f. 351_b_ omitted it, matters of which the
   obvious cause is that both translators were less familiar with
   the poem than it is now easy to be. There is amplest textual
   warrant for reading _Mubin_ in both the places indicated
   above; its reinstatement gives to the English and French
   translations what they have needed, namely, the clinch of a
   definite stimulus and date of repentance, which was the
   influence of the Mubin in 928 AH. (1521-2 AD.). The whole
   passage about the peccant verse and its fruit of contrition
   should be read with others that express the same regret for
   broken law and may all have been added to the diary at the
   same time, probably in 935 AH. (1529 AD.). They will be found
   grouped in the Index _s.n._ Babur.

   [1584] _mundin burun_, by which I understand, as the
   grammatical construction will warrant, _before writing the
   Mubin_. To read the words as referring to the peccant verse,
   is to take the clinch off the whole passage.

   [1585] _i.e._ of the _Qoran_ on which the _Mubin_ is based.

   [1586] Dropping down-stream, with wine and good company, he
   entirely forgot his good resolutions.

   [1587] This appears to refer to the good thoughts embodied in
   the _Mubin_.

   [1588] This appears to contrast with the "sublime realities"
   of the _Qoran_.

   [1589] In view of the interest of the passage, and because
   this verse is not in the Rampur _Diwan_, as are many contained
   in the Hindustan section, the Turki original is quoted. My
   translation differs from those of Mr. Erskine and M. de
   Courteille; all three are tentative of a somewhat difficult
   verse.

     _Ni qila min sining bila ai til?
     Jihating din mining aichim qan dur.
     Nicha yakhshi disang bu hazl aila shi'r
     Biri-si fahash u biri yalghan dur.
     Gar disang kuima min, bu jazm bila
     Jalau'ingni bu 'arsa din yan dur._

   [1590] The Qoran puts these sayings into the mouths of Adam
   and Eve.

   [1591] Hai. MS. _tindurub_; Ilminsky, p. 327, _yandurub_;
   W.-i-B. I.O. 217, f. 175, _sard sakhta_.

   [1592] Of 'Ali-masjid the _Second Afghan War_ (official
   account) has a picture which might be taken from Babur's camp.

   [1593] Shaikh Zain's list of the drinking-days (f. 252 note)
   explains why sometimes Babur says he preferred _ma'jun_. In
   the instances I have noticed, he does this on a drinking-day;
   the preference will be therefore for a confection over wine.
   December 9th was a Saturday and drinking-day; on it he
   mentions the preference; Tuesday Nov. 21st was a drinking day,
   and he states that he ate _ma'jun_.

   [1594] presumably the _karg-khana_ of f. 222_b_,
   rhinoceros-home in both places. A similar name applies to a
   tract in the Rawalpindi District,--Babur-khana, Tiger-home,
   which is linked to the tradition of Buddha's self-sacrifice to
   appease the hunger of seven tiger-cubs. [In this Babur-khana
   is the town Kacha-kot from which Babur always names the river
   Haru.]

   [1595] This is the first time on an outward march that Babur
   has crossed the Indus by boat; hitherto he has used the ford
   above Attock, once however specifying that men on foot were
   put over on rafts.

   [1596] f. 253.

   [1597] In my Translator's Note (p. 428), attention was drawn
   to the circumstance that Babur always writes Daulat Khan
   _Yusuf-khail_, and not Daulat Khan _Ludi_. In doing this, he
   uses the family- or clan-name instead of the tribal one,
   _Ludi_.

   [1598] _i.e._ day by day.

   [1599] _darya_, which Babur's precise use of words _e.g._ of
   _darya_, _rud_, and _su_, allows to apply here to the Indus
   only.

   [1600] Presumably this was near Parhala, which stands, where
   the Suhan river quits the hills, at the eastern entrance of a
   wild and rocky gorge a mile in length. It will have been up
   this gorge that Babur approached Parhala in 925 AH.
   (Rawalpindi Gazetteer p. 11).

   [1601] _i.e._ here, bed of a mountain-stream.

   [1602] The Elphinstone Codex here preserves the following
   note, the authorship of which is attested by the scribe's
   remark that it is copied from the handwriting of Humayun
   Padshah:--As my honoured father writes, we did not know until
   we occupied Hindustan (932 AH.), but afterwards did know, that
   ice does form here and there if there come a colder year. This
   was markedly so in the year I conquered Gujrat (942 AH.-1535
   AD.) when it was so cold for two or three days between Bhulpur
   and Gualiar that the waters were frozen over a hand's
   thickness.

   [1603] This is a Kakar (Gakkhar) clan, known also as
   Baragowah, of which the location in Jahangir Padshah's time
   was from Rohtas to Hatya, _i.e._ about where Babur encamped
   (_Memoirs of Jahangir_, Rogers and Beveridge, p. 97; E. and D.
   vi, 309; Provincial Gazetteers of Rawalpindi and Jihlam, p. 64
   and p. 97 respectively).

   [1604] _andin autub_, a reference perhaps to going out beyond
   the corn-lands, perhaps to attempt for more than provisions.

   [1605] _qush-at_, a led horse to ride in change.

   [1606] According to Shaikh Zain it was in this year that Babur
   made Buhlulpur a royal domain (B.M. Add. 26,202 f. 16), but
   this does not agree with Babur's explanation that he visited
   the place because it was _khalsa_. Its name suggests that it
   had belonged to Buhlul _Ludi_; Babur may have taken it in 930
   AH. when he captured Sialkot. It never received the population
   of Sialkot, as Babur had planned it should do because
   pond-water was drunk in the latter town and was a source of
   disease. The words in which Babur describes its situation are
   those he uses of Akhsi (f. 4_b_); not improbably a resemblance
   inclined his liking towards Buhlulpur. (It may be noted that
   this Buhlulpur is mentioned in the _Ayin-i-akbari_ and marked
   on large maps, but is not found in the G. of I. 1907.)

   [1607] Both names are thus spelled in the _Babur-nama_. In
   view of the inclination of Turki to long vowels, Babur's short
   one in Jat may be worth consideration since modern usage of
   Jat and Jat varies. Mr. Crooke writes the full vowel, and
   mentions that Jats are Hindus, Sikhs, and Muhammadans (_Tribes
   and Castes of the North-western Provinces and Oude_, iii, 38).
   On this point and on the orthography of the name, Erskine's
   note (_Memoirs_ p. 294) is as follows: "The Jets or Jats are
   the Muhammadan peasantry of the Panj-ab, the bank of the
   Indus, Siwistan _etc._ and must not be confounded with the
   Jats, a powerful Hindu tribe to the west of the Jamna, about
   Agra _etc._ and which occupies a subordinate position in the
   country of the Rajputs."

   [1608] The following section contains a later addition to the
   diary summarizing the action of 'Alam Khan before and after
   Babur heard of the defeat from the trader he mentions. It
   refutes an opinion found here and there in European writings
   that Babur used and threw over 'Alam Khan. It and Babur's
   further narrative shew that 'Alam Khan had little valid
   backing in Hindustan, that he contributed nothing to Babur's
   success, and that no abstention by Babur from attack on
   Ibrahim would have set 'Alam Khan on the throne of Dihli. It
   and other records, Babur's and those of Afghan chroniclers,
   allow it to be said that if 'Alam Khan had been strong enough
   to accomplish his share of the compact that he should take and
   should rule Dihli, Babur would have kept to his share, namely,
   would have maintained supremacy in the Panj-ab. He advanced
   against Ibrahim only when 'Alam Khan had totally failed in
   arms and in securing adherence.

   [1609] This objurgation on over-rapid marching looks like the
   echo of complaint made to Babur by men of his own whom he had
   given to 'Alam Khan in Kabul.

   [1610] Mahmud himself may have inherited his father's title
   Khan-i-jahan but a little further on he is specifically
   mentioned as the son of Khan-i-jahan, presumably because his
   father had been a more notable man than he was. Of his tribe
   it may be noted that the Haidarabad MS. uniformly writes
   Nuhani and not Luhani as is usual in European writings, and
   that it does so even when, as on f. 149_b_, the word is
   applied to a trader. Concerning the tribe, family, or caste
   _vide_ G. of I. _s.n._ Lohanas and Crooke _l.c._ _s.n._
   Pathan, para. 21.

   [1611] _i.e._ west of Dihli territory, the Panj-ab.

   [1612] He was of the Farmul family of which Babur says (f.
   139_b_) that it was in high favour in Hindustan under the
   Afghans and of which the author of the _Waqi'at-i-mushtaqi_
   says that it held half the lands of Dihli in _jagir_ (E. and
   D. iv, 547).

   [1613] Presumably he could not cut off supplies.

   [1614] The only word similar to this that I have found is one
   "Jaghat" said to mean serpent and to be the name of a Hindu
   sub-caste of Nats (Crooke, iv, 72 & 73). The word here might
   be a nick-name. Babur writes it as two words.

   [1615] _khasa-khail_, presumably members of the Sahu-khail
   (family) of the Ludi tribe of the Afghan race.

   [1616] Erskine suggested that this man was a rich banker, but
   he might well be the Farmuli Shaikh-zada of f. 256_b_, in view
   of the exchange Afghan historians make of the Farmuli title
   Shaikh for Mian (_Tarikh-i-sher-shahi_, E. & D. iv, 347 and
   _Tarikh-i-daudi_ ib. 457).

   [1617] This Biban, or Biban, as Babur always calls him without
   title, is Malik Biban _Jilwani_. He was associated with Shaikh
   Bayazid _Farmuli_ or, as Afghan writers style him, Mian
   Bayazid _Farmuli_. (Another of his names was Mian Biban, son
   of Mian Ata _Sahu-khail_ (E. & D. iv, 347).)

   [1618] This name occurs so frequently in and about the Panj-ab
   as to suggest that it means a fort (Ar. _maluzat_?). This one
   in the Siwaliks was founded by Tatar Khan _Yusuf-khail_
   (_Ludi_) in the time of Buhlul _Ludi_ (E. and D. iv, 415).

   [1619] In the Beth Jalandhar _du-ab_.

   [1620] _i.e._ on the Siwaliks, here locally known as Katar
   Dhar.

   [1621] Presumably they were from the Hazara district east of
   the Indus. The _Tabaqat-i-akbari_ mentions that this
   detachment was acting under Khalifa apart from Babur and
   marching through the skirt-hills (lith. ed. p. 182).

   [1622] _dun_, f. 260 and note.

   [1623] These were both refugees from Harat.

   [1624] Sarkar of Batala, in the Bari _du-ab_ (A.-i-A. Jarrett,
   p. 110).

   [1625] _kurushur waqt_ (Index _s.n._ _kurush_).

   [1626] Babur's phrasing suggests beggary.

   [1627] This might refer to the time when Ibrahim's commander
   Bihar (Bahadur) Khan _Nuhani_ took Lahor (Translator's Note
   _in loco_ p. 441).

   [1628] They were his father's. Erskine estimated the 3 _krors_
   at L75,000.

   [1629] _shiqq_, what hangs on either side, perhaps a satirical
   reference to the ass' burden.

   [1630] As illustrating Babur's claim to rule as a Timurid in
   Hindustan, it may be noted that in 814 AH. (1411 AD.), Khizr
   Khan who is allowed by the date to have been a Sayyid ruler in
   Dihli, sent an embassy to Shahrukh Mirza the then Timurid
   ruler of Samarkand to acknowledge his suzerainty
   (_Matla'u's-sa'dain_, Quatremere, N. et Ex. xiv, 196).

   [1631] Firishta says that Babur mounted for the purpose of
   preserving the honour of the Afghans and by so doing enabled
   the families in the fort to get out of it safely (lith. ed. p.
   204).

   [1632] _chuhra_; they will have been of the Corps of braves
   (_yigit_; Appendix H. section _c._).

   [1633] _kim kulli gharz aul aidi_; Pers. trs. _ka
   gharz-i-kulli-i-au bud_.

   [1634] Persice, the eves of Sunday and Monday; Anglice,
   Saturday and Sunday nights.

   [1635] Ghazi Khan was learned and a poet (Firishta ii, 42).

   [1636] _mullayana khud_, perhaps books of learned topic but
   not in choice copies.

   [1637] f. 257. It stands in 31 deg. 50' N. and 76 deg. E.
   (G. of I.).

   [1638] This is on the Salt-range, in 32 deg. 42' N. and 72 deg.
   50' E. (_Ayin-i-akbari_ trs. Jarrett, i, 325; Provincial
   Gazetteer, Jihlam District).

   [1639] He died therefore in the town he himself built. Kitta
   Beg probably escorted the Afghan families from Milwat also;
   Dilawar Khan's own seems to have been there already (f. 257).

   The _Babur-nama_ makes no mention of Daulat Khan's relations
   with Nanak, the founder of the Sikh religion, nor does it
   mention Nanak himself. A tradition exists that Nanak, when on
   his travels, made exposition of his doctrines to an attentive
   Babur and that he was partly instrumental in bringing Babur
   against the Afghans. He was 12 years older than Babur and
   survived him nine. (Cf. _Dabistan_ lith. ed. p. 270; and, for
   Jahangir Padshah's notice of Daulat Khan, _Tuzuk-i-jahangiri_,
   Rogers and Beveridge, p. 87).

   [1640] I translate _dun_ by _dale_ because, as its equivalent,
   Babur uses _julga_ by which he describes a more pastoral
   valley than one he calls a _dara_.

   [1641] _bir aqar-su._ Babur's earlier uses of this term
   [_q.v._ index] connect it with the swift flow of water in
   irrigation channels; this may be so here but also the term may
   make distinction between the rapid mountain-stream and the
   slow movement of rivers across plains.

   [1642] There are two readings of this sentence; Erskine's
   implies that the neck of land connecting the fort-rock with
   its adjacent hill measures 7-8 _qari_ (yards) from side to
   side; de Courteille's that where the great gate was, the
   perpendicular fall surrounding the fort shallowed to 7-8
   yards. The Turki might be read, I think, to mean whichever
   alternative was the fact. Erskine's reading best bears out
   Babur's account of the strength of the fort, since it allows
   of a cleft between the hill and the fort some 140-160 feet
   deep, as against the 21-24 of de Courteille's. Erskine may
   have been in possession of information [in 1826] by which he
   guided his translation (p. 300), "At its chief gate, for the
   space of 7 or 8 _gez_ (_qari_), there is a place that admits
   of a draw-bridge being thrown across; it may be 10 or 12 _gez_
   wide." If de Courteille's reading be correct in taking 7-8
   _qari_ only to be the depth of the cleft, that cleft may be
   artificial.

   [1643] _yighach_, which also means wood.

   [1644] f. 257.

   [1645] Chief scribe (f. 13 n. to 'Abdu'l-wahhab). Shaw's
   Vocabulary explains the word as meaning also a "high official
   of Central Asian sovereigns, who is supreme over all _qazis_
   and _mullas_."

   [1646] Babur's persistent interest in Balkh attracts
   attention, especially at this time so shortly before he does
   not include it as part of his own territories (f. 270).

   Since I wrote of Balkh _s.a._ 923 AH. (1517 AD.), I have
   obtained the following particulars about it in that year; they
   are summarized from the _Habibu's-siyar_ (lith. ed. iii, 371).
   In 923 AH. Khwand-amir was in retirement at Pasht in
   Ghurjistan where also was Muhammad-i-zaman Mirza. The two went
   in company to Balkh where the Mirza besieged Babur's man
   Ibrahim _chapuk_ (Slash-face), and treacherously murdered one
   Aurdu-shah, an envoy sent out to parley with him. Information
   of what was happening was sent to Babur in Kabul. Babur
   reached Balkh when it had been besieged a month. His presence
   caused the Mirza to retire and led him to go into the
   Dara-i-gaz (Tamarind-valley). Babur, placing in Balkh
   Faqir-i-'ali, one of those just come up with him, followed the
   Mirza but turned back at Aq-gumbaz (White-dome) which lies
   between Chach-charan in the Heri-rud valley and the Ghurjistan
   border, going no further because the Ghurjistanis favoured the
   Mirza. Babur went back to Kabul by the Firuz-koh, Yaka-aulang
   (cf. f. 195) and Ghur; the Mirza was followed up by others,
   captured and conveyed to Kabul.

   [1647] Both were amirs of Hind. I understand the cognomen
   Mazhab to imply that its bearer occupied himself with the
   Muhammadan Faith in its exposition by divines of Islam
   (_Hughes' Dictionary of Islam_).

   [1648] These incidents are included in the summary of 'Alam
   Khan's affairs in section _i_ (f. 255_b_). It will be observed
   that Babur's wording implies the "waiting" by one of lower
   rank on a superior.

   [1649] Elph. MS. Karnal, obviously a clerical error.

   [1650] Shaikh Sulaiman Effendi (Kunos) describes a _tunqitar_
   as the guardian in war of a prince's tent; a night-guard; and
   as one who repeats a prayer aloud while a prince is mounting.

   [1651] _rud_, which, inappropriate for the lower course of the
   Ghaggar, may be due to Babur's visit to its upper course
   described immediately below. As has been noted, however, he
   uses the word _rud_ to describe the empty bed of a
   mountain-stream as well as the swift water sometimes filling
   that bed. The account, here-following, of his visit to the
   upper course of the Ghaggar is somewhat difficult to
   translate.

   [1652] _Hindustanda daryalardin bashqa, bir aqar-su kim bar_
   (_dur_, is added by the Elph. MS.), _bu dur_. Perhaps the
   meaning is that the one (chief?) irrigation stream, apart from
   great rivers, is the Ghaggar. The bed of the Ghaggar is
   undefined and the water is consumed for irrigation (G. of I.
   xx, 33; Index _s.n._ _aqar-su_).

   [1653] in Patiala. Maps show what may be Babur's strong
   millstream joining the Ghaggar.

   [1654] Presumably he was of Ibrahim's own family, the
   Sahu-khail. His defeat was opportune because he was on his way
   to join the main army.

   [1655] At this place the Elphinstone Codex has preserved,
   interpolated in its text, a note of Humayun's on his first use
   of the razor. Part of it is written as by Babur:--"Today in
   this same camp the razor or scissors was applied to Humayun's
   face." Part is signed by Humayun:--"As the honoured dead,
   earlier in these Acts (_waqi'at_) mentions the first
   application of the razor to his own face (f. 120), so in
   imitation of him I mention this. I was then at the age of 18;
   now I am at the age of 48, I who am the sub-signed Muhammad
   Humayun." A scribe's note attests that this is "copied from
   the hand-writing of that honoured one". As Humayun's 48th
   (lunar) birthday occurred a month before he left Kabul, to
   attempt the re-conquest of Hindustan, in November 1554 AD. (in
   the last month of 961 AH.), he was still 48 (lunar) years old
   on the day he re-entered Dihli on July 23rd 1555 AD. (Ramzan
   1st 962 AH.), so that this "shaving passage" will have been
   entered within those dates. That he should study his Father's
   book at that time is natural; his grandson Jahangir did the
   same when going to Kabul; so doubtless would do its author's
   more remote descendants, the sons of Shah-jahan who
   reconquered Transoxiana.

   (Concerning the "shaving passage" _vide_ the notes on the
   Elphinstone Codex in JRAS. 1900 p. 443, 451; 1902 p. 653; 1905
   p. 754; and 1907 p. 131.)

   [1656] This ancient town of the Saharanpur district is
   associated with a saint revered by Hindus and Muhammadans. Cf.
   W. Crooke's _Popular Religion of Northern India_ p. 133. Its
   _chashma_ may be inferred (from Babur's uses of the word
   _q.v._ Index) as a water-head, a pool, a gathering place of
   springs.

   [1657] He was the eighth son of Babur's maternal-uncle Sl.
   Ahmad Khan _Chaghatai_ and had fled to Babur, other brothers
   following him, from the service of their eldest brother
   Mansur, Khaqan of the Mughuls (_Tarikh-i-rashidi_ trs. p.
   161).

   [1658] _fars-waqti_, when there is light enough to
   distinguish one object from another.

   [1659] _dim kuruldi_ (Index _s.n._ _dim_). Here the L. & E.
   _Memoirs_ inserts an explanatory passage in Persian about the
   _dim_. It will have been in one of the _Waqi'at-i-baburi MSS._
   Erskine used; it is in Muh. _Shirazi_'s lithograph copy of the
   Udaipur Codex (p. 173). It is not in the Turki text or in all
   the MSS. of the Persian translation. Manifestly, it was
   entered at a time when Babur's term _dim kuruldi_ requires
   explanation in Hindustan. The writer of it himself does not
   make details clear; he says only, "It is manifest that people
   declare (the number) after counting the mounted army in the
   way agreed upon amongst them, with a whip or a bow held in the
   hand." This explanation suggests that in the march-past the
   troops were measured off as so many bow- or whip-lengths
   (Index _s.n._ _dim_).

   [1660] These _araba_ may have been the baggage-carts of the
   army and also carts procured on the spot. Erskine omits
   (_Memoirs_ p. 304) the words which show how many carts were
   collected and from whom. Doubtless it would be through not
   having these circumstances in his mind that he took the
   _araba_ for gun-carriages. His incomplete translation, again,
   led Stanley Lane-Poole to write an interesting note in his
   _Babur_ (p. 161) to support Erskine against de Courteille
   (with whose rendering mine agrees) by quoting the circumstance
   that Humayun had 700 guns at Qanauj in 1540 AD. It must be
   said in opposition to his support of Erskine's "gun-carriages"
   that there is no textual or circumstantial warrant for
   supposing Babur to have had guns, even if made in parts, in
   such number as to demand 700 gun-carriages for their
   transport. What guns Babur had at Pani-pat will have been
   brought from his Kabul base; if he had acquired any, say from
   Lahor, he would hardly omit to mention such an important
   reinforcement of his armament; if he had brought many guns on
   carts from Kabul, he must have met with transit-difficulties
   harassing enough to chronicle, while he was making that long
   journey from Kabul to Pani-pat, over passes, through
   skirt-hills and many fords. The elephants he had in Bigram may
   have been his transport for what guns he had; he does not
   mention his number at Pani-pat; he makes his victory a
   bow-man's success; he can be read as indicating that he had
   two guns only.

   [1661] These Ottoman (text, _Rumi_, Roman) defences Ustad
   'Ali-quli may have seen at the battle of Chaldiran fought some
   40 leagues from Tabriz between Sl. Salim _Rumi_ and Shah
   Isma'il _Safawi_ on Rajab 1st 920 AH. (Aug. 22nd 1514 AD.). Of
   this battle Khwand-amir gives a long account, dwelling on the
   effective use made in it of chained carts and palisades
   (_Habibu's-siyar_ iii, part 4, p. 78; _Akbar-nama_ trs. i,
   241).

   [1662] Is this the village of the Pani Afghans?

   [1663] Index _s.n._ arrow.

   [1664] _Pareshan jam'i u jam'i pareshan;
          Giriftar qaumi u qaumi 'aja'ib._

   These two lines do not translate easily without the context of
   their original place of occurrence. I have not found their
   source.

   [1665] _i.e._ of his father and grandfather, Sikandar and
   Buhlul.

   [1666] As to the form of this word the authoritative MSS. of
   the Turki text agree and with them also numerous good ones of
   the Persian translation. I have made careful examination of
   the word because it is replaced or explained here and there in
   MSS. by _s:hb:ndi_, the origin of which is said to be obscure.
   The sense of _b:d-hindi_ and of _s:hb:ndi_ is the same, _i.e._
   irregular levy. The word as Babur wrote it must have been
   understood by earlier Indian scribes of both the Turki and
   Persian texts of the _Babur-nama_. Some light on its
   correctness may be thought given by Hobson Jobson (Crooke's
   ed. p. 136) _s.n._ Byde or Bede Horse, where the word Byde is
   said to be an equivalent of _pindari_, _luti_, and _qazzaq_,
   raider, plunderer, so that Babur's word _b:d-hindi_ may mean
   _qazzaq_ of Hind. Wherever I have referred to the word in many
   MSS. it is pointed to read _b:d_, and not _p:d_, thus
   affording no warrant for understanding _pad_, foot, foot-man,
   infantry, and also negativing the spelling _bid_, _i.e._ with
   a long vowel as in _Byde_.

   It may be noted here that Muh. _Shirazi_ (p. 174) substituted
   _s:hb:ndi_ for Babur's word and that this led our friend the
   late William Irvine to attribute mistake to de Courteille who
   follows the Turki text (_Army of the Mughuls_ p. 66 and
   _Memoires_ ii, 163).

   [1667] _bi tajarba yigit aidi_ of which the sense may be that
   Babur ranked Ibrahim, as a soldier, with a brave who has not
   yet proved himself deserving of the rank of beg. It cannot
   mean that he was a youth (_yigit_) without experience of
   battle.

   [1668] Well-known are the three decisive historical battles
   fought near the town of Pani-pat, _viz._ those of Babur and
   Ibrahim in 1526, of Akbar and Himu in 1556, and of Ahmad
   _Abdali_ with the Mahratta Confederacy in 1761. The following
   lesser particulars about the battle-field are not so
   frequently mentioned:--(_i_) that the scene of Babur's victory
   was long held to be haunted, Badayuni himself, passing it at
   dawn some 62 years later, heard with dismay the din of
   conflict and the shouts of the combatants; (_ii_) that Babur
   built a (perhaps commemorative) mosque one mile to the n.e. of
   the town; (_iii_) that one of the unaccomplished desires of
   Sher Shah _Sur_, the conqueror of Babur's son Humayun, was to
   raise two monuments on the battle-field of Pani-pat, one to
   Ibrahim, the other to those Chaghatai sultans whose martyrdom
   he himself had brought about; (_iv_) that in 1910 AD. the
   British Government placed a monument to mark the scene of Shah
   _Abdali's_ victory of 1761 AD. This monument would appear,
   from Sayyid Ghulam-i-'ali's _Nigar-nama-i-hind_, to stand
   close to the scene of Babur's victory also, since the
   Mahrattas were entrenched as he was outside the town of
   Pani-pat. (Cf. E. & D. viii, 401.)

   [1669] This important date is omitted from the L. & E.
   _Memoirs_.

   [1670] This wording will cover armour of man and horse.

   [1671] _atlanduk_, Pers. trs. _suwar shudim_. Some later
   oriental writers locate Babur's battle at two or more miles
   from the town of Pani-pat, and Babur's word _atlanduk_ might
   imply that his cavalry rode forth and arrayed outside his
   defences, but his narrative allows of his delivering attack,
   through the wide sally-ports, after arraying behind the carts
   and mantelets which checked his adversary's swift advance. The
   Mahrattas, who may have occupied the same ground as Babur,
   fortified themselves more strongly than he did, as having
   powerful artillery against them. Ahmad Shah _Abdali's_ defence
   against them was an ordinary ditch and _abbattis_, [Babur's
   ditch and branch,] mostly of _dhak_ trees (_Butea frondosa_),
   a local product Babur also is likely to have used.

   [1672] The preceding three words seem to distinguish this Shah
   Husain from several others of his name and may imply that he
   was the son of _Yaragi Mughul Ghanchi_ (Index and I.O. 217 f.
   184b l. 7).

   [1673] For Babur's terms _vide_ f. 209_b_

   [1674] This is Mirza Khan's son, _i.e._ Wais _Miran-shahi's_.

   [1675] A dispute for this right-hand post of honour is
   recorded on f. 100_b_, as also in accounts of Culloden.

   [1676] _tartib u yasal_, which may include, as Erskine took it
   to do, the carts and mantelets; of these however, Ibrahim can
   hardly have failed to hear before he rode out of camp.

   [1677] f. 217_b_ and note; Irvine's _Army of the Indian
   Mughuls_ p. 133. Here Erskine notes (_Mems._ p. 306) "The size
   of these artillery at this time is very uncertain. The word
   _firingi_ is now (1826 AD.) used in the Deccan for a swivel.
   At the present day, _zarb-zan_ in common usage is a small
   species of swivel. Both words in Babur's time appear to have
   been used for field-cannon." (For an account of guns,
   intermediate in date between Babur and Erskine, _see_ the
   _Ayin-i-akbari_. Cf. f. 264 n. on the carts (_araba_).)

   [1678] Although the authority of the
   _Tarikh-i-salatin-i-afaghana_ is not weighty its reproduction
   of Afghan opinion is worth consideration. It says that
   astrologers foretold Ibrahim's defeat; that his men, though
   greatly outnumbering Babur's, were out-of-heart through his
   ill-treatment of them, and his amirs in displeasure against
   him, but that never-the-less, the conflict at Pani-pat was
   more desperate than had ever been seen. It states that Ibrahim
   fell where his tomb now is (_i.e._ in _circa_ 1002 AH.-1594
   AD.); that Babur went to the spot and, prompted by his tender
   heart, lifted up the head of his dead adversary, and said,
   "Honour to your courage!", ordered brocade and sweetmeats made
   ready, enjoined Dilawar Khan and Khalifa to bathe the corpse
   and to bury it where it lay (E. & D. v, 2). Naturally, part of
   the reverence shewn to the dead would be the burial together
   of head and trunk.

   [1679] f. 209_b_ and App. H. section _c._ Baba _chuhra_ would
   be one of the corps of braves.

   [1680] He was a brother of Muhibb-i-'ali's mother.

   [1681] To give Humayun the title Mirza may be a scribe's
   lapse, but might also be a _nuance_ of Babur's, made to shew,
   with other _minutiae_, that Humayun was in chief command. The
   other minute matters are that instead of Humayun's name being
   the first of a simple series of commanders' names with the
   enclitic accusative appended to the last one (here Wali), as
   is usual, Humayun's name has its own enclitic _ni_; and,
   again, the phrase is "_Humayun with_" such and such begs, a
   turn of expression differentiating him from the rest. The same
   unusual variations occur again, just below, perhaps with the
   same intention of shewing chief command, there of Mahdi
   Khwaja.

   [1682] A small matter of wording attracts attention in the
   preceding two sentences. Babur, who does not always avoid
   verbal repetition, here constructs two sentences which, except
   for the place-names Dihli and Agra, convey information of
   precisely the same action in entirely different words.

   [1683] d. 1325 AD. The places Babur visited near Dihli are
   described in the _Reports of the Indian Archaeological
   Survey_, in Sayyid Ahmad's _Asar Sanadid_ pp. 74-85, in
   Keene's _Hand-book to Dihli_ and Murray's _Hand-book to Bengal
   etc._ The last two quote much from the writings of Cunningham
   and Fergusson.

   [1684] and on the same side of the river.

   [1685] d. 1235 AD. He was a native of Aush [Ush] in Farghana.

   [1686] d. 1286 AD. He was a Slave ruler of Dihli.

   [1687] 'Alau'u'd-din Muh. Shah _Khilji Turk_ d. 1316 AD. It is
   curious that Babur should specify visiting his Minar
   (_minari_, Pers. trs. I.O. 217 f. 185_b_, _minar-i-au_) and
   not mention the Qutb Minar. Possibly he confused the two. The
   'Alai Minar remains unfinished; the Qutb is judged by
   Cunningham to have been founded by Qutbu'd-din Aibak _Turk_,
   _circa_ 1200 AD. and to have been completed by Sl.
   Shamsu'd-din Altamsh (Ailtimish?) _Turk_, _circa_ 1220 AD. Of
   the two tanks Babur visited, the Royal-tank (_hauz-i-khaz_)
   was made by 'Alau'u'd-din in 1293 AD.

   [1688] The familiar Turki word Tughluq would reinforce much
   else met with in Dihli to strengthen Babur's opinion that, as
   a Turk, he had a right to rule there. Many, if not all, of the
   Slave dynasty were Turks; these were followed by the Khilji
   Turks, these again by the Tughluqs. Moreover the Panj-ab he
   had himself taken, and lands on both sides of the Indus
   further south had been ruled by Ghaznawid Turks. His latest
   conquests were "where the Turk had ruled" (f. 226_b_) long,
   wide, and with interludes only of non-Turki sway.

   [1689] Perhaps this charity was the _Khams_ (Fifth) due from a
   victor.

   [1690] Bikramajit was a Tunur Rajput. Babur's unhesitating
   statement of the Hindu's destination at death may be called a
   fruit of conviction, rather than of what modern opinion calls
   intolerance.

   [1691] 120 years (Cunningham's _Report of the Archaeological
   Survey_ ii, 330 _et seq._).

   [1692] The _Tarikh-i-sher-shahi_ tells a good deal about the
   man who bore this title, and also about others who found
   themselves now in difficulty between Ibrahim's tyranny and
   Babur's advance (E. & D. iv, 301).

   [1693] Gualiar was taken from Bikramajit in 1518 AD.

   [1694] _i.e._ from the Deccan of which 'Alau'u'd-din is said
   to have been the first Muhammadan invader. An account of this
   diamond, identified as the Koh-i-nur, is given in _Hobson
   Jobson_ but its full history is not told by Yule or by
   Streeter's _Great Diamonds of the World_, neither mentioning
   the presentation of the diamond by Humayun to Tahmasp of which
   Abu'l-fazl writes, dwelling on its overplus of payment for all
   that Humayun in exile received from his Persian host
   (_Akbar-nama_ trs. i, 349 and note; _Asiatic Quarterly
   Review_, April 1899 H. Beveridge's art. _Babur's diamond_;
   _was it the Koh-i-nur?_).

   [1695] 320 _ratis_ (Erskine). The _rati_ is 2.171 Troy grains,
   or in picturesque primitive equivalents, is 8 grains of rice,
   or 64 mustard seeds, or 512 poppy-seeds,--uncertain weights
   which Akbar fixed in cat's-eye stones.

   [1696] Babur's plurals allow the supposition that the three
   men's lives were spared. Malik Dad served him thenceforth.

   [1697] Erskine estimated these as _dams_ and worth about
   L1750, but this may be an underestimate (_H. of I._ i, App.
   E.).

   [1698] "These begs of his" (or hers) may be the three written
   of above.

   [1699] These will include cousins and his half-brothers
   Jahangir and Nasir as opposing before he took action in 925
   AH. (1519 AD.). The time between 910 AH. and 925 AH. at which
   he would most desire Hindustan is after 920 AH. in which year
   he returned defeated from Transoxiana.

   [1700] _kichik karim_, which here seems to make contrast
   between the ruling birth of members of his own family and the
   lower birth of even great begs still with him. Where the
   phrase occurs on f. 295, Erskine renders it by "down to the
   dregs", and de Courteille (ii, 235) by "_de toutes les
   bouches_" but neither translation appears to me to suit
   Babur's uses of the term, inasmuch as both seem to go too low
   (cf. f. 270_b_).

   [1701] _aiurushub_, Pers. trs. _chaspida_, stuck to.

   [1702] The first expedition is fixed by the preceding passage
   as in 925 AH. which was indeed the first time a passage of the
   Indus is recorded. Three others are found recorded, those of
   926, 930 and 932 AH. Perhaps the fifth was not led by Babur in
   person, and may be that of his troops accompanying 'Alam Khan
   in 931 AH. But he may count into the set of five, the one made
   in 910 AH. which he himself meant to cross the Indus. Various
   opinions are found expressed by European writers as to the
   dates of the five.

   [1703] Muhammad died 632 AD. (11 AH.).

   [1704] Tramontana, n. of Hindu-kush. For particulars about the
   dynasties mentioned by Babur see Stanley Lane-Poole's
   _Muhammadan Dynasties_.

   [1705] Mahmud of Ghazni, a Turk by race, d. 1030 AD. (421
   AH.).

   [1706] known as Muh. _Ghuri_, d. 1206 AD. (602 AH.).

   [1707] _surubturlar_, lit. drove them like sheep (cf. f.
   154b).

   [1708] _khud_, itself, not Babur's only Hibernianism.

   [1709] "This is an excellent history of the Musalman world
   down to the time of Sl. Nasir of Dihli A.D. 1252. It was
   written by Abu 'Umar Minhaj al Jurjani. See Stewart's
   catalogue of Tipoo's Library, p. 7" (Erskine). It has been
   translated by Raverty.

   [1710] _bargustwan-war_; Erskine, cataphract horse.

   [1711] The numerous instances of the word _padshah_ in this
   part of the _Babur-nama_ imply no such distinction as attaches
   to the title Emperor by which it is frequently translated
   (Index _s.n._ _padshah_).

   [1712] d. 1500 AD. (905 AH.).

   [1713] d. 1388 AD. (790 AH.).

   [1714] The ancestor mentioned appears to be Nasrat Shah, a
   grandson of Firuz Shah _Tughluq_ (S. L. Poole p. 300 and
   Beale, 298).

   [1715] His family belonged to the Rajput sept of Tank, and had
   become Muhammadan in the person of Sadharan the first ruler of
   Gujrat (Crooke's _Tribes and Castes; Mirat-i-sikandari_,
   Bayley p. 67 and n.).

   [1716] S. L.-Poole p. 316-7.

   [1717] Mandau (Mandu) was the capital of Malwa.

   [1718] Stanley Lane-Poole shews (p. 311) a dynasty of three
   Ghuris interposed between the death of Firuz Shah in 790 AH.
   and the accession in 839 AH. of the first Khilji ruler of
   Gujrat Mahmud Shah.

   [1719] He reigned from 1518 to 1532 AD. (925 to 939 AH.
   S.L.-P. p. 308) and had to wife a daughter of Ibrahim _Ludi_
   (_Riyazu's-salatin_). His dynasty was known as the
   Husain-shahi, after his father.

   [1720] "Strange as this custom may seem, a similar one
   prevailed down to a very late period in Malabar. There was a
   jubilee every 12 years in the Samorin's country, and any-one
   who succeeded in forcing his way through the Samorin's guards
   and slew him, reigned in his stead. 'A jubilee is proclaimed
   throughout his dominions at the end of 12 years, and a tent is
   pitched for him in a spacious plain, and a great feast is
   celebrated for 10 or 12 days with mirth and jollity, guns
   firing night and day, so, at the end of the feast, any four of
   the guests that have a mind to gain a throne by a desperate
   action in fighting their way through 30 or 40,000 of his
   guards, and kill the Samorin in his tent, he that kills him,
   succeeds him in his empire.' See Hamilton's _New Account of
   the East Indies_ vol. i. p. 309. The attempt was made in 1695,
   and again a very few years ago, but without success" (Erskine
   p. 311).

   The custom Babur writes of--it is one dealt with at length in
   Frazer's _Golden Bough_--would appear from Blochmann's
   _Geography and History of Bengal_ (JASB 1873 p. 286) to have
   been practised by the Habshi rulers of Bengal of whom he
   quotes Faria y Souza as saying, "They observe no rule of
   inheritance from father to son, but even slaves sometimes
   obtain it by killing their master, and whoever holds it three
   days, they look upon as established by divine providence. Thus
   it fell out that in 40 years space they had 13 kings
   successively."

   [1721] No doubt this represents Vijayanagar in the Deccan.

   [1722] This date places the composition of the _Description of
   Hindustan_ in agreement with Shaikh Zain's statement that it
   was in writing in 935 AH.

   [1723] Are they the Khas of Nepal and Sikkim? (G. of I.).

   [1724] Here Erskine notes that the Persian (trs.) adds, "_mir_
   signifying a hill, and _kas_ being the name of the natives of
   the hill-country." This may not support the name _kas_ as
   correct but may be merely an explanation of Babur's meaning.
   It is not in I.O. 217 f. 189 or in Muh. _Shirazi_'s
   lithographed _Waqi'at-i-baburi_ p. 190.

   [1725] Either yak or the tassels of the yak. See Appendix M.

   [1726] My husband tells me that Babur's authority for this
   interpretation of Sawalak may be the _Zafar-nama_ (Bib. Ind.
   ed. ii, 149).

   [1727] _i.e._ the countries of Hindustan.

   [1728] so pointed, carefully, in the Hai. MS. Mr. Erskine
   notes of these rivers that they are the Indus, Hydaspes,
   Ascesines, Hydraotes, Hesudrus and Hyphasis.

   [1729] _Ayin-i-akbari_, Jarrett 279.

   [1730] _parcha parcha_, _kichikrak kichikrak_, _anda munda_,
   _tashliq taqghina_. The Gazetteer of India (1907 i, 1) puts
   into scientific words, what Babur here describes, the ruin of
   a great former range.

   [1731] Here _aqar-sular_ might safely be replaced by
   "irrigation channels" (Index _s.n._).

   [1732] The verb here is _tashmaq_; it also expresses to carry
   like ants (f. 220), presumably from each person's carrying a
   pitcher or a stone at a time, and repeatedly.

   [1733] "This" notes Erskine (p. 315) "is the _wulsa_ or
   _walsa_, so well described by Colonel Wilks in his Historical
   Sketches vol. i. p. 309, note 'On the approach of an hostile
   army, the unfortunate inhabitants of India bury under ground
   their most cumbrous effects, and each individual, man, woman,
   and child above six years of age (the infant children being
   carried by their mothers), with a load of grain proportioned
   to their strength, issue from their beloved homes, and take
   the direction of a country (if such can be found,) exempt from
   the miseries of war; sometimes of a strong fortress, but more
   generally of the most unfrequented hills and woods, where they
   prolong a miserable existence until the departure of the
   enemy, and if this should be protracted beyond the time for
   which they have provided food, a large portion necessarily
   dies of hunger.' See the note itself. The Historical Sketches
   should be read by every-one who desires to have an accurate
   idea of the South of India. It is to be regretted that we do
   not possess the history of any other part of India, written
   with the same knowledge or research."

   "The word _wulsa_ or _walsa_ is Dravidian. Telugu has
   _valasa_, 'emigration, flight, or removing from home for fear
   of a hostile army.' Kanarese has _valase_, _olase_, and
   _olise_, 'flight, a removing from home for fear of a hostile
   army.' Tamil has _valasei_, 'flying for fear, removing
   hastily.' The word is an interesting one. I feel pretty sure
   it is not Aryan, but Dravidian; and yet it stands alone in
   Dravidian, with nothing that I can find in the way of a root
   or affinities to explain its etymology. Possibly it may be a
   borrowed word in Dravidian. Malayalam has no corresponding
   word. Can it have been borrowed from Kolarian or other
   primitive Indian speech?" (Letter to H. Beveridge from Mr. F.
   E. Pargiter, 8th August, 1914.)

   _Wulsa_ seems to be a derivative from Sanscrit _ulvash_, and
   to answer to Persian _wairani_ and Turki _buzughlughi_.

   [1734] _lalmi_, which in Afghani (Pushtu) signifies grown
   without irrigation.

   [1735] "The improvement of Hindustan since Babur's time must
   be prodigious. The wild elephant is now confined to the
   forests under Hemala, and to the Ghats of Malabar. A wild
   elephant near Karrah, Manikpur, or Kalpi, is a thing, at the
   present day (1826 AD.), totally unknown. May not their
   familiar existence in these countries down to Babur's days, be
   considered rather hostile to the accounts given of the
   superabundant population of Hindustan in remote times?"
   (Erskine).

   [1736] _diwan._ I.O. 217 f. 190b, _dar diwan fil jawab
   miguind_; Mems. p. 316. They account to the government for the
   elephants they take; _Mems._ ii, 188, _Les habitants payent
   l'impot avec le produit de leur chasse_. Though de
   Courteille's reading probably states the fact, Erskine's
   includes de C.'s and more, inasmuch as it covers all captures
   and these might reach to a surplusage over the imposts.

   [1737] Pers. trs. _gaz_=24 inches. _Il est bon de rappeler que
   le mot turk qari, que la version persane rend par gaz, designe
   proprement l'espace compris entre le haut de l'epaule jusqu'au
   bout des doigts_ (de Courteille, ii, 189 note). The _qari_
   like one of its equivalents, the ell (Zenker), is a variable
   measure; it seems to approach more nearly to a yard than to a
   _gaz_ of 24 inches. See _Memoirs of Jahangir_ (R. & B. pp. 18,
   141 and notes) for the heights of elephants, and for
   discussion of some measures.

   [1738] _khud_, itself.

   [1739] _i.e._ pelt; as Erskine notes, its skin is scattered
   with small hairs. Details such as this one stir the question,
   for whom was Babur writing? Not for Hindustan where what he
   writes is patent; hardly for Kabul; perhaps for Transoxiana.

   [1740] Shaikh Zain's wording shows this reference to be to a
   special piece of artillery, perhaps that of f. 302.

   [1741] A string of camels contains from five to seven, or, in
   poetry, even more (Vullers, ii, 728, _sermone poetico series
   decem camelorum_). The item of food compared is corn only
   (_bughuz_) and takes no account therefore of the elephant's
   green food.

   [1742] The Ency. Br. states that the horn seldom exceeds a
   foot in length; there is one in the B.M. measuring 18 inches.

   [1743] ab-khwura kishti, water-drinker's boat, in which name
   kishti may be used with reference to shape as boat is in
   _sauce-boat_. Erskine notes that rhinoceros-horn is supposed
   to sweat on approach of poison.

   [1744] _ailik_, Pers. trs. _angusht_, finger, each seemingly
   representing about one inch, a hand's thickness, a finger's
   breadth.

   [1745] lit. hand (_qul_) and leg (_but_).

   [1746] The anatomical details by which Babur supports this
   statement are difficult to translate, but his grouping of the
   two animals is in agreement with the modern classification of
   them as two of the three _Ungulata vera_, the third being the
   tapir (Fauna of British India:--Mammals, Blanford 467 and,
   illustration, 468).

   [1747] De Courteille (ii, 190) reads _kumuk_, osseuse; Erskine
   reads _gumuk_, marrow.

   [1748] Index _s.n._ rhinoceros.

   [1749] _Bos bubalus._

   [1750] "so as to grow into the flesh" (Erskine, p. 317).

   [1751] _sic_ in text. It may be noted that the name _nil-gai_,
   common in general European writings, is that of the cow;
   _nil-gau_, that of the bull (Blanford).

   [1752] _b:h:ri qutas_; _see_ Appendix M.

   [1753] The doe is brown (Blanford, p. 518). The word _bughu_
   (stag) is used alone just below and seems likely to represent
   the bull of the Asiatic wapiti (f. 4 n. on _bughu-maral_.)

   [1754] _Axis porcinus_ (Jerdon, _Cervus porcinus_).

   [1755] _Saiga tartarica_ (Shaw). Turki _huna_ is used, like
   English deer, for male, female, and both. Here it seems
   defined by _airkaki_ to mean stag or buck.

   [1756] _Antelope cervicapra_, black-buck, so called from the
   dark hue of its back (Yule's H.J. _s.n._ Black-buck).

   [1757] _tuyuq_, underlined in the Elph. MS. by _kura_,
   cannon-ball; Erskine, foot-ball, de Courteille, _pierre plus
   grosse que la cheville_ (_tuyaq_).

   [1758] This mode of catching antelopes is described in the
   _Ayin-i-akbari_, and is noted by Erskine as common in his day.

   [1759] _H. gaina._ It is 3 feet high (Yule's H.J. _s.n._
   Gynee). Cf. A. A. Blochmann, p. 149. The ram with which it is
   compared may be that of _Ovis ammon_ (Vigne's _Kashmir etc._
   ii, 278).

   [1760] Here the Pers. trs. adds:--They call this kind of monkey
   _langur_ (baboon, I.O. 217 f. 192).

   [1761] Here the Pers. trs. adds what Erskine mistakenly
   attributes to Babur:--People bring it from several
   islands.--They bring yet another kind from several islands,
   yellowish-grey in colour like a _pustin tin_ (leather coat of
   ?; Erskine, skin of the fig, _tin_). Its head is broader and
   its body much larger than those of other monkeys. It is very
   fierce and destructive. It is singular _quod penis ejus semper
   sit erectus, et nunquam non ad coitum idoneus_ [Erskine].

   [1762] This name is explained on the margin of the Elph. MS.
   as "_rasu_, which is the weasel of Tartary" (Erskine). _Rasu_
   is an Indian name for the squirrel _Sciurus indicus_. The
   _kish_, with which Babur's _nul_ is compared, is explained by
   de C. as _belette_, weasel, and by Steingass as a fur-bearing
   animal; the fur-bearing weasel is (_Mustelidae_) _putorius
   ermina_, the ermine-weasel (Blanford, p. 165), which thus
   seems to be Babur's _kish_. The alternative name Babur gives
   for his _nul_, _i.e._ _mush-i-khurma_, is, in India, that of
   _Sciurus palmarum_, the palm-squirrel (G. of I. i, 227); this
   then, it seems that Babur's _nul_ is. Erskine took _nul_ here
   to be the mongoose (_Herpestes mungus_) (p. 318); and
   Blanford, perhaps partly on Erskine's warrant, gives
   _mush-i-khurma_ as a name of the lesser _mungus_ of Bengal. I
   gather that the name _nawal_ is not exclusively confined even
   now to the (_mungus_.)

   [1763] If this be a tree-mouse and not a squirrel, it may be
   _Vandeleuria oleracea_ (G. of I. i, 228).

   [1764] The notes to this section are restricted to what serves
   to identify the birds Babur mentions, though temptation is
   great to add something to this from the mass of interesting
   circumstance scattered in the many writings of observers and
   lovers of birds. I have thought it useful to indicate to what
   language a bird's name belongs.

   [1765] Persian, _gul_; English, eyes.

   [1766] _qulach_ (Zenker, p. 720); Pers. trs. (217 f. 192_b_)
   _yak qad-i-adm_; de Courteille, _brasse_ (fathom). These three
   are expressions of the measure from finger-tip to finger-tip
   of a man's extended arms, which should be his height, a fathom
   (6 feet).

   [1767] _qanat_, of which here "primaries" appears to be the
   correct rendering, since Jerdon says (ii, 506) of the bird
   that its "wings are striated black and white, primaries and
   tail deep chestnut".

   [1768] The _qirghawal_, which is of the pheasant species, when
   pursued, will take several flights immediately after each
   other, though none long; peacocks, it seems, soon get tired
   and take to running (Erskine).

   [1769] Ar. _barraq_, as on f. 278_b_ last line where the Elph.
   MS. has _barraq_, marked with the _tashdid_.

   [1770] This was, presumably, just when Babur was writing the
   passage.

   [1771] This sentence is in Arabic.

   [1772] A Persian note, partially expunged from the text of the
   Elph. MS. is to the effect that 4 or 5 other kinds of parrot
   are heard of which the revered author did not see.

   [1773] Erskine suggests that this may be the _loory_
   (_Loriculus vernalis_, Indian loriquet).

   [1774] The birds Babur classes under the name _sharak_ seem to
   include what Oates and Blanford (whom I follow as they give
   the results of earlier workers) class under _Sturnus_,
   _Eulabes_ and _Calornis_, starling, grackle and mina, and
   tree-stare (_Fauna of British India_, Oates, vols. i and ii,
   Blanford, vols. iii and iv).

   [1775] Turki, _qaba_; Ilminsky, p. 361, _tang_ (_tund_?).

   [1776] E. D. Ross's _Polyglot List of Birds_, p. 314,
   _Chighir-chiq_, Northern swallow; Elph. MS. f. 230_b_
   interlined _jil_ (Steingass lark). The description of the bird
   allows it to be _Sturnus humii_, the Himalayan starling
   (Oates, i, 520).

   [1777] Elph. and Hai. MSS. (Sans. and Bengali) _p:ndui_; two
   good MSS. of the Pers. trs. (I.O. 217 and 218) _p:ndawali_;
   Ilminsky (p. 361) _mina_; Erskine (_Mems._ p. 319)
   _pindaweli_, but without his customary translation of an
   Indian name. The three forms shewn above can all mean "having
   protuberance or lump" (_pinda_) and refer to the bird's
   wattle. But the word of the presumably well-informed scribes
   of I.O. 217 and 218 can refer to the bird's sagacity in speech
   and be _pandawali_, possessed of wisdom. With the same
   spelling, the word can translate into the epithet _religiosa_,
   given to the wattled _mina_ by Linnaeus. This epithet Mr.
   Leonard Wray informs me has been explained to him as due to
   the frequenting of temples by the birds; and that in Malaya
   they are found living in cotes near Chinese temples.--An
   alternative name (one also connecting with _religiosa_)
   allowed by the form of the word is _binda-wali_. H. _binda_ is
   a mark on the forehead, made as a preparative to devotion by
   Hindus, or in Sans. and _Bengali_, is the spot of paint made
   on an elephant's trunk; the meaning would thus be "having a
   mark". Cf. Jerdon and Oates _s.n._ _Eulabes religiosa_.

   [1778] _Eulabes intermedia_, the Indian grackle or hill-mina.
   Here the Pers. trs. adds that people call it _mina_.

   [1779] _Calornis chalybeius_, the glossy starling or
   tree-stare, which never descends to the ground.

   [1780] _Sturnopastor contra_, the pied mina.

   [1781] Part of the following passage about the _luja_ (var.
   _lukha_, _lucha_) is _verbatim_ with part of that on f. 135;
   both were written about 934-5 AH. as is shewn by Shaikh Zain
   (Index _s.n._) and by inference from references in the text
   (Index _s.n._ B.N. date of composition). _See_ Appendix N.

   [1782] Lit. mountain-partridge. There is ground for
   understanding that one of the birds known in the region as
   _monals_ is meant. _See_ Appendix N.

   [1783] Sans. _chakora_; Ar. _durraj_; P. _kabg_; T. _kiklik_.

   [1784] Here, probably, southern Afghanistan.

   [1785] _Caccabis chukur_ (Scully, Shaw's Vocabulary) or _C.
   pallescens_ (Hume, quoted under No. 126 E. D. Ross' _Polyglot
   List_).

   [1786] "In some parts of the country (_i.e._ India before 1841
   AD.), tippets used to be made of the beautiful black,
   white-spotted feathers of the lower plumage (of the _durraj_),
   and were in much request, but they are rarely procurable now"
   (_Bengal Sporting Magazine_ for 1841, quoted by Jerdon, ii,
   561).

   [1787] A broad collar of red passes round the whole neck
   (Jerdon, ii, 558).

   [1788] Ar. _durraj_ means one who repeats what he hears, a
   tell-tale.

   [1789] Various translations have been made of this passage, "I
   have milk and sugar" (Erskine), "_J'ai du lait, un peu de
   sucre_" (de Courteille), but with short _sh:r_, it might be
   read in more than one way ignoring milk and sugar. See Jerdon,
   ii, 558 and Hobson Jobson _s.n._ Black-partridge.

   [1790] Flower-faced, _Trapogon melanocephala_, the horned
   (_sing_)-monal. It is described by Jahangir (_Memoirs_, R. and
   B., ii, 220) under the names [H. and P.] _phul-paikar_ and
   Kashmiri, _sonlu_.

   [1791] _Gallus sonneratii_, the grey jungle-fowl.

   [1792] Perhaps _Bambusicola fytchii_, the western
   bambu-partridge. For _chil_ see E. D. Ross, _l.c._ No. 127.

   [1793] Jahangir (_l.c._) describes, under the Kashmiri name
   _put_, what may be this bird. It seems to be _Gallus
   ferrugineus_, the red jungle-fowl (Blanford, iv, 75).

   [1794] Jahangir helps to identify the bird by mentioning its
   elongated tail-feathers,--seasonal only.

   [1795] The migrant quail will be _Coturnix communis_, the grey
   quail, 8 inches long; what it is compared with seems likely to
   be the bush-quail, which is non-migrant and shorter.

   [1796] Perhaps _Perdicula argunda_, the rock bush-quail, which
   flies in small coveys.

   [1797] Perhaps _Coturnix coromandelica_, the black-breasted or
   rain quail, 7 inches long.

   [1798] Perhaps _Motacilla citreola_, a yellow wag-tail which
   summers in Central Asia (Oates, ii, 298). If so, its Kabul
   name may refer to its flashing colour. Cf. E. D. Ross, _l.c._
   No. 301; de Courteille's _Dictionary_ which gives _qarcha_,
   wag-tail, and Zenker's which fixes the colour.

   [1799] _Eupodotis edwardsii_; Turki, _tughdar_ or _tughdiri_.

   [1800] Erskine noting (Mems. p. 321), that the bustard is
   common in the Dakkan where it is bigger than a turkey, says it
   is called _tughdar_ and suggests that this is a corruption of
   _tughdaq_. The uses of both words are shewn by Babur, here,
   and in the next following, account of the _charz_. Cf. G. of
   I. i, 260 and E. D. Ross _l.c._ Nos. 36, 40.

   [1801] _Sypheotis bengalensis_ and _S. aurita_, which are both
   smaller than _Otis houbara_ (_tughdiri_). In Hindustan _S.
   aurita_ is known as _likh_ which name is the nearest approach
   I have found to Babur's [_luja_] _lukha_.

   [1802] Jerdon mentions (ii, 615) that this bird is common in
   Afghanistan and there called _dugdaor_ (_tughdar_,
   _tughdiri_).

   [1803] _Cf._ Appendix B, since I wrote which, further
   information has made it fairly safe to say that the Hindustan
   _baghri-qara_ is _Pterocles exustus_, the common sand-grouse
   and that the one of f. 49b is _Pterocles arenarius_, the
   larger or black-bellied sand-grouse. _P. exustus_ is said by
   Yule (H. J. _s.n._ Rock-pigeon) to have been miscalled
   rock-pigeon by Anglo-Indians, perhaps because its flight
   resembles the pigeon's. This accounts for Erskine's rendering
   (p. 321) _baghri-qara_ here by rock-pigeon.

   [1804] _Leptoptilus dubius_, Hind. _hargila_. Hindustanis call
   it _pir-i-ding_ (Erskine) and _peda dhauk_ (Blanford), both
   names referring, perhaps, to its pouch. It is the adjutant of
   Anglo-India. Cf. f. 235.

   [1805] only when young (Blanford, ii, 188).

   [1806] Elph. MS. _mank:sa_ or _mankia_; Hai. MS. _m:nk_.
   Haughton's _Bengali Dictionary_ gives two forms of the name
   _manek-jur_ and _manak-yoi_. It is _Dissura episcopus_, the
   white-necked stork (Blanford iv, 370, who gives _manik-jor_
   amongst its Indian names). Jerdon classes it (ii, 737) as
   _Ciconia leucocephala_. It is the beefsteak bird of
   Anglo-India.

   [1807] _Ciconia nigra_ (Blanford, iv, 369).

   [1808] Under the Hindustani form, _buza_, of Persian _buzak_
   the birds Babur mentions as _buzak_ can be identified. The
   large one is _Inocotis papillosus_, _buza_, _kala buza_, black
   curlew, king-curlew. The bird it equals in size is a buzzard,
   Turki _sar_ (not Persian _sar_, starling). The king-curlew has
   a large white patch on the inner lesser and marginal coverts
   of its wings (Blanford, iv, 303). This agrees with Babur's
   statement about the wings of the large _buzak_. Its length is
   27 inches, while the starling's is 9-1/2 inches.

   [1809] _Ibis melanocephala_, the white ibis, Pers. _safed
   buzak_, Bengali _sabut buza_. It is 30 inches long.

   [1810] Perhaps, _Plegadis falcinellus_, the glossy ibis, which
   in most parts of India is a winter visitor. Its length is 25
   inches.

   [1811] Erskine suggests that this is _Platalea leucorodia_,
   the _chamach-buza_, spoon-bill. It is 33 inches long.

   [1812] _Anas poecilorhyncha._ The Hai. MS. writes _gharm-pai_,
   and this is the Indian name given by Blanford (iv, 437).

   [1813] _Anas boschas._ Dr. Ross notes (No. 147), from the
   _Sanglakh_, that _suna_ is the drake, _burchin_, the duck and
   that it is common in China to call a certain variety of bird
   by the combined sex-names. Something like this is shewn by the
   uses of _bugha_ and _maral_ _q.v._ Index.

   [1814] _Centropus rufipennis_, the common coucal (Yule's H.J.
   _s.n._ Crow-pheasant); H. _makokha_, _Cuculus castaneus_
   (Buchanan, quoted by Forbes).

   [1815] _Pteropus edwardsii_, the flying-fox. The inclusion of
   the bat here amongst birds, may be a clerical accident, since
   on f. 136 a flying-fox is not written of as a bird.

   [1816] Babur here uses what is both the Kabul and Andijan name
   for the magpie, Ar. _'aqqa_ (Oates, i, 31 and Scully's Voc),
   instead of T. _saghizghan_ or P. _dam-sicha_ (tail-wagger).

   [1817] The Pers. trs. writes _sandulach mamula_, _mamula_
   being Arabic for wag-tail. De Courteille's Dictionary
   describes the _sandulach_ as small and having a long tail, the
   cock-bird green, the hen, yellow. The wag-tail suiting this in
   colouring is _Motacilla borealis_ (Oates, ii, 294; syn.
   _Budytes viridis_, the green wag-tail); this, as a migrant,
   serves to compare with the Indian "little bird", which seems
   likely to be a red-start.

   [1818] This word may represent Scully's _kirich_ and be the
   Turki name for a swift, perhaps _Cypselus affinis_.

   [1819] This name is taken from its cry during the breeding
   season (Yule's H.J. _s.n._ Koel).

   [1820] Babur's distinction between the three crocodiles he
   mentions seems to be that of names he heard, _shir-abi_,
   _siyah-sar_, and _gharial_.

   [1821] In this passage my husband finds the explanation of two
   somewhat vague statements of later date, one made by
   Abu'l-fazl (A. A. Blochmann, p. 65) that Akbar called the
   _kilas_ (cherry) the _shah-alu_ (king-plum), the other by
   Jahangir that this change was made because _kilas_ means
   lizard (_Jahangir's Memoirs_, R. & B. i, 116). What Akbar did
   is shewn by Babur; it was to reject the _Persian_ name
   _kilas_, cherry, because it closely resembled _Turki gilas_,
   lizard. There is a lizard _Stellio Lehmanni_ of Transoxiana
   with which Babur may well have compared the crocodile's
   appearance (Schuyler's _Turkistan_, i, 383). Akbar in
   Hindustan may have had _Varanus salvator_ (6 ft. long) in
   mind, if indeed he had not the great lizard, _al lagarto_, the
   alligator itself in his thought. The name _kilas_ evidently
   was banished only from the Court circle, since it is still
   current in Kashmir (Blochmann _l.c._ p. 616); and Speede (p.
   201) gives _keeras_, cherry, as used in India.

   [1822] This name as now used, is that of the purely
   fish-eating crocodile. [In the Turki text Babur's account of
   the _gharial_ follows that of the porpoise; but it is grouped
   here with those of the two other crocodiles.]

   [1823] As the Hai. MS. and also I.O. 216 f. 137 (Pers. trs.)
   write _kalah_ (_galah_)-fish, this may be a large cray-fish.
   One called by a name approximating to _galah_-fish is found in
   Malayan waters, _viz._ the _galah_-prawn (_hudang_) (cf.
   Bengali _gula-chingri_, _gula_-prawn, Haughton). _Galah_ and
   _gula_ may express lament made when the fish is caught
   (Haughton pp. 931, 933, 952); or if _kalah_ be read, this may
   express scolding. Two good MSS. of the _Waqi'at-i-baburi_
   (Pers. trs.) write _kaka_; and their word cannot but have
   weight. Erskine reproduces _kaka_ but offers no explanation of
   it, a failure betokening difficulty in his obtaining one. My
   husband suggests that _kaka_ may represent a stuttering sound,
   doing so on the analogy of Vullers' explanation of the
   word,--_Vir ridiculus et facetus qui simul balbutiat_; and also
   he inclines to take the fish to be a crab (_kakra_). Possibly
   _kaka_ is a popular or vulgar name for a cray-fish or a crab.
   Whether the sound is lament, scolding, or stuttering the
   fisherman knows! Shaikh Zain enlarges Babur's notice of this
   fish; he says the bones are prolonged (_bar awarda_) from the
   ears, that these it agitates at time of capture, making a
   noise like the word _kaka_ by which it is known, that it is
   two _wajab_ (18 in.) long, its flesh surprisingly tasty, and
   that it is very active, leaping a _gaz_ (_cir._ a yard) out of
   the water when the fisherman's net is set to take it. For
   information about the Malayan fish, I am indebted to Mr. Cecil
   Wray.

   [1824] T. _qiyuenlighi_, presumably referring to spines or
   difficult bones; T. _qin_, however, means a scabbard [Shaw].

   [1825] One of the common frogs is a small one which, when
   alarmed, jumps along the surface of the water (G. of I. i,
   273).

   [1826] _Anb_ and _anbah_ (pronounced _amb_ and _ambah_) are
   now less commonly used names than _am_. It is an interesting
   comment on Babur's words that Abu'l-fazl spells _anb_, letter
   by letter, and says that the _b_ is quiescent (_Ayin_ 28; for
   the origin of the word mango, _vide_ Yule's H.J. _s.n._).

   [1827] A corresponding diminutive would be fairling.

   [1828] The variants, entered in parenthesis, are found in the
   Bib. Ind. ed. of the _Ayin-i-akbari_ p. 75 and in a (bazar)
   copy of the _Quranu's-sa'dain_ in my husband's possession. As
   Amir Khusrau was a poet of Hindustan, either _khwash_
   (_khwesh_) [our own] or _ma_ [our] would suit his meaning. The
   couplet is, literally:--

     Our fairling, [_i.e._ mango] beauty-maker of the garden,
     Fairest fruit of Hindustan.

   [1829] Daulat Khan _Yusuf-khail Ludi_ in 929 AH. sent Babur a
   gift of mangoes preserved in honey (_in loco_ p. 440).

   [1830] I have learned nothing more definite about the word
   _kardi_ than that it is the name of a superior kind of peach
   (_Ghiyasu'l-lughat_).

   [1831] The preceding sentence is out of place in the Turki
   text; it may therefore be a marginal note, perhaps not made by
   Babur.

   [1832] This sentence suggests that Babur, writing in Agra or
   Fathpur did not there see fine mango-trees.

   [1833] See Yule's H.J. on the plantain, the banana of the
   West.

   [1834] This word is a descendant of Sanscrit _mocha_, and
   parent of _musa_ the botanical name of the fruit (Yule).

   [1835] Shaikh Effendi (Kunos), Zenker and de Courteille say of
   this only that it is the name of a tree. Shaw gives a name
   that approaches it, _arman_, a grass, a weed; Scully explains
   this as _Artemisia vulgaris_, wormwood, but Roxburgh gives no
   _Artemisia_ having a leaf resembling the plantain's. Scully
   has _aramadan_, unexplained, which, like _aman-qara_, may
   refer to comfort in shade. Babur's comparison will be with
   something known in Transoxiana. Maize has general resemblance
   with the plantain. So too have the names of the plants, since
   _mocha_ and _mauz_ stand for the plantain and (Hindi) _muka'i_
   for maize. These incidental resemblances bear, however
   lightly, on the question considered in the Ency. Br. (art.
   maize) whether maize was early in Asia or not; some writers
   hold that it was; if Babur's _aman-qara_ were maize, maize
   will have been familiar in Transoxiana in his day.

   [1836] Abu'l-fazl mentions that the plantain-tree bears no
   second crop unless cut down to the stump.

   [1837] Babur was fortunate not to have met with a seed-bearing
   plantain.

   [1838] The ripe "dates" are called P. _tamar-i Hind_, whence
   our tamarind, and _Tamarindus Indica_.

   [1839] _Sophora alopecuroides_, a leguminous plant (Scully).

   [1840] Abu'l-fazl gives _galaunda_ as the name of the "fruit"
   [_mewa_],--Forbes, as that of the fallen flower. Cf. Brandis p.
   426 and Yule's H.J. _s.n._ Mohwa.

   [1841] Babur seems to say that spirit is extracted from both
   the fresh and the dried flowers. The fresh ones are favourite
   food with deer and jackals; they have a sweet spirituous
   taste. Erskine notes that the spirit made from them was
   well-known in Bombay by the name of Moura, or of Parsi-brandy,
   and that the farm of it was a considerable article of revenue
   (p. 325 n.). Roxburgh describes it as strong and intoxicating
   (p. 411).

   [1842] This is the name of a green, stoneless grape which when
   dried, results in a raisin resembling the sultanas of Europe
   (_Jahangir's Memoirs_ and Yule's H.J. _s.n._; Griffiths'
   _Journal of Travel_ pp. 359, 388).

   [1843] _Aul_, lit. the _aul_ of the flower. The Persian
   translation renders _aul_ by _bu_ which may allow both words
   to be understood in their (root) sense of _being_, _i.e._
   natural state. De Courteille translates by _quand la fleur est
   fraiche_ (ii, 210); Erskine took _bu_ to mean smell (_Memoirs_
   p. 325), but the _aul_ it translates, does not seem to have
   this meaning. For reading _aul_ as "the natural state", there
   is circumstantial support in the flower's being eaten raw
   (Roxburgh). The annotator of the Elphinstone MS. [whose
   defacement of that Codex has been often mentioned], has added
   points and _tashdid_ to the _aul-i_ (_i.e._ its _aul_), so as
   to produce _awwali_ (first, f. 235). Against this there are
   the obvious objections that the Persian translation does not
   reproduce, and that its _bu_ does not render _awwali_; also
   that _aul-i_ is a noun with its enclitic genitive _ya_ (_i_).

   [1844] This word seems to be meant to draw attention to the
   various merits of the _mahuwa_ tree.

   [1845] Erskine notes that this is not to be confounded with E.
   _jambu_, the rose-apple (_Memoirs_ p. 325 n.). Cf. Yule's H.J.
   _s.n. Jambu_.

   [1846] var. _ghat-alu_, _ghab-alu_, _ghain-alu_, _shafl-alu_.
   Scully enters _'ain-alu_ (true-plum?) unexplained. The
   _kamrak_ fruit is 3 in. long (Brandis) and of the size of a
   lemon (Firminger); dimensions which make Babur's 4 _ailik_
   (hand's-thickness) a slight excess only, and which thus allow
   _ailik_, with its Persion translation, _angusht_, to be
   approximately an inch.

   [1847] Speede, giving the fruit its Sanscrit name _kamarunga_,
   says it is acid, rather pleasant, something like an insipid
   apple; also that its pretty pink blossoms grow on the trunk
   and main branches (i, 211).

   [1848] Cf. Yule's H.J. _s.n._ jack-fruit. In a Calcutta
   nurseryman's catalogue of 1914 AD. three kinds of jack-tree
   are offered for sale, viz. "Crispy or Khaja, Soft or Neo,
   Rose-scented" (Seth, Feronia Nursery).

   [1849] The _gipa_ is a sheep's stomach stuffed with rice,
   minced meat, and spices, and boiled as a pudding. The
   resemblance of the jack, as it hangs on the tree, to the
   haggis, is wonderfully complete (Erskine).

   [1850] These when roasted have the taste of chestnuts.

   [1851] Firminger (p. 186) describes an ingenious method of
   training.

   [1852] For a note of Humayun's on the jack-fruit _see_
   Appendix O.

   [1853] _aid-i-yaman aimas._ It is somewhat curious that Babur
   makes no comment on the odour of the jack itself.

   [1854] _bush_, English bosh (Shaw). The Persian translation
   inserts no more about this fruit.

   [1855] Steingass applies this name to the plantain.

   [1856] Erskine notes that "this is the bullace-plum, small,
   not more than twice as large as the sloe and not so
   high-flavoured; it is generally yellow, sometimes red." Like
   Babur, Brandis enumerates several varieties and mentions the
   seasonal changes of the tree (p. 170).

   [1857] This will be Kabul, probably, because Transoxiana is
   written of by Babur usually, if not invariably, as "that
   country", and because he mentions the _chikda_ (_i.e.
   chika?_), under its Persian name _sinjid_, in his _Description
   of Kabul_ (f. 129_b_).

   [1858] P. _mar manjan_, which I take to refer to the
   _riwajlar_ of Kabul. (Cf. f. 129_b_, where, however, (note 5)
   are _corrigenda_ of Masson's _rawash_ for _riwaj_, and his
   third to second volume.) Kehr's Codex contains an extra
   passage about the _karaun da_, _viz._ that from it is made a
   tasty fritter-like dish, resembling a rhubarb-fritter
   (Ilminsky, p. 369).

   [1859] People call it (P.) _palasa_ also (Elph. MS. f. 236,
   marginal note).

   [1860] Perhaps the red-apple of Kabul, where two sorts are
   common, both rosy, one very much so, but much inferior to the
   other (Griffith's _Journal of Travel_ p. 388).

   [1861] Its downy fruit grows in bundles from the trunk and
   large branches (Roxburgh).

   [1862] The reference by "also" (_ham_) will be to the _kamrak_
   (f. 283_b_), but both Roxburgh and Brandis say the _amla_ is
   six striated.

   [1863] The Sanscrit and Bengali name for the chirunji-tree is
   _piyala_ (Roxburgh p. 363).

   [1864] Cf. f. 250_b_.

   [1865] The leaflet is rigid enough to serve as a runlet, but
   soon wears out; for this reason, the usual practice is to use
   one of split bamboo.

   [1866] This is a famous hunting-ground between Biana and
   Dhulpur, Rajputana, visited in 933 AH. (f. 33O_b_). Babur's
   great-great-grandson Shah-jahan built a hunting-lodge there
   (G. of I.).

   [1867] Hai. MS. _mu'arrab_, but the Elph. MS. _maghrib_,
   [occidentalizing]. The Hai. MS. when writing of the orange
   (_infra_) also has _maghrib_. A distinction of locality may be
   drawn by _maghrib_.

   [1868] Babur's "Hindustan people" (_ail_) are those neither
   Turks nor Afghans.

   [1869] This name, with its usual form _tadi_ (toddy), is used
   for the fermented sap of the date, coco, and _mhar_ palms also
   (cf. Yule's H.J. _s.n._ toddy).

   [1870] Babur writes of the long leaf-stalk as a branch
   (_shakh_); he also seems to have taken each spike of the
   fan-leaf to represent a separate leaf. [For two omissions from
   my trs. _see_ Appendix O.]

   [1871] Most of the fruits Babur describes as orange-like are
   named in the following classified list, taken from Watts'
   _Economic Products of India_:--"+Citrus aurantium+, _narangi_,
   _sangtara_, _amrit-phal_; +C. decumana+, _pumelo_, shaddock,
   forbidden-fruit, _sada-phal_; +C. medica+ proper, _turunj_,
   _limu_; +C. medica limonum+, _jambhira_, _karna-nebu_." Under
   _C. aurantium_ Brandis enters both the sweet and the Seville
   oranges (_narangi_); this Babur appears to do also.

   [1872] _kindiklik_, explained in the Elph. Codex by _nafwar_
   (f. 238). This detail is omitted by the Persian translation.
   Firminger's description (p. 221) of Aurangabad oranges
   suggests that they also are navel-oranges. At the present time
   one of the best oranges had in England is the navel one of
   California.

   [1873] Useful addition is made to earlier notes on the
   variability of the _yighach_, a variability depending on time
   taken to cover the ground, by the following passage from
   Henderson and Hume's _Lahor to Yarkand_ (p. 120), which shews
   that even in the last century the _farsang_ (the P. word used
   in the Persian translation of the _Babur-nama_ for T.
   _yighach_) was computed by time. "All the way from Kargallik
   (Qarghaliq) to Yarkand, there were tall wooden mile-posts
   along the roads, at intervals of about 5 miles, or rather one
   hour's journey, apart. On a board at the top of each post, or
   _farsang_ as it is called, the distances were very legibly
   written in Turki."

   [1874] _ma'rib_, Elph. MS. _magharrib_; (cf. f. 285_b_ note).

   [1875] _i.e. narang_ (Sans. _naranga_) has been changed to
   _naranj_ in the 'Arab mouth. What is probably one of Humayun's
   notes preserved by the Elph. Codex (f. 238), appears to say--it
   is mutilated--that _narang_ has been corrupted into _naranj_.

   [1876] The Elph. Codex has a note--mutilated in early
   binding--which is attested by its scribe as copied from
   Humayun's hand-writing, and is to the effect that once on his
   way from the Hot-bath, he saw people who had taken poison and
   restored them by giving lime-juice.

   Erskine here notes that the same antidotal quality is ascribed
   to the citron by Virgil:--

     Media fert tristes succos. tardumque saporem
     Felicis mali, quo non praesentius ullum,
     Pocula si quando saevae infecere novercae,
     Miscueruntque herbas et non innoxia verba,
     Auxilium venit, ac membris agit atra venena.

     Georgics II. v. 126.

     _Vide_ Heyne's note i, 438.

   [1877] P. _turunj_, wrinkled, puckered; Sans. _vijapura_ and
   H. _bijaura_ (_Ayin_ 28), seed-filled.

   [1878] Babur may have confused this with H. _bijaura_; so too
   appears to have done the writer (Humayun?) of a [now
   mutilated] note in the Elph. Codex (f. 238), which seems to
   say that the fruit or its name went from Bajaur to Hindustan.
   Is the country of Bajaur so-named from its indigenous orange
   (_vijapura_, whence _bijaura_)? The name occurs also north of
   Kangra.

   [1879] Of this name variants are numerous, _santra_,
   _santhara_, _samtara_, etc. Watts classes it as a _C.
   aurantium_; Erskine makes it the common sweet orange;
   Firminger, quoting Ross (p. 221) writes that, as grown in the
   Nagpur gardens it is one of the finest Indian oranges, with
   rind thin, smooth and close. The Emperor Muhammad Shah is said
   to have altered its name to _rang-tara_ because of its fine
   colour (_rang_) (Forbes). Speede (ii, 109) gives both names.
   As to the meaning and origin of the name _santara_ or
   _santra_, so suggestive of Cintra, the Portuguese home of a
   similar orange, it may be said that it looks like a hill-name
   used in N. E. India, for there is a village in the Bhutan
   Hills, (Western Duars) known from its orange groves as
   Santra-bari, Abode of the orange. To this (mentioned already
   as my husband's suggestion in Mr. Crooke's ed. of Yule's H.J.)
   support is given by the item "Suntura, famous Nipal variety",
   entered in Seth's Nursery-list of 1914 (Feronia Nurseries,
   Calcutta). Light on the question of origin could be thrown, no
   doubt, by those acquainted with the dialects of the hill-tract
   concerned.

   [1880] This refers, presumably, to the absence of the beak
   characteristic of all citrons.

   [1881] melter, from the Sans. root _gal_, which provides the
   names of several lemons by reason of their solvent quality,
   specified by Babur (_infra_) of the _amal-bid_. Erskine notes
   that in his day the _gal-gal_ was known as _kilmek_
   (_galmak_?).

   [1882] Sans. _jambira_, H. _jambir_, classed by Abu'l-fazl as
   one of the somewhat sour fruits and by Watts as _Citrus medica
   limonum_.

   [1883] Watts, _C. decumana_, the shaddock or pumelo; Firminger
   (p. 223) has _C. decumana pyriformis_ suiting Babur's
   "pear-shaped". What Babur compared it with will be the
   Transoxanian pear and quince (_P. amrud_ and _bihi_) and not
   the Indian guava and Bengal quince (_P. amrud_ and _H. bael_).

   [1884] The Turki text writes _amrd_. Watts classes the
   _amrit-phal_ as a _C. aurantium_. This supports Erskine's
   suggestion that it is the mandarin-orange. Humayun describes
   it in a note which is written pell-mell in the text of the
   Elph. Codex and contains also descriptions of the _kamila_ and
   _santara_ oranges; it can be seen translated in Appendix O.

   [1885] So spelled in the Turki text and also in two good MSS.
   of the Pers. trs. I.O. 217 and 218, but by Abu'l-fazl
   _amal-bit_. Both P. _bid_ and P. _bit_ mean willow and cane
   (ratan), so that _amal-bid_ (_bit_) can mean acid-willow and
   acid-cane. But as Babur is writing of a fruit like an orange,
   the cane that bears an acid fruit, _Calamus rotang_, can be
   left aside in favour of _Citrus medica acidissima_. Of this
   fruit the solvent property Babur mentions, as well as the
   commonly-known service in cleansing metal, link it, by these
   uses, with the willow and suggest a ground for understanding,
   as Erskine did, that _amal-bid_ meant acid-willow; for
   willow-wood is used to rub rust off metal.

   [1886] This statement shows that Babur was writing the
   _Description of Hindustan_ in 935 AH. (1528-9 AD.), which is
   the date given for it by Shaikh Zain.

   [1887] This story of the needle is believed in India of all
   the citron kind, which are hence called _sui-gal_
   (needle-melter) in the Dakhin (Erskine). Cf. Forbes, p. 489
   _s.n. sui-gal_.

   [1888] Erskine here quotes information from Abu'l-fazl (_Ayin_
   28) about Akbar's encouragement of the cultivation of fruits.

   [1889] Hindustani (Urdu) _garhal_. Many varieties of Hibiscus
   (syn. Althea) grow in India; some thrive in Surrey gardens;
   the _jasun_ by name and colour can be taken as what is known
   in Malayan, Tamil, etc., as the shoe-flower, from its use in
   darkening leather (Yule's H.J.).

   [1890] I surmise that what I have placed between asterisks
   here belongs to the next-following plant, the oleander. For
   though the branches of the _jasun_ grow vertically, the bush
   is a dense mass upon one stout trunk, or stout short stem. The
   words placed in parenthesis above are not with the Haidarabad
   but are with the Elphinstone Codex. There would seem to have
   been a scribe's skip from one "rose" to the other. As has been
   shewn repeatedly, this part of the Babur-nama has been much
   annotated; in the Elph. Codex, where only most of the notes
   are preserved, some are entered by the scribe pell-mell into
   Babur's text. The present instance may be a case of a marginal
   note, added to the text in a wrong place.

   [1891] The peduncle supporting the plume of medial petals is
   clearly seen only when the flower opens first. The plumed
   Hibiscus is found in florists' catalogues described as
   "double".

   [1892] This Anglo-Indians call also rose-bay. A Persian name
   appears to be _zahr-giyah_, poison-grass, which makes it the
   more probable that the doubtful passage in the previous
   description of the _jasun_ belongs to the rod-like oleander,
   known as the poison-grass. The oleander is common in
   river-beds over much country known to Babur, outside India.

   [1893] Roxburgh gives a full and interesting account of this
   tree.

   [1894] Here the Elph. Codex, only, has the (seeming) note, "An
   'Arab calls it _kazi_" (or _kawi_). This fills out Steingass'
   part-explanation of _kawi_, "the blossom of the fragrant
   palm-tree, _armat_" (p. 1010), and of _armat_, "a kind of
   date-tree with a fragrant blossom" (p. 39), by making _armat_
   and _kawi_ seem to be the _Pandanus_ and its flower.

   [1895] _Calamus scriptorius_ (Vullers ii, 607. H. B.).
   Abu'l-fazl compares the leaves to _jawari_, the great millet
   (Forbes); Blochmann (A. A. p. 83) translates _jawari_ by
   _maize_ (_juwara_, Forbes).

   [1896] T. _airkak-qumush_, a name Scully enters unexplained.
   Under _qumush_ (reed) he enters _Arundo madagascarensis_;
   Babur's comparison will be with some Transoxanian _Arundo_ or
   _Calamus_, presumably.

   [1897] _Champa_ seems to have been Babur's word (Elph. and
   Hai. MSS.), but is the (B.) name for _Michelia champaka_; the
   Pers. translation corrects it by (B.) _chambeli_, (_yasman_,
   jasmine).

   [1898] Here, "outside India" will be meant, where Hindu rules
   do not prevail.

   [1899] _Hind ailari-ning ibtida-si hilal ailar-ning
   istiqbal-din dur._ The use here of _istiqbal_, welcome,
   attracts attention; does it allude to the universal welcome of
   lighter nights? or is it reminiscent of Muhammadan welcome to
   the Moon's crescent in Shawwal?

   [1900] For an exact statement of the intercalary months _vide_
   Cunningham's _Indian Eras_, p. 91. In my next sentence
   (_supra_) the parenthesis-marks indicate blanks left on the
   page of the Hai. MS. as though waiting for information. These
   and other similar blanks make for the opinion that the Hai.
   Codex is a direct copy of Babur's draft manuscript.

   [1901] The sextuple division (_ritu_) of the year is referred
   to on f. 284, where the Signs Crab and Lion are called the
   season of the true Rains.

   [1902] Babur appears not to have entered either the Hindi or
   the Persian names of the week:--the Hai. MS. has a blank space;
   the Elph. MS. had the Persian names only, and Hindi ones have
   been written in above these; Kehr has the Persian ones only;
   Ilminsky has added the Hindi ones. (The spelling of the Hindi
   names, in my translation, is copied from Forbes' Dictionary.)

   [1903] The Hai. MS. writes _gari_ and _garial_. The word now
   stands for the hour of 60 minutes.

   [1904] _i.e._ gong-men. The name is applied also to an
   alligator _Lacertus gangeticus_ (Forbes).

   [1905] There is some confusion in the text here, the Hai. MS.
   reading _birinj-din tishi_(?) _nima quiubturlar_--the Elph. MS.
   (f. 240_b_) _biring-din bir yassi nima quiubturlar_. The
   Persian translation, being based on the text of the
   Elphinstone Codex reads _az biring yak chiz pahni rekhta and_.
   The word _tishi_ of the Hai. MS. may represent _tasht_ plate
   or _yassi_, broad; against the latter however there is the
   sentence that follows and gives the size.

   [1906] Here again the wording of the Hai. MS. is not clear;
   the sense however is obvious. Concerning the clepsydra _vide_
   A. A. Jarrett, ii, 15 and notes; Smith's _Dictionary of
   Antiquities_; Yule's H.J. _s.n._ Ghurry.

   [1907] The table is:--60 _bipals_ = 1 _pal_; 60 _pals_ = 1
   _g'hari_ (24 m.); 60 _g'hari_ or 8 _pahr_ = one _din-rat_
   (nycthemeron).

   [1908] Qoran, cap. CXII, which is a declaration of God's
   unity.

   [1909] The (S.) _rati_ = 8 rice-grains (Eng. 8 barley-corns);
   the (S.) _masha_ is a kidney-bean; the (P.) _tank_ is about 2
   oz.; the (Ar.) _misqal_ is equal to 40 _ratis_; the (S.)
   _tula_ is about 145 oz.; the (S.) _ser_ is of various values
   (Wilson's _Glossary_ and Yule's H. J.).

   [1910] There being 40 Bengal _sers_ to the _man_, Babur's word
   _manban_ seems to be another name for the _man_ or _maund_. I
   have not found _manban_ or _minasa_. At first sight _manban_
   might be taken, in the Hai. MS. for (T.) _batman_, a weight of
   13 or 15 lbs., but this does not suit. Cf. f. 167 note to
   _batman_ and f. 173_b_ (where, however, in the note f. 157
   requires correction to f. 167). For Babur's table of measures
   the Pers. trs. has 40 _sers_ = 1 _man_; 12 _mans_ = 1 _mani_;
   100 _mani_ they call _minasa_ (217, f. 201_b_, l. 8).

   [1911] Presumably these are caste-names.

   [1912] The words in parenthesis appear to be omitted from the
   text; to add them brings Babur's remark into agreement with
   others on what he several times makes note of, _viz._ the
   absence not only of irrigation-channels but of those which
   convey "running-waters" to houses and gardens. Such he writes
   of in Farghana; such are a well-known charm _e.g._ in Madeira,
   where the swift current of clear water flowing through the
   streets, turns into private precincts by side-runlets.

   [1913] The Hai. MS. writes _lunguta-dik_, like a lunguta,
   which better agrees with Babur's usual phrasing. _Lung_ is
   Persian for a cloth passed between the loins, is an equivalent
   of S. _dhoti_. Babur's use of it (_infra_) for the woman's
   (P.) _chaddar_ or (S.) _sari_ does not suit the Dictionary
   definition of its meaning.

   [1914] When Erskine published the Memoirs in 1826 AD. he
   estimated this sum at 1-1/2 millions Sterling, but when he
   published his _History of India_ in 1854, he had made further
   research into the problem of Indian money values, and judged
   then that Babur's revenue was L4,212,000.

   [1915] Erskine here notes that the promised details had not
   been preserved, but in 1854 AD. he had found them in a
   "paraphrase of part of Babur", manifestly in Shaikh Zain's
   work. He entered and discussed them and some matters of
   money-values in Appendices D. and E. of his _History of
   India_, vol. I. Ilminsky found them in Kehr's Codex (C. ii,
   230). The scribe of the Elph. MS. has entered the revenues of
   three _sarkars_ only, with his usual quotation marks
   indicating something extraneous or doubtful. The Hai. MS. has
   them in contents precisely as I have entered them above, but
   with a scattered mode of setting down. They are in Persian,
   presumably as they were rendered to Babur by some Indian
   official. This official statement will have been with Babur's
   own papers; it will have been copied by Shaikh Zain into his
   own paraphrase. It differs slightly in Erskine's and again, in
   de Courteille's versions. I regret that I am incompetent to
   throw any light upon the question of its values and that I
   must leave some uncertain names to those more expert than
   myself. Cf. Erskine's Appendices _l.c._ and Thomas' _Revenue
   resources of the Mughal Empire_. For a few comments _see_ App.
   P.

   [1916] Here the Turki text resumes in the Hai. MS.

   [1917] Elph. MS. f. 243_b_; W. i. B. I.O. 215 has not the
   events of this year (as to which omission _vide_ note at the
   beginning of 932 AH. f. 251_b_) and 217 f. 203; Mems. p. 334;
   Ilminsky's imprint p. 380; _Mems._ ii, 232.

   [1918] This should be 30th if Saturday was the day of the week
   (Gladwin, Cunningham and Babur's narrative of f. 269).
   Saturday appears likely to be right; Babur entered Agra on
   Thursday 28th; Friday would be used for the Congregational
   Prayer and preliminaries inevitable before the distribution of
   the treasure. The last day of Babur's narrative 932 AH. is
   Thursday Rajab 28th; he would not be likely to mistake between
   Friday, the day of his first Congregational prayer in Agra,
   and Saturday. It must be kept in mind that the _Description of
   Hindustan_ is an interpolation here, and that it was written
   in 935 AH., three years later than the incidents here
   recorded. The date Rajab 29th may not be Babur's own entry; or
   if it be, may have been made after the interpolation of the
   dividing mass of the _Description_ and made wrongly.

   [1919] Erskine estimated these sums as "probably L56,700 to
   Humayun; and the smaller ones as L8,100, L6,480, L5,670 and
   L4,860 respectively; very large sums for the age". (_History
   of India_, i. 440 n. and App. E.)

   [1920] These will be his daughters. Gul-badan gives precise
   details of the gifts to the family circle (_Humayun-nama_ f.
   10).

   [1921] Some of these slaves were Sl. Ibrahim's dancing-girls
   (Gul-badan, _ib._).

   [1922] Ar. _sada_. Perhaps it was a station of a hundred men.
   Varsak is in Badakhshan, on the water flowing to Taliqan from
   the Khwaja Muhammad range. Erskine read (p. 335) _sada Varsak_
   as _sadur rashk_, incentive to emulation; de C. (ii, 233)
   translates _sada_ conjecturally by _circonscription_. Shaikh
   Zain has Varsak and to the recipients of the gifts adds the
   "Khwastis, people noted for their piety" (A. N. trs. H. B. i,
   248 n.). The gift to Varsak may well have been made in
   gratitude for hospitality received by Babur in the time of
   adversity after his loss of Samarkand and before his return to
   Kabul in 920 AH.

   [1923] _circa_ 10d. or 11d. Babur left himself stripped so
   bare by his far-flung largess that he was nick-named Qalandar
   (Firishta).

   [1924] Badayuni says of him (Bib. Ind. ed. i, 340) that he was
   _kafir kalima-gu_, a pagan making the Muhammadan Confession of
   Faith, and that he had heard of him, in Akbar's time from
   Bairam Khan-i-khanan, as kingly in appearance and poetic in
   temperament. He was killed fighting for Rana Sanga at Kanwaha.

   [1925] This is his family name.

   [1926] _i.e._ not acting with Hasan _Miwati_.

   [1927] Gul-badan says that the Khwaja several times asked
   leave on the ground that his constitution was not fitted for
   the climate of Hindustan; that His Majesty was not at all, at
   all, willing for him to go, but gave way at length to his
   importunity.

   [1928] in Patiala, about 25 miles s.w. of Ambala.

   [1929] Shaikh Zain, Gul-badan and Erskine write Nau-kar. It
   was now that Khwaja Kalan conveyed money for the repair of the
   great dam at Ghazni (f. 139).

   [1930] The friends did not meet again; that their friendship
   weathered this storm is shewn by Babur's letter of f. 359. The
   _Abushqa_ says the couplet was inscribed on a marble tablet
   near the _Hauz-i-khas_ at the time the Khwaja was in Dihli
   after bidding Babur farewell in Agra.

   [1931] This quatrain is in the Rampur _Diwan_ (_q.v._ index).
   The _Abushqa_ quotes the following as Khwaja Kalan's reply,
   but without mentioning where the original was found. Cf. de
   Courteille, Dict. _s.n._ _taskari_. An English version is
   given in my husband's article _Some verses by the Emperor
   Babur_ (A. Q. R. January, 1911).

     You shew your gaiety and your wit,
     In each word there lie acres of charm.
     Were not all things of Hind upside-down,
     How could you in the heat be so pleasant on cold?

   It is an old remark of travellers that everything in India is
   the opposite of what one sees elsewhere. Timur is said to have
   remarked it and to have told his soldiers not to be afraid of
   the elephants of India, "For," said he, "their trunks are
   empty sleeves, and they carry their tails in front; in
   Hindustan everything is reversed" (H. Beveridge _ibid._). Cf.
   App. Q.

   [1932] Badayuni i, 337 speaks of him as unrivalled in music.

   [1933] f. 267_b_.

   [1934] _auruq_, which here no doubt represents the women of
   the family.

   [1935] _'ain parganalar._

   [1936] Babur's advance, presumably.

   [1937] The full amounts here given are not in all MSS., some
   scribes contenting themselves with the largest item of each
   gift (_Memoirs_ p. 337).

   [1938] The 'Id of Shawwal, it will be remembered, is
   celebrated at the conclusion of the Ramzan fast, on seeing the
   first new moon of Shawwal. In A.H. 932 it must have fallen
   about July 11th 1526 (Erskine).

   [1939] A square shawl, or napkin, of cloth of gold, bestowed
   as a mark of rank and distinction (_Memoirs_ p. 338 n.); _une
   tunique enrichie de broderies_ (_Memoires_, ii, 240 n.).

   [1940] _kamar-shamshir._ This Steingass explains as
   sword-belt, Erskine by "sword with a belt". The summary
   following shews that many weapons were given and not belts
   alone. There is a good deal of variation in the MSS. The Hai.
   MS. has not a complete list. The most all the lists show is
   that gifts were many.

   [1941] f. 263_b_.

   [1942] over the Ganges, a little above Anup-shahr in the
   Buland-shahr district.

   [1943] A seeming omission in the text is made good in my
   translation by Shaikh Zain's help, who says Qasim was sent to
   Court.

   [1944] This quatrain is in the Rampur _Diwan_. It appears to
   pun on Biana and _bi(y)an_.

   [1945] Kandar is in Rajputana; Abu'l-fazl writes Kuhan-dar,
   old habitation.

   [1946] This is the first time Babur's begs are called amirs in
   his book; it may be by a scribe's slip.

   [1947] Chandwar is on the Jumna, between Agra and Etawah.

   [1948] Here _aqar-sular_ will stand for the waters which
   flow--sometimes in marble channels--to nourish plants and charm
   the eye, such for example as beautify the Taj-mahal
   pleasaunce.

   [1949] Index _s.n._ The _talar_ is raised on pillars and open
   in front; it serves often for an Audience-hall (Erskine).

   [1950] _tash 'imarat_, which may refer to the extra-mural
   location of the house, or contrast it with the inner
   _khilwat-khana_, the women's quarters, of the next sentence.
   The point is noted as one concerning the use of the word
   _tash_ (Index _s.n._). I have found no instance in which it is
   certain that Babur uses _tash_, a stone or rock, as an
   adjective. On f. 301 he writes _tashdin 'imarat_,
   house-of-stone, which the Persian text renders by
   _'imarat-i-sangin_. Wherever _tash_ can be translated as
   meaning outer, this accords with Babur's usual diction.

   [1951] _baghcha_ (Index _s.n._). That Babur was the admitted
   pioneer of orderly gardens in India is shewn by the 30th
   _Ayin_, On Perfumes:--"After the foot-prints of Firdaus-makani
   (Babur) had added to the glory of Hindustan, embellishment by
   avenues and landscape-gardening was seen, while
   heart-expanding buildings and the sound of falling-waters
   widened the eyes of beholders."

   [1952] Perhaps _gaz_, each somewhat less than 36 inches.

   [1953] The more familiar Indian name is _baoli_. Such wells
   attracted Peter Mundy's attention; Yule gives an account of
   their names and plan (Mundy's _Travels in Asia_, Hakluyt
   Society, ed. R. C. Temple, and Yule's _Hobson Jobson_ _s.n._
   Bowly). Babur's account of his great _wain_ is not easy to
   translate; his interpreters vary from one another; probably no
   one of them has felt assured of translating correctly.

   [1954] _i.e._ the one across the river.

   [1955] _tash masjid_; this, unless some adjectival affix
   (_e.g._ _din_) has been omitted by the scribe, I incline to
   read as meaning extra, supplementary, or outer, not as
   "mosque-of-stone".

   [1956] or Jajmawa, the old name for the sub-district of
   Kanhpur (Cawnpur).

   [1957] _i.e._ of the Corps of Braves.

   [1958] Dilmau is on the left bank of the Ganges, s.e. from
   Bareilly (Erskine).

   [1959] _Marv-ning bundi-ni baghlab_, which Erskine renders by
   "Having settled the revenue of Merv", and de Courteille by,
   "_Apres avoir occupe Merv_." Were the year's revenues
   compressed into a 40 to 50 days collection?

   [1960] _i.e._ those who had part in his brother's murder. Cf.
   Nizamu'd-din Ahmad's _Tabaqat-i-akbari_ and the
   _Mirat-i-sikandari_ (trs. _History of Gujrat_ E. C. Bayley).

   [1961] Elph. MS. f. 252; W.-i-B. I.O. 215 f. 199b and 217 f.
   208_b_; Mems. p. 343.

   [1962] _siunchi_ (Zenker). Faruq was Mahim's son; he died in
   934 A.H. before his father had seen him.

   [1963] _salah._ It is clear from the "_tash-awi"_ (Pers. trs.
   _khana-i-sang_) of this mortar (_qazan_) that stones were its
   missiles. Erskine notes that from Babur's account cannon would
   seem sometimes to have been made in parts and clamped
   together, and that they were frequently formed of iron bars
   strongly compacted into a circular shape. The accoutrement
   (_salah_) presumably was the addition of fittings.

   [1964] About L40,000 sterling (Erskine).

   [1965] The MSS. write Safar but it seems probable that
   Muharram should be substituted for this; one ground for not
   accepting Safar being that it breaks the consecutive order of
   dates, another that Safar allows what seems a long time for
   the journey from near Dilmau to Agra. All MSS. I have seen
   give the 8th as the day of the month but Erskine has 20th. In
   this part of Babur's writings dates are sparse; it is a
   narrative and not a diary.

   [1966] This phrase, foreign to Babur's diction, smacks of a
   Court-Persian milieu.

   [1967] Here the Elph. MS. has Safar Muharram (f. 253), as has
   also I.O. 215 f. 200b, but it seems unsafe to take this as an
   _al Safarani_ extension of Muharram because Muh.-Safar 24th
   was not a Wednesday. As in the passage noted just above, it
   seems likely that Muharram is right.

   [1968] Cf. f. 15_b_ note to Qambar-i-'ali. The title
   _Akhta-begi_ is to be found translated by "Master of the
   Horse", but this would not suit both uses of _akhta_ in the
   above sentence. Cf. Shaw's Vocabulary.

   [1969] _i.e._ Tahangarh in Karauli, Rajputana.

   [1970] Perhaps _sipahi_ represents Hindustani foot-soldiers.

   [1971] Rafi'u-d-din _Safawi_, a native of Ij near the Persian
   Gulf, teacher of Abu'l-fazl's father and buried near Agra
   (_Ayin-i-akbari_).

   [1972] This phrase, again, departs from Babur's simplicity of
   statement.

   [1973] About L5,000 (Erskine).

   [1974] About L17,500 (Erskine).

   [1975] Hai. MS. and 215 f. 201b, Hasti; Elph. MS. f. 254, and
   Ilminsky, p. 394, Aimishchi; _Memoirs_, p. 346, Imshiji, so
   too _Memoires_, ii, 257.

   [1976] About L5000 (Erskine). Bianwan lies in the _subah_ of
   Agra.

   [1977] Cf. f. 175 for Babur's estimate of his service.

   [1978] Cf. f. 268_b_ for Babur's clemency to him.

   [1979] Firishta. (Briggs ii, 53) mentions that Asad had gone
   to Tahmasp from Kabul to congratulate him on his accession.
   Shah Isma'il had died in 930 AH. (1524 AD.); the title
   Shah-zada is a misnomer therefore in 933 AH.--one possibly
   prompted by Tahmasp's youth.

   [1980] The letter is likely to have been written to Mahim and
   to have been brought back to India by her in 935 AH. (f.
   380_b_). Some MSS. of the Pers. trs. reproduce it in Turki and
   follow this by a Persian version; others omit the Turki.

   [1981] Turki, _bua_. Hindi _bawa_ means sister or
   paternal-aunt but this would not suit from Babur's mouth, the
   more clearly not that his epithet for the offender is
   _bad-bakht_. Gul-badan (H.N. f. 19) calls her "ill-omened
   demon".

   [1982] She may have been still in the place assigned to her
   near Agra when Babur occupied it (f. 269).

   [1983] f. 290. Erskine notes that the _tula_ is about equal in
   weight to the silver _rupi_.

   [1984] It appears from the kitchen-arrangements detailed by
   Abu'l-fazl, that before food was dished up, it was tasted from
   the pot by a cook and a subordinate taster, and next by the
   Head-taster.

   [1985] The Turki sentences which here follow the well-known
   Persian proverb, _Rasida bud balai wali ba khair guzasht_, are
   entered as verse in some MSS.; they may be a prose quotation.

   [1986] She, after being put under contribution by two of
   Babur's officers (f. 307_b_) was started off for Kabul, but,
   perhaps dreading her reception there, threw herself into the
   Indus in crossing and was drowned. (Cf. A.N. trs. H. Beveridge
   _Errata_ and _addenda_ p. xi for the authorities.)

   [1987] _gil makhtum_, Lemnian earth, _terra sigillata_, each
   piece of which was impressed, when taken from the quarry, with
   a guarantee-stamp (Cf. Ency. Br. _s.n._ Lemnos).

   [1988] _tiriaq-i-faruq_, an antidote.

   [1989] Index _s.n._

   [1990] Kamran was in Qandahar (Index _s.n._). Erskine observes
   here that Babur's omission to give the name of Ibrahim's son,
   is noteworthy; the son may however have been a child and his
   name not known to or recalled by Babur when writing some years
   later.

   [1991] f. 299_b_.

   [1992] The _Ayin-i-akbari_ locates this in the _sarkar_ of
   Jun-pur, a location suiting the context. The second Persian
   translation ('Abdu'r-rahim's) has here a scribe's skip from
   one "news" to another (both asterisked in my text); hence
   Erskine has an omission.

   [1993] This is the Char-bagh of f. 300, known later as the Ram
   (Aram)-bagh (Garden-of-rest).

   [1994] Presumably he was coming up from Marwar.

   [1995] This name varies; the Hai. MS. in most cases writes
   Qismati, but on f. 267_b_, Qismatai; the Elph. MS. on f. 220
   has Q:s:mnai; De Courteille writes Qismi.

   [1996] _artkab qildi_, perhaps drank wine, perhaps ate
   opium-confections to the use of which he became addicted later
   on (Gulbadan's _Humayun-nama_ f. 30_b_ and 73_b_).

   [1997] _fursatlar_, _i.e._ between the occupation of Agra and
   the campaign against Rana Sanga.

   [1998] Apparently the siege Babur broke up in 931 AH. had been
   renewed by the Auzbegs (f. 255_b_ and Trs. Note _s.a._ 931 AH.
   section _c_).

   [1999] These places are on the Khulm-river between Khulm and
   Kahmard. The present tense of this and the following sentences
   is Babur's.

   [2000] f. 261.

   [2001] Erskine here notes that if the _ser_ Babur mentions be
   one of 14 _tulas_, the value is about L27; if of 24 _tulas_,
   about L45.

   [2002] T. _chapduq_. Cf. the two Persian translations 215 f.
   205_b_ and 217 f. 215; also Ilminsky, p. 401.

   [2003] _bulghan chiriki._ The Rana's forces are thus stated by
   Tod (_Rajastan; Annals of Marwar_ Cap. ix):--"Eighty thousand
   horse, 7 Rajas of the highest rank, 9 Raos, and 104 chieftains
   bearing the titles of Rawul and Rawut, with 500 war-elephants,
   followed him into the field." Babur's army, all told, was
   12,000 when he crossed the Indus from Kabul; it will have had
   accretions from his own officers in the Panj-ab and some also
   from other quarters, and will have had losses at Panipat; his
   reliable kernel of fighting-strength cannot but have been
   numerically insignificant, compared with the Rajput host. Tod
   says that almost all the princes of Rajastan followed the Rana
   at Kanwa.

   [2004] _durbatur._ This is the first use of the word in the
   _Babur-nama_; the defacer of the Elph. Codex has altered it to
   _auratur_.

   [2005] Shaikh Zain records [Abu'l-fazl also, perhaps quoting
   from him] that Babur, by varying diacritical points, changed
   the name Sikri to Shukri in sign of gratitude for his victory
   over the Rana. The place became the Fathpur-sikri of Akbar.

   [2006] Erskine locates this as 10 to 12 miles n.w. of Biana.

   [2007] This phrase has not occurred in the B.N. before;
   presumably it expresses what has not yet been expressed; this
   Erskine's rendering, "each according to the speed of his
   horse," does also. The first Persian translation, which in
   this portion is by Muhammad-quli _Mughul Hisari_, translates
   by _az dambal yak digar_ (I.O. 215, f. 205_b_); the second,
   'Abdu'r-rahim's, merely reproduces the phrase; De Courteille
   (ii, 272) appears to render it by (amirs) _que je ne nomme
   pas_. If my reading of Tahir-tibri's failure be correct
   (_infra_), Erskine's translation suits the context.

   [2008] The passage cut off by my asterisks has this outside
   interest that it forms the introduction to the so-called
   "Fragments", that is, to certain Turki matter not included in
   the standard _Babur-nama_, but preserved with the
   Kehr--Ilminsky--de Courteille text. As is well-known in
   Baburiana, opinion has varied as to the genesis of this
   matter; there is now no doubt that it is a translation into
   Turki from the (_Persian_) _Akbar-nama_, prefaced by the
   above-asterisked passage of the _Babur-nama_ and continuous
   (with slight omissions) from Bib. Ind. ed. i, 106 to 120 (trs.
   H. Beveridge i, 260 to 282). It covers the time from before
   the battle of Kanwa to the end of Abu'l-fazl's description of
   Babur's death, attainments and Court; it has been made to seem
   Babur's own, down to his death-bed, by changing the third
   person of A.F.'s narrative into the autobiographical first
   person. (Cf. Ilminsky, p. 403 l. 4 and p. 494; _Memoires_ ii,
   272 and 443 to 464; JRAS. 1908, p. 76.)

   A minute point in the history of the B.N. manuscripts may be
   placed on record here; _viz._ that the variants from the true
   _Babur-nama_ text which occur in the Kehr-Ilminsky one, occur
   also in the corrupt Turki text of I.O. No. 214 (JRAS 1900, p.
   455).

   [2009] _chapar kumak yitmas_, perhaps implying that the speed
   of his horses was not equal to that of Muhibb-i-'ali's.
   Translators vary as to the meaning of the phrase.

   [2010] Erskine and de Courteille both give Mustafa the
   commendation the Turki and Persian texts give to the carts.

   [2011] According to Tod's _Rajastan_, negotiations went on
   during the interval, having for their object the fixing of a
   frontier between the Rana and Babur. They were conducted by a
   "traitor" Salah'd-din _Tuar_ the chief of Raisin, who moreover
   is said to have deserted to Babur during the battle.

   [2012] Cf. f. 89 for Babur's disastrous obedience to
   astrological warning.

   [2013] For the reading of this second line, given by the good
   MSS. _viz._ _Tauba ham bi maza nist, bachash_, Ilminsky (p.
   405) has _Tauba ham bi maza, mast bakhis_, which de Courteille
   [II, 276] renders by, "_O ivrogne insense! que ne goutes-tu
   aussi a la penitence?_" The Persian couplet seems likely to
   be a quotation and may yet be found elsewhere. It is not in
   the Rampur Diwan which contains the Turki verses following it
   (E. D. Ross p. 21).

   [2014] _kichmaklik_, to pass over (to exceed?), to ford or go
   through a river, whence to transgress. The same metaphor of
   crossing a stream occurs, in connection with drinking, on f.
   189_b_.

   [2015] This line shews that Babur's renouncement was of wine
   only; he continued to eat confections (_ma'jun_).

   [2016] Cf. f. 186_b_. Babur would announce his renunciation in
   Diwan; there too the forbidden vessels of precious metals
   would be broken. His few words leave it to his readers to
   picture the memorable scene.

   [2017] This night-guard (_'asas_) cannot be the one concerning
   whom Gul-badan records that he was the victim of a little joke
   made at his expense by Babur (H. N. Index _s.n._). He seems
   likely to be the Haji Muh. _'asas_ whom Abu'l-fazl mentions in
   connection with Kamran in 953 AH. (1547 AD.). He may be the
   _'asas_ who took charge of Babur's tomb at Agra (cf.
   Gul-badan's H. N. _s.n._ Muh. 'Ali _'asas taghai_, and
   _Akbar-nama_ trs. i, 502).

   [2018] _saqali qirqmaqta u quimaqta._ Erskine here notes that
   "a vow to leave the beard untrimmed was made sometimes by
   persons who set out against the infidels. They did not trim
   the beard till they returned victorious. Some vows of similar
   nature may be found in Scripture", _e.g._ II Samuel, cap. 19
   v. 24.

   [2019] Index _s.n._ The _tamgha_ was not really abolished
   until Jahangir's time--if then (H. Beveridge). See Thomas'
   _Revenue Resources of the Mughal Empire_.

   [2020] There is this to notice here:--Babur's narrative has
   made the remission of the _tamgha_ contingent on his success,
   but the _farman_ which announced that remission is dated some
   three weeks before his victory over Rana Sanga (Jumada II,
   13th-March 16th). Manifestly Babur's remission was absolute
   and made at the date given by Shaikh Zain as that of the
   _farman_. The _farman_ seems to have been despatched as soon
   as it was ready, but may have been inserted in Babur's
   narrative at a later date, together with the preceding
   paragraph which I have asterisked.

   [2021] "There is a lacuna in the Turki copy" (_i.e._ the
   Elphinstone Codex) "from this place to the beginning of the
   year 935. Till then I therefore follow only Mr. Metcalfe's and
   my own Persian copies" (Erskine).

   [2022] I am indebted to my husband for this revised version of
   the _farman_. He is indebted to M. de Courteille for help
   generally, and specially for the references to the Qoran
   (_q.v. infra_).

   [2023] The passages in italics are Arabic in the original, and
   where traced to the Qoran, are in Sale's words.

   [2024] _Qoran, Surah_ XII, v. 53.

   [2025] _Surah_ LVII, v. 21.

   [2026] _Surah_ LVII, v. 15.

   [2027] _Surah_ VII, v. 140.

   [2028] _Surah_ II, v. 185.

   [2029] These may be self-conquests as has been understood by
   Erskine (p. 356) and de Courteille (ii. 281) but as the Divine
   "acceptance" would seem to Babur vouched for by his military
   success, "victories" may stand for his success at Kanwa.

   [2030] _Surah_ II, 177 where, in Sale's translation, the
   change referred to is the special one of altering a legacy.

   [2031] The words _diguchi_ and _yiguchi_ are translated in the
   second _Waqi'at-i-baburi_ by _sukhan-gui_ and
   [_wilayat_]_-khwar_. This ignores in them the future element
   supplied by their component _gu_ which would allow them to
   apply to conditions dependent on Babur's success. The Hai. MS.
   and Ilminsky read _tiguchi_, supporter- or helper-to-be, in
   place of the _yiguchi_, eater-to-be I have inferred from the
   _khwar_ of the Pers. translation; hence de Courteille writes
   "_amirs auxquels incombait l'obligation de raffermir le
   gouvernement_". But Erskine, using the Pers. text alone, and
   thus having _khwar_ before him, translates by, "amirs who
   enjoyed the wealth of kingdoms." The two Turki words make a
   depreciatory "jingle", but the first one, _diguchi_, may imply
   serious reference to the duty, declared by Muhammad to be
   incumbent upon a wazir, of reminding his sovereign "when he
   forgetteth his duty". Both may be taken as alluding to
   dignities to be attained by success in the encounter from
   which wazirs and amirs were shrinking.

   [2032] Firdausi's _Shah-nama_ [Erskine].

   [2033] Also Chand-wal; it is 25 m. east of Agra and on the
   Jamna [_Tabaqat-i-nasiri_, Raverty, p. 742 n.9]

   [2034] Probably, Overthrower of the rhinoceros, but if
   _Gurg-andaz_ be read, of the wolf.

   [2035] According to the Persian calendar this is the day the
   Sun enters Aries.

   [2036] The practical purpose of this order of march is shewn
   in the account of the battle of Panipat, and in the Letter of
   Victory, f. 319.

   [2037] _kurohcha_, perhaps a short _kuroh_, but I have not
   found Babur using _cha_ as a diminutive in such a case as
   _kurohcha_.

   [2038] or Kanua, in the Biana district and three marches from
   Biana-town. "It had been determined on by Rana Sangram Singh
   (_i.e._ Sanga) for the northern limit of his dominions, and he
   had here built a small palace." Tod thus describes Babur's
   foe, "Sanga Rana was of the middle stature, and of great
   muscular strength, fair in complexion, with unusually large
   eyes which appear to be peculiar to his descendants. He
   exhibited at his death but the fragments of a warrior: one eye
   was lost in the broil with his brother, an arm in action with
   the Lodi kings of Dehli, and he was a cripple owing to a limb
   being broken by a cannon-ball in another; while he counted 80
   wounds from the sword or the lance on various parts of his
   body" (Tod's _Rajastan_, cap. Annals of Mewar).

   [2039] Here M. de C. has the following note (ii, 273 n.); it
   supplements my own of f. 264 [n. 3]. "_Le mot araba, que j'ai
   traduit par chariot est pris par M. Leyden_" (this should be
   Erskine) "_dans le sens de 'gun', ce que je ne crois pas
   exact; tout au plus signifierait-il affut_" (gun-carriage).
   "_Il me parait impossible d'admettre que Baber eut a sa
   disposition une artillerie attelee aussi considerable. Ces
   araba pouvaient servir en partie a transporter des pieces de
   campagne, mais ils avaient aussi une autre destination, comme
   on le voit par la suite du recit._" It does not appear to me
   that Erskine _translates_ the word _araba_ by the word _gun_,
   but that the _arabas_ (all of which he took to be
   gun-carriages) being there, he supposed the guns. This was not
   correct as the various passages about carts as defences show
   (cf. Index _s.nn._ _araba_ and carts).

   [2040] It is characteristic of Babur that he reproduces Shaikh
   Zain's _Fath-nama_, not because of its eloquence but because
   of its useful details. Erskine and de Courteille have the
   following notes concerning Shaikh Zain's _farman_:--"Nothing
   can form a more striking contrast to the simple, manly and
   intelligent style of Baber himself, than the pompous, laboured
   periods of his secretary. Yet I have never read this Firman to
   any native of India who did not bestow unlimited admiration on
   the official bombast of Zeineddin, while I have met with none
   but Turks who paid due praise to the calm simplicity of Baber"
   [Mems. p. 359]. "_Comme la precedente (farman), cette piece
   est redigee en langue persane et offre un modele des plus
   accomplis du style en usage dans les chancelleries orientales.
   La traduction d'un semblable morceau d'eloquence est de la
   plus grande difficulte, si on veut etre clair, tout en restant
   fidele a l'original._"

   Like the Renunciation _farman_, the Letter-of-victory with its
   preceding sentence which I have asterisked, was probably
   inserted into Babur's narrative somewhat later than the battle
   of Kanwa. Hence Babur's pluperfect-tense "had indited". I am
   indebted to my husband for help in revising the difficult
   _Fath-nama_; he has done it with consideration of the variants
   between the earlier English and the French translations. No
   doubt it could be dealt with more searchingly still by one
   well-versed in the Qoran and the Traditions, and thus able to
   explain others of its allusions. The italics denote Arabic
   passages in the original; many of these are from the Qoran,
   and in tracing them M. de Courteille's notes have been most
   useful to us.

   [2041] Qoran, cap. 80, last sentence.

   [2042] Shaikh Zain, in his version of the _Babur-nama_, styles
   Babur Nawab where there can be no doubt of the application of
   the title, _viz._ in describing Shah Tahmasp's gifts to him
   (mentioned by Babur on f. 305). He uses the title also in the
   _farman_ of renunciation (f. 313_b_), but it does not appear
   in my text, "royal" (fortune) standing for it (_in loco_ p.
   555, l. 10).

   [2043] The possessive pronoun occurs several times in the
   Letter-of-victory. As there is no semblance of putting forward
   that letter as being Babur's, the pronoun seems to imply "on
   our side".

   [2044] The _Babur-nama_ includes no other than Shaikh Zain's
   about Kanwa. Those here alluded to will be the announcements
   of success at Milwat, Panipat, Dibalpur and perhaps elsewhere
   in Hindustan.

   [2045] In Jun-pur (_Ayin-i-akbari_); Elliot & Dowson note (iv,
   283-4) that it appears to have included, near Sikandarpur, the
   country on both sides of the Gogra, and thence on that river's
   left bank down to the Ganges.

   [2046] That the word Nawab here refers to Babur and not to his
   lieutenants, is shewn by his mention (f. 278) of Sanga's
   messages to himself.

   [2047] Qoran, cap. 2, v. 32. The passage quoted is part of a
   description of Satan, hence mention of Satan in Shaikh Zain's
   next sentence.

   [2048] The brahminical thread.

   [2049] _khar-i-mihnat-i-irtidad dar daman._ This Erskine
   renders by "who fixed thorns from the pangs of apostacy in the
   hem of their garments" (p. 360). Several good MSS. have
   _khar_, thorn, but Ilminsky has Ar. _khimar_, cymar, instead
   (p. 411). De Courteille renders the passage by "_portent au
   pan de leurs habits la marque douloureuse de l'apostasie_"
   (ii, 290). To read _khimar_, cymar (scarf), would serve, as a
   scarf is part of some Hindu costumes.

   [2050] Qoran, cap. 69, v. 35.

   [2051] M. Defremery, when reviewing the French translation of
   the B.N. (_Journal des Savans_ 1873), points out (p. 18) that
   it makes no mention of the "blessed ten". Erskine mentions
   them but without explanation. They are the _'asharah
   mubash-sharah_, the decade of followers of Muhammad who
   "received good tidings", and whose certain entry into Paradise
   he foretold.

   [2052] Qoran, cap. 3, v. 20. M. Defremery reads Shaikh Zain to
   mean that these words of the Qoran were on the infidel
   standards, but it would be simpler to read Shaikh Zain as
   meaning that the infidel insignia on the standards "denounce
   punishment" on their users.

   [2053] He seems to have been a Rajput convert to Muhammadanism
   who changed his Hindi name Silhadi for what Babur writes. His
   son married Sanga's daughter; his fiefs were Raisin and
   Sarangpur; he deserted to Babur in the battle of Kanwa. (Cf.
   Erskine's _History of India_ i, 471 note; _Mirat-i-sikandari_,
   Bayley's trs. _s.n._; _Akbar-nama_, H.B.'s trs. i, 261; Tod's
   _Rajastan_ cap. Mewar.)

   [2054] "Dejal or al Masih al Dajjal, the false or lying
   Messiah, is the Muhammadan Anti-christ. He is to be one-eyed,
   and marked on the forehead with the letters K.F.R. signifying
   Kafer, or Infidel. He is to appear in the latter days riding
   on an ass, and will be followed by 70,000 Jews of Ispahan, and
   will continue on the Earth 40 days, of which one will be equal
   to a year, another to a month, another to a week, and the rest
   will be common days. He is to lay waste all places, but will
   not enter Mekka or Medina, which are to be guarded by angels.
   He is finally to be slain at the gate of Lud by Jesus, for
   whom the Musalmans profess great veneration, calling him the
   breath or spirit of God.--See Sale's _Introductory Discourse to
   the Koran_" [Erskine].

   [2055] Qoran, cap. 29, v. 5.

   [2056] "This alludes to the defeat of [an Abyssinian
   Christian] Abraha the prince of Yemen who [in the year of
   Muhammad's birth] marched his army and some elephants to
   destroy the _ka'ba_ of Makka. 'The Meccans,' says Sale, 'at
   the appearance of so considerable a host, retired to the
   neighbouring mountains, being unable to defend their city or
   temple. But God himself undertook the defence of both. For
   when Abraha drew near to Mecca, and would have entered it, the
   elephant on which he rode, which was a very large one and
   named Mahmud, refused to advance any nigher to the town, but
   knelt down whenever they endeavoured to force him that way,
   though he would rise and march briskly enough if they turned
   him towards any other quarter; and while matters were in this
   posture, on a sudden a large flock of birds, like swallows,
   came flying from the sea-coast, every-one of which carried
   three stones, one in each foot and one in its bill; and these
   stones they threw down upon the heads of Abraha's men,
   certainly killing every one they struck.' The rest were swept
   away by a flood or perished by a plague, Abraha alone reaching
   Senaa, where he also died" [Erskine]. The above is taken from
   Sale's note to the 105 chapter of the Qoran, entitled "the
   Elephant".

   [2057] Presumably black by reason of their dark large mass.

   [2058] Presumably, devouring as fire.

   [2059] This is 50 m. long and blocked the narrow pass of the
   Caspian Iron-gates. It ends south of the Russian town of
   Dar-band, on the west shore of the Caspian. Erskine states
   that it was erected to repress the invasions of Yajuj and
   Mujuj (Gog and Magog).

   [2060] Qoran, cap. lxi, v. 4.

   [2061] Qoran, cap. ii, v. 4. Erskine appears to quote another
   verse.

   [2062] Qoran, cap. xlviii, v. 1.

   [2063] Index _s.n._

   [2064] _Khirad_, Intelligence or the first Intelligence, was
   supposed to be the guardian of the empyreal heaven (Erskine).

   [2065] Chin-timur _Chingiz-khanid Chaghatai_ is called Babur's
   brother because a (maternal-) cousin of Babur's own
   generation, their last common ancestor being Yunas Khan.

   [2066] Sulaiman _Timurid Miran-shahi_ is called Babur's son
   because his father was of Babur's generation, their last
   common ancestor being Sl. Abu-sa'id Mirza. He was 13 years old
   and, through Shah Begim, hereditary shah of Badakhshan.

   [2067] The Shaikh was able, it would appear, to see himself as
   others saw him, since the above description of him is his own.
   It is confirmed by Abu'l-fazl and Badayuni's accounts of his
   attainments.

   [2068] The honourable post given to this amir of Hind is
   likely to be due to his loyalty to Babur.

   [2069] Ahmad may be a nephew of Yusuf of the same agnomen
   (Index _s.nn._).

   [2070] I have not discovered the name of this old servant or
   the meaning of his seeming-sobriquet, Hindu. As a _quchin_ he
   will have been a Mughul or Turk. The circumstance of his
   service with a son of Mahmud _Miran-shahi_ (down to 905 AH.)
   makes it possible that he drew his name in his youth from the
   tract s.e. of Mahmud's Hisar territory which has been known as
   Little Hind (Index _s.n._ Hind). This is however conjecture
   merely. Another suggestion is that as _hindu_ can mean
   _black_, it may stand for the common _qara_ of the Turks,
   _e.g._ Qara Barlas, Black Barlas.

   [2071] I am uncertain whether Qara-quzi is the name of a
   place, or the jesting sobriquet of more than one meaning it
   can be.

   [2072] Soul-full, animated; var. Hai. MS. _khan-dar_. No
   agnomen is used for Asad by Babur. The _Akbar-nama_ varies to
   _jamadar_, wardrobe-keeper, cup-holder (_Bib. Ind._ ed. i,
   107), and Firishta to _sar-jamadar_, head wardrobe-keeper
   (lith. ed. p. 209 top). It would be surprising to find such an
   official sent as envoy to 'Iraq, as Asad was both before and
   after he fought at Kanwa.

   [2073] son of Daulat Khan _Yusuf-khail Ludi_.

   [2074] These are the titles of the 20th and 36th chapters of
   the Qoran; Sale offers conjectural explanations of them. The
   "family" is Muhammad's.

   [2075] a Bai-qara Timurid of Babur's generation, their last
   common ancestor being Timur himself.

   [2076] an Auzbeg who married a daughter of Sl. Husain M.
   _Bai-qara_.

   [2077] It has been pointed out to me that there is a Chinese
   title of nobility _Yun-wang_, and that it may be behind the
   words _jang-jang_. Though the suggestion appears to me
   improbable, looking to the record of Babur's officer, to the
   prevalence of sobriquets amongst his people, and to what would
   be the sporadic appearance of a Chinese title or even
   class-name borne by a single man amongst them. I add this
   suggestion to those of my note on the meaning of the words
   (Index _s.n._ Muh. 'Ali). The title _Jun-wang_ occurs in Dr.
   Denison Ross' _Three MSS. from Kashghar_, p. 5, v. 5 and
   translator's preface, p. 14.

   [2078] Cf. f. 266 and f. 299. _Yaragi_ may be the name of his
   office, (from _yaraq_) and mean provisioner of arms or food or
   other military requirements.

   [2079] or, Tardi _yakka_, the champion, Gr. _monomachus_ (A.
   N. trs. i, 107 n.).

   [2080] var. 1 watch and 2 _g'haris_; the time will have been
   between 9 and 10 a.m.

   [2081] _juldu ba nam al 'aziz-i-baradar shud_, a phrase not
   easy to translate.

   [2082] _viz._ those chained together as a defence and probably
   also those conveying the culverins.

   [2083] The comparison may be between the darkening smoke of
   the fire-arms and the heresy darkening pagan hearts.

   [2084] There appears to be a distinction of title between the
   _akhta-begi_ and the _mir-akhwur_ (master of the horse).

   [2085] Qoran, cap. 14, v. 33.

   [2086] These two men were in one of the flanking-parties.

   [2087] This phrase "our brother" would support the view that
   Shaikh Zain wrote as for Babur, if there were not, on the
   other hand, mention of Babur as His Majesty, and the precious
   royal soul.

   [2088] _diwanian_ here may mean those associated with the
   wazir in his duties: and not those attending at Court.

   [2089] Qoran, cap. 14, v. 52.

   [2090] Index _s.n. chuhra_ (a brave).

   [2091] _hizabran-i-besha yakrangi_, literally, forest-tigers
   (or, lions) of one hue.

   [2092] There may be reference here to the chains used to
   connect the carts into a defence.

   [2093] The braves of the _khasa tabin_ were part of Babur's
   own centre.

   [2094] perhaps the cataphract elephants; perhaps the men in
   mail.

   [2095] Qoran, cap. 101, v. 54.

   [2096] Qoran, cap. 101, v. 4.

   [2097] _ba andakhtan-i-sang u zarb-zan tufak bisyari._ As
   Babur does not in any place mention metal missiles, it seems
   safest to translate _sang_ by its plain meaning of _stone_.

   [2098] Also, metaphorically, swords.

   [2099] _tir._ My husband thinks there is a play upon the two
   meanings of this word, arrow and the planet Mercury; so too in
   the next sentence, that there may be allusion in the _kuakib
   sawabit_ to the constellation Pegasus, opposed to Babur's
   squadrons of horse.

   [2100] The Fish mentioned in this verse is the one pictured by
   Muhammadan cosmogony as supporting the Earth. The violence of
   the fray is illustrated by supposing that of Earth's seven
   climes one rose to Heaven in dust, thus giving Heaven eight.
   The verse is from Firdausi's _Shah-nama_, [Turner-Macan's ed.
   i, 222]. The translation of it is Warner's, [ii, 15 and n.]. I
   am indebted for the information given in this note to my
   husband's long search in the _Shah-nama_.

   [2101] Qoran, cap. 3, v. 133.

   [2102] Qoran, cap. 61, v. 13.

   [2103] Qoran, cap. 48, v. 1.

   [2104] Qoran, cap. 48, v. 3.

   [2105] [see p. 572] _farash_. De Courteille, reading _firash_,
   translates this metaphor by _comme un lit lorsqu'il est
   defait_. He refers to Qoran, cap. 101, v. 3. A better metaphor
   for the breaking up of an army than that of moths scattering,
   one allowed by the word _farash_, but possibly not by
   Muhammad, is _vanished like bubbles on wine_.

   [2106] Bagar is an old name for Dungarpur and Banswara [_G. of
   I._ vi, 408 _s.n._ Banswara].

   [2107] _sic_, Hai. MS. and may be so read in I.O. 217 f.
   220_b___; Erskine writes Bikersi (p. 367) and notes the
   variant Nagersi; Ilminsky (p. 421) N:krsi; de Courteille (ii.
   307) Niguersi.

   [2108] Cf. f. 318_b_, and note, where it is seen that the
   stones which killed the lords of the Elephants were so small
   as to be carried in the bill of a bird like a swallow. Were
   such stones used in matchlocks in Babur's day?

   [2109] _guzaran_, var. _gurazan_, caused to flee and hogs
   (Erskine notes the double-meaning).

   [2110] This passage, entered in some MSS. as if verse, is made
   up of Qoran, cap. 17, v. 49, cap. 33, v. 38, and cap. 3, v.
   122.

   [2111] As the day of battle was Jumada II. 13th (March 16th),
   the _Fath-nama_ was ready and dated twelve days after that
   battle. It was started for Kabul on Rajab 9th (April 11th).
   Something may be said here appropriately about the surmise
   contained in Dr. Ilminsky's Preface and M. de Courteille's
   note to _Memoires_ ii, 443 and 450, to the effect that Babur
   wrote a plain account of the battle of Kanwa and for this in
   his narrative substituted Shaikh Zain's _Fath-nama_, and that
   the plain account has been preserved in Kehr's _Babur-nama_
   volume [whence Ilminsky reproduced it, it was translated by M.
   de Courteille and became known as a "Fragment" of Baburiana].
   Almost certainly both scholars would have judged adversely of
   their suggestion by the light of to-day's easier research. The
   following considerations making against its value, may be set
   down:--

   (1) There is no sign that Babur ever wrote a plain account of
   the battle or any account of it. There is against his doing so
   his statement that he inserts Shaikh Zain's _Fath-nama_
   because it gives particulars. If he had written any account,
   it would be found preceding the _Fath-nama_, as his account of
   his renunciation of wine precedes Shaikh Zain's _Farman_
   announcing the act.

   (2) Moreover, the "Fragment" cannot be described as a plain
   account such as would harmonize with Babur's style; it is in
   truth highly rhetorical, though less so as Shaikh Zain's.

   (3) The "Fragment" begins with a quotation from the
   _Babur-nama_ (f.310_b_ and n.), skips a good deal of Babur's
   matter preliminary to the battle, and passes on with what
   there can be no doubt is a translation in inferior Turki of
   the _Akbar-nama_ account.

   (4) The whole of the extra matter is seen to be continuous and
   not fragmentary, if it is collated with the chapter in which
   Abu'l-fazl describes the battle, its sequel of events, the
   death, character, attainments, and Court of Babur. Down to the
   death, it is changed to the first person so as to make Babur
   seem to write it. The probable concocter of it is Jahangir.

   (5) If the Fragment were Babur's composition, where was it
   when 'Abdu-r-rahim translated the _Babur-nama_ in 998 AH.-1590
   AD.; where too did Abu'l-fazl find it to reproduce in the
   _Akbar-nama_?

   (6) The source of Abu'l-fazl's information seems without doubt
   to be Babur's own narrative and Shaikh Zain's _Fath-nama_.
   There are many significant resemblances between the two
   rhetoricians' metaphors and details selected.

   (7) A good deal might be said of the dissimilarities between
   Babur's diction and that of the "Fragment". But this is
   needless in face of the larger and more circumstantial
   objections already mentioned.

   (For a fuller account of the "Fragment" see JRAS. Jan. 1906
   pp. 81, 85 and 1908 p. 75 ff.)

   [2112] _Tughra_ means an imperial signature also, but would
   Babur sign Shaikh Zain's _Fath-i-nama_? His autograph verse at
   the end of the _Rampur Diwan_ has his signature following it.
   He is likely to have signed this verse. Cf. App. Q. [Erskine
   notes that titles were written on the back of despatches, an
   unlikely place for the quatrain, one surmises.]

   [2113] This is in the _Rampur diwan_ (E.D.R. Plate 17). Dr. E.
   Denison Ross points out (p. 17 n.) that in the 2nd line the
   Hai. Codex varies from the _Diwan_. The MS. is wrong; it
   contains many inaccuracies in the latter part of the Hindustan
   section, perhaps due to a change of scribe.

   [2114] These words by _abjad_ yield 933. From Babur's use of
   the pluperfect tense, I think it may be inferred that (my)
   Sections _a_ and _b_ are an attachment to the _Fath-nama_,
   entered with it at a somewhat later date.

   [2115] My translation of this puzzling sentence is tentative
   only.

   [2116] This statement shews that the Dibalpur affair occurred
   in one of the B.N. gaps, and in 930 AH. The words make 330 by
   _abjad_. It may be noted here that on f. 312_b_ and notes
   there are remarks concerning whether Babur's remission of the
   _tamgha_ was contingent on his winning at Kanwa. If the
   remission had been delayed until his victory was won, it would
   have found fitting mention with the other sequels of victory
   chronicled above; as it is not with these sequels, it may be
   accepted as an absolute remission, proclaimed before the
   fight. The point was a little uncertain owing to the seemingly
   somewhat deferred insertion in Babur's narrative of Shaikh
   Zain's _Farman_.

   [2117] _da'ira_, presumably a defended circle. As the word
   _aurdu_ [bracketed in the text] shows, Babur used it both for
   his own and for Sanga's camps.

   [2118] Hence the Rana escaped. He died in this year, not
   without suspicion of poison.

   [2119] _aichimni khali qildim_, a seeming equivalent for
   English, "I poured out my spleen."

   [2120] var. _maluk_ as _e.g._ in I.O. 217 f.225_b_, and also
   elsewhere in the _Babur-nama_.

   [2121] On f. 315 the acts attributed to Ilias Khan are said to
   have been done by a "mannikin called Rustam Khan". Neither
   name appears elsewhere in the B.N.; the hero's name seems a
   sarcasm on the small man.

   [2122] Babur so-calls both Hasan and his followers, presumably
   because they followed their race sympathies, as of Rajput
   origin, and fought against co-religionists. Though Hasan's
   subjects, Meos, were nominally Muhammadans, it appears that
   they practised some Hindu customs. For an account of Miwat,
   see _Gazetteer of Ulwur_ (Alwar, Alur) by Major P. W. Powlett.

   [2123] Alwar being in Miwat, Babur may mean that bodies were
   found beyond that town in the main portion of the Miwat
   country which lies north of Alwar towards Dihli.

   [2124] Major Powlett speaking (p. 9) of the revenue Miwat paid
   to Babur, quotes Thomas as saying that the coins stated in
   Babur's Revenue Accounts, _viz._ 169,810,00 _tankas_ were
   probably Sikandari _tankas_, or Rs. 8,490,50.

   [2125] This word appears to have been restricted in its use to
   the Khan-zadas of the ruling house in Miwat, and was not used
   for their subjects, the Meos (Powlett _l.c._ Cap. I.). The
   uses of "Miwati" and "Meo" suggest something analogous with
   those of "Chaghatai" and "Mughul" in Babur's time. The
   resemblance includes mutual dislike and distrust (Powlett
   _l.c._).

   [2126] _qilurlar aikan dur._ This presumptive past tense is
   frequently used by the cautious Babur. I quote it here and in
   a few places near-following because it supports Shaw's
   statement that in it the use of _aikan_ (_ikan_) reduces the
   positive affirmation of the perfect to presumption or rumour.
   With this statement all grammarians are not agreed; it is
   fully supported by the _Babur-nama_.

   [2127] Contrast here is suggested between Sultans of Dihli &
   Hind; is it between the greater Turks with whom Babur classes
   himself immediately below as a conqueror of Hind, and the Ludi
   Sultans of Dihli?

   [2128] The strength of the Tijara hills towards Dihli is
   historical (Powlett _l.c._ p. 132).

   [2129] This is one of the names of the principal river which
   flows eastwards to the south of Alwar town; other names are
   Barah and Ruparel. Powlett notes that it appears in Thorn's
   Map of the battle of Laswarree (1803 AD.), which he reproduces
   on p. 146. But it is still current in Gurgaon, with also a
   variant Manas-le, man-killer (_G. of Gurgaon_ 1910 AD. ivA,
   p.6).

   [2130] _aultururlar aikan dur_, the presumptive past tense.

   [2131] f.308.

   [2132] _qilghan aikan dur_, the presumptive past tense.

   [2133] _Sultan atigha juldu bulub_; Pers. trs. _Juldu ba nam-i
   Sultan shud_. The _juldu_ guerdon seems to be apart from the
   fief and allowance.

   [2134] f. 315.

   [2135] Babur does not record this detail (f. 315).

   [2136] f. 298_b_ and f. 328_b_. Ja'far is mentioned as Mahdi's
   son by Gul-badan and in the _Habibu's-siyar_ iii, 311, 312.

   [2137] f. 388_b_.

   [2138] The town of Firuzpur is commonly known as
   Firuzpur-jhirka (Firuzpur of the spring), from a small
   perennial stream which issues from a number of fissures in the
   rocks bordering the road through a pass in the Miwat hills
   which leads from the town _via_ Tijara to Rewari (_G. of
   Gurgaon_, p. 249). In Abu'l-fazl's day there was a Hindu
   shrine of Mahadeo near the spring, which is still a place of
   annual pilgrimage. The Kutila lake is called Kotla-_jhil_ in
   the _G. of G._ (p. 7). It extends now 3 m. by 2-1/2 m. varying
   in size with the season; in Abu'l-fazl's day it was 4 _kos_ (8
   m.) round. It lies partly in the district of Nuh, partly in
   Gurgaon, where the two tracts join at the foot of the Alwar
   hills.

   [2139] This is the frequently mentioned size for reservoirs;
   the measure here is probably the _qari_, _cir._ a yard.

   [2140] Babur does not state it as a fact known to himself that
   the Manas-ni falls into the Kutila lake; it did so formerly,
   but now does not, tradition assigning a cause for the change
   (_G. of G._ p. 6). He uses the hear-say tense, _kirar aimish_.

   [2141] Khari and Toda were in Akbar's _sarkar_ of Rantambhor.

   [2142] Bhosawar is in Bhurtpur, and Chausa (or Jusa) may be
   the Chausath of the _Ayin-i-akbari_, ii, 183.

   [2143] As has been noted frequently, this phrase stands for
   artificial water-courses.

   [2144] Certainly Trans-Hindu-kush lands; presumably also those
   of Trans-Indus, Kabul in chief.

   [2145] _austi_; perhaps the reservoir was so built as to
   contain the bubbling spring.

   [2146] _Chun ja'i khwush karda am._

   [2147] f. 315.

   [2148] var. Janwar (Jarrett). It is 25 m. east of Agra on the
   Muttra-Etawa road (_G. of I._).

   [2149] _kucha-band_, perhaps a barricade at the limit of a
   suburban lane.

   [2150] This has been mentioned already (f. 327).

   [2151] f. 315.

   [2152] _i.e._ those professedly held for Babur.

   [2153] Or, according to local pronunciation, Badayun.

   [2154] This is the old name of Shahabad in Rampur (_G. of I._
   xxii, 197). The _A.-i-A._ locates it in Sambal. Cf. E. and
   D.'s _History of India_, iv, 384 n. and v. 215 n.

   [2155] Perhaps the one in Sitapur.

   [2156] f. 305_b_.

   [2157] As the Elphinstone Codex which is the treasure-house of
   Humayun's notes, has a long _lacuna_ into which this episode
   falls, it is not known if the culprit entered in his copy of
   the _Babur-nama_ a marginal excuse for his misconduct (cf. f.
   252 and n.); such excuse was likely to be that he knew he
   would be forgiven by his clement father.

   [2158] f. 305_b_.

   [2159] Kamran would be in Qandahar. Erskine notes that the sum
   sent to him would be about L750, but that if the coins were
   rupis, it would be L30,000.

   [2160] _qita'_, for account of which form of poem _see_
   Blochmann's translations of Saifi's and Jami's _Prosody_, p.
   86.

   [2161] _Rampur Diwan_ (E. D. Ross' ed. p. 16 and Plate 14_a_).
   I am uncertain as to the meaning of ll. 4 and 10. I am not
   sure that what in most MSS. ends line 4, _viz._ _aul dam_,
   should not be read as _aulum_, death; this is allowed by Plate
   14a where for space the word is divided and may be _aulum_. To
   read _aulum_ and that the deserters fled from the death in
   Hind they were anxious about, has an answering phrase in "we
   still are alive". Ll. 9 and 10 perhaps mean that in the things
   named all have done alike. [Ilminsky reads _khair nafsi_ for
   the elsewhere _hazz-nafsi_.]

   [2162] These are 20 attitudes (_rak'ah_) assumed in prayer
   during Ramzan after the Bed-time Prayer. The ablution
   (_ghusl_) is the bathing of the whole body for ceremonial
   purification.

   [2163] This Feast is the 'Id-i-fitr, held at the breaking of
   the Ramzan Fast on the 1st of Shawwal.

   [2164] Erskine notes that this is the earliest mention of
   playing-cards he can recall in oriental literature.

   [2165] f. 339_b_.

   [2166] The two varieties mentioned by Babur seem to be
   _Diospyrus melanoxylon_, the wood of which is called _tindu
   abnus_ in Hindustani, and _D. tomentosa_, Hindi, _tindu_
   (Brandis _s.nn._). Bari is 19 m. west of Dulpur.

   [2167] _mi'ad_, perhaps the time at which the Shaikh was to
   appear before Babur.

   [2168] The Pers. trs. makes the more definite statement that
   what had to be read was a Section of the Qoran (_wird_). This
   was done with remedial aim for the illness.

   [2169] As this statement needs comment, and as it is linked to
   matters mentioned in the _Rampur Diwan_, it seems better to
   remit remarks upon it to Appendix Q, _Some matters concerning
   the Rampur Diwan_.

   [2170] _risala._ _See_ Appendix Q.

   [2171] Elph. MS. _lacuna_; I.O. 215 _lacuna_ and 217 f. 229;
   Mems. p. 373. This year's narrative resumes the diary form.

   [2172] There is some uncertainty about these names and also as
   to which adversary crossed the river. The sentence which, I
   think, shews, by its plural verb, that Humayun left two men
   and, by its co-ordinate participles, that it was they crossed
   the river, is as follows:--(Darwish and Yusuf, understood)
   _Qutb Sirwani-ni u bir para rajalar-ni bir darya autub
   aurushub yakshi basib turlar_. _Autub_, _aurushub_ and _basib_
   are grammatically referable to the same subject, [whatever was
   the fact about the crossing].

   [2173] _bir darya_; W.-i-B. 217 f. 229, _yak darya_, one
   river, but many MSS. _har darya_, every river. If it did not
   seem pretty certain that the rebels were not in the
   Miyan-du-ab one would surmise the river to be "one river" of
   the two enclosing the tract "between the waters", and that one
   to be the Ganges. It may be one near Sambhal, east of the
   Ganges.

   [2174] var. Shirwani. The place giving the cognomen may be
   Sarwan, a _thakurat_ of the Malwa Agency (_G. of I._). Qutb of
   Sirwan may be the Qutb Khan of earlier mention without the
   cognomen.

   [2175] n.w. of Aligarh (Kul). It may be noted here, where
   instances begin to be frequent, that my translation "we
   marched" is an evasion of the Turki impersonal "it was
   marched". Most rarely does Babur write "we marched", never, "I
   marched."

   [2176] in the Aligarh (Kul) district; it is the Sikandara Rao
   of the _A.-i-A._ and the _G. of I._

   [2177] _Rampur Diwan_ (E. D. Ross' ed., p. 19, Plate 16_b_).
   This _Diwan_ contains other quatrains which, judging from
   their contents, may well be those Babur speaks of as also
   composed in Sambal. _See_ Appendix Q, _Some matters concerning
   the Rampur Diwan_.

   [2178] These are aunts of Babur, daughters of Sl. Abu-sa'id
   _Miran-shahi_.

   [2179] Sikandarabad is in the Buland-shahr district of the
   United Provinces.

   [2180] It is not clear whether Babur returned from Sikri on
   the day he started for Jalisir; no question of distance would
   prevent him from making the two journeys on the Monday.

   [2181] As this was the rendezvous for the army, it would be
   convenient if it lay between Agra and Anwar; as it was 6 m.
   from Agra, the only mapped place having approximately the name
   Jalisir, _viz._ Jalesar, in Etah, seems too far away.

   [2182] Anwar would be suitably the Unwara of the _Indian
   Atlas_, which is on the first important southward dip of the
   Jumna below Agra. Chandwar is 25 m. east of Agra, on the
   Muttra-Etawah road (_G. of I._); Jarrett notes that
   Tiefenthaler identifies it with Firuzabad (_A.-i-A._ ii, 183
   n.).

   [2183] In the district of Kalpi. The name does not appear in
   maps I have seen.

   [2184] _agha_, Anglice, uncle. He was Sa'id Khan of Kashghar.
   Haidar M. says Baba Sl. was a spoiled child and died without
   mending his ways.

   [2185] From Kalpi Babur will have taken the road to the s.w.
   near which now runs the Cawnpur (Kanhpur) branch of the Indian
   Midland Railway, and he must have crossed the Betwa to reach
   Irij (Irich, _Indian Atlas_, Sheet 69 N.W.).

   [2186] Leaving Irij, Babur will have recrossed the Betwa and
   have left its valley to go west to Bandir (Bhander) on the
   Pahuj (_Indian Atlas_, Sheet 69 S.W.).

   [2187] beneficent, or Muhassan, comely.

   [2188] The one man of this name mentioned in the _B.N._ is an
   amir of Sl. Husain _Bai-qara_.

   [2189] It seems safe to take Kachwa [Kajwa] as the Kajwarra of
   Ibn Batuta, and the Kadwaha (Kadwaia) of the _Indian Atlas_,
   Sheet 52 N.E. and of Luard's _Gazetteer_ _of Gwalior_ (i,
   247), which is situated in 24 deg. 58' N. and 77 deg. 57' E. Each
   of the three names is of a place standing on a lake; Ibn Batuta's
   lake was a league (4 m.) long, Babur's about 11 miles round;
   Luard mentions no lake, but the _Indian Atlas_ marks one quite
   close to Kadwaha of such form as to seem to have a tongue of
   land jutting into it from the north-west, and thus suiting
   Babur's description of the site of Kachwa. Again,--Ibn Batuta
   writes of Kajwarra as having, round its lake, idol-temples;
   Luard says of Kadwaha that it has four idol-temples standing
   and nine in ruins; there may be hinted something special about
   Babur's Kachwa by his remark that he encouraged its people,
   and this speciality may be interaction between Muhammadanism
   and Hinduism serving here for the purpose of identification.
   For Ibn Batuta writes of the people of Kajwarra that they were
   _jogis_, yellowed by asceticism, wearing their hair long and
   matted, and having Muhammadan followers who desired to learn
   their (occult?) secrets. If the same interaction existed in
   Babur's day, the Muhammadan following of the Hindu ascetics
   may well have been the special circumstance which led him to
   promise protection to those Hindus, even when he was out for
   Holy-war. It has to be remembered of Chandiri, the nearest
   powerful neighbour of Kadwaha, that though Babur's capture
   makes a vivid picture of Hinduism in it, it had been under
   Muhammadan rulers down to a relatively short time before his
   conquest. The _jogis_ of Kachwa could point to long-standing
   relations of tolerance by the Chandiri Governors; this, with
   their Muhammadan following, explains the encouragement Babur
   gave them, and helps to identify Kachwa with Kajarra. It may
   be observed that Babur was familiar with the interaction of
   the two creeds, witness his "apostates", mostly Muhammadans
   following Hindu customs, witness too, for the persistent fact,
   the reports of District-officers under the British _Raj_.
   Again,--a further circumstance helping to identify Kajwarra,
   Kachwa and Kadwaha is that these are names of the last
   important station the traveller and the soldier, as well
   perhaps as the modern wayfarer, stays in before reaching
   Chandiri. The importance of Kajwarra is shewn by Ibn Batuta,
   and of Kadwaha by its being a _mahall_ in Akbar's _sarkar_ of
   Bayawan of the _suba_ of Agra. Again,--Kadwaha is the place
   nearest to Chandiri about which Babur's difficulties as to
   intermediate road and jungle would arise. That intermediate
   road takes off the main one a little south of Kadwaha and runs
   through what looks like a narrow valley and broken country
   down to Bhamor, Bhuranpur and Chandiri. Again,--no bar to
   identification of the three names is placed by their
   differences of form, in consideration of the vicissitudes they
   have weathered in tongue, script, and transliteration. There
   is some ground, I believe, for surmising that their common
   source is _kajur_, the date-fruit. [I am indebted to my
   husband for the help derived from Ibn Batuta, traced by him in
   Sanguinetti's trs. iv, 33, and S. Lee's trs. p. 162.]

   (Two places similar in name to Kachwa, and situated on Babur's
   route _viz._ Kocha near Jhansi, and Kuchoowa north of Kadwaha
   (Sheet 69 S.W.) are unsuitable for his "Kachwa", the first
   because too near Bandir to suit his itinerary, the second
   because too far from the turn off the main-road mentioned
   above, because it has no lake, and has not the help in
   identification detailed above of Kadwaha.)

   [2190] _qurughir_ which could mean also _reserved_ (from the
   water?).

   [2191] _qazan._ There seems to have been one only; how few
   Babur had is shewn again on f. 337.

   [2192] _Indian Atlas_, Sheet 52 N.E. near a tributary of the
   Betwa, the Or, which appears to be Babur's Burhanpur-water.

   [2193] The bed of the Betwa opposite Chandiri is 1050 ft.
   above the sea; the walled-town (_qurghan_) of Chandiri is on a
   table-land 250 ft. higher, and its citadel is 230 ft. higher
   again (Cunningham's _Archeological Survey Report_, 1871 A.D.
   ii, 404).

   [2194] The plan of Chandiri illustrating Cunningham's Report
   (_see_ last note) allows surmise about the road taken by
   Babur, surmise which could become knowledge if the names of
   tanks he gives were still known. The courtesy of the
   Government of India allows me to reproduce that plan [Appendix
   R, _Chandiri_ and _Gwaliawar]_.

   [2195] He is said to have been Governor of Chandiri in 1513
   AD.

   [2196] Here and in similar passages the word _m:ljar_ or
   _m:lchar_ is found in MSS. where the meaning is that of T.
   _buljar_. It is not in any dictionary I have seen; Mr. Irvine
   found it "obscure" and surmised it to mean "approach by
   trenches", but this does not suit its uses in the _Babur-nama_
   of a military post, and a rendezvous. This surmise,
   containing, as it does, a notion of protection, links _m:ljar_
   in sense with Ar. _malja'_. The word needs expert
   consideration, in order to decide whether it is to be received
   into dictionaries, or to be rejected because explicable as the
   outcome of unfamiliarity in Persian scribes with T. _buljar_
   or, _more Persico_ with narrowed vowels, _buljar_. Shaw in his
   Vocabulary enters _buljaq_ (_buljar_?), "a station for troops,
   a rendezvous, see _malja'_," thus indicating, it would seem,
   that he was aware of difficulty about _m:ljar_ and _buljaq_
   (_buljar_?). There appears no doubt of the existence of a
   Turki word _buljar_ with the meanings Shaw gives to _buljaq_;
   it could well be formed from the root _bul_, being, whence
   follows, being in a place, posted. _Malja_ has the meaning of
   a standing-place, as well as those of a refuge and an asylum;
   both meanings seem combined in the _m:ljar_ of f. 336_b_,
   where for matchlockmen a _m:ljar_ was ordered "raised". (Cf.
   Irvine's _Army of the Indian Moghuls_ p. 278.)

   [2197] _yaghda_; Pers. trs. _sar-ashib_. Babur's remark seems
   to show that for effect his mortar needed to be higher than
   its object. Presumably it stood on the table-land north of the
   citadel.

   [2198] _shatu._ It may be noted that this word, common in
   accounts of Babur's sieges, may explain one our friend the
   late Mr. William Irvine left undecided (_l.c._ p. 278), _viz._
   _shatur_. On p. 281 he states that _narduban_ is the name of a
   scaling-ladder and that Babur mentions scaling ladders more
   than once. Babur mentions them however always as _shatu_.
   Perhaps _shatur_ which, as Mr. Irvine says, seems to be made
   of the trunks of trees and to be a siege appliance, is really
   _shatu u_ ... (ladder and ...) as in the passage under note
   and on f. 216_b_, some other name of an appliance following.

   [2199] The word here preceding _tura_ has puzzled scribes and
   translators. I have seen the following variants in
   MSS.;--_nukri_ or _tukri_, _b:kri_ or _y:kri_, _bukri_ or
   _yukri_, _bukrai_ or _yukrai_, in each of which the _k_ may
   stand for _g_. Various suggestions might be made as to what
   the word is, but all involve reading the Persian enclitic _i_
   (forming the adjective) instead of Turki _lik_. Two roots,
   _tig_ and _yug_, afford plausible explanations of the unknown
   word; appliances suiting the case and able to bear names
   formed from one or other of these roots are _wheeled
   mantelet_, and _head-strike_ (P. _sar-kob_). That the word is
   difficult is shewn not only by the variants I have quoted, but
   by Erskine's reading _naukari tura_, "to serve the _turas_," a
   requisite not specified earlier by Babur, and by de
   Courteille's paraphrase, _tout ce qui est necessaire aux
   touras_.

   [2200] Sl. Nasiru'd-din was the Khilji ruler of Malwa from 906
   to 916 A.H. (1500-1510 AD.).

   [2201] He was a Rajput who had been prime-minister of Sl.
   Mahmud II. _Khilji_ (son of Nasiru'd-din) and had rebelled.
   Babur (like some other writers) spells his name Mindni,
   perhaps as he heard it spoken.

   [2202] Presumably the one in the United Provinces. For
   Shamsabad in Gualiar _see_ Luard _l.c._ i, 286.

   [2203] _chiqti_; Pers. trs. _bar amad_ and, also in some MSS.
   _nami bar amad_; Mems. p. 376, "averse to conciliation";
   _Mems._ ii, 329, "_s'eleverent contre cette proposition_." So
   far I have not found Babur using the verb _chiqmaq_
   metaphorically. It is his frequent verb to express "getting
   away", "going out of a fort". It would be a short step in
   metaphor to understand here that Medini's men "got out of it",
   _i.e._ what Babur offered. They may have left the fort also;
   if so, it would be through dissent.

   [2204] f. 332.

   [2205] I.O. 217, f. 231, inserts here what seems a gloss, "_Ta
   in ja Farsi farmuda_" (_gufta_, said). As Babur enters his
   speech in Persian, it is manifest that he used Persian to
   conceal the bad news.

   [2206] The _Illustrated London News_ of July 10th, 1915 (on
   which day this note is written), has an apropos picture of an
   ancient fortress-gun, with its stone-ammunition, taken by the
   Allies in a Dardanelles fort.

   [2207] The _du-tahi_ is the _ab-duzd_, water-thief, of f. 67.
   Its position can be surmised from Cunningham's Plan [Appendix
   R].

   [2208] For Babur's use of hand (_qul_) as a military term
   _see_ f. 209.

   [2209] His full designation would be Shah Muhammad _yuz-begi_.

   [2210] This will be flight from the ramparts to other places
   in the fort.

   [2211] Babur's account of the siege of Chandiri is incomplete,
   inasmuch as it says nothing of the general massacre of pagans
   he has mentioned on f. 272. Khwafi Khan records the massacre,
   saying, that after the fort was surrendered, as was done on
   condition of safety for the garrison, from 3 to 4000 pagans
   were put to death by Babur's troops on account of hostility
   shewn during the evacuation of the fort. The time assigned to
   the massacre is previous to the _juhar_ of 1000 women and
   children and the self-slaughter of men in Medini Rao's house,
   in which he himself died. It is not easy to fit the two
   accounts in; this might be done, however, by supposing that a
   folio of Babur's MS. was lost, as others seem lost at the end
   of the narrative of this year's events (_q.v._). The lost
   folio would tell of the surrender, one clearly affecting the
   mass of Rajput followers and not the chiefs who stood for
   victory or death and who may have made sacrifice to honour
   after hearing of the surrender. Babur's narrative in this part
   certainly reads less consecutive than is usual with him;
   something preceding his account of the _juhar_ would improve
   it, and would serve another purpose also, since mention of the
   surrender would fix a term ending the now too short time of
   under one hour he assigns as the duration of the fighting. If
   a surrender had been mentioned, it would be clear that his "2
   or 3 _garis_" included the attacking and taking of the
   _du-tahi_ and down to the retreat of the Rajputs from the
   walls. On this Babur's narrative of the unavailing sacrifice
   of the chiefs would follow in due order. Khwafi Khan is more
   circumstantial than Firishta who says nothing of surrender or
   massacre, but states that 6000 men were killed fighting.
   Khwafi Khan's authorities may throw light on the matter, which
   so far does not hang well together in any narrative, Babur's,
   Firishta's, or Khwafi Khan's. One would like to know what led
   such a large body of Rajputs to surrender so quickly; had they
   been all through in favour of accepting terms? One wonders,
   again, why from 3 to 4000 Rajputs did not put up a better
   resistance to massacre. Perhaps their assailants were Turks,
   stubborn fighters down to 1915 AD.

   [2212] For suggestion about the brevity of this period, _see_
   last note.

   [2213] Clearly, without Babur's taking part in the fighting.

   [2214] These words by _abjad_ make 934. The Hai. MS.
   mistakenly writes _Bud Chandiri_ in the first line of the
   quatrain instead of _Bud chandi_. Khwafi Khan quotes the
   quatrain with slight variants.

   [2215] _Chandiri tauri wilayat_ (_da_?) _waqi' bulub tur_,
   which seems to need _da_, in, because the fort, and not the
   country, is described. Or there may be an omission _e.g._ of a
   second sentence about the walled-town (fort).

   [2216] This is the "Kirat-sagar" of Cunningham's Plan of
   Chandiri; it is mentioned under this name by Luard (_l.c._ i,
   210). "Kirat" represents Kirti or Kirit Singh who ruled in
   Gualiar from 1455 to 1479 AD., there also making a tank
   (Luard, _l.c._ i, 232).

   [2217] For illustrative photographs _see_ Luard, _l.c._ vol.
   i, part iv.

   [2218] I have taken this sentence to apply to the location of
   the tanks, but with some doubt; they are on the table-land.

   [2219] Babur appears to have written Betwi, this form being in
   MSS. I have read the name to be that of the river Betwa which
   is at a considerable distance from the fort. But some writers
   dispraise its waters where Babur praises.

   [2220] T. _qia_ means a slope or slant; here it may describe
   tilted _strata_, such as would provide slabs for roofing and
   split easily for building purposes. (_See_ next note.)

   [2221] _'imarat qilmaq munasib_. This has been read to mean
   that the _qialar_ provide good sites (Mems. & _Mems._), but
   position, distance from the protection of the fort, and the
   merit of local stone for building incline me to read the words
   quoted above as referring to the convenient lie of the stone
   for building purposes. (_See_ preceding note.)

   [2222] _Chandiri-da judai (jady)-ning irtiqa'i yigirma-bish
   darja dur_; Erskine, p. 378, Chanderi is situated in the 25th
   degree of N. latitude; de Courteille, ii, 334, _La hauteur du
   Capricorne a Tchanderi est de 25 degrees_. The latitude of
   Chandiri, it may be noted, is 24 deg. 43'. It does not appear
   to me indisputable that what Babur says here is a statement of
   latitude. The word _judai_ (or _jady_) means both Pole-star
   and the Sign Capricorn. M. de Courteille translates the quoted
   sentence as I have done, but with Capricorn for Pole-star. My
   acquaintance with such expressions in French does not allow me
   to know whether his words are a statement of latitude. It
   occurs to me against this being so, that Babur uses other
   words when he gives the latitude of Samarkand (f. 44_b_); and
   also that he has shewn attention to the Pole-star as a guide
   on a journey (f. 203, where he uses the more common word
   _Qutb_). Perhaps he notes its lower altitude when he is far
   south, in the way he noted the first rise of Canopus to his
   view (f. 125).

   [2223] Mallu Khan was a noble of Malwa, who became ruler of
   Malwa in 1532 or 1533 AD. [?], under the style of Qadir Shah.

   [2224] _i.e._ paid direct to the royal treasury.

   [2225] This is the one concerning which bad news reached Babur
   just before Chandiri was taken.

   [2226] This presumably is the place offered to Medini Rao (f.
   333_b_), and Bikramajit (f. 343).

   [2227] Obviously for the bridge.

   [2228] _m:ljar_ (_see_ f. 333 n.). Here the word would mean
   befittingly a protected standing-place, a refuge, such as
   matchlockmen used (f. 217 and Index _s.n._ _araba_).

   [2229] _sighirurdi_, a vowel-variant, perhaps, of
   _sughururdi_.

   [2230] f. 331_b_. This passage shews that Babur's mortars were
   few.

   [2231] _nufur qul-lar-din ham karka bila rah rawa kishi u at
   aitilar_, a difficult sentence.

   [2232] _Afghanlar kupruk baghlamaq-ni istib'ad qilib tamaskhur
   qilurlar aikandur._ The ridicule will have been at slow
   progress, not at the bridge-making itself, since
   pontoon-bridges were common (Irvine's _Army of the Indian
   Moghuls_).

   [2233] _tuilab_; Pers. trs. _uftan u khezan_, limping, or
   falling and rising, a translation raising doubt, because such
   a mode of progression could hardly have allowed escape from
   pursuers.

   [2234] Anglice, on Friday night.

   [2235] According to the Persian calendar, New-year's-day is
   that on which the Sun enters Aries.

   [2236] so-spelled in the Hai. MS.; by de Courteille
   Banguermadu; the two forms may represent the same one of the
   Arabic script.

   [2237] or Gui, from the context clearly the Gumti. Jarrett
   gives Godi as a name of the Gumti; Gui and Godi may be the
   same word in the Arabic script.

   [2238] Some MSS. read that there was not much pain.

   [2239] I take this to be the Kali-Sarda-Chauka affluent of the
   Gogra and not its Sarju or Saru one. To so take it seems
   warranted by the context; there could be no need for the fords
   on the Sarju to be examined, and its position is not suitable.

   [2240] Unfortunately no record of the hunting-expedition
   survives.

   [2241] One historian, Ahmad-i-yadgar states in his
   _Tarikh-i-salatin-i-afaghina_ that Babur went to Lahor
   immediately after his capture of Chandiri, and on his return
   journey to Agra suppressed in the Panj-ab a rising of the
   Mundahar (or, Mandhar) Rajputs. His date is discredited by
   Babur's existing narrative of 934 AH. as also by the absence
   in 935 AH. of allusion to either episode. My husband who has
   considered the matter, advises me that the Lahor visit may
   have been made in 936 or early in 937 AH. [These are a period
   of which the record is lost or, less probably, was not
   written.]

   [2242] Elph. MS. f. 262; I. O. 215 f. 207b and 217 f. 234_b_;
   _Mems._ p. 382. Here the Elphinstone MS. recommences after a
   _lacuna_ extending from Hai. MS. f. 312_b_.

   [2243] _See_ Appendix S:--_Concerning the dating of_ 935 AH.

   [2244] 'Askari was now about 12 years old. He was succeeded in
   Multan by his elder brother Kamran, transferred from Qandahar
   [Index; JRAS. 1908 p. 829 para. (1)]. This transfer, it is
   safe to say, was due to Babur's resolve to keep Kabul in his
   own hands, a resolve which his letters to Humayun (f. 348), to
   Kamran (f. 359), and to Khwaja Kalan (f. 359) attest, as well
   as do the movements of his family at this time. What would
   make the stronger government of Kamran seem now more "for the
   good of Multan" than that of the child 'Askari are the Biluchi
   incursions, mentioned somewhat later (f. 355_b_) as having
   then occurred more than once.

   [2245] This will be his own house in the
   Garden-of-eight-paradises, the Char-bagh begun in 932 AH.
   (August 1526 AD.).

   [2246] To this name Khwand-amir adds Ahmadu'l-haqiri, perhaps
   a pen-name; he also quotes verses of Shihab's
   (_Habibu's-siyar_ lith. ed. iii, 350).

   [2247] Khwand-amir's account of his going into Hindustan is
   that he left his "dear home" (Herat) for Qandahar in
   mid-Shawwal 933 AH. (mid-July 1527 AD.); that on Jumada I.
   10th 934 AH. (Feb. 1st 1528 AD.) he set out from Qandahar on
   the hazardous journey into Hindustan; and that owing to the
   distance, heat, setting-in of the Rains, and breadth of rapid
   rivers, he was seven months on the way. He mentions no
   fellow-travellers, but he gives as the day of his arrival in
   Agra the one on which Babur says he presented himself at
   Court. (For an account of annoyances and misfortunes to which
   he was subjected under Auzbeg rule in Herat _see Journal des
   Savans_, July 1843, pp. 389, 393, Quatremere's art.)

   [2248] Concerning Gualiar _see_ Cunningham's _Archeological
   Survey Reports_ vol. ii; Louis Rousselet's _L'Inde des Rajas_;
   Lepel Griffin's _Famous Monuments of Central India_,
   especially for its photographs; _Gazetteer of India_; Luard's
   _Gazetteer of Gwalior_, text and photographs; _Travels of
   Peter Mundy_, Hakluyt Society ed. R. C. Temple, ii, 61,
   especially for its picture of the fort and note (p. 62)
   enumerating early writers on Gualiar. Of Persian books there
   is Jalal _Hisari's Tarikh-i-Gwaliawar_ (B.M. Add. 16,859) and
   Hiraman's (B.M. Add. 16,709) unacknowledged version of it,
   which is of the B.M. MSS. the more legible.

   [2249] Perhaps this stands for Gwaliawar, the form seeming to
   be used by Jalal _Hisari_, and having good traditional support
   (Cunningham p. 373 and Luard p. 228).

   [2250] _tushlanib_, _i.e._ they took rest and food together at
   mid-day.

   [2251] This seems to be the conjoined Gambhir and Banganga
   which is crossed by the Agra-Dhulpur road (_G. of I._ Atlas,
   Sheet 34).

   [2252] _aichtuq_, the plural of which shews that more than one
   partook of the powders (_safuf_).

   [2253] T. _talqan_, Hindi _sattu_ (Shaw). M. de Courteille's
   variant translation may be due to his reading for _talqan_,
   _talghaq_, _flot_, _agitation_ (his Dict. _s.n._) and _yil_,
   wind, for _bila_, with.

   [2254] in 933 AH. f. 330_b_.

   [2255] "Each beaked promontory" (Lycidas). Our name
   "Selsey-bill" is an English instance of Babur's (not
   infrequent) _tumshuq_, beak, bill of a bird.

   [2256] No order about this Char-bagh is in existing annals of
   934 AH. Such order is likely to have been given after Babur's
   return from his operations against the Afghans, in his account
   of which the annals of 934 AH. break off.

   [2257] The fort-hill at the northern end is 300 ft. high, at
   the southern end, 274 ft.; its length from north to south is
   1-3/4 m.; its breadth varies from 600 ft. opposite the main
   entrance (Hati-pul) to 2,800 ft. in the middle opposite the
   great temple (Sas-bhao). Cf. Cunningham p. 330 and Appendix R,
   _in loco_, for his Plan of Gualiar.

   [2258] This Arabic plural may have been prompted by the
   greatness and distinction of Man-sing's constructions. Cf.
   Index _s.nn._ _begat_ and _baghat_.

   [2259] A translation point concerning the (Arabic) word
   _'imarat_ is that the words "palace", "_palais_", and
   "residence" used for it respectively by Erskine, de
   Courteille, and, previous to the Hindustan Section, by myself,
   are too limited in meaning to serve for Babur's uses of it in
   Hindustan; and this (1) because he uses it throughout his
   writings for buildings under palatial rank (_e.g._ those of
   high and low in Chandiri); (2) because he uses it in Hindustan
   for non-residential buildings (_e.g._ for the Badalgarh
   outwork, f. 341_b_, and a Hindu temple _ib._); and (3) because
   he uses it for the word "building" in the term building-stone,
   f. 335_b_ and f. 339_b_. _Building_ is the comprehensive word
   under which all his uses of it group. For labouring this point
   a truism pleads my excuse, namely, that a man's vocabulary
   being characteristic of himself, for a translator to increase
   or diminish it is to intrude on his personality, and this the
   more when an autobiography is concerned. Hence my search here
   (as elsewhere) for an English grouping word is part of an
   endeavour to restrict the vocabulary of my translation to the
   limits of my author's.

   [2260] Jalal _Hisari_ describes "Khwaja Rahim-dad" as a
   paternal-nephew of Mahdi Khwaja. Neither man has been
   introduced by Babur, as it is his rule to introduce when he
   first mentions a person of importance, by particulars of
   family, _etc._ Both men became disloyal in 935 AH. (1529 AD.)
   as will be found referred to by Babur. Jalal _Hisari_
   supplements Babur's brief account of their misconduct and
   Shaikh Muhammad _Ghaus'_ mediation in 936 AH. For knowledge
   of his contribution I am indebted to my husband's perusal of
   the _Tarikh-i-Gwaliawar_.

   [2261] Erskine notes that Indians and Persians regard
   moonshine as cold but this only faintly expresses the
   wide-spread fear of moon-stroke expressed in the Psalm (121 v.
   6), "The Sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the Moon by
   night."

   [2262] _Agarcha luk baluk u bi siyaq._ Ilminsky [p. 441] has
   _baluk baluk_ but without textual warrant and perhaps
   following Erskine, as he says, speaking generally, that he has
   done in case of need (Ilminsky's Preface). Both Erskine and de
   Courteille, working, it must be remembered, without the help
   of detailed modern descriptions and pictures, took the above
   words to say that the buildings were scattered and without
   symmetry, but they are not scattered and certainly Man-sing's
   has symmetry. I surmise that the words quoted above do not
   refer to the buildings themselves but to the stones of which
   they are made. T. _luk_ means heavy, and T. _baluk_ [? block]
   means a thing divided off, here a block of stone. Such blocks
   might be _bi siyaq_, _i.e._ irregular in size. To take the
   words in this way does not contradict known circumstances, and
   is verbally correct.

   [2263] The Rajas' buildings Babur could compare were Raja
   Karna (or Kirti)'s [who ruled from 1454 to 1479 AD.], Raja
   Man-sing's [1486 to 1516 AD.], and Raja Bikramajit's [1516 to
   1526 AD. when he was killed at Panipat].

   [2264] The height of the eastern face is 100 ft. and of the
   western 60 ft. The total length from north to south of the
   outside wall is 300 ft.; the breadth of the residence from
   east to west 160 ft. The 300 ft. of length appears to be that
   of the residence and service-courtyard (Cunningham p. 347 and
   Plate lxxxvii).

   [2265] _kaj bila aqaritib._ There can be little doubt that a
   white pediment would show up the coloured tiles of the upper
   part of the palace-walls more than would pale red sandstone.
   These tiles were so profuse as to name the building Chit
   Mandir (Painted Mandir). Guided by Babur's statement,
   Cunningham sought for and found plaster in crevices of carved
   work; from which one surmises that the white coating approved
   itself to successors of Man-sing. [It may be noted that the
   word Mandir is in the same case for a translator as is
   _'imarat_ (f. 339_b_ n.) since it requires a grouping word to
   cover its uses for temple, palace, and less exalted
   buildings.]

   [2266] The lower two storeys are not only backed by solid
   ground but, except near the Hati-pul, have the rise of ground
   in front of them which led Babur to say they were "even in a
   pit" (_chuqur_).

   [2267] MSS. vary between _har_ and _bir_, every and one, in
   this sentence. It may be right to read _bir_, and apply it
   only to the eastern facade as that on which there were most
   cupolas. There are fewer on the south side, which still stands
   (Luard's photo. No. 37).

   [2268] The ground rises steeply from this Gate to an inner
   one, called Hawa-pul from the rush of air (_hawa_) through it.

   [2269] Cunningham says the riders were the Raja and a driver.
   Perhaps they were a mahout and his mate. The statue stood to
   the left on exit (_chiqish_).

   [2270] This window will have been close to the Gate where no
   mound interferes with outlook.

   [2271] Rooms opening on inner and open courts appear to form
   the third story of the residence.

   [2272] T. _chuqur_, hollow, pit. This storey is dark and
   unventilated, a condition due to small windows, absence of
   through draught, and the adjacent mound. Cunningham comments
   on its disadvantages.

   [2273] _Agarcha Hindustani takalluflar qilib turlar wali bi
   hawalik-raq yirlar dur._ Perhaps amongst the pains taken were
   those demanded for _punkhas_. I regret that Erskine's
   translation of this passage, so superior to my own in literary
   merit, does not suit the Turki original. He worked from the
   Persian translation, and not only so, but with a less rigid
   rule of translation than binds me when working on Babur's
   _ipsissima verba_ (_Mems._ p. 384; Cunningham p. 349; Luard p.
   226).

   [2274] The words _aurta da_ make apt contrast between the
   outside position of Man-sing's buildings which helped to form
   the fort-wall, and Bikramajit's which were further in except
   perhaps one wall of his courtyard (see Cunningham's Plate
   lxxxiii).

   [2275] Cunningham (p. 350) says this was originally a
   _bara-duri_, a twelve-doored open hall, and must have been
   light. His "originally" points to the view that the hall had
   been altered before Babur saw it but as it was only about 10
   years old at that time, it was in its first form, presumably.
   Perhaps Babur saw it in a bad light. The dimensions Cunningham
   gives of it suggest that the high dome must have been
   frequently ill-lighted.

   [2276] The word _talar_, having various applications, is not
   easy to match with a single English word, nor can one be sure
   in all cases what it means, a platform, a hall, or _etc._ To
   find an equivalent for its diminutive _talar-ghina_ is still
   more difficult. Rahim-dad's _talar_-ette will have stood on
   the flat centre of the dome, raised on four pillars or perhaps
   with its roof only so-raised; one is sure there would be a
   roof as protection against sun or moon. It may be noted that
   the dome is not visible outside from below, but is hidden by
   the continuation upwards of walls which form a mean-looking
   parallelogram of masonry.

   [2277] _T. tur yul._ Concerning this hidden road _see_
   Cunningham p. 350 and Plate lxxxvii.

   [2278] _baghcha._ The context shews that the garden was for
   flowers. For Babur's distinctions between _baghcha_, _bagh_
   and _baghat_, _see_ Index _s.nn._

   [2279] _shaft-alu_ _i.e._ the rosy colour of peach-flowers,
   perhaps lip-red (Steingass). Babur's contrast seems to be
   between those red oleanders of Hindustan that are rosy-red,
   and the deep red ones he found in Gualiar.

   [2280] _kul_, any large sheet of water, natural or artificial
   (Babur). This one will be the Suraj-kund (Sun-tank).

   [2281] This is the Teli Mandir, or Telingana Mandir (Luard).
   Cf. Cunningham, p. 356 and Luard p. 227 for accounts of it;
   and _G. of I._ _s.n._ Teliagarhi for Teli Rajas.

   [2282] This is a large outwork reached from the Gate of the
   same name. Babur may have gone there specially to see the
   Gujari Mandir said by Cunningham to have been built by
   Man-sing's Gujar wife Mriga-nayana (fawn-eyed). Cf. Cunningham
   p. 351 and, for other work done by the same Queen, in the s.
   e. corner of the fort, p. 344; Luard p. 226. In this place
   "construction" would serve to translate _'imarat_ (f. 340 n.).

   [2283] _ab-duzd_, a word conveying the notion of a stealthy
   taking of the water. The walls at the mouth of Urwa were built
   by Altamsh for the protection of its water for the fort. The
   date Babur mentions (a few lines further) is presumably that
   of their erection.

   [2284] Cunningham, who gives 57 ft. as the height of this
   statue, says Babur estimated it at 20 _gaz_, or 40 ft., but
   this is not so. Babur's word is not _gaz_ a measure of 24
   fingers-breadth, but _qari_, the length from the tip of the
   shoulder to the fingers-ends; it is about 33 inches, not less,
   I understand. Thus stated in _qaris_ Babur's estimate of the
   height comes very near Cunningham's, being a good 55 ft. to 57
   ft. (I may note that I have usually translated _qari_ by
   "yard", as the yard is its nearest English equivalent. The
   Pers. trs. of the B. N. translates by _gaz_, possibly a larger
   _gaz_ than that of 24 fingers-breadth _i.e._ inches.)

   [2285] The statues were not broken up by Babur's agents; they
   were mutilated; their heads were restored with coloured
   plaster by the Jains (Cunningham p. 365; Luard p. 228).

   [2286] _rozan_ [or, _auz:n_] ... _tafarruj qilib_. Neither
   Cunningham nor Luard mentions this window, perhaps because
   Erskine does not; nor is this name of a Gate found. It might
   be that of the Dhonda-paur (Cunningham, p. 339). The 1st Pers.
   trs. [I.O. 215 f. 210] omits the word _rozan_ (or, _auz:n_);
   the 2nd [I.O. 217 f. 236b] renders it by _ja'i_, place.
   Manifestly the Gate was opened by Babur, but, presumably, not
   precisely at the time of his visit. I am inclined to
   understand that _rozan_ ... _tafarruj karda_ means enjoying
   the window formerly used by Muhammadan rulers. If _auz:n_ be
   the right reading, its sense is obscure.

   [2287] This will have occurred in the latter half of 934 AH.
   of which no record is now known.

   [2288] He is mentioned under the name Asuk Mal _Rajput_, as a
   servant of Rana Sanga by the _Mirat-i-sikandari_, lith. ed. p.
   161. In Bayley's Translation p. 273 he is called Awasuk,
   manifestly by clerical error, the sentence being _az
   janib-i-au Asuk Mal Rajput dar an (qila') buda_....

   [2289] _ata-lik, aughul-lik_, _i.e._ he spoke to the son as a
   father, to the mother as a son.

   [2290] The _Mirat-i-sikandari_ (lith. ed. p. 234, Bayley's
   trs. p. 372) confirms Babur's statement that the precious
   things were at Bikramajit's disposition. Perhaps they had been
   in his mother's charge during her husband's life. They were
   given later to Bahadur Shah of Gujrat.

   [2291] The Teli Mandir has not a cupola but a waggon-roof of
   South Indian style, whence it may be that it has the southern
   name Telingana, suggested by Col. Luard.

   [2292] See Luard's Photo. No. 139 and P. Mundy's sketch of the
   fort p. 62.

   [2293] This will be the Ghargaraj-gate which looks south
   though it is not at the south end of the fort-hill where there
   is only a postern approached by a flight of stone steps
   (Cunningham p. 332).

   [2294] The garden will have been on the lower ground at the
   foot of the ramp and not near the Hati-pul itself where the
   scarp is precipitous.

   [2295] _Mundin kichikraq atlanilghan aikandur._ This may imply
   that the distance mentioned to Babur was found by him an
   over-estimate. Perhaps the fall was on the Murar-river.

   [2296] Rope (Shaw); _corde qui sert a attacher le bagage sur
   les chameaux_ (de Courteille); a thread of 20 cubits long for
   weaving (Steingass); I have the impression that an _arghamchi_
   is a horse's tether.

   [2297] For information about this opponent of Babur in the
   battle of Kanwa, _see_ the _Asiatic Review_, Nov. 1915, II.
   Beveridge's art. _Silhadi, and the Mirat-i-sikandari_.

   [2298] Colonel Luard has suggested to us that the Babur-nama
   word Sukhjana may stand for Salwai or Sukhalhari, the names of
   two villages near Gualiar.

   [2299] Presumably of night, 6-9 p.m., of Saturday Muh.
   18th-Oct. 2nd.

   [2300] f. 330_b_ and f. 339_b_.

   [2301] Between the last explicit date in the text, _viz._
   Sunday, Muh. 19th, and the one next following, _viz._
   Saturday, Safar 3rd, the diary of six days is wanting. The gap
   seems to be between the unfinished account of doings in
   Dhulpur and the incomplete one of those of the Monday of the
   party. For one of the intermediate days Babur had made an
   appointment, when in Gualiar (f. 343), with the envoys of
   Bikramajit, the trysting-day being Muh. 23rd (_i.e._ 9 days
   after Muh. 14th). Babur is likely to have gone to Biana as
   planned; that envoys met him there may be surmised from the
   circumstance that when negociations with Bikramajit were
   renewed in Agra (f. 345), two sets of envoys were present, a
   "former" one and a "later" one, and this although all envoys
   had been dismissed from Gualiar. The "former" ones will have
   been those who went to Biana, were not given leave there, but
   were brought on to Agra; the "later" ones may have come to
   Agra direct from Ranthambhor. It suits all round to take it
   that pages have been lost on which was the record of the end
   of the Dhulpur visit, of the journey to the, as yet unseen,
   fort of Biana, of tryst kept by the envoys, of other doings in
   Biana where, judging from the time taken to reach Sikri, it
   may be that the _ma'jun_ party was held.

   [2302] Anglice, Tuesday after 6 p.m.

   [2303] _aghaz aichib nima yib_, which words seem to imply the
   breaking of a fast.

   [2304] Doubtless the garden owes its name to the eight heavens
   or paradises mentioned in the Quran (Hughes' _Dictionary of
   Islam_ _s.n._ Paradise). Babur appears to have reached Agra on
   the 1st of Safar; the 2nd may well have been spent on the home
   affairs of a returned traveller.

   [2305] The great, or elder trio were daughters of Sl.
   Abu-sa'id Mirza, Babur's paternal-aunts therefore, of his
   dutiful attendance on whom, Gul-badan writes.

   [2306] "Lesser," _i.e._ younger in age, lower in rank as not
   being the daughters of a sovereign Mirza, and held in less
   honour because of a younger generation.

   [2307] Gul-badan mentions the arrival in Hindustan of a khanim
   of this name, who was a daughter of Sl. Mahmud Khan
   _Chaghatai_, Babur's maternal-uncle; to this maternal
   relationship the word _chicha_ (mother) may refer. _Yinka_,
   uncle's or elder brother's wife, has occurred before (ff. 192,
   207), _chicha_ not till now.

   [2308] Cf. f. 344_b_ and n.5 concerning the surmised movements
   of this set of envoys.

   [2309] This promise was first proffered in Gualiar (f.343).

   [2310] These may be Bai-qara kinsfolk or Miran-shahis married
   to them. No record of Shah Qasim's earlier mission is
   preserved; presumably he was sent in 934 AH. and the record
   will have been lost with much more of that year's. Khwand-amir
   may well have had to do with this second mission, since he
   could inform Babur of the discomfort caused in Heri by the
   near leaguer of 'Ubaidu'l-lah _Auzbeg_.

   [2311] _Albatta auzumizni har nu' qilib tigurkumiz dur._ The
   following versions of this sentence attest its
   difficulty:--_Waqi'at-i-baburi_, 1st trs. I.O. 215 f. 212,
   _albatta khudra ba har nu'i ka bashad dar an khub khwahim
   rasanad_; and 2nd trs. I.O. 217 f. 238_b_, _albatta dar har
   nu' karda khudra mi rasanim_; _Memoirs_ p. 388, "I would make
   an effort and return in person to Kabul"; _Memoires_ ii, 356,
   _je ferais tous mes efforts pour pousser en avant_. I surmise,
   as Payanda-i-hasan seems to have done (1st Pers. trs.
   _supra_), that the passage alludes to Babur's aims in
   Hindustan which he expects to touch in the coming spring. What
   seems likely to be implied is what Erskine says and more,
   _viz._ return to Kabul, renewal of conflict with the Auzbeg
   and release of Khurasan kin through success. As is said by
   Babur immediately after this, Tahmasp of Persia had defeated
   'Ubaidu'l-lah _Auzbeg_ before Babur's letter was written.

   [2312] _Simab yimakni bunyad qildim_, a statement which would
   be less abrupt if it followed a record of illness. Such a
   record may have been made and lost.

   [2313] The preliminaries to this now somewhat obscure section
   will have been lost in the gap of 934 AH. They will have given
   Babur's instructions to Khwaja Dost-i-khawand and have thrown
   light on the unsatisfactory state of Kabul, concerning which a
   good deal comes out later, particularly in Babur's letter to
   its Governor Khwaja Kalan. It may be right to suppose that
   Kamran wanted Kabul and that he expected the Khwaja to bring
   him an answer to his request for it, whether made by himself
   or for him, through some-one, his mother perhaps, whom Babur
   now sent for to Hindustan.

   [2314] 934 AH.-August 26th 1528 AD.

   [2315] The useful verb _tibramak_ which connotes agitation of
   mind with physical movement, will here indicate anxiety on the
   Khwaja's part to fulfil his mission to Humayun.

   [2316] Kamran's messenger seems to repeat his master's words,
   using the courteous imperative of the 3rd person plural.

   [2317] Though Babur not infrequently writes of _e.g._ Bengalis
   and Auzbegs and Turks in the singular, the Bengali, the
   Auzbeg, the Turk, he seems here to mean 'Ubaidu'l-lah, the
   then dominant Auzbeg, although Kuchum was Khaqan.

   [2318] This muster preceded defeat near Jam of which Babur
   heard some 19 days later.

   [2319] Humayun's wife was Bega Begim, the later Haji Begim;
   Kamran's bride was her cousin perhaps named Mah-afruz
   (Gul-badan's _Humayun-nama_ f. 64_b_). The hear-say tense used
   by the messenger allows the inference that he was not
   accredited to give the news but merely repeated the rumour of
   Kabul. The accredited bearer-of-good-tidings came later (f.
   346_b_).

   [2320] There are three enigmatic words in this section. The
   first is the Sayyid's cognomen; was he _dakni_, rather dark of
   hue, or _zakni_, one who knows, or _rukni_, one who props,
   erects scaffolding, _etc._? The second mentions his
   occupation; was he a _ghaiba-gar_, diviner (Erskine,
   water-finder), a _jiba-gar_, cuirass-maker, or a _jiba-gar_,
   cistern-maker, which last suits with well-making? The third
   describes the kind of well he had in hand, perhaps the stone
   one of f. 353_b_; had it scaffolding, or was it for
   drinking-water only (_khwaraliq_); had it an arch, or was it
   chambered (_khwazaliq_)? If Babur's orders for the work had
   been preserved,--they may be lost from f. 344_b_, trouble would
   have been saved to scribes and translators, as an example of
   whose uncertainty it may be mentioned that from the third word
   (_khwaraliq_?) Erskine extracted "jets d'eau and artificial
   water-works", and de Courteille "_taille dans le roc vif_".

   [2321] All Babur's datings in Safar are inconsistent with his
   of Muharram, if a Muharram of 30 days [as given by Gladwin and
   others].

   [2322] _hararat._ This Erskine renders by "so violent an
   illness" (p. 388), de Courteille by "_une inflammation
   d'entrailles_" (ii, 357), both swayed perhaps by the earlier
   mention, on Muh. 10th, of Babur's medicinal quick-silver, a
   drug long in use in India for internal affections (Erskine).
   Some such ailment may have been recorded and the record lost
   (f. 345_b_ and n. 8), but the heat, fever, and trembling in
   the illness of Safar 23rd, taken with the reference to last's
   year's attack of fever, all point to climatic fever.

   [2323] _aindini_ (or, _andini_). Consistently with the
   readings quoted in the preceding note, E. and de C. date the
   onset of the fever as Sunday and translate _aindini_ to mean
   "two days after". It cannot be necessary however to specify
   the interval between Friday and Sunday; the text is not
   explicit; it seems safe to surmise only that the cold fit was
   less severe on Sunday; the fever had ceased on the following
   Thursday.

   [2324] Anglice, Monday after 6 p.m.

   [2325] The _Rashahat-i-'ainu'l-hayat_ (Tricklings from the
   fountain of life) contains an interesting and almost
   contemporary account of the Khwaja and of his
   _Walidiyyah-risala_. A summary of what in it concerns the
   Khwaja can be read in the JRAS. Jan. 1916, H. Beveridge's art.
   The tract, so far as we have searched, is now known in
   European literature only through Babur's metrical translation
   of it; and this, again, is known only through the _Rampur
   Diwan_. [It may be noted here, though the topic belongs to the
   beginning of the _Babur-nama_ (f. 2), that the _Rashahat_
   contains particulars about Ahrari's interventions for peace
   between Babur's father 'Umar Shaikh and those with whom he
   quarrelled.]

   [2326] "Here unfortunately, Mr. Elphinstone's Turki copy
   finally ends" (Erskine), that is to say, the Elphinstone Codex
   belonging to the Faculty of Advocates of Edinburgh.

   [2327] This work, Al-busiri's famous poem in praise of the
   Prophet, has its most recent notice in M. Rene Basset's
   article of the _Encyclopaedia of Islam_ (Leyden and London).

   [2328] Babur's technical terms to describe the metre he used
   are, _ramal musaddas makhbun 'aruz_ and _zarb gah abtar gah
   makhbun muhzuf wazn_.

   [2329] _autkan yil (u) har mahal mundaq 'arizat kim buldi_,
   from which it seems correct to omit the _u_ (and), thus
   allowing the reference to be to last year's illnesses only;
   because no record, of any date, survives of illness lasting
   even one full month, and no other year has a _lacuna_ of
   sufficient length unless one goes improbably far back: for
   these attacks seem to be of Indian climatic fever. One in last
   year (934 AH.) lasting 25-26 days (f. 331) might be called a
   month's illness; another or others may have happened in the
   second half of the year and their record be lost, as several
   have been lost, to the detriment of connected narrative.

   [2330] Mr. Erskine's rendering (_Memoirs_ p. 388) of the above
   section shows something of what is gained by acquaintance
   which he had not, with the _Rashahat-i-'ainu'l-hayat_ and with
   Babur's versified _Walidiyyah-risala_.

   [2331] This gap, like some others in the diary of 935 AH. can
   be attributed safely to loss of pages, because preliminaries
   are now wanting to several matters which Babur records shortly
   after it. Such are (1) the specification of the three articles
   sent to Nasrat Shah, (2) the motive for the feast of f.
   351_b_, (3) the announcement of the approach of the surprising
   group of envoys, who appear without introduction at that
   entertainment, in a manner opposed to Babur's custom of
   writing, (4) an account of their arrival and reception.

   [2332] Land-holder (_see_ _Hobson-Jobson_ _s.n._ talookdar).

   [2333] The long detention of this messenger is mentioned in
   Babur's letter to Humayun (f. 349).

   [2334] These words, if short _a_ be read in Shah, make 934 by
   _abjad_. The child died in infancy; no son of Humayun's had
   survived childhood before Akbar was born, some 14 years later.
   Concerning Abu'l-wajd _Farighi_, _see_ _Habibu's-siyar_, lith.
   ed. ii, 347; _Muntakhabu't-tawarikh_, Bib. Ind. ed. i, 3; and
   Index _s.n._

   [2335] I am indebted to Mr. A. E. Hinks, Secretary of the
   Royal Geographical Society, for the following approximate
   estimate of the distances travelled by Bian Shaikh:--(_a_) From
   Kishm to Kabul 240m.--from Kabul to Peshawar 175m.--from
   Peshawar to Agra (railroad distance) 759 m.--total 1174 m.;
   daily average _cir._ 38 miles; (_b_) Qila'-i-zafar to Kabul
   264m.--Kabul to Qandahar 316m.--total 580m.; daily average
   _cir._ 53 miles. The second journey was made probably in 913
   AH. and to inform Babur of the death of the Shah of Badakhshan
   (f. 213_b_).

   [2336] On Muh. 10th 934 AH.-Sep. 26th 1528 AD. For accounts of
   the campaign _see_ Rieu's Suppl. Persian Cat. under _Histories
   of Tahmasp_ (Churchill Collection); the _Habibu's-siyar_ and
   the _'Alam-arai-'abbasi_, the last a highly rhetorical work,
   Babur's accounts (Index _s.n._ Jam) are merely repetitions of
   news given to him; he is not responsible for mistakes he
   records, such as those of f. 354. It must be mentioned that
   Mr. Erskine has gone wrong in his description of the battle,
   the starting-point of error being his reversal of two events,
   the encampment of Tahmasp at Radagan and his passage through
   Mashhad. A century ago less help, through maps and travel, was
   available than now.

   [2337] _tufak u araba_, the method of array Babur adopted from
   the Rumi-Persian model.

   [2338] Tahmasp's main objective, aimed at earlier than the
   Auzbeg muster in Merv, was Herat, near which 'Ubaid Khan had
   been for 7 months. He did not take the shortest route for
   Mashhad, _viz._ the Damghan-Sabzawar-Nishapur road, but went
   from Damghan for Mashhad by way of Kalpush (_'Alam-arai_ lith.
   ed. p. 45) and Radagan. Two military advantages are obvious on
   this route; (1) it approaches Mashhad by the descending road
   of the Kechef-valley, thus avoiding the climb into that valley
   by a pass beyond Nishapur on the alternative route; and (2) it
   passes through the fertile lands of Radagan. [For Kalpush and
   the route _see_ Fr. military map, Sheets Astarabad and Merv,
   n.e. of Bastam.]

   [2339] 7 m. from Kushan and 86 m. from Mashhad. As Lord Curzon
   reports (_Persia_, ii, 120) that his interlocutors on the spot
   were not able to explain the word "Radkan," it may be useful
   to note here that the town seems to borrow its name from the
   ancient tower standing near it, the _Mil-i-radagan_, or, as
   Reclus gives it, _Tour de meimandan_, both names meaning,
   Tower of the bounteous (or, beneficent, highly-distinguished,
   _etc._). (Cf. Vullers Dict. _s.n._ _rad_; Reclus' _L'Asie
   Anterieure_ p. 219; and O'Donovan's _Merv Oasis_.) Perhaps
   light on the distinguished people (_radagan_) is given by the
   _Dabistan's_ notice of an ancient sect, the Radiyan, seeming
   to be fire-worshippers whose chief was Rad-guna, an eminently
   brave hero of the latter part of Jamshid's reign (800 B.C.?).
   Of the town Radagan Daulat Shah makes frequent mention. A
   second town so-called and having a tower lies north of
   Ispahan.

   [2340] In these days of trench-warfare it would give a wrong
   impression to say that Tahmasp entrenched himself; he did
   what Babur did before his battles at Panipat and Kanwa
   (_q.v._).

   [2341] The Auzbegs will have omitted from their purview of
   affairs that Tahmasp's men were veterans.

   [2342] The holy city had been captured by 'Ubaid Khan in 933
   AH. (1525 AD.), but nothing in Bian Shaikh's narrative
   indicates that they were now there in force.

   [2343] Presumably the one in the Radagan-meadow.

   [2344] using the _yada-tash_ to ensure victory (Index _s.n._).

   [2345] If then, as now, Scorpio's appearance were expected in
   Oct.-Nov., the Auzbegs had greatly over-estimated their power
   to check Tahmasp's movements; but it seems fairly clear that
   they expected Scorpio to follow Virgo in Sept.-Oct. according
   to the ancient view of the Zodiacal Signs which allotted two
   houses to the large Scorpio and, if it admitted Libra at all,
   placed it between Scorpio's claws (Virgil's _Georgics_ i, 32
   and Ovid's _Metamorphoses_, ii, 195.--H. B.).

   [2346] It would appear that the Auzbegs, after hearing that
   Tahmasp was encamped at Radagan, expected to interpose
   themselves in his way at Mashhad and to get their 20,000 to
   Radagan before he broke camp. Tahmasp's swiftness spoiled
   their plan; he will have stayed at Radagan a short time only,
   perhaps till he had further news of the Auzbegs, perhaps also
   for commissariat purposes and to rest his force. He visited
   the shrine of Imam Reza, and had reached Jam in time to
   confront his adversaries as they came down to it from
   Zawarabad (Pilgrims'-town).

   [2347] or, Khirjard, as many MSS. have it. It seems to be a
   hamlet or suburb of Jam. The _'Alam-arai_ (lith. ed. p. 40)
   writes Khusrau-jard-i-Jam (the Khusrau-throne of Jam), perhaps
   rhetorically. The hamlet is Maulana 'Abdu'r-rahman _Jami's_
   birthplace (Daulat Shah's _Tazkirat_, E. G. Browne's ed. p.
   483). Jam now appears on maps as Turbat-i-Shaikh Jami, the
   tomb (_turbat_) being that of the saintly ancestor of Akbar's
   mother Hamida-banu.

   [2348] The _'Alam-arai_ (lith. ed. p. 31) says, but in
   grandiose language, that 'Ubaid Khan placed at the foot of his
   standard 40 of the most eminent men of Transoxania who prayed
   for his success, but that as his cause was not good, their
   supplications were turned backwards, and that all were slain
   where they had prayed.

   [2349] Here the 1st Pers. trs. (I.O. 215 f. 214) mentions that
   it was Chalma who wrote and despatched the exact particulars
   of the defeat of the Auzbegs. This information explains the
   presumption Babur expresses. It shows that Chalma was in Hisar
   where he may have written his letter to give news to Humayun.
   At the time Bian Shaikh left, the Mirza was near Kishm; if he
   had been the enterprising man he was not, one would surmise
   that he had moved to seize the chance of the sultans'
   abandonment of Hisar, without waiting for his father's urgency
   (f. 348_b_). Whether he had done so and was the cause of the
   sultans' flight, is not known from any chronicle yet come to
   our hands. Chalma's father Ibrahim _Jani_ died fighting for
   Babur against Shaibaq Khan in 906 AH. (f. 90_b_).

   As the sense of the name-of-office Chalma is still in doubt, I
   suggest that it may be an equivalent of _aftabachi_, bearer of
   the water-bottle on journeys. _T. chalma_ can mean a
   water-vessel carried on the saddle-bow; one Chalma on record
   was a _safarchi_; if, in this word, _safar_ be read to mean
   journey, an approach is made to _aftabachi_ (fol. 15_b_ and
   note; Blochmann's A.-i-A. p. 378 and n. 3).

   [2350] The copies of Babur's Turki letter to Humayun and the
   later one to Khwaja Kalan (f. 359) are in some MSS. of the
   Persian text translated only (I.O. 215 f. 214); in others
   appear in Turki only (I.O. 217 f. 240); in others appear in
   Turki and Persian (B. M. Add. 26,000 and I.O. 2989); while in
   Muh. Shirazi's lith. ed. they are omitted altogether (p. 228).

   [2351] Trans- and Cis-Hindukush. Payanda-hasan (in one of his
   useful glosses to the 1st Pers. trs.) amplifies here by
   "Khurasan, Ma wara'u'n-nahr and Kabul".

   [2352] The words Babur gives as mispronunciations are somewhat
   uncertain in sense; manifestly both are of ill-omen:--Al-aman
   itself [of which the _alama_ of the Hai. MS. and Ilminsky
   maybe an abbreviation,] is the cry of the vanquished,
   "Quarter! mercy!"; _Ailaman_ and also _alaman_ can represent a
   Turkman raider.

   [2353] Presumably amongst Timurids.

   [2354] Perhaps Babur here makes a placatory little joke.

   [2355] _i.e._ that offered by Tahmasp's rout of the Auzbegs
   at Jam.

   [2356] He was an adherent of Babur. Cf. f. 353.

   [2357] The plural "your" will include Humayun and Kamran.
   Neither had yet shewn himself the heritor of his father's
   personal dash and valour; they had lacked the stress which
   shaped his heroism.

   [2358] My husband has traced these lines to Nizami's _Khusrau_
   and _Shirin_. [They occur on f. 256_b_ in his MS. of 317
   folios.] Babur may have quoted from memory, since his version
   varies. The lines need their context to be understood; they
   are part of Shirin's address to Khusrau when she refuses to
   marry him because at the time he is fighting for his sovereign
   position; and they say, in effect, that while all other work
   stops for marriage (_kadkhudai_), kingly rule does not.

   [2359] _Aulughlar kutarimlik kirak_; 2nd Pers. trs. _buzurgan
   bardasht mi baid kardand_. This dictum may be a quotation. I
   have translated it to agree with Babur's reference to the ages
   of the brothers, but _aulughlar_ expresses greatness of
   position as well as seniority in age, and the dictum may be
   taken as a Turki version of "_Noblesse oblige_", and may also
   mean "The great must be magnanimous". (Cf. de C.'s Dict.
   _s.n._ _kutarimlik_.) [It may be said of the verb _bardashlan_
   used in the Pers. trs., that Abu'l-fazl, perhaps translating
   _kutarimlik_ reported to him, puts it into Babur's mouth when,
   after praying to take Humayun's illness upon himself, he cried
   with conviction, "I have borne it away" (A.N. trs. H.B. i,
   276).]

   [2360] If Babur had foreseen that his hard-won rule in
   Hindustan was to be given to the winds of one son's
   frivolities and the other's disloyalty, his words of scant
   content with what the Hindustan of his desires had brought
   him, would have expressed a yet keener pain (_Rampur Diwan_
   E.D.R.'s ed. p. 15 l. 5 fr. ft.).

   [2361] _Bostan_, cap. _Advice of Noshirwan to Hurmuz_ (H.B.).

   [2362] A little joke at the expense of the mystifying letter.

   [2363] For _ya_, Mr. Erskine writes _be_. What the mistake was
   is an open question; I have guessed an exchange of _i_ for
   _u_, because such an exchange is not infrequent amongst Turki
   long vowels.

   [2364] That of reconquering Timurid lands.

   [2365] of _Kulab_; he was the father of Haram Begim, one of
   Gul-badan's personages.

   [2366] _aun alti gunluk m:ljar bila_, as on f. 354_b_, and
   with exchange of T. _m:ljar_ for P. _mi'ad_, f. 355_b_.

   [2367] Probably into Rajput lands, notably into those of
   Salahu'd-din.

   [2368] _tukhmaliq chakmanlar_; as _tukhma_ means both button
   and gold-embroidery, it may be right, especially of Hindustan
   articles, to translate sometimes in the second sense.

   [2369] These statements of date are consistent with Babur's
   earlier explicit entries and with Erskine's equivalents of the
   Christian Era, but at variance with Gladwin's and with
   Wuestenfeldt's calculation that Rabi' II. 1st was Dec. 13th.
   Yet Gladwin (_Revenue Accounts_, ed. 1790 AD. p. 22) gives
   Rabi' I. 30 days. Without in the smallest degree questioning
   the two European calculations, I follow Babur, because in his
   day there may have been allowed variation which finds no entry
   in methodical calendars. Erskine followed Babur's statements;
   he is likely nevertheless to have seen Gladwin's book.

   [2370] Erskine estimated this at L500, but later cast doubts
   on such estimates as being too low (_History of India_, vol.
   i, App. D.).

   [2371] The bearer of the stamp (_tamgha_) who by impressing it
   gave quittance for the payment of tolls and other dues.

   [2372] Either 24ft. or 36ft. according to whether the short or
   long _qari_ be meant (_infra_). These towers would provide
   resting-place, and some protection against ill-doers. They
   recall the two _mil-i-radagan_ of Persia (f. 347 _n._ 9), the
   purpose of which is uncertain. Babur's towers were not "_kos
   minars_", nor is it said that he ordered each _kuroh_ to be
   marked on the road. Some of the _kos minars_ on the "old
   Mughal roads" were over 30ft. high; a considerable number are
   entered and depicted in the _Annual Progress Report_ of the
   Archaeological Survey for 1914 (Northern Circle, p. 45 and
   Plates 44, 45). Some at least have a _lower_ chamber.

   [2373] Four-doored, open-on-all-sides. We have not found the
   word with this meaning in Dictionaries. It may translate H.
   _chaukandi_.

   [2374] Erskine makes 9 _kos_ (_kurohs_) to be 13-14 miles,
   perhaps on the basis of the smaller _gaz_ of 24 inches.

   [2375] _alti yam-ati baghlaghailar_ which, says one of
   Erskine's manuscripts, is called a _dak-choki_.

   [2376] Neither Erskine (_Mems._ p. 394), nor de Courteille
   (_Mems._ ii, 370) recognized the word _Mubin_ here, although
   each mentions the poem later (p. 431 and ii, 461), deriving
   his information about it from the _Akbar-nama_, Erskine
   direct, de Courteille by way of the Turki translation of the
   same _Akbar-nama_ passage, which Ilminsky found in Kehr's
   volume and which is one of the much discussed "Fragments", at
   first taken to be extra writings of Babur's (cf. Index _in
   loco_ _s.n._ Fragments). Ilminsky (p. 455) prints the word
   clearly, as one who knows it; he may have seen that part of
   the poem itself which is included in Beresine's _Chrestomathie
   Turque_ (p. 226 to p. 272), under the title _Fragment d'un
   poeme inconnu de Babour_, and have observed that Babur himself
   shews his title to be _Mubin_, in the lines of his colophon
   (p. 271),

     _Chu bian qildim anda shar'iyat,
     Ni 'ajab gar Mubin didim at?_

   (Since in it I have made exposition of Laws, what wonder if I
   named it _Mubin_ (exposition)?) Cf. _Translator's Note_, p.
   437. [Beresine says (Ch. T.) that he prints half of his
   "_unique manuscrit_" of the poem.]

   [2377] The passage Babur quotes comes from the _Mubin_ section
   on _tayammum masa'la_ (purification with sand), where he tells
   his son sand may be used, _Su yuraq bulsa sindin air bir mil_
   (if from thee water be one _mil_ distant), and then interjects
   the above explanation of what the _mil_ is. Two lines of his
   original are not with the _Babur-nama_.

   [2378] The _tanab_ was thus 120 ft. long. Cf. A.-i-A. Jarrett
   i, 414; Wilson's _Glossary of Indian Terms_ and Gladwin's
   _Revenue Accounts_, p. 14.

   [2379] Babur's customary method of writing allows the
   inference that he recorded, in due place, the coming and
   reception of the somewhat surprising group of guests now
   mentioned as at this entertainment. That preliminary record
   will have been lost in one or more of the small gaps in his
   diary of 935 AH. The envoys from the Samarkand Auzbegs and
   from the Persian Court may have come in acknowledgment of the
   _Fath-nama_ which announced victory over Rana Sanga; the
   guests from Farghana will have accepted the invitation sent,
   says Gul-badan, "in all directions," after Babur's defeat of
   Sl. Ibrahim _Ludi_, to urge hereditary servants and Timurid
   and Chingiz-khanid kinsfolk to come and see prosperity with
   him now when "the Most High has bestowed sovereignty" (f.
   293a; Gul-badan's H.N. f. 11).

   [2380] Hindu here will represent Rajput. D'Herbelot's
   explanation of the name Qizil-bash (Red-head) comes in
   usefully here:--"KEZEL BASCH or KIZIL BASCH. Mot Turc qui
   signifie _Tete rouge_. Les Turcs appellent les Persans de ce
   nom, depuis qu'Ismael Sofi, fondateur de la Dynastie des
   princes qui regnent aujourd'hui en Perse, commanda a ses
   soldats de porter un bonnet rouge autour duquel il y a une
   echarpe ou Turban a douze plis, en memoire et a l'honneur des
   12 Imams, successeurs d'Ali, desquels il pretendoit descendre.
   Ce bonnet s'appelle en Persan, _Taj_, et fut institue l'an
   907e de l'Heg." Tahmasp himself uses the name Qizil-bash;
   Babur does so too. Other explanations of it are found
   (Steingass), but the one quoted above suits its use without
   contempt. (Cf. f. 354 n. 3).

   [2381] _cir._ 140-150ft. or more if the 36in. _qari_ be the
   unit.

   [2382] _Andropogon muricatus_, the scented grass of which the
   roots are fitted into window spaces and moistened to mitigate
   dry, hot winds. Cf. _Hobson-Jobson_ _s.n._ _Cuscuss_.

   [2383] A nephew and a grandson of Ahrari's second son Yahya
   (f. 347_b_) who had stood staunch to Babur till murdered in
   906 AH.-1500 AD. (80_b_). They are likely to be those to whom
   went a copy of the _Mubin_ under cover of a letter addressed
   to lawyers of Ma wara'u'n-nahr (f. 351 n. 1). The Khwajas were
   in Agra three weeks after Babur finished his metrical version
   of their ancestor's _Walidiyyah-risala_; whether their coming
   (which must have been announced some time before their
   arrival), had part in directing his attention to the tract can
   only be surmised (f. 346).

   [2384] He was an Auzbeg (f. 371) and from his association here
   with a Bai-qara, and, later with Qasim-i-husain who was half
   Bai-qara, half Auzbeg, seems likely to be of the latter's
   family (Index _s.nn._).

   [2385] _sachaq kiurdi_ (_kilturdi_?) No record survives to
   tell the motive for this feast; perhaps the gifts made to
   Babur were congratulatory on the birth of a grandson, the
   marriage of a son, and on the generally-prosperous state of
   his affairs.

   [2386] Gold, silver and copper coins.

   [2387] Made so by _bhang_ or other exciting drug.

   [2388] _aral_, presumably one left by the winter-fall of the
   Jumna; or, a peninsula.

   [2389] Scribes and translators have been puzzled here. My
   guess at the Turki clause is _aurang airalik kish jabbah_. In
   reading _muslin_, I follow Erskine who worked in India and
   could take local opinion; moreover gifts made in Agra probably
   would be Indian.

   [2390] For one Hafiz of Samarkand see f.237_b_.

   [2391] Kuchum was Khaqan of the Auzbegs and had his seat in
   Samarkand. One of his sons, Abu-sa'id, mentioned below, had
   sent envoys. With Abu-sa'id is named Mihr-ban who was one of
   Kuchum's wives; Pulad was their son. Mihr-ban was, I think, a
   half-sister of Babur, a daughter of 'Umar Shaikh and Umid of
   Andijan (f. 9), and a full-sister of Nasir. No doubt she had
   been captured on one of the occasions when Babur lost to the
   Auzbegs. In 925 AH.-1519 AD. (f. 237_b_) when he sent his
   earlier _Diwan_ to Pulad Sl. (_Translator's Note_, p. 438) he
   wrote a verse on its back which looks to be addressed to his
   half-sister through her son.

   [2392] Tahmasp's envoy; the title Chalabi shews high birth.

   [2393] This statement seems to imply that the weight made of
   silver and the weight made of gold were of the same size and
   that the differing specific gravity of the two metals,--that of
   silver being _cir._ 10 and that of gold _cir._ 20--gave their
   equivalents the proportion Babur states. Persian Dictionaries
   give _sang_ (_tash_), a weight, but without further
   information. We have not found mention of the _tash_ as a
   recognized Turki weight; perhaps the word _tash_ stands for an
   ingot of unworked metal of standard size. (Cf. _inter alios
   libros_, A.-i-A. Blochmann p. 36, Codrington's _Musalman
   Numismatics_ p. 117, concerning the _misqal, dinar, etc._)

   [2394] _tarkash bila._ These words are clear in the Hai. MS.
   but uncertain in some others. E. and de C. have no equivalent
   of them. Perhaps the coins were given by the quiverful; that a
   quiver of arrows was given is not expressed.

   [2395] Babur's half-nephew; he seems from his name
   Keepsake-of-nasir to have been posthumous.

   [2396] 934 AH.-1528 AD. (f. 336).

   [2397] Or, gold-embroidered.

   [2398] Wife of Muhammad-i-zaman Mirza.

   [2399] These Highlanders of Asfara will have come by
   invitation sent after the victory at Panipat; their welcome
   shows remembrance of and gratitude for kindness received a
   quarter of a century earlier. Perhaps villagers from Dikh-kat
   will have come too, who had seen the Padshah run barefoot on
   their hills (_Index s.nn._).

   [2400] Here gratitude is shewn for protection given in 910
   AH.-1504 AD. to the families of Babur and his men when on the
   way to Kabul. Qurban and Shaikhi were perhaps in Fort Ajar (f.
   122_b_, f. 126).

   [2401] Perhaps these acrobats were gipsies.

   [2402] This may be the one with which Sayyid Dakni was
   concerned (f. 346).

   [2403] Babur obviously made the distinction between _pahr_ and
   _pas_ that he uses the first for day-watches, the second for
   those of the night.

   [2404] Anglice, Tuesday, Dec. 21st; by Muhammadan plan,
   Wednesday 22nd. Dhulpur is 34 m. s. of Agra; the journey of
   10hrs. 20m. would include the nooning and the time taken in
   crossing rivers.

   [2405] The well was to fill a cistern; the 26 spouts with
   their 26 supports were to take water into (26?) conduits.
   Perhaps _tash_ means that they were hewn in the solid rock;
   perhaps that they were on the outer side of the reservoir.
   They will not have been built of hewn stone, or the word would
   have been _sangin_ or _tashdin_.

   [2406] One occupation of these now blank days is indicated by
   the date of the "_Rampur Diwan_", Thursday Rabi' II. 15th
   (Dec. 27th).

   [2407] The demon (or, athlete) sultan of Rumelia (_Rumlu_);
   once Tahmasp's guardian (_Tazkirat-i-Tahmasp_, Bib. Ind. ed.
   Phillott, p. 2). Some writers say he was put to death by
   Tahmasp (_aet._ 12) in 933 AH.; if this were so, it is strange
   to find a servant described as his in 935 AH. (An account of
   the battle is given in the _Sharaf-nama_, written in 1005 AH.
   by Sharaf Khan who was reared in Tahmasp's house. The book
   has been edited by Veliaminof-Zernof and translated into
   French by Charmoy; cf. Trs. vol. ii, part i, p. 555.--_H.
   Beveridge._)

   [2408] This name, used by one who was with the Shah's troops,
   attracts attention; it may show the composition of the Persian
   army; it may differentiate between the troops and their
   "Qizil-bash leader".

   [2409] Several writers give Saru-qamsh (Charmoy, _roseau
   jaune_) as the name of the village where the battle was
   fought; Sharaf Khan gives 'Umarabad and mentions that after
   the fight Tahmasp spent some time in the meadow of
   Saru-qamsh.

   [2410] The number of Tahmasp's guns being a matter of
   interest, reference should be made to Babur's accounts of his
   own battles in which he arrayed in Rumi (Ottoman) fashion; it
   will then be seen that the number of carts does not imply the
   number of guns (Index _s.n._ _araba_, cart).

   [2411] This cannot but represent Tahmasp who was on the
   battle-field (_see_ his own story _infra_). He was 14 years
   old; perhaps he was called Shah-zada, and not Shah, on account
   of his youth, or because under guardianship (?). Readers of
   the Persian histories of his reign may know the reason. Babur
   hitherto has always called the boy Shah-zada; after the
   victory at Jam, he styles him Shah. Juha Sl. (_Taklu_) who was
   with him on the field, was Governor of Ispahan.

   [2412] If this Persian account of the battle be in its right
   place in Babur's diary, it is singular that the narrator
   should be so ill-informed at a date allowing facts to be
   known; the three sultans he names as killed escaped to die,
   Kuchum in 937 AH.-1530 AD., Abu-sa'id in 940 AH.-1533 AD.,
   'Ubaid in 946 AH.-1539 AD. (Lane-Poole's _Muhammadan
   Dynasties_). It would be natural for Babur to comment on the
   mistake, since envoys from two of the sultans reported killed,
   were in Agra. There had been time for the facts to be known:
   the battle was fought on Sep. 26th; the news of it was in Agra
   on Nov. 23rd; envoys from both adversaries were at Babur's
   entertainment on Dec. 19th. From this absence of comment and
   for the reasons indicated in note 3 (_infra_), it appears that
   matter has been lost from the text.

   [2413] Tahmasp's account of the battle is as follows
   (_T.-i-T._ p. 11):--"I marched against the Auzbegs. The battle
   took place outside Jam. At the first onset, Auzbeg prevailed
   over Qizil-bash. Ya'qub Sl. fled and Sl. Walama _Taklu_ and
   other officers of the right wing were defeated and put to
   flight. Putting my trust in God, I prayed and advanced some
   paces.... One of my body-guard getting up with 'Ubaid struck
   him with a sword, passed on, and occupied himself with
   another. Qulij Bahadur and other Auzbegs carried off the
   wounded 'Ubaid; Kuchkunji (Kuchum) Khan and Jani Khan Beg,
   when they became aware of this state of affairs, fled to Merv.
   Men who had fled from our army rejoined us that day. That
   night I spent on the barren plain (_sahra'_). I did not know
   what had happened to 'Ubaid. I thought perhaps they were
   devising some stratagem against me." The 'A.-'A. says that
   'Ubaid's assailant, on seeing his low stature and contemptible
   appearance, left him for a more worthy foe.

   [2414] Not only does some comment from Babur seem needed on an
   account of deaths he knew had not occurred, but loss of matter
   may be traced by working backward from his next explicit date
   (_Friday 19th_), to do which shows fairly well that the "same
   day" will be not Tuesday the 16th but Thursday the 18th.
   Ghiasu'd-din's reception was on the day preceding Friday 19th,
   so that part of Thursday's record (as shewn by "on this same
   day"), the whole of Wednesday's, and (to suit an expected
   comment by Babur on the discrepant story of the Auzbeg deaths)
   part of Tuesday's are missing. The gap may well have contained
   mention of Hasan _Chalabi's_ coming (f. 357), or explain why
   he had not been at the feast with his younger brother.

   [2415] _qurchi_, perhaps body-guard, life-guardsman.

   [2416] As on f. 350_b_ (_q.v._ p. 628 n. 1) _aun alti gunluk
   buljar_ (or, _m:ljar_) _bila_.

   [2417] A sub-division of the Ballia district of the United
   Provinces, on the right bank of the Ghogra.

   [2418] _i.e._ in 16 days; he was 24 or 25 days away.

   [2419] The envoy had been long in returning; Kanwa was fought
   in March, 1527; it is now the end of 1528 AD.

   [2420] Rabi' II. 20th--January 1st 1529 AD.; Anglice, Friday,
   after 6p.m.

   [2421] This "Bengali" is territorial only; Nasrat Shah was a
   Sayyid's son (f.271).

   [2422] Isma'il Mita (f. 357) who will have come with Mulla
   Mazhab.

   [2423] _mi'ad_, cf. f. 350_b_ and f. 354_b_. Ghiasu'd-din may
   have been a body-guard.

   [2424] Ludi Afghans and their friends, including Biban and
   Bayazid.

   [2425] _yulluq turalik_; _Memoirs_, p. 398, "should act in
   every respect in perfect conformity to his commands";
   _Memoires_ ii, 379, "_chacun suivant son rang et sa dignite_."

   [2426] _tawachi._ Babur's uses of this word support Erskine in
   saying that "the _tawachi_ is an officer who corresponds very
   nearly to the Turkish _chawush_, or special messenger"
   (Zenker, p. 346, col. iii) "but he was also often employed to
   act as a commissary for providing men and stores, as a
   commissioner in superintending important affairs, as an
   aide-de-camp in carrying orders, _etc._"

   [2427] Here the Hai. MS. has the full-vowelled form, _buljar_.
   Judging from what that Codex writes, _buljar_ may be used for
   a rendezvous of troops, _m:ljar_ or _b:ljar_ for any other
   kind of tryst (f. 350, p. 628 n. 1; Index _s.nn._), also for a
   shelter.

   [2428] _yawushub aidi_, which I translate in accordance with
   other uses of the verb, as meaning approach, but is taken by
   some other workers to mean "near its end".

   [2429] Though it is not explicitly said, Chin-timur may have
   been met with on the road; as the "also" (_ham_) suggests.

   [2430] To the above news the _Akbar-nama_ adds the important
   item reported by Humayun, that there was talk of peace. Babur
   replied that, if the time for negotiation were not past,
   Humayun was to make peace until such time as the affairs of
   Hindustan were cleared off. This is followed in the A. N. by a
   seeming quotation from Babur's letter, saying in effect that
   he was about to leave Hindustan, and that his followers in
   Kabul and Tramontana must prepare for the expedition against
   Samarkand which would be made on his own arrival. None of the
   above matter is now with the _Babur-nama_; either it was there
   once, was used by Abu'l-fazl and lost before the Persian trss.
   were made; or Abu'l-fazl used Babur's original, or copied,
   letter itself. That desire for peace prevailed is shewn by
   several matters:--Tahmasp, the victor, asked and obtained the
   hand of an Auzbeg in marriage; Auzbeg envoys came to Agra, and
   with them Turk Khwajas having a mission likely to have been
   towards peace (f. 357_b_); Babur's wish for peace is shewn
   above and on f. 359 in a summarized letter to Humayun. (Cf.
   Abu'l-ghazi's _Shajarat-i-Turk_ [_Histoire des Mongols_,
   Desmaisons' trs. p. 216]; _Akbar-nama_, H. B.'s trs. i, 270.)

   A here-useful slip of reference is made by the translator of
   the _Akbar-nama_ (_l.c._ n. 3) to the Fragment (_Memoires_ ii,
   456) instead of to the _Babur-nama_ translation (_Memoires_
   ii, 381). The utility of the slip lies in its accompanying
   comment that de C.'s translation is in closer agreement with
   the _Akbar-nama_ than with Babur's words. Thus the
   _Akbar-nama_ passage is brought into comparison with what it
   is now safe to regard as its off-shoot, through Turki and
   French, in the Fragment. When the above comment on their
   resemblance was made, we were less assured than now as to the
   genesis of the Fragment (Index _s.n._ Fragment).

   [2431] Hind-al's guardian (G. B.'s _Humayun-nama_ trs. p. 106,
   n. 1).

   [2432] Nothing more about Humayun's expedition is found in the
   B. N.; he left Badakhshan a few months later and arrived in
   Agra, after his mother (f. 380_b_), at a date in August of
   which the record is wanting.

   [2433] under 6 m. from Agra. Gul-badan (f. 16) records a visit
   to the garden, during which her father said he was weary of
   sovereignty. Cf. f. 331_b_, p. 589 n. 2.

   [2434] _kurnish kilkan kishilar._

   [2435] MSS. vary or are indecisive as to the omitted word. I
   am unable to fill the gap. Erskine has "_Sir Mawineh_ (or
   hair-twist)" (p. 399), De Courteille, _Sir-mouineh_ (ii, 382).
   _Muina_ means ermine, sable and other fine fur
   (_Shamsu'l-lughat_, p 274, col. 1).

   [2436] His brother Hazrat Makhdumi Nura (Khwaja Khawand
   Mahmud) is much celebrated by Haidar Mirza, and Babur
   describes his own visit in the words he uses of the visit of
   an inferior to himself. Cf. _Tarikh-i-rashidi_ trs. pp. 395,
   478; _Akbar-nama_ trs., i, 356, 360.

   [2437] No record survives of the arrival of this envoy or of
   why he was later in coming than his brother who was at Babur's
   entertainment. Cf. f. 361_b_.

   [2438] Presumably this refers to the appliances mentioned on
   f. 350_b_.

   [2439] f. 332, n. 3.

   [2440] _zarbaft m:l:k._ Amongst gold stuffs imported into
   Hindustan, Abu'l-fazl mentions _milak_ which may be Babur's
   cloth. It came from Turkistan (A.-i-A. Blochmann, p. 92 and
   n.).

   [2441] A _tang_ is a small silver coin of the value of about a
   penny (Erskine).

   [2442] _tanglasi_, lit. at its dawning. It is not always clear
   whether _tanglasi_ means, Anglice, next dawn or day, which
   here would be Monday, or whether it stands for the dawn
   (daylight) of the Muhammadan day which had begun at 6 p. m. on
   the previous evening, here Sunday. When Babur records, _e.g._
   a late audience, _tanglasi_, following, will stand for the
   daylight of the day of audience. The point is of some
   importance as bearing on discrepancies of days, as these are
   stated in MSS., with European calendars; it is conspicuously
   so in Babur's diary sections.

   [2443] _risalat tariqi bila_; their special mission may have
   been to work for peace (f. 359_b_, n. 1).

   [2444] He may well be Kamran's father-in-law Sl. 'Ali Mirza
   Taghai _Begchik_.

   [2445] _nimcha u takband._ The _tak-band_ is a silk or woollen
   girdle fastening with a "hook and eye" (Steingass), perhaps
   with a buckle.

   [2446] This description is that of the contents of the
   "_Rampur Diwan_"; the _tarjuma_ being the _Walidiyyah-risala_
   (f. 361 and n.). What is said here shows that four copies went
   to Kabul or further north. Cf. Appendix Q.

   [2447] _Sar-khat_ may mean "copies" set for Kamran to imitate.

   [2448] _bir pahr yawushub aidi_; I.O. 215 f. 221, _qarib yak
   pas roz bud_.

   [2449] _akhar_, a word which may reveal a bad start and
   uncertainty as to when and where to halt.

   [2450] This, and not Chandwar (f. 331_b_), appears the correct
   form. Neither this place nor Abapur is mentioned in the G. of
   I.'s Index or shewn in the I.S. Map of 1900 (cf. f. 331_b_ n.
   3). Chandawar lies s.w. of Firuzabad, and near a village
   called Sufipur.

   [2451] Anglice, Wednesday after 6 p.m.

   [2452] or life-guardsman, body-guard.

   [2453] This higher title for Tahmasp, which first appears
   here in the B.N., may be an early slip in the Turki text,
   since it occurs in many MSS. and also because "Shah-zada"
   reappears on f. 359.

   [2454] Slash-face, _balafre_; perhaps Ibrahim _Begchik_ (Index
   _s.n._), but it is long since he was mentioned by Babur, at
   least by name. He may however have come, at this time of
   reunion in Agra, with Mirza Beg Taghai (his uncle or
   brother?), father-in-law of Kamran.

   [2455] The army will have kept to the main road connecting the
   larger towns mentioned and avoiding the ravine district of the
   Jumna. What the boat-journey will have been between high banks
   and round remarkable bends can be learned from the G. of I.
   and Neave's _District Gazetteer of Mainpuri_. Rapri is on the
   road from Firuzabad to the ferry for Bateswar, where a large
   fair is held annually. (It is misplaced further east in the
   I.S. Map of 1900.) There are two Fathpurs, n. e. of Rapri.

   [2456] _aulugh tughaining tubi._ Here it suits to take the
   Turki word _tughai_ to mean bend of a river, and as referring
   to the one shaped (on the map) like a soda-water bottle, its
   neck close to Rapri. Babur avoided it by taking boat below its
   mouth.--In neither Persian translation has _tughai_ been read
   to mean a bend of a river; the first has _az payan ruia
   Rapri_, perhaps referring to the important ford (_payan_); the
   second has _az zir bulandi kalan Rapri_, perhaps referring to
   a height at the meeting of the bank of the ravine down which
   the road to the ford comes, with the high bank of the river.
   Three examples of _tughai_ or _tuqai_ [a synonym given by
   Dictionaries], can be seen in Abu'l-ghazi's _Shajrat-i-Turk_,
   Fraehn's imprint, pp. 106, 107, 119 (Desmaisons' trs. pp. 204,
   205, 230). In each instance Desmaisons renders it by _coude_,
   elbow, but one of the examples may need reconsideration, since
   the word has the further meanings of wood, dense forest by the
   side of a river (Vambery), prairie (Zenker), and reedy plain
   (Shaw).

   [2457] Blochmann describes the apparatus for marking lines to
   guide writing (A.-i-A. trs. p. 52 n. 5):--On a card of the size
   of the page to be written on, two vertical lines are drawn
   within an inch of the edges; along these lines small holes are
   pierced at regular intervals, and through these a string is
   laced backwards and forwards, care being taken that the
   horizontal strings are parallel. Over the lines of string the
   pages are placed and pressed down; the strings then mark the
   paper sufficiently to guide the writing.

   [2458] _tarkib (ning) khati bila tarjuma bilir auchun._ The
   _Rampur Diwan_ may supply the explanation of the uncertain
   words _tarkib khati_. The "translation" (_tarjuma_), mentioned
   in the passage quoted above, is the _Walidiyyah-risala_, the
   first item of the _Diwan_, in which it is entered on crowded
   pages, specially insufficient for the larger hand of the
   chapter-headings. The number of lines per page is 13; Babur
   now fashions a line-marker for 11. He has already despatched 4
   copies of the translation (f. 357_b_); he will have judged
   them unsatisfactory; hence to give space for the mixture of
   hands (_tarkib khati_), _i.e._ the smaller hand of the poem
   and the larger of the headings, he makes an 11 line marker.

   [2459] Perhaps Ahrari's in the _Walidiyyah-risala_, perhaps
   those of Muhammad. A quatrain in the _Rampur Diwan_ connects
   with this admonishment [Plate xiv_a_, 2nd quatrain].

   [2460] Jakhan (_G. of Mainpuri_). The _G. of Etawa_
   (Drake-Brockman) p. 213, gives this as some 18 m. n.w. of
   Etawa and as lying amongst the ravines of the Jumna.

   [2461] f. 359_b_ allows some of the particulars to be known.

   [2462] Mahdi may have come to invite Babur to the luncheon he
   served shortly afterwards. The Hai. MS. gives him the
   honorific plural; either a second caller was with him or an
   early scribe has made a slip, since Babur never so-honours
   Mahdi. This small point touches the larger one of how Babur
   regarded him, and this in connection with the singular story
   Nizamu'd-din Ahmad tells in his _Tabaqat-i-akbari_ about
   Khalifa's wish to supplant Humayun by Mahdi Khwaja (Index
   _s.nn._).

   [2463] _yigitlarni shokhluqgha salduq_, perhaps set them to
   make fun. Cf. f. 366, _yigitlar bir para shokhluq qildilar_.
   Muh. _Shirazi_ (p. 323 _foot_) makes the startling addition of
   _dar ab_ (_andakhtim_), _i.e._ he says that the royal party
   flung the braves into the river.

   [2464] The _Gazetteer of Etawa_ (Drake-Brockman) p. 186,
   _s.n._ Baburpur, writes of two village sites [which from their
   position are Muri-and-Adusa], as known by the name Sarai
   Baburpur from having been Babur's halting-place. They are 24m.
   to the s.e. of Etawa, on the old road for Kalpi. Near the name
   Baburpur in the Gazetteer Map there is Muhuri (Muri?); there
   is little or no doubt that Sarai Baburpur represents the
   camping-ground Muri-and-Adusa.

   [2465] This connects with Kitin-qara's complaints of the
   frontier-begs (f. 361), and with the talk of peace (f.
   356_b_).

   [2466] This injunction may connect with the desired peace; it
   will have been prompted by at least a doubt in Babur's mind as
   to Kamran's behaviour perhaps _e.g._ in manifested dislike for
   a Shia'. Concerning the style Shah-zada _see_ f. 358, p. 643,
   n. 1.

   [2467] Kamran's mother Gul-rukh _Begchik_ will have been of
   the party who will have tried in Kabul to forward her son's
   interests.

   [2468] f. 348, p. 624, n. 2.

   [2469] Kabul and Tramontana.

   [2470] Presumably that of Shamsu'd-din Muhammad's mission. One
   of Babur's couplets expresses longing for the fruits, and also
   for the "running waters", of lands other than Hindustan, with
   conceits recalling those of his English contemporaries in
   verse, as indeed do several others of his short poems (_Rampur
   Diwan_ Plate xvii A.).

   [2471] Hai. MS. _na marbutlighi_; so too the 2nd Pers. trs.
   but the 1st writes _wairani u karabi_ which suits the matter
   of defence.

   [2472] _qurghan_, walled-town; from the _mazbut_ following,
   the defences are meant.

   [2473] _viz._ Governor Khwaja Kalan, on whose want of
   dominance his sovereign makes good-natured reflection.

   [2474] _'alufa u qunal_; cf. 364_b_.

   [2475] Following _ailchi_ (envoys) there is in the Hai. MS.
   and in I.O. 217 a doubtful word, _bumla_, _yumla_; I.O. 215
   (which contains a Persian trs. of the letter) is obscure,
   Ilminsky changes the wording slightly; Erskine has a free
   translation. Perhaps it is _yaumi_, daily, misplaced (_see_
   above).

   [2476] Perhaps, endow the Mosque so as to leave no right of
   property in its revenues to their donor, here Babur. Cf.
   Hughes' _Dict. of Islam_ s.nn. _shari'_, _masjid_ and _waqf_.

   [2477] f. 139. Khwaja Kalan himself had taken from Hindustan
   the money for repairing this dam.

   [2478] _sapqun alip_; the 2nd Pers. trs. as if from _satqun
   alip_, _kharida_, purchasing.

   [2479] _nazar-gah_, perhaps, theatre, as showing the play
   enacted at the ford. Cf. ff. 137, 236, 248_b_. Tutun-dara will
   be Masson's Tutam-dara. Erskine locates Tutun-dara some 8
   _kos_ (16 m.) n. w. of Hupian (Upian). Masson shews that it
   was a charming place (_Journeys in Biluchistan, Afghanistan
   and the Panj-ab_, vol. iii, cap. vi and vii).

   [2480] _jibachi._ Babur's injunction seems to refer to the
   maintaining of the corps and the manufacture of armour rather
   than to care for the individual men involved.

   [2481] Either the armies in Nil-ab, or the women in the
   Kabul-country (f. 375).

   [2482] Perhaps what Babur means is, that both what he had said
   to 'Abdu'l-lah and what the quatrain expresses, are dissuasive
   from repentance. Erskine writes (_Mems._ p. 403) but without
   textual warrant, "I had resolution enough to persevere"; de
   Courteille (_Mems._ ii, 390), "_Voici un quatrain qui exprime
   au juste les difficultes de ma position._"

   [2483] The surface retort seems connected with the jacket,
   perhaps with a request for the gift of it.

   [2484] Clearly what recalled this joke of Banai's long-silent,
   caustic tongue was that its point lay ostensibly in a baffled
   wish--in 'Ali-sher's professed desire to be generous and a
   professed impediment, which linked in thought with Babur's
   desire for wine, baffled by his abjuration. So much Banai's
   smart verbal retort shows, but beneath this is the
   _double-entendre_ which cuts at the Beg as miserly and as
   physically impotent, a defect which gave point to another jeer
   at his expense, one chronicled by Sam Mirza and translated in
   Hammer-Purgstall's _Geschichte von schoenen Redekuenste
   Persiens_, art. CLV. (Cf. f. 179-80.)--The word _madagi_ is
   used metaphorically for a button-hole; like _na-mardi_, it
   carries secondary meanings, miserliness, impotence, _etc._
   (Cf. Wollaston's _English-Persian Dictionary_ _s.n._
   button-hole, where only we have found _madagi_ with this
   sense.)

   [2485] The 1st Pers. trs. expresses "all these jokes", thus
   including with the double-meanings of _madagi_, the jests of
   the quatrain.

   [2486] The 1st Pers. trs. fills out Babur's allusive phrase
   here with "of the _Walidiyyah_". His wording allows the
   inference that what he versified was a prose Turki translation
   of a probably Arabic original.

   [2487] Erskine comments here on the non-translation into
   Persian of Babur's letters. Many MSS., however, contain a
   translation (f. 348, p. 624, n. 2 and E.'s n. f. 377_b_).

   [2488] Anglice, Thursday after 6 p.m.

   [2489] What would suit measurement on maps and also Babur's
   route is "Jumoheen" which is marked where the Sarai
   Baburpur-Atsu-Phaphand road turns south, east of Phaphand
   (I.S. Map of 1900, Sheet 68).

   [2490] var. _Qabaq_, _Qatak_, _Qanak_, to each of which a
   meaning might be attached. Babur had written to Humayun about
   the frontier affair, as one touching the desired peace (f.
   359).

   [2491] This will refer to the late arrival in Agra of the
   envoy named, who was not with his younger brother at the feast
   of f. 351_b_ (f. 357, p. 641, n. 2).--As to Tahmasp's style,
   see f. 354, f. 358.

   [2492] Shah-quli may be the ill-informed narrator of f. 354.

   [2493] Both are marked on the southward road from Jumoheen
   (Jumandna?) for Auraiya.

   [2494] The old Kalpi _pargana_ having been sub-divided,
   Dirapur is now in the district of Cawnpore (Kanhpur).

   [2495] That this operation was not hair-cutting but
   head-shaving is shewn by the verbs T. _qirmaq_ and its Pers.
   trs. _tarash kardan_. To shave the head frequently is common
   in Central Asia.

   [2496] This will be Chaparghatta on the
   Dirapur-Bhognipur-Chaparghatta-Musanagar road, the affixes
   _kada_ and _ghatta_ both meaning house, temple, _etc._

   [2497] Mahim, and with her the child Gul-badan, came in
   advance of the main body of women. Babur seems to refer again
   to her assumption of royal style by calling her Wali, Governor
   (f. 369 and n.). It is unusual that no march or halt is
   recorded on this day.

   [2498] or, Arampur. We have not succeeded in finding this
   place; it seems to have been on the west bank of the Jumna,
   since twice Babur when on the east bank, writes of coming
   opposite to it (_supra_ and f. 379). If no move was made on
   Tuesday, Jumada II. 6th (cf. last note), the distance entered
   as done on Wednesday would locate the halting-place somewhere
   near the Akbarpur of later name, which stands on a road and at
   a ferry. But if the army did a stage on Tuesday, of which
   Babur omits mention, Wednesday's march might well bring him
   opposite to Hamirpur and to the "Rampur"-ferry. The verbal
   approximation of Arampur and "Rampur" arrests attention.--Local
   encroachment by the river, which is recorded in the District
   Gazetteers, may have something to do with the disappearance
   from these most useful books and from maps, of _pargana_
   Adampur (or, Arampur).

   [2499] _tushlab._ It suits best here, since solitude is the
   speciality of the excursion, to read _tushmak_ as meaning to
   take the road, Fr. _cheminer_.

   [2500] _da'wi bila_; _Mems._ p. 404, challenge; _Mems._ ii,
   391, _il avait fait des facons_, a truth probably, but one
   inferred only.

   [2501] This will be more to the south than Kura Khas, the
   headquarters of the large district; perhaps it is "Koora
   Khera" (? Kura-khiraj) which suits the route (I.S. Map, Sheet
   88).

   [2502] Perhaps Kunda Kanak, known also as "Kuria, Koria, Kura
   and Kunra Kanak" (_D.G. of Fathpur_).

   [2503] Haswa or Hanswa. The conjoint name represents two
   villages some 6m. apart, and is today that of their
   railway-station.

   [2504] almost due east of Fathpur, on the old King's Highway
   (_Badshahi Sar-rah_).

   [2505] His ancestors had ruled in Junpur from 1394 to 1476
   AD., his father Husain Shah having been conquered by Sl.
   Sikandar _Ludi_ at the latter date. He was one of three rivals
   for supremacy in the East (_Sharq_), the others being
   Jalalu'd-din _Nuhani_ and Mahmud _Ludi_,--Afghans all three.
   Cf. Erskine's _History of India, Babur_, i, 501.

   [2506] This name appears on the I.S. Map, Sheet 88, but too
   far north to suit Babur's distances, and also off the Sarai
   Munda-Kusar-Karrah road. The position of Naubasta suits
   better.

   [2507] Sher Khan was associated with Dudu Bibi in the charge
   of her son's affairs. Babur's favours to him, his son
   Humayun's future conqueror, will have been done during the
   Eastern campaign in 934 AH., of which so much record is
   missing. Cf. _Tarikh-i-sher-shahi_, E. & D.'s _History of
   India_, iv, 301 _et seq._ for particulars of Sher Khan (Farid
   Khan _Sur Afghan_).

   [2508] In writing "Sl. Mahmud", Babur is reporting his
   informant's style, he himself calling Mahmud "Khan" only (f.
   363 and f. 363_b_).

   [2509] This will be the more northerly of two Kusars marked as
   in Karrah; even so, it is a very long 6 _kurohs_ (12m.) from
   the Dugdugi of the I.S. Map (cf. n. _supra_).

   [2510] _bir para ash u ta'am_, words which suggest one of
   those complete meals served, each item on its separate small
   dish, and all dishes fitting like mosaic into one tray. T.
   _ash_ is cooked meat (f. 2 n. 1 and f. 343_b_); Ar. _ta'am_
   will be sweets, fruit, bread, perhaps rice also.

   [2511] The _yaktai_, one-fold coat, contrasts with the
   _du-tahi_, two-fold (A.-i-A. Bib. Ind. ed., p. 101, and
   Blochmann's trs. p. 88).

   [2512] This acknowledgement of right to the style Sultan
   recognized also supremacy of the Sharqi claim to rule over
   that of the Nuhani and _Ludi_ competitors.

   [2513] _mindin biti turgan waqai'._ This passage Teufel used
   to support his view that Babur's title for his book was
   _Waqai'_, and not _Babur-nama_ which, indeed, Teufel describes
   as the _Kazaner Ausgabe adoptirte Titel_. _Babur-nama_,
   however, is the title [or perhaps, merely scribe's name]
   associated both with Kehr's text and with the Haidarabad
   Codex.--I have found no indication of the selection by Babur of
   any title; he makes no mention of the matter and where he uses
   the word _waqai'_ or its congeners, it can be read as a common
   noun. In his colophon to the _Rampur Diwan_, it is a parallel
   of _ash'ar_, poems. Judging from what is found in the _Mubin_,
   it may be right to infer that, if he had lived to complete his
   book--now broken off _s.a._ 914 AH. (f. 216_b_)--he would have
   been explicit as to its title, perhaps also as to his grounds
   for choosing it. Such grounds would have found fitting mention
   in a preface to the now abrupt opening of the _Babur-nama_ (f.
   1_b_), and if the _Malfuzat-i-timuri_ be Timur's authentic
   autobiography, this book might have been named as an ancestral
   example influencing Babur to write his own. Nothing against
   the authenticity of the _Malfuzat_ can be inferred from the
   circumstance that Babur does not name it, because the preface
   in which such mention would be in harmony with _e.g._ his
   _Walidiyyah_ preface, was never written. It might accredit the
   _Malfuzat_ to collate passages having common topics, as they
   appear in the _Babur-nama_, _Malfuzat-i-timuri_ and
   _Zafar-nama_ (cf. E. & D.'s H. of I. iv, 559 for a discussion
   by Dr. Sachau and Prof. Dowson on the _Malfuzat_). (Cf. Z.D.M.
   xxxvii, p. 184, Teufel's art. _Babur und Abu'l-fazl_;
   Smirnow's Cat. of _Manuscrits Turcs_, p. 142; Index _in loco_
   _s.nn._ _Mubin_ and Title.)

   [2514] Koh-khiraj, Revenue-paying Koh (H. G. Nevill's _D. G.
   of Allahabad_, p. 261).

   [2515] _kima aichida_, which suggests a boat with a cabin, a
   _bajra_ (_Hobson-Jobson_ _s.n._ budgerow).

   [2516] He had stayed behind his kinsman Khwaja Kalan. Both, as
   Babur has said, were descendants of Khwaja 'Ubaidu'l-lah
   _Ahrari_. Khwaja Kalan was a grandson of Ahrari's second son
   Yahya; Khwaja 'Abdu'sh-shahid was the son of his fifth, Khwaja
   'Abdu'l-lah (Khwajagan-khwaja). 'Abdu'sh-shahid returned to
   India under Akbar, received a fief, maintained 2,000 poor
   persons, left after 20 years, and died in Samarkand in 982
   AH.-1574-5 AD. (A.-i-A., Blochmann's trs. and notes, pp. 423,
   539).

   [2517] f. 363, f. 363_b_.

   [2518] Not found on maps; OOjani or Ujahni about suits the
   measured distance.

   [2519] Prayag, Ilahabad, Allahabad. Between the asterisk in my
   text (_supra_) and the one following "ford" before the
   foliation mark f. 364, the Hai. MS. has a _lacuna_ which, as
   being preceded and followed by broken sentences, can hardly be
   due to a scribe's skip, but may result from the loss of a
   folio. What I have entered above between the asterisks is
   translated from the Kehr-Ilminsky text; it is in the two
   Persian translations also. Close scrutiny of it suggests that
   down to the end of the swimming episode it is not in order and
   that the account of the swim across the Ganges may be a
   survival of the now missing record of 934 AH. (f. 339). It is
   singular that the Pers. trss. make no mention of Piag or of
   Sir-auliya; their omission arouses speculation, as to in which
   text, the Turki or Persian, it was first tried to fill what
   remains a gap in the Hai. Codex. A second seeming sign of
   disorder is the incomplete sentence _yurtgha kilib_, which is
   noted below. A third is the crowd of incidents now standing
   under "Tuesday". A fourth, and an important matter, is that on
   grounds noted at the end of the swimming passage (p. 655 n. 3)
   it is doubtful whether that passage is in its right place.--It
   may be that some-one, at an early date after Babur's death,
   tried to fill the _lacuna_ discovered in his manuscript, with
   help from loose folios or parts of them. Cf. Index _s.n._
   swimming, and f. 377_b_, p. 680 n. 2.

   [2520] The Chaghatai sultans will have been with 'Askari east
   of the Ganges.

   [2521] _tur hawalik_; _Mems._ p. 406, violence of the wind;
   _Mems_. ii, 398, _une temperature tres agreable_.

   [2522] _yurtgha kilib_, an incomplete sentence.

   [2523] _aral bar aikandur_, phrasing implying uncertainty;
   there may have been an island, or such a peninsula as a
   narrow-mouthed bend of a river forms, or a spit or bluff
   projecting into the river. The word _aral_ represents
   _Aiki-su-arasi_, _Miyan-du-ab_, _Entre-eaux_,
   Twixt-two-streams, Mesopotamia.

   [2524] _qul_; Pers. trss. _dast andakhtan_ and _dast_.
   Presumably the 33 strokes carried the swimmer across the deep
   channel, or the Ganges was crossed higher than Piag.

   [2525] The above account of Babur's first swim across the
   Ganges which is entered under date Jumada II. 27th, 935 AH.
   (March 8th, 1529 AD.), appears misplaced, since he mentions
   under date Rajab 25th, 935 AH. (April 4th, 1529 AD. f.
   366_b_), that he had swum the Ganges at Baksara (Buxar) a year
   before, _i.e._ on or close to Rajab 25th, 934 AH. (April 15th,
   1528 AD.). Nothing in his writings shews that he was near Piag
   (Allahabad) in 934 AH.; nothing indisputably connects the
   swimming episode with the "Tuesday" below which it now stands;
   there is no help given by dates. One supposes Babur would take
   his first chance to swim the Ganges; this was offered at
   Qanauj (f. 336), but nothing in the short record of that time
   touches the topic. The next chance would be after he was in
   Aud, when, by an unascertained route, perhaps down the Ghogra,
   he made his way to Baksara where he says (f. 366_b_) he swam
   the river. Taking into consideration the various testimony
   noted, [Index _s.n._ swimming] there seems warrant for
   supposing that this swimming passage is a survival of the
   missing record of 934 AH. (f. 339). Cf. f. 377_b_, p. 680 and
   n. 2 for another surmised survival of 934 AH.

   [2526] "Friday" here stands for Anglice, Thursday after 6
   p.m.; this, only, suiting Babur's next explicit date Sha'ban
   1st, Saturday.

   [2527] The march, beginning on the Jumna, is now along the
   united rivers.

   [2528] _zarb-zanlik arabalar._ Here the carts are those
   carrying the guns.

   [2529] From the particulars Babur gives about the Tus (Tons)
   and Karma-nasa, it would seem that he had not passed them
   last year, an inference supported by what is known of his
   route in that year:--He came from Gualiar to the Kanar-passage
   (f. 336), there crossed the Jumna and went direct to Qanauj
   (f. 335), above Qanauj bridged the Ganges, went on to
   Bangarmau (f. 338), crossed the Gumti and went to near the
   junction of the Ghogra and Sarda (f. 338_b_). The next
   indication of his route is that he is at Baksara, but whether
   he reached it by water down the Ghogra, as his meeting with
   Muh. Ma'ruf _Farmuli_ suggests (f. 377), or by land, nothing
   shews. From Baksara (f. 366) he went up-stream to Chausa (f.
   365_b_), on perhaps to Sayyidpur, 2m. from the mouth of the
   Gumti, and there left the Ganges for Junpur (f. 365). I have
   found nothing about his return route to Agra; it seems
   improbable that he would go so far south as to near Piag; a
   more northerly and direct road to Fathpur and Sarai Baburpur
   may have been taken.--Concerning Babur's acts in 934 AH. the
   following item, (met with since I was working on 934 AH.),
   continues his statement (f. 338_b_) that he spent a few days
   near Aud (Ajodhya) to settle its affairs. The _D.G. of
   Fyzabaa_ (H. E. Nevill) p. 173 says "In 1528 AD. Babur came to
   Ajodhya (Aud) and halted a week. He destroyed the ancient
   temple" (marking the birth-place of Rama) "and on its site
   built a mosque, still known as Babur's Mosque.... It has two
   inscriptions, one on the outside, one on the pulpit; both are
   in Persian; and bear the date 935 _AH._" This date may be that
   of the completion of the building.--(_Corrigendum_:--On f. 339
   n. 1, I have too narrowly restricted the use of the name
   Sarju. Babur used it to describe what the maps of Arrowsmith
   and Johnson shew, and not only what the _Gazetteer of India_
   map of the United Provinces does. It applies to the Sarda (f.
   339) as Babur uses it when writing of the fords.)

   [2530] Here the lacuna of the Hai. Codex ends.

   [2531] Perhaps, where there is now the railway station of
   "Nulibai" (I.S. Map). The direct road on which the army moved,
   avoids the windings of the river.

   [2532] This has been read as T. _kint_, P. _dih_, Eng. village
   and Fr. _village_.

   [2533] "Nankunpur" lying to the north of Puhari
   railway-station suits the distance measured on maps.

   [2534] These will be the women-travellers.

   [2535] Perhaps jungle tracts lying in the curves of the river.

   [2536] _jirga_, which here stands for the beaters' incurving
   line, witness the exit of the buffalo at the end. Cf. f.
   367_b_ for a _jirga_ of boats.

   [2537] _auzun auzagh_, many miles and many hours?

   [2538] Bulloa? (I.S. Map).

   [2539] Anglice, Sunday after 6 p.m.

   [2540] _'alufa u qunal_ (f. 359_b_).

   [2541] than the Ganges perhaps; or narrowish compared with
   other rivers, _e.g._ Ganges, Ghogra, and Jun.

   [2542] _yil-turgi yurt_, by which is meant, I think, close to
   the same day a year back, and not an indefinite reference to
   some time in the past year.

   [2543] Maps make the starting-place likely to be Sayyidpur.

   [2544] re-named Zamania, after Akbar's officer 'Ali-quli Khan
   Khan-i-zaman, and now the head-quarters of the Zamania
   _pargana_ of Ghazipur. Madan-Benares was in Akbar's _sarkar_
   of Ghazipur. (It was not identified by E. or by de C.) Cf.
   _D.G. of Ghazipur_.

   [2545] In the earlier part of the Hai. Codex this Afghan
   tribal-name is written Nuhani, but in this latter portion a
   different scribe occasionally writes it Luhani (Index _s.n._).

   [2546] _'arza-dasht_, _i.e._ phrased as from one of lower
   station to a superior.

   [2547] His letter may have announced his and his mother Dudu
   Bibi's approach (f. 368-9).

   [2548] Nasir Khan had been an amir of Sl. Sikandar _Ludi_.
   Sher Khan _Sur_ married his widow "Guhar Kusain", bringing him
   a large dowry (A.N. trs. p. 327; and _Tarikh-i-sher-shahi_, E.
   & D.'s _History of India_ iv, 346).

   [2549] He started from Chaparghatta (f. 361_b_, p. 650 n. 1).

   [2550] _yil-turgi yurt._

   [2551] "This must have been the Eclipse of the 10th of May
   1528 AD.; a fast is enjoined on the day of an eclipse"
   (Erskine).

   [2552] Karma-na['s]a means loss of the merit acquired by good
   works.

   [2553] The I.S. Map marks a main road leading to the mouth of
   the Karma-na['s]a and no other leading to the river for a
   considerable distance up-stream.

   [2554] Perhaps "Thora-nadee" (I.S. Map).

   [2555] Anglice, Sunday after 6 p.m.

   [2556] _autkan yil._

   [2557] Perhaps the _du-aba_ between the Ganges and
   "Thora-nadee".

   [2558] _yil-tur ... Gang-sui-din min dastak bila autub, ba'zi
   at, ba'zi tiwah minib, kilib, sair qililib aidi._ Some
   uncertainty as to the meaning of the phrase _dastak bila
   autub_ is caused by finding that while here de Courteille
   agrees with Erskine in taking it to mean swimming, he varies
   later (f. 373_b_) to _appuyes sur une piece de bois_. Taking
   the Persian translations of three passages about crossing
   water into consideration (p. 655 after f. 363_b_, f. 366_b_
   (here), f. 373_b_), and also the circumstances that E. and de
   C. are once in agreement and that Erskine worked with the help
   of Oriental _munshis_, I incline to think that _dastak bila_
   does express swimming.--The question of its precise meaning
   bears on one concerning Babur's first swim across the Ganges
   (p. 655, n. 3).--Perhaps I should say, however, that if the
   sentence quoted at the head of this note stood alone, without
   the extraneous circumstances supporting the reading of _dastak
   bila_ to mean swimming, I should incline to read it as stating
   that Babur went on foot through the water, feeling his footing
   with a pole (_dastak_), and that his followers rode through
   the ford after him. Nothing in the quoted passage suggests
   that the horses and camels swam. But whether the Ganges was
   fordable at Baksara in Babur's time, is beyond surmise.

   [2559] _fasl soz_, which, manifestly, were to be laid before
   the envoy's master. The articles are nowhere specified; one is
   summarized merely on f. 365. The incomplete sentence of the
   Turki text (_supra_) needs their specification at this place,
   and an explicit statement of them would have made clearer the
   political relations of Babur with Nasrat Shah.--A folio may
   have been lost from Babur's manuscript; it might have
   specified the articles, and also have said something leading
   to the next topic of the diary, now needing preliminaries,
   _viz._ that of the Mirza's discontent with his new
   appointment, a matter not mentioned earlier.

   [2560] This suits Babur's series, but Gladwin and Wuestenfeld
   have 10th.

   [2561] The first is near, the second on the direct road from
   Buxar for Arrah.

   [2562] The Hai. MS. makes an elephant be posted as the sole
   scout; others post a _sardar_, or post braves; none post man
   and beast.

   [2563] This should be 5th; perhaps the statement is confused
   through the gifts being given late, Anglice, on Tuesday 4th,
   Islamice on Wednesday night.

   [2564] The Mirza's Timurid birth and a desire in Babur to give
   high status to a representative he will have wished to leave
   in Bihar when he himself went to his western dominions,
   sufficiently explain the bestowal of this sign of sovereignty.

   [2565] _jirga._ This instance of its use shews that Babur had
   in mind not a completed circle, but a line, or in sporting
   parlance, not a hunting-circle but a beaters'-line. [Cf. f.
   251, f. 364_b_ and _infra_ of the crocodile.] The word is used
   also for a governing-circle, a tribal-council.

   [2566] _aulugh_ (_kima_). Does _aulugh_ (_auluq_, _uluq_)
   connect with the "bulky Oolak or baggage-boat of Bengal"?
   (_Hobson-Jobson_ _s.n._ Woolock, oolock).

   [2567] De Courteille's reading of Ilminsky's "Baburi" (p. 476)
   as Bairi, old servant, hardly suits the age of the boat.

   [2568] Babur anticipated the custom followed _e.g._ by the
   White Star and Cunard lines, when he gave his boats names
   having the same terminal syllable; his is _aish_; on it he
   makes the quip of the har _aish_ of the Farmaish.

   [2569] As Vullers makes Ar. _ghurfat_ a synonym of
   _chaukandi_, the Farmaish seems likely to have had a cabin,
   open at the sides. De Courteille understood it to have a
   rounded stern. [Cf. E. & D.'s _History of India_ v, 347, 503
   n.; and Gul-badan's H. N. trs. p. 98, n. 2.]

   [2570] _mindin rukhsat aldi_; phrasing which bespeaks admitted
   equality, that of Timurid birth.

   [2571] _i.e._ subjects of the Afghan ruler of Bengal; many
   will have been Biharis and Purbiyas. Makhdum-i-'alam was
   Nasrat Shah's Governor in Hajipur.

   [2572] This might imply that the Afghans had been prevented
   from joining Mahmud Khan _Ludi_ near the Son.

   [2573] Sl. Muhammad Shah _Nuhani Afghan_, the former ruler of
   Bihar, dead within a year. He had trained Farid Khan _Sur_ in
   the management of government affairs; had given him, for
   gallant encounter with a tiger, the title Sher Khan by which,
   or its higher form Sher Shah, history knows him, and had made
   him his young son's "deputy", an office Sher Khan held after
   the father's death in conjunction with the boy's mother Dudu
   Bibi (_Tarikh-i-sher-shahi_, E. & D.'s _History of India_ iv,
   325 _et seq._).

   [2574] _guz baghi yusunluq_; by which I understand they were
   held fast from departure, as _e.g._ a mouse by the fascination
   of a snake.

   [2575] f. 365 mentions a letter which may have announced their
   intention.

   [2576] Ganges; they thus evaded the restriction made good on
   other Afghans.

   [2577] Anglice, Saturday 8th after 6 p.m.

   [2578] The _D. G. of Shahabad_ (pp. 20 and 127) mentions that
   "it is said Babur marched to Arrah after his victory over
   Mahmud _Ludi_", and that "local tradition still points to a
   place near the Judge's Court as that on which he pitched his
   camp".

   [2579] Kharid which is now a _pargana_ of the Ballia district,
   lay formerly on both sides of the Ghogra. When the army of
   Kharid opposed Babur's progress, it acted for Nasrat Shah, but
   this Babur diplomatically ignored in assuming that there was
   peace between Bengal and himself.--At this time Nasrat Shah
   held the riverain on the left bank of the Ghogra but had lost
   Kharid of the right bank, which had been taken from him by
   Junaid _Barlas_. A record of his occupation still survives in
   Kharid-town, an inscription dated by his deputy as for 1529
   AD. (_District Gazetteer of Ballia_ H. R. Nevill), and _D. G.
   of Saran_ (L. L. S. O'Malley), Historical Chapters.

   [2580] Babur's opinion of Nasrat Shah's hostility is more
   clearly shewn here than in the verbal message of f. 369.

   [2581] This will be an unceremonious summary of a
   word-of-mouth message.

   [2582] Cf. f. 366_b_, p. 661 n. 2.

   [2583] This shews that Babur did not recognize the Saran
   riverain down to the Ganges as belonging to Kharid. His
   offered escort of Turks would safe-guard the Kharidis if they
   returned to the right bank of the Ghogra which was in Turk
   possession.

   [2584] The Hai. MS. has _wali_, clearly written; which, as a
   word representing Mahim would suit the sentence best, may make
   playful reference to her royal commands (f. 361_b_), by
   styling her the Governor (_wali_). Erskine read the word as a
   place-name Dipali, which I have not found; De Courteille omits
   Ilminsky's _w:ras_ (p. 478). The MSS. vary and are uncertain.

   [2585] This is the "Kadjar" of Reclus' _L'Asie anterieure_ and
   is the name of the Turkman tribe to which the present ruling
   house of Persia belongs. "Turkman" might be taken as applied
   to Shah Tahmasp by Div Sultan's servant on f. 354.

   [2586] _Nelumbium speciosum_, a water-bean of great beauty.

   [2587] Shaikh Yahya had been the head of the Chishti Order.
   His son (d. 782 AH.-1380-1 AD.) was the author of works named
   by Abu'l-fazl as read aloud to Akbar, a discursive detail
   which pleads in my excuse that those who know Babur well
   cannot but see in his grandson's character and success the
   fruition of his mental characteristics and of his labours in
   Hindustan. (For Sharafu'd-din _Muniri_, cf.
   _Khazinatu'l-asfiya_ ii, 390-92; and _Ayin-i-akbari_ _s.n._)

   [2588] Kostenko's _Turkistan Region_ describes a regimen for
   horses which Babur will have seen in practice in his native
   land, one which prevented the defect that hindered his at
   Munir from accomplishing more than some 30 miles before
   mid-day.

   [2589] The distance from Munir to the bank of the Ganges will
   have been considerably longer in Babur's day than now because
   of the change of the river's course through its desertion of
   the Burh-ganga channel (cf. next note).

   [2590] In trying to locate the site of Babur's coming battle
   with the forces of Nasrat Shah, it should be kept in mind that
   previous to the 18th century, and therefore, presumably, in
   his day, the Ganges flowed in the "Burh-ganga" (Old Ganges)
   channel which now is closely followed by the western boundary
   of the Ballia _pargana_ of Du-aba; that the Ganges and Ghogra
   will have met where this old channel entered the bed of the
   latter river; and also, as is seen from Babur's narrative,
   that above the confluence the Ghogra will have been confined
   to a narrowed channel. When the Ganges flowed in the
   Burh-ganga channel, the now Ballia _pargana_ of Du-aba was a
   sub-division of Bihiya and continuous with Shahabad. From it
   in Bihiya Babur crossed the Ganges into Kharid, doing this at
   a place his narrative locates as some 2 miles from the
   confluence. Cf. _D. G. of Ballia_, pp. 9, 192-3, 206, 213. It
   may be observed that the former northward extension of Bihiya
   to the Burh-ganga channel explains Babur's estimate (f. 370)
   of the distance from Munir to his camp on the Ganges; his
   12_k._ (24m.) may then have been correct; it is now too high.

   [2591] De Courteille, _pierrier_, which may be a balista.
   Babur's writings give no indication of other than
   stone-ammunition for any projectile-engine or fire-arm. Cf. R.
   W. F. Payne-Gallwey's _Projectile-throwing engines of the
   ancients_.

   [2592] Sir R. W. F. Payne-Gallwey writes in _The Cross-bow_
   (p. 40 and p. 41) what may apply to Babur's _zarb-zan_
   (culverin?) and _tufang_ (matchlock), when he describes the
   larger culverin as a heavy hand-gun of from 16-18lb., as used
   by the foot-soldier and requiring the assistance of an
   attendant to work it; also when he says that it became the
   portable arquebus which was in extensive use in Europe by the
   Swiss in 1476 AD.; and that between 1510 and 1520 the arquebus
   described was superseded by what is still seen amongst remote
   tribes in India, a matchlock arquebus.

   [2593] The two positions Babur selected for his guns would
   seem to have been opposite two ferry-heads, those, presumably,
   which were blocked against his pursuit of Biban and Bayazid.
   'Ali-quli's emplacement will have been on the high bank of old
   alluvium of south-eastern Kharid, overlooking the narrowed
   channel demanded by Babur's narrative, one pent in presumably
   by _kankar_ reefs such as there are in the region. As
   illustrating what the channel might have been, the varying
   breadth of the Ghogra along the 'Azamgarh District may be
   quoted, _viz._ from 10 miles to 2/5m., the latter being where,
   as in Kharid, there is old alluvium with _kankar_ reefs
   preserving the banks. Cf. Reid's _Report of Settlement
   Operations in 'Azamgarh, Sikandarpur, and Bhadaon_.--Firishta
   gives Badru as the name of one ferry (lith. ed. i. 210).

   [2594] Mustafa, like 'Ali-quli, was to take the offensive by
   gun-fire directed on the opposite bank. Judging from maps and
   also from the course taken by the Ganges through the
   Burh-ganga channel and from Babur's narrative, there seems to
   have been a narrow reach of the Ghogra just below the
   confluence, as well as above.

   [2595] This ferry, bearing the common name Haldi (turmeric),
   is located by the course of events as at no great distance
   above the enemy's encampment above the confluence. It cannot
   be the one of Sikandarpur West.

   [2596] _guzr_, which here may mean a casual ford through water
   low just before the Rains. As it was not found, it will have
   been temporary.

   [2597] _i.e._ above Babur's positions.

   [2598] _sarwar_ (or _dar_) _waqt_.

   [2599] The preceding sentence is imperfect and varies in the
   MSS. The 1st Pers. trs., the wording of which is often
   explanatory, says that there were _no_ passages, which, as
   there were many ferries, will mean fords. The Haldi-guzr where
   'Askari was to cross, will have been far below the lowest
   Babur mentions, _viz._ Chatur-muk (Chaupara).

   [2600] This passage presupposes that guns in Kharid could hit
   the hostile camp in Saran. If the river narrowed here as it
   does further north, the Ghazi mortar, which seems to have been
   the only one Babur had with him, would have carried across,
   since it threw a stone 1,600 paces (_qadam_, f. 309). Cf.
   Reid's _Report_ quoted above.

   [2601] Anglice, Saturday after 6p.m.

   [2602] _yaqin bulghan fauj_, var. _ta'in bulghan fauj_, the
   army appointed (to cross). The boats will be those collected
   at the Haldi-ferry, and the army 'Askari's.

   [2603] _i.e._ near 'Ali-quli's emplacement.

   [2604] Cf. f. 303, f. 309, f. 337 and n. 4.

   [2605] "The _yasawal_ is an officer who carries the commands
   of the prince, and sees them enforced" (Erskine). Here he will
   have been the superintendent of coolies moving earth.

   [2606] _ma'jun-nak_ which, in these days of Babur's return to
   obedience, it may be right to translate in harmony with his
   psychical outlook of self-reproach, by _ma'jun_-polluted.
   Though he had long ceased to drink wine, he still sought cheer
   and comfort, in his laborious days, from inspiriting and
   forbidden confections.

   [2607] Probably owing to the less precise phrasing of his
   Persian archetype, Erskine here has reversed the statement,
   made in the Turki, that Babur slept in the Asaish (not the
   Farmaish).

   [2608] _austida tashlar._ An earlier reading of this, _viz._
   that stones were thrown on the intruder is negatived by
   Babur's mention of wood as the weapon used.

   [2609] _su sari_ which, as the boats were between an island
   and the river's bank, seems likely to mean that the man went
   off towards the main stream. _Mems._ p. 415, "made his escape
   in the river"; _Mems._ ii, 418, _dans la direction du large_.

   [2610] This couplet is quoted by Jahangir also (_Tuzuk_, trs.
   Rogers & Beveridge, i, 348).

   [2611] This, taken with the positions of other
   crossing-parties, serves to locate 'Askari's "Haldi-passage"
   at no great distance above 'Ali-quli's emplacement at the
   confluence, and above the main Bengal force.

   [2612] perhaps, towed from the land. I have not found Babur
   using any word which clearly means to row, unless indeed a
   later _rawan_ does so. The force meant to cross in the boats
   taken up under cover of night was part of Babur's own, no
   doubt.

   [2613] _atish-bazi_ lit. fire-playing, if a purely Persian
   compound; if _atish_ be Turki, it means discharge, shooting.
   The word "fire-working" is used above under the nearest to
   contemporary guidance known to me, _viz._ that of the list of
   persons who suffered in the Patna massacre "during the
   troubles of October 1763 AD.", in which list are the names of
   four Lieutenants fire-workers (_Calcutta Review_, Oct. 1884,
   and Jan. 1885, art. _The Patna Massacre_, H. Beveridge).

   [2614] _bi tahashi_, without protest or demur.

   [2615] Anglice, Wednesday after 6 p.m.

   [2616] Perhaps those which had failed to pass in the darkness;
   perhaps those from Haldi-guzr, which had been used by
   'Askari's troops. There appear to be obvious reasons for their
   keeping abreast on the river with the troops in Saran, in
   order to convey reinforcements or to provide retreat.

   [2617] _kimalar austida_, which may mean that he came, on the
   high bank, to where the boats lay below.

   [2618] as in the previous note, _kimalar austida_. These will
   have been the few drawn up-stream along the enemy's front.

   [2619] The reproach conveyed by Babur's statement is borne out
   by the strictures of Haidar Mirza _Dughlat_ on Baba Sultan's
   neglect of duty (_Tarikh-i-rashidi_ trs. cap. lxxvii).

   [2620] _yusunluq tushi_, Pers. trss. _tarf khud_, i.e. their
   place in the array, a frequent phrase.

   [2621] _dastak bila dosta-i-qamish bila._ Cf. f. 363_b_ and f.
   366_b_, for passages and notes connected with swimming and
   _dastak_. Erskine twice translates _dastak bila_ by swimming;
   but here de Courteille changes from his earlier _a la nage_
   (f. 366_b_) to _appuyes sur une piece de bois_. Perhaps the
   swift current was crossed by swimming with the support of a
   bundle of reeds, perhaps on rafts made of such bundles (cf.
   _Illustrated London News_, Sep. 16th, 1916, for a picture of
   Indian soldiers so crossing on rafts).

   [2622] perhaps they were in the Burh-ganga channel, out of
   gun-fire.

   [2623] If the Ghogra flowed at this point in a narrow channel,
   it would be the swifter, and less easy to cross than where in
   an open bed.

   [2624] _chirik-aili_, a frequent compound, but one of which
   the use is better defined in the latter than the earlier part
   of Babur's writings to represent what then answered to an Army
   Service Corps. This corps now crosses into Saran and joins the
   fighting force.

   [2625] This appears to refer to the crossing effected before
   the fight.

   [2626] or Kundbah. I have not succeeded in finding this name
   in the Nirhun _pargana_; it may have been at the southern end,
   near the "Domaigarh" of maps. In it was Tir-muhani, perhaps a
   village (f. 377, f. 381).

   [2627] This passage justifies Erskine's surmise (_Memoirs_, p.
   411, n. 4) that the Kharid-country lay on both banks of the
   Ghogra. His further surmise that, on the east bank of the
   Ghogra, it extended to the Ganges would be correct also, since
   the Ganges flowed, in Babur's day, through the Burh-ganga (Old
   Ganges) channel along the southern edge of the present Kharid,
   and thus joined the Ghogra higher than it now does.

   [2628] Bayazid and Ma'ruf _Farmuli_ were brothers. Bayazid had
   taken service with Babur in 932 AH. (1526 AD.), left him in
   934 AH. (end of 1527 AD.) and opposed him near Qanuj. Ma'ruf,
   long a rebel against Ibrahim _Ludi_, had never joined Babur;
   two of his sons did so; of the two, Muhammad and Musa, the
   latter may be the one mentioned as at Qanuj, "Ma'ruf's son"
   (f. 336).--For an interesting sketch of Ma'ruf's character and
   for the location in Hindustan of the Farmuli clan, _see_ the
   _Waqi'at-i-mushtaqi_, E. & D.'s _History of India_, iv,
   584.--In connection with Qanuj, the discursive remark may be
   allowable, that Babur's halt during the construction of the
   bridge of boats across the Ganges in 934 AH. is still
   commemorated by the name Badshah-nagar of a village between
   Bangarmau and Nanamau (Elliot's _Onau_, p. 45).

   [2629] On f. 381 'Abdu'l-lah's starting-place is mentioned as
   Tir-muhani.

   [2630] The failure to join would be one of the evils predicted
   by the dilatory start of the ladies from Kabul (f. 360_b_).

   [2631] The order for these operations is given on f. 355_b_.

   [2632] f. 369. The former Nuhani chiefs are now restored to
   Bihar as tributaries of Babur.

   [2633] Erskine estimated the _krur_ at about L25,000, and the
   50 _laks_ at about L12,500.

   [2634] The Mirza thus supersedes Junaid _Barlas_ in
   Junpur.--The form Junapur used above and elsewhere by Babur and
   his Persian translators, supports the _Gazetteer of India_
   xlv, 74 as to the origin of the name Junpur.

   [2635] a son of Nasrat Shah. No record of this earlier
   legation is with the _Babur-nama_ manuscripts; probably it has
   been lost. The only article found specified is the one asking
   for the removal of the Kharid army from a ferry-head Babur
   wished to use; Nasrat Shah's assent to this is an anti-climax
   to Babur's victory on the Ghogra.

   [2636] Chaupara is at the Saran end of the ferry, at the
   Sikandarpur one is Chatur-muk (Four-faces, an epithet of
   Brahma and Vishnu).

   [2637] It may be inferred from the earlier use of the phrase
   Gogar (or Gagar) and Saru (Siru or Sird), on f. 338-8_b_, that
   whereas the rebels were, earlier, for crossing Saru only,
   _i.e._ the Ghogra below its confluence with the Sarda, they
   had now changed for crossing above the confluence and further
   north. Such a change is explicable by desire to avoid
   encounter with Babur's following, here perhaps the army of
   Aud, and the same desire is manifested by their abandonment of
   a fort captured (f. 377_b_) some days before the rumour
   reached Babur of their crossing Saru and Gogar.--Since
   translating the passage on f. 338, I have been led, by
   enforced attention to the movement of the confluence of Ghogra
   with Ganges (Saru with Gang) to see that that translation,
   eased in obedience to distances shewn in maps, may be wrong
   and that Babur's statement that he dismounted 2-3 _kurohs_
   (4-6 m.) above Aud at the confluence of Gogar with Saru, may
   have some geographical interest and indicate movement of the
   two affluents such _e.g._ as is indicated of the Ganges and
   Ghogra by tradition and by the name Burh-ganga (cf. f. 370, p.
   667, n. 2).

   [2638] or L:knur, perhaps Liknu or Liknur. The capricious
   variation in the MSS. between L:knu and L:knur makes the
   movements of the rebels difficult to follow. Comment on these
   variants, tending to identify the places behind the words, is
   grouped in Appendix T, _On L:knu_ (_Lakhnau_) and _L:knur_
   (_Lakhnar_).

   [2639] Taking _guzr_ in the sense it has had hitherto in the
   _Babur-nama_ of ferry or ford, the detachment may have been
   intended to block the river-crossings of "Saru and Gogar". If
   so, however, the time for this was past, the rebels having
   taken a fort west of those rivers on Ramzan 13th. Nothing
   further is heard of the detachment.--That news of the
   rebel-crossing of the rivers did not reach Babur before the
   18th and news of their capture of L:knu or L:knur before the
   19th may indicate that they had crossed a good deal to the
   north of the confluence, and that the fort taken was one more
   remote than Lakhnau (Oude). Cf. Appendix T.

   [2640] Anglice, Wednesday after 6 p.m.

   [2641] These are recited late in the night during Ramzan.

   [2642] _kaghaz u ajza'_, perhaps writing-paper and the various
   sections of the _Babur-nama_ writings, _viz._ biographical
   notices, descriptions of places, detached lengths of diary,
   _farmans_ of Shaikh Zain. The _lacunae_ of 934 AH., 935 AH.,
   and perhaps earlier ones also may be attributed reasonably to
   this storm. It is easy to understand the loss of _e.g._ the
   conclusion of the Farghana section, and the diary one of 934
   AH., if they lay partly under water. The accident would be
   better realized in its disastrous results to the writings, if
   one knew whether Babur wrote in a bound or unbound volume.
   From the minor losses of 935 AH., one guesses that the current
   diary at least had not reached the stage of binding.

   [2643] The _tungluq_ is a flap in a tent-roof, allowing light
   and air to enter, or smoke to come out.

   [2644] _ajza' u kitab._ _See_ last note but one. The _kitab_
   (book) might well be Babur's composed narrative on which he
   was now working, as far as it had then gone towards its
   untimely end (Hai. MS. f. 216_b_).

   [2645] _saqarlat kut-zilucha_, where _saqarlat_ will mean warm
   and woollen.

   [2646] Kharid-town is some 4 m. s.e. of the town of
   Sikandarpur.

   [2647] or L:knu. Cf. Appendix T. It is now 14 days since
   'Abdu'l-lah _kitabdar_ had left Tir-muhani (f. 380) for
   Sambhal; as he was in haste, there had been time for him to go
   beyond Aud (where Baqi was) and yet get the news to Babur on
   the 19th.

   [2648] In a way not usual with him, Babur seems to apply three
   epithets to this follower, _viz._ _ming-begi_, _shaghawal_,
   _Tashkindi_ (Index _s.n._).

   [2649] or Kandla; cf. Revenue list f. 293; is it now Saran
   Khas?

   [2650] L18,000 (Erskine). For the total yield of Kundla (or
   Kandla) and Sarwar, _see_ Revenue list (f. 293).

   [2651] f. 375. P. 675 n. 2 and f. 381, p. 687 n. 3.

   [2652] A little earlier Babur has recorded his ease of mind
   about Bihar and Bengal, the fruit doubtless of his victory
   over Mahmud _Ludi_ and Nasrat Shah; he now does the same about
   Bihar and Sarwar, no doubt because he has replaced in Bihar,
   as his tributaries, the Nuhani chiefs and has settled other
   Afghans, Jalwanis and Farmulis in a Sarwar cleared of the
   Jalwani (?) rebel Biban and the Farmuli opponents Bayazid and
   Ma'ruf. The Farmuli Shaikh-zadas, it may be recalled, belonged
   by descent to Babur's Kabul district of Farmul.--The
   _Waqi'at-i-mushtaqi_ (E. & D.'s _H. of I._ iv, 548) details
   the position of the clan under Sikandar _Ludi_.

   [2653] The MSS. write Fathpur but Nathpur suits the context, a
   _pargana_ mentioned in the _Ayin-i-akbari_ and now in the
   'Azamgarh district. There seems to be no Fathpur within
   Babur's limit of distance. The _D. G. of 'Azamgarh_ mentions
   two now insignificant Fathpurs, one as having a school, the
   other a market. The name G:l:r:h (K:l:r:h) I have not found.

   [2654] The passage contained in this section seems to be a
   survival of the lost record of 934 AH. (f. 339). I have found
   it only in the _Memoirs_ p. 420, and in Mr. Erskine's own
   Codex of the _Waqi'at-i-baburi_ (now B.M. Add. 26,200), f. 371
   where however several circumstances isolate it from the
   context. It may be a Persian translation of an authentic Turki
   fragment, found, perhaps with other such fragments, in the
   Royal Library. Its wording disassociates it from the
   'Abdu'r-rahim text. The Codex (No. 26,200) breaks off at the
   foot of a page (_supra_, Fathpur) with a completed sentence.
   The supposedly-misplaced passage is entered on the next folio
   as a sort of ending of the _Babur-nama_ writings; in a rough
   script, inferior to that of the Codex, and is followed by
   _Tam, tam_ (Finis), and an incomplete date 98-, in words.
   Beneath this a line is drawn, on which is subtended the
   triangle frequent with scribes; within this is what seems to
   be a completion of the date to 980 AH. and a pious wish,
   scrawled in an even rougher hand than the rest.--Not only in
   diction and in script but in contents also the passage is a
   misfit where it now stands; it can hardly describe a village
   on the Saru; Babur in 935 AH. did not march for Ghazipur but
   may have done so in 934 AH. (p. 656, n. 3); Isma'il _Jalwani_
   had had leave given already in 935 AH. (f. 377) under other
   conditions, ones bespeaking more trust and tried
   allegiance.--Possibly the place described as having fine
   buildings, gardens _etc._ is Aud (Ajodhya) where Babur spent
   some days in 934 AH. (cf. f. 363_b_, p. 655 n. 3).

   [2655] "Here my Persian manuscript closes" (This is B.M. Add.
   26,200). "The two additional fragments are given from Mr.
   Metcalfe's manuscript alone" (now B.M. Add. 26,202) "and
   unluckily, it is extremely incorrect" (Erskine). This note
   will have been written perhaps a decade before 1826, in which
   year the _Memoirs of Babur_ was published, after long delay.
   Mr. Erskine's own Codex (No. 26,200) was made good at a later
   date, perhaps when he was working on his History of India
   (pub. 1854), by a well-written supplement which carries the
   diary to its usual end _s.a._ 936 AH. and also gives Persian
   translations of Babur's letters to Humayun and Khwaja Kalan.

   [2656] Here, as earlier, Nathpur suits the context better than
   Fathpur. In the Nathpur _pargana_, at a distance from Chaupara
   approximately suiting Babur's statement of distance, is the
   lake "Tal Ratoi", formerly larger and deeper than now. There
   is a second further west and now larger than Tal Ratoi;
   through this the Ghogra once flowed, and through it has tried
   within the last half-century to break back. These changes in
   Tal Ratoi and in the course of the Ghogra dictate caution in
   attempting to locate places which were on it in Babur's day
   _e.g._ K:l:r:h (_supra_).

   [2657] Appendix T.

   [2658] This name has the following variants in the Hai. MS.
   and in Kehr's:--Dalm-u-uu-ur-ud-ut. The place was in Akbar's
   _sarkar_ of Manikpur and is now in the Rai Bareilly district.

   [2659] Perhaps Chaksar, which was in Akbar's _sarkar_ of
   Junpur, and is now in the 'Azamgarh district.

   [2660] Hai. MS. _J:nara khund tawabi si bila_ (perhaps
   _tawabi'si_ but not so written). The obscurity of these words
   is indicated by their variation in the manuscripts. Most
   scribes have them as Chunar and Junpur, guided presumably by
   the despatch of a force to Chunar on receipt of the news, but
   another force was sent to Dalmau at the same time. The rebels
   were defeated s.w. of Dalmau and thence went to Mahuba; it is
   not certain that they had crossed the Ganges at Dalmau; there
   are difficulties in supposing the fort they captured and
   abandoned was Lakhnau (Oude); they might have gone south to
   near Kalpi and Adampur, which are at no great distance from
   where they were defeated by Baqi _shaghawal_, if Lakhnur (now
   Shahabad in Rampur) were the fort. (Cf. Appendix T.)--To take
   up the interpretation of the words quoted above, at another
   point, that of the kinsfolk or fellow-Afghans the rebels
   planned to join:--these kinsfolk may have been, of Bayazid, the
   Farmulis in Sarwar, and of Biban, the Jalwanis of the same
   place. The two may have trusted to relationship for harbourage
   during the Rains, disloyal though they were to their kinsmen's
   accepted suzerain. Therefore if they were once across Ganges
   and Jumna, as they were in Mahuba, they may have thought of
   working eastwards south of the Ganges and of getting north
   into Sarwar through territory belonging to the Chunar and
   Junpur governments. This however is not expressed by the words
   quoted above; perhaps Babur's record was hastily and
   incompletely written.--Another reading may be Chunar and Jaund
   (in Akbar's _sarkar_ of Rohtas).

   [2661] _yuliini tushqailar._ It may be observed concerning the
   despatch of Muhammad-i-zaman M. and of Junaid _Barlas_ that
   they went to their new appointments Junpur and Chunar
   respectively; that their doing so was an orderly part of the
   winding-up of Babur's Eastern operations; that they remained
   as part of the Eastern garrison, on duty apart from that of
   blocking the road of Biban and Bayazid.

   [2662] This mode of fishing is still practised in India
   (Erskine).

   [2663] Islamice, Saturday night; Anglice, Friday after 6 p.m.

   [2664] This Tus, "Tousin, or Tons, is a branch from the Ghogra
   coming off above Faizabad and joining the Sarju or Parsaru
   below 'Azamgarh" (Erskine).

   [2665] Kehr's MS. p. 1132, Mang (or Mank); Hai. MS. Taik; I.O.
   218 f. 328 Ba:k; I.O. 217 f. 236_b_, Biak. Maing in the
   Sultanpur district seems suitably located (_D.G. of
   Sultanpur_, p. 162).

   [2666] This will be the night-guard (_'asas_); the librarian
   (_kitabdar_) is in Sambhal. I.O. 218 f. 325 inserts _kitabdar_
   after 'Abdu'l-lah's name where he is recorded as sent to
   Sambhal (f. 375).

   [2667] He will have announced to Taj Khan the transfer of the
   fort to Junaid _Barlas_.

   [2668] L3750. Parsarur was in Akbar's _subah_ of Lahor; G. of
   I. xx, 23, Pasrur.

   [2669] The estimate may have been made by measurement (f. 356)
   or by counting a horse's steps (f. 370). Here the Hai. MS. and
   Kehr's have D:lmud, but I.O. 218 f. 328_b_ (D:lmuu).

   [2670] As on f. 361_b_, so here, Babur's wording tends to
   locate Adampur on the right (west) bank of the Jumna.

   [2671] Hai. MS. _auta_, presumably for _aurta_; Kehr's p.
   1133, Aud-daghi, which, as Baqi led the Aud army, is _ben
   trovato_; both Persian translations, _miangani_, central,
   inner, _i.e._ _aurta_, perhaps household troops of the Centre.

   [2672] Anglice, Saturday 12th after 6 p.m.

   [2673] In Akbar's _sarkar_ of Kalanjar, now in the Hamirpur
   district.

   [2674] L7500 (Erskine). Amroha is in the Moradabad district.

   [2675] At the Chaupara-Chaturmuk ferry (f.
   376).--_Corrigendum_:--In the Index of the _Babur-nama
   Facsimile_, Musa _Farmuli_ and Musa Sl. are erroneously
   entered as if one man.

   [2676] _i.e._ riding light and fast. The distance done between
   Adampur and Agra was some 157 miles, the time was from 12 a.m.
   on Tuesday morning to about 9 p.m. of Thursday. This exploit
   serves to show that three years of continuous activity in the
   plains of Hindustan had not destroyed Babur's capacity for
   sustained effort, spite of several attacks of (malarial?)
   fever.

   [2677] Anglice, Tuesday 12.25 a.m.

   [2678] He was governor of Etawa.

   [2679] Islamice, Friday, Shawwal 18th, Anglice, Thursday, June
   24th, soon after 9 p.m.

   [2680] Anglice, she arrived at mid-night of
   Saturday.--Gul-badan writes of Mahim's arrival as unexpected
   and of Babur's hurrying off on foot to meet her
   (_Humayun-nama_ f. 14, trs. p. 100).

   [2681] Mahim's journey from Kabul to Agra had occupied over 5
   months.

   [2682] Hindu Beg _quchin_ had been made Humayun's retainer in
   932 AH. (f. 297), and had taken possession of Sambhal for him.
   Hence, as it seems, he was ordered, while escorting the ladies
   from Kabul, to go to Sambhal. He seems to have gone before
   waiting on Babur, probably not coming into Agra till now.--It
   may be noted here that in 933 AH. he transformed a Hindu
   temple into a Mosque in Sambhal; it was done by Babur's orders
   and is commemorated by an inscription still existing on the
   Mosque, one seeming not to be of his own composition, judging
   by its praise of himself. (JASB. _Proceedings_, May 1873, p.
   98, Blochmann's art. where the inscription is given and
   translated; and _Archaeological Survey Reports_, xii, p. 24-27,
   with Plates showing the Mosque).

   [2683] Cf. f. 375, f. 377, with notes concerning 'Abdu'l-lah
   and Tir-muhani. I have not found the name Tir-muhani on maps;
   its position can be inferred from Babur's statement (f. 375)
   that he had sent 'Abdu'l-lah to Sambhal, he being then at
   Kunba or Kunia in the Nurhun _pargana_.--The name Tir-muhani
   occurs also in Gorakhpur.--It was at Tir-muhani (Three-mouths)
   that Khwand-amir completed the _Habibu's-siyar_ (lith. ed. i,
   83; Rieu's _Pers. Cat._ p. 1079). If the name imply three
   water-mouths, they might be those of Ganges, Ghogra and Daha.

   [2684] _nim-kara._ E. and de C. however reverse the _roles_.

   [2685] The _Tarikh-i-gualiari_ (B.M. Add. 16, 709, p. 18)
   supplements the fragmentary accounts which, above and _s.a._
   936 AH., are all that the _Babur-nama_ now preserves
   concerning Khwaja Rahim-dad's misconduct. It has several
   mistakes but the gist of its information is useful. It
   mentions that the Khwaja and his paternal-uncle Mahdi Khwaja
   had displeased Babur; that Rahim-dad resolved to take refuge
   with the ruler of Malwa (Muhammad _Khilji_) and to make over
   Gualiar to a Rajput landholder of that country; that upon this
   Shaikh Muhammad _Ghaus_ went to Agra and interceded with
   Babur and obtained his forgiveness for Rahim-dad. Gualiar was
   given back to Rahim-dad but after a time he was superseded by
   Abu'l-fath [Shaikh Guran]. For particulars about Mahdi Khwaja
   and a singular story told about him by Nizamu'd-din Ahmad in
   the _Tabaqat-i-akbari_, _vide_ Gul-badan's _Humayun-nama_,
   Appendix B, and _Translator's Note_ p. 702, Section _f_.

   [2686] He may have come about the misconduct of his nephew
   Rahim-dad.

   [2687] The 'Idu'l-kabir, the Great Festival of 10th
   Zu'l-hijja.

   [2688] About L1750 (Erskine).

   [2689] Perhaps he was from the tract in Persia still called
   Chaghatai Mountains. One Ibrahim _Chaghatai_ is mentioned by
   Babur (f. 175b) with Turkman begs who joined Husain
   _Bai-qara_. This Hasan-i-'ali _Chaghatai_ may have come in
   like manner, with Murad the Turkman envoy from 'Iraq (f. 369
   and n. 1).

   [2690] Several incidents recorded by Gul-badan (writing half a
   century later) as following Mahim's arrival in Agra, will
   belong to the record of 935 AH. because they preceded
   Humayun's arrival from Badakhshan. Their omission from Babur's
   diary is explicable by its minor _lacunae_. Such are:--(1) a
   visit to Dhulpur and Sikri the interest of which lies in its
   showing that Bibi Mubarika had accompanied Mahim Begim to Agra
   from Kabul, and that there was in Sikri a quiet retreat, a
   _chaukandi_, where Babur "used to write his book";--(2) the
   arrival of the main caravan of ladies from Kabul, which led
   Babur to go four miles out, to Naugram, in order to give
   honouring reception to his sister Khan-zada Begim;--(3) an
   excursion to the Gold-scattering garden (_Bagh-i-zar-afshan_),
   where seated among his own people, Babur said he was "bowed
   down by ruling and reigning", longed to retire to that garden
   with a single attendant, and wished to make over his
   sovereignty to Humayun;--(4) the death of Dil-dar's son Alwar
   (var. Anwar) whose birth may be assigned to the gap preceding
   932 AH. because not chronicled later by Babur, as is Faruq's.
   As a distraction from the sorrow for this loss, a journey was
   "pleasantly made by water" to Dhulpur.

   [2691] Cf. f. 381b n. 2. For his earlier help to Rahim-dad
   _see_ f. 304. For Biographies of him _see_ Blochmann's A.-i-A.
   trs. p. 446, and Badayuni's _Muntakhabu-'t-tawarikh_
   (Ranking's and Lowe's trss.).

   [2692] Beyond this broken passage, one presumably at the foot
   of a page in Babur's own manuscript, nothing of his diary is
   now known to survive. What is missing seems likely to have
   been written and lost. It is known from a remark of
   Gul-badan's (H.N. p. 103) that he "used to write his book"
   after Mahim's arrival in Agra, the place coming into her
   anecdote being Sikri.

   [2693] Jauhar's _Humayun-nama_ and Bayazid _Biyat's_ work of
   the same title were written under the same royal command as
   the Begim's. They contribute nothing towards filling the gap
   of 936 AH.; their authors, being Humayun's servants, write
   about him. It may be observed that criticism of these books,
   as recording trivialities, is disarmed if they were commanded
   because they would obey an order to set down whatever was
   known, selection amongst their contents resting with
   Abu'l-fazl. Even more completely must they be excluded from a
   verdict on the literary standard of their day.--Abu'l-fazl must
   have had a source of Baburiana which has not found its way
   into European libraries. A man likely to have contributed his
   recollections, directly or transmitted, is Khwaja Muqim
   _Harawi_. The date of Muqim's death is conjectural only, but
   he lived long enough to impress the worth of historical
   writing on his son Nizamu'-d-din Ahmad. (Cf. E. and D.'s H. of
   I. art. _Tabaqat-i-akbari_ v, 177 and 187; T.-i-A. lith. ed.
   p. 193; and for Bayazid _Biyat's_ work, JASB. 1898, p. 296.)

   [2694] Ibn Batuta (Lee's trs. p. 133) mentions that after his
   appointment to Gualiar, Rahim-dad fell from favour ... but was
   restored later, on the representation of Muhammad Ghaus; held
   Gualiar again for a short time, (he went to Bahadur Shah in
   Gujrat) and was succeeded by Abu'l-fath (_i.e._ Shaikh Guran)
   who held it till Babur's death.

   [2695] Its translation and explanatory noting have filled two
   decades of hard-working years. _Tanti labores auctoris et
   traductoris!_

   [2696] I am indebted to my husband for acquaintance with
   Nizamu'-d-din Ahmad's record about Babur and Kashmir.

   [2697] In view of the vicissitudes to which under Humayun the
   royal library was subjected, it would be difficult to assert
   that this source was not the missing continuation of Babur's
   diary.

   [2698] E. and D.'s H. of I. art. _Tarikh-i Khan-i-jahan Ludi_
   v, 67. For Ahmad-i-yadgar's book and its special features
   _vide_ _l.c._ v, 2, 24, with notes; Rieu's _Persian Catalogue_
   iii, 922_a_; JASB. 1916, H. Beveridge's art. _Note on the
   Tarikh-i-salatin-i-afaghana._

   [2699] Humayun's last recorded act in Hindustan was that of
   933 AH. (f. 329_b_) when he took unauthorized possession of
   treasure in Dihli.

   [2700] _Tarikh-i-rashidi_ trs. p. 387.

   [2701] T.-i-R. trs. p. 353 _et seq._ and Mr. Ney Elias' notes.

   [2702] Abu'l-fazl's record of Humayun's sayings and minor
   doings at this early date in his career, can hardly be
   anything more accurate than family-tradition.

   [2703] The statement that Khalifa was asked to go so far from
   where he was of the first importance as an administrator,
   leads to consideration of why it was done. So little is known
   explicitly of Babur's intentions about his territories after
   his death that it is possible only to put that little together
   and read between its lines. It may be that he was now planning
   an immediate retirement to Kabul and an apportionment during
   life of his dominions, such as Abu-sa'id had made of his own.
   If so, it would be desirable to have Badakhshan held in
   strength such as Khalifa's family could command, and
   especially desirable because as Barlas Turks, that family
   would be one with Babur in desire to regain Transoxiana. Such
   a political motive would worthily explain the offer of the
   appointment.

   [2704] The "Shah" of this style is derived from Sulaiman's
   Badakhshi descent through Shah Begim; the "Mirza" from his
   Miran-shahi descent through his father Wais Khan Mirza. The
   title Khan Mirza or Mirza Khan, presumably according to the
   outlook of the speaker, was similarly derived from forbears,
   as would be also Shah Begim's; (her personal name is not
   mentioned in the sources).

   [2705] Sa'id, on the father's, and Babur, on the mother's
   side, were of the same generation in descent from Yunas Khan;
   Sulaiman was of a younger one, hence his pseudo-filial
   relation to the men of the elder one.

   [2706] Sa'id was Shah Begim's grandson through her son Ahmad,
   Sulaiman her great-grandson through her daughter Sultan-Nigar,
   but Sulaiman could claim also as the heir of his father who
   was nominated to rule by Shah Begim; moreover, he could claim
   by right of conquest on the father's side, through Abu-sa'id
   the conqueror, his son Mahmud long the ruler, and so through
   Mahmud's son Wais Khan Mirza.

   [2707] The menace conveyed by these words would be made the
   more forceful by Babur's move to Lahor, narrated by
   Ahmad-i-yadgar. Some ill-result to Sa'id of independent rule
   by Sulaiman seems foreshadowed; was it that if Babur's
   restraining hand were withdrawn, the Badakhshis would try to
   regain their lost districts and would have help in so-doing
   from Babur?

   [2708] It is open to conjecture that if affairs in Hindustan
   had allowed it, Babur would now have returned to Kabul.
   Ahmad-i-yadgar makes the expedition to be one for pleasure
   only, and describes Babur as hunting and sight-seeing for a
   year in Lahor, the Panj-ab and near Dihli. This appears a mere
   flourish of words, in view of the purposes the expedition
   served, and of the difficulties which had arisen in Lahor
   itself and with Sa'id Khan. Part of the work effected may have
   been the despatch of an expedition to Kashmir.

   [2709] This appears a large amount.

   [2710] The precision with which the Raja's gifts are stated,
   points to a closely-contemporary and written source. A second
   such indication occurs later where gifts made to Hind-al are
   mentioned.

   [2711] An account of the events in Multan after its occupation
   by Shah Hasan _Arghun_ is found in the latter part of the
   _Tabaqat-i-akbari_ and in Erskine's H. of I. i, 393 _et
   seq._--It may be noted here that several instances of confusion
   amongst Babur's sons occur in the extracts made by Sir H.
   Elliot and Professor Dowson in their _History of India_ from
   the less authoritative sources [_e.g._ v, 35 Kamran for
   Humayun, 'Askari said to be in Kabul (pp. 36 and 37); Hind-al
   for Humayun _etc._] and that these errors have slipped into
   several of the District Gazetteers of the United Provinces.

   [2712] As was said of the offering made by the Raja of Kahlur,
   the precision of statement as to what was given to Hind-al,
   bespeaks a closely-contemporary written source. So too does
   the mention (text, _infra_) of the day on which Babur began
   his return journey from Lahor.

   [2713] Cf. _G. of I._ xvi, 55; Ibbetson's _Report on Karnal_.

   [2714] It is noticeable that no one of the three royal
   officers named as sent against Mohan _Mundahir_, is
   recognizable as mentioned in the _Babur-nama_. They may all
   have had local commands, and not have served further east.
   Perhaps this, their first appearance, points to the origin of
   the information as independent of Babur, but he might have
   been found to name them, if his diary were complete for 936
   AH.

   [2715] The E. and D. translation writes twice as though the
   inability to "pull" the bows were due to feebleness in the
   men, but an appropriate reading would refer the difficulty to
   the hardening of sinews in the composite Turkish bows, which
   prevented the archers from bending the bows for stringing.

   [2716] One infers that fires were burned all night in the
   bivouac.

   [2717] At this point the A.S.B. copy (No. 137) of the
   _Tarikh-i-salatin-i-afaghana_ has a remark which may have been
   a marginal note originally, and which cannot be supposed made
   by Ahmad-i-yadgar himself because this would allot him too
   long a spell of life. It may show however that the
   interpolations about the two Timurids were not inserted in his
   book by him. Its purport is that the Mundahir village
   destroyed by Babur's troops in 936 AH.-1530 AD. was still in
   ruins at the time it was written 160 (lunar) years later
   (_i.e._ in 1096 AH.-1684-85 AD.). The better Codex (No. 3887)
   of the Imperial Library of Calcutta has the same passage.--Both
   that remark and its context show acquaintance with Samana and
   Kaithal.--The writings now grouped under the title
   _Tarikh-i-salatin-i-afaghana_ present difficulties both as to
   date and contents (cf. Rieu's _Persian Catalogue_ _s. n._).

   [2718] Presumably in Tihrind.

   [2719] Cf. G. B.'s H. N. trs. and the _Akbar-nama_ Bib. Ind.
   ed. and trs., Index _s.nn._; Hughes' _Dictionary of Islam_
   _s.n._ Intercession.

   [2720] A closer translation would be, "I have taken up the
   burden." The verb is _bardashtan_ (cf. f. 349, p. 626 n. 1).

   [2721] _See_ Erskine's _History of India_ ii, 9.

   [2722] At this point attention is asked to the value of the
   Ahmad-i-yadgar interpolation which allows Babur a year of
   active life before Humayun's illness and his own which
   followed. With no chronicle known of 936 AH. Babur had been
   supposed ill all through the year, a supposition which
   destroys the worth of his self-sacrifice. Moreover several
   inferences have been drawn from the supposed year of illness
   which are disproved by the activities recorded in that
   interpolation.

   [2723] E. and D.'s _History of India_ v, 187; G. B.'s
   _Humayun-nama_ trs. p. 28.

   [2724] _dar khidmat-i-diwani-i-buyutat_; perhaps he was a
   Barrack-officer. His appointment explains his attendance on
   Khalifa.

   [2725] Khalifa prescribed for the sick Babur.

   [2726] _khanwada-i-biganah_, perhaps, foreign dynasty.

   [2727] From Sambhal; Gul-badan, by an anachronism made some 60
   years later, writes Kalanjar, to which place Humayun moved 5
   months after his accession.

   [2728] I am indebted to my husband's perusal of Sayyid Ahmad
   Khan's _Asar-i-sanadid_ (Dihli ed. 1854 p. 37, and Lakhnau
   ed. 1895 pp. 40, 41) for information that, perhaps in 935 AH.,
   Mahdi Khwaja set up a tall slab of white marble near Amir
   Khusrau's tomb in Dihli, which bears an inscription in praise
   of the poet, composed by that Shihabu'd-din the Enigmatist who
   reached Agra with Khwand-amir in Muharram 935 AH. (f. 339_b_).
   The inscription gives two chronograms of Khusrau's death (725
   AH.), mentions that Mahdi Khwaja was the creator of the
   memorial, and gives its date in the words, "The beautiful
   effort of Mahdi Khwaja."--The Dihli ed. of the
   _Asar-i-sanadid_ depicts the slab with its inscription; the
   Lakhnau ed. depicts the tomb, may show the slab _in situ_, and
   contains interesting matter by Sayyid Ahmad Khan. The slab is
   mentioned without particulars in Murray's _Hand-book to
   Bengal_, p. 329.

   [2729] Lee's _Ibn Batuta_ p. 133 and Hiraman's
   _Tarikh-i-gualiari_. Cf. G. B.'s _Humayun-nama_ trs. (1902
   AD.), Appendix B.--_Mahdi Khwaja._

   [2730] In an anonymous _Life of Shah Isma'il Safawi_, Mahdi
   Khwaja [who may be a son of the Musa Khwaja mentioned by Babur
   on f. 216] is described as being, in what will be 916-7 AH.,
   Babur's _Diwan-begi_ and as sent towards Bukhara with 10,000
   men. This was 29 years before the story calls him a young man.
   Even if the word _jawan_ (young man) be read, as T. _yigit_ is
   frequently to be read, in the sense of "efficient fighting
   man", Mahdi was over-age. Other details of the story, besides
   the word _jawan_, bespeak a younger man.

   [2731] G. B.'s H. N. trs. p. 126; _Habibu's-siyar_, B. M. Add.
   16,679 f. 370, l. 16, lith. ed. Sec. III. iii, 372 (where a
   clerical error makes Babur give Mahdi _two_ of his
   full-sisters in marriage).--Another _yazna_ of Babur was
   Khalifa's brother Junaid _Barlas_, the husband of Shahr-banu,
   a half-sister of Babur.

   [2732] Babur, shortly before his death, married Gul-rang to
   Aisan-timur and Gul-chihra to Tukhta-bugha _Chaghatai_. Cf.
   _post_, Section _h_, _Babur's wives and children_; and G. B.'s
   H. N. trs. Biographical Appendix _s.nn._ Dil-dar Begim and
   Salima Sultan Begim _Miran-shahi_.

   [2733] Cf. G. B.'s H. N. trs. p. 147.

   [2734] She is the only adult daughter of a Timurid mother
   named as being such by Babur or Gul-badan, but various
   considerations incline to the opinion that Dil-dar Begim also
   was a Timurid, hence her three daughters, all named from the
   Rose, were so too. Cf. references of penultimate note.

   [2735] It attaches interest to the Mirza that he can be taken
   reasonably as once the owner of the Elphinstone Codex (cf.
   JRAS. 1907, pp. 136 and 137).

   [2736] Death did not threaten when this gift was made; life in
   Kabul was planned for.--Here attention is asked again to the
   value of Ahmad-i-yadgar's Baburiana for removing the
   impression set on many writers by the blank year 936 AH. that
   it was one of illness, instead of being one of travel, hunting
   and sight-seeing. The details of the activities of that year
   have the further value that they enhance the worth of Babur's
   sacrifice of life.--Haidar Mirza also fixes the date of the
   beginning of illness as 937 AH.

   [2737] The author, or embroiderer, of that anonymous story did
   not know the _Babur-nama_ well, or he would not have described
   Babur as a wine-drinker after 933 AH. The anecdote is parallel
   with Nizamu'd-din Ahmad's, the one explaining why the Mirza
   was selected, the other why the _damad_ was dropped.

   [2738] _Bib. Ind._ i, 341; Ranking's trs. p. 448.

   [2739] The night-guard; perhaps Mahim Begim's brother (G. B.'s
   H. N. trs. pp. 27-8).

   [2740] G. B.'s H. N. trs. f. 34_b_, p. 138; Jauhar's _Memoirs
   of Humayun_, Stewart's trs. p. 82.

   [2741] Cf. G. B.'s H. N. trs. p. 216, Bio. App. _s.n._ Bega
   Begam.

   [2742] f. 128, p. 200 n. 3. Cf. Appendix U.--_Babur's Gardens
   in and near Kabul_.

   [2743] Cf. H. H. Hayden's _Notes on some monuments in
   Afghanistan_, [_Memoirs of the Asiatic Society of Bengal_ ii,
   344]; and _Journal asiatique_ 1888, M. J. Darmesteter's art.
   _Inscriptions de Caboul_.

   [2744] _an_, a demonstrative suggesting that it refers to an
   original inscription on the second, but now absent, upright
   slab, which presumably would bear Babur's name.

   [2745] Ruzwan is the door-keeper of Paradise.

   [2746] Particulars of the women mentioned by Babur, Haidar,
   Gul-badan and other writers of their time, can be seen in my
   Biographical Appendix to the Begim's _Humayun-nama_. As the
   Appendix was published in 1902, variants from it occurring in
   this work are corrections superseding earlier and
   less-informed statements.

   [2747] _Tarikh-i-rashidi_ trs. Ney Elias and Ross p. 308.

   [2748] Bio. App. _s.n._ Gul-chihra.

   [2749] The story of the later uprisings against Mahim's son
   Humayun by his brothers, by Muhammad-i-zaman _Bai-qara_ and
   others of the same royal blood, and this in spite of Humayun's
   being his father's nominated successor, stirs surmise as to
   whether the rebels were not tempted by more than his defects
   of character to disregard his claim to supremacy; perhaps
   pride of higher maternal descent, this particularly amongst
   the Bai-qara group, may have deepened a disregard created by
   antagonisms of temperament.

   [2750] Until the Yangi-ariq was taken off the Sir, late in the
   last century, for Namangan, the oasis land of Farghana was
   fertilized, not from the river but by its intercepted
   tributaries.

   [2751] Ujfalvy's translation of Yaqut (ii, 179) reads one
   _farsakh_ from the mountains instead of 'north of the river.'

   [2752] Kostenko describes a division of Tashkint, one in which
   is Ravine-lane (_jar-kucha_), as divided by a deep ravine; of
   another he says that it is cut by deep ravines (Babur's _'umiq
   jarlar_).

   [2753] Babur writes as though Akhsi had one Gate only (f.
   112_b_). It is unlikely that the town had come down to having
   a single exit; the Gate by which he got out of Akhsi was the
   one of military importance because served by a draw-bridge,
   presumably over the ravine-moat, and perhaps not close to that
   bridge.

   [2754] For mention of upper villages _see_ f. 110 and note 1.

   [2755] _Cf._ f. 114 for distances which would be useful in
   locating Akhsi if Babur's _yighach_ were not variable; Ritter,
   vii, 3 and 733; Reclus, vi, index _s.n._ Farghana; Ujfalvy ii,
   168, his quotation from Yaqut and his authorities; Nalivkine's
   _Histoire du Khanat de Kokand_, p. 14 and p. 53; Schuyler, i,
   324; Kostenko, Tables of Contents for cognate general
   information and i, 320, for Tashkint; von Schwarz, index under
   related names, and especially p. 345 and plates; Pumpelly, p.
   18 and p. 115.

   [2756] This Turki-Persian Dictionary was compiled by Mirza
   Mahdi Khan. Nadir Shah's secretary and historian, whose life
   of his master Sir William Jones translated into French (Rieu's
   Turki Cat. p. 264_b_).

   [2757] The _Padshah-nama_ whose author, 'Abdu'l-hamid, the
   biographer of Shah-jahan, died in 1065 AH. (1655 AD.) mentions
   the existence of lacunae in a copy of the Babur-nama, in the
   Imperial Library and allowed by his wording to be Babur's
   autograph MS. (i, 42 and ii, 703).

   [2758] _Akbar-nama_, Bib. Ind. ed. i, 305; H. B. i, 571.

   [2759] Hai. MS. f. 118_b_; _aushal baghda su aqib kila dur
   aidi_. _Babur-nama_, _su aqib_, water flowed and _aushal_ is
   rare, but in the R.P. occurs 7 times.

   [2760] _guzum awiqi-gha barib tur._ B.N. f. 117_b_, _guzum
   awiqu-gha bardi_.

   [2761] _kura dur min_, B.N. f. 83, _tush kurdum_ and _tush
   kurar min_.

   [2762] _ablaq suwar bilan_; P. _suwar_ for T. _atliq_ or
   _atliq kishi_; _bilan_ for B.N. _bila_, and an odd use of
   piebald (_ablaq_).

   [2763] _masnad_, B.N. _takht_, throne. _Masnad_ betrays
   Hindustan.

   [2764] _Hamra'ilari (sic) bir bir ga (sic) maslahat qila
   durlar._ _Maslahat for B.N. kingash_ or _kingaish_; _hamrah_,
   companion, for _mining bila bar_, etc.

   [2765] _baghlamaq_ and f. 119_b_ _baghlaghanlar_; B.N. _almak_
   or _tutmaq_ to seize or take prisoner.

   [2766] _diwar_ for _tam_.

   [2767] f. 119, _at-tin auzlar-ni tashlab_; B.N. _tushmak_,
   dismount. _Tashlamaq_ is not used in the sense of dismount by
   B.

   [2768] _padshah_ so used is an anachronism (f. 215); Babur
   Mirza would be correct.

   [2769] _zahiran_; B.N. _yaqin_.

   [2770] Ilminsky's imprint stops at _dib_; he may have taken
   _kim-dib_ for signs of quotation merely. (This I did earlier,
   JRAS 1902, p. 749.)

   [2771] Aligarh ed. p. 52; Rogers' trs. i, 109.

   [2772] _Cf._ f. 63_b_, n. 3.

   [2773] Another but less obvious objection will be mentioned
   later.

   [2774] Julien notes (_Voyages des pelerins Bouddhistes_, ii,
   96), "Dans les annales des Song on trouve Nang-go-lo-ho, qui
   repond exactement a l'orthographe indienne Nangarahara, que
   fournit l'inscription decouvert par le capitaine Kittoe"
   (JASB. 1848). The reference is to the Ghoswara inscription, of
   which Professor Kielhorn has also written (_Indian Antiquary_,
   1888), but with departure from Nangarahara to Nagarahara.

   [2775] The scribe of the Haidarabad Codex appears to have been
   somewhat uncertain as to the spelling of the name. What is
   found in histories is plain, N:g:r:har. The other name varies;
   on first appearance (fol. 131_b_) and also on fols. 144 and
   154_b_, there is a vagrant dot below the word, which if it
   were above would make Ning-nahar. In all other cases the word
   reads N:g:nahar. Nahar is a constant component, as is also the
   letter _g_(or _k_).

   [2776] Some writers express the view that the medial _r_ in
   this word indicates descent from Nagarahara, and that the
   medial _n_ of Elphinstone's second form is a corruption of it.
   Though this might be, it is true also that in local speech _r_
   and _n_ often interchange, _e.g._ Chighar- and Chighan-sarai,
   Suhar and Suhan (in Nur-valley).

   [2777] This asserts _n_ to be the correct consonant, and
   connects with the interchange of _n_ and _r_ already noted.

   [2778] Since writing the above I have seen Laidlaw's almost
   identical suggestion of a nasal interpolated in Nagarahara
   (JASB. 1848, art. on Kittoe). The change is of course found
   elsewhere; is not Tank for Taq an instance?

   [2779] These affluents I omit from main consideration as
   sponsors because they are less obvious units of taxable land
   than the direct affluents of the Kabul-river, but they remain
   a reserve force of argument and may or may not have counted in
   Babur's nine.

   [2780] Cunningham, i, 42. My topic does not reach across the
   Kabul-river to the greater Udyanapura of Beal's _Buddhist
   Records_ (p. 119) nor raise the question of the extent of that
   place.

   [2781] The strong form Ning-nahar is due to euphonic impulse.

   [2782] Some discussion about these coins has already appeared
   in JRAS. 1913 and 1914 from Dr. Codrington, Mr. M. Longworth
   Dames and my husband.

   [2783] This variant from the Turki may be significant. Should
   _tamghanat(-i-)sikka_ be read and does this describe
   countermarking?

   [2784] It will be observed that Babur does not explicitly say
   that Husain put the beg's name on the coin.

   [2785] _Habibu's-siyar_ lith. ed. iii, 228; _Haidarabad_ Codex
   text and trs. f. 26_b_ and f. 169; Browne's Daulat Shah p.
   533.

   [2786] Husain born 842 AH. (1438 AD.); d. 911 AH. (1506 AD.).

   [2787] Cf. f. 7_b_ note to braves (_yigitlar_). There may be
   instances, in the earlier Farghana section where I have
   translated _chuhra_ wrongly by _page_. My attention had not
   then been fixed on the passage about the coins, nor had I the
   same familiarity with the Kabul section. For a household page
   to be clearly recognizable as such from the context, is
   rare--other uses of the word are translated as their context
   dictates.

   [2788] They can be traced through my Index and in some cases
   their careers followed. Since I translated _chuhra-jirga-si_
   on f. 15_b_ by cadet-corps, I have found in the Kabul section
   instances of long service in the corps which make the word
   cadet, as it is used in English, too young a name.

   [2789] This Mr. M. Longworth Dames pointed out in JRAS. 1913.

   [2790] _Habibu's-siyar_ lith. ed. iii, 219; Ferte trs. p. 28.
   For the information about Husain's coins given in this
   appendix I am indebted to Dr. Codrington and Mr. M. Longworth
   Dames.

   [2791] Elphinstone MS. f. 150_b_; Haidarabad MS. f. 190_b_;
   Ilminsky, imprint p. 241.

   [2792] Muh. Ma'sum _Bhakkari's Tarikh-i-sind_ 1600, Malet's
   Trs. 1855, p. 89; Mohan Lall's _Journal_ 1834, p. 279 and
   _Travels_ 1846, p. 311; Bellew's _Political Mission to
   Afghanistan_ 1857, p. 232; _Journal Asiatique_ 1890,
   Darmesteter's _La grande inscription de Qandahar_; JRAS. 1898,
   Beames' _Geography of the Qandahar inscription_. Murray's
   _Hand-book of the Panjab etc._ 1883 has an account which as to
   the Inscriptions shares in the inaccuracies of its sources
   (Bellew & Lumsden).

   [2793] The plan of Qandahar given in the official account of
   the Second Afghan War, makes Chihil-zina appear on the wrong
   side of the ridge, n.w. instead of n.e.

   [2794] destroyed in 1714 AD. It lay 3 m. west of the present
   Qandahar (not its immediate successor). It must be observed
   that Darmesteter's insufficient help in plans and maps led him
   to identify Chihil-zina with Chihil-dukhtaran
   (Forty-daughters).

   [2795] _Tarikh-i-rashidi_ trs. p. 387; _Akbar-nama_ trs. i,
   290.

   [2796] Hai. Codex, Index _sn.n._

   [2797] It is needless to say that a good deal in this story
   may be merely fear and supposition accepted as occurrence.

   [2798] Always left beyond the carpet on which a reception is
   held.

   [2799] This is not in agreement with Babur's movements.

   [2800] _i.e._ Humayun wished for a full-brother or sister,
   another child in the house with him. The above names of his
   brother and sister are given elsewhere only by Gulbadan (f.
   6_b_).

   [2801] The "we" might be Mahim and Humayun, to Babur in camp.

   [2802] Perhaps before announcing the birth anywhere.

   [2803] Presumably this plural is honorific for the Honoured
   Mother Mahim.

   [2804] Mahim's and Humayun's quarters.

   [2805] Gul-badan's _Humayun-nama_, f. 8.

   [2806] JRAS. A. S. Beveridge's Notes on _Babur-nama_ MSS.
   1900, [1902,] 1905, 1906, [1907,] 1908 (Kehr's transcript, p.
   76, and Latin translation with new letter of Babur p. 828).

   [2807] In all such matters of the _Babur-nama_ Codices, it has
   to be remembered that their number has been small.

   [2808] Vigne's _Travels in Kashmir_ ii, 277-8;
   _Tarikh-i-rashidi_ trs., p. 302 and n. and p. 466 and note.

   [2809] It is not likely to be one heard current in Hindustan,
   any more than is Babur's Ar. _bu-qalamun_ as a name of a bird
   (Index _s.n._); both seem to be "book-words" and may be traced
   or known as he uses them in some ancient dictionary or book of
   travels originating outside Hindustan.

   [2810] My note 6 on p. 421 shows my earlier difficulties, due
   to not knowing (when writing it) that _kabg-i-dari_ represents
   the snow-cock in the Western Himalayas.

   [2811] By over-sight mention of this note was omitted from my
   article on the Elphinstone Codex (JRAS. 1907, p. 131).

   [2812] Speede's _Indian Hand-book_ (i, 212) published in 1841
   AD. thus writes, "It is a curious circumstance that the finest
   and most esteemed fruit are produced from the roots below the
   surface of the ground, and are betrayed by the cracking of the
   earth above them, and the effluvia issuing from the fissure; a
   high price is given by rich natives for fruit so produced."

   [2813] In the margin of the Elphinstone Codex opposite the
   beginning of the note are the words, "This is a marginal note
   of Humayun Padshah's."

   [2814] Every Emperor of Hindustan has an epithet given him
   after his death to distinguish him, and prevent the necessity
   of repeating his name too familiarly. Thus _Firdaus-makan_
   (dweller-in-paradise) is Babur's; Humayun's is
   _Jannat-ashi-yani_, he whose nest is in Heaven; Muhammad
   Shah's _Firdaus-aramgah_, he whose place of rest is Paradise;
   _etc._ (Erskine).

   [2815] Here Mr. Erskine notes, "Literally, _nectar-fruit_,
   probably the mandarin orange, by the natives called _naringi_.
   The name _amrat_, or pear, in India is applied to the guava or
   _Psidium pyriferum_--(_Spondias mangifera_, Hort. Ben.--D.
   Wallich)."... Mr. E. notes also that the note on the
   _amrit-phal_ "is not found in either of the Persian
   translations".

   [2816] _chuchuman_, Pers. trs. _shirini bi maza_, perhaps
   flat, sweet without relish. Babur does not use the word, nor
   have I traced it in a dictionary.

   [2817] _chuchuk_, savoury, nice-tasting, not acid (Shaw).

   [2818] _chuchuk naranj andaq (?) mat'un aidi kim har kim-ni
   shirin-karlighi bi masa qilkandi, naranj-su'i dik tur dirlar
   aidi._

   [2819] The _lemu_ may be _Citrus limona_, which has abundant
   juice of a mild acid flavour.

   [2820] The _kamila_ and _samtara_ are the real oranges
   (_kaunla_ and _sangtara_), which are now (_cir._ 1816 AD.)
   common all over India. Dr. Hunter conjectures that the
   _sangtara_ may take its name from Cintra, in Portugal. This
   early mention of it by Babur and Humayun may be considered as
   subversive of that supposition. (This description of the
   _samtara_, vague as it is, applies closer to the _Citrus
   decumana_ or _pampelmus_, than to any other.--D.
   Wallich.)--Erskine.

   [2821] Humayun writes of this fruit as though it were not the
   _sang-tara_ described by his father on f. 287 (p. 511 and
   note).

   [2822] M. de Courteille translated _jama'_ in a general sense
   by _totalit.'_ instead of in its Indian technical one of
   revenue (as here) or of assessment. Hence Professor Dowson's
   "totality" (iv, 262 n.).

   [2823] The B.M. has a third copy, Or. 5879, which my husband
   estimates as of little importance.

   [2824] Sir G. A. Grierson, writing in the _Indian Antiquary_
   (July 1885, p. 187), makes certain changes in Ajodhya Prasad's
   list of the Brahman rulers of Tirhut, on grounds he states.

   [2825] Index _s.n._ Babur's letters. The passage Shaikh Zain
   quotes is found in Or. 1999, f. 65_b_, Add. 26,202, f. 66_b_,
   Or. 5879, f. 79_b_.

   [2826] Cf. Index _in loco_ for references to Babur's metrical
   work, and for the Facsimile, JASB. 1910, Extra Number.

   [2827] Monday, Rabi' II. 15th 935 AH.--Dec. 27th 1528 AD. At
   this date Babur had just returned from Dhulpur to Agra (f.
   354, p. 635, where in note 1 for Thursday read Monday).

   [2828] Owing to a scribe's "skip" from one _yibarildi_ (was
   sent) to another at the end of the next sentence, the passage
   is not in the Hai. MS. It is not well given in my translation
   (f. 357_b_, p. 642); what stands above is a closer rendering
   of the full Turki, _Humayungha tarjuma_ [_u_?] _ni-kim
   Hindustangha kilkani aitqan ash'arni yibarildi_ (Ilminsky p.
   462, 1. 4 fr. ft., where however there appears a slight
   clerical error).

   [2829] Hesitation about accepting the colophon as
   unquestionably applying to the whole contents of the
   manuscript is due to its position of close association with
   one section only of the three in the manuscript (cf. _post_ p.
   lx).

   [2830] Plate XI, and p. 15 (mid-page) of the Facsimile
   booklet.--The Facsimile does not show the whole of the marginal
   quatrain, obviously because for the last page of the
   manuscript a larger photographic plate was needed than for the
   rest. With Dr. Ross' concurrence a photograph in which the
   defect is made good, accompanies this Appendix.

   [2831] The second section ends on Plate XVII, and p. 21 of the
   Facsimile booklet.

   [2832] Needless to say that whatever the history of the
   manuscript, its value as preserving poems of which no other
   copy is known publicly, is untouched. This value would be
   great without the marginal entries on the last page; it finds
   confirmation in the identity of many of the shorter poems with
   counterparts in the _Babur-nama_.

   [2833] Another autograph of Shah-i-jahan's is included in the
   translation volume (p. xiii) of Gul-badan Begam's
   _Humayun-nama_. It surprises one who works habitually on
   historical writings more nearly contemporary with Babur, in
   which he is spoken of as _Firdaus-makani_ or as _Giti-sitani
   Firdaus-makani_ and not by the name used during his life, to
   find Shah-i-jahan giving him the two styles (cf. _Jahangir's
   Memoirs_ trs. ii, 5). Those familiar with the writings of
   Shah-i-jahan's biographers will know whether this is usual at
   that date. There would seem no doubt as to the identity of _an
   Hazrat._--The words _an hazrat_ by which Shah-i-jahan refers to
   Babur are used also in the epitaph placed by Jahangir at
   Babur's tomb (Trs. Note p. 710-711).

   [2834] The Qazi's rapid acquirement of the _mufradat_ of the
   script allows the inference that few letters only and those of
   a well-known script were varied.--_Mufradat_ was translated by
   Erskine, de Courteille and myself (f. 357_b_) as alphabet but
   reconsideration by the light of more recent information about
   the _Baburi-khatt_ leads me to think this is wrong because
   "alphabet" includes every letter.--On f. 357b three items of
   the _Baburi-khatt_ are specified as despatched with the
   Hindustan poems, _viz._ _mufradat_, _qita'lar_ and
   _sar-i-khatt_. Of these the first went to Hind-al, the third
   to Kamran, and no recipient is named for the second; all
   translators have sent the _qita'lar_ to Hind-al but I now
   think this wrong and that a name has been omitted, probably
   Humayun's.

   [2835] f. 144_b_, p. 228, n. 3. Another interesting matter
   missing from the _Babur-nama_ by the gap between 914 and 925
   AH. is the despatch of an embassy to Czar Vassili III. in
   Moscow, mentioned in Schuyler's _Turkistan_ ii, 394, Appendix
   IV, Grigorief's _Russian Policy in Central Asia._ The mission
   went after "Sultan Babur" had established himself in Kabul; as
   Babur does not write of it before his narrative breaks off
   abruptly in 914 AH. it will have gone after that date.

   [2836] I quote from the Veliaminof-Zernov edition (p. 287)
   from which de Courteille's plan of work involved extract only;
   he translates the couplet, giving to _khatt_ the
   double-meanings of script and down of youth (_Dictionnaire
   Turque_ _s.n._ _sighnaqi_). The _Sanglakh_ (p. 252) _s.n._
   _sighnaq_ has the following as Babur's:--

     _Chu balai khatti nasib'ng bulmasa Babur ni tang?
     Bare khatt almansur khatt sighnaqi mu dur?_

   [2837] Gibb's _History of Ottoman Poetry_ i, 113 and ii, 137.

   [2838] Reclus' _L'Asie Russe_ p. 238.

   [2839] On this same _tahrir qildim_ may perhaps rest the
   opinion that the Rampur MS. is autograph.

   [2840] I have found no further mention of the tract; it may be
   noted however that whereas Babur calls his _Treatise on
   Prosody_ (written in 931 AH.) the _'Aruz_, Abu'l-fazl writes
   of a _Mufassal_, a suitable name for 504 details of
   transposition.

   [2841] _Tuzuk-i-jahangir_ lith. ed. p. 149; and _Memoirs of
   jahangir_ trs. i, 304. [In both books the passage requires
   amending.]

   [2842] Rampur MS. Facsimile Plate XIV and p. 16, verse 3;
   _Akbar-nama_ trs. i, 279, and lith. ed. p. 91.

   [2843] Cf. Index _s.n._ Dalmau and Bangarmau for the
   termination in double _u_.

   [2844] Dr. Ilminsky says of the Leyden & Erskine _Memoirs of
   Babur_ that it was a constant and indispensable help.

   [2845] My examination of Kehr's Codex has been made
   practicable by the courtesy of the Russian Foreign Office in
   lending it for my use, under the charge of the Librarian of
   the India Office, Dr. F. W. Thomas.--It should be observed that
   in this Codex the Hindustan Section contains the purely Turki
   text found in the Haidarabad Codex (cf. JRAS. 1908, p. 78).

   [2846] It may indicate that the List was not copied by Babur
   but lay loose with his papers, that it is not with the
   Elphinstone Codex, and is not with the 'Abdu'r-rahim Persian
   translation made from a manuscript of that same annotated
   line.

   [2847] Cf. _in loco_ p. 656, n. 3.

   [2848] A few slight changes in the turn of expressions have
   been made for clearness sake.

   [2849] Index _s.n._ Mir Baqi of Tashkint. Perhaps a better
   epithet for _sa'adat-nishan_ than "good-hearted" would be one
   implying his good fortune in being designated to build a
   mosque on the site of the ancient Hindu temple.

   [2850] There is a play here on Baqi's name; perhaps a good
   wish is expressed for his prosperity together with one for the
   long permanence of the sacred building _khair_ (_khairat_).

   [2851] Presumably the order for building the mosque was given
   during Babur's stay in Aud (Ajodhya) in 934 AH. at which time
   he would be impressed by the dignity and sanctity of the
   ancient Hindu shrine it (at least in part) displaced, and like
   the obedient follower of Muhammad he was in intolerance of
   another Faith, would regard the substitution of a temple by a
   mosque as dutiful and worthy.--The mosque was finished in 935
   AH. but no mention of its completion is in the _Babur-nama_.
   The diary for 935 AH. has many minor _lacunae_; that of the
   year 934 AH. has lost much matter, breaking off before where
   the account of Aud might be looked for.

   [2852] The meaning of this couplet is incomplete without the
   couplet that followed it and is (now) not legible.

   [2853] Firishta gives a different reason for Babur's sobriquet
   of _qalandar_, namely, that he kept for himself none of the
   treasure he acquired in Hindustan (Lith. ed. p. 206).

   [2854] Jahangir who encamped in the Shahr-ara-garden in Safar
   1016 AH. (May 1607 AD.) says it was made by Babur's aunt,
   Abu-sa'id's daughter Shahr-banu (Rogers and Beveridge's
   _Memoirs of Jahangir_ i, 106).

   [2855] A _jalau-khana_ might be where horse-head-gear, bridles
   and reins are kept, but _Ayin_ 60 (A.-i-A.) suggests there may
   be another interpretation.

   [2856] She was a daughter of Hind-al, was a grand-daughter
   therefore of Babur, was Akbar's first wife, and brought up
   Shah-i-jahan. Jahangir mentions that she made her first
   pilgrimage to her father's tomb on the day he made his to
   Babur's, Friday Safar 26th 1016 AH. (June 12th 1607 AD.). She
   died _aet._ 84 on Jumada I. 7th 1035 AH. (Jan. 25th 1626 AD.).
   Cf. _Tuzuk-i-jahangiri_, Muh. Hadi's Supplement lith. ed. p.
   401.

   [2857] Mr. H. H. Hayden's photograph of the mosque shows
   pinnacles and thus enables its corner to be identified in his
   second of the tomb itself.

   [2858] One of Daniel's drawings (which I hope to reproduce)
   illuminates this otherwise somewhat obscure passage, by
   showing the avenue, the borders of running-water and the
   little water-falls,--all reminding of Madeira.

   [2859] _choki_, perhaps "shelter"; see Hobson-Jobson _s.n._

   [2860] If told with leisurely context, the story of the visits
   of Babur's descendants to Kabul and of their pilgrimages to
   his tomb, could hardly fail to interest its readers.



THE HISTORY OF BABUR OR BABUR-NAMA

   Index I. Personal

   +Aba-bikr Mirza+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son
       of Abu-sa'id and a Badakhshi begim--particulars 22, 26;
     his attack on Hisar 51;
     defeated by Husain _Bai-qara_ and his death (884) 260;
     his Bai-qara marriage 266;
     a Badakhshi connection 51;
     [d. 884 AH.-1479 AD.].

   +Aba-bikr Mirza+ _Dughlat Kashghari_, son of Saniz and a Chiras
       (var. Jaras) begim--invades Farghana (899) 32;
     his annexations in Badakhshan 695;
     his Miranshahi wife 48;
     [d. 920 AH.-1514 AD.].

   +'Abbas+, a slave--murderer of Aulugh (Ulugh) Beg _Shah-rukhi_ (853) 85.

   +'Abbas Sultan+ _Auzbeg_--marries Gul-chihra _Miran-shahi_, Babur's
         daughter (954) 713.

   +'Abdu'l-'ali Tarkhan+ _Arghun Chingiz-Khanid_--particulars 38, 39;
     [d. cir. 899 AH.-1494 AD.].

   +'Abdu'l-'aziz+ _mir-akhwur_--ordered to catch pheasants (925) 404;
     ->[2861] posted in Lahor (930) 442;
     sent into Milwat (932) 460;
     on service 465-6, 471, 530;
     the reserve at Panipat 472-3;
     reinforces the right 473;
     surprised and defeated by Sanga (933) 549, 550;
     in the left wing at Kanwa 567, 570;
     pursues Sanga 576;
     ordered against Baluchis (935) 638;
     writes from Lahor about the journey of Babur's family 659, 660;
     arrested 688;
     -> sequel to his sedition not given in the _Akbar-nama_ 692;
     -> reference to his sedition 698.

   +'Abdu'l-'aziz Mirza+ _Shah-rukhi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of
       Aulugh Beg--his Chaghatai wife 19-20.

   +'Abdu'l-baqi+--surrenders Qandahar to Babur (928) 436, 437.

   +'Abdu'l-baqi Mirza+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of
      'Usman--particulars 280;
     referred to 266 n. 6;
     goes to Heri (908) 336;
     his wife Sultanim _Bai-qara_ 265 n. 5, 280.

   +'Abdu'l-ghaffar+ _tawachi_--conveys military orders (935) 638.

   Mir +'Abdu'l-ghafur+ _Lari_, of Husain _Bai-qara's_ Court--particulars
       284, 285;
     [d. 912 AH.-1506-7 AD.].

   Khwaja +'Abdu'l-haqq+, brother of Khwaja Makhdumi Nura--waited upon
       by Babur (935) 641, 686;
     has leave to stay in Agra 641.

   +'Abdu'l-karim+ _Ushrit_ (var.) _Auighur_[2862] (var.)--serving Ahmad
      _Miran-shahi_ 40;
     captured by an Auzbeg (902) 65.

   +'Abdu'l-khaliq Beg+ _Isfarayini_--particulars 273-4 (where read
       _Isfarayini_ for "_Isfarayini_").

   Shaikh +'Abdu'l-lah+ _aishik-agha_--with Jahangir (899) 32;
     leaves Babur for home (902) 191.

   Sayyid +'Abdu'l-lah+ _Andikhudi_--his Bai-qara wife Bairam-sultan
       and their son Barka _q.v._

   Khwaja +'Abdu'l-lah+ _Ansari_--his tomb visited by Babur (912) 305;
     a surmised attendant on it 145 n. 1;
     [d, 481 AH.-1088 AD.].

   Shaikh +'Abdu'l-lah+ _bakawal_--with the Bai-qara families (913) 328.

   Shaikh +'Abdu'l-lah+ _Barlas_--particulars 51;
     excites the Tarkhan rebellion (901) 61-2;
     his daughter a cause of attempt on Samarkand 64;
     with his son-in-law Mas'ud _Miran-shahi_ (903) 93.

   Khwaja +'Abdu'l-lah Khwajagan Khwaja+--fifth son of 'Ubaidu'l-lah
      _Ahrari_--his son 'Abdu'sh-shahid, _q.v._

   Mulla +'Abdu'l-lah+ _kitabdar_--one of eleven left with Babur (913) 337;
     given the third of a potent confection (925) 373;
     a drunken lapse 398;
     induced by Babur to restrict his drinking 399;
     at a party where Babur, abstaining, watches the drinkers 400-1;
     rebuked for an offending verse 416;
     joins Babur in an autumn garden 418;
     on service (932) 468, 530;
     in the right centre at Panipat (932) 472, 473;
       and at Kanwa (933) 565, 569;
     sent to take possession of Agra 475;
     is sarcastic 581;
     in attendance on Auzbeg envoys (935) 631;
     sent to take charge of Sambhal (935) 675, 687;
     conveys orders 676;
     sends news of Biban and Bayazid 679;
     arrives in Agra, 687.

   Khwaja +'Abdu'l-lah+ _Marwarid_--particulars 278-9;
     preeminent on the dulcimer 291;
     [d. 922 AH.-1516 AD.].

   +'Abdu'l-lah Mirza+ _Shah-rukhi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_--succeeds his
       father, Ibrahim, in Shiraz (838) 20, and his
     cousin 'Abdu'l-latif in Transoxiana (854) 85-6;
     Yunas Khan his retainer _q.v._;
     [d Jumada I. 22, 855 AH.-1450 AD.].[2863]

   Khwaja +'Abdu'l-lah Qazi+, see Khwaja Maulana-i-qazi.

   +'Abdu'l-lah Sultan+ _Auzbeg-Shaiban_--particulars 267;
     serving Babur in Hindustan (after 933?) 267.

   +'Abdu'l-latif+ _bakhshi_--serving Husain _Bai-qara_ (901) 57;
     acts for Babur from Qunduz (932-3) 546.

   +'Abdu'l-latif Mirza+ _Shah-rukhi Timurid, Barlas Turk_--murders and
       succeeds his father Aulugh Beg (853) 15;
     a couplet on his parricide 85[2864];
     [d Rabi' l .26, 854 AH.-1450 AD.[2865]].

   +'Abdu'l-latif Sultan+ _Auzbeg_, _Shaibani Chingiz-khanid_, son of
       Hamza-- Babur's half-sister Yadgar (_aet. cir._ 8) his share of
       spoil (908) 18.

   Mulla +'Abdu'l-maluk+ _Khwasti_ (var. malik)--at Bajaur (925) 368;
     sent ahead into Bhira 381;
     and to Kabul 415;
     returns from an embassy to 'Iraq (932) 446 (here _qurchi_);
     sent again (935) 642;
     on service (933) 576, 582.

   +'Abdu'l-minan+, son of Mulla Haidar--holding Bish-kint (907) 151.

   Amir +'Abdu'l-qadus Beg+ _Dughlat_--slays Jamal _Khar Arghun_ (877) 35;
     conveys wedding gifts to Babur and arouses suspicion (900) 43;
     [for his death see T.R. trs. pp. 94, 103].

   +'Abdu'l-qadus Beg+ _Kohbur Chaghatai_--with Babur at Madu (Mazu) (905)
       109 (where for "qasim" read qadus);
     one of the eight fugitives from Akhsi (908) 177.

   Mirak +'Abdu'r-rahim+ _Sadr_--his servant Badru'd-din _q.v._

   +'Abdu'r-rahim+ _shaghawal_--sent to speak the Bhira people fair for
       Babur (925) 381;
     given charge of Ibrahim _Ludi's_ mother (933) 543;
     fetches a hostage to Court 578;
       who escapes 581.

   Maulana +'Abdu'r-rahim+_ Turkistani_--fleeces Khwand-amir 328.

   Mulla +'Abdu'r-rahman+ _Ghaznawi_--particulars 218;
       [d. 921 AH.-1515 AD.].

   Maulana +'Abdu'r-rahman+ _Jami_--his letters imitated by Nawa'i 271;
     his sarcasm on Shaikhim's Verse 277;
     his tomb visited by Babur (912) 285, 305;
     Babur's reverential mention of him 283, 286;
     his example followed by production of the _Walidiyyah-risala_ (935)
       620;
     his birth-place 623 n. 8;
     his disciple 'Abdu'l-ghafur 284;
     [898 AH.-1492 AD.].

   +'Abdu'r-rahman Khan+ _Barak-zai Afghan_, Amir of Afghanistan--mentioned
       in connection with Jami's tomb 305 n. 6;
     [d. 1319 AH.-1901 AD.].

   +'Abdu'r-razzaq Mirza+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of
       Aulugh Beg _Kabuli_--loses Kabul (910) 195, 365;
     out with Babur 234;
     surmised part-vendor of Babur's mother's burial-ground 246 n. 2;
     in Herat (912) 298;
     escapes Shaibani and joins Babur (913) 331;
     in the left wing at Qandahar 334;
     his loot 337-8;
     deserts Qalat in fear of Shaibani 340;
     left in charge of Kabul _ib._;
     given Ningnahar 344;
     rebels (914) 345;
     his position stated 345 n. 6;
     [d. 915 AH.-1509 AD.?].

   Khwaja +'Abdu'sh-shahid+, son of Ahrari's fifth son Khwajagan-khwaja
      ('Abdu'l-lah)--placed on Babur's right-hand (935) 631;
     gifts made to him 632;
     invited to a _ma'jun_-party 653;
     particulars 653 n. 4;
     -> a likely recipient of the _Mubin_ 438, 631 n. 3;
     [d. 982 AH.-1574 AD.].

   +'Abdu'sh-shukur+ _Mughul_, son of Qambar-i-'ali _Silakh_--serving
       Jahangir _Miran-shahi_ (after 910) 192;
     in the right wing at Kanwa (933) 566.

   +'Abdu'l-wahhab+ _Mughul_--given Shaikh Puran to loot (913) 328.

   +'Abdu'l-wahhab+ _shaghawal_, servant of 'Umar-shaikh and Ahmad
       _Miran-shahi_--forwards news (899) 25;
     gives Khujand to Babur 54;
     his son Mir Mughul _q.v._

   +Abraha+ _Yemeni_, an _Abyssinian Christian_--his defeat (571 AD.)
      563 n. 3.

   Imam +Abu Hanifa+--his followers' respect for the _Hidayat_ 76;
     his ruling that peacock-meat is lawful food 493.

   Khwaja +Abu'l-barka+ _Faraqi_--criticizes Bana'i's verse (906) 137.

   Shaikh +Abu'l-fath+, servant of the Shah-zada of Mungir--envoy from
       Bengal to Babur (934, 935) 676;
     placed on Babur's right-hand (935) 631.

   +Abu'l-fath Sa'id Khan+, see Sa'id Khan _Chaghatai_.

   +Abu'l-fath+ _Turkman_, son of 'Umar--his joining Babur from 'Iraq 280;
     made military-collector of Dhulpur (933) 540;
     Babur visits his _hammam_ (935) 615.

   +Abu'l-fazl+, see _Akbar-nama_.

   +Abu'l-hasan+ _qur-begi_--in the right wing at Qandahar (913) 334;
     does well (925) 404;
     his brother Muhammad Husain _q.v._

   +Abu'l-hasan+ _qurchi_--in the centre at Qandahar (913) 335.

   +Abu'l-hashim+, servant of Sl. 'Ali [Taghai _Begchik_]--overtakes Babur
       with ill news (925) 412.

   +Abu'l-ma'ali+ _Tirmizi_-- -> his burial-place has significance as
       to Mahdi Khwaja's family 705;
     [d. 971 AH.-1564 AD.].

   Khwaja +Abu'l-makaram+--supports Bai-sunghar _Miran-shahi_ (901) 62,
       (902) 65;
     acts for peace (903) 91;
     meets Babur, both exiles (904) 99;
     at Babur's capture of Samarkand (906) 132, 141;
     leaves it with him 147 n. 2;
     speaks for him (908) 157-8;
     fails to recognize him 161;
     -> at Archian 184;
     [d. 908 AH.-1502 AD.].

   Shaikh +Abu'l-mansur+ _Mataridi_--his birthplace Samarkand 75, 76;
     [d. 333 AH.-944 AD.].

   +Abu'l-muhammad+ _neza-baz_--in the _tulghuma_ of the left wing, at
       Panipat (932) 473;
     on service (933) 582, (934) 589, 598.

   +Abu'l-muhammad+ _Khujandi_--his sextant 74 n. 4.

   +Abu'l-muhsin Mirza+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of Husain
        and Latif--particulars 262 (where for "husain" read muhsin), 269;
     serving his father (901) 58;
     defeats his brother Badi'u'z-zaman (902) 69, 70;
     defeated by his father at Halwa-spring (904) 260;
     his men take Qarakul from Auzbegs (906) 135;
     co-operates against Shaibani (912) 296;
     rides out to meet Babur 297;
     they share a divan 298;
     presses him to winter in Heri 300;
     returns to his district (Merv) 301;
     his later action and death 329-30, 331;
     [d. 913 AH.-1507 AD.].

   +Abu'l-muslim Kukuldash+--brings an Arghun gift to Babur (925) 401, 402.

   +Abu'l-qasim+ _Jalair_--tells Babur a parrot story. (935)[2866] 494.

   +Abu'l-qasim+--a musician (923) 387, 388 (here Qasim only).

   +Abu'l-qasim+, _Kohbur Chaghatai_, son of Haidar-i-qasim--on
     service with Babur (902) 68, (906) 130, 131, 133;
     in the right wing at Sar-i-pul (Khwaja Kardzan) 139;
     killed 141;
     [d. 906 AH.-1501 AD.].

   Shaikh +Abu'l-wajd+ _Farighi_, maternal-uncle of Zain
       _Khawafi_--makes verse on the Kabul-river (932) 448;
     his chronogram on Al-aman's birth (935) 621;
     [d. 940 AH.-1533 AD.[2867]].

   Shaikh +Abu-sa'id Khan+ _Dar-miyan_[2868]--particulars 276.

   Sultan +Abu-sa'id Mirza+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas
       Turk_--his descent 14;
     asserts Timurid supremacy over Chaghatai Khaqans (855) 20, 344, 352;
     takes Mawara'u'n-nahr (855) 86;
     forms his Corps of Braves 28, 50;
     a single combat in his presence (857) 50;
     defeats Husain _Bai-qara_ (868) 259;
     a swift courier to him 25;
     joined by the Black-sheep Turkmans (872) 49;
     orders the Hindustan army mobilized 46;
     defeated and killed by the White-sheep Turkmans (873) 25, 46, 49;
     appointments named 24, 37;
     his banishment of Nawa'i 271;
     reserves a Chaghatai wife for a son 21, 36;
     his Badakhshi wife and their son 22,[2869] 260;
     his Tarkhan _Arghun_ wife and their sons, 33, 45;
     his mistress Khadija _q.v._;
     his daughters Payanda-sultan, Shahr-banu, Rabi'a-sultan,
       Khadija-sultan, Fakhr-i-jahan, Apaq-sultan, Aq Begim _q.v._;
     retainers named as his 'Ali-dost _Sagharichi_, Muhammad Baranduq,
       Aurus, and Zu'n-nun _Arghun_ _q.v._;
     his marriage connection Nuyan _Tirmizi_ _q.v._;
     [d. 873 AH.-1469 AD.].

   +Abu-sa'id Puran+, see Jamalu'd-din.

   +Abu-sa'id Sultan+ _Auzbeg-Shaiban_, _Chingiz-khanid_, son of
       Kuchum-- -> at Ghaj-davan (918) 360;
     at Jam (935) 622, 636;
     sends an envoy to Babur 631, 632, 641;
     [d. 940 AH.-1533-4 AD.].

   Shaikh +Abu-sa'id Tarkhan+ (var. Bu-sa'id)--his house Mirza Khan's
       loot in Qandahar (913) 338.

   +Abu-turab Mirza+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of Husain
       and Mingli--particulars 262, 269;
     his son Sohrab _q.v._;
     [d before 911 AH.-1505-6 AD.].

   +Adik Sultan+ _Qazzaq_, _Juji Chingiz-khanid_ (var. Aung Sultan),
       son of Jani Beg Khan (T.R. trs. 373)--husband of Sultan-nigar
       _Chaghatai_ _q.v._

   +'Adil Sultan+ _Auzbeg-Shaiban_(?), _Chingiz-khanid_(?),
       son of Mahdi and a Bai-qara begim--marries Shad _Bai-qara_ 263;
     suggestions as to his descent 264 n. 1;
     waits on Babur at Kalanur (932) 458;
     on Babur's service 468, 471, 475, 530;
     in the left wing at Panipat 472;
     and at Kanwa (933) 567, 570;
     ordered against Baluchis (935) 638;
     -> mentioned as a landless man 706.

   Sayyida +Afaq+, a legendary wife of Babur 358 n. 2;
     her son and grandson _ib._

   +Afghani Aghacha+, see Mubarika.

   Sayyid +Afzal Beg+, son of 'Ali _Khwab-bin_--conveys Husain
       _Bai-qara's_ summons to Babur for help against Shaibani (911) 255;
     particulars 282;
     takes news to Herat of Babur's start from Kabul (912) 294;
     sends him news of Husain's death 295;
     [d. 921 AH.-1516 AD.].

   +Agha Begim+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter
        of Husain and Payanda-sultan--parentage and marriage (or betrothal,
        H.S. iii, 327) 266;
     [d died in childhood].

   +Agha-sultan+, _ghunchachi_ of 'Umar Shaikh--her daughter
       Yadgar-i-sultan _q.v._

   +Ahi+--his feet frost-bitten (912) 311.

   +Ahi+, a poet--particulars 289;
     [d 907 AH.-1501-2].

   +Ahli+, a poet--particulars 290;
     (for 4 writers using _Ahli_ as their pen-name see 290 n. 6).

   Sultan +Ahmad+ _Ailchi-bugha_, _Mughul_--one of four daring much
       (912) 315;
     in the left wing at Qandahar (913) 334.

   Pir +Ahmad+--leaves Samarkand with the Tarkhans (905) 121;
     fights for Babur at Sar-i-pul (Khwaja Kardzan) (906) 139.

   +Ahmad+ _Afshar Turk_--a letter to him endorsed by Babur (935) 617.

   Mirza +Ahmad 'Ali+ _Farsi_, _Barlas_--particulars 273.

   +Ahmad 'Ali Tarkhan+ _Arghun_, brother of Quli Beg--favours Babur and
       admits him to Qandahar (913) 337.

   Mulla +Ahmad+ _Balkhi_-- conveys treasure to Balkh (932) 446.

   Mirza Sayyidi +Ahmad+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of
       Miran-shah--particulars 257 n. 5;
     named in a line of descent 280 n. 1;
     his son Ahmad and grandson 'Abdu'l-baqi _q.v._

   Mir +Ahmad Beg+ _Itaraji Mughul_, paternal-uncle of Tambal--guardian
       of a son of The Khan (Mahmud) 115;
     reinforces Babur (903) 92;
     acts against him (905) 115, 116;
     acts against 'Ali _Miran-shahi_ 112;
     makes a contemptuous speech about Tambal (906) 145.

   +Ahmad Beg+ _Safawi_-- -> leads a reinforcement to help Babur
       (917) 353.

   Sultan +Ahmad+ _Char-shamba'i_, see Char-shamba.

   +Ahmad+ _chashnigir_--helps in poisoning Babur (933) 541;
     [d. 933 AH.-1526 AD.].

   +Ahmad Haji Beg+ _Duldai_, _Barlas Turk_--particulars 25, 37, 38;
     his pen-name Wafa'i and a couplet of his 38;
     his hospitality to 'Ali-sher _Nawai_ 38, 271;
     drives Khusrau Shah from Samarkand (900) 51;
     supports Bai-sunghar _Miran-shahi_ in the Tarkhan rebellion (901)
       62, 63;
     his death at the hands of slaves and slave-women 63-4;
     [d. 901 AH.-1496 AD.].

   +Ahmadi+ _parwanchi_--on service (925) 377, (932) 458, 460, (933) 540;
     sent to surprise Ibrahim _Ludi_ (932) 468 (his name is omitted in
       my text);
     in the left centre at Panipat 472, 473;
     his ill-behaviour in the heats 524.

   Sultan +Ahmad Khan+--+Alacha Khan+--_Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_, son of
       Yunas and Shah Begim--particulars 23, 160;
     meaning of his sobriquet Alacha Khan 23;
     younger Khan-dada, Babur's name for him 129;
     considered as a refuge for Babur (899) 29, (903) 92, (906) 129,
       (908) 158;
     visits Tashkint (908) 159;
     ceremonies of meeting 160-1, 171-2;
     moves with his elder brother Mahmud against Tambal 161, 168, 171;
     his kindness to Babur 159, 166-7, 169, 171;
     is given Babur's lands and why 168;
     retires from Andijan in fear of Shaibani 172;
     defeated by Shaibani at Archian (908 or 909) 7, 23, -> 182-3;
     his death (909) reported to Babur (911) 246 and n. 4;
     his sons Mansur, Sa'id, Baba (T.R. trs. 160, Babajak), Chin-timur,
       Tukhta-bugha, and Aisan-timur q.v.;
     his grandson Baba _q.v._;
     -> followers of his return from forced migration (908) when
       Shaibani is killed (916) 351;
     [dend of 909 AH.-1504 AD.].

   +Ahmad Khan+ _Haji-tarkhani_ (_Astrakhani_)--marries Badi'u'l-jamal
       (Badka) _Bai-qara_ (899?) 257, 258;
     their sons (Mahmud and Bahadur) 258;
     their daughter Khan-zada _q.v._

   Sultan +Ahmad Mirza+ _Dughlat_--sent by The Khan (Mahmud) to help Babur
       (908) 161.

   Sultan +Ahmad Mirza+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of
       Abu-sa'id--the lands his father gave him 35, 86;
     his brother Mahmud taken to his care (873 or 4) 46;
     his disaster on the Chir (895) 17, 25, 31, 34;
     a swift courier to him 25;
     defeats 'Umar Shaikh 17, 34; 12 n. 2; 53;
     invades Farghana (899) 13, 30;
     given Aura-tipa 27;
     dreaded for Babur 29;
     retires and dies 31, 33;
     particulars 33, 40;
     referred to by Husain _Bai-qara_ (910) 190;
     his wives and children 35-6;
     an honoured Beg Nuyan _Tirmizi_ _q.v._;
     [d. 899 AH.-1494 AD.].

   Sultan +Ahmad Mirza+, _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of
       Mirza Sayyidi Ahmad--particulars 257 n. 5;
     his wife Aka Begim _Bai-qara_ and their son Kichik Mirza _q.v._; 266
       n. 6;
     a building of his at Heri 305.

   +Ahmad+ _mushtaq_, _Turkman_--takes Mahmud _Miran-shahi_ to Hisar
      (873 or 4) 46-7.

   Sultan +Ahmad+ _qarawal_, father of Quch (Quj) Beg, Tardi Beg and
       Sher-afgan Beg _q.v._--defends Hisar (901) 58;
     enters Babur's service (905) 112;
     in the left Wing at Khuban (905) 113;
     holds Marghinan 123.

   +Ahmad-i-qasim+ _Kohbur Chaghatai_, son of Haidar-i-qasim--with Babur
       (906) 133;
     invited to a disastrous entertainment (907) 152;
     joins Jahangir and Tambal 156;
     in Akhsi (908) 171;
     defeats an Auzbeg raider (910) 195;
     helps to hold Kabul for Babur (912) 313;
     pursues Mirza Khan 317, 320;
     holding Tashkint against Auzbegs (918) 356, 358, 396, 397;
     a Kabuli servant of his 351.

   +Ahmad-i-qasim+ _Qibchaq Turk_, (grand-?) son of Baqi _Chaghaniani_
       and a sister of Khusrau Shah, perhaps son of Baqi's son
       Muhammad-i-qasim (189 n. 3)--holding Kahmard and Bamian (910) 189;
     given charge of the families of Babur's expeditionary force 189;
     ill-treats them and is forced to flee 197, 243;
     goes to Husain _Bai-qara_ _ib._;
     killed at Qunduz 244;
     [d. 910 AH.-1505 AD.].

     Sultan +Ahmad Qazi+ _Qilich_--particulars 29;
     his son Khwaja Maulana-i-qazi _q.v._

   +Ahmad+ _qushchi_--seen by the fugitive Babur (908) 180.

   Khwaja +Ahmad+ _Sajawandi_--his birthplace 217.

   +Ahmad Shah+ _Khilji Turk_--dispossessed of Chandiri by Ibrahim
      _Ludi_ 593;
     restored by Babur (934) 598.

   +Ahmad Shah+ _Durrani_, _Abdali Afghan_--his victory at Panipat (1174)
       472;
     [d. 1182 AH.-1772 AD.].

   +Ahmad Tarkhan+ _Arghun Chingiz-khanid_ (?)--joins Babur in Samarkand
       (906) 133;
     loses Dabusi to Shaibani 137;
     [d. 906 AH.-1500 AD.].

   +Ahmad (son of) Tawakkal+ _Barlas_, amir of Husain
       _Bai-qara_--particulars 272.

   +Ahmad+ _yasawal_--conveys a message from Babur to the begs of Kabul
       Fort (912) 314.

   Khwaja +Ahmad+ _Yasawi_--+Sayyid Ata+--Shaibani's vow at his shrine
       348, 356;
     [d. 514 AH.-1120-1 AD.].[2870]

   +Ahmad-i-yusuf Beg+ _Aughlaqchi_, son of Hasan, nephew of
       Yusuf--managing Yar-yilaq for 'Ali _Miran-shahi_ (904) 98;
     dismissed on suspicion of favouring Babur 98;
     probably joins Babur with his uncle (910) 196;
     remonstrated with him for fighting unmailed (911) 252;
     helping loyalists in Kabul (912) 313;
     saves Babur a blow 315, 316;
     at Bajaur (925) 369, 401 (here Ahmad Beg);
     joins Babur in Hindustan (933) 550;
     in the right wing at Kanwa 566 (where in n. 1 for "may" read is),
       569;
     governor of Sialkot 98.

   Malik +Ahmad+ _Yusuf-zai Afghan_, nephew of Sulaiman
       _q.v._--particulars App. K.

   +Ai Begim+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter of Mahmud
       and Khan-zada II.--betrothed to Jahangir. (_cir._ 895) 48;
     married (910) 189;
     their daughter 48.

   +Aiku-salam+ _Mughul_--rebels against Babur (914) 345.

   +Aiku[2871]-timur Beg Tarkhan+ _Arghun_--his descendant Darwesh Beg
       _q.v._;
     [d. 793 AH.-1391 AD.].

    Sultan? +Ailik+ _Mazi Auighur_ (_Uighur_)--his descendant Khwaja
       Maulana-i-qazi _q.v._

   +Airzin Beg+ (var. Airazan) _Barin Mughul_--supports Yunas _Chaghatai_
       (_cir._ 830), takes him to Aulugh Beg _Shah-rukhi_
       (_cir._ 832) 19;
     ill-received and his followers scattered 20;
     [d. 832 AH.-1428 AD.].

   +Aisan-bugha Khan+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_, son of Dawa--named in
       Yunas Khan's genealogy 19;
     [d_cir._ 718 AH.-1318 AD.].

   +Aisan-bugha Khan II.+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_, son of
       Wais--particulars 19;
     invades Farghana and defeated at Aspara (_cir._ 855) 20;
     quarrels with the begs of the Sagharichi _tuman_ and leads to the
       elevation of Yunas _ib._;
     [d. 866 AH.-1462 AD.].

   +Aisan-daulat Begim+ _Kunji_ (or _Kunchi_) _Mughul_, wife of Yunas
       _Chaghatai_--particulars 20, 21;
     her good judgment (900) 43;
     entreats Babur's help for Andijan (903) 88-9;
     joins him in Khujand after the loss of Andijan 92;
       and in Dikh-kat after that of Samarkand (907) 151;
     news of her death reaches Kabul (911) 246;
     rears one of 'Umar Shaikh's daughters 18;
     her kinsmen 'Ali-dost, Sherim, Ghiyas _q.v._;
     [d. 910 AH.-1505 AD.].

   +Aisan-quli Sultan _Auzbeg-Shaiban_, _Chingiz-khanid_--his Bai-qara
       marriage, 265, 397.

   +Aisan-timur Sultan+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_, son of Ahmad
      (Alacha Khan)--on Babur's service 318, 682;
     meets Babur (935) 654;
     in the battle of the Ghogra 672, 673;
     thanked 677;
     angers Babur 684.

   +Aka Begim+, _Barlas Turk_, daughter of Timur--an ancestress of Husain
       _Bai-qara_ 256.

   +Aka Begim+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, daughter of Mansur and
       Firuza--particulars 257;
     her husband Ahmad and their son Kichik Mirza _q.v._

   Abu'l-fath Jalalu'd-din Muhammad +Akbar+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_,
       _Barlas Turk_, grandson of Babur and Mahim-- -> 184;
     -> an addition about him made to the Chihil-zina inscription 432;
     -> his visit to Panipat (963) 472;
     his change in the name of the cherry explained by Babur's words 501,
       n. 6;
     [d1014 AH.-1605 AD.].

   +Alacha Khan+, see Ahmad _Chaghatai_.

   +Al-aman+, son of Humayun--his birth and name (935) 621, 624, 642;
     [d in infancy].

   +'Alam Khan+ _Kalpi_, son of Jalal Khan _Jik-hat_ (or
       _Jig-hat_)--holding Kalpi and not submissive to Babur (932) 523;
     goes to Court (933) 544;
     disobeys orders 557;
     is Babur's host in Kalpi (934) 590;
     on service (935) 682;
     an order about him 684.

   'Alau'u'd-din +'Alam Khan+ _Ludi Afghan_, son of Buhlul-- -> a principal
       actor between 926-32 AH. 428;
     -> asks and obtains Babur's help against his nephew Ibrahim (929)
       439-441;
     placed by Babur in charge of Dibalpur (930) 442;
     -> defeated by Daulat Khan _Yusuf-khail_ (931) 444;
     flees to Kabul and is again set forth 444, 455;
     defeated by Ibrahim and returns to Babur (932) 454-8;
     his relations with Babur reviewed 455, n. 1;
     in Fort Ginguta 457, 463;
     in the left centre at Kanwa (933) 565;
     his sons Jalal, Kamal, and Sher Khan (_Ludi_) _q.v._

   Sultan 'Alau'u'd-din +'Alam Khan+ _Sayyidi_--holding Dihli 481;
     [d. 855 AH.-1451 AD.].

   +'Alam Khan+ _Tahangari_, brother of Nizam Khan of Biana--works badly
       with Babur's force (933) 538;
     defeated by his brother 539;
     sent out of the way before Kanwa 547.

   +'Alau'u'd-din Husain Shah+, ruler in Bengal--the circumstances of his
       succession 483;
     his son Nasrat _q.v._;
     [d. 925 AH.-1518 AD.?].

   +'Alau'u'd-din Husain+ _Jahan-soz Ghuri_--his destruction in Ghazni
       (550) 219;
     [d. 556 AH.-1161 AD.?].

   Sultan +'Alau'u'd-din Muhammad Shah+ _Khilji Turk_--Babur visits his
       tomb and minar (932) 476;
     his bringing of the Koh-i-nur from the Dakkhin 477;
     [d. 715 AH.-1315 AD.].

   Sultan +'Alau'u'd-din+ _Sawadi_--waits on Babur (925) 372, 375-6.

   +'Alaul Khan+ _Sur Afghan_--writes dutifully to Babur (935) 659.

   +'Alaul Khan+ _Nuhani Afghan_--his waitings on Babur (934, 935) 677,
       680.

   Sharafu'd-din Muhammad +al Busiri+--his _Qasidatu'l-burda_ an example
       for the _Walidiyyah-risala_ 620;
     [d_cir._ 693 AH.-1294 AD.].

   +Alexander of Macedon+, see Iskandar _Filqus_ (_Failaqus_).

   Sayyid +'Ali+--escapes from a defeat (909) 102;
     out with Babur (925) 403;
     sent against Baluchis (935) 638.

   Sultan +'Ali+ _asghar_ Mirza _Shah-rukhi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_,
       son of Mas'ud _Kabuli_--particulars 382.

   +'Ali Ataka+, servant of Khalifa--reinforces the right wing
       (_tulghuma_) at Kanwa (933) 569.

   Shaikh +'Ali Bahadur+, one of Timur's chiefs--his descendant Baba
       'Ali 27.

   Khwaja +'Ali Bai+--mentioned (906) 127;
     fights for Babur at Sar-i-pul (Khwaja Kardzan) 139;
     his son Jan-i-'ali _q.v._

   Shaikh +'Ali+ _Barin Mughul_, son of Shaikh Jamal--in the left wing
       (_tulghuma_) at Panipat (932) 473;
     sent against Baluchis (935) 638.

   +'Ali+ _Barlas Turk_--his son Muhammad Baranduq _q.v._

   +'Ali Beg+ _Jalair Chaghatai_, father of Hasan-i-'Ali and Apaq
       Bega--his Shah-rukhi service 278.[2872]

   Mir (Shaikh) +'Ali Beg+ _Turk_ (inferred 389), governor of Kabul for
        Shah-rukh _Timurid_--his sons Baba Kabuli, Darya Khan, and Ghazi
       (Apaq) Khan (_q.v._) cherished by Mas'ud _Shah-rukhi_ 382;
     (see his son Ghazi's grandson Minuchihr for a Turk relation 386).

   Sultan +'Ali+ _chuhra_, _Chaghatai_--his loyalty to Babur doubted
       (910) 239;
     rebels (914) 345.

   Sayyid +'Ali-darwesh Beg+ _Khurasani_--particulars 28;
     with Jahangir (_aet._ 8), in Akhsi (899) 32, leaves Babur for home
       (903) 91;
     on Babur's service (904) 106, (905) 28, 118.

   Mir +'Ali-dost Taghai+ _Kunji Mughul_, a Sagharichi-_tuman_
       beg--particulars 27-8;
     his appointment on Babur's accession (899) 32;
     has part in a conference (900) 43;
     surrenders Andijan (903) 88-9;
     asks Babur's pardon (904) 99;
     gives him Marghinan 100;
     defeated by Tambal 106;
     in the right wing at Khuban (905) 113;
     his ill-timed pacifism 118;
     his self-aggrandizement 119, 123;
     joins Babur against Samarkand 123;
     in fear of his victims, goes to Tambal 125;
     his death _ib._;
     his brother Ghiyas, his son Muhammad-dost, and his servant Yul-chuq
       _q.v._;
     [da few years after 905 AH.-1500 AD.].

   Mir Sayyid +'Ali+ _Hamadani_--his death and burial 211;
     [d. 786 AH.-1384 AD.].

   Mulla +'Ali-jan+ (var. Khan)--fetches his wife from Samarkand (925) 403;
     is taught a rain-spell (926) 423;
     makes verse on the Kabul-river (932) 448;
     a satirical couplet on him made and repented by Babur 448;
     host of Mulla Mahmud _Farabi_ (935) 653.

   +'Ali Khan+ _Bayandar_, _Aq-quiluq Turkman_--joins Husain _Bai-qara_
       (873) 279.

   Shaikh-zada +'Ali Khan+ _Farmuli Afghan_--his family-train captured
       (932) 526;
     waits on Babur 526-7;
     in the left wing at Kanwa (933) 567;
     on service 576, 582, 678.

   +'Ali Khan+ _Istilju_--leads Isma'il _Safawi's_ reinforcement to Babur
       (917) 353.

   Sayyid +'Ali Khan+ _Turk_, son of Ghazi (Apaq) Khan and grandson of
       Mir (Shaikh) 'Ali Beg--one of Sikandar _Ludi's_ Governors in the
       Panjab (910) 382;
     leaves Bhira on Babur's approach _ib._;
     his lands made over by him to Daulat Khan _Yusuf-khail_ 382-3;
     his son Minuchihr and their Turk relation (389) _q.v._

   +'Ali Khan+ _Turkman_, son of 'Umar Beg--defends the Bai-qara families
       against Shaibani (913) 328.

   +'Ali Khan+ _Yusuf-khail Ludi Afghan_--eldest son of Daulat Khan--his
       servants wait on Babur (925) 382;
     comes out of Milwat (Malot) to Babur (932) 459-60;
     sent under guard to Bhira 461;
     his son Isma'il _q.v._

   Sayyid +'Ali+ _Khwab-bin_, father of Sayyid Afzal _q.v._ (cf. H.S.
       lith. ed. iii, 346).

   Mulla Sultan +'Ali+ _khwush-nawis_, calligrapher of Husain
       _Bai-qara_--particulars 291;
     given lessons in penmanship by Shaibani (913) 329;
     [d. 919 AH.-1513 AD.].

   +'Ali-mazid Beg+ _quchin_--particulars 26;
     leaves Babur for home (903) 91.

   Mir +'Ali+ _mir-akhwur_[2873]--particulars 279;
     helps Husain _Bai-qara_ to surprise Yadgar-i-muhammad _Shah-rukhi_
       in Heri (875) 134, 279.

   Sultan +'Ali Mirza+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of Mahmud
       and Zuhra--particulars 47;
     serving his half-brother Bai-sunghar (900) 27, 55;
     made _padshah_ in Samarkand by the Tarkhans (901) 62-3, 86;
     meets Babur 64;
     their arrangement 66,(902) 65, 82, 86;
     gives no protection to his blind half-brother Mas'ud (903) 95;
     suspects a favoured beg (904) 98;
     quarrels with the Tarkhans (905) 121;
     desertions from him 122;
     defeats Mirza Khan's Mughuls _ib._;
     is warned of Babur's approach 125;
     gives Samarkand to Shaibani and by him is murdered (906) 125-7;
     his wife Sultanim _Miran-shahi_ and sister Makhdum-sultan _q.v._;
     [d. 906 AH.-1500 AD.].

   Sultan +'Ali Mirza Taghai+ _Begchik_ (Mirza Beg Taghai), brother(?)
       of Babur's wife Gul-rukh--movements of his which bear on the
       _lacuna_ of 914-924 AH. 408;
     arrives in Kabul (925) _ib._;
     Kamran marries his daughter (934) 619;
     conveys Babur's wedding gifts to Kamran (935) 642;
     takes also a copy of the _Walidiyyah-risala_ and of the Hindustan
       poems, with writings (_sar-khatt_) in the Baburi script 642.

   Ustad +'Ali-quli+--his match-lock shooting at Bajaur (925) 369;
     shoots prisoners (932) 466;
     ordered to make Rumi defences at Panipat 469;
     fires _firingis_ from the front of the centre 473;
     casts a large mortar (933) 536, 547;
     his jealousy of Mustafa _Rumi_ 550;
     his post previous to Kanwa 558;
     his valiant deeds in the battle 570-1;
     a new mortar bursts (934) 588;
     his choice of ground at Chandiri 593;
     his stone-discharge interests Babur 595, 670-1-2;
     uses the Ghazi mortar while the Ganges bridge is in building 599;
     a gift to his son (935) 633;
     his post in the battle of the Ghogra 667, 668, 669.

   +'Ali-quli+ _Hamadani_-- -> sent by Babur to punish the Mundahirs,
       and fails (936) 700.

   Mir +'Ali+ _qurchi_--conveys playing-cards to Shah Hasan _Arghun_
       (933) 584.

   Malik +'Ali+ _qutni_(?)--in the left centre at Bajaur (925) 369.

   +'Ali Sayyid+ _Mughul_--in the right wing at Qandahar (913) 334;
     rebels (914) 345[2874];
     his connection Aurus-i 'Ali Sayyid 335.

   +'Ali+ _shab-kur_ (night-blind)--one of five champions defeated in
       single combat by Babur (914) 349.

   Mir +'Ali-sher Beg+ _Chaghatai_, pen-names Nawa'i and Fana'i--his
       obligations to Ahmad Haji Beg and return to Herat 38;
     fails in a mission of Husain _Bai-qara's_ (902) 69[2875];
     his Turki that of Andijan 4;
     checks Husain in Shi'a action 258;
     opposes administrative reform 282;
     particulars 271-2;
     his relations with Bana'i 286-7, 648;
     corresponds with Babur (906) 106;
     exchanges quatrains with Pahlawan Bu-sa'id 292;
     some of his poems transcribed by Babur (925) 419;
     his restoration of the Rabat-i-sang-bast 301 n. 1;
     his flower-garden (_baghcha_) and buildings visited or occupied by
       Babur (912) 301, 305, 306;
     his brother Darwesh-i-'ali _q.v._;
     a favoured person 278;
     a mystic of his circle 280-1;
     his scribe 271;
     [d. 906 AH.-Dec. 1500 AD.].

   +'Ali-shukr Beg+, of the Baharlu-aimaq of the Aq-quiluq[2876]
       Turkmans--his daughter Pasha, grandson Yar-i-'ali _Balal_,
       and descendant Bairam Khan-i-khanan _q.v._

     Sultan +'Ali Sistani+ _Arghun_--his help against Shaibani counselled
       (913) 326;
     -> one of five champions worsted by Babur in single combat (914) 349;
     with Babur and chops at a tiger (925) 393.

   Shaikh +'Ali Taghai+ _Mervi_(?)--holding Balkh for Badi'u'z-zaman
       _Bai-qara_ (902) 70;
     joint-darogha in Heri (911) 293.

   +Allah-birdi+ (var. quli)--serving Babur (910) 234.

   +Allah-wairan+ _Turkman_--in the van at Qandahar (913) 335.

   +Alur+ or Alwar,[2877] son of Babur and Dil-dar--mentioned 689 n. 5.
       -> 712;
     [ddied an infant].

   +Amin Mirza+--an Auzbeg envoy to Babur (935) 631;
     receives gifts 632, 641.

   +Amin-i-muhammad Tarkhan+ _Arghun_--punished for disobedience (925)
       390-1;
     deals with a drunken companion 415.

   +Amir Khan+, chief guardian of Tahmasp _Safawi_-- -> negociates with
       Babur (927) 433.

   Mulla +Apaq+--particulars 526;
     on Babur's service (932) 526, 528, (933) 539, (934) 590;
     surprised by Sanga (933) 549;
     made _shiqdar_ of Chandiri 598;
     his retainers on service (935) 679.

   +Apaq Bega+ _Jalair Chaghatai_, sister of Husan-i-'ali--a poet 286.

   Sayyida +Apaq Begim+ _Andikhudi_--particulars 267, 268, 269;
     visited in Herat by Babur (912) 301.

   +Apaq Khan+, see Ghazi Khan.

   +Apaq Khan+ _Yusuf-khail_, see Ghazi Khan.

   +Apaq-sultan Begim+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter of
       Abu-sa'id--one of the paternal aunts visited by Babur (912)
       301 n. 3.

   +Aq Begim+ (1), _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter of Husain
       and Payanda-sultan--particulars 265;
     [pre-deceased her husband who died d. 911 AH.-1504 AD.].

   +Aq Begim+ (2), _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_--daughter of
       Abu-sa'id and Khadija--particulars 262, 268;
     waited on by Babur (935) 606.

   +Aq Begim+ (3), _ut supra_, daughter of Mahmud
       and Khan-zada II.--brought to join Babur's march (910) 48.

   +Aq Begim+ (4), see Saliha-sultan.

   +Aq-bugha Beg+, one of Timur's chiefs--collateral ancestor of
       Khudai-birdi _Timur-tash_ 24.

   +'Aqil Sultan+ _Auzbeg-Shaiban_, son of 'Adil and Shad _Bai-qara_--his
       conjectured descent 264 n. 1 (where in l. 4 for "'aqil"
       read 'adil).

   +Araish Khan+--proffers support to Babur against Ibrahim _Ludi_
       (932) 463;
     in the left centre at Kanwa (933) 565;
     negociates about surrendering Chandiri (934) 594;
     his gift of a boat to Babur 663.

   +Arghun Sultan+, elder brother of Muhammad 'Ali _Jang-jang_--deputed to
       hold Milwat (Malot., 932) 461.

   Shaikh +'Arif+ _Azari_, nephew of Timur's story-teller, see Index
       _s.n._ Aulugh Beg _Shah-rukhi_;
     [d. 866 AH.-1461-2 AD. _aet._ 82, Beale].

   +Arslan+ _Jazala_--his building of the Rabat-i-sang-bast 301 n. 1.

   +Asad Beg+ _Turkman_--joins Husain _Bai-qara_ 279;
     his brother Taham-tan _q.v._

   Khwaja and Khwajagi +Asadu'l-lah+ _Jan-dar_, _Khawafi_--with Babur in
       Dikh-kat (907) 150;
     envoy to Tahmasp _Safawi_ (933) 540, 583;
     has charge of Ibrahim _Ludi's_ mother 543;
     in the right wing at Kanwa 566, 569.

   Khwaja +Asafi+--particulars 286;
     waits on Babur (912) 286;
     [d. 920 or 926 AH.-1514 or 1520 AD.].

   +'Asas+, see Khwaja Muhammad 'Ali _'asas_.

   +'Ashiq+ _bakawal_--with advance-troops for Chandiri (934) 590;
     ordered on service (935) 638.

   +'Ashiq-i-muhammad Kukuldash+ _Arghun_, son of "Amir Tarkhan Junaid"
       (H.S. lith. ed. iii, 359)--defends Ala-qurghan against Shaibani
       (913) 328;
     his brother Mazid Beg _q.v._

   +'Ashiqu'l-lah+ _Arghun_--killed fighting against Babur at Qandahar
       (913) 333 (where for "'Ashaq" read 'Ashiq).

   +Asiru'd-din+ _Akhsikiti_, a poet--his birthplace Akhsi-village
       (kit-kint) 9-10;
     [d. 608 AH.-1211-2 AD.].

   Muhammad +'Askari+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of Babur
       and Gul-rukh-- -> his birth (922) 364;
     gifts to him (932) 523, (933) 628;
     -> his recall from Multan (934) 603-4-5, 699[2878];
     waits on his father (935) 605;
     made Commander (_aet. cir._ 12) of the army of the East 628, 637;
     at a feast 631;
     takes leave 634;
     waits on his father at Dugdugi 651;
     east of the Ganges 654;
     in the battle of the Ghogra 668-9, 671-3;
     waits on Babur after the victory 674;
     [d. 965 AH.-1557-8 AD.].

   +Asuk Mal+ _Rajput_--negociates with Babur for Sanga's son (934-5)
       612-3.

   Sayyid +'Ata+, see Khwaja Ahmad _Yasawi_.

   Khwaja Jamalu'd-in +'Ata+--particulars 282 (where in n. 3 for
       (H.S. iii), "345" read 348-9).

   +Ataka+ _bakhshi_ (var. Atika, Pers. Atka)--a surgeon who dresses
       a wound of Babur's (908) 169.

   +Ata+ _mir-akhwur_--gives Babur a meal (925) 418.

   Mir Burhanu'd-din +'Ata'u'l-lah+ _Mashhadi_--particulars 285
       (H.S. iii, 345);
     [d. 926 AH.-1520 AD.].

   +Atun Mama+, a governess--walks from Samarkand to Pashaghar (907) 148;
     mentioned? (925) 407 l. 4.

   +Aughan-birdi+ _Mughul_ (var. Afghan-birdi and -tardi)--on service
       (925) 376, 377;
     of a boat-party 387;
     in the battle of the Ghogra (935) 671, 672.

   Sayyid _Aughlaqchi_, see Murad.

   +Auliya Khan+ _Ishraqi_--waits on Babur (935) 677.

   +Aulugh Beg Mirza+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of Muhammad
       Sultan Mirza--his (?) journey to Hindustan (933) 265.

   +Aulugh Beg Mirza+ _Kabuli_, _Miran-shahi_, _ut supra_,
       son of Abu-sa'id--particulars 95;
     his earliest guardians amusingly frustrate his designs against
       them 270;
     his dealings with the Yusuf-zai App. K. xxxvi;
     his co-operation with Husain _Bai-qara_ against the Auzbegs 190;
     his praise of Istalif 216;
     his death (907) 185;
     gardens of his bought by Babur (perhaps one only) 216, (911) 246;
     another garden 315;
     houses of his 247, 251;
     his Almshouse 315;
     referred to 284;
     his joint-guardians Muhammad Baranduq and Jahangir _Barlas_, his
       later one Wais Ataka _q.v._;
     his sons 'Abdu'r-razzaq and Miran-shah, his daughter Bega Begim
       and daughter-in-law Manauwar _q.v._;
     [d. 907 AH.-1501-2 AD.].

   +Aulugh Beg Mirza+ _Shah-rukhi_, _ut supra_ (Ulugh), son
       of Shah-rukh--his Trans-oxus rule 85[2879];
     receives Yunas _Chaghatai_ badly (832-3?) 19-20;
     defeated by Aba-bikr _Miran-shahi_ 260;
     his family dissensions 20;
     his constructions, Astronomical and other 74, 77, 78-9[2880];
     his sportsmanship 34[2881];
     his murder and its chronograms 85;
     Babur resides in his College (906) 142;
     his sons 'Abdu'l-latif and 'Abdu'l-'aziz _q.v._;
     a favoured beg Yusuf _Aughlaqchi_ _q.v._;
     Preface, _q.v._ _On the misnomer "Mughul Dynasty"._
     [d. 853 AH.-1449 AD.].

   +Aulus Agha+ (Ulus), daughter of Khwaja Husain _q.v._--particulars 24.

   +Aurdu-bugha Tarkhan+ _Arghun_ (Urdu)--his son-in-law Abu-sa'id
       _Miran-shahi_ and son Darwesh-i-muhammad _q.v._

   +Aurdu-shah+--murdered as an envoy (923) 463 n. 3.

   +Aurangzib Padshah+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_-- -> referred
       to as of Babur's line 184;
     [d. 1118 AH.-O.S. 1707 AD.].

   Amir +Aurus+-- -> flees from his post on Shaibani's death (916) 350.

   +Aurus-i 'Ali Sayyid+ _Mughul_, son? of 'Ali Sayyid--in the centre at
       Qandahar (913) 335.

   +Aurus+ _Arghun_--his son Muhammad-i-aurus _q.v._

   +Auzbeg Bahadur+ (Uzbeg)-- -> one of five champions worsted in single
       combat by Babur (914) 349 n. 1.

   +Auzun Hasan Beg+ _Aq-quiluq Turkman_--his defeat of the Qara-quiluq
       Turkmans and of Abu-sa'id _Miran-shahi_ 49;
     [d. 883 AH.-1478 AD.].

   Khwaja +Auzun Hasan+ (Uzun)[2882]--negociates for Babur (899) 30;
     his appointment 32;
     confers in Babur's interests (900) 43 (where add his name after
      'Ali-dost's);
     acts for Jahangir against Babur (903) 87, 88, 91, (904) 100, 101,
       102;
     his servant's mischievous report of Babur's illness (903) 89;
     his men defeated by Babur's allies 102;
     loses Akhsi and Andijan 102-3;
     captured and released by Babur 104;
     goes into Samarkand to help Babur (907) 146;
     his brother Husain and adopted son Mirim _q.v._

   +'Ayisha-sultan Begim+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter of
       Husain--particulars 267;
     her husbands Qasim _Auzbeg-Shaiban_ and Buran, her sons
       Qasim-i-husain and 'Abdu'l-lah _q.v._

   +'Ayisha-sultan Begim+ _Miran-shahi_, _ut supra_, daughter of Ahmad
       (Alacha Khan) and first wife of Babur--particulars 35, 36;
     married (905) 35, 120, 711;
     joins Babur in Samarkand (906) 135-6;
     her child 136;
     leaves Babur 36.

   Mir +Ayub Beg+ _Begchik_--particulars 50;
     sent by The Khan (Mahmud) to help Babur (903) 92, (906) 138, 161,
       170;
     his Mughuls misbehave at Sar-i-pul (Khwaja Kardzan) 140;
     claims post in the right wing (_tulghuma_) 155;
     his Mughuls confuse pass-words 164;
     in the right wing at Qandahar (913) 334;
     -> vainly tempts Sa'id _Chaghatai_ to betray Babur (916) 351;
     -> does not then desert 352, 362;
     -> rebels in Hisar (918) 362;
     -> dying, repents his disloyalty (920) 362;
     his sons Buhlul-i-ayub, Ya'qub-i-ayub and Yusuf-i-ayub _q.v._;
     [d. 920 AH.-1514 AD.].

   +'Azim Humayun+ _Sarwani_--invests Gualiar 477;
     his title changed and why (933) 537;
     his son Fath Khan _q.v._

   Mir +'Azu+, a musical composer--particulars 292.

   +Baba 'Ali+ _aishik-agha_ (_ishik_), a Lord-of-the-Gate of Husain
       _Bai-qara_--particulars 278;
     his son Yunas-i-'ali and friend Badru'd-din _q.v._

   Baba-quli's Sultan +Baba 'Ali Beg+[2883]--particulars 27;
     his sons Baba-quli, Sayyidim 'Ali and Dost-i-anju (?) Shaikh _q.v._;
     [d. 900 AH.-1495 AD.].

   +Baba-aughuli+, see Papa-aughuli.

   +Baba Chuhra+, a household brave--reprieved from death (914) 344;
     on Babur's service (932) 474, 534, (934) 590, 602;
     does well in the battle of the Ghogra (935) 671.

   +Baba Husain+, see Husain.

   +Baba Jan+ _akhtachi_, a groom or squire--Babur dislocates his own
       thumb in striking him (925) 409.

   +Baba Jan+ _qabuzi_--musician at entertainments (925) 386-7, 388.

   +Baba Kabuli+ _Turk_, son of Mir 'Ali, Shah-rukh _(Timurid)'s_
       Governor of Kabul--nominated 'Umar Shaikh's guardian when Kabul was
       allotted to the boy 14;
     particulars 382;
     his brothers Darya Khan and Ghazi (Apaq) Khan _q.v._

   +Baba Khan Sultan+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_, (Babajak), son of Ahmad
       (Alacha Khan)--his ceremonious meeting with Babur (908) 159;
     [living in 948 AH.-1542--T.R.].

   +Baba Khan+ _Chaghatai_, son of The Khan (Mahmud)--murdered with his
       father and brothers by Shaibani (914) 35.

   +Baba Qashqa+ _Mughul_ (perhaps identical with Qashqa Mahmud _Chiras_
       _q.v._)--out with Babur (925) 404, 405;
     in charge of Dibalpur (930) 442;
     his brothers Malik Qasim and Kuki;
     his sons Shah Muhammad, Dost-i-muhammad and Haji Muhammad Khan
       _Kuki_ _q.v._;
     [d_cir._ 940 AH.-1553 AD.].[2884]

   Sultan +Baba-quli Beg+, son of Sultan Baba 'Ali Beg--serving under
       Khusrau Shah (901) 60, 61;
     with Babur and captured (903) 72;
     staunch to him 91;
     in the centre at Qandahar (913) 335;
     conveys royal letters (932) 529.[2885]

   +Baba Sairami+--pursues Babur in his flight from Akhsi (908) 178;
     promised fidelity but seems to have been false 179-182.

   +Baba Shaikh+ _Chaghatai_, brother of Mulla Baba _Pashaghari_--in the
       left centre at Qandahar (913) 335;
     -> rebels at Ghazni (921) 363;
     forgiven (925) 397;
     deserts Humayun (932) 546;
     his capture and death 545;
     a reward given for his head _id._;
     [d. 932 or 933 AH.-1526 AD.].

   +Baba Shaikh+--sent out for news (935) 661.

   +Baba Sher-zad+--one of three with Babur against Tambal (908) 163;
     does well at Akhsi 174;
     fights against rebels at Kabul (912) 315;
     at Qandahar (913) 335.

   +Baba Sultan+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_, son of Khalil son of Ahmad
       (Alacha Khan)--waits on Babur near Kalpi (934) 590;
     particulars 590;
     on service 318, (934) 599;
     not at his post (935) 672.

   +Baba Yasawal+--at the siege of Bajaur (925) 370;
     chops at a tiger's head 393.

   +Babu Khan+--holding Kalanjar and looking towards Hati _Kakar_ (925)
       387.

   Zahiru'd-din Muhammad _Babur Padshah_ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, Barlas
       Turk--b. Muharram 6th 888 AH.-Feb. 14th 1483 AD. p. 1;
     dJumada I, 6th 937 AH.-Dec. 26th 1530 A.D. 708;
     +Parentage+:--paternal 13;
       maternal 19, 21;
     +Titles+:--Mirza (inherited) Padshah (taken) 344;
       Ghazi (won) 574;
       Firdaus-makani (Dweller-in-paradise, posthumous) see Gladwin's
         Revenue Accounts;
     +Religion+:--[2886]belief in God's guidance 31, 72-3, 103-13-37-94-99;
       in His intervention 73, 247, 316, 446-51-74-79, 525-96, 620;
       that His will was done 55, 100-16-32-34-35-67, 269,
         316-22-23-36-37-70, 454-70-71-80, 542-94, 627-28-70;
       that He has pleasure in good 331;
       that to die is to go to His mercy 67;
       reliance on Him 100-08-16-32, 311, 463, 678;
       God called to witness 254
         and invoked to bless 624;
       His punishment of sin 42-5, 449-77 (Hell),
         and of breach of Law 449;
       His visitation of a father's sins on children 45;
       His predestination of events 128, 243-46-53, 469, 594;
       --prayer to Him for a sign of victory 440,
         for the dead 246,
         against a bad wife 258;
       a life-saving prayer 316;
     +Characteristics+:--ambition 92-7;
       admiration of high character 27, 67, 89, 90;
       bitterness and depression (in youth)
       91, 130-52-57-78;
       consideration for dependants 91-9, 158-78-96, 469;
       distrust of the world 95, 144-56;
       silent humiliation 119;
       fairness 15, 24, 91, 105, 469;
       fearlessness 163-5-73;
       fidelity:--to word 104, 129 (see 118-9), 172-3, 194,
         to salt 125,
         to family-relation,--filial 88-9, 135-49-57-58-88,
           --fraternal see Jahangir and Nasir,--Timurid 41, 149-57-68,
             Chaghatai 54, 169-72,
             Mughul 27, 119-25,
             Auzbeg 37;
       friendship see Nuyan and Khw. Kalan;
       good judgment 43, 87, 91, 134-37-55;
       gratitude 99, 633;
       insouciance 150;
       joy at release from stress 99, 134-35-48-81;
       bashfulness and passion 120;
       persistence 92-7 and _passim_;
       promptitude 117, 170;
       reprobation of vice, tyranny and cruelty 42-5-6, 50, 66, 70, 90-6,
           102-10-25-97, 290
         and of an unmotherly woman 125-28;
       self-reproach 147;
       self-comment on inexperienced action 165-67-73;
       dislike of talkativeness 28, 97, 143-92-93;
       vexation at loss of rule (_aet._ 14) 90-1-9, 129-30-57;
       truth for truth sake 135, 318;
       seeking and weighing counsel 73, 100-14-31-41-65-70-73-97-98,
         229-30-31-48, 340-76-78, 410-12-69, 524-30-77, 628-39-67-69-82;
       enjoins Humayun to take counsel 627;
     +Occupations+ (non-military):--archery _i.a._ 175;
       calligraphy see _infra_;
       literary composition see _infra_;
       metrical amusements see verse;
       Natural History _passim_;
       travel, excursions, sight-seeing, social intercourse _passim_;
       building 5, 217-9, 375-98,
         in Dulpur 585, 606-07-42,
         in Agra 642,
         in Kabul 646-7,
         in Sikri 588,
         Ajodhya mosque 656 n. 3, App. U,
         Panipat mosque 472 n. 1;
       gardening and garden-making _passim_;
       --Babur's script (_Baburi-khatt_) devised 910 AH. 228,
         Qoran transcribed by him in it 228 n. 4;
       studied by an enquirer 285;
       alphabet and specimens sent to Babur's sons 642;
       _Abushqa_ account of, App. Q, lxii to lxv;
     +Observance and breaches of Muh. Law+:--signs of his Sunni mind
         _e.g._ 25, 44, 111, 262, 370-7, 483, 547-51-74-89-96,
         in the _Mubin_ and _Walidiyyah-risala q.v._;
       his orthodox reputation 711;
       his heterodox seeming 354,
         and arrow-sped disclaimer 361;
       --his boyish obedience as to wine 302,
         up to his 23rd year 299, 302-3-4;
       for breach see Law and Wine;
     +Writings+:--_a._ Verses in the B.N. down to 926 AH. see _infra_;
       _b._ First Diwan 402;*
         perhaps containing the _Abushqa_ quotations 438;
       _c._ Diary of 925 and 926 _q.v._ AH. (probably a survival of more)
             *438;
       _d._ The _Mubin_ (928 AH.) 426-37-38-49;
         quoted 630-31 n. 3;
       _e._ Treatise on Prosody (931 AH.)
        586, App. Q, lx, lxvi;
       _f._ The _Walidiyyah-risala_ (935 AH.) 619-20-31 n. 3, (_tarjuma_)
          642-3, App. Q, lix;
       _g._ The _Hindustan Poems_ 642, App. Q;
       _h._ _Rampur MS._ of 6 and 7. App. Q, referred to *438, 620 n. 6,
          642 n. 3;
       _i._ Diary of 932 to 936 _q.v._;
       _j._ Narrative of 899 to within 914 AH. _q.v._;
     +Babur's verse quoted in the Babur-nama+:--(Turki,) love-sickness
         120-1;
       the worldling 130;
       granting a request 137;
       respite from stress 148;
       praise of a beloved 153;
       the neglected exile 154;
       isolation 156;
       the New Years 236;
       Fortune's cruelty 309;
       ? Turkman Hazara raid 312;
       Spring 321;
       God only is strength 337;
       dealing with tribesmen 393;
       greeting to absent convives 401;
       message to a kinswoman 402;
       his broken vow 449, 450 n.;
       reply to Khw. Kalan 526;
       disobedience to Law (T. & P.) 556;
       Death inevitable (T. & P.) 556 (?);
       the Ghazi's task 575;
       to those who have left him 584;
       couplet used in metrical amusement 586, App. 2, sect. 2;
       fever 588;
       Chandiri 596;
       on his first grandson's birth 624;
       _Mubin_ quoted 637;
       Pagan lands 637;
       pain in renunciation 648;
       an invitation 683;
       [Persian,] good in everything 311;
       insight of Age 340;
       on casting off his Shi'a seeming 361;
       parting from Khw. Kalan 372;
       a message 411;
       satirical couplet 448;
       before Panipat 470;
       Biana warned 529.
     See Table of Contents, _On Babur's Naming_.

    +Babur Mirza+ _Arlat_, son of Muhammad-i-qasim and Rabi'a-sultan
       _Miran-shahi_--his Bai-qara marriage 266.

   'Abdu'l-qasim +Babur Mirza+ _Shah-rukhi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son
       of Bai-sunghar--his sister 265;
     his retainers Muhammad Baranduq and Mazid _q.v._;
     his pleasure-house 302;
     [d. 861 AH.-1457 AD.].

   Baburi--a bazar-boy (905) 120.

   +Badi'u'l-jamal Begim+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter
       of Abu-sa'id--waited on by Babur near Agra (935) 616.

   Badi'u'l-jamal +Badka Begim+ _Bai-qara_, _ut supra_, daughter of
       Mansur and Firuza--particulars 257, 258;
     her husband Ahmad _Haji-tarkhani_, their sons Mahmud and Bahadur
       and daughter Khan-zada _q.v._

   +Badi'u'z-zaman Mirza+ _Bai-qara_, _ut supra_, son of Husain and Bega
       _Mervi_--serving his father against Khusrau Shah (901) 57;
     defeated 61;
     takes offence with his father 61, 69;
     in arms and defeated by his father 69, 70;
     his retort on Nawa'i (_q.v._);
     goes destitute to Khusrau Shah and is well-treated 70, 130;
     on Khusrau Shah's service 71;
     moves with Arghun chiefs against his father (903) 95, 261;
     gives Babur no help against Shaibani (906) 138;
     his co-operation sought by his father (910) 190, 191;
     takes refuge with his father 243;
     has fear for himself (911) 292-3;
     joint-ruler in Heri 293;
     concerts and abandons action against Shaibani (912) 296-7, 301;
     his social relations with Babur 297, 8, 9, 300, 2, 4;
     courteous to Babur as a non-drinker 303;
     a false report of him in Kabul (912) 313;
     irresolute against Shaibani (913) 326;
     his army defeated 275, 327;
     abandons his family and flees (1) to Shah Beg _Arghun_,
       (2) to Isma'il _Safawi_ 327;
     captured in Tabriz by Sultan Salim _Rumi_ (920) and dies
       in Constantinople (923) 327 n. 5;
     a couplet on his name 201-2;
     musicians compete in his presence 291;
     his host-facility 304;
     his son Muhammad-i-zaman, his begs Jahangir _Barlas_ and Zu'n-nun
       _Arghun q.v._.; joined by Sayyidim _Darban_ _q.v_;
     his College in Heri 306; [d. 923 AH.-1517 AD.].

   Sayyid +Badr+--particulars 276;
     safe-guards Mahmud _Miran-shahi_ 46-7;
     seen by Babur in Herat (912) 299;
     (see H.S. lith. ed. iii, 233).

   +Badru'd-din+--particulars 278;
     his friend Baba 'Ali _q.v._;
     his son (?) receives Kachwa (934) 590.

   Maulana +Badru'd-din+ _Hilali_, _Chaghatai_--particulars 290;
     his poet-daughter 286 n. 1;
     [d. 939 AH.-1532-3 AD.].

   +Bahadur Khan+ _Sarwani_--Babur halts at his tomb (935) 686.

   +Bahadur Khan+ _Gujrati_, _Tank Rajput_--ill-received by Ibrahim
       _Ludi_ (932);
     exchanges friendly letters with Babur 534;
     becomes Shah in Gujrat 535;
     is given the Khilji jewels 613 n. 1;
     [d. 943 AH.-1547 AD.].

   +Bahjat Khan+ (or Bihjat), a Governor of Chandiri--Babur halts near his
       tank (934) 592, 594.

   +Bai-qara Mirza+ _'Umar-shaikhi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, grandson of
       Timur--mentioned in a genealogy 256;
     a grandson 'Abdu'l-lah _Andikhudi_ _q.v._

   +Bai-qara Mirza+ _'Umar-shaikhi_, _ut supra_, son of Mansur and
       Firuza--particulars 257;
     his brother Husain, and sons Wais and Iskandar _q.v._

   +Bairam Beg+[2887]-- -> reinforces Babur from Balkh (918) 359;
     serving Najm _Sani_ 360.

   +Bairam Khan+ _Baharlu-Qara-quiluq Turkman_ (Akbar's Khan-i-khanan),
       son of Saif-'ali--his ancestry 91 n. 3, 109 n. 5 (where for
       "father" read "grandfather");
     -> mention of a witness of his assassination 348;
     quotation of his remarks on Hasan Khan _Mewati_ 523 n. 3;
     [d. 968 AH.-1561 AD.].

   +Bairam-sultan Begim+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter of
       Husain and Mingli--particulars 266;
     her husband 'Abdu'l-lah _Andikhudi_, their son Barka _q.v._

   +Bai-sunghar Mirza+ _Miran-shahi_, _ut supra_, son of Mahmud
       and Pasha--particulars 47, 110-112;
     succeeds in Samarkand (900) 52, 86;
     withstands The Khan (Mahmud) 52;
     the _khutba_ read for him in Babur's lands 52;
     his man surrenders Aura-tipa 55-6;
     his favouritism incites the Tarkhan rebellion (901) 38, 61;
     escapes from Tarkhan imprisonment 62, 86;
     defeated by his half-brother 'Ali 38, 63;
     prosperous (902) 65;
     moves against 'Ali 65;
     retires before Babur 66;
     at grips with him 67;
     asks Shaibani's help (903) 73;
     goes to Khusrau Shah 74;
     made ruler in Hisar 93, 5, 6, 261;
     murdered (905) 110;
     his death referred to 50, 112;
     his pen-name 'Adili 111;
     his sister's marriage 41;
     his brother Mas'ud, his guardian Ayub _q.v._;
     [d. 905 AH.-1499 AD.].

   +Bai-sunghar Mirza+ _Shah-rukhi Timurid_, son of Shah-rukh--his servant
       Yusuf _Andijani_ 4;
     [d. 837 AH.-1433-4 AD.].

   +Balkhi+ _faliz-kari_--grows melons in Agra (935) 686.

   +Baltu+--rescues Khalifa's son Muhibb-i-'ali (933) 550.

   Mulla +Bana'i+--Maulana Jamalu'd-din _Bana'i_--in Khwaja Yahya's service
         and seen by Babur (901) 64,
       in Shaibani's (906) 136,
       in Babur's 64, 136;
     particulars 286-7;
     given the Heri's authors to loot (913) 328;
     Babur recalls a joke of his (935) 648;
     two of his quatrains quoted 137;
     his musical composition 286, 292;
     [murdered 918 AH. -1512 AD.].

   +Banda-i-'ali+, _darogha_ of Karnan--pursues Babur from Akhsi (908)
       178-9, 180, 181.

   +Banda-i-'ali+ _Yaragi Mughul_, son of Haidar Kukuldash--sent
       to reinforce Babur (904) 101;
     in the van at Sar-i-pul (906) 139;
     his mistimed zeal (908) 176;
     his son-in-law Qasim Beg quchin _q.v._

   +Baqi Beg+ _Chaghaniani_, _Qibchaq Turk_--his influence on Mas'ud
       _Miran-shahi_ (901) 57, (903) 95;
     defends Hisar for him (901) 58;
     acts against him (902) 71;
     joins Babur (910) 48, 188-9;
     advises sensibly 190, 197;
     leaves his family with Babur's 191;
     dislikes Qambar-i-'ali _Silakh_ 192;
     helps his brother Khusrau to make favourable terms with Babur 192-3;
     quotes a couplet on seeing Suhail 195;
     his Mughuls oppose Khusrau 197;
     mediates for Muqim _Arghun_ (910) 199;
     Babur acts on his advice 230-1, 239, (911) 246, 249;
     particulars 249-50;
     dismissed towards Hindustan 250;
     killed on his road 231, 251;
     his son Muhammad-i-qasim and grandson(?) Ahmad-i-qasim _q.v._;
     [d. 911 AH.-1505-6 AD.].

   +Baqi+ _Gagiani Afghan_--his caravan through the Khaibar (911) 250.

   +Baqi+ (_khiz_)_hiz_--opposes Babur (908) 174, 396.

   Khwaja +Baqi+, son of Yahya son of Ahrari--murdered 128;
     [d. 906 AH.-1500 AD.].[2888]

   +Baqi Beg+ _Tashkindi_, _shaghawal_ and (later) _ming-bashi_
       (= _hazari_)--sent to Balkh with promise of head-money (932) 463,
       546;
     on service (934) 590, 601, 2;
     reports from Aud (Oudh) (935) 679;
     on service with the Aud (Oudh) army 684, 5;
     leave given him for home 685.

   +Baqi Tarkhan+, _Arghun Chingiz-khanid_, son of 'Abdu'l-'ali and
       a daughter of Aurdu-bugha--particulars 38, 40;
     consumes the Bukhara revenues (905) 121;
     defeated by Shaibani 124;
     occupies Qarshi (qy. Kesh) (906) 135;
     plans to join Babur 138;
     goes to Shaibani and dies in misery 40.

   +Baraq Khan+, _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_--mentioned in the genealogy
       of Yunas 19.

   +Baraq Sultan+ _Auzbeg-Shaiban Chingiz-khanid_, son of Siunjuk--at Jam
       (934) 622.

   Sayyid +Barka+ _Andikhudi_, Timur's exhumation of his body 266 n. 4.

   Sayyid +Barka+ _Andikhudi_, descendant of the last-entered, son of
       'Abdu'l-lah--particulars 266;
     serving Babur (917) 266.

   +Bar-mal+ _Idri_--his force at Kanwa (933) 562.

   +Ba-sa'id+ _Tarkhani_, see Abu-sa'id _Tarkhani_.

   +Basant Rao+--killed by (Baba Qashqa's brother?) Kuki in the battle of
       the Ghogra 673;
     [d. 935 AH.-1529 AD.].

   +Batalmius+ (Ptolemy)--mentioned as constructor of an observatory 79.

   Sultan +Bayazid+[2889]--urges attack on the Afridi (925) 411, 412.

   Shaikh +Bayazid+, _Farmuli Afghan_--acts for his dead brother
       Mustafa[2890] (932) 527;
     waits on Babur and receives Aud (Oudh) 527;
     on service 530;
     in Aud (933) 544;
     his loyalty tested (934) 589;
     with Biban, opposing Babur 594, 598-601, 2, (935) 638;
     serving Mahmud _Ludi_ against Babur 652, 673;
     Babur resolves to crush him and Biban 677-8;
     mentioned 679, 692;
     takes Luknur(?) 681, App. T;
     action continued against him 681, 2, 5;
     his comrade Biban _q.v._;
     [d. 937 AH.-1531 AD.].

   Shaikh +Bayazid+ _Itarachi Mughul_, brother of Ahmad Tambal--holding
       Akhsi for Jahangir (908) 170;
     sends a force against Pap 171;
     receives Babur in Akhsi 171-2;
     made prisoner against Babur's wish 173;
     escapes 175;
     reported as sending Yusuf _darogha_ to Babur's hiding-place 182.

   +Bega Begim (1)+, _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter of
       Husain and Payanda--particulars 266;
     [d before Husain 911 AH.-1505 AD.].

   +Bega Begim (2)+, _Miran-shahi ut supra_, daughter of Aulugh Beg
       _Kabuli_--her marriage with Muhammad Ma'sum _Bai-qara_ (902) 264.

   +Bega Begim (3)+, _Miran-shahi ut supra_, daughter of Mahmud and
       Khan-zada II--betrothed to Haidar _Bai-qara_ (901) 48, 61, 263;
     married (903) 48;
     their child 263.

   +Bega Begim (4)+, _Shah-rukhi ut supra_, daughter of Bai-sunghar
       (_Shah-rukhi_)--her grandson's marriage 265.

   +Bega Begim (5)+,--Haji Begim--daughter of Yadgar Taghai, wife of
       Humayun--her son Al-aman _q.v._

   +Bega Begim (6)+,--"the Bibi"--, see Mubarika.

   +Bega Sultan Begim+ _Mervi_, wife of Husain _Bai-qara_--particulars
       261, 7, 8;
     divorced 268;
     her son Badi'u'z-zaman _q.v._;
     [893 AH.-1488 AD.].

   Wais _Laghari's_ +Beg-gina+,--brings Babur news of Al-aman's birth
       (935) 621, 4.[2891]

   The +Begims+, Babur's paternal aunts--waited on by him 301, 616, 686.

   +Begim Sultan+, see Sa'adat-bakht.

   +Begi Sultan Aghacha+, _ghunchachi_ of Husain _Bai-qara_--particulars
       269.

   +Beg Mirak+ _Mughul_--brings Babur good news (932) 466;
     on service (933) 548.

   +Beg Mirak+ _Turkman_, a beg of the Chiras (Mughul) _tuman_--acts for
       Yunas Khan 191;
     [d. 832 AH.-1428-9 AD.].

   +Beg Tilba+ _Itarachi Mughul_, brother of Ahmad Tambal--induces
       the Khan (Mahmud) not to help Babur (903) 91, (905) 115;
     his light departure perplexes his brother 116;
     invites Shaibani into Farghana (908) 172.

   +Bhupat Rao+, son of Salahu'd-din--killed at Kanwa 573;
     [d. 933 AH.-1527 AD.].

   +Bian Shaikh+ (Biyan)--his rapid journeys 621, 624;
     brings news of the battle of Jam (935) 622, 623 n. 3;
     the source of his news 624 n. 1;
     hurried back 624, 627.

   +Bian-quli+--his son Khan-quli _q.v._

   Malik +Biban+ _Jilwani_?[2892] _Afghan_--deserts 'Alam Khan _Ludi_
       (932) 457 and n. 2;
     writes dutifully to Babur 464;
     is presuming at an audience 466;
     deserts Babur 468, 528;
     is defeated 528-9;
     with Bayazid, besieges Luknur (933) 582;
     defeats Babur's troops 594, 598;
     opposes Babur in person (934) 598-601;
     referred to as a rebel (935) 638;
     serving Mahmud _Ludi_ 652, 675;
     Babur resolves to crush him 677-8;
     mentioned 679 n. 7, 692;
     takes Luknur(?) 681, App. T;
     action taken against him 681, 2, 5;
     his constant associate Bayazid _Farmuli_ _q.v._

   Muhammad Shah, +Bihar Khan+ _Bihari_, _Nuhani Afghan_, son of Darya
       Khan--declared independent in Bihar (932) 523;
     particulars 664;
     his widow Dudu and son Jalal _q.v._;
     [d. 934 AH.-1527 AD.].

   +Bihar Khan+ _Ludi_ (or Pahar Khan),[2893] a Panj-ab amir of Ibrahim
       Ludi's in 930 AH.--[2894] defeated by Babur (930) 208, 441 (where
       add "or Pahar"), 578;
     a chronogram which fixes the date 575.

   +Bihjat+, see Bahjat.

   +Bih-bud Beg+--particulars 277, App. H, and Additional Notes under
       p. 277.

   Ustad Kamalu'd-din +Bih-zad+--particulars 291;
     his training due to Nawa'i 272;
     is instructed in drawing by Shaibani (913) 329.

   +Raja of Bijanagar+ (Vijayanagar)--mentioned as ruling in 932 AH. 483.

   +Raja Bikam-deo+, named in the Hindustan Revenue List.

   +Raja Bikam-chand+, _ut supra_.

   +Raja Bikramajit+, _ut supra_.

   +Bi-khub Sultan+ (var. Ni- or Nai-khub)? _Auzbeg-Shaiban_--on Babur's
       service (934) 589, 602, (935) 651, 682;
     in the battle of the Ghogra 669.

   Rana +Bikramajit+, son of Sanga and Padmawati--negotiations for him
       with Babur (934) -> 603, 612, (935) 612-3, 615, 616;
     pact made with him 616-7;
     possessor of Khilji jewels 613;
     his mother Padmawati and her kinsman Asuk Mal _q.v._

   Raja +Bikramajit+ _Gualiari_, _Tunwar Rajput_--his ancestral fortress
       477;
     his Koh-i-nur (932) 477;
     his buildings 607-610 and nn.;
     his palace Babur's quarters (935) 607;
     his death (932) 477;
     [d. 932 AH.-1526 AD.].

   Raja +Bikramajit+ (Vikramaditya)--his Observatory and Tables 79.

   +Birim Deo+ _Malinhas_--on Babur's service (932) 462.

   Raja +Bir-sing Deo+--named in the Revenue List (935) 521;
     his force at Kanwa (933) 562;
     serving Babur 639.

   Khalifa's +Bishka+(?)--a woman who leaves Samarkand with Babur's mother
       (907) 147.

   +Bishka Mirza+ _Itarachi Mughul_--brings and receives gifts (925) 415,
       416.

   +Brethren of Babur+--removal of their opposition to his aim on
       Hindustan 478.

   +Buhlul-i-ayub+ _Begchik_, son of Ayub--Babur warned against him
       (910) 190;
     joins Babur 196;
     his misconduct 241, (911) 254.

   Sultan +Buhlul+, +Sahu-khail Ludi+, _Afghan_--grandfather of Ibrahim
       463;
     his treasure 470;
     his tomb visited by Babur 476;
     his capture of Junpur and Dihli 481;
     his sons Sikandar and 'Alau'u'd-din _q.v._;
     [d. 894 AH.-1488 AD.].

   Pahlawan +Buhlul+, _tufang-andazi_--receives gifts (935) 633.

   +Bujka+, a household bravo--on Babur's service (932) 458, 474, 534,
       (933) 545;
     his success at Biana 547.

   Malik +Bu Khan+ _Dilah-zak (Dilazak) Afghan_--receives gifts from Babur
       (925) 394;
     brings tribute 409.

   +Buran Sultan+ _Auzbeg-Shaiban_--his marriage with 'Ayisha-sultan
       _Bai-qara_ 267;
     their son 'Abdu'l-lah _q.v._

   Shaikh +Burhanu'd-din 'Ali Qilich+, _Marghinani_, author of
       the _Hidayat_--his birthplace Rashdan 7;
     a descendant 29, 89;
     [d. 593 AH.-1197 AD.].

   Malik +Bu-sa'id+ _Kamari_--a guide (910) 230, 231;
     doubted 233.


   +Chaghatai Khan+, second son of Chingiz Khan--his _yurt_
       (camping-ground) occupied by his descendant Yunas 12;
     mentioned in the genealogy of Yunas 19;
     [d. 638 AH.-1241 AD.].

   +Chaku+ _Barlas_, one of Timur's noted men--an ancestor of Muhammad
       Baranduq 270;
     descent of his line to Akbar's day 270 n. 2.

   Rai +Chandraban+, _Chauhan Rajput_--killed at Kanwa (933) 573;
     [d. 933 AH.-1527 A.D.].

   +Chapuq+ (Slash-face), see Ibrahim _Begchik_.

   Sultan Ahmad +Char-shamba+--unhorses Muhammad Mumin[2895] _Bai-qara_
       (902) 71;
     coincident occurrences of "Char-shamba" 71.

   Isma'il +Chilma+ (or Chalma), son of Ibrahim _Jani_--writes particulars
       of the battle of Jam (935) 624.

   +Chilma+ _Mughul_ (or Chalma)--in the centre at Qandahar (913) 335;
     rebels in Kabul (914) 345.

   +Chilma+ _taghchi Mughul_ (? shoeing-smith)--in the centre at Qandahar
       (913) 335.

   +Chingiz Khan+ _Mughul_--counted back to in Yunas Khan's genealogy
       12, 19;
     his capture of Samarkand (619 AH.-1222 AD.) 75;
     referred to concerning the name Qarshi 84;
     his Rules (_Tura_) 155, 298;
     [d. 624 AH.-1227 AD.].

   +Chin+ _Sufi_--defends Khwarizm for Husain _Bai-qara_ against Shaibani
       (910) 242 n. 3, 244;
     killed in the surrender 255-6;
     [d. 911 AH.-1505-6 AD.].

   +Chin-timur Sultan+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_, son of Ahmad--mentioned
       _s.a._ 912 as serving Babur 318;
     succeeds against Ibrahim _Ludi's_ advance (932) 467;
     in the right centre at Panipat 472,
       and at Kanwa (933) 565, 568 n. 3;
     rewarded 527, 578-9;
     on service (933) 540;
     at Chandiri (934) 590;
     pursues Biban and Bayazid 601, 602;
     in command against Baluchis (935) 638, 676;
     met on a journey 639;
     writes of loss of reinforcement 675;
     ordered to Agra 676;
     waits on Babur 688;
     his brothers Mansur, Aisan-timur, Tukhta-bugha, Sa'id, Khalil
       _q.v._;
     [d. 936 AH.-1530 AD.].

   +Chiqmaq Beg+--sent on road-surveyor's work (935) 629-30;
     the _Mubin_ quoted in connection with his orders 630;
     his clerk Shahi _q.v._

   +Chirkas qizlar+ (Circassian girls), see Gulnar and Nar-gul.

   +Chuli Begim+, _Azaq Turkman_--particulars 265, 268;
     her husband Husain _Bai-qara_ and their daughter Sultanim _q.v._;
     [dbefore 911 AH.-1505 AD.].


   +Damachi+ _Mughul_--in the centre at Qandahar (913) 335.

   +Dankusi+ var. Nigarsi--killed at Kanwa 573;
     [d. 933 AH.-1527 AD.].

   +Darwesh-i-'ali+--serving Humayun in Sambhal (934) 587.

   +Darwesh-i-'ali Beg+ _Chaghatai_, brother of Nawa'i--particulars 275;
     in Babur's service (916) 275 and (917) 277;
     his poet-wife Apaq Bega _q.v._

   +Darwesh-i-'ali+ _piada_ and, later, _tufang-andaz_--takes news
       of Hind-al's birth to Babur (925) 385.

   +Darwesh-i 'Ali Sayyid+ _Mughul_--in the centre at Qandahar (913) 335.

   +Darwesh Beg Tarkhan+, _Arghun_--particulars 39;
     [d. 895 AH.-1490 AD.].

   +Darwesh Gau+ _Andijani_--put to death as seditious (899) 30.

   Shaikh +Darwesh Kukuldash+ _qur-begi_--at a household-party (906) 131;
     his death, successor in office, and avengeance 251, 253;
     [d. 911 AH.-1505-6 AD.].

   +Darwesh-i-muhammad+ _Fazli_--defeated (910) 241;
     degraded for not supporting a comrade (925) 405.

   +Darwesh-i-muhammad Sarban+--Mirza Khan's envoy to Babur (925) 402;
     a non-drinker not pressed to disobey 406;
     replaces a china cup 407;
     enters Babur's service 408;
     over-pressed to break the Law 410;
     eats a strange fruit 410-1;
     at ma'jun-parties 412, (935) 683;
     asks a fruitful question (932) 470-1;
     in the right-centre at Pani-pat 472 and at Kanwa (933) 565;
     recals a vow to Babur 553;
     in the battle of the Ghogra (935) 673.

   +Darwesh-i-muhammad Tarkhan+ _Arghun Chingiz-khanid_--particulars 38;
     envoy to the Andijan begs (899) 31;
     his part in the Tarkhan rebellion (901) 62;
     his death 38, 63;

     his relationship to Miran-shahis 13 n. 5, 33, 38, and his kinsman
       'Abdu'l-'ali _q.v._;
     [d. 901 AH.-1496 AD.].

   +Darwesh Sultan+ (_? Chaghatai_)--on Babur's service (934) 599.

   +Darya Khan+ _Turk_, son of Mir (Shaikh) 'Ali Beg--particulars 382; his
       sons Yar-i-husain and Hasan _q.v._

   +Darya Khan+ _Nuhani_, _Afghan_--his sons Saif Khan and Bihar Khan, his
       grandson Jalal _q.v._

   Mulla +Daud+--killed serving Babur 549;
     [d. 933 AH.-1527 AD.].

   Sayyid +Daud+ _Garm-seri_--receives gifts (935) 633.

   +Daud Khan+ _Ludi_--defeated by Babur's troops (932) 467-8.

   +Daud+ _Sarwani_, see Rawu'i _Sarwani_.

   +Daulat Khan+, _Yusuf-khail Ludi_, _Afghan_, son of Tatar--is given
       Bhira _etc._ 382, 383;
     concerning his lands, Author's Note 383;
     -> a principal actor from 926 to 932 AH. 428;
     dreads Ibrahim _Ludi_ 439;
     -> proffers allegiance to Babur (929?) 439, 440;
     -> his gift of an Indian fruit decides Babur to help him 440,
          503 n. 6;
     -> his action causes the return to Kabul of Babur's fourth expedition
         into Hindustan 442;
     his strength and action 443-4;
     his rumoured attack on Lahor (932) 451, 453;
     negotiates with 'Alam Khan (931?) 455-6;
     loses Milwat to Babur (932) 459;
     his death 461;
     his sons 'Ali, Apaq, Dilawar _q.v._;
     his relations with Nanak 461 n. 3;
     [d. 932 AH.-1526 A.D.].

   +Daulat-i-muhammad Kukuldash+, see Qutluq-i-muhammad.

   +Daulat-qadam ?+--his son Mir Mughul _q.v._

   +Daulat-shah+ _Isfarayini_, author of the _Tazkiratu'sh-shu'ara_--at
       Tazkir'atu'sh the battle of Chikman-sarai (876) 46 n. 2;
     [d. 895 AH.-1490 AD.?].

   +Daulat-sultan Khanim+, _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_, daughter of Yunas
       Khan and Shah Begim--particulars 24;
     her long family separation (907) 149;
     meets her brother Ahmad (908) 159;
     married as a captive by Timur _Auz-beg_ (909) 24;
     rejoins Babur (917) _ib._ and 358 n. 1;
     letters from her reach Babur (925) 409;
     sends letters and gifts to him (932) 446.

   +Dawa Khan+, _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_---mentioned in Yunas Khan's
       genealogy 19;
     [d. 706 +AH.+-1306-7 AD.].

   +Dejal+, the false Messiah 563 n. 1.

   +Deo Sultan?+, see Div.

   Raja +Dharmankat+ _Gualiari_--stirs trouble (933) 539;
     lays siege to Gualiar 557.

   +Dharm-deo+--his force at Kanwa (933) 562.

   +Dilawar Khan+ _Yusuf-khail Ludi_, _Afghan_, son of Daulat
       Khan-- -> ill-received by Ibrahim _Ludi_ (929?) 439;
     -> goes to Kabul to ask help from Babur 439-40;
     imprisoned by his father (931) 442, 443;
     escapes and joins 'Alam Khan 455, 456;
     joins Babur 457, 461;
     location of his mother's family 462;
     does not sit in Babur's presence 466;
     entrusted by Babur with care for the corpse of Ibrahim _Ludi_ 474
        n. 1;
     in the right wing at Kanwa (933) 567 (here styled Khan-i-khanan);
     [d. 946 AH.-1539 AD.].

   +Dil-dar Begim+ (? Salha-sultan 3rd daughter of Mahmud _Miran-shahi_
       and Pasha), wife of Babur--her unborn child forcibly adopted (925)
       347,
     and App. L;
     her son Alwar (Alur)'s death (935) 689 n. 5;
     particulars 712-4;
     her sons Hind-al and Alur, her daughters Gul-rang, Gul-chihra and
       Gul-badan _q.v._

   +Dilpat Rao+--killed at Kanwa 573;
     [d. 933 AH.-1527 AD.].

   +Div Sultan+ _Rumlu_ (or Deo)--recaptures Balkh (cir. 919) 363;
     particulars 635 n. 2;
     his servant describes the battle of Jam (935) 635-6.

   +Diwa Hindu+, son of Siktu--waits on Babur in Bhira (925) 382;
     made prisoner and ransomed 399.

   +Diwana+ _jama-baf_--put to retaliatory death 73;
     [d. 903 AH.-1497 AD.].

   +Baba Dost+--put in charge of Humayun's Trans-Indus district (925) 391;
     conveys wine to Babur's camp (933) 551 (here _suchi_).[2896]

   +Dost+, son of Muhammad Baqir--drunk (925) 415.

   +Dost-anju+?[2897] +Shaikh+, son of Baba 'Ali--left in charge of Ghazni
       (911) 307.

   +Dost Beg+ _Mughul_, son of Baba Qashqa and brother (p. 588) of Shah
       Muhammad--at a social gathering and sent to Bhira 388
      (here _muhrdar_);
     made a _diwan_ (932) 476;
     in charge of Biana (933) 539 and made its _shiqdar_ 579
       (here Lord-of-the Gate);
     in the right centre at Kanwa 565, 569;
     waits on Babur 581;
     pursues rebels (934) 601 (here Dost-i-muhammad);
     in the battle of the Ghogra (935) 673;
     for his kinsmen see _s.n._ Baba Qashqa.

   Khwaja +Dost-i-khawand+--lets himself down over the wall of Qandahar
       (913) 343;
     at boat-parties (925) 385, 388;
     comes from Kabul to Agra (933) 544;
     in the left-centre at Kanwa 565;
     -> sent on Babur's family affairs to Humayun in Badakhshan (934) 603;
     delayed in Kabul till Kamran's arrival 618 and nn. 2-6;
     his letters reach Babur (935) 618.

   +Dost-kildi+ _Mughul_--in the centre at Qandahar (913) 335.

   +Dost-i-nasir Beg+--Dost Beg--(Nasir's Dost), son of Nasir--enters
       Babur's service (904) 103;
     on service (906) 131, (908) 163, 165;
     one of three standing by Babur 166, 167, 396;
     with him at Akhsi 174, 396;
     one of the eight in the flight 177, 396;
     at the recapture of Kabul (912) 315;
     in the left centre at Qandahar (913) 335, 338;
     at Tashkint (918) -> 356 n. 1, -> 358, 396-7;
     opposing rebels (921) -> 364, 397;
     leading the left at Bajaur (925) 368 (here first styled Beg), 369,
       370, 397;
     his revenue work 384;
     at wine parties 387, 388;
     at Parhala 390;
     attacked by fever 394;
     his death and his burial at Ghazni 395-6;
     his brother Mirim _q.v._;
     particulars 395-7;
     [d. 925 AH.-1519 AD.].

   +Dost+ _Sar-i-puli_, _piada_ and (later) _kotwal_--attacks Babur
       blindly (912) 316-7;
     wounded (913) 324;
     [d. 913 AH.-1507 AD.].

   +Dost-i-yasin-khair+--wrestles well with eight in successive
       (935) 653; 656.

   +Dudu Bibi+, widow of Bihar Khan _Bihari_--news of her bringing her
       son to Babur (935) 664;
     encouraging letters sent to her 665;
     Sher Khan _Sur _her co-guardian for her son 664 n. 2;
     her son Jalalu'd-din _Nuhani_ _q.v._


   +Faghfur Diwan+--on service (933) 551;
     his servants sent for fruit to Kabul (935) 687.
     Hai. MS. reads Maghfur.

   +Fajji+ _Gagiani_, _Afghan_--guides Babur's first passage of
       the Khaibar (910) 229.

   +Fakhru'n-nisa'+, daughter of Babur and 'Ayisha--died an infant 35-6,
       136;
     [d. 906 AH.-1500-1 AD.].

   +Faqi-i-'ali+--reprieved (914) 345; with Babur and left in charge of
       Balkh (923) 463;
     -> left in charge of Qila'i-zafar by Humayun (936) 695.

   +Farid Khan+ _Nuhani_, _Afghan_, son of Nasir--writes dutifully
       to Babur (935) 659.

   +Faridun+, (an ancient Shah of Persia)--mentioned in a verse 85.

   +Faridun-i-husain Mirza+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, son of Husain and
       Mingli--particulars 263, 269;
     [d. 915 AH.-1509 AD.].

   +Faridun+ _qabuzi_--summoned by Babur (935) 617.

   Mulla +Farrukh+--placed on Babur's left at a feast (935) 631;
     gifts made to him 632.

   +Farrukh+ _Arghun_--surrenders Qalat-i-ghilzai to Babur (911) 248-9.

   Mirza +Farrukh+ _Aughlaqchi_, son of Hasan--mentioned for his qualities
       279.

   +Farrukh-i-husain Mirza+, _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son
       of Husain and Papa--particulars 264;
     [d. 915 AH.-1509 AD.].

   +Farrukh-zad Beg+--Babur dismounts in his garden at Qandahar (913) 337.

   +Faruq+, son of Babur and Mahim--his birth (932) announced to Babur
       (933) 536, 689 n. 5;
     [933 AH.-1526-7 AD.].

   +Fath Khan+ _Sarwani_ Khan-i-jahan, son of 'Azim-humayun--is escorted
       to Babur (932) 534;
     well-received (933) 537;
     his hereditary title superseded _ib._;
     invited to a wine-party _ib._;
     serving Mahmud _Ludi_ (935) 652;
     his son Mahmud _q.v._;
     ? a kinsman Daud _q.v._

   +Fatima-sultan Agha+ _Mughul_--first wife of 'Umar Shaikh _Miran-shahi_
       17, 24;
     their son Jahangir _q.v._

   +Fatima-sultan Begim+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter
       of Husain and Mingli--particulars 266;
     her husband Yadgar-i-farrukh _Miran-shahi_ _q.v._;
     [dbefore 911 AH.-1505 AD.].

   +Fazil Kukuldash+--serving Shah Beg _Arghun_ (910) 238;
     -> a good account of him named 443;
     his death a crushing grief to Shah Beg _ib._;
     [d. 930 AH.-1514 AD.].

   +Fazil Tarkhan+--a Turkistan merchant created a Tarkhan by Shaibani,
       [Author's Note] 133;
     his death _ib._;
     [906 AH.-1500 AD.].

   +Fazli+, see Darwesh-i-muhammad.

   +Ferdinand the Catholic+--his action in 1504 (910 AH.) 187
       n. 2 (Erskine).

   +Firuza Begim+ _Qanjut_, wife of Mansur _Bai-qara_ her Timurid
       ancestry 256;
     her children Bai-qara (II), Husain, Aka and Badka _q.v._;
     [d. 874 AH.-1469-70 AD.].

   +Firuz Khan+ _Mewati_--reprieved (932) 477-8.

   +Firuz Khan+, _Sarang-khani_, _Afghan_--on Ibrahim _Ludi's_ service
       527;
     waits on Babur (932) 527, and on his service 530.

   Sultan +Firuz Shah+, _Tughluq Turk_--his servants' dynasties 481, 482;
     his relations with the rulers of Malwa 482 (where in n. 3 for
       "Gujrat" read Malwa);
     [d. 790 AH.-1388 AD.].

   +Firuz Shah Beg+--his grandson 'Abdu'l-khaliq _q.v._


   +Gadai+ _Balal_--rejoins Babur (913) 330-1.

   +Gadai+ _bihjat_--misbehaves (925) 414.

   +Gadai Taghai+--shares a confection (925) 375;
     at social gatherings 385, 7, 8, 400, 412;
     rides carrying a full pitcher 386;
     out with Babur 404;
     removes a misbehaving namesake 414.

   +Gauhar-shad Begim+, wife of Shah-rukh _Timurid_--Babur visits her
       college and tomb (912) 305;
     [d. 861 AH.-1457 AD.].

   +Gauhar-shad Begim+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter
       of Abu-sa'id--visited by Babur (935) 616.

   Mir +Gesu+--finds chronogram identical with Shaikh Zain's 575.

   Apaq +Ghazi Khan+ _Turk_, son of Mir (Shaikh) 'Ali Beg--particulars
       382;
     his brothers Baba Kabuli and Darya Khan, his son 'Ali and his
       relation Nazar-i-'ali _Turk_ _q.v._

   Apaq +Ghazi Khan+ _Yusuf-khail Ludi Afghan_, son of
       Daulat Khan-- -> arrested by Babur (930) 442;
     moves against Babur (932) 451, 453;
     not trusted 455;
     agrees to help 'Alam Khan 455-6;
     receives him ill on defeat 457-8;
     pursued for Babur 458, 460, 461, 462, 463;
     Babur's reproach for his abandonment of his family 460-1;
     his forts in the Dun 462;
     his library less valuable than was expected by Babur 460;
     his kinsman Haji Khan and his own son 465.

   +Ghiyas+, a buffoon 400 (where erroneously Ghias).

   Mir +Ghiyas+, building entrusted to him (935) 642.

   Mir +Ghiyas Taghai+ _Kunji Mughul_, brother of 'Ali-dost--particulars
       28;
     enters the Khan (Mahmud)'s service (899) 28, 32;
     [d before 914 AH.-1507-8 AD.].

   Amir +Ghiyasu'd-din+, -> patron of Khwand-amir and supposed ally
       of Babur--killed in Herat (927) 432.

   +Ghiyasu'd-din+, nephew of Khwand-amir-- -> conveys the keys of Qandahar
       to Babur (928) 432, 435, 436.

   Sultan +Ghiyasu'd-din+ _Balban_--Babur visits his tomb (932) 475;
     [d 686 AH.-1287 AD.].

   +Ghiyasu'd-din+ _qurchi_--takes campaigning orders to Junaid _Barlas_
       (935) 628;
     returns to Court 636;
     takes orders to the Eastern amirs 638.

   +Ghulam-i-'ali+--returns from taking Babur's three articles to Nasrat
       Shah (935) 676.

   +Ghulam bacha+, a musician--heard by Babur in Herat (912) 303.

   +Ghulam-i-shadi+, a musician--particulars 292;
     his younger brother Ghulam bacha _q.v._

   Mulla +Ghulam+ _Yasawal_--makes an emplacement for the Ghazi mortar
       (935) 670;
     sent to collect the Bihar tribute 676.

   Ghuri _Barlas_--on Babur's service (905) 125;
     in the left wing at Qandahar (913) 334;
     wounded 336;
     [d. 919 AH.-1513 AD.].

   +Gujur Khan+--ordered on service (935) 638.

   +Gul-badan Begim+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter
       of Babur and Dil-dar-- -> her birth (929 or 930) and her book
       (_cir._ 995) 441;
     her journey to Agra (935) 650 n. 2;
     -> her parentage 712;
     [d. 1011 AH.-1603 AD.].

   +Gul-barg+ _Barlas Turk_, daughter of Khalifa-- -> betrothed(?) to Shah
       Hasan _Arghun_ (924-5) 366;
     -> married (930) 443.

   +Gul-chihra Begim+, full sister of Gul-badan _supra_--her marriage with
       Tukhta-bugha _Chaghatai_ 705 n. 1, 708;
     her parentage 712;
     -> perhaps the mother of Salima _Chaqaniani_ 713.

   +Gul-rang Begim+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter
       of Babur and Dil-dar-- -> born in Khwast (920) 363;
     -> married to Aisan-timur _Chaghatai_ (937) 705 n. 1, 708;
     parentage 712.

   +Gul-rukh Begim+ _Begchik_, wife of Babur-- -> with Babur on the
       Trans-oxus campaign (916-20) 358;
     particulars 712;
     her sons Kamran and 'Askari and her brother(?) Sultan 'Ali Mirza
       Taghai _q.v._

   Mirak +Gur+ _diwan_ (or Kur) captured by Shaibani (913) 328.

   Shaikh Abu'l-fath +Guran+ (G'huran)--serving Babur (932) 526, 528-9,
       (933) 539, 567, (934) 590;
     in the right wing at Kanwa (933) 567;
     host to Babur in Kul (Koel) (934) 587;
     takes lotus-seeds to him 666;
     sends him grapes (935) 686;
     given Gualiar (936) 688, 690;
     -> holds it till Babur's death 692 n. 1.


   +Habiba-sultan Begim+ _Arghun_, wife of Ahmad
       _Miran-shahi_--particulars 36, 37;
     arranges her daughter Ma'suma's marriage with Babur (912) 306,
       (913) 330.

   +Habiba-sultan Khanish+ _Dughlat_, daughter of Muhammad Husain
       and Khub-nigar _Chaghatai_--her marriages 21-2;
     depends on Babur (917) 22.

   +Hafiz Haji+, a musician--heard by Babur in Heri (912) 303.

   +Hafiz+ _kabar-katib_--his brother conveys Babur's earliest Diwan to
       Samarkand (925) 482;
     at a feast (935) 631, 632.

   +Hafiz Mirak+--composes an inscription (913) 343.

   +Hafiz-i-muhammad Beg+ _Duldai Barlas_--particulars 25;
     in Aura-tipa (893) 17, 25;
     -> joint-guardian of Mirza Khan (905) 25, 122;
     his death 26;
     his sons Muhammad _miskin_ and Tahir _q.v._;
     his (?) Char-bagh 108;
     [d_cir._ 909-10 AH.-1504 AD.].

   Khwaja Shamsu'd-din Muhammad +Hafiz+ _Shirazi_--parodied (910) 201;
     [d. 791 AH.-1389 AD.].

   +Hafiz+ _Tashkindi_--gifts made to him (935) 632.

   +Haibat Khan+ _karg-andaz_, _Hindustani_--leaves Babur (933) 557.

   +Haibat Khan+ _Samana'i_-- -> perhaps the provider of matter to fill
       the _lacuna_ of 936 AH., 693.

   Mulla +Haidar+--his sons 'Abdu'l-minan and Mumin _q.v._

   +Haidar+ _'Alamdar_--on Babur's service (925) 383, (926) 421.

   +Haidar-'ali Sultan+ _Bajauri_--obeys custom in testing his dead
       mother's virtue 212;
     -> his Gibri fort taken by Babur (924) 366, 7, 8.

   +Haidar Kukuldash+ _Yaragi Mughul_, Mahmud Khan's "looser and
       binder"--defeated 35, (900) and killed 52, 111-2;
     his garden 54;
     his son Banda-i-'ali and a descendant (?) Husain _Yaraji_ _q.v._

   +Haidar-Mirza+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of Husain
       and Payanda-sultan--his Miran-shahi betrothal at Hisar (901) 48, 61;
     rejoins his father opportunely (903) 261;
     particulars 263;
     his wife Bega _q.v._;
     [d. 908 AH.-1502-3 AD.].

   Muhammad +Haidar Mirza Kurkan+ _Dughlat_, author of
       the _Tarikh-i-rashidi_--particulars 21-2,[2898] 348;
     -> takes refuge with Babur (916) 350;
     -> his first battle (917) 353;
     -> ill when Kul-i-malik was fought (918) 357-8;
     goes to Sa'id Khan in Kashgar 22, 362;
     on Sa'id's service (933) 590, (936) 695-6;
     [d. 958 AH.-1551 AD.].

   +Haidar-i-qasim Beg+ _Kohbur Chaghatai_--father of Abu'l-qasim,
       Ahmad-i-qasim and Quch (Quj) Beg _q.v._

   +Haidar-quli+--on Auzun Hasan's service (904) 102.

   +Haidar-quli+, servant of Khwaja Kalan--on service (932) 467;
     mentioned by Babur in writing to the Khwaja (935) 648.

   +Haidar+ _rikabdar_--stays with Babur at a crisis (903) 91;
     his son Muhammad 'Ali _q.v._

   +Haidar+ _taqi_--his garden near Kabul 198 n. 1.

   +Haji Ghazi+ _Manghit_--sent to help Babur (904) 101 where in n. 3 add
       Vambery's Note 29 to the references.

   +Haji ('Ali) Khan+ _Yusuf-khail Ludi Afghan_--acting with 'Alam Khan
       _Ludi_ (932) 445-6-7.

   +Haji piada+--killed at the Lovers'-cave 68;
     [902 AH.-1497 AD.].

   +Haji Pir+ _bakawal_--negociates for Husain _Bai-qara_ with the Hisar
       begs (901) 61.

   +Halahil+--on service (925) 391, (925) 638.

   +Halwachi Tarkhan+ _Arghun_--engages Babur's left wing at Qandahar
       (913) 336.

   Sayyid Mir +Hamah+--gets the better of two traitors (932-3) 546;
     receives head-money (933) 546;
     in the right wing at Kanwa 566.

   +Hamid Khan+ _Khasa-khail Sarang-khani Ludi_--opposes Babur (932) 465;
     defeated by Humayun 466;
     defeated (633) 540;
     sent out of the way before Kanwa 547.

   +Hamusi+, son of Diwa--sent to make a Hindu pact with Sanga's son
       (935) 616.

   Amir +Hamza+--a poem mentioned imitating that in which he is celebrated
       280;
     [d. 3 AH.-625 AD.].

   +Hamza Beg+ _quchin_, son of Qasim and a daughter of Banda-i-'ali--his
       wedding gifts to Babur on his marriage with Khalifa's daughter
       (925) 400;
     joins Babur on summons from Qunduz 406, 410.

   +Hamza Bi+ _Mangfit Auzbeg_--defeated, when raiding, by Babur's men
       (910) 195.

   +Hamza Khan+, Malik of 'Ali-shang--made over to the avengers of blood
       (926) 425;
     [d. 926 AH.-1520 AD.].

   +Hamza Sultan+ _Auzbeg_--his various service 58, 59, 131;
     defeated by Husain _Bai-qara_ (901) 58;
     enters Babur's service 59;
     given leave 64;
     his Mughuls rebel against Babur (904) 105;
     serving Shaibani (906) 131, 139, (910) 244;
     -> holding Hisar and comes out against Babur (916) 352;
     defeated at Pul-i-sangin and put to death by Babur (917) 18, 37,
       262, 353;
     his defeat announced to Isma'il _Safawi_ 354;
     his sons in the battle of Jam (935) 622;
     his sons 'Abdu'l-latif and Mamaq _q.v._; his Miran-shahi wife 37;
     [d. 917 AH.-1511 AD.].

   +Haq-dad+, headman of Dur-nama--makes offering of his garden to Babur
       (926) 420.

   +Haq-nazar+--finds the body of his nephew (Nuyan) Kukuldash (907) 152.

   +Haq-nazir+ _chapa_--to punish his raid, beyond the power of the Herat
       Mirzas (912) 300.

   +Harunu'r-rashid Khalifa+--his second son Mamun Khalifa (d. 218 AH.)
       79;
     [d. 193 AH.-809 AD.].

   Ustad +Hasan-i-'ali+--orders given for the completion of work he had
       begun in Kabul (935) 646-7.

   +Hasan-i-'ali+ _Chaghatai_--receives a pargana (935) 689.

   +Hasan-i-'ali+ _Jalair Chaghatai_, son of 'Ali (_q.v._)--particulars
       278, 286;
     meets Babur (912) 299;
     his poet-sister 286 n. 1;
     [d. 925 AH.-1519 AD.].

   Sayyid +Hasan+ _Aughlaqchi Mughul_, son of Murad--particulars 279;
     serving Babur (917) 279;
     his son Farrukh _q.v._;
     [d. 918 AH.-1522 AD.].

   +Hasan+ _Barlas_--his rough dealing with Babur (910) 194.

   Shah +Hasan Beg+ _Arghun_, son of Shah (Shuja') Beg--quarrels with his
       father and goes to Babur (924) 365, -> 430;
     his betrothal (?) to Gul-barg (924-6) 366 and marriage (930) 443;
     in the left centre at Bajaur (925) 369;
     sent to claim ancient lands of the Turks 383-4;
     is successful 388;
     out with Babur 395;
     gifts to him _ib._ 414, 584;->
     social matters 400, 7, 10, 12;
     Babur sends him a quatrain 401;
     (see _s.n._ Shah-zada), -> a principal actor between 930 and 932
       AH. 427;
     his attack on Multan 437, 442 and _s.n._ 'Askari;
     accedes in Sind (930) 443;
     reads the _khutba_ for Babur 430;
     his envoy to Babur (935) 632;
     [d. 962 AH.-1555 AD.].

   +Hasan+ _Chalabi_--Tahmasp _Safawi's_ envoy to Babur (935), arrives
       late 631, 632 n. 3, 641;
     Babur accepts excuse for his delay 649;
     Babur's envoy accompanies him on his return 641;
     his servant gives Babur's envoy an account of the battle of Jam 649.

   +Hasan-dikcha+ of Akhsi--supports Babur (904) 101.

   +Hasan-i-khalifa+, son of Nizamu'd-din 'Ali--sent on service 679.

   +Hasan Khan+ _Bariwal Hindustani_--leaves Babur for Sanga (933) 557.

   +Hasan Khan+ _Darya-khani_, son of Darya Khan son of Mir 'Ali Beg--on
       service for Babur (933) 582;
     in the battle of the Ghogra (935) 669;
     pursuing rebels 678.

   +Hasan-i-makan+, loses Kandar to Sanga (932) 529-30.

   +Hasan Khan+ _Mewati_--his change of capital (930) 578;
     his opposition to Babur (932) 523 and n. 3, (933) 545, 547;
     his force at Kanwa 562 and death 573;
     Bairam Khan's remarks on him 523 n. 3;
     his son Nahar _q.v._;
     [d. 933 AH.-1527 AD.].

   +Hasan Nabira+, grandson of Muhammad _Sighal_--waits on Babur (902) 66;
     captures his elder brother (903) 72;
     leaves 'Ali for Mirza Khan (905) 122;
     goes as envoy (?) to Babur from Mirza Khan (925) 415;
     his elder brother Muhammad Qasim Nabira _q.v._

   Mulla +Hasan+ _sarraf_--given custody of gifts for Kabul (932) 525.

   +Hasan+ _sharbatchi_--helps Bai-sunghar _Miran-shahi's_ escape (901)
       62.

   +Hasan-i-yaq'ub Beg+, son of Nuyan Beg?--particulars 26;
     supports Babur (899) 30, 31;
     his appointments 32;
     shows disloyalty (900) 43;
     his death 44;
     his sobriquet Nuyan's Hasan 273;
     [d. 900 AH.-1494 AD.].

   Malik +Hast+ _Janjuha_--receives an envoy from Babur (925) 380;
     serving Babur 380, 389;
     his injuries from Hati _Kakar_ 391.

   +Hati+ _Kakar_--particulars 387;
     his misdeeds provoke punishment (925) 387, 9, 91;
     abandons Parhala 390;
     sends Babur tribute and is sent an envoy 391-2;
     referred to 452.

   'Abdu'l-lah +Hatifi+, nephew of Jami--particulars 288.

   +Hatim+ _qurchi_--promoted to be _qur-begi_ (911) 252;
     in the centre at Qandahar (913) 335.

   +Hazaraspi+, see Pir-i-muhammad.

   +Henry VII of England+--his _Intercursus malus_ contemporary with
       910 AH. 187 n. 2.

   +Henry of Navarre+-- -> his difficulties, as to creed, less than those
       of Babur in 917 AH.-1511 AD., 356.

   +Hilali+, see Badru'd-din _Hilali_.

   Abu'l-nasir Muhammad +Hind-al Mirza+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_,
       _Barlas Turk_, son of Babur and Dil-dar--his pre-natal adoption
       (925) 374;
     meaning of his name Hind-al 385;
     gifts to him or his servants 522, (935) 633, 642;
     the _Walidiyyah-risala_ and Hindustan verses sent to him 642;
     under summons to Hind 645, -> 696;
     -> sent by Humayun to Qila'-i-zafar (936) 695;
     referred to 697;
     -> waits on his father in Lahor 699;
     -> his dying father's wish to see him (937) 708;
     his escort of Babur's family in 946 AH. referred to 710;
     [d. 958 AH.-1551 AD.].

   +Hindi+--Mindi,--Mahndi, see Mahndi.

   +Hindu Beg+ _quchin_--leaves 'Ali _Miran-shahi_ for Mirza Khan (905)
       122;
     sent to raid Panj-kura (925) 374;
     in Bhira 386-8;
     leaves it 399;
     out with Babur 403;
     serving under Humayun (932) 465-6, 528-9;
     in the right wing at Panipat 472 and at Kanwa (933) 566 and
       n. 2, 569;
     escorts Mahim from Kabul (935) 687;
     sent to Sambhal _ib._;
     waits on Babur _ib._ and n. 2, 689;
     his mosque in Sambhal 687 n. 2.

   -> +Hulaku Khan+ _Ail-khani_ (_Il-khani_)--referred to 79;
     [d. 663 AH.-1264 AD.].

   +Hul-hul Aniga+--a woman drinker 417.

   Nasiru'd-din Muhammad +Humayun Mirza+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_,
       _Barlas Turk_, son of Babur and Mahim--his birth (913) 344;
     his mother's parentage 344 n. 3, -> 712-3;
     death of elder brethren referred to 374;
     a Trans-indus district given to him (925) 391;
     carried in haste to meet his father 395;
     makes a good shot 417;
     prefers not to go to Lamghan (926) 421;
     -> appointed to Badakhshan (927) 427;
     with his father in the Trans-oxus campaign (916-20) 358;
     his delay in joining the Hindustan expedition (932) 444, 446
       n. 3, 447;
     a desertion from him 545;
     first sight of a rhinoceros 451;
     books given to him at Milwat 460;
     his story-teller killed _ib._;
     a successful first military affair 466-7;
     on service 471;
     in the right wing at Panipat 472;
     sent to take possession of Agra 475, 476, 526;
     becomes owner of the Koh-i-nur 477;
     receives Sambhal and other gifts 522, 7, 8;
     appointed against the Eastern Afghans, his campaign 534, 544;
     mentioned in connection with the title 'Azam-humayun (933) 537;
     his return to Agra 544;
     his dislike of wine 545;
     in the right wing at Kanwa 566, 568-9;
     his departure for Kabul (and Badakhshan) 579-80;
     misappropriates treasure 583, -> 695 n. 1;
     a daughter born (934 or 5) 618;
     his father's messenger, detained a year by
     him, arrives in Agra (935) 621, 626;
     birth of a son (934) 621, 624-5;
     letter to him from his father quoted 624-27;
     ordered to act with Kamran against the Auzbegs 625-6;
     news of his action reaches Babur 639, 640;
     gifts sent to him on his son's birth and with them the
       _Walidiyyah-risala_ and the Hindustan poems 642;
     topics of a letter to him enumerated 645;
     the letter despatched 649;
     gifts from him to his father 687;
     a family tradition that his father wished to abdicate in his favour
       689 n. 5;
     -> misery of his creation 692;
     concerning a plan to set him aside from the succession 644
       n. 4, 688 n. 2, -> 692-3, -> 702-7;
     deserts his post in Badakhshan (936) 694;
     its sequel 695, 6, 7-8;
     ordered by his father to Sambhal 697;
     his illness and his father's self-surrender (937) 701-2;
     goes back to Sambhal 702;
     summoned and is declared successor at his father's last audience
       708;
     [d. 963 AH.-1556 AD.].[2899]

   Baba +Husain+--his murder of Aulugh Beg _Shah-rukhi_ (853) 85 and
       n. 3.[2900]

   Maulana Shaikh +Husain+--particulars 283-4.

   +Husain+ _Aikrak_ (?) (or Hasan)--receives the Chin-ab country from
       Babur (925) 386;
     misbehaves (926) 423.

   Sayyid +Husain Akbar+ _Tirmizi_, a maternal relative of Mas'ud
       _Miran-shahi_--attacks the fugitive Bai-sunghar (903) 74;
     out with Babur (910) 234;
     suspected 239;
     in the left wing at Qandahar (913) 334.

   Sultan +Husain+ _Arghun Qara-kuli_--particulars 40;
     leaves Samarkand with the Tarkhans (905) 121;
     fights for Babur at Sar-i-pul (Khwaja Kardzan) (906) 139;
     his great-niece Ma'suma a wife of Babur 36.

   +Husain Aqa+ _Sistani_--in the right wing at Kanwa (933) 566.

   +Husain+ _'audi_, lutanist of Husain _Bai-qara_--particulars 292;
     owed his training to 'Ali-sher _Nawa'i_ 272.

   Shah +Husain+ _bakhshi_--brings Babur news of a success (935) 685.

   Khwaja +Husain Beg+, brother of Auzun Hasan--particulars 26;
     his daughter a wife of 'Umar Shaikh 24, 146 n. 3;
     leaves Samarkand with the Tarkhans (905) 121;
     fights for Babur at Sar-i-pul (Khwaja Kardzan) (906) 139;
     one of eight in the flight from Akhsi (908) 177 (here Khwaja
       Husaini);
     his lameness causes him to leave Babur 178;
     sends Lahor revenues to Kabul (932) 446;
     waits on Babur 458;
     on service (933) 549 (here Mulla Husain);
     in the left centre at Kanwa 566.

   Shah +Husain+ _chuhra_, a brave of Husain _Bai-qara_--left in Balkh
       (902) 70.

   Sultan +Husain+ _Dughlat_--joins Babur (901) 58-9;
     conspires against Tambal (907) 154;
     sent by The Khan (Mahmud) to help Babur (908) 161.

   +Husain+ _Ghaini_--a punitive force sent against him (911) 253.

   +Husain-i-hasan+--out with Babur (925) 403;
     killed and avenged 404, 405;
     [d. 925 AH.-1519 AD.].

   Maulana Shah +Husain+ _Kami_, a poet--particulars 290.

   +Husain Kashifi+--his omission from Babur's list of Herat
       celebrities 283 n. 1.

   +Husain Khan+ _Lashkar_ (?) _Wazir_--writes from Nasrat Shah,
       accepting Babur's three articles (935) 676.

   Sultan +Husain Mirza+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of
       Mansur--defeats Mahmud _Miran-shahi_ (865) 46, 259 and (876) 260;
     his relations with Nawa'i 33, 272;
     his campaign against Khusrau Shah (901) 57, 58-61, 130;
     his dissensions with his sons 61, 69, (902) 68-70, 260, (903) 94-5;
     his capture of Heri (875) compared with Babur's of Samarkand (906)
       134-5;
     does not help Babur against Shaibani 138, 145;
     asks Babur's help against him (910) 190-1, (911) 255;
     his death 256, and burial 293;
     particulars of his life and court 256-292:
     --(personal 256
     --amirs 270
     --sadrs 280
     --wazirs, etc. 281
     --poets 286
     --artists 291)
     --his dealings with Zu'n-nun _Arghun_ and Khusrau Shah 274;
     his kindness to Mas'ud _Miran-shahi_ (903) 93, 95;
     his disorderly Finance Office 281-2;
     delays a pilgrim 284; his copyist 291;
     his splendid rule 300;
     his buildings 305;
     his relation Nuyan Beg _Tirmizi_ 273;
     Babur writes to him in ignorance of his death (912) 294;
     Babur's comments on him 60, 191, 225;
     a poem mistakenly attributed to him 281;
     [d. 911 AH.-1506 AD.].

   Sultan +Husain Mirza+ _Miran-shahi_, son of Mahmud and a Tirmizi
       wife--his death (_aet._ 13) in his father's lifetime, 47, 110.

   Mir +Husain+ _mu'amma'i Nishapuri_--particulars 288 and n. 7;
     [d. 904 AH.-1498-9 AD.].

   +Husain Khan+ _Nuhani Afghan_--holding Rapri and not submissive to
       Babur (932) 523;
     abandons it 530;
     takes it again (933) 557;
     drowned in flight 582;
     [d. 933 AH.-1527 AD.].

   Sultan +Husain+ _Qanjut_, maternal grandfather of Husain
       _Bai-qara_--his Timurid descent 256 n. 5.

   Shah Mir +Husain+ _Qarluq_--waits on Babur (925) 403 (here var. Hasan)
       409;
     sent to Bajaur (926) 422;
     meets Babur on his road 423;
     in charge of _impedimenta_ (932) 458;
     allowed to raid from Milwat 464;
     fighting for Babur 468, 471;
     in the left wing at Panipat 472;
     posted in Junpur (933) 544.

   +Husain-i Shaikh Timur+--particulars 273 (where in n. 2 read
       grand("father")).

   Sultan +Husain+ _Sharqi_--rise and fall of his dynasty 481;
     [d. 905 AH.-1500 AD.].

   Shah +Husain+ _Yaragi Mughul Ghanchi_--in the left wing at Panipat
       (932) 472, and at Kanwa (933) 567;
     on service 530.

   +Husamu'd-din 'Ali+ _Barlas_, son of Khalifa--on service (934) 601;
     waits on Babur (935) 687.


   +Ibn-i-husain Mirza+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of Husain
       and Papa--parentage 265;
     joins his brothers against Shaibani (912) 296;
     fails in etiquette when meeting Babur 297;
     his place at a reception 298;
     goes back to his districts Tun and Qain 301;
     mentioned 331;
     the poet Ahi his servant 289;
     [d. 919 AH.-1513 AD.].

   +Ibrahim Ata+ (Father Abraham)--his tomb in Turkistan 159.

   +Ibrahim Beg+ _Begchik_, brother of Ayub--in the right wing at Qandahar
       (913) 334.

   Mir +Ibrahim+ _Begchik_--fights and kills a guardian of 'Umar Shaikh
       _Miran-shahi_ (_cir._ 870) 25.

   +Ibrahim+ _Chaghatai_--joins Husain _Bai-qara_ 279,[2901] 689 n. 4.

   +Ibrahim+ _chuhra_--conveys a quatrain of Babur's (925) 401.

   +Ibrahim+ _Duldai Barlas_--particulars 274.

     Sultan +Ibrahim+ _Ghaznawi_--his tomb 218;
     [d. 492 AH.-1098 AD.].

   +Ibrahim-i-husain Mirza+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of
       Husain--particulars 265;
     on his father's service (901) 57;
     receives Balkh (902) 70;
     besieged (903) 93-4;
     [d. 910 AH.-1504-5 AD.].

   +Ibrahim+ _Jani_--fights for Babur at Sar-i-pul (906) 139;
     one of three Ibrahims killed there 141, 624 n. 1;
     his son Chilma _q.v._;
     [d. 906 AH.-1501 AD.].

   Mir +Ibrahim+ _qanuni_--waits on Babur (935) 605;
     his kinsman Yunas-i-'ali _q.v._

   Sultan +Ibrahim+ _Sahu-khail Ludi Afghan_, son of Sikandar--Babur sends
       him a goshawk and asks for the ancient lands of the Turk (925)
       385;
     -> co-operation against him proffered to Babur by Sanga 426, 529;
     -> a principal actor in the years of the _lacuna_ from 926
          to 932 AH. 427;
     -> no indication of Babur's intending to attack him in 926 AH. 429;
     his misdoing leads to appeal for Babur's help (929) 439;
     defeats his uncle 'Alam Khan (932) 456-7;
     Babur moves from the Dun against him 463;
     his military strength 463, 470;
     imprisons humble men sent by Babur 464;
     various news of him 465, 466-7;
     Babur's estimate of him 470;
     defeated and killed at Panipat 473-4, 630 n. 4;
     an Afghan account of Babur's care for his corpse _ib._;
     references to his rule in Gualiar 977, to the rebellion of his
       Eastern amirs 523, 527, to his capture of Chandiri and defeat at
       Dhulpur by Sanga 593, to Babur's route when he was defeated (932)
       206, and to his "prison-house" 459;
     his resources contrasted with Babur's 480;
     his treasure at an end (935) 617;
     his mother q.v. _s.n._ mother;
     his son sent to Kamran's charge in Qandahar (933) 544;
     [d. 932 AH.-1526 AD.].

   +Ibrahim Saru+ _Mingligh Beg_--_Chapuk_--particulars [Author's Note] 52;
     disloyal to Babur (900) 52;
     besieged and submits 53;
     receives Shiraz (902) 66;
     remains with Babur at a crisis (903) 91;
     on service (904) 101, 106;
     his man holds fast in Aush 107;
     plundered by 'Ali-dost (905) 119;
     waits on Babur 125;
     one of three Ibrahims killed at Sar-i-pul (Khwaja Kardzan) 139, 141;
     his brother Samad _q.v._; his good bowman 66;
     [d. 906 AH.-1501 AD.].

   +Ibrahim Sultan Mirza+ _Shah-rukhi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of
       Shah-rukh--his rule in Shiraz, death and successor (838) 20;
     referred to 85;
     [d. 838 AH.-1414-5 AD.].

   +Ibrahim Taghai Beg+ _Begchik_, brother of Ayub--wounded and nicknamed
       _Chapuk_ (902) 67;
     leaves Babur (903) 86;
     in Akhsi with Bayazid _Itarachi_ (908) 171;
     sent against Pap _ib._;
     arrests Bayazid 173-4;
     wounded but fights for Babur 174;
     soon falls behind in the flight from Akhsi 176;
     in the right wing at Qandahar (913) 334;
     holds Balkh for Babur (923) 463 n. 3;
     sent as Babur's envoy to Auzbeg Khans and Sultans (935) 643.

   +Ibrahim Tarkhan+ _Arghun_--serving Husain _Bai-qara_ (901) 58;
     holding Shiraz (906) 130;
     reinforces Babur 131;
     one of three Ibrahims killed at Sar-i-pul 140-1;
     his brother Ahmad _q.v._;
     [d. 906 AH.-1501 AD.].

   Qazi +Ikhtiyar+--particulars 285;
     waits on Babur and examines the Baburi script (912) 285;
     is instructed in the exposition of the Qoran by Shaibani (913) 329;
     [d. 928 AH.-1521 AD.].

   +Ilias Khan+, see Rustam.

   Shah +'Imad+ _Shirazi_--brings Babur friendly letters from two amirs of
       Hind (932) 463.

   +'Imadu'd-din Mas'ud+--an envoy of Jahangir _Miran-shahi_ to Tramontane
       clans (911-912) 296.

   +'Imadu'l-mulk+, a slave--strangles Sikandar _Gujrati_ (932) 535.

   +Imam-i-muhammad+--Babur's company drink at his house (925) 418;
     his master Khwaja Muhammad-amin _q.v._

   +Isan+, see Aisan.

   +Ishaq Ata+ (Father Isaac)--his tomb in Turkistan 159.

   +Iskandar+, see Sikandar.

   +Islim+ _Barlas_--particulars 276.

   +Isma'il+ _chilma_, see Chilma.

   +Isma'il Khan+ _Jilwani_ (not _Jalwani_)--with 'Alam Khan _Ludi_ (932)
       456;
     deserts him 457;
     writes dutifully to Babur 464;
     speaks of waiting on him (934?) 680;
     does it (935) 677, 679.

   +Isma'il Khan+ _Yusuf-khail Ludi_, son of 'Ali--parleys with Babur at
       Milwat (932) 459;
     deported 461.

   +Isma'il Mita+--Nasrat Shah's envoy to Babur (935) 640-1, 664-5.

   +Isma'il+ _Safawi 'Arab_, Shah of Persia--reference to his capture of
       'Iraq (cir. 906) 280, 336;
     gives refuge to a fugitive Bai-qara (913) 327 n. 5;
     -> hostilities begin between him and Shaibani (915) 350;
     defeats Shaibani at Merv (916) 18, 318, -> 350;
     sends Khan-zada back to Babur 18, 352;
     -> asked by Babur for reinforcement (917) 352-4;
     -> his alliance dangerous for Babur 355;
     -> indication of his suzerain relation with Babur 355;
     -> a principal actor in the _lacuna_ years from 926-930, 427;
     -> his relations with Shah Beg _Arghun_ 430;
     relations with Babur (927) 433-4;
     -> his death after defeat (930) 443;
     -> Lord Bacon on his personal beauty 443 n. 1;
     his son Tahmasp _q.v._;
     his (presumed) Bai-qara disciple in Shi'a heresy 262;
     [d. 930 AH.-1524 AD.].

   +Ja'far Khwaja+, son of Mahdi Khwaja and step-son of Babur's sister
       Khan-zada--fills his father's place in Etawa (933) 579, 582;
     sent to collect boats (934) 598;
     pursues Biban and Bayazid (935) 682.

   +Jahangir+ _Barlas_, son of Ibrahim and a Badakhshi Begim (T.R. trs.
       p. 108)--particulars 273;
     joint-governor of Kabul for Abu-sa'id 270, 273.

   +Jahangir Mirza+ _Barlas Turk_, eldest son of Timur--named
       in Abu-sa'id's genealogy 14;
     is given Samarkand by Timur 85;
     his tomb in Kesh 83;
     his son Muhammad 78, 85;
     [d. 776 AH.-1374-5 AD.].

   +Jahangir Mirza+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of 'Umar
       Shaikh and Fatima _Mughul_--particulars 17;
     sent (a child) to reinforce an uncle (_cir._ 895) and then betrothed
       48, 189;
     comes to Andijan after his father's death (899) 32;
     Mughul support for him against Babur (900) 43-4, (903) 87-8,
       (904) 101;
     joins Tambal 103; a "worry" 104;
     defeated at Khuban (905) 113;
     waits on Babur 119;
     summoned for a Samarkand expedition 122;
     reinforces Babur (906) 138;
     a gift to him from the exiled Babur (907) 150;
     joins Babur (908) 173;
     acts against Babur's wishes 173-4;
     flees in panic 174-5;
     rumoured a prisoner 176;
     -> his occupation of Khujand (909?) 182;
     Babur rejects advice to dismiss him (910) 191;
     deference to him from Khusrau Shah 193;
     his part in occupying Kabul 198, 199;
     receives Ghazni 227;
     out with Babur 233-4, 235-6, 239;
     rejects counsel to betray him 239;
     is Babur's host in Ghazni 240;
     his experiences in an earthquake (911) 247;
     insists on a move for Qalat-i-ghilzai 248;
     waits on Babur and does service 252-3;
     his misconduct 254;
     causes Babur to mobilize his troops 255;
     goes to Yaka-aulang (912) 294;
     the clans not supporting him, he goes to Heri with Babur 295-6;
     at social gatherings 298, 302;
     defeats his half-brother Nasir 321;
     his death 331 n. 3, 345;
     his widow brings their son Pir-i-muhammad to Babur (913) 331;
     [d. 912 or 913 AH.-1507-8 AD.].

   Nuru'ddin Muhammad +Jahangir Padshah+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_,
       _Barlas Turk_, son of Akbar--his work in Babur's burial-ground 710;
     words of his made clear by Babur's 501 n. 6;
     mentioned concerning the _tamgha_ 553 n. 1;
     [d. 1037 AH.-1627 AD.].

   +Jahangir+ _Turkman_--revolts in Badakhshan against the Auzbegs (910)
       242;
     keeping his head up (913) 340.

   +Jahan-shah+ _Barlas_, son of Chaku--mentioned in his son Muhammad
       Baranduq's genealogy 270.

   +Jahan-shah Mirza+ _Barani_, _Qara-quiluq Turkman_--ruling in Tabriz
       while Yunas _Chaghatai_ stayed there 20;
     his sons defeated by the Aq-quiluq (872) 49;
     his son Muhammadi's wife Pasha 49;[2902]
     [d. 872 AH.-1467-8 AD.].

   Rai +Jaipal+ _Lahori_--a legend of his siege of Ghazni 219;
     [d_cir._ 392 AH.-1002 AD.].

   Raja +Jai-singh+ _Jaipuri_--his astronomical instruments 79 n. 4;
     [d. 1156 AH.-1743 AD.].

   +Jalal Khan+ _Jig-hat_--waits on 'Alam Khan _Ludi_ (932) 456 and n. 4;
     his house in Dihli Babur's quarters 476;
     his son 'Alam Khan _Kalpi_ _q.v._

   +Jalal Khan+ _Ludi_, son of'Alam Khan--deserts his father (932) 457;
     in the left wing at Kanwa (933) 567 (where for "Jamal" read Jalal).

   +Jalal+ _Tashkindi_--brings Babur news of Biban and Bayazid (935) 685.

   +Jalalu'd-din Mahmud+ _nai_--a flautist, heard in Herat (912) 303.

   Sultan +Jalalu'd-din+ _Nuhani_--Jalal Khan, son of Bihar Khan and
       Dudu--one of three competitors for rule (935) 651 n. 5;
     writes dutifully to Babur 659;
     news of his and his mother's coming 664;
     waits on Babur 676;
     receives revenue from Bihar 676.

   Maulana +Jalalu'd-din+ _Purani_--origin of his cognomen 306;
     his descendant Jamalu'd-din Abu-sa'id _Puran_ _q.v._;
     [d. 862 AH.-1458 AD.].

   Sultan +Jalalu'd-din+ _Sharqi_, son of Husain Shah--waits on Babur
       (935) 651;
     particulars 651 n. 5;
     his man abandons Benares 652;
     entertains Babur 652;
     his son styled Sultan _ib._;
     his gift of a boat to Babur 663;
     in the battle of the Ghogra 669;
     on service 678.

   Shaikh +Jamal+ _Barin Mughul_--his son(?) Shaikh 'Ali _q.v._

   Shaikh +Jamal+ _Farmuli Afghan_--deserts 'Alam Khan (932) 457;
     serving Babur (933) 551.

   Shaikh +Jamali+--at a feast (935) 631;
     conveys encouragement to Dudu Bibi 665-6.

   Shaikh +Jamalu'd-din Abu-sa'id+ _Puran_--particulars 306 n. 2;
     ill-treated by Shaibani (913) 306 n. 2, 328;
     [d. 921 AH.-1515 AD.].

   Shaikh +Jamalu'd-din+ _khar_, _Arghun_--captor of Yunas Khan and
       Aisan-daulat Begim (T.R. trs. p. 94)
     --slain 35;
     [d. 877 AH.-1472-3 AD.].

   Mir +Jamalu'd-din+ _muhaddas_--particulars 284;
     [living 934-7 AH.-1527-31 AD.].

   Shaikh +Jami+--ancestor of Akbar's mother 623 n. 8.

   +Jami+, see 'Abdu'r-rahman _Jami_.

   +Jamshid+, (an ancient ruler of Persia)--mentioned 85, 152.

   Mir +Jan-airdi+, retainer of Zu'n-nun _Arghun_--sells provisions to
       Babur (912) 308.

   +Janak+--recites in Turki (912) 304.

   +Janaka Kukuldash+, (or Khanika)--escapes after Sar-i-pul (906) 141.

   +Jan-i-'ali+--murdered by Shaibani (906) 127, 128;
     [d. 906 AH.-1500 AD.].

   +Jan Beg+--in charge of _impedimenta_ (932) 458;
     allowed leave for a raid 464;
     in a night-attack 471;
     in the left wing at Panipat 472 and at Kanwa (933) 567 (here
       Jan-i-muhammad Beg Ataka);
     on service (935) 682 (here Jani Beg).

   Mir +Jan+ _Diwan_--his house in Qandahar reserved as loot for Nasir
       _Miran-shahi_ (913) 338.

   +Jani Beg+ _Duldai Barlas Turk_--particulars 37 (where nn. 2 and 3
       should be reversed).

   +Jani Beg Sultan Khan+ _Auzbeg-Shaban Chingiz-khanid_--his two
       Miran-shahi marriages of conquest 18, 35;
     fights for Shaibani at Sar-i-pul (906) 139 (where read Jani Beg
       Sultan);
     he and his sons at Jam (935) 622;
     flees to Merv 636 n. 2.

   +Jan-i-hasan+, _Barin Mughul_--sent to reinforce Babur (903) 92, (908)
       161, 170.

   +Jan-i-nasir+--answers a call-to-arms (925) 408.

   Mir +Jan+ _Samarkandi_--his distasteful singing (912) 303.

   +Jan-wafa Mirza+--serving Shaibani in Samarkand (906) 131;
     escapes on Babur's success 133.

   Barlas +Juki+--brings Babur good news, a live Auzbeg, and a head (925)
       408.

   +Juha Sultan+ _Taklu_,Governor of Ispahan--with Tahmasp _Safawi_ on
       the battle-field of Jam (935) 635.

   +Juji Khan+ _Chingiz-khanid_--a Qazzak descendant mentioned 23.

   Muhammad +Juki Mirza+ _Shah-rukhi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of
       'Abdu'l-latif (d. 854)--mentioned as besieged by Abu-sa'id
       _Miran-shahi_ 24;
     [d. 868 AH.-1463-4 AD.].

   Sultan +Junaid+ _Barlas_ (or Junid)--particulars 276;
     his sons Nizamu'd-din 'Ali Khalifa and Junaid _q.v._

   Sultan +Junaid+ _Barlas_ (or Junid), son of the last-entered--incites
       an attempt on Samarkand (900) 52, 111;
     serving Babur (932) 460, 468, 471;
     in the left wing at Panipat 472;
     sent to help in occupying Dihli 475;
     given Dulpur 530-1;
     posted in Junpur (933) 544;
     in Kharid (935) 637 and n. 1;
     joins Babur late and is not received 667;
     gives local information 668;
     in the battle of the Ghogra 669;
     on service 679, 682 and n. 2;
     his wife Shahr-banu _Miran-shahi_ _q.v._


   +Kabuli Begim+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_--abandoned by her
       husband Badi'u'z-zaman _Bai-qara_ and captured by Shaibani (913)
       328.

   +Kahil+ _sahib-i-qadam_--gives his horse to Babur (908) 174.

   Pahlawan +Kalal+--wrestles (935) 650.

   +Kalantar of Dikh-kat+ (var. _kalantar_ and _kilantar_)--his house used
       by Babur (907) 150;
     his aged mother's story _ib._

   +Kalimu'l-lah Shah+ _Bahmini Afghan_--ruling the Dakkhin (932) 482.

   +Kal-qashuq+--put to retaliatory death (903) 73.

   Sayyid +Kamal+--serving Khusrau Shah (903) 96 (where for "Qasim" read
       Kamal).

   +Kamal Khan+ _Sahu-khail Ludi Afghan_, son of 'Alam Khan--in the left
       wing at Kanwa (933) 567.

   +Kamal Khwaja+--his birth-place Khujand 8;
     [d. 803 AH.-1400-1 AD.].

   +Kamal+ _sharbatchi_--in the right wing at Qandahar (913) 335.

   Pahlawan Khwaja +Kamalu'd-din+ _Badakhshi_--in the right wing at Kanwa
       (933) 566.

   Khwaja +Kamalu'd-din Husain+ _Gasur-gahi_--particulars 280, 281;
     sent as envoy to Shaibani (904) 145.

   Khwaja +Kamalu'd-din Mahmud+, retainer of Isma'il _Safawi_-- -> with
       Babur after the defeat at Ghaj-davan (919) 362-3;
     [d_cir._ 919 AH.-1514 AD.].

   +Kamalu'd-din+ _Qiaq_ (var.)--lays before Babur complaint of the begs
       of the Balkh frontier (935) 649.

   +Kamran Mirza+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of Babur and
       Gul-rukh _Begchik_-- -> the date of his birth App. J, xxxv;
     -> taken on the Transoxus campaign (916-920) 358;
     carried in haste to meet his father (920) 395;
     joins his father 417;
     -> the _Mubin_ written for his instruction (928) 438;
     -> left in charge of Kabul and Qandahar (932) App. J, xxxv;
     a letter from Babur to him _ib._ and App. L, xliii;
     his copy of the _Babur-nama_ App. J, xxxv-vi;
     gifts sent to him (932) 460, 522, 642;
     put in charge of Ibrahim _Ludi's_ son (933) 544;
     -> of his transfer to Multar (934-5) -> 604, 605 n. 3, 645;
     of his proceedings in Kabul 618;
     his marriage to a cousin 619;
     the _Walidiyyah-risala_, Hindustan Poems and specimens of the
       Baburi script sent to him 642;
     heads of a letter to him 645, 646;
     -> meets Humayun in Kabul (935) 696;
     -> meets Babur in Lahor (936) 699;
     -> of his governments 699;
     -> later action in Multan and Lahor (938) (which read for 935) 699;
     -> visits his father's tomb near Agra (946) 709;
     [d. 964 AH.-1556 AD.].

   +Kanku+ or Gangu--killed at Kanwa 573;
     [d. 933 AH.-1527 AD.].

   +Karim-birdi+--on Babur's service (935) 661.

   +Karim-dad+ _Turkman_--at a household party (906) 131;
     escapes from Sar-i-pul (Khwaja Kardzan) 141;
     one of four fighting with Babur (908) 166, 396;
     reprieved from a death sentence (914) 345.

   +Karm-chand+--acting for Hasan _Mewati_ (933) 545, 578;
     asks peace from Babur for Hasan's son Nahar 578.

   +Karm Singh+--killed at Kanwa 573;
     [d. 933 AH.-1527 AD.].

   +Raja Karna+ _Gualiari_, (or, Kirti), _Tunwar Rajput_--his buildings
       in Gualiar 608 n. 3.

   +Khadija Agha+, and later, Begim, mistress of Abu-sa'id _Miran-shahi_,
       wife of Husain _Bai-qara_--particulars 262, 268;
     her dominance 268, 292;
     visited in Heri by Babur (912) 301;
     at an entertainment to him 302;
     a suspicion against her 302 n. 1;
     captured by Shaibani (913) 327;
     given for a traitor to loot 328;
     her daughter Aq Begim and sons Shah-i-gharib and Muzaffar-i-husain
       _q.v._

   +Khadija-sultan Begim+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter
       of Abu'sa'id--(probably) seen by Babur in Heri
    (912) 301;
     Babur visits her near Agra (934) 588 and in Agra Fort (935) 606,
       616.

   +Khaldar+ _Yaragi Mughul_, son of Haidar Kukuldash--fights for Babur
       at Sar-i-pul (Khwaja Kardzan) (906) 139.

   +Khalifa+, see Nizamu'd-din 'Ali _Barlas_.

   +Khalil+ _chuhra_--a brave who fought well for Babur (904) 101.

   +Khalil+ _diwana_--on Auzun Hasan's service (904) 102 (where for
       "Diwan" read diwana).

   Sultan +Khalil Mirza+, _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of
       Miran-shah--mentioned 262 n. 2;
     [d. 814 AH.-1411-2 AD.].

   Sultan +Khalil Mirza+ _Miran-shahi_ (_ut supra_), son of Abu-sa'id--his
       daughter sole wife of Bai-sunghar _Miran-shahi_ 112.

   +Khalil Sultan+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_, son of Ahmad, (Alacha
       Khan), full brother of Sa'id--his son Baba Sultan _q.v._

   +Khalil Sultan+ _Itaraji Mughul_, brother of Ahmad Tambal--holding Madu
       for Tambal (905) 109;
     captured _ib._, and released 119;
     surprises Aush 125;
     helps Babur against Shaibani (906) 138;
     killed at Sar-i-pul 141;
     [d. 906 AH.-1501 AD.].

   +Khalwi+ _piada_ (or Khalwa)--his spear-head bitten off by a tiger
       (925) 393.

   The +Khatib of Qarshi+--an envoy to Babur (910) 188.

   +Khan-i-jahan+, see Fath Khan _Sarwani_.

   +Khan-i-jahan+, a "pagan"--opposes Babur (933) 539.

   +Khan-quli+, son of Bian-quli--leaves Babur in Samarkand (903) 86;
     at a household party (906) 131 (where read Khan-quli for
       "Khan-i-quli");
     gives ground for suspicion (907) 156;
     one of eight in the flight from Akhsi (908) 176, 177;
     in the right-centre at Qandahar (913) 335.

   +Khan-zada Begim (1)+, _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter
       of Mahmud--particulars 48.

   +Khan-zada Begim (2)+, _ut supra_, daughter of Mas'ud and
       Sa'adat-bakht--particulars 267;
     visited by Babur near Agra (935) 616.

   +Khan-zada Begim (3)+, _ut supra_, daughter of 'Umar Shaikh
       and Qutluq-nigar--particulars 17;
     her marriage with Shaibani (907) 18, 147, -> 184;
     her divorce and remarriage with Sayyid Hadi Khwaja 352 [H.S. iii],
       364;
     her reunion with Babur (916) 18, 352, 356;
     her marriage with Mahdi Khwaja _q.v._;
     her summons to Hindustan (935) 647;
     his son Khurram Shah _q.v._;
     [d. 952 AH.-1545 AD.].

   +Khan-zada Begim (4)+, _Tirmizi_, wife of Mahmud
       _Miran-shahi_--particulars 48;
     her son Mas'ud _q.v._;
     her niece 48.

   +Khan-zada Begim (5)+, _Tirmizi_, niece of the above, wife of
       Mahmud--particulars 48, 9;
     her son Husain _q.v._;
     her five daughters 47-8.

   +Khan-zada Begim (6)+, _Tirmizi_, wife of Ahmad
       _Miran-shahi_--particulars 37;
     Babur, a child, pulls off her wedding veil (893) 37.

   +Khan-zada Khanim+ _Haji-tarkhani_, daughter of Ahmad and
       Badi'u'l-jamal (Badka)--particulars 258 n. 2, 329;
     illegally married by Shaibani (913) 329;
     her husband Muzaffar-i-husain _Bai-qara_ _q.v._

   +Khawand Shah Amir+, ("Mirkhond"), author of the
       _Rauzatu's-safa_--omitted (or lost) from Babur's list of Herat
       celebrities 283 n. 1;
     [d. 903 AH.-1498 AD.].

   +Khizr Khwaja Khan+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_--mentioned in Yunas
       Khan's genealogy 19.

   Khwaja +Khizr+ _Nuhani_, a merchant--killed by a Mughul (910) 235
       (where for "_Luhani_" read _Nuhani_).

   +Khub-nigar Khanim+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_, daughter of Yunas
       and Aisan-daulat--particulars 21, 22;
     her death announced to Babur (907) 148, 149;
     her rebel husband forgiven for her sake (912) 319;
     her husband Muhammad Husain _Dughlat_, their son Haidar
       and daughter Habiba _q.v._;
     [d. 907 AH.-1501-2 AD.].

   +Khuda-bakhsh+ _Chaghatai_, retainer, (1) of Khusrau Shah,
       (2) of Babur--in the right wing at Qandahar (913) 334;
     rebels against Babur (914) 345.

   +Khudai-birdi Beg+ _tughchi_, _Mughul_--stays with Babur at a crisis
       (903) 91;
     made a beg and on service 110;
     killed at Sar-i-pul 141;
     [d. 906 AH.-1501 AD.].

   +Khudai-birdi+ _buqaq_, _Mughul_--killed at Asfara (900) 53 (here
       _atakam_, my guardian);
     his favour from Babur 105;
     his son Quli _chunaq_ _q.v._;
     [d. 900 AH.-1495 AD.].

   +Khudai-birdi+ _tughchi Timur-tash_--made 'Umar Shaikh's
       Lord-of-the-Gate (_cir._ 870) 14;
     particulars 24-5;
     [da few years after 870 AH.-1466 AD.].

   +Khurram Shah+ _Auzbeg-Shaiban_, _Chingiz-khanid_, son of Shaibani
       and Khan-zada--particulars 18;
     [da few years after 916 AH.-1510-11 AD.].

   +Khush-kildi+[2903] _Mughul_--in the centre at Qandahar (913) 335.

   +Khusrau+, an ancient ruler of Persia--mentioned in a couplet 85.

   +Khusrau+ _Gagiani_--waits on Babur (910) 230 (where insert his name
       in the last line);
     taken as a guide 231.

   +Khusrau Kukuldash+--at a household party (906) 131 (where insert his
       name after that of Shaikh Darwesh);
     captured by Tambal (908) 168;
     rejoins Babur (913) 330-1;
     in the right centre at Qandahar 335;
     out with Babur (925) 377, 403;
     an enquiry 405;
     -> posted in Sialkot (930) 442;
     seeming still to hold it (932) 453;
     on service 465, 471;
     in the van at Panipat 472;
     in the right wing at Kanwa (933) 566, 568;
     given Alur (Alwar) by mistake 578;
     sent against Baluchis (935) 638;
     at social gatherings 385-7-8.

   Amir Khwaja +Khusrau+ _Lachin Turk_--a couplet of his quoted 503;
     [d. 725 AH.-1325 AD.].

   +Khusrau Shah+[2904] _Turkistani_, _Qibchaq Turk_,
      --particulars 49-50;
     takes Mahmud _Miran-shahi_ (_aet._ 17) to Hisar (_cir._ 873) 46-7;
     referred to as a rival 50;
     his tolerance of Hisari ill-conduct (899) 41-2;
     expelled from Samarkand on Mahmud's death (900) 51-2;
     opposes Husain _Bai-qara_ (901) 57, 60-1;
     his rise helped by Bai-qara failures 61;
     supports Mas'ud _Miran-shahi_ 64;
     falls out with him 71, 93;
     blinds him (903) 95;
     defeats Badi'u'-zaman _Bai-qara_ 60-1;
     re-equips him defeated by his father (902) 70;
     receives well the fugitive Bai-sunghar _Miran-shahi_ (903) 74;
     makes him _padshah_ in Hisar 93;
     strangles him (905) 110;
     a fugitive Tarkhan goes to him (906) 120, 141;
     his niggardliness to Babur 129, 130;
     gives him no help against Shaibani 138, -> 183;
     Qasim Beg _quchin_ takes refuge with him (907) 27;
     his position less secure (910) 188;
     followers of his join Babur 189, 192, 196, 227 n. 3;
     invited to co-operate with the Timurid Mirzas against Shaibani 190;
     takes the Kabul road on Babur's approach 192, 244;
     offers him service 192;
     the interview of his submission 193-4;
     allowed to go towards Khurasan 194, 195;
     breaks his pact and is put to flight 197, 243;
     gets sensible counsel in Herat 243;
     makes trouble for Nasir _Miran-shahi_ in Badakhshan 244-5;
     beheaded at Qunduz by the Auzbegs 244;
     good results from his death for Babur 245;
     Babur's reflections on the indiscipline of his followers 199,
       230 n. 5, 239, 244-5;
     his former following rebels (914) 335;
     his brothers Wali and Baqi, and nephew Ahmad-i-qasim _q.v._;
     [d. 910 AH.-1505 AD.].

   +Khwaja Chishti+ var. Husaini--at a feast (935) 631.

   'Abdu'l-lah +Khwajagan-khwaja+, fifth son of 'Ubaidu'l-lah
       _Ahrari_--his son 'Abdu'sh-shahid 653 n. 4.

   +Khwajaka Khwaja+, Muhammad-i-'ubaidu'l-lah, eldest son of
       Ahrari--protects Bai-sunghar _Miran-shahi_ in the Tarkhan rebellion
       (901) 62 (where, erroneously, "Khwajaki");
     becomes his spiritual guide 63;
     visited in Farkat by Babur (907) 149;
     his brother Yahya _q.v._

   +Khwaja Kalan+, descendant of 'Ubaidu'l-lah _Ahrari_-- -> a likely
       recipient of the _Mubin_ 438, 631 n. 3 (where for "son" read
       grandson of Yahya);
     at a feast in Agra (935) 631;
     gifts and leave given 632, 641-2;
     a copy of Babur-nama writings sent to him 653.

   Mir +Khwaja Kalan+, son of Maulana Muhammad Sadru'd-din--receives
       Bajaur (925) 370;
     particulars 370 n. 2;
     prisoners pardoned at his request 371;
     out with Babur 372;
     returns to Bajaur 376;
     is recalled on grounds given (926) 422-3;
     joins Babur for Hindustan (932) 447;
     on service 465-6;
     in the right wing at Panipat 472;
     helps to secure Agra 475;
     of his leaving Hindustan 520, 531;
     his offending couplet about leaving, and Babur's reply 525-6;
     has charge of Kabul and Ghazni 524;
     conveys money to repair the Ghazni dam 219, 524 n. 2, 647 n. 1;
     Babur's various writings sent to him, quatrains (925) 372, (932)
       525-6, (935) the _Walidiyyah-risala_ and Hindustan poems 642
     --letters (925) 411, (935) 604, 618 n. 2, quoted 645-8;
     commended to Humayun as a friend 627;
     a letter of his mentioned 644;
     wine parties in his house (925) 371-2, 375;
     has Ghazni wine at Milwat (932) 461;
     urged to renounce wine 648;
     tells Babur of a fruitful orange-tree (935) 510, cf. 483 n. 2;
     -> quotation from his ode on Babur's death 709.

   'Abdu'l-lah +Khwaja Maulana-i-qazi+--particulars 29, 89-90;
     supports Babur (899) 30;
     chases off an invader 32;
     confers with other well-wishers of the boy (900) 43;
     mediates for Ibrahim _Saru_ 53, for Aurgutis (902) 68;
     envoy to Auzun Hasan (903) 87;
     open-handed to Babur's followers 88;
     entreats him to save Andijan 88-9;
     Mir Mughul aids him in its defence 122;
     hanged by Tambal and Auzun Hasan 89;
     'Ali-dost fears retaliation for his death (905) 119;
     his right guidance recalled by Babur (912) 303;
     [d. 903 AH.-1498 AD.].

   +Khwajaki Mulla-i-sadr+, son of Maulana Muhammad Sadru'd-din,
       and elder brother of Khwaja Kalan--particulars 67;
     killed near Yam 67;
     [d. 902 AH.-1497 AD.].

   +Khwaja Mir-i-miran+--speaks boldly at Akhsi (908) 174;
     in charge of baggage camels (925) 376, 377, and of Babur's camp 389,
       391;
     Babur halts near his Lamghan village (926) 424;
     given charge of Daulat Khan _Yusuf-khail_ (932) 459-60;
     in the left-centre at Panipat 973;
     entrusted with gifts for Kabul 525.

   +Khwaja Mir Sultan+--he and his son receive gifts (935) 632.

   +Khwand-amir+, grandson of Khawand Shah Amir ("Mirkhond")
     -- -> associated with Muhammad-i-zaman _Bai-qara_ (923) 364-5,
       463 n. 3;
     fleeced by Shaibani's order (913) 328 n. 2;
     his discomforts in Herat 617 n. 2;
     waits on Babur (935) 605;
     Babur invites him in verse 693;
     completes the _Habibu's-siyar_ while at Tir-muhani with Babur 687
       n. 3;
     his omission (or loss) from Babur's list of Herat celebrities 283
       n. 1;
     his and Babur's varied choice of details 328 n. 2;
     -> his patron Amir Ghiyasu'd-din and nephew Ghiyasu'd-din 436;
     [d. 942 AH.-1535 AD.].

   Khwaja +Khwand-sa'id+--Babur visits his tomb (925) 407.

   Mir +Khawand+--Shah Amir ("Mirkhond")--author of the _Rauzatu's-safa_,
       grandfather of Khwand-amir--his omission (or loss) from Babur's
       list of Herat celebrities 283 n. 1;
     [d. 903 AH.-1498 AD.].

   +Kichik 'Ali+--his courage (908) 176;
     made prisoner (933) 557, 576;
     _shiqdar_ of Koel 176.

   +Kichik Baqi+ _diwana_--suspended (911) 248;
     killed at Qalat-i-ghilzai 248;
     [d. 911 AH.-1505 AD.].

   +Kichik Begim+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter of Husain
       and Payanda-sultan--refused in marriage to Mas'ud _Miran-shahi_ 265;
     "afterwards" marries Multa Khwaja 266.[2905]

   +Kichik Khwaja+--on 'Askari's service (935) 681, 682.

   +Kichik Khwaja Beg+, son of Maulana Muhammad Sadru'd-din and elder
       brother of Khwaja Kalan--in the left wing at Khuban (905) 113;
     killed at Qalat-i-ghilzai 248[2906];
     [d. 911 AH.-1505 AD.].

   +Kichik Mirza+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of Ahmad
       (Mirza Sayyidi) and Aka _Bai-qara_--particulars 257.

   +Kichkina+ _tunqtar_--sent with orders to Tramontane begs (925) 406.

   +Kipa+ and +Kipik+, see Kupuk.

   Raja +Kirti+ _Gualiari_, see Karna.

   +Kitin-qara Sultan+ _Auzbeg_--in Balkh (932) 545-6;
     at Jam (935) 622 (where in n. 1 read 935 for "934");
     makes complaint to Babur 649, 645 n. 1.

   +Kitta Beg+ _Kohbur Chaghatai_, son of Sayyidi Qara--convoys
       Yusuf-khail chiefs to Bhira (932) 461;
     on Babur's service 465-6, 468, 528, (933) 545, (935) 638;
     wounded at Biana (933) 548.

   +Kitta Mah+ and +Kichik Mah+, slaves of Muzaffar-i-husain
       _Bai-qara_--offend Babur by their performance (912) 304.

   +Kuchum Khan Sultan+--Kuchkunji--_Auzbeg-Shaiban_,
       _Chinqiz-khanid_--particulars 632 n. 3;
     -> his force gathered at Qarshi (917) 353;
     -> a principal actor between 926 and 932 AH. 427;
     his position in relation to 'Ubaidu'l-lah (935) 618 n. 6;
     in the battle of Jam 622;
     various accounts of his escape or death 623, 636;
     his envoy to Babur 631, 632;
     his sons Abu-sa'id and Pulad _q.v._; [d. 937 AH.-1530-1 AD.].

   +Kuki-i+[1] +Baba Qashqa+, see Haji Muhammad Khan _Kuki_.

   +Kuki+,[2907] paternal-uncle of the last-entered (A.N.)--on Babur's
       service (934) 589, (935) 674, 679;
     in the battle of the Ghogra 673; [d. 940 AH.-1553 AD.?].

   +Kupuk Beg+, var. Kipik, Kipa (hunchbacked)--in Babur's service (910)
       237;
     promoted (911) 253;
     frost-bitten (912) 311;
     in the centre at Qandahar (913) 335;
     envoy to Mirza Khan (925) 405.

   +Kupuk Bi+ _Auzbeg_ var. _ut supra_--blamed for three murders (906)
       128;
     given Khwarizm by Shaibani (911) 256;
     his son Qambar-i-'ali _q.v._

   +Kupuk Mirza+ _Bai-qara_, Muhammad Muhsin, son of Husain
       and Latif-sultan--parentage 262;
     defeated by his father (904) 260;
     does not join his brothers against Shaibani (912) 296-7;
     defeated and killed 329-30; [d. 913 AH.-1507 AD.].

   Sayyid +Lachin+--bearer of an urgent message from Babur (932) 453.

   Hazrat +Lam+, (Lamak, Lamakan), father of Noah--his reputed tomb, 210.

   +Langar Khan+ _Janjuha_--on Babur's service (925) 380, 381, 388-9, 412;
     one of a raft-party 385;
     waits on Babur 391, 411.

   +Langar Khan+ _Niazai Afghan_--one of a raft-party (925) 412;
     waits on Babur (926) 421.

   +Latif Begim+ _Duldai Barlas Turk_--particulars 37 (where for "916"
       read 917 AH.).

   +Latif-sultan Aghacha+ _Char-shamba'i_, a mistress of Husain
       _Bai-qara_--particulars 269;
     her sons Abu'l-muhsin and Kupuk _q.v._;
     [dbefore 911 AH.-1506 AD.].

   +Lope de Vega+--a popular use of his name resembling one of Nawa'i's
       287 n. 3.

   +Lutfi Beg+--measures the Ganges-bank on Babur's journey (933) 659.


   +Maghfur+, see Faghfur.

   +Mah-afruz+--married by Kamran (934) 619 n. 1.

   +Mah-chuchuq+ _Arghun_, daughter of Muqim and Zarif--marries Qasim
       Kukuldash (913) 342, 199 n. 1, -> 365;
     their daughter Nahid _q.v._;
     [d_cir._ 975 AH.-1568 AD.].

   +Mahdi Sultan+ _Auzbeg_, the constant associate (brother?)
       of Hamza--defeated by Husain _Bai-qara_ (901) 58;
     enters Babur's service 59;
     deserts 64;
     defeats 'Ali _Miran-shahi_ and goes back to Shaibani 65;
     his Mughuls are disloyal to Babur (904) 105;
     serving Shaibani (906) 131;
     at Sar-i-pul 139;
     at Hisar (910) 244;
     -> retires before Babur (916) 352;
     defeated and killed by him at Pul-i-sangin (917) 18, 37, 262, 353,
       354;
     his Miran-shahi wife 36;
     his sons at Jam (935) 622;
     [d. 917 AH.-1511-12 AD.].

   +Mahdi-Sultan+ _Auzbeg-Shaiban_?--his identity discussed 264 n. 1;
     his son 'Adil and grandson 'Aqil _q.v._

   Sayyid +Mahdi Khwaja+, son of Musa Khwaja and third husband of Babur's
       sister Khan-zada--Babur's _diwan-begi_ (916-7) 704 n. 3;
     -> dissuades Muhammad-i-zaman from accepting Babur's invitation to
          Kabul (after 920) 364;
     on Babur's service (932) 468, 471;
     in the left wing at Panipat 472, 473;
     commands troops sent to seize Dihli 475;
     gifts made to him 527;
     given Etawa 530;
     orders changed 531;
     serves as an escort (933) 534, 537;
     given Biana 539;
     sends news of Sanga's approach 544;
     joins Babur quickly 548;
     in the left wing at Kanwa 567;
     given leave for Kabul 579;
     host to Babur near Etawa (935) 644;
     waits on him returning to Agra 686;
     displeases him 688 n. 2, 704 n. 2;
     summoned to Court 689;
     later particulars 644 n. 4, 688 n. 2, -> 692;
     -> discussion of a plan to make him Padshah 703-7;
     -> his name may be a gloss in the story 705;
     his son Ja'far _q.v._;
     his inscribed slab at Amir Khusrau's tomb 704 n. 1;
     his surmised Tirmizi descent 704;
     his relation or servant Mir Muhammad (925) 381.

   +Mahim Begim+, wife of Babur--particulars 344 n. 3, 711, -> 712, 714;
     -> with Babur during the Transoxus campaign (916-920) 358;
     adopts Hind-al (925) 374, 385, -> 715, App. L;
     -> visits Humayun in Badakhshan (928) 436;
     goes to Agra (935) 640 n. 2, 650 n. 2, 665, 686-7, 689 n. 2, 690;
     -> her influence probably misused on Humayun 694, 707;
     meets him, sick, in Muttra (937) 701-2;
     -> her care of Babur's Agra tomb (937) 709;
     [d. 940 AH.-1533-4 AD.].

   Sayyid +Mahmud+ _Aughlaqchi_, _Mughul_--forced to go on foot (910) 239.

   +Mahmud Beg+ _Nundaki_, _Barlas Turk_--particulars 51;
     defends Hisar against Aba-bikr _Miran-shahi_ ( 873) 51,
       and against Husain _Bai-qara_ (901) 58;
     negociates with Husain 61.

   Sultan +Mahmud+ _Duldai Barlas Turk_--expelled from Andijan (900) 44;
     turns informer (905) 125.

   Mulla +Mahmud+ _Farabi_, associated with Khalifa--reads the Qoran to
       Babur (925) 401;
     rebukes a jest at Khalifa's expense 416;
     reads the _Khutba_ first for Babur in Dihli (932) 476;
     reinforces the right wing [_tulghuma_] at Kanwa (933) 569;
     leads the Morning Prayer at Rapri (935) 643 (where for "Muhammad"
       read Mahmud).

   Sultan +Mahmud Ghazi+ _Ghaznawi Turk_--his humble capital Ghazni 217,
       219;
     his and his descendants' tombs 218;
     Dost-i-nasir's tomb near his 396;
     his dam and Babur's gift from Hindustan for its repairs 219;
     But-khak traditionally named from his idol-breaking 409 n. 3;
     mentioned as a conqueror of Hindustan 479;
     contrast made between his position and Babur's 479;
     [d. 421 AH.-1030 AD.].

   Sultan +Mahmud Khan+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_, Khaqan of the
       Mughuls, elder son of Yunas and Shah Begim--succeeds
     his father (892) 13;
     his disaster on the Chir (895) 31, 34, 39;
     invades Farghana (899) 13, 31;
     thought of as a refuge for Babur 29, (908) 178;
     retires from Farghana 32;
     attempts Samarkand and is defeated (900) 52, 111, (905) 122;
     takes Aura-tipa (900) 55-6;
     demands Andijan (903) 87;
     is visited by Babur (900) 54, (903) 90, 92, (907 and 908) 153-159;
     sends help to Babur (903) 90, 92, (904) 101, (906) 138, 139;
     his men abandon Babur (903) 91, 92;
     he opposes Babur (905) 115-6, 116;
     moves out against Tambal (907) 154, 156;
     numbers his army 154;
     acclaims his standards 155;
     ceremonies on his meeting his brother Ahmad (908) 160;
     goes with him against Tambal 161, 168, 171;
     they number their armies 161;
     retires to Tashkint 172;
     defeated at Archian by Shaibani (909) 7, 23, -> 182-3;
     his prae-accession sobriquet Khamka Khan 23;
     his summer retreat in Farghana 5;
     his Miran-shahi marriage (cir. 892) 13, 35;
     retainers of his 25, 28;
     former followers, deported (908) by Shaibani,
       return after his death (916) 351;
     Babur's comment on him as a soldier 91, 157,
       and as a verse-maker 154;
     -> murdered with five young sons by Shaibani 350;
     [d. 914 AH.-1509 AD.].

   +Mahmud Khan+ _Ludi Afghan_, son of Sikandar--fights for Sanga at Kanwa
       (933) 562;
     reported to have taken Bihar (935) 639, 675;
     one of three competitors for rule 651 n. 5;
     gathers an army to oppose Babur 651-2;
     it breaks up 654;
     is near the Son 658;
     flees before Babur's men 662;
     referred to 664 n. 7, 679 n. 7;
     on his title Sultan 652 nn. 2, 6, 653-4 n. 1;
     [d. 945 AH.-1543 AD.].

   +Mahmud Khan+ _Nuhani Afghan_
     --holding a district from Babur;
     taken by 'Alam Khan (932) 455, 456;
     deserts 'Alam Khan;
     waits on Babur and given revenue from Ghazipur 527;
     sent against Etama 530;
     waits on Babur (935) 659;
     searches for a passage through the Ghogra 668;
     in the battle of the Ghogra 669 (here _Ghazipuri_);
     receives a grant on Bihar 676;
     on service against Biban and Bayazid 682.

   +Mahmud Khan+ _shikdar_ of Sikandarpur--collects boats for Babur's
       passage of the Ghogra (935) 668.

   +Mahmud Khan Sultan+ _Auzbeg-Shaiban Chingiz-khanid_--in the battle
       of Sar-i-pul (Khwaja Kardzan) (906) 139;
     receives Qunduz (910) 244;
     his protection sought 196 n. 5;
     dies 244;
     [d. 910 AH.-1504 AD.].

   Sultan +Mahmud+ _Khilij_ Turk, ruler in Malwa--particulars 482 (where
       in n. 2 for "Gujrat" read Malwa);
     his territory (916) 593;
     his jewels (925 and 935) 612-3;
     thought of by Rahim dad as a refuge 688 n. 2 (where for "Muhammad"
       read Mahmud);
     [d. 937 AH.-1531 AD.].

   +Mahmud+ _kundur-sangak, piada_--killed fighting 68;
     [d. 902 AH.-1497 AD.].

   Sultan +Mahmud+ _mir-akhwur_, see Mirza Beg _firmgi-baz_
       (58 and n. 4).

   Sultan +Mahmud Mirza+ _Ghazi_, _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_,
       son of Abu-sa'id--particulars 45-51;
     defeated by Husain _Bai-qara_ (865 and 876), 46, 259-60, 268;
     succeeds his brother Ahmad (899) 40-1, 86;
     alienates allegiance 41-2;
     sends Babur wedding-gifts (900) 43;
     his death 27, 45, 50, 52;
     his family joins Babur (910) 189;
     referred to 12 n. 2, 13 n. 5, 190, 194;
     his Hisar house 93;
     [d. 900 AH.-1495 AD.].

   Sayyid +Mahmud Saifi+, Maulana _'Aruzi_--author of the
       _'Aruz-i-saifi_--tutor of Bai-sunghar _Miran-shahi_ 111.

   +Mahmud+ _Sarwani_, son of Fath Khan Khan-i-jahan--ordered to stay at
       Court (933) 537.

   +Mahmud Shah+ _Ilyas_--his murder mentioned to illustrate a succession
       custom of Bengal 483.

   Sultan +Mahmud+ _Sharqi_, son of Jalalu'd-din--Babur gives him the
       title of Sultan (935) 652.

   +Mahmud+, son of Muhammad-i-makhdumi--beheaded in Badakhshan 242;
     [d. 910 AH.-1504-5 AD.?].

   (?) +Mahndi+ (415, 473), or Mindi or Hindi (235, 335)--kills an Afghan
       trader (910) 235;
     in the centre at Qandahar (913) 335;
     wine first given to him (925) 415;
     in the left wing [_tulghuma_] at Panipat (932) 473.

   Khwaja +Majdu'd-din Muhammad+ _Khawafi_--particulars 281, 282.

   +Makan+ _Farmuli_(?) _Afghan_--not submissive to Babur (932) 529;
     sent out of the way before Kanwa (933) 547;
     his son Hasan _q.v._

   +Makhdum-i-'alam+, Nasrat Shah's Governor in Hajipur--his defences on
       the Gandak (935) 663.

   Hazrat +Makhdumi Nura+--mentioned 641 n. 1.

   +Makhdum-sultan Begim+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter
       of Mahmud and Zuhra--in Badakhshan (_cir._ 935) 48.

   +Makhdum-sultan Begim+ _Qara-guz_, wife of 'Umar Shaikh--particulars
       18, 24.

   +Malik-dad+ _Kararani_ (_Karani_)[2908]--reprieved (932) 477-8;
     on service (933) 540, 582, (935) 682;
     in the right wing at Kanwa (933) 557.

   +Malik-i-muhammad Mirza+ _Miran-shahi_, nephew of Abu-sa'id--aspires
       to rule (899) 41;
     murdered 41;
     his wife 47;
     his house 146;
     [d. 899 AH.-1494 AD.].

   +Maliks of Alangar+--their garden a halting-place (926) 424.

   +Malik of Fan+--stingy to Babur (906) 130.

   +Malik-quli+ _Kunari_--Babur halts at his son's house (926) 423 (where
       read quli for "'Ali").

   +Malik Sharq+--returns from service (935) 683.

   +Mallu Khan+ of Malwa--his tank at Chanderi 597 n. 8, 598.

   +Mamaq Sultan+ _Auzbeg-Shaiban Chingiz-khanid_, son of Hamza--takes
       service with Babur (901) 58, 59;
     -> his death 353;
     [d. 917 AH.-1511-2 AD.].

   +Mamum Khalifa+, _'Abbasi_, son of Harunu'r-rashid--his Observatory
       and Tables, Author's Note 79;
     [d. 218 AH.-833 AD.].

   +Manik-chand+ _Chauhan Rajput_--killed at Kanwa 573;
     [d. 933 AH.-1527 AD.].

   Raja +Man-sing+ _Gualiari_, _Tunwar Rajput_--his buildings 607, 608;
     his son Bikramajit _q.v._;
     [d. 924 AH.-1518 AD.].

   Shah +Mansur+ _bakhshi_--helps Shaibani to take Herat (913) 325;
     given Khadija Begim to loot 326.

   Shah +Mansur+ _Barlas_--on service (932) 465-6, 475, 530, (933) 545;
     in the right centre at Panipat (932) 472, 473,
       and at Kanwa (933) 565, 569;
     his untimely praise of the Rajput army 548, 550.

   Sultan +Mansur Khan+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_, eldest son of Ahmad,
       Alacha Khan-- -> defeats his half-brother Sa'id (914) 349;
     -> mentioned as Khaqan of the Mughuls, Sa'id as Khan in Kashghar 427;
     [d. 950 AH.-1543 AD.].

   +Mansur Mirza+ _Bai-qara_, _'Umar-shaikhi Timurid_, _Barlas
       Turk_--mentioned in his son Husain's genealogy 256;
     his not-reigning 256;
     his wife Firuza and their children 256, 257;
     his beg Wali _q.v._

   +Mansur+ _Turkman_--in the centre at Qandahar (913) 335.

   Malik Shah +Mansur+ _Yusuf-zai Afghan_, son of Sulaiman--envoy of his
       tribe to Babur (924) 371;
     his daughter's
     marriage with Babur (925) 375, App. K;
     waits on him 399, 400;
     his brother Taus Khan and cousin Ahmad _q.v._;
     a follower 377.

   +Maqsud+ _suchi_, _sharbatchi_, _karg_--in the left centre at Qandahar
       (913) 335, 338;
     his tossing by a rhinoceros (_karg_) 400.

   +Marghub+ _qul_--in Mahawin (932) 523.

   Mian +Ma'ruf+ _Farmuli Afghan_[2909]--disaffected to Ibrahim and
       (later) to Babur (932) 523;
     his opposition 530;
     flees 533-4;
     his son Muhammad (?) leaves him (934) 598;
     his sons Muhammad and Musa _q.v._

   +Ma'ruf+ _Yaq'ub-khail Dilah-zak_ (_Dilazak_) _Afghan_--waits on Babur
       at 'Ali-masjid (925) 394.

   Shaikh +Maslahat+ _Khujandi_--his birthplace 8;
     dreamed of by Babur (906) 132;
     his tomb visited by Timur (790) 132 n. 2.

   +Masti+ _chuhra_--deals with a drunken man (925) 415;
     intoxicated by beer (926) 423.

   Sultan +Mas'ud+ _Ghaznawi_--his tomb 218.

   Sultan +Mas'ud Mirza+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of
       Mahmud and Khan-zada I--particulars 47, 48;
     holding Hisar (900) 52;
     opposes Husain _Bai-qara_ and flees (901) 57-8, 130;
     one of three besieging Samarkand; retires with his desired Barlas
       bride 64;
     quarrels with Khusrau Shah (902) 71,
       and with the Hisar begs (903) 93;
     takes refuge with Husain _Bai-qara_ 93, 95, 261, 265;
     returns to Khusrau and is blinded by him 95, 50;
     goes back to Husain 95, 266;
     mentioned as older than Bai-sunghar 110;
     meets Babur in Herat (912) 302;
     murdered by Auzbegs (913) 267;
     his wives Saliha-sultan _Miran-shahi_, and Sa'adat-bakht
       _Bai-qara_ _q.v._;
     his betrothed (?) Kichik Begim _Bai-qara_ _q.v._;
     [d. 913 AH.-1507 AD.].

   Sultan +Mas'ud Mirza+ _Kabuli_, _Shah-rukhi_, _ut supra_--particulars
       382;
     his cherished followers, sons of Mir 'Ali Beg _q.v._;
     his son 'Ali _asghar_ _q.v._;
     [deposed 843 AH.-1439-40 AD.].

   Mulla +Mas'ud+ _Sherwani_, of Husain _Bai-qara's_ Court--no particulars
       284.

   +Ma'suma-sultan Begim+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter
       of Ahmad and Habiba-sultan, and wife of Babur--particulars 36,
       -> 711;
     her marriage arranged (912) 306, -> 714;
     brought from Herat (913) 330;
     married 339;
     dies in child-bed and her name at once given to her child 36;
     [d_cir._ 915 AH.-1509 AD.].

   +Ma'suma-sultan Begim+, _ut supra_, daughter of Babur
       and Ma'suma-sultan (_supra_)--her birth 36;
     with her father in the Transoxus campaign (916-920) 358;
     her marriage (or betrothal) to Muhammad-i-zaman _Bai-qara_
       (923 or 924) 365;
     gifts made to her servants (935) 633;
     -> in the family-list 705, 706.

   +Maulana Sayyidi+, or _Mashhadi_--his chronogram on Humayun's birth
       (913) 344.

   Shaikh +Mazid Beg+, Babur's first guardian--particulars 26, 27;
    [d before 899 AH.-1494 AD.].

   Mir +Mazid Taghai+ _Kunji Mughul_, brother or uncle
       of Aisan-daulat--takes part in a sally from Samarkand (906) 142;
     wounded at Akhsi (908) 168;
     rebels (921) 363, 397;
     his relations, 'Ali-dost, Sherim, Qul-nazr _q.v._;
     [d_cir._ 923 AH.-1517 AD.].

   +Mazid Beg Tarkhan+ _Arghun_, son of Amir Tarkhan Junaid (H.S. lith.
       ed. iii, 359)--his retainer Khusrau Shah 49;
     his action in 873 AH. 51;
     his brother 'Ashiq-i-muhammad _q.v._

   Shaikh +Mazid Kukuldash+--envoy of Muhammad-i-zaman to Babur (925) 402.

   +Medini Rao+ var. Mindi _etc._--particulars 593 n. 5;
     his force at Kanwa (933) 562;
     holding Chanderi (934) 483, 593;
     Babur negociates with him 594;
     his house the scene of a supreme rite 595.

   +Mihr-angez Begim+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_--married as a
       captive (913) 329 n. 1.

   +Mihr-ban Khanim+ (see _infra_)--gifts to and from Babur (935) 631,
       632, 641;
     her husband Kuchum _Auzbeg_ and their son Pulad _q.v._;
     a verse seeming to be addressed to her (925) 402.

   +Mihr-banu Begim+ _Miran-shahi_, half-sister of Babur (perhaps the
       Khanim last entered)--particulars 18.

   +Mihr-nigar Khanim+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_, daughter of
       Yunas--particulars 21, 149;
     joins Babur in Kabul (911) 246;
     visited by him after her disloyalty (912) 315;
     goes to Badakhshan (913) 341;
     dies a prisoner 21.

   +Milli Surduk+--reprieved from death (932) 477, 478.

   +Mingli Bi Aghacha+, a mistress of Husain _Bai-qara_--particulars 269;
     her sons and daughters 262-3, 266.

   +Minglik Kukuldash+--leaves Samarkand (907) 147.

   +Minuchihr Mirza+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, brother
       of Abu-sa'id--an attributed descendant 24;
     his son Malik-i-muhammad _q.v._

   +Minuchihr Khan+ _Turk_--delayed in waiting on Babur by a forcible
       marriage (925) 386, 388;
     on Babur's service in Bhira 389;
     leading Darya-khanis (934) 589;
     his relation Nazar-i-'ali _Turk_ _q.v._

   +Mirak+--entrusted with building work (935) 642.

   +Mirak Kur Diwan+ (or Gur)--in Ala-qurghan when Shaibani took Herat
       (913) 328.

   +Miran-shah Mirza+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of Aulugh
       Beg _Kabuli_--rebels against his father and goes to Khusrau Shah 95;
     sent to Bamian 96.

   +Miran-shah Sultan Mirza+ _Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, 3rd son
       of Timur--mentioned in a genealogy 14;
     his daughter's son Ahmad _Bai-qara_ _q.v._;
     [d. 810 AH.-1407-8 AD.].

   +Mir Buzurg+ _Tirmizi_--his daughter and granddaughter, wives of Mahmud
       _Miran-shahi_ 47-8, 49.

   +Mirim+--Mir Muhammad?[2910]--adopted son of Auzun Hasan--killed
        fighting against Babur 170;
     [d. 908 AH.-1502 AD.].

   +Mirim Diwan+--_ut supra_--captured serving Babur (904) 106;
     released (905) 119;
     discovers a rebel (912) 319.

   +Mirim+ _Laghari_--_ut supra_--leaves Babur for home (903) 91;
     captured serving Babur (904) 106;
     killed 167;
     [d. 904 AH.-1499 AD.].

   +Mirim-i-nasir Beg+--_ut supra_--enters Babur's service (904) 103;
     one of a household-party (906) 131;
     in the left centre at Qandahar (913) 335, 338;
     at social gatherings (925) 385, 388;
     on service 389, 391;
     receives his dead brother's district 397.

   +Mirim Tarkhan+--_ut supra_--drowned while serving Bai-sunghar
        _Miran-shahi_ 74;
     [d. 903 AH.-1497 AD.].

   +Mir Khurd+ _bakawal_--one of a boat-party (925) 388;
     ordered to catch pheasants 404;
     made Hind-al's guardian 408;
     on service (935) 640.

   +Mir Mughul+, son of 'Abdu'l-wahhab _shaghawal_--helps to defend
       Andijan (903) 122;
     his son killed (904) 102 (here Mughul Beg);
     sent by Tarkhans to invite Babur to Samarkand (905) 122, 123;
     on service (925) 389 (here Beg Muhammad _Mughul_); measures
     Babur's marches (935) 658 (here Mughul Beg);
     in the battle of the Ghogra 673-4 (here Mughul-i 'Abdu'l-wahhab).

   +Mir Sang-tarash+--entrusted with building-work (935) 642.

   +Mirza Beg+ _firingi-baz_--in Husain _Bai-qara's_ service (901) 58.

   +Mirza Beg Kai-khusrawi+--in Ala-qurghan when Shaibani took Heri
       (913) 328.

   +Mirza Beg Taghai+, see Sl. 'Ali M. Taghai _Begchik_.

   +Mirza Beg Tarkhan+--in the left centre at Panipat (932) 472.

   Wais +Mirza Khan+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_--Khan Mirza--son
       of Mahmud and Sultan-nigar _Chaghatai_--particulars 47;
     sent by The Khan (Mahmud _Chaghatai_) against Samarkand (905) 122;
     in Tashkint (908) 159;
     at Khusrau Shah's audience of submission (910) 193;
     demands vengeance on him 194;
     on service 234;
     disloyal (912) 313-20;
     captured and banished 320;
     rejoins Babur from Herat (913) 331;
     in the right wing at Qandahar 334;
     his loot 338;
     goes to Badakhshan on Shah Begim's insistance 340-1, 342;
     his claim to rule in it 698 nn. 1-3;
     serves as a refuge for Sa'id _Chaghatai_ (915) 349
       and Haidar _Dughlat_ 350;
     sends Babur news of Shaibani's defeat at Merv (916) 350;
     invites his help in recovering their ancestral lands _ib._;
     messenger of Babur to Isma'il _Safawi_ 352;
     helps him to defend Hisar (918) 359;
     receives him plundered 362;
     sends him an envoy (925) 402;
     loses lands to Sa'id _Chaghatai_ 695;
     -> mentioned 427;
     his death announced to Babur (927) 433, 621 n. 5;
     his titles 21 n. 5;
     his guardians 26, 122;
     [d. 927 AH.-1521 AD.].

   +Mir-zadas+ of Khwast--wait on Babur (925) 399.

   +Mirza-i-malu+ _Qarluq_?--his son Shah Husain or Hasan _q.v._

   +Mirza Mughul+, son of Daulat-qadam-i-turk--conveys letters
       (932) 526-7.

   +Mohan+ _Mundahir Rajput_-- -> a punitive expedition against him
       (936) 700-1;
     [d. 936 AH.-1529 AD.?].

   The +Mother+ of the Head-man of Dikh-kat--particulars 150.

   Ibrahim _Ludi's_ +Mother+--receives an allowance from Babur (932) 478;
     attempts to poison him (933) 541;
     started under guard for Kabul 543;
     her grandson sent to Kamran 544;
     [d. 933 AH.-1527 AD.].

   +Mirza-quli Kukuldash+ (Mirza's servant?)--with Jahangir (_aet._ 9)
       in Akhsi (899) 32;
     one of three with Babur (908) 166, 396;
     fights for him in Akhsi 174-5;
     one of eight in flight 177;
     his horse fails 178;
     at social gatherings (925) 385, 387, 388;
     out with Babur 403;
     behaves in his own fashion 407.

   +Muatukan+ _Chaghatai Chingis-khanid_--mentioned in Yunas Khan's
       genealogy 19.

   Bibi +Mubaraka+ _Yusuf-zai Afghan_, a wife of Babur--referred
       to 367 n. 3;
     her courtship App. K;
     asked and given in marriage 375, 376;
     a couplet suiting her 411;
     accompanies Mahim to Agra (935) 689 n. 5;
     -> her probable charge of conveying Babur's body to Kabul 709-10;
     her brother Jamal App. K, xli;
     [d early under Akbar 963 AH.-1556 AD.].

   +Mubarak Khan+ _Jilwani_--killed serving Biban (935) 685.

   +Mubarak Shah+ _Muzaffari_--rises in Badakhshan against Shaibani
       (_cir._ 910) 242;
     invites Nasir _Miran-shahi_ 242, 243;
     defeats Auzbegs (912) 294-5;
     defeats Nasir 321;
     in force (913)
       Author's Note 340;
     invites Mirza Khan to Qila'i-zafar 21;
     [d_cir._ 913 AH.-1508 AD.].

   +Mughul Beg+, amir of Husain _Bai-qara_--particulars 275.

   A +Mughul servant+--aims an arrow at Babur (912) 316.

   +Muhammad+, the Prophet--reference to 75;
     a saying on travel 184;
     his edicts do not include the imposition of the _tamgha_ 555;
     on the duty of a wazir 556;
     mentioned in the _farman_ and the _fath-nama_ (933) 553, 559-574.

   Khwaja +Muhammad+, an old tailor of 'Umar Shaikh's--allays anxiety
       for Babur (899) 30.

   Mir +Muhammad-i-Mahdi Khwaja+--on service (925) 381.

   Pahlawan Haji +Muhammad+--gifts made to him (935) 633.

   Ustad Sultan +Muhammad+, a Kabul builder--orders for his work
       (935) 646-7.

   +Muhammad 'Ali+, son of Haidar _kikabdar_--brings a gift (925) 418;
     summons Humayun (933) 537-8;
     sent out for news (935) 661, 662.

   +Muhammad 'Ali+ _bakhshi_--on Abu-sa'id's service and defeated
       by Husain _Bai-qara_ (868) 259.

   +Muhammad 'Ali+ _Jang-jang_--in the centre at Bajaur (925) 370;
     at boat-parties 387, 388;
     his servant's service 391, 392;
     his districts 392-3, 530;
     reinforced 412;
     waits on Babur 403, 419, (932) 458;
     at Milwat (932) 460, 461;
     at Hisar-firuza 465-6;
     wounded 471;
     in the van at Panipat 472;
     on service 530, (933) 549, 550, 576, 582;
     in the left wing at Kanwa 557;
     acts unsuccessfully against Biban and Bayazid (934) 589, 594, 598;
     pursues from near Qanuj 601;
     sent against Baluchis (935) 638;
     his brother Arghun and sons Tardi-muhammad and Nan-roz _q.v._

   Khwaja +Muhammad 'Ali+ _kitabdar_--messenger to Khwaja Yahya
       (905) 124;
     confuses a pass word (908) 164 (here _sairt-kishi_ = _sart_);
     captured by Tambal 168;
     fights against rebels (912) 315;
     in the left centre at Qandahar (913) 335;
     in charge of treasure 338;
     at entertainments (925) 410, 411, 413;
     -> at Kalanur (930) 442 (here Tajik = Sart).

   +Muhammad 'Ali+ _Mubashir-beg_--stays with Babur at a crisis
       (903) 91;
     at Khuban (905) 113;
     in the flight from Akhsi (908) 163;
     captured by Tambal 168;
     killed on service 252;
     his servant Sulaiman 175;
     [d. 911 AH.-1506 AD.].

   +Muhammad 'Ali+ _piada_--deserts Nasir _Miran-shahi_ (913) 343.

   Khwaja +Muhammad 'Ali Taghai+--'Asas--brother of Mahim Begim?--in the
        van at Qandahar (913) 335;
     meets Babur at a crisis (914) 346;
     waits on Babur (925) 399, 403;
     answers a military summons 408;
     the first to follow Babur in renouncing wine (933) 552;
     at various entertainments (925) 387, 388, 400, 412, (926) 423,
       (935) 683;
     on his identity 522 n. 4;
     -> in charge of Babur's Agra tomb (937) 709.

   Khwaja +Muhammad-amin+--out with Babur (910) 230;
     deserts from Qandahar (913) 343;
     at a garden-wine-party (925) 418;
     his servant Imam-i-muhammad _ib._

   +Muhammad-amin Khan+ _Qazani_, _Jugi Chingiz-khanid_--Shaibani sends
       him a Herat musician 292;
     [d. 925 AH.-1519 AD.].

   Ustad +Muhammad-amin+ _jibachi_--attention for him desired from Khwaja
       Kalan (935) 647.

   +Muhammad+ _Andijani_--sent to Kabul (912) 313-4.

   +Muhammad+ _Arghun_--with Mughuls against Babur (904) 106.

   Sayyid +Muhammad-i-aurus+ _Arghun_, son of Aurus--particulars 279.

   Shah Sultan +Muhammad+ _Badakhshi_--his claim to Greek descent and his
       six daughters 22.
     (Cf. T.R. trs. p. 107.)

   Miir +Muhammad+ _Badakhshi_ of Ishkimish--particulars 288-9;
     waits on Babur (917) 289.

   +Muhammad+ _bakhshi_--on service at Qandahar (913) 338.

   +Muhammad Baqir Beg+ _Andijani_--with Jahangir (899) 32;
     disloyal to Babur (900) 44;
     with Bai-sunghar (902) 65;
     leaves Babur for home (903) 91;
     in Akhsi and seen in the flight (908) 189, 181;
     -> 182;
     his son Dost _q.v._

   +Muhammad Baranduq Beg+ _Barlas Turk_--particulars 270;
     on Husain _Bai-qara's_ service (901) 58;
     retorts on Khusrau Shah (910) 243;
     retainer of Muzaffar-i-husain _Bai-qara_ (911) 274, 293;
     acts against Shaibani (912) 296, 297;
     at a feast 298;
     concerning Babur's reception at the Heri Court 299;
     presses him to winter in Heri 307;
     his plan of defence rejected (913) 326.

   +Muhammad Beg+ _Begchik_, brother of Ayub--in the right wing
       at Qandahar (913) 334.

   Pahlawan +Muhammad Bu-sa'id+--particulars 292.

   Shah +Muhammad+ _diwana_, receives a fugitive Bai-qara 263;
     his son brings Babur news of Biban and Bayazid (935) 681.

   +Muhammad-dost Taghai+ _Kunji Mughul_, son of 'Ali-dost--with Babur
       (900) 53;
     remains at a crisis (903) 91;
     captured by Tambal (904) 106;
     released (905) 119;
     his self-aggrandizment 119;
     deserts to Tambal 125;
     negociates for him with Babur (908) 173;
     blinded by the Auzbegs 125.

   Sayyid +Muhammad+ _Dughlat Hisari_--enters Babur's service (901) 58,
       59;
     his Mughuls desert Babur (904) 105;
     conspires against Tambal and goes to The Khan (Mahmud) (907) 154;
     sent with Babur against Tambal (908) 161.

   Sultan +Muhammad+ _Duldai_, _Barlas Turk_--Babur's messenger to Husain
       _Bai-qara_ (912) 294;
     returns with news of Husain's death 295;
     in the right centre at Qandahar (913) 335;
     waits on Babur from Bajaur (925) 401;
     overtakes him at Jui-shahi 410;
     at a wine-party _ib._;
     at Hisar-firuza (932) 465-6;
     in the right-wing at Panipat 472;
     given Qanuj 530;
     abandons it (933) 557;
     unwilling to return there 582;
     sent against Baluchis (935) 638;
     ordered to Agra 676.

   Shah +Muhammad+ _Farmuli Afghan_, son of Ma'ruf--particulars 675;
     Babur gives him Sarun (934) 603, 675;
     waits on Babur (935) 675, 679.

   Sultan +Muhammad+ _Galpuk_, _Itarachi Mughul_--opposing Babur
       (908) 165.

   Shaikh +Muhammad+ _Ghaus_--particulars 539;
     helps Babur to gain Gualiar (933) 539-40;
     intercedes for Rahim-dad (936) 688, 690.

   +Muhammad Haidar Mirza+ _Dughlat_, see Haidar.

   +Muhammad Husain Mirza Kurkan+ _Dughlat_, receives Aura-tipa
       (900) 56;
     effects Qasim _quchin's_ dismissal (903) 90;
     sent by The Khan (Mahmud) to help Babur 92;
     lends him Pashaghar (904) 97,
       and Dikh-kat (907) 148;
     sent against Samarkand (905) 122;
     keeps back Aura-tipa from Babur (907) 149;
     goes to him in Kabul (911) 246;
     incites a Mughul revolt against him (912) 313-17;
     captured and banished 319;
     ungrateful for leniency _ib._;
     Shaibani avenges Babur _ib._;
     his son Haidar's excuses for him 317 n. 3;
     his wife Khub-nigar, son Haidar, daughter Habiba _q.v._;
     [d. 914 AH.-1508 AD.].

   +Muhammad Husain+, brother of Abu'l-hasan _qur-begi_--joins Mirza Khan
       (912) 315;
     on Babur's service (925) 413 (here _qurchi_).

   +Muhammad-i-husain Mirza+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of
       Husain and Mingli--particulars 262, 268;
     hostile to his father (903) 94;
     his flight into 'Iraq 262.

   Mir +Muhammad+ _jala-ban_--examines a ford through the Sind-water
       (Indus) (925) 378;
     selects a site for a pontoon-bridge across the Ganges (934) 599;
     examines fords above Aud (Oudh) 602;
     advises about crossing the Saru (Goghra) 674;
     rewarded for his pontoon-bridge (935) 635;
     his raft-mishaps (925) 407, 423.

   +Muhammad Jan+, Najm Sani's Lord-of-the-Gate-- -> envoy to Babur and
       discontented with his reception (917) 355.

   +Muhammad Khalil+ _akhta-begi_--sent raiding (933) 538;
     at Kanwa (933) 569.

   +Muhammad Khan+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_--mentioned in Yunas Khan's
       genealogy 19.

   +Muhammadi Kukuldash+, kinsman of Baba Qashqa (?--_q.v._)--seen with
       Babur by Khan-zada (before 907 and in 916) 18;
     on service at Milwat (932) 458, 460;
     in the right centre at Panipat 472, 473, 475;
     sent against Dulpur 530;
     receives Samana 528;
     in the right wing at Kanwa (933) 566, 569, 576;
     sends news of a second[2911] Baluchi incursion (935) 605 n. 3, 638;
     reports action 675;
     ordered to Agra 676;
     at various entertainments (925) 385, 388, 412.

   +Muhammad-i-makhdumi+--his son Mahmud _q.v._

   +Muhammad Ma'sum Mirza+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of
       Husain and Mingli--particulars 264, 269;
     his wife Bega _Miran-shahi_ _q.v._;
     [d. 907 AH.-1501-2 AD. See HS. iii, 290].

   Mulla +Muhammad+ _Mazhab_--profers support to Babur (932) 463;
     Babur's envoy to Bengal (935) 637.

   +Muhammad Mazid Tarkhan+ _Arghun Chingiz-khanid_, son of
       Aurdu-bugha--particulars 39;
     has charge of Nasir _Miran-shahi_ (899) 32;
     leaves Samarkand after the Tarkhan rebellion (901) 62;
     displeases 'Ali _Miran-shahi_ (905) 121;
     plotted against _ib._;
     invites Mirza Khan and Babur 122, 123;
     welcomes Babur 40, 124;
     joins Khusrau Shah (906) 129;
     fights for Babur at Sar-i-pul (Khwaja Kardzan) 139;
     takes refuge with Khusrau Shah 141;
     at Kul-i-malik (918) -> 357;
     killed there 39;
     his house a post of Babur's 143;
     [d. 918 AH.-1512 AD.].

   Sultan +Muhammad Mirza+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_--parentage
       257.

   Sayyid +Muhammad Mirza+ _Dughlat_, uncle of Haidar--sent to help Babur
       (906) 139;
     envoy of Sa'id _Chaghatai_ to him (917) 22;
     escorts his niece to Kashghar _ib._

   Sultan +Muhammad Mirza+ _Miran-shahi_, grandson of Timur--his son
       Abu-sa'id _q.v._

   Sultan +Muhammad Mirza+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_--his father Abu-sa'id
       _q.v._

   +Muhammad+ _miskin_, _Duldai Barlas_, son of Hafiz--captured
       by Babur's men (903) 72.

   +Muhammad Muhsin+ _Bai-qara_, see Kupuk.

   +Muhammad Muqim Beg+ _Arghun_, son of Zu'n-nun--takes possession
       of Kabul (908) 195 n. 3;
     loses it to Babur (910) 198, 199, 227, 246 n. 3;
     loses Qalat-i-ghilzai to him (911) 248-9;
     seeks his co-operation against Shaibani (913) 330;
     withdraws and fails in etiquette 331-2;
     opposed to Babur at Qandahar 333-7;
     flees in defeat 339.

   Khwaja +Muhammad Muqim+ _Herawi_, father of Nizamu'd-din Ahmad the
       historian-- -> mentioned 691 n. 1, -> 692;
     -> his story of a plan to supersede Humayun as Padshah
         in 937 AH. 703;
     discussion of it 704-7;
     its incredibility as told 704-5.

   +Muhammad Mumin+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son
       of Badi'u'z-zaman--Astarabad claimed for him (902) 69;
     defeated by an uncle 71 (where _delete_ the _'ain_ from his name);
     his murder attributed to Khadija Begim 268.

   Shaikh +Muhammad+ _Musalman_, ancestor of the Farmuli Shaikh-zadas--his
       tomb and descendants 220.

   Sultan +Muhammad Muzaffar+ _Gujrati_, _Tank Rajput_--particulars 481-2;
     his death 481;
     his sons Sikandar Shah and Bahadur Khan _q.v._;
     [d. 932 AH.-1526 AD.].

   +Muhammad+ _Nuhani_, see Bihar Khan.

   Mulla +Muhammad+ _Parghari_--loquacious (932) 453.

   +Muhammad-i-qasim+ _Barlas_--comes accidentally on Babur (925) 417.

   +Muhammad-i-qasim Mirza+ _Arlat_, son of Abu'l-qasim
       (H.S. iii, 327)--his Bai-qara wife and their child 265;
     his sons (?) Babur and Murad _q.v._

   +Muhammad-i-qasim Mirza+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, son of Husain
       and Papa--parentage 265.

   +Muhammad-i-qasim+ _Nabira_, grandson of Muhammad _Sighal_--made
       prisoner when opposing Babur (903) 72.

   +Muhammad-i-qasim+ _Qibchaq Turk_, son of Baqi _Chaghaniani_--leaves
       his family in Ajar (910) 191;
     father (?) of Ahmad-i-qasim _q.v._

   +Muhammad-quli+ _quchin_--Mir Shah _quchin_--helps Bai-sunghar's escape
       from Samarkand (901) 62;
     with Babur at Samarkand and wounded (902) 68;
     stays with him at a crisis (903) 91;
     captured (904)
       and released by Tambal (905) 119;
     in the van at Sar-i-pul (Khwaja Kardzan) (906) 139;
     besieged in Samarkand 142-144;
     with Babur when surprised by Tambal (908) 163;
     in the left wing at Qandahar (913) 334;
     in a raid (925) 403.

   +Muhammad+ _qurchi_, retainer of Khusrau Shah--rises against the Auzbeg
       occupation of Badakhshan (910) 242;
     expels Nasir _Miran-shahi_ (912) 321;
     keeping up his head (913) 340.

     Ustad +Muhammad+ _sabz-bana_--his son Bana'i _q.v._

   Maulana +Muhammad Sadru'd-din+ _Andijani_--his six sons' service
       to Babur 370 n. 2;
     his sons Khwajaka Mulla-i-sadr, Kichik Khwaja, Khwaja Kalan _q.v._

   +Muhammad Salih Mirza+ _Khwarizmi_, author of the _Shaibani-nama_--in
        Khwaja Yahya's service[2912] and waits on Babur (901) 64;
     leaves Samarkand with the Tarkhans (905) 121;
     enters Shaibani's service 65 n. 3;
     on Shaibani's service (910) 196 n. 5;
     couplets of his quoted by Babur 120-1, 448;
     [d. 941 AH.-1534-5 AD.].

   Ustad Shah +Muhammad+ _sang-tarash_--cuts an inscription (913) 343;
     receives orders for work (933) 585, 606, (935) 642.

   +Muhammad Shah+ _Khilji Turk_, son of Nasiru'd-din of Malwa--takes
       Chanderi and seeks Ibrahim _Ludi's_ protection (916) 593;
     his young son Ahmad _q.v._;
     [d. 931 AH.-1524 AD.?].

   +Muhammad Shah Padshah+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_--his
       change of name for an orange 511 n. 4;
     [d. 1161 AH.-1748 AD.].

   +Muhammad+ _Shaibani_, see Shaibani.

   Shaikh +Muhammad-i Shaikh Bhakari+ (?)--on service (933) 382.

   Shah +Muhammad Shaikh-zada+ _Farmuli Afghan_, son of Ma'ruf--leaves his
       Afghan associates (934) 598 (no name here);
     favoured by Babur 603, 675;
     compelled to act with Biban and Bayazid (935) 675;
     writes dutifully to Babur _ib._;
     waits on 'Askari and Babur _ib._ and 679.

   +Muhammad Sharif+ _munajjim_ (astrologer)--comes to Kabul (925) 399
       and to Agra (933) 551;
     augurs defeat at Kanwa 551, 576;
     offers congratulations on victory, blamed and banished with
       a gift 576.

   Sultan +Muhammad+ _Sighal_, _Chaghatai_--his descendants
       Muhammad-i-qasim and Hasan _q.v._
     (Cf. 66 n. 4 and H.S. lith. ed. iii, 275 for tribe and title resp.).

   +Muhammad Sultan+ _bakhshi_--left behind to catch pheasants (925) 404;
     in a night-attack on Ibrahim's camp (932) 471;
     in the left wing at Panipat 472;
     has custody of the cook who poisoned Babur (933) 542;
     staff-officers at Kanwa 568;
     host to Babur (935) 629;
     introduces a Kabul messenger 644;
     brings news of Mahmud _Ludi_ 653-4;
     writes that Babur's family is on its way from Kabul 657;
     waits on Babur 606;
     his servant Shah Qasim _q.v._

   Sultan +Muhammad Sultan+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_--Sultanim
       and Khanika--eldest son of The Khan (Mahmud)--sent to help Babur
      (903) 92;
     his guardian and he oppose Babur (905) 116;
     his part in acclaiming the standards (907) 155;
     goes out to meet his uncle Ahmad (Alacha Khan) (908) 159;
     -> murdered 350;
     [d. 914 AH.-1508 AD.].

   +Muhammad Sultan-i-jahangir Mirza+ _Jahangiri Timurid_,
       _Barlas Turk_--Samarkand given to him by his grandfather Timur 85;
     his college 78.

   +Muhammad Sultan Mirza+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of Wais
       and Sultanim--particulars 265;
     waits on Babur at Kalanur (932) 458;
     on Babur's service 468, 471, 475, 530, 534, (933) 545, 548, 582,
       (934) 589, (935) 682;
     in the left wing at Panipat (932) 472
       and at Kanwa (933) 567, 570;
     gifts to him 527;
     given Qanuj 582;
     joins Babur (935) 651;
     in the battle of the Ghogra 671, 672, 674;
     -> mentioned 706 (where wrongly classed with half-Timurids);
     once owner of the Elphinstone Codex 706 n. 3.

   Beg +Muhammad+ _ta'alluqchi_--conveys gifts to Humayun (Muh. 934)
       and returns (Rabi'I, 935) 621;
     Babur complains of his detention.

   +Muhammad Tahir+--captured (903) 74.

   Muhammad +Timur Sultan+ _Auzbeg-Shaiban_, _Chingiz-khanid_, son of
       Shaibani--at Samarkand (906) 128;
     at Sar-i-pul (Khwaja Kardzan) 139;
     defeats and kills two Bai-qara Mirzas (913) 263, 329-30;
     leaves Samarkand on Babur's approach (917) 354;
     at Ghaj-davan (918) 360;
     his marriages with captives 24, 36, 328 n. 1.

   Mulla +Muhammad+ _talib-mu'ammai_--an enigmatist of Husain
       _Bai-qara's_ Court--particulars 201 n. 7[2913];
     a couplet of his quoted 201-2;
     [d. 918 AH.-1512 AD.].

   Pahlawan Haji +Muhammad+ _tufang-andazi_--receives gifts (935) 633.

   Mulla +Muhammad+ _Turkistani_, retainer of Khusrau Shah--makes Qunduz
       safe for Shaibani Khan (910) 192.

   +Muhammad-i-'ubaidu'l-lah+, son of Ahrari, see Khwaja Khwaja.

   Sultan +Muhammad Wais+--waits on Babur (902) 66;
     runs away and is suspected (907) 156;
     serving Babur at Akhsi (908) 174;
     his retainer Kichik 'Ali _q.v._

   +Muhammad Wali+ Beg--particulars 277;
     on Husain Bai-qara's service (901) 57, (902) 70, (903) 94.

   +Muhammad-i-yusuf+ _Aughlaqchi_, elder son of Yusuf--waits on Babur
       (905) 125.

   Mir +Muhammad-i-yusuf+--particulars 285;
     waits on Babur in Herat (912) 285;
     Shaibani instructs him in exposition (913) 329.

   +Muhammad+ _Zaitun_[2914]--opposing Babur (932) 523;
     written to and makes false excuse 529, 530;
     waits on Babur (933) 540;
     sent out of the way before Kanwa 547.

   Khwaja +Muhammad Zakariya+,[2915] son of Yahya--murdered 128;
     [906 AH.-1500 AD.].

   +Muhammad-i-zaman Mirza+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, grandson
       and last surviving heir of Husain--particulars 261, 269 n. 6, 279;
     spared by Shaibani 263;
     his wanderings and association with Khwand-amir 364-5, 463 n. 3;
     sent to Babur and married to his daughter Ma'suma-sultan (923-4) 365;
     in Balkh 365, 522;
     dutiful letters and tribute sent by him to Babur (925) 385, 402,
       -> 427, -> (926-932) 428;
     with Babur (935) 606, 631, 639, 659;
     objects to the Bihar command 661-2;
     does homage for it and is given _insignia_ of royalty 662, -> 706;
     starts for Bihar but is recalled 663, 664;
     in the battle of the Ghogra 668, 669, 671;
     -> given Junpur 682;
     pursues Biban and Bayazid 682;
     grounds for surmising in Babur the intention to leave him as ruler
       in Hindustan 705-7;
     -> of his later uprisings against Humayun 714 n. 1;
     [ddrowned at Chausa 946 AH.-1539 AD.].

   +Muhibb-i-'ali Khan+ _Barlas Turk_, son of Khalifa-- -> marries Nahid
       Begim (930) 443;
     in a night-attack (932) 471;
     in the left centre at Panipat 472, 473
       and at Kanwa (933) 565;
     unhorsed in 'Abdu'l-'aziz' discomfiture 549-50;
     on service (934) 601.

   +Muhibb-i-'ali+ _qurchi_--on Khusrau Shah's service (901) 60, (902) 71;
     joins Babur (910) 188;
     Babur's praise of him (912) 307, 308;
     loyal 313, (914) 346;
     in the van at Qandahar (913) 335;
     collector of an impost (925) 384;
     at Hisar-firuza (932) 465-6;
     at an entertainment 410.

   +Muhibb-sultan+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter
       of Mahmud--particulars 48, 49.

   Saqi +Muhsin+--wrestles (935) 660.

   +Muhsin+ _Duldai Barlas_--at Chanderi (934) 590.

   +Muinu'd-din al Zamji+--omitted (or lost) from Babur's list of Herat
       celebrities 283 n. 1.

   +Mujahid Khan+ _Multani_--on Babur's service (933) 540.

   The +Mulla+, see 'Abdu'r-rahman _Jami_.

   +Mulla Baba+ _Farkati_--brings Babur news of Shaibani (913) 343.

   +Mulla Bihishti+--conveys gifts to Hind-al (935) 642.

   +Mulla Baba+ _Pashaghari_, _Chaghatai_--comes into one of Babur's
       dreams (906) 132;
     at Sar-i-pul 141;
     envoy for Babur to Khusrau Shah (910) 188;
     loyal (912) 313, (914) 346;
     -> disloyal in Ghazni (921) 363;
     deserts Humayun (932) 545;
     joins the Auzbegs;
     his proceedings 546;
     his brother Baba Shaikh _q.v._;
     his Kabul garden 315.

   +Mulla Hijri+, a poet--waits on Babur (907) 153.

   +Mulla Kabir+--his devious route to wait on Babur (925) 399.

   +Mulla Khwajaka+--prescribes for Babur (925) 399 (where read
       Khwajaka).

   +Mulla Khwaja-i Sayyid Ata+--his Bai-qara wife 265-6.

   +Mulla Tabrizi+--conveys gifts (935) 642.

   +Mulla Taghai+--envoy to Babur of Abu-sa'id _Auzbeg_ (935) 631, 632,
       641.

   +Mumin+--suspected of the death of Nuyan Kukuldash (907) 151-2.

   +Mumin-i-'ali+ _tawachi_--conveys orders (932) 451;
     conveys the Kanwa Letter-of-victory to Kabul (933) 580.

   +Mumin Ataka+--out with Babur (925) 404;
     on service (932) 465, 534;
     in the left wing (_tulghuma_) at Kanwa (933) 568, 569;
     his brethren (935) 679.

   Khwaja +Munir+ _Aushi_--incites attack on Bukhara (902) 65.

   Sayyid +Murad+ _Aughlaqchi_[2916]--referred to as father of Yusuf 39
       and Hasan 279;
     [d. 874 AH.-1469-70 AD.].

   +Murad Beg+ _Bayandari Turkman_--his joining Husain _Bai-qara_
       (908) 280, 336.

   +Murad Mirza+ _Arlat_, son of Muhammad-i-qasim and Rabi'a-sultan
       _Miran-shahi_--his Bai-qara (?) marriage 266.[2917]

   +Murad+ _Qajar Turkman_, _qurchi_--'Iraqi envoy to Babur (935) 666,
       688, 689, n. 4.

   Mulla Khwaja +Murshid+ _'Iraqi_--envoy of Babur to Ibrahim _Ludi_
       (925) 385, -> 427 n. 3;
     made Diwan of Bihar (935) 661, 662.

   Mir +Murtaza+--particulars 284.

   +Musa Khwaja+--whispers of Mughul rebellion (914) 346.

   Malik +Musa+ _Dilah-zak (Dilazak) Afghan_--receives gifts (925) 394;
     brings tribute 409.

   +Musa Sultan+ _Farmuli_, son of Ma'ruf--waits on Babur (935) 685;
     in the battle of the Ghogra 669.

   +Mustafa Shaikh-zada+ _Farmuli Afghan_--on service for Ibrahim _Ludi_
       (932) 527;
     his brother Bayazid _q.v._;
     [d. 932 AH.-1525-6 AD.].

   +Mustafa+ _Rumi_, _tawachi_--his culverin-discharge at Panipat
       (932) 474;
     has carts made for defence at Kanwa (933) 550;
     at Kanwa 550, 568-9;
     at the Gangas bridge (934) 599;
     in the battle of the Ghogra (935) 668, 669, 670.

   +Mu'yad+--leading Darya-khanis for Babur (933) 582.

   Shah +Muzaffar+--particulars 291;
     his artist-training owed to Nawa'i 272.

   +Muzaffar+ _Barlas_--particulars 270-1.

   Sultan +Muzaffar+ _Gujrati_--his death and successor 534 (where for
        [Jumada II] "and" read 932);
     [d. 932 AH.-1526 AD.].

   +Muzaffar-i-husain Mirza+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son
       of Husain and Khadija--particulars 262, 268;
     serving under his father (901) 58, (902) 71;
     given Astarabad (902) 61, 69;
     made joint-ruler in Heri (911) 292-3;
     combines in action against Shaibani (912) 296-7
       and withdraws 301;
     fails in etiquette 297;
     in social relation with Babur 298, 299, 300, 302-3;
     plain speech to him from Qasim Beg 304;
     a false report of him in Kabul 313;
     irresolute in opposing Shaibani (913) 326;
     his army defeated 327;
     flees (to Astarabad) abandoning his family _ib._;
     his wife Khan-zada Khanim _q.v._

   Sultan +Muzaffar Shah+ _Habshi_, mentioned in illustration of a
       Bengal custom 483.


   Mirza Yar-i-ahmad +Najm Sani+, wazir of Isma'il _Safawi_--his killing
       Sohrab _Bai-qara_ 262;
     -> his commission to correct Babur (918) 355, 359;
     -> his massacre in Qarshi 360;
     -> slain at Ghaj-dawan 262 n. 4, 361;
     Babur's alleged failure to support him 361;
     his retainer Muhammad Jan _q.v._;
     [d. 918 AH.-1512 AD.].

   +Nadir Shah+ _Afsharid_--his birthplace (mod.) Qalat-i-nadiri 329
       n. 4;
     [d. 1160 AH.-1747 AD.].

   +Nahar+, son of Hasan Khan _Mewati_--released by Babur from capture
       (933) 545;
     returns to Court 578;
     escapes 581.

   Nahid Begim-- -> her marriage (930) 443.

   +Na'man Chuhra+--captured by Tambal (908) 168;
     at a wine-party (925) 385.

   Guru +Nanak Shah+--his relations with Daulat Khan _Yusuf-khail_ and
       traditionally with Babur 461 n. 3;
     [d. 946 AH.-1539 AD.].

   Napoleon-- -> his problem of creed in Egypt less difficult than that of
       Babur with Shi'a support 356.

   +Narpat Hara+ _Chauhan Rajput_--his force at Kanwa (933) 562.

   +Nasir Beg+--makes over Andijan to Babur (904) 103;
     counsels him (908) 165;
     captured by Tambal 168;
     his sons Dost-, Mirim-, and Shahim-i-nasir; his brother-in-law Auzun
       Hasan _q.v._

   +Nasir Khan+ _Nuhani Afghan_--particulars 659 n. 4;
     disaffected to Ibrahim _Ludi_ and unsubmissive to Babur (932) 523;
     discussion of his movements 530;
     assembles a force but flees before Babur's 533-4, 544;
     his son Farid _q.v._

   +Nasir Mirza+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of
       'Umar Shaikh--particulars 17;
     in Kasan (_aet._ 8) (899) 32;
     taken to his uncle Ahmad 32;
     meets Babur (908) 172, 178;
     at the capture of Kabul (910) 198, 199;
     Zurmut hostility 220;
     given Ningnahar 227;
     misconduct 229, 241-2;
     accepts an invitation to Badakhshan 242-3;
     has an imbroglio with Khusrau Shah 243;
     clans which had left him 255;
     defeats Auzbegs (912) 295;
     defeated by Badakhshis and goes to Babur 321;
     Babur's reflections on the situation 322;
     out with Babur (913) 324;
     in the van at Qandahar 335;
     his loot and command and beleaguerment in Qandahar 339-40;
     goes to Ghazni 343, 344;
     -> given Kabul (917) 363;
     -> returns it to Babur (920) 363;
     dies in Ghazni (921) 363;
     his sister Mihr-banu and wife Qara-guz _Bai-qara_ _q.v._;
     [d. 921 AH.-1515 AD.].

   Khwaja +Nasiru'd-din+ _Tusi_--his Astronomical Tables 79;
     [d. 672 AH.-1274 AD.].

   Sultan +Nasiru'd-din+ _Khilji Turk_, Sultan of Malwa--events following
       his death 593;
     his son Mahmud _q.v._;
     [d. 916 AH.-1510 AD.].

   +Nasrat Shah+ _Husain-shahi_, Sultan in Bengal--particulars 482-3;
     reported friendly to Babur (935) 628, 637;
     sends him an envoy 637;
     negociations with him 661, 664, 676;
     referred to as at peace with Babur 665;
     mentioned 667, 677, 679;
     his troops defeated on the Ghogra 671-4;
     peace made 676;
     [d. 939 AH.-1532 AD.].

   +Nasrat Shah+ _Tughluq Turk_--receives Dihli from Timur 481 n. 4.

   +Naurang Beg+-- -> punishes the Mundahirs (936) 700, 701.

   +Nau-roz+, brother of Muhammad-'ali _Jang-jang_--at Bajaur (925) 370.

   +Naukar Hindu+, see Tuka.

   +Nazar-i-'ali+ _Turk_--on Babur's service (925) 389;
     his relation Minuchihr _q.v._

   +Nazar Bahadur+--killed on Khusrau Shah's service 93, 94, 279;
     [d. 903 AH.-1497-8 AD.].

   +Nazar Bahadur+ _Auzbeg_--one of five champions worsted by Babur in
       single combat (914) 349 n. 1.

   Shah +Nazar+ _Turkman_--in the centre at Qandahar (913) 335;
     rebels (914) 345.

   +Ni'amat+ _Arghun_--his defeat 34.

   Mulla +Ni'amat+--killed in a surprise by Sanga 549;
     [d. 933 AH.-1527 AD.].

   Khwaja +Ni'amatu'l-lah+--his son Asafi 286 n. 2.

   +Nigarsi+, see Dankusi.

   +Nizam Khan+ _Biana'i_--not submissive to Babur (932) 523;
     receives letters and a quatrain from him 529;
     defeats Babur's troops (933) 538-9;
     waits on Babur 539;
     in the left wing at Kanwa 567;
     on service (935) 678.

   Khwaja +Nizamu'd-din Ahmad+, the author of the _[T.]abaqat-i-akbari_,
       son of Muhammad Muqim-- -> discussion of his story of the intended
       supersession of Babur's sons 702-8;
     [d. 1003 AH.-1594 AD.].

   Sayyid +Nizamu'd-din 'Ali Khalifa+ _Marghilani_, _Barlas Turk_
        son of Junaid--escapes from prison and death (900) 55;
     driven from Babur's presence (903) 90, (905) 119;
     defends Kabul (912) 313;
     mediates (914) 345;
     hears rumours of Mughul revolt 346;
     in the left centre at Bajaur (925) 369
       and at Panipat (932) 473;
     given charge of Ibrahim's corpse 474 n. 1;
     at Kanwa (933) 556, 558, 564-5;
     on service 384, 395, 666;
     communicates bad news at Chanderi (934) 594 and (935) 639;
     mediates for Rahim-dad 689;
     -> declines the Badakhshan government (936) 697;
     -> discussion of his plan to set Humayun aside (in Hindustan?)
          702-8;
     his seat at a feast 631;
     host to Babur 408;
     his sons Muhibb-i-'ali, Husamu'd-din-i-'ali, Hamza and daughter
       Gul-barg _q.v._

   Shaikh +Nizamu'd-din Auliya+--his tomb visited by Babur (932) 475;
     [d. 725 AH.-1325 AD.].

   +Nizamu'l-mulk+ _Khawafi_, Diwan in Heri--arrested and put
       to death 282;
     [d. 903 AH.-1497-8 AD.].

   Hazrat +Nuh+ (Noah)--his father Lam _q.v._

   +Nur Beg+ (perhaps Sayyid Nuru'd-din _Chaghaniani_ _infra)_--disobeys
       the Law, plays the lute (925) 395;
     joins Babur in an autumn garden 418;
     his brethren on service (932) 446;
     with Babur in the East (935) 653;
     in the battle of the Ghogra 673;
     sent to allay Rahim-dad's fears 688-9;
     his brother Shaham _q.v._

   Sayyid +Nuru'd-din+ _Chaghaniani_--Sayyid Amir--a son-in-law of Babur
       and father of Salima-sultan -> 713;
     perhaps Nur Beg _supra_.

   Shaikh +Nuru'd-din Beg+ _Turkistani_, _Qibchaq Turk_--grandfather,
       through a daughter, of Yunas _Chaghatai_ 19 (see T.R. trs. p. 64).

   +Nuru'l-lah+ _tamburchi_--his experience in an earthquake (911) 247.

   Sayyid +Nuyan Beg+ _Tirmizi_--particulars 273;
     his son Hasan-i-ya'qub _q.v._

   +Nuyan Kukuldash+ _Tirmizi_--makes a right guess (906) 131-2;
     on service against Shaibani 142;
     his sword sent as a gift to Tambal (907) 150;
     that sword wounds Babur's head (908) 151, 167, 396;
     his suspicious death 151-152;
     Babur's grief 152;
     Nuyan's uncle Haq-nazar _q.v._;
     [d. 907 AH.-1502 AD.].


   +Padmawati+, wife of Rana Sanga--in Rantanbhur (935) 612;
     mentioned 613 n. 1;
     her son Bikramajit and kinsman Asuk-mal _q.v._

   +Pahar Khan+ _Ludi_, see Bihar.

   +Pahar Mirza+, a father-in-law of Jahangir _Miran-shahi_--his daughter
       brings her son Pir-i-muhammad to Babur (913) 331.

   +Pahlawan+ _Audi_ (_Oudhi_)--wrestles (935) 683, 688.

   +Pahlawan+ _Lahori_, a boatman--wrestles (935) 656.

   +Papa Aghacha+, a mistress of Husain _Bai-qara_--particulars 266,
       268-9;
     her five sons and three daughters _ib._[2918]

   +Papa-aughuli+, of Babur's household--out with Babur (910) 234;
     at Qandahar (913) 335.

   +Parbat+ _Kakar_--conveys tribute to Babur (925) 391, 392, 393.

   +Pasha Begim+ _Baharlu_, _Aq-quiluq Turkman_, daughter of 'Ali-shukr
       Beg--particulars 49;
     her nephew Yar-'ali Balal _q.v._[2919]

   +Payanda-muhammad+ _Qiplan_--out with Babur (925) 404.

   +Payanda-sultan Begim+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter
       of Abu-sa'id and wife of Husain _Bai-qara_--particulars 263, 265,
       268;
     her son Haidar and her daughters _ib._;
     visited in Herat by Babur (912) 301;
     arranges a marriage for him 306;
     captured by Shaibani (913) 327.

   +Pietro della Valle+--an illustration drawn from his recorded
       morning-draught (1623 AD.) 395.

   Khwaja +Pir Ahmad+ _Khawafi_--his son 281.

   +Pir Budagh Sultan+, Khaqan in Desht Qibchaq (H.S. iii, 232)--his
       Bai-qara marriage 258 n. 2.

   Mir +Pir Darwesh+ _Hazar-aspi_--in charge of Balkh (857) 50;
     fights there _ib._

   +Piri Beg+ _Turkman_--joins Babur (913) 336;
     particulars Author's Note, 336.

   +Pir Kanu+ of Sakhi-sarwar--Babur halts at his tomb (910) 238.

   +Pir Muhammad+ _Ailchi-bugha_, _quchin_--particulars 50 and nn.;
     drowned 48 n. 4, 50;
     [895 AH.-1490 AD.].

   +Pir Muhammad+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_,_ Barlas Turk_, son of
       Jahangir--brought by his widowed mother to Babur (913) 331.

   +Pir-quli+ _Sistani_--in the right wing at Panipat (932) 472, and at
       Kanwa (933) 566;
     on service (932) 530.

   +Pir Sultan+ _Pashai_--one of Babur's guides (912) 308.

   Prester John, Wang Khan [T.R. trs. 16], Ong Khan [Abu'l-ghazi,
       Desmaisons' trs. p. 55]--his title 23 n. 3.

   +Pulad Sultan+ _Auzbeg-Shaiban Chingiz-khanid_--son of Kuchum--Babur
       sends him his earliest-mentioned Diwan (925) 402, 632 n. 3;
     at Jam (934) 622;
     an envoy goes from him to Babur (935) 631, 632, 641.

   +Puran+ (Allah-birdi or Allah-quli)--out with Babur (910) 234; wounded
       (913) 342;
     his father-in-law Qasim _quchin_ _q.v._


   +Qabil+ (Cain)--Babur goes alone to his tomb (925) 415.

   +Qadir-birdi+ _Ghaini_--spoken to by Babur when in hiding (908) 180-1.

   +Qaitmas+ _Turkman_, retainer of Jahangir--drowned (910) 237.[2920]

   +Qalandar+ _piada_--on Babur's service (932) 529.

   +Qambar-i-'ali+ _Arghun_--on Babur's service (935) 688.

   +Qambar-i-'ali Beg+--mobilizes the Hindustan army by Abu-sa'id's order
       (873?) 46;
     expelled from Khurasan with Mahmu _Miran-shahi_ 47.

   +Qambar-i-'ali Beg+ _quchin_, son of Qasim--races with Babur (?)
       (907) 147;
     wounded, brings Babur a message (908) 174;
     one of the eight in flight from Akhsi 177;
     gives Babur his horse 177-8;
     beats down snow for a road (912) 308-9;
     fights rebels in Kabul 315;
     at Qandahar (913) 334;
     wounded 336;
     hurries from Qunduz against rebels in Ghazni (921) 364;
     brings Babur a letter from Balkh (?) (925) 385.

   +Qambar-i-'ali Be+g _Silakh_, _Mughul_--particulars 28;
     his inconvenient absence (904) 106;
     recalled (905) 108;
     goes away 110;
     returns 112;
     in the van at Khuban 113;
     goes away 115;
     returns and is ill-tempered 117;
     his districts 115, 124;
     his ill-timed pacificism 118;
     his misconduct 123;
     goes to Tambal, made prisoner, escapes to Babur 124;
     on Babur's service (906) 130, 131;
     at Sar-i-pul 138, 139;
     sends his family out of Samarkand 141;
     ? races with Babur (907) 147;
     ? leaves Babur in Dikh-kat 150 n. 3;
     conspires against Tambal and goes to The Khan (Mahmud) 154;
     serves Babur against Tambal (908) 161, 162, 165, 166;
     counsels Babur distastefully and flees 168, 170;
     talks to him of peace with Tambal 173;
     made prisoner in Akhsi against Babur's wish 174;
     leaves Khusrau Shah for Babur (910) 189;
     dismissed by Babur and why 192, 532 n. 1;
     his son 'Abdu'-shukur _q.v._

   +Qambar Bi+ _Auzbeg_--blamed by Shaibani for three murders (906) 128;
     on service for him (910) 242, 244;
     defeated by Tahmasp _Safawi's_ men (934) 622.

   +Qara Ahmad+ _yurunchi_--Babur's messenger to the Kabul begs (912) 314.

   +Qara Barlas+--leaves Samarkand with the Tarkhans (905) 121;
     fights for Babur at Sar-i-pul (906) 139;
     besieged and holds out to the end 143, 144.

   Sayyid +Qara Beg+ _Kohbur Chaghatai_--remains with Babur at a crisis
       (903) 91;
     invited into Akhsi (for Babur) (904) 101;
     escapes after defeat 106;
     at Khuban (905) 113;
     released 119[2921];
     his (?) hasty retreat to entrenchments (906) 138, 232 n. 4;
     his son 'Abdu'l-qadus _q.v._

   +Qara Bilut+--surrenders Qalat-i-ghilzai to Babur (911) 248-9.

   +Qaracha Khan+--punished for disobedience (925) 390-1;
     on service (934) 602, (935) 638;
     his messenger with news of Mahim's journey 650, 659.

   +Qara-guz Begim+ _Arlat_--her marriage with Nasir _Miran-shahi_ 265.

   +Qara-guz Begim+, see (1) Makhduma, (2) Rabi'a-sultan.

    +Qara-quzi+--on Babur's service (932) 471;
     in the left-wing [_tulghuma_] at Panipat 473.

   +Qarlughach Bakhshi+ kills Mughul Beg's son (904) 102.

   +Qashqa Mahmud+ (or Qashqa), Beg of the Chiras _tuman_ of Mughuls--sent
       to help Babur (906) 138;
     quarrels with a Begchik for the military post of honour (907) 155.
     (He may be "Baba Qashqa" _q.v._)

   Mulla +Qasim+--building work given to him (935) 642.

   Sayyid +Qasim+ (p. 96), see Sayyid Kamal.

   +Qasim-i-'ajab Beg+--remains with Babur at a crisis (903) 91;
     promoted to beg's rank (904) 104;
     captured by Tambal's men (905) 115-6;
     released 119.

   +Qasim-i-'ali+ _tariyaki_--musician at entertainments (925) 385, 387,
       388.

   +Qasim Beg+ _quchin_--particulars 26;
     supports Babur (899) 30, (900) 43;
     his appointments 43, 44 (where delete Sayyid as his title);
     punishes misconducted Mughuls (902) 66-7, 153 and has to leave
       Babur (907) 27, 67;
     on missions (903) 90, (904) 100, 101;
     remains with Babur at a crisis (903) 91;
     defeated by Mughuls (904) 105-6;
     in the centre at Khuban (905) 113;
     banished from Andijan by 'Ali-dost 119;
     rejoins Babur for Samarkand 123, (906) 130;
     suspects Bana'i 136;
     in the centre at Sar-i-pul 139;
     defending Samarkand 141, 142, 143, 144;
     races with Babur (907) 147;
     advises a tactful gift 150;
     out with Babur (910) 234;
     rewarded (911) 252;
     goes with a punitive force to Nigr-au 253;
     a saying of his twisted for ill 254;
     defeats Auzbegs (912) 295;
     insists in Herat on ceremony due to Babur 298;
     angered by Babur's being pressed to drink wine 304;
     mistaken as to a route 308-9;
     mistakenly compassionate 313;
     allowed to keep his Fifth of spoil (913) 324;
     in the left wing at Qandahar 334, 335;
     wounded 336;
     retainers allotted to him 339;
     his counsel 339-40;
     mediates for suspects (914) 345;
     waits on Babur returned from Hindustan (925) 395;
     mediates for Tramontane clans to leave Kabul 402;
     Babur breaks fast at his house 408;
     his sons Hamza, Tingri-birdi, Qambar-i-'ali _q.v._;
     his ill-conducted nephew 414;
     a servant 313;
     a father-in-law Banda-i-'ali _q.v._;
     [d. 928 AH.-1522 AD.].

   +Qasim+ _Duldai_, _Barlas Turk_--serving Bai-sunghar _Miran-shahi_
       (902) 65;
     joins Babur 66.

   +Qasim-i-husain+ _Auzbeg-Shaiban_, son of Qasim and 'Ayisha-sultan
       _Bai-qara_--particulars 267, 298;
     joins Babur (933) 550;
     at Kanwa 556, 559;
     receives Badaun 582;
     on service 582, (934) 589, (935) 682;
     in the battle of the Ghogra (935) 669;
     mentioned 631 n. 4, -> 706.

   Sayyid +Qasim+ _Jalair_--wins the Champion's Portion at Asfara
       (900) 53;
     takes it at Shahrukhiya 53;
     stays with Babur at a crisis (903) 91;
     joins him for Samarkand (905) 123-4;
     at Sar-i-pul (Khwaja Kardzan) (906) 139;
     his strange doings in Pap (908) 171;
     his unseasonable arrival in Akhsi 174;
     defeats an Auzbeg raider (910) 195;
     out with Babur 234, (925) 403;
     drunk 415;
     Babur pays him a consolation-visit 418;
     a party in his country-house (926) 420;
     assigned to reinforce Khwaja Kalan in Kabul (935) 647.

   +Qasim Khan+ _Qazzaq_, _Juji Chingiz-khanid_--his marriage with
       Sultan-nigar _Chaghatai_ 23;
     his good administration 23-4;
     [d. 924 AH.-1518 AD.].

   +Qasim+ _Khitka (?) Arghun_, (var. _Jangeh_)--in Akhsi (908) 171.

   +Qasim Khwaja+--succeeds in his brother Yakka's appointments (935) 674;
     on service 682.

   +Qasim Kukuldash+--at a household party (906) 131 (his name is omitted
       from the Hai. MS. f. 83 and from my text);
     helps Babur at his mother's burial (911) 246;
     at Qandahar (913) 335;
     his Arghun marriage 342, 199 n. 1, -> 443.

   +Qasim Mir-akhwur+--stays with Babur at a crisis (903) 91;
     on service (933) 548.

   Malik +Qasim+ _Mughul_, brother (p. 568) of Baba Qashqa--in the
       right-wing [_tulghuma_] at Panipat (932) 473, and at Kanwa
       (933) 568;
     on service with his brethren (932) 528, (933) 558, 582, (934) 589;
     his good service near Qanuj and his death 599;
     his kinsmen, see _s.n._ Baba Qashqa;
     [d. 934 AH.-1528 AD.].

   Shah +Qasim+ _piada_--sent on a second mission to Babur's kinsfolk
       in Khurasan (935) 617.

   +Qasim+ _Sambhali_--not submissive to Babur (932) 523;
     surrenders 528, 529;
     sent out of the way before Kanwa (933) 547 (where the Hai. MS. adds
       "Beg", by clerical? error).

   +Qasim Sultan+ _Auzbeg-Shaiban Chingiz-khanid_--his Bai-qara
       marriage 267;
     at a reception (912) 298;
     his son Qasim-i-husain _q.v._

   +Qataq Begim+, wife of Ahmad _Miran-shahi_--particulars 36;
     of Ahmad's escape from her dominance 36 n. 1.

   +Qayyam Beg+--Aurdu (Urdu) Shah--out with Babur (925) 403;
     waits on Babur as Governor of Ningnahar (926) 421;
     joins him in Hindustan (933) 550 (here Qawwam Aurdu-shah);
     at Kanwa 556, 569.

   +Qazi Bihzadi+--Babur forbids unlawful drinks in his house (925) 398.

   +Qazi Ghulam+--escapes death by pretending to be a slave (904) 102.

   +Qazi Jia+--waits on Babur (932) 527;
     on service 530, (933) 544, (935) 639;
     joins Babur 667;
     on service 668, 682.

   +Qazi of Kabul+--waits on Babur (925) 395.

   +Qazi of Samana+-- -> complains of Mundahir attack (936) 693, 700.

   +Qismatai Mirza+--on Babur's service in Hindustan (932) 474, (933) 545,
       546-7, 548;
     his untimely praise of the Rajput army 548, 550.

   +Qilka+ _Kashghari_--escapes death (904) 102.

   +Qizil+ _tawachi_--messenger of Shah Beg _Arghun_ to Babur (925) 395.

   +Qublai Khan+, great-grandson of Chingiz Khan--his building at Qarshi
       84 n. 2;
     [d. 693 AH.-1294 AD.].

   +Quch Beg+ (Quj), son of Ahmad _qarawal_--in the left wing at Khuban
       (905) 113;
     his courage at Bishkharan 118;
     leaves Babur for Hisar (906) 129;
     ? reprieved at Qasim _quchin_'s request (914) 345;
     on Babur's service (925) 374, (925) 384;
     at Parhala 390;
     comes on summons to Kabul 409;
     referred to as dead (933) 565;
     his brother Tardi Beg _q.v._

   +Quch+ _Arghun_--allotted in Qalat to Qasim _quchin_ (913) 339.

   +Quch Beg+ _Kohbur Chaghatai_, son of Haidar-i-qasim--at Sar-i-pul
       (906) 139;
     in Samarkand besieged 142, 143, 144.

   +Qul-aruk+--drowned in the Sind-water (910) 237.

   +Qul-bayazid+ _bakawal_--particulars 237;
     swims the Sind-water (910) 237;
     at Qandahar (913) 335, 338;
     his son Tizak _q.v._;
     his tomb near Kabul 198.

   +Quli Beg+ _Arghun_--known as attached to Babur (913) 337;
     returns from an embassy to Kashghar (925) 415;
     his brother Ahmad-'ali Tarkhan _q.v._

   +Qulij Bahadur+ _Auzbeg_--mentioned in Tahmasp _Safawi_'s account
       of Jam (935) 636 n. 2.

   Mirza +Quli Kukuldash+, see Mirza-quli.

   +Quli-muhammad+ _Bughda quchin_--particulars 40.

   Ustad +Qul-muhammad+ _'Audi_--particulars 291;
     his musical training owed to Nawa'i 272.

   +Qul-nachaq+--holding Balkh for the Bai-qaras (912) 294, 296;
     surrenders it to Shaibani 300.

   +Qul-nazar+ of Taghai Beg--sallies out from Samarkand (906) 142;
     does well 144.

   +Qurban+ _Chirkhi_--sent into Bhira (925) 381;
     a false rumour about him as invited into Balkh (935) 625;
     gifts to his
     servants 633;
     in the battle of the Ghogra 669;
     on service 678.

   +Qusam ibn 'Abbas+, one of the Companions--his tomb at Samarkand 75.

   +Qusum-nai (?)+--on service (932) 534.

   +Qutb Khan+ _Sarwani_--not submissive to Babur (932) 523;
     Mahdi Khwaja sent against him in Etawa 530;
     takes Chandwar (933) 557;
     abandons both places 579, 582;
     defeated 587.

   Khwaja +Qutbu'd-din+ _Aushi_ (_Ushi_)--his birthplace in Farghana
       475 n. 6;
     Babur visits his tomb in Dihli (932) 475;
     [d. 633 AH.-1235 AD.].

   +Qutluq Khwaja Kukuldash+--with Babur in Samarkand (906) 143, 144;
     host to Babur (925) 398, 407;
     held up as an example 406.

   +Qutluq-muhammad Kukuldash+, foster-brother of Daulat-sultan
       Khanim--brings Babur letters from Kashghar (925) 409 (where for
       "Daulat" read Qutluq).

   +Qutluq-nigar Khanim+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_, mother
       of Babur--particulars 21;
     mentioned 17, 19;
     in Andijan (900) 43;
     entreats her son's help (903) 88, 89;
     sent to join him in Khujand 92, and in Aura-tipa (905) 136;
     her Mughuls rebel (904) 105;
     with Babur in Samarkand (906) 136;
     leaves the town with him (907) 147;
     hears of a sister's death 148-9;
     goes to her own family in Tashkint 149;
     her dangerous illness _ib._;
     her safety leaves Babur free (908) 157, 158;
     -> with him in Sukh 184;
     uses his tent in the exodus from Farghana (910) 188;
     left in Kahmard 189;
     crosses Hindu-kush and rejoins him in Kabul 197;
     her death (911) 21, 246;
     her treatment as a refugee in Tashkint (908) contrasted with that
       of her refugee-relations in Kabul (912) 318;
     her concern for her son's marriage affairs (905) 120, (910) 48;
     her old governess 148;
     [d. 911 AH.-1505 AD.].

   +Qutluq-qadam+ _qarawal_--out with Babur (910) 236-7;
     in the left-centre at Qandahar (913) 335;
     on service (925) 403, (932) 458, 460, 468, 471, 530;
     in the left wing at Panipat 472 and at Kanwa (933) 567, 570;
     on service 475;
     host to Babur (926) 424;
     his tomb and bridge near Kabul 198, 204;
     [d. 934 AH.-1528 AD.?].

   +Qutluq-sultan Begim+, daughter of Miran-shah son of Timur--wife
       of Husain _Qanjut_ 256 n. 5.


   +Rabi'a-sultan Begim+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_--Qara-guz
       Begim--daughter of Ahmad--particulars 13, 35.

   Sayyid +Rafi'u'd-din+ _Safawi_--Mulla Rafi'--mediates for Nizam Khan
       with Babur (933) 539;
     concocts tonic powders (935) 606;
     at a feast 631.

   Khwaja +Rahim-dad+, paternal-nephew of Mahdi Khwaja--receives
       and obtains possession of Gualiar (933) 539, 540, 547;
     his quarters and constructions there (935) 607, 610, 613;
     Babur sleeps in his flower-garden 612, 613;
     action against him as seditious 688-9, (936) 690;
     his son held as hostage and escapes (935) 688-9;
     -> Ibn Batuta's account of him 692 n. 1;
     -> no sequel of his rebellion mentioned in the _Akbar-nama_ 692.

   +Rahmat+ _piada_--conveys letters to Kabul (932) 466.

   +Raja of Kahlur+-- -> waits on Babur (936) 699.

   +Rajab-sultan Begim+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter
       of Mahmud--particulars 48, 49.

   +Ramzan+ _luli_--a musician at parties (925) 387, 388.

   +Rao+ _Sarwani_, see Daud.

   Sultan +Rashid Khan+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_, son of Sa'id
       and Makhtum _Qaluchi_ (T.R. trs. p. 187)--his Qazzaq marriage 23.

   Mr. Thomas +Rastel+--an illustration drawn from his morning-draught
       recorded [1623 AD.] 395.

   +Rana Ratan-si+--successor of his father Sanga in Chitor 613;
     mentioned in connection with the Khilji jewels _ib._;
     his younger brother Bikramajit _q.v._

   +Rauh-dam+--musician at entertainments (925) 385, 387, 388;
     in a raft-misadventure 407.

   +Rawu'i+ _Sarwani_ (Rao)--serving Babur (933) 538 (here read as Daud),
       (935) 682;
     host to Babur (934) 588.

   +Rinish+ (var. Zinish) _Auzbeg_--his defeat by Tahmasp _Safawi_
       (934) 618, 622 (where in n. 1 for "934" read 935 as the date
       of the battle of Jam);
     [d. 934 AH.-1528 AD.].

   A +Rumi+ prescribes for Babur (935) 657, 660.

   Raja _Rup-narain_--included in Babur's Revenue List 521.

   +Ruqaiya Agha+, wife of Badi'u'z-zaman _Bai-qara_--captured in Herat
       and married by Timur _Auzbeg_ 328.

   +Ruqaiya-sultan Begim+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter
       of 'Umar Shaikh--particulars 18, 19;
     [d_cir._ 935 AH.-1528 AD.].

   +Rustam-i-'ali+ _Turkman_--in the centre at Qandahar (913) 335;
     on service (925) 377, (933) 538;
     in the _tulghuma_ of the left-wing at Kanwa 568, 569.

   +Rustam Khan+--Ilias (p. 576)--captures Babur's commander at Kul (Koel)
       (933) 557, 576;
     captured and flayed alive 576.


   +Sa'adat-bakht Begim++--Begim Sultan+--_Bai-qara Timurid_,
       _Barlas Turk_, daughter of Husain--particulars 266-7.

   Nasiru'd-din +Sabuktigin+ _Ghaznawi Turk_--the humble status of his
       capital 217;
     a legend concerning him 219;
     his son Mahmud _q.v._;
     [d. 387 AH.-997 AD.].

   +Sadharan+ _Tank Rajput_--his acceptance of Islam 481 n. 5.

   Pahlawan +Sadiq+--made to wrestle (935) 650;
     forbidden as an antagonist 653;
     wrestles 688.

   Mulla +Sa'du'd-din Mas'ud+ _Taftazani_--a descendant of 283;
     [d. 792 AH.-1390 AD.].

   Sultan +Sa'id Khan+ _Ghazi_, _Chaghatai Chinqiz-khanid_, son of
       Ahmad--particulars 698 nn. 2, 3, 349;
     meets Babur (908) 159;
     stays with him in Kabul (914) 318, 349-50;
     receives Andijan from him (916) 318, 357;
     loyal to him 344 n. 2, -> 351-2;
     sends an envoy to him (917) 22;
     Haidar _Dughlat_ goes from Babur to Sa'id (918) 362;
     two kinswomen take refuge with him (923 and 924) 24 (where in n. 1
       _delete_ the second sentence);
     reported to have designs on Badakhshan (925) 412;
     an envoy to him returns 415;
     -> named as a principal actor between 926 and 932 AH. 427;
     writes and sends gifts to Babur (932) 446;
     -> invades Badakhshan (936) 695-6;
     -> gist of a letter from Babur to him 697-8;
     -> Babur moves menacingly for the North-west 698;
     his full-brother Khalil, his son Rashid, his wife Habiba, and
       _kukuldash_ Yangi Beg _q.v._;
     [d. 939 AH.-1533 AD.].

   +Sa'idliq Sa'd+ _Turkman_--defeated by Husain _Bai-qara_ (873?) 260.

   +Saif-i-'ali Beg+ _Baharlu Qara-quiluq Turkman_, father of Bairam
       Khan-i-khanan--particulars 91 n. 3.[2922]

   Maulana +Saifi+ _Bukhari_--'Aruzi--particulars 288;
     [d. 909 AH.-1503-4 AD.].

   +Saif Khan+ _Nuhani_, son of Darya Khan--deserts 'Alam Khan _Ludi_
       (932) 457.

   +Saifu'd-din Ahmad+, Shaikhu'l-islam in Herat--particulars 283;
     takes the keys of Herat to Shaibani (913) 328;
     his pupil Muhammad-i-yusuf _q.v._;
     killed by Shah Isma'il 283;
     [d. 916 AH.-1510 A.D.].

   Haji +Saifu'd-din Beg+, ? uncle of Timur--his descendant Wali Beg 272.

   +Sakma+ _Mughul_--rebels against Babur (914) 345.

   +Salahu'd-din+ (_Silhadi_)--particulars 562 n. 3, 614 n. 2;
     his force at Kanwa (933) 562;
     attack on him planned and abandoned (934) 598;
     Babur visits village near his birthplace (935) 614;
     mentioned 628 n. 2.

   +Saliha-sultan Begim+ _Miran-shahi_, daughter of Mahmud and Pasha,
       wife of Babur--(name not now in the Turki text) 47;
     -> the likelihood that she and "Dil-dar" were one 713 (where read
          Saliha).

   +Saliha-sultan+ _Miran-shahi_--Aq Begim--daughter of Ahmad
       and Qataq--particulars 35;
     gifts from her wedding reach Babur (900) 43.

   +Salima-sultan Begim+-- -> her parentage 713.

   Sultan +Salim+ _Rumi_--takes Badi'u-z-zaman _Bai-qara_, a captive,
       to Constantinople (920) 327 n. 5;
     -> defeats Isma'il _Safawi_ at Chaldiran (920) 443, 469;
     [d. 926 AH.-1520 AD.].

   +Samad+ _Minglighi_--wounded and dies 106;
     [d. 904 AH.-1499 AD.].

   Mehtar +Sambhal+, slave of Shah Beg _Arghun_--particulars 338 n. 2;
     captured at Qandahar and escapes (913) 338;
     -> Commander in Qandahar and revictuals it for Shah Beg 432.

   Sultan +Sanjar+ _Barlas Turk_, son of 'Abdu'l-lah--incites a Mughul
       revolt in Kabul (912) 313-17;
     spared on family grounds 317.

   Sultan +Sanjar Mirza+ _Mervi_--his daughter Bega Sultan Begim's
       Bai-qara marriage (_cir._ 860) 267.

   Rana +Sanga+ _Mewari_--particulars 483, 558 n. 2;
     his capture of Chanderi 593;
     proffers Babur co-operation against Ibrahim _Ludi_ (931?) 426, 529;
     fails him (932) 529;
     takes Kandar 530, 539;
     Babur's attack on him deferred 530-1
       and determined (933) 538;
     his strength and approach 544, 547;
     defeated at Kanwa 559-574;
     escapes 576;
     references to the battle 267, 533, 579, 582, 583, 599, 600, 630
       n. 4, 637, 663;
     his lands not invaded, on climatic grounds 577, 578;
     Babur's planned attack on him in Chitor frustrated (934) 598;
     his wife Padmawati and sons Ratan-si and Bikramajit _q.v._;
     his trusted man Medini Rao _q.v._;
     [d. 934 AH.-1528 AD.].[2923]

   +Sangur Khan+ _Janjuha_--waits on Babur (925) 383;
     on service 389, 419;
     killed in a sally from Biana 548;
     [d. 933 AH.-1527 AD.].

   Mir +Sar-i-barhana+, see Shamsu'd-din Muhammad.

   +Sarigh-bash Mirza+ _Itarachi_--sent by The Khan (Mahmud) to help Babur
       (908) 161, 170.

   Mulla +Sarsan+--Kamran's messenger and custodian of Ibrahim _Ludi's_
       son (933) 544.

   +Sar-u-pa+ _Gujur_--Babur's guide to Parhala (925) 389, 391.

   +Satrvi Kachi+--his force at Kanwa (933) 562.

   Sultan +Satuq-bughra Khan Ghazi Padshah+ (b. 384 AH.-994 AD.).--a
       surmised descendant 29 n. 8;
     his style Padshah 344 n. 2.

   +Sayyid Amir+, see Nuru'd-din _Chaghaniani_.

   +Sayyid Dakkani+--Shah Tahir _Khwandi Dakkani_--present at a feast
       (935) 631.[2924]

   +Sayyid Dakni+ _Shirazi_, or Rukni, or Zakni--receives honours
       and orders (935) 619;
     on his name and work _ib._ n. 2, 634 n. 1;
     (see _supra_).

   +Sayyidi Beg Taghai+, see Sherim Taghai.

   +Sayyidim 'Ali+ _darban_ (? Muhammad-'ali), son of Baba
       'Ali Beg--particulars 307;
     serving Khusrau Shah (901) 60-1;
     leads the Rusta-hazara to join Babur (910) 196;
     a follower punished 197;
     takes Bai-qara service (912) 307;
     drowned by Badi'u'z-zaman 307-8;
     [d_cir._ 913 AH.-1507 AD.].

   +Sayyid Mashhadi+ (var. Masnadi)--brings Babur news of Khwaja
       Rahimdad's sedition (935) 688.

   +Sayyid Mirza+ _Andikhudi_, ? brother of Apaq Begim--his two Bai-qara
       marriages 267.

   +Sayyid Rumi+--at a feast (935) 631.

   +Sayyid Tabib+ _Khurasani_--attends Babur's mother (911) 247.

   +Shad Begim+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_--particulars 263-4;
     her husband 'Adil Sultan _Auzbeg_ _q.v._

   +Shadi+, a reciter--his son Ghulam-i-shadi 292.

   +Shadi Khan+ _Kiwi Afghan_--fights and submits to Babur (910) 233.

   +Shadman+ _chuhra_--wrestles (935) 660.

   +Shah Baba+ _bildar_--entrusted with building work (935) 642.

   +Shah-baz+ _qalandar_--his tomb destroyed by Babur (925) 377.

   +Shah-baz+ _Qarluq_--serving Tambal (908) 170.

   +Shah Beg+ _Arghun_--Shuja' Beg--son of Zu'n-nun--his close association
       with his father 274;
     mentioned as with him in Qandahar (902) 71, (910) 198, 227;
     they give refuge to Badi'u'z-zaman _Bai-qara_ (902) 71, (913) 307;
     act with the Mirza (903) 94, 95;
     favoured by Husain _Bai-qara_ 264;
     his dominance _ib._;
     proffers and renounces co-operation with Babur against Shaibani
       (913) 330, 331-2;
     loses Qandahar to him 337-8;
     -> released from Safawi imprisonment by his slave Sambhal's devotion
         (917) 338 n. 2, 365;
     news of his taking Kahan reaches Babur (925) 395;
     his interpretation of Babur's reiterated attack on Qandahar 365,
       -> 427;
     other suggestions for the attack of 926 AH. 430;
     -> action of his checks an expedition into Hindustan (926) 428, 429,
          430;
     -> his position and political relations 429;
     Babur's campaign against Qandahar (926-928) 366, 430-436, App.
       J. xxxiv;
     -> final surrender to Babur (928) _ib._;
     -> his death 437, 443;
     his son Shah Hasan, brother Muhammad Muqim, slave Mehtar, commissary
       Qizil _q.v._;
     [d. 930 AH.-1524 AD.?].

   +Shah Begim+ _Badakhshi_, wife of Yunas Khan _Chaghatai_--particulars
       22-3;
     visited by Babur (903) 92, (907) 149, (908) 157;
     delays to accept his plans 158;
     meets her younger son Ahmad 159;
     -> ordered by Shaibani to stay in Tashkint 184;
     comes to Babur in Kabul (911) 246;
     disloyal (912) 317;
     his reflections on her conduct 318-9;
     goes to Badakhshan (913) 21, 35, 341;
     captured by Aba-bikr _Kashghari_;
     her sons Mahmud and Ahmad, her daughter Daulat-sultan, her nephew
       Sanjar _Barlas_;
     her grandsons Mirza Khan and Sa'id (and his brothers) _q.v._

   +Shah-i-gharib Mirza+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of Husain
       and Khadija--particulars 261, 268;
     his retainer Ahi the poet 289 n. 3;
     [d. 902 AH.-1496-7 AD.--H.S. lith. ed. iii, 260].

   +Shahi+ _qalandar_--plays the _ribab_ (925) 417.

   +Shahi+ _tamghachi_--appointed clerk (935) 629.

   +Shahim+ (Shah Muhammad?)--sent for news (932) 454;
     climbs into Chanderi (934) 595 (here _yuz-bashi_);
     his brother Nur Beg _q.v._

   +Shahim-i-nasir+--one of eight fugitives from Akhsi (908) 177.

   +Shah-jahan Padshah+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_-- -> 184;
     his imitation of Babur (1030) 298 n. 3;
     -> his work in Babur's burial-garden 710, App. V, lxxx;
     [d. 1076 AH.-1666 AD.].

   +Shah Muhammad+ _muhrdar_, son of Baba Qashqa--on Babur's service
       (925) 388, (935) 688;
     his kinsmen _see_ _s.n._ Baba Qashqa;
     [d. 958 AH.-1551 AD.].[2925]

   +Shah-quli+ _ghichaki_--a guitar-player--particulars 291.

   +Shah-quli+ _Kul-abi_--goes into Hisat (935) 640;
     his brother Wais _q.v._

   +Shah-quli+, ? servant of Div Sultan (p. 635)--sent to give Babur
       a report of the battle of Jam (935) 649;
     conveys from Babur an acceptance of excuse to Tahmasp _Safawi_ 649.

   +Shahrak+--conveys letters and a copy of Babur-nama writings
       (935) 652, 653.

   +Shahr-banu Begim+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter
       of Abu-sa'id--particulars 268;
     married to Husain _Bai-qara_ (_cir._ 873) and divorced
       (876) 21 n. 1, 268.

   +Shahr-banu Begim+ _Miran-shahi_, (_ut supra_), daughter
       of 'Umar Shaikh, wife of Junaid _Barlas_--particulars 18.

   +Shahrukh Mirza+ _Barlas Turk_, son of Timur--mentioned
       in a genealogy 14;
     ruling in Herat when Husain _Bai-qara_ was born there (842) 256;
     his wazir serves Husain (after 873) 281;
     [d. 850 AH.-1447 AD.].

   +Shahrukh-Sultan+ _Afshar Turk_--commands a reinforcement for Babur
       from Isma'il _Safawi_ (917) 354.

   +Shah Sufi+--does well in Samarkand (906) 144.

   +Shah Sultan Begim+ (? _Arghun_), wife of Abu-sa'id _Miran-shahi_
       and mother of 'Umar Shaikh--her parentage not stated 13 n. 5,[2926]
       45 n. 1;
     goes from Akhsi to Andijan when widowed (899) 32;
     a mediator (905) 113;
     her death announced (907) 149;
     [d. 906 AH.-1501 AD.].

   +Shah-suwar+ _Mughul_--fights in single combat (904) 106.

   +Shah Tahir+ _Khwandi Dakkani_, see Sayyid Dakkani.

   +Shah-zada+, ? Shah Hasan _Arghun_--(926) 417, 418.

   +Shah-zada+ _Mungiri_, son of Nasrat Shah--negociates with Babur
       (935) 676 (where the note reference "5" should follow Mungir).

   +Shaibak+ _piada_--brings news of Hind-al's birth (925) 385.

   A +Shaiban-Auzbeg Sultan's+ marriage 23.

   Muhammad +Shaibani Khan+--Shaibaq Khan[2927]--_Auzbeg-Shaiban
       Chingiz-khanid_--his relations with Hamza and Mahdi Sultans _q.v._;
     invited to help Bai-sunghar (903) 73;
     raids Shiraz 92;
     defeats Tarkhans in Dabusi (905) 40, 124, (906) 137;
     takes Bukhara 125;
     is given Samarkand by 'Ali _Miran-shahi_ 125;
     murders the Mirza (906) 128;
     his men murder Khwaja Yahya and two sons 128;
     loses Samarkand by Babur's surprise attack 131, 132, 134;
     Babur's comparison of this capture with Husain _Bai-qara's_
       of Herat 135;
     Babur's estimate of Shaibani's position 137-8;
     defeats Babur at Sar-i-pul (Khwaja Kardzan) 138-141;
     besieges Samarkand and effects its surrender (906) 142-7;
     receives an envoy from Husain _Bai-qara_ 145;
     crosses the frozen Saihun and raids Shahrukhiya 151;
     plunders Aura-tipa 152-3;
     referred to (908) 158, 168;
     invited into Farghana 172;
     defeats the Chaghatai Khans and Babur at Archian 18, -> 183;
     captures Andijan (909?) 192;
     beheads Wali _Qibchaq_ (910) 196;
     takes Khwarizin (911) 242, 255-6;
     co-operation against him invited by Husain _Bai-qara_ (910) 190,
       (911) 255;
     his men beaten in Badakhshan (911-2) 294-5;
     takes Balkh 300;
     his capture of Herat (913) 263, 275, 296-7, 325-330;
     besieges Nasir _Miran-shahi_ in Qandahar and retires 339-40, 343;
     a recognized menace to Kabul 21 n. 4, 340, 342;
     orders Sa'id _Chaghatai's_ death (914) 349;
     -> murders Chaghatai and Dughlat chiefs 350;
     war begun with Shah Isma'il (915) 350;
     defeated and killed at Merv 350;
     his wives Mihr-nigar _Chaghatai_, Khan-zada _Miran-shahi_,
       Zuhra _Auzbeg_ _q.v._;
     his sons Timur and Khurram _q.v._;
     Bana'i his retainer (906) 136;
     creates a Tarkhan 133;
     [d. 915 AH.-Dec. 1510 AD.].

   +Shaikhi+--receives gifts (935) 633.

   +Shaikhim Beg+, amir and poet of Husain _Bai-qara_--particulars 277,
       286;
     [d. 918 AH.-1512-3 AD.].

   +Shaikhim Mirza+ _Auzbeg_--holding Qarshi for his nephew
       'Ubaidu'l-lah (918) 360.

   +Shaikhim+ _mir-shikar_--loses one of Babur's good hawks (925) 394.

   +Shaikhi+ _nayi_, flautist in Husain _Bai-qara's_ Court--particulars
       291;
     owed his training to Nawa'i 272.

   Shaikh +Sharaf+ _Qara-baghi_--his arrest for sedition (935) 687-8.

   Shaikh +Sharafu'd-din+ _Muniri_--his father Shaikh Yahya _Chishti_ 666;
     his writings read aloud to Akbar 666 n. 7;
     [d. 782 AH.-1380 AD.].

   +Shami+ (Syrian)--deserts from Qandahar (913) 343.

   +Sher-afgan+, brother of Tardi and Quj Begs--on Babur's service
       (933) 538.

   +Sher-i-ahmad+--belittled as good company (935) 648.

   +Sherak Beg+ _Argun_ (var. Sher, Sherka)--serving Muqim _Arghun_
       (910) 195;
     defeated and takes service with Babur 196, 198;
     in the centre at Qandahar (913) 335.

   +Sher-i-'ali+ _Aughlan_,[2928] _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_--mentioned
       in Yunas Khan's genealogy 19.

   +Sher-i-'ali+ _chuhra_ (a brave?)--deserts Babur (906) 129;
     put to death under suspicion (911) 248.

   Mir +Sher Haji Beg+ _Kunji Mughul_--his daughter's marriage with Yunas
       Khan 20 (where for "'Ali-sher" read Sher Haji).

   +Sherim+ (Sher-i-muhammad?) _chuhra_, a brave?--defends Hisar (910) 244;
     killed at Qunduz _ib._;
     [d. 910 AH.-1505 AD.].

   +Sherim Taghai+ _Kunji Mughul_--Taghai Beg--maternal uncle of Babur's
       mother--supports Babur (899) 29, (903) 91, 98;
     captured by Tambal (905) 110;
     released 119;
     in Samarkand (906) 141, 143, 188;
     Babur's reflections on his conduct 141, 188;
     thinks of leaving Babur (910) 188;
     on his service 194, 197, 234;
     loses an index-finger 235;
     his post against rebels (912) 314;
     an opinion on game (_kiyik_) (913) 325;
     in the right wing at Qandahar (913) 334, 337;
     counsels a retreat to Badakhshan from Kabul 340;
     -> disloyal (916) 351;
     heads Mughul revolt in Ghazni (921) 363;
     defeated 364, 397;
     takes refuge with Babur 364;
     his son Tuqa _q.v._;
     his (and other) abbreviated names 29 n. 2.

   +Sherim Zikr Beg+--put to death in Kabul under 'Abdu'r-razzaq
       (909?) 195 n. 3.

   +Sher Khan+ _Ludi Afghan_, son of 'Alam Khan--on his father's service
       (932) 455.

   +Sher Khan Sur+ _Afghan_--Farid Khan--Sher Shah--favoured by Babur
       (934) 652;
     serving Mahmud _Ludi_ (935) 652;
     co-guardian of Jalal Khan _Nuhani_ with Dudu Bibi 652 n. 1, 664 n. 2;
     writes dutifully to Babur 659;
     his training, cognomen and one of his marriages 664 n. 2, 659 n. 4;
     his victory over Humayun (1540) 652 n. 3.

   +Sher Khan+ _Tarkalani_--host to Babur (926) 424.

   +Sher-quli+ _qarawal Mughul_--loyal to Babur (912) 315;
     at Qandahar (913) 333, 335;
     rebels (914) 345.

   Baba +Sher-zad+, _see_ Baba Sher-zad.

   Mulla +Shams+--very riotous (932) 453.

   Sultan +Shamsu'd-din+ _Ailtmish_[2929] (_Altamsh_) of the Slave
       dynasty in Dihli--his buildings in Gualiar 610, 611;
     [d. 633 AH.-1236 AD.].

   Sayyid +Shamsu'd-din Muhammad+--Mir Sar-i-barahna--particulars 280.

   +Shamsu'd-din Muhammad+--bearer of letters between Khwaja Kalan
       and Babur (935) 644, 645, 649.

   Maulana +Shihab+ _mu'ammai_--arrives in Agra from Herat (935) 605;
     invited in verse by Babur 683;
     [d. 942 AH.-1535 AD.].

   Khusrau's +Shihabu'd-din+--on Babur's service (935) 689, (936) 690.

   Shaikh +Shihabu'd-din+ _'Arab_--at a feast (935) 631.

   Mu'zzu'd-din +Shihabu'd-din Muhammad+ _Ghuri_--his capital Ghazni 217;
     mentioned as a conqueror of Hindustan 479;
     his position contrasted with Babur's 479-80, 481;
     [d. 602 AH.-1206 AD.].

   Shah +Sikandar+--on Babur's service (932-3) 546;
     sent to Bihar (935) 664.

   +Sikandar-i-Filkus+--Alexander of Macedon--Badakhshi chiefs claim
       of descent from him 22;
     a surmise that he founded Samarkand 75;
     his supposition that the Indus was the Nile a probable root of
       a geographical crux 206 n. 3;
     [d. 327 B.C.].

   Sultan +Sikandar Mirza+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, nephew
       of Husain--parentage 257;
     his wife Sultan-nizhad _q.v._;
     [d. 908 AH.-1502-3 AD.].

   Sultan +Sikandar+ _Ludi Afghan_, son of Buhlul--over-lord in Bhira
       (910) 382, 383;
     his treasure 470, exhausted (935) 617;
     his siege of Gualiar 477;
     his capture of Junpur and Dihli (881) 481, 571 n. 5;
     Babur visits his tomb (932) 476;
     his brother 'Alam Khan and sons Ibrahim and Mahmud _q.v._;
     -> his death and its date 427 and n. 3;
     [d. 923 AH.-1517 AD.].

   +Sikandar Shah+ _Gujrati_--his accession and murder 534-5 (where for
       "2nd" read 932);
     [d. 932 AH.-1526 AD.].

   +Siktu+ _Hindu_--father of Diwa _q.v._

   +Siunduk+ _Turkman_--his hands frost-bitten (912) 311;
     in the centre at Qandahar (913) 335;
     rebels against Babur (914) 355.

   +Siunjuk Sultan Khan+ _Auzbeg-Shaiban_, _Chingiz-khanid_,
       son of Abu'l-khair-- -> besieges Tashkint (918) 358, 396;
     his son Baraq at Jam (935) 622.

   +Sohrab Mirza+ _Bai-qara_, son of Abu-turab--particulars 262.

   The +Spanish Ambassadors+--the place of their first interview with
       Timur 78 n. 2.

   +Sulaiman+--offers his horse to a wounded man (908) 175.

   +Sulaiman Aqa+ _Turkman_--envoy of Tahmasp _Safawi_ to Babur
       (933) 540, 583;
     in the right wing at Kanwa 566.

   +Sulaiman Mirza+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of Mirza
       Khan (Wais)[2930]-- -> brought to Kabul on his father's death
       (927) 433 n. 1;
     in the right centre at Panipat (932) 472, and at Kanwa (933) 565;
     -> sent to govern Badakhshan (936) 697-8, 699;
     -> Babur's protective warning to Sa'id _Chaghatai_ 697-8 (here styled
          Shah Mirza);
     on his descent 698 nn. 2, 3;
     meets his rebel grandson Shahrukh (_cir._ 983) 191 n. 2;
     [d. 997 AH.-1589 AD.].

   Mian _Sulaiman Shaikh-zada_ _Farmuli Afghan_--reinforces 'Alam Khan
       _Ludi_ (932) 456;
     gives him 4 _laks_ 457;
     Babur dismounts at his Dihli home 476.

   Malik Shah +Sulaiman+ _Yusuf-zai Afghan_--murdered by Aulugh Beg
       _Kabuli_ App. K, xxxvi;
     his sons Mansur and Taus, his nephew Ahmad _q.v._

   +Sultan-bakht Begim+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter
       of Abu-sa'id--her daughter visited by Babur (935) 616.

   +Sultanim Begim+ _Miran-shahi_ (_ut supra_), daughter of Ahmad
       and Qataq--particulars 36.

   +Sultanim Begim+ _Bai-qara_ (_ut supra_), daughter of Husain
       and Chuli Begim--particulars 265;
     arrives in Kabul (925) 397;
     dies on her way to Agra (933) 265;
     her husbands Wais _Bai-qara_ and 'Abdu'l-baqi _Miran-shahi_,
       her son Muhammad
     Sultan Mirza and grandson Aulugh Mirza (265 n. 5) _q.v._;
     [d. 933 AH.-1527 AD.].

   +Sultan Malik+ _Kashghari_, _Duldai Barlas Turk_--his sons Hafiz
       Muhammad and Ahmad Haji Beg, his brother Jani Beg _q.v._

   +Sultan-nigar Khanim+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_, daughter of Yunas
       Khan and Shah Begim--particulars 23;
     long parted from a half sister (907) 149;
     meets her brother Ahmad (908) 159;
     mentioned in Babur's reflection on disloyal kinsfolk (912) 318;
     writes to him from Kashghar (932) 446 n. 2;
     her son Wais [Mirza Khan] and grandson Sulaiman _q.v._[2931];
     [d. 934 AH.-1527-8 AD.].

   +Sultan-nizhad Begim+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter
       of Husain and Papa--particulars 266;
     her husband Sikandar _Bai-qara_ _q.v._

   +Sultan-quli+ and +Sultan 'Ali+, see Baba-quli and Baba 'Ali.

   +Sultan-quli+ _chunaq_, _Mughul_--his fidelity (904)
       and treachery(?) (914 and 921) 105, 109 n. 5;
     falls into a pit outside Kabul (910) 198;
     does a bold deed 236;
     out with Babur (911) 252-3;
     rejoins Babur from Herat (913) 330-1;
     in the Mughul rebellion at Ghazni (921) 364 n. 1.

   Sultan +Suyurghatmish Mirza+ _Shah-rukhi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_,
       son of Shah-rukh--mentioned in his son Mas'ud's genealogy 382.


   +Taghai Beg+, see Sherim Taghai.

   +Taghai Shah+ _bakhshi_--put in charge of Shah Beg's treasury
       (913) 338.

   +Taham-tan+ _Turkman_--particulars 279;
     his grandson Muhammad-i-zaman _q.v._

   +Tahir Beg+ _Duldai Barlas Turk_, son of Hafiz-i-muhammad--joint
       governor of Mirza Khan (905) 122;
     feeds the famished Babur (907) 148.

   +Tahir+ _tibri_--finds Ibrahim _Ludi's_ body (932) 475;
     surprised by Rajputs (933) 549.

   Shah-zada[2932] +Tahmasp+ _Safawi 'Arab_, son of Isma'il-- -> mentioned
       as reigning from 930-932 AH. 427;
     Babur's envoy to him (930) returns with gifts (933) 540, 560 n. 2,
       538, -> 712;
     his campaigns against the Auzbegs (934) 618, (935) the battle
       of Jam 617 n. 3, 622-4 (where on p. 622 n. 1 read 935 for "934"),
       625 n. 4, 635-6;
     his own account of the battle 635-6;
     desires peace 639 n. 3;
     his envoys in Agra 630, 632;
     his friendship enjoined on Kamran 645;
     [d. 984 AH.-1576 AD.].

   +Taj Khan+ _Sarang-khani Afghan_--sends Babur news that Mahmud
       _Ludi's_ army has broken up (935) 654;
     waits on Babur 657;
     brings news which prevents hunting 658;
     sent on service 682;
     superseded in Chunar by Junaid _Barlas_ 683.

   +Taju'd-din Mahmud+ _Arghun_--holding Qalat for Muqim (913) 339;
     waits on Babur (925) 418.

     Sultan Ahmad +Tambal+ _Itarachi Mughul_--with Babur at Asfara
       (900) 53;
     wounded near Samarkand (902) 67;
     promoted (903) 86;
     deserts Babur under privation 86, 87;
     joins Auzun Hasan in supporting Jahangir in Farghana 87-8;
     induces The Khan (Mahmud) to withdraw support from Babur 91;
     his tyranny (904) 100-1;
     brings Jahangir against Babur in Marghinan 101;
     his men drubbed out of Akhsi and defeated at the ferry 101-2;
     loses Andijan 103;
     is joined by anxious Mughuls 105;
     takes Jahangir against Andijan and retires 106-7;
     Babur's campaign against him (905) 108-110, 112-5;
     defeated at Khuban 113;
     helped feebly by The Khan 115-6;
     opposes Babur at Archian 117
       and at Bishkaran 118;
     terms made 118-9;
     waits on Babur 119;
     his ill-influence 119, 125;
     makes Qambar-i-'ali prisoner 124;
     deserters to him 118, 125, 156;
     moves against The Khan (906) 145, 154;
     an uncle's rough comment on him 145;
     is sent Nuyan's sword by Babur (907) 150-1;
     conspiracy against him 154;
     the two Khans join Babur against him (908) 161-176;
     wounds Babur with Nuyan's sword 166-7, 396;
     terms with him repudiated by Babur 169, 171;
     invites Shaibani into Farghana 172;
     occupies Akhsi citadel 173;
     left by Jahangir 173-174;
     mentioned to Babur in the flight from Akhsi 178, 182;
     -> helped by Shaibani 183;
     defeated by him and killed 244 and n. 3;
     a couplet of Muhammad Salih's about him 289;
     his brothers Beg Tilba, Khalil, Muhammad and Bayazid _q.v._;
     [d. 909 AH.-1504 AD.].

   +Tang-atmish Sultan+ _Auzbeg-Shaiban?_--at a feast (935) 631;
     his descent 631 n. 4;
     in the battle of the Ghogra 669.

   +Tardi Beg+, brother of Quj (Quch) and Sher-afgan--in the left centre
       at Panipat (932) 472, 473,
     and at Kanwa (933) 565;
     on service 538-9, 582, (934) 590, 602;
     [d. 946 AH.-1539 AD.].

   +Tardi Beg+ _khaksar_--Babur visits him (925) 417-8;
     makes verse dropping down the Kabul-river (932) 448;
     praises a spring and receives a district 467, 581;
     returns to the darwesh-life (933) 583;
     conveys a gift to Kamran in Qandahar 583.

   +Tardika+--Tardi _yakka_ (568 n. 1)--on service (932) 462;
     in the right wing [_tulghuma_] at Kanwa (933) 568, 579;
     joins Babur at Dugdugi (935) 651;
     on service 678.

   +Tardi-muhammad+ _Jang-jang_, son of Muhammad _Jang-jang_--sent into
       Bhira (935) 661, 664.

   +Tardi-muhammad+ _Qibchaq_--at entertainments (925) 386, 400.

   +Tarkhan Begim+ _Arghun Chingiz-khanid_, daughter
       of 'Abdu'l-'ali--particulars 36.

   +Tarsam Bahadur+--punishes the Mundahirs (936) 700-1.

   +Tarsun-muhammad Sultan+--serving Humayun (935) 640.

   Malik +Taus+ _Yusuf-zai Afghan_--escorts his sister Mubaraka to her
       wedding with Babur (925) 375.

   +Tatar Khan+ _Kakar_ (or _Gakar_)--particulars 387;
     detains one travelling to Babur (925) 386;
     killed by his cousin Hati 387, 389;
     Babur dismounts at his house in Pauhala 390;
     [d. 925 AH.-1519 AD.].

   +Tatar Khan+ _Sarang-khani Afghan_--Khan-i-jahan--in Gualiar and not
       submissive to Babur (932) 523;
     surrenders (933) 539-40;
     on Babur's service (935) 582 (here Khan-i-jahan).

   +Tatar Khan+ _Yusuf-khail Ludi Afghan_--particulars 382, 383;
     his son Daulat Khan _q.v._;
     [da few years before 910 AH.-1504-5 AD.].

   Amir +Timur Beg+ _Barlas Turk_--Sahib-i-qiran--mentioned in genealogies
       14, 256;
     his birthplace Kesh 83;
     Samarkand his capital 75, 77, 78;
     his description of Soghd 84;
     his removal of the body of Sayyid Barka to Samarkand 266 n. 4;
     circumambulates Shaikh Maslahat's tomb (790) 132 n. 2;
     and Ahmad _Yassawi's_ (799) 356;
     captures of Qarshi 134 n. 1;
     his example followed in the bestowal of Farghana 14;
     his gifts of the governments of Dihli 487 and Samarkand 85;
     his descendants styled Mirza down to 913 AH. 344;
     Husain _Bai-qara_ the best swordsman of his line 259
       and greatest in his lands 191;
     a descendant 567;
     favoured begs 19, 39;
     one of his old soldiers 150;
     a descendant effects the migration of fowlers to Multan 225;
     Babur's victory where his had been at Pul-i-sangin 352;
     his and his descendants rule in Hindustan 382;
     their loss of lands to the Auzbegs 340;
     his builders and Babur's numerically compared 520;
     [d. 807 AH.-1405 AD.].

   +Timur 'Usman+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_--mentioned 280.

   +Tingri-birdi+ _Bashaghi_ (?) _Mughul_--in the left wing [_tulghuma_]
       at Panipat (932) 473.

   +Tingri-birdi Beg+, son of Qasim _quchin_--helps to beat down snow for
       a road (912) 308-9;
     in the left wing at Qandahar (913) 334, 336;
     his servant at Bajaur (925) 361;
     entertains Babur 401;
     returns to his districts Khwast and Andar-ab 403;
     overtakes Babur at Jui-shahi 410;
     acts swiftly for him (932-3) 546.

   +Tingri-quli+, a musician--plays at Babur's entertainments (925) 385,
       386, 388;
     upset into the Parwan-water 407;
     first given wine 415.

   +Tirahi Sultan+--takes a letter to Khwaja Kalan (925) 411.

   Mulla +Tirik-i-'ali+ (= Pers. Jan-i-'ali ?)--fights for Babur
       at Bajaur (925) 368 and (on his name) n. 5;
     on service (933) 551 (where read Tirik).

   +Tizak+, son of Qul-i-bayazid _bakawal_--captured as a child and kept
       4 years (910) 197.

   +Tufan+ _Arghun_--joins Babur and so creates a good omen (913) 333.

   Sayyid +Tufan+--on Babur's service (932) 453.

   +Tughluq-timur Khan+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_--mentioned in Yunas
       Khan's genealogy 19.

   +Tuka+ _Hindu_ (var. Nau-kar)--given charge of gifts for Kabul
       (932) 525.

   +Tukhta-bugha Sultan+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_, son of Ahmad
       (Alacha Khan)--waits on Babur (934) 601;
     at a feast (935) 631;
     referred to as serving Babur 318;
     works magic 654;
     in the battle of the Ghogra 672, 673;
     receives praise, thanks, and guerdon 674, 677;
     on service 682;
     [d_cir._ 940 AH.-1533-4 AD.].

   +Tulik Kukuldash+[2933]--Tambal strikes him with Babur's sword
       (912) 316;
     defeats Auzbegs in Badakhshan (925) 408;
     on Humayun's service (935) 640;
     his servant Barlas Juki _q.v._

   +Tulmish+ _Auzbeg_--in the battle of the Ghogra (935) 669;
     on service 678.

   +Tulun Khwaja Beg+, _Barin Mughul_--particulars 87;
     on Babur's service (902) 66, (903) 88;
     killed 88;
     [d. 903 AH.-1498 AD.].

   +Tun-sultan+ (var. Yun) _Mughul--ghunchachi_ of 'Umar Shaikh 24.

   +Tuqa Beg+, son of Sherim Taghai--captured by Tambal when serving
       Babur (904) 106;
     killed as a prisoner 107;
     [d. 904 AH.-1499 AD.]


   Khwaja +'Ubaidu'l-lah+ _Ahrari Naqshbandi_--his righteous influence
       in Samarkand 42;
     his intervention for peace between 'Umar Shaikh and kinsmen
       62 and n. 1;
     Pashaghar once his village 97;
     disciples named by Babur, Ahmad and 'Umar Shaikh _Miran-shahi_,
       Darwesh Beg Tarkhan, and Maulana-i-qazi _q.v._;
     held in slight esteem by Mahmud _Miran-shahi_ 46;
     his family ill-treated by Mahmud (899) 41;
     dreamed of by Babur (906) 132;
     his _Walidiyyah-risala_ versified by Babur 619-20, 468 n. 4, -> 604;
     his sons [Muhammad 'Ubaidu'l-lah] Khwajaka Khwaja and Yahya _q.v._;
     [d. 895 AH.-1491 AD.].

   +'Ubaidu'l-lah Sultan Khan+ _Auzbeg_, _Shaibani Chingiz-khanid_,
       son of Mahmud and nephew of Shaibani--defeats two pairs of Bai-qara
       Mirzas (913) 263, 329-30;
     defeated at Merv (917) 354;
     defeated north of Bukhara _ib._;
     his vow and return to obedience 348, 356;
     victorious over Babur at Kul-i-malik (918) 201 n. 7, 357-8;
     routs Najm Sani at Ghaj-davan 360-1;
     avenges Mughul tyranny in Hisar 362;
     attacks Herat (927) 434;
     takes Merv (932) 534, 617 n. 2;
     takes Mashhad (933) 534, 623 n. 3;
     attacked by Tahmasp _Safawi_ (934) 618, 622;
     defeated at Jam (935) 622 (where in n. 1 for "934" read 935), 635-6;
     Tahmasp's description of him 636 n. 2[2934];
     his wives by capture Habiba _Dughlat_ and Mihr-angez
       _Bai-qara_ _q.v._;
     [d. 946 AH.-1539 AD.].

   Rawal +Udai-singh+ _Bagari_--his force at Kanwa (933) 562;
     his death 573;
     [d. 933 AH.-1527 AD.].

   +Ulugh, Ulus+, see Aulugh, Aulus.

   Mir +'Umar Beg+ _Turkman_--particulars 279;
     his sons Abu'l-fath and 'Ali Khan _q.v._

   +'Umar Mirza+ _Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of Miran-shah--mentioned
       262 n. 3.

   +'Umar Shaikh Mirza I+, son of Timur--mentioned 14 (where in l. 3 for
       "and" read who);
     receives Farghana 14;
     [d. 797 AH.-1395 AD.].

   +'Umar Shaikh Mirza II+ _Miran-shahi_, father of Babur--particulars
       16-19, 24-28;
     his lands 17, 24, 50, 55, 95 n. 2, 103;
     Akhsi his capital 10;
     his ambition 12;
     his family relations 12;
     betroths Babur 35, 120;
     Farghana invaded (899) 13;
     his death 13, 29, 32, App. A, i, iii;
     his house used by Babur (908) 172
       and his tomb visited (900) 54, (908) 173;
     his mother Shah Sultan Begim _q.v._;
     his retainers Tulun Khwaja, 'Abdu'l-wahhab, Khwajaki Khwaja _q.v._;
     his old tailor 30;
     mentioned 6;
     [d. 899 AH.-1494 AD.].

   +Umid Aghacha+ _Andijani_, _ghunchachi_ of 'Umar Shaikh--her son Nasir
       _q.v._;
     [dbefore 899 AH.-1494 AD.].

   +'Usman+, the Third Khalif--Babur surmised that Samarkand became
       Musalman in his reign 75;
     [dmurdered 35 AH.-665 AD.].

   Mulla-zada Mulla +'Usman+--particulars 284;
     his birthplace Chirkh 217.


   Amir +Wahid+--his tomb in Herat visited by Babur (912) 306;
     [d. 35 AH.-655-6 AD. ?]

   Beg +Wais+--brings news from Kabul to Agra (933) 536.

   Pir (or Mir) +Wais+--stays with Babur at a crisis (903) 91;
     released (905) 119;
     leaves Samarkand during the siege (906-7) 146.

   Shaikh +Wais+--stays with Babur at a crisis (903) 91;
     leaves Samarkand during the siege (906-7) 146.

   +Wais Ataka+--his canal at Kabul 200.

   +Wais Khan+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_, father of Yunas
       Khan--mentioned 19;
     his sons Yunas and Aisan-bugha _q.v._;
     [d. 832 AH.-1428-9 AD.].

   Sultan +Wais+ _Kulabi_--his friendship recommended to Humayun
       (935) 627;
     -> reinforces Qila'-i-zafar (935 or 936) 696;
     his daughter Haram Begim _q.v._

   +Wais+ _Laghari_ +Beg+ _tughchi_--particulars 28;
     joins The Khan (Mahmud) (899) 32;
     safe-guards his ward Nasir _Miran-shahi_ _ib._;
     on service for Bai-sunghar (902) 65;
     waits on Babur 66;
     stays with him at a crisis (903) 91;
     on his service (904) 98, 100, 101, 106;
     at Khuban (905) 113;
     advises 117;
     plundered by 'Ali-dost 119;
     leaves Samarkand during the siege (906-7) 146;
     his son (?) Beg-gina _q.v._

   +Wais+ _Miran-shahi_, see Mirza Khan.

   Sultan +Wais Mirza+ _Bai-qara Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, son of
       Bai-qara II--parentage 257;
     his cousin and wife Sultanim _q.v._

   Sultan +Wais+ _Sawadi_--mentioned 372;
     sent to collect a tax he had fixed (925) 374;
     receives gifts and leave 376.[2935]

   Sultan +Walama+ _Taklu_--mentioned in Shah Tahmasp's account
       of the battle of Jam (935) 626 n. 2.

   Pir +Wali+ _Barlas Turk_-- -> loses Siwistan to Shah Beg (_cir._ 917)
       429 n. 1.

   +Wali Beg+ _Barlas_--particulars 272-3;
     his son Muhammad-i-Wali _q.v._;
     [d. 973 AH.].

   +Wali Beg+ _Qibchaq Turk_, brother of Khusrau Shah[2936]--particulars
       51;
     on his brother's service (901) 60, 64, (902) 71, (903) 93-4;
     mentioned (906) 129, (910) 191 by Husain _Bai-qara_;
     inquired for from Khusrau by Babur 193;
     defeated by Aimaqs 196;
     his death 51, 196;
     his former followers gathered together 242;
     [d. 910 AH.-1504 AD.].

   +Wali+ _khazanchi_, _Qara-quzi_--captured by Tambal in Akhsi (908) 181;
     in the left centre at Qandahar (913) 335;
     his matchlock shooting at Bajaur (925) 369;
     on service 391, (932) 458, 465-6, 471;
     in the right wing at Panipat 472, 475,
       and at Kanwa (933) 566;
     his ill-behaviour in the heats 524.

   +Wali+ _parschi_ (cheeta-keeper)--receives a gift (935) 633.

   +Wali Qizil+ _Mughul_--rebuked (932) 453;
     in the right-wing [_tulghuma_] at Panipat 473;
     made _shiq-dar_ of Dihli 476;
     on service (934) 601, (935) 638.


   +Yadgar-i-muhammad+[2937] +Mirza+ _Shah-rukhi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_,
       son of Muhammad--his capture of Herat referred to 278;
     his defeat by Husain _Bai-qara_ at Chanaran (874) 260;
     his loss of Herat to Husain (875) 260, 279,
       compared with Shaibani's of Samarkand to Babur (906) 134-5;
     the date of his death referred to 259 n. 1;
     his Master-of-horse Mir (Qambar-i-)'ali _q.v._;
     [d. 875 AH.-1470-1 AD.].

   +Yadgar-i-nasir Mirza+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_,
       son of Nasir--gifts made to him (935) 632;
     [d. 953 AH.-1546 AD.].

   +Yadgar-i-sultan Begim+ _Miran-shahi_ (_ut supra_), daughter of
       'Umar Shaikh--particulars 18;
     her Auzbeg marriage (908) 18, 356;
     her return to Babur (917) 356.

   +Yadgar Taghai+--his daughter Bega Begim _q.v._

   Khwaja +Yahya+, younger son of 'Ubaidu'l-lah _Ahrari_--his part in
       the Tarkhan revolt (901) 63;
     treats with Babur (904) 98;
     welcomes him to Samarkand (905) 124;
     waits on Shaibani (906) 127;
     banished by him and murdered with two sons 128, 147 n. 4;
     his house mentioned 133;
     his sons Muhammad Zakariya and Baqi, his grandsons 'Abdu'sh-shahid
       and Khwaja Kalan _q.v._;
     [d. 906 AH.-1500 AD.].

   Shaikh +Yahya+ _Chishti_--his tomb visited by Babur (935) 666;
     his son Sharafu'd-din _Muniri_ _q.v._

   +Yahya+ _Nuhani_, at the head of Hindustan traders--allowed to leave
       Kabul (925) 416.

   +Yahya Nuhani+ (perhaps the man last entered)--waits on Babur
       (935) 676;
     a grant and leave given 683;
     his younger brother (no name) 683.

   +Yakka Khwaja+--on Babur's service (934) 598; in the battle
   of the Ghogra (935) 671; drowned 674; his brother Qasim _q.v._;
   [d. 935 AH.-1529 AD.].

   +Yangi Beg Kukuldash+--brings Babur letters and gifts from Kashghar
       (932) 445-6.

   +Ya'qub-i-ayub+ _Begchik_, son of Ayub--on Husain Bai-qara's service
       (901) 58;
     proffers Khusrau Shah's service to Babur (910) 192-3.

   Sultan +Ya'qub Beg+ _Aq-quiluq Turkman_--a desertion to him 275;
     affords refuge to Bana'i 287;
     his beg Timur 'Usman _Miran-shahi_ _q.v._;
     [d. 896 AH.-1491 AD.].

   Maulana +Ya'qub+ _Naqshbandi_--his birthplace Chirkh 217;
     [d. 851 AH.-1447 AD.].

   +Ya'qub+ _tez-jang_-- -> one of five champions defeated in single combat
       by Babur (914) 349 n. 1.

   +Ya'qub Sultan+--mentioned as at Jam 636 n. 2.

   Mulla +Yarak+--plays one of his compositions and incites Babur
       to compose (926) 422.

   +Yarak Taghai+ (var. Yarik)--stays with Babur at a crisis (903) 91;
     _locum tenens_ in Akhsi (905) 116;
     retaliates on Turkman Hazaras (911) 253;
     takes charge of sheep raided by Babur (912) 313;
     in the right wing at Qandahar (913) 334.

   +Yar-i-'ali+ _Balal_, _Baharlu Qara-quiluq Turkman_, grandfather
       of Bairam Khan-i-khanan--stays with Babur at a crisis (903) 91;
     wounded (905) 109 (where in n. 5 for "father" read grandfather);
     rejoins Babur (910) 189;
     on his Tramontane service (932-3) 546.

   +Yar-i-husain+, grandson of Mir (Shaikh) 'Ali Beg--waits on Babur
       (910) 228;
     asks permission to raise a force in Babur's name 231;
     kills Baqi _Chaghaniani_ (911) 250-1.

   +Yarim Beg+--Yar-i-muhammad?--on Babur's service (913) 337.

   +Yili-pars Sultan+ _Auzbeg-shaiban_--his brother Aisan-quli
       (_q.v._) 265.

   +Yisun-tawa Khan+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_--mentioned in Yunas
       Khan's genealogy 19.

   +Yul-chuq+--conveys a message to Babur (904) 99.

   +Yunas-i-'ali+, son of Baba 'Ali Lord-of-the-Gate--surprised at a
       Tuesday's fast (925) 398;
     on Babur's service 278, 468 (where read his name in l. 3) 475, 521;
     in the right centre at Panipat (932) 472, 473
       and at Kanwa (933) 565, 569;
     has charge of Ibrahim's mother 543, 545;
     makes a garden (932) 532;
     in social charge of Tahmasp _Safawi's_ envoys (935) 631;
     inquires into Muhammad-i-zaman _Bai-qara's_ objections to Bihar
       661, 662;
     in the battle of the Ghogra 671;
     at entertainments (925) 400, (935) 683;
     his kinsman Ibrahim _qanuni_ _q.v._

   +Yunas Khan+ _Chaghatai Chingiz-khanid_, Babur's maternal
       grandfather--particulars[2938] 19-24;
     made Khan of the Mughuls by Babur's grandfather 20, 344 n. 2, 352;
     his friendly relations with Babur's father 12;
     receives Tashkint from him 13;
     defeats him 16;
     his sons Mahmud and Ahmad _q.v._ and daughters 21-4;
     his servant Qambar-i-'ali _q.v._ mentioned 92 n. 1, 149, 565 n. 1;
     [d. 892 AH.-1487 AD.].

   Khwaja +Yunas+ _Sajawandi_--his birthplace in Luhugur (Logar) 217.

   +Yusuf-i-'ali+--musician at entertainments (925) 385, 387, 388,
     418.

   +Yusuf-i-'ali+ _bakawal_--on Babur's service in Bajaur (925) 375.

   +Yusuf-i-'ali Kukuldash+--made joint-_darogha_ in Herat (911) 293;
     Babur's cicerone in Herat (912) 304;
     his good dancing 303.

   +Yusuf-i-'ali+ _rikabdar_--conveys a letter concerning Hind-al's
       pre-natal adoption (925) 374;
     receives a gift for swimming 401;
     meets Babur 418;
     (?) in Sambhal (934) 587;
     (?) dies there 675, 687 (here 'Ali-i-yusuf);
     [d. 935 AH.-1529 AD.].[2939]

   Khwaja +Yusuf+ _Andijani_, a musician--particulars 4.

   +Yusuf-i-ayub+ _Begchik_, son of Ayub--Babur warned against him
       (910) 190;
     takes service with Babur 196;
     winters with Nasir 241;
     leaves Babur for Jahangir (911) 190, 254.

   +Yusuf+ _badi_'[2940]--particulars 289;
     [d. 897 AD.-1492].

   Sayyid +Yusuf Beg+ _Aughlaqchi_, son of Murad--particulars 39;
     waits on Babur from Samarkand (903) 72;
     holding Yar-yilaq for 'Ali _Miran-shahi_ (904) 98;
     dismissed from Khurasan on suspicion 98;
     joins Babur (910) 196;
     advises him 197;
     his death 241;
     his brother Hasan and sons Muhammad-i-yusuf and Ahmad-i-yusuf
       _q.v._;
     [d. 910 AH.-1505 AD.].

   +Yusuf darogha+ of Akhsi?--interviews Babur during the flight
       (908) 181-2.

   Sayyid +Yusuf+ _Machami_--particulars 118;
     opposes Babur (905) 118, 117 n. 2.


   +Zahid Khwaja+--abandons Sambhal (933) 557;
     on service (935) 682;
     [d. 953 AH.-1546 AD.].

   Shaikh +Zain+ _Khawafi_--verse-making on the Kabul-river (932) 448;
     his account of Babur's regretted couplet 448 n. 5;
     goes into Dihli for the Congregational Prayer 476;
     makes a garden at Agra 532;
     recalls a vow to Babur (933) 553;
     his _insha_ on Babur's renunciation of wine and of the _tamgha_
       553-6;
     his _Fath-nama_ of Kanwa 559-574, and chronograms of victory 575;
     in the left centre of the battle 565;
     prefers requests for Muhammad-i-zaman _Bai-qara_ (935) 662;
     invited in verse by Babur 683;
     his maternal uncle Abu'l-wajd _q.v._;
     [d. 940 AH.-1533-4 AD.].

   +Zainab-sultan Begim+--her granddaughter met by Babur near Agra
       (935) 616.

   +Zainab-sultan Begim+ _Miran-shahi Timurid_, _Barlas Turk_, daughter
       of Mahmud--particulars 48;
     married to Babur (910) 48, 711;
     [d_cir._ 912 AH.-1506-7 AD.].

   +Zard-rui+--on Babur's service (935) 668, 669.

   +Zar-dusht+ ("Zoroaster")--mentioned in a verse 85.

   Bibi +Zarif Khatun+--her daughter Mah-chuchuq 199 n. 1, 342 n. 3.

   +Zubaida Aghacha+ _Jalair_--particulars 267, 273 n. 2;
     [dbefore 911 AH.-1506 AD.].

   +Zubaida Khatun+, wife of Khalifa Harunu'r-rashid--a surmise
       concerning her 306 n. 1;
     [d. 216 AH.-831 AD.].

   +Zubair+ _Raghi_--revolts against Auzbeg rule in Badakhshan (910) 242,
       (912) 295;
     defeats Nasir _Miran-shahi_ 321;
     standing firm (913) 340;
     [d. 914 AH.-1508 AD.].

   +Zuhra Begi Agha+ _Auzbeg_, concubine of Mahmud
       _Miran-shahi_--particulars 47, 49;
     intrigues disastrously with Shaibani (905) 125-6, (906) 127-8.

   Mir Shaikh +Zu'n-nun Beg+ _Arghun_--particulars 274-5;
     captures Shal (Quetta) (884) 429 n. 1;
     his ward-ship of 'Ali _Miran-shahi_ (900) 55;
     imprisons Khalifa 55;
     surrenders Aura-tipa 56;
     serving Husain _Bai-qara_ (901) 57, 60 n. 3;
     becomes an ally of the rebel Badi'u-z-zaman (902) 71, (903) 94-5,
       260;
     invited by Husain to co-operate against Shaibani (910) 190, 191;
     goes for refuge to Husain 243;
     dealings with his son Muqim 198, 227, 248;
     his title Lion-of-God 281;
     part of the coalition government in Herat (911) 293;
     defeats Auzbegs (912) 296;
     social matters 298, 299, 307;
     hears plain speaking from Qasim Beg _quchin_ 304;
     his futile opposition to Shaibani (913) 326;
     defeated and killed 275, 327;
     his retainer Jan-airdi;
     [d. 913 AH.-1507 AD.].


Index II. Geographical.


   Abapur (S.E. of Agra), Babur at 642-3.

   Aba-quruq (Kabul), Babur at 197.

   Ab-burdan (Upper Zar-afshan), description of 152;
     spring and pass of 152;
     a route through 40 n. 4.

   Ab-dara (Hisar-shadman), Babur takes up good ground at 353.

   Ab-dara (Hindu-kush), a winter-route through 205, 242, 321, 351.

   Ab-i-khan (Farghana), Tambal in 110, 112.

   Ab-i-rahmat = Qara-su _q.v._ (Samarkand), mentioned to locate
       Kan-i-gil 78, 81.

   Ab-istada (S.E. of Ghazni) described 239;
     Babur at 218, 239.

   Abiward (Khurasan), Anwari's birthplace 260 n. 1.

   Ab-i-yar-quruq (Samarkand), Babur in 66.

   Abuha or Anuha (N.W.F.P. India), limits Sawad 400.

   Abun- or Atun-village (Kabul), Babur at 407.

   Adampur or Arampur-_pargana_ (U.P. India), Babur at 650, 684;
       682 n. 1;
     location of 650 n. 3;
     684 n. 3.

   Adinapur (Kabul), on the Surkh-rud 209;
     of the name 207, App. E, xxi;
     a darogha's head-quarters 208;
     the Bagh-i-wafa near 421, 443;
     Babur at 229.

   Adusa-and-Muri (U.P. India), Babur at 645.

   Afghanistan, Babur's limitation of the name 200;
     demerits of its mountains 223.

   Agra, revenue of 521;
     'Alam Khan plans to attack 455-6, 474;
     estimate of Panipat casualties made in 474;
     submits to Babur 523;
     exhaustion of treasure in 617;
     a military rendezvous 676;
     supplies from 685; hot season in 524;
     measurement of Kabul-Agra road 629;
     water-raising in 487;
     Babur takes oleanders to 610;
     his workmen in 520, 630, 642;
     keeps Ramzan in 584;
     receives letters from 639;
     comes and goes to and from 478, 548, 581, 606, 686;
     others ditto 475, 526, 540, 576-8, 606, 621-4, 650;
     mentioned to locate places 529, 531 (2), 588, 597, 641, 650-8, 680.

   Ahangaran (on the Heri-rud, Khurasan), 308 n.

   Ahangaran-julga[2941] (S.E. of Tashkint), Babur at 90, 152, 161.

   Ahar-passage (Ganges), Babur's troops at 528.

   Aibak, mod. Haibak, Fr. map Boukhara, Hai-bagh (Kabul-Balkh route),
       Babur at 189;
     a rebel near 546, and for location 546, n. 2.

   Aikari-yar (Kabul), Babur's scouts fight near 196.

   Aiki-su-ara[2942] = Miyan-du-ab = Between-the-two-waters (Farghana)
       an alternative name Rabatik-aurchin 88;
     located 88, n. 2;
     Mughuls in 88, 105;
     Babur in 114;
     Tambal in 116.

   Ailaish- or Ailamish-darya, ? Qara-darya (Farghana), Babur's men
       defeated on, 105;
     game near 114.

   Ailak-yilaq (Hisar-shadman), Babur at 187-8, 194.

   Ailchi (E. Turkistan), of the name 50, n. 2.

   Aindiki var. (Kabul), Babur gathers tooth-picks near 407.

   'Aish-pushla (Farghana), Tambal near 106;
     Babur near 165.

   Aitmak-daban (Samarkand) described 83;
     a boundary 84;
     64 n. 1;
     80 n. 2.

   Ai-tughdi (Kabul) position of 253 n. 3;
     Babur at 253.

   Ajar Fort (in Kahmard, or Kahmard _q.v._ Fr. map Maimene), Babur's
       and his followers' families left in 189;
     various occurrences in 197, 243, 293;
     a plan to defend 191;
     gifts to its peasantry 633 n. 5.

   Akhsi, Akhsikit (Farghana), described 9;
     book-name of 9 and n. 4;
     position of 13;
      --'Umar Shaikh's capital 10;
     exploit at 16;
     death at 13;
      --a rebel at 26;
     a death in 40;
     appointments to 32, 115;
     a notable of 110;
     a village of 171;
     a melon of 82;
     besieged 31-2, 54;
     threatened 44;
     army of, called up against Babur 110;
     comings and goings from and to 87, 90, 101-3, 124, 161, 176, 180,
       182, 183;
     river-fight below 102;
     Babur at 54, 116, 170-1-2;
     apportioned to Jahangir 118-9;
     an army hostile to Babur near 162;
     promised to Babur 168;
     his attempt to defend 173-6;
     his flight from 176, 396;
     Shaibani defeats the Chaghatai Khans near 18, 182, 351-6.

   Akriada-_pargana_ (Panj-ab), a holder of 453.

   Alai-tagh (Farghana), on a Hisar--E. Turkistan route 129;
     sub-districts of 162.

   Alangar-_tuman_ (Kabul), described 210;
     a constituent of the true Lamghanat 210;
     a holder of 241;
     Babur in 424.

   Ala-qurghan = Ikhtiyaru'd-din (Herat), Babur reported captive in 313;
     the Bai-qara households in 327;
     captured by Shaibani 328.

   Ala-sai-_buluk_ (Kabul), described 220-1;
     wines of 221.

   Ala-tagh (s. of Qalat-i-ghilzai, Afghanistan), over-run 249.[1]

   Alexander's Iron-wall (Darband _q.v._ Caspian Sea), mentioned
       in metaphor 564;
     purpose of 564 n. 3.

   Alexandria ad Caucasum (Kabul), site of 214 n. 7.

   Alghu-tagh var. Aulugh-tagh (mid-Oxus valley), a Bai-qara arrival
       near 60.

   'Ali-abad (Samarkand), Shaibani in 135.

   'Ali-masjid (Khaibar-route), Babur passes 394, 411-2, 450;
     description of its spring 412 n. 1.

   'Ali-shang-_tuman_ (Kabul), described 210;
     a constituent of the tune Lamghanat 210;
     a holder of 241;
     Babur in 342, 424.

   Allahabad (India), _see_ Piag.

   Almaligh (E. Turkistan), depopulation of 1;
     located 2 n. 1;
     referred to 162 n. 2.

   Almar (s. of Maimene, Fr. map), Babur passes through, 296.

   Almatu (E. Turkistan), depopulation of 1;
     located 2 n. 1;
     referred to 162 n. 2;
     *a battle near 349.

   Alti-shahr (E. Turkistan), an occasional name of Yiti-kint 11 n. 6.

   Alwar, Alur (Rajputana), a rebel leaves 545;
     an arrival from 687;
     mentioned to fix limits 577-8-9;
     gift made of its treasure 519;
     an appointment to 578.

   Ambahar (N.W.F.P. India?), on a suggested route 376;
     pass of 376.

   Ambala (Panj-ab), Babur at 465.

   'Ambar-koh (Qunduz), a fight on 61.

   Amla (Kabul), Babur at 422.

   Amroha (U.P. India), revenue assigned of 685.

   Amu-darya, Oxus, Babur on 48, 189, 249, others on 57, 74, 193, 244,
       *359[2943];
     of Trans-Amu tribes 242;
     limits territory 49;
     *Babur's fortunes lost beyond 426;
     --ferries of, Aubaj, 93, 95 (where for Aubaj read Char-jui), 110,
       189, Charjui (which read for Aubaj), Kilif 57, 191, Kirki 191,
       Tirmiz 191.

   Andar-ab (n. of Hindu-kush), a n. boundary of Kabul 200;
     mountains of 221;
     roads from 205;
     a holder of 403;
     comings through 51, 193 (Babur's), 196.

   Andaraba (Panj-ab), Babur at 391-2.

   Andijan (Farghana), description of 3-4;
     the capital, sport in, pure Turki in, climate of 4
         --its water 5,
         mountains of 15, 55, 102, 118, 125;
       tribes of 162;
       a grass of 221;
       its Char-bagh 29;
       celebrities of 4, 280;
       mentioned to locate places, etc., 4, 8, 10, 16, 113, 396;
       its railway 30 n. 5;
     given to 'Umar Shaikh I and II, 14;
     people of led into captivity 20, 22;
     Babur its governor 29 n. 1;
     succeeds in it 29;
     attacks on 27, 30, 54, 87-8, 106-8, 161-8, 171, 192;
     captures of 18, 20, 89, 90, 122, 192, 244;
     demanded from Babur 87, 168, 318, 351-2;
     Auzbeg chiefs wait on Babur in 58;
     lost by Babur 89-90, 122;
     his attempts to regain 92-7-8, 162-5;
     succeeds, 103-4, 115;
     proposed disposition of 118;
     the cause of his second exile from 105; he
     compares it with Samarkand 123;
     a raid near 164;
     its army on service, 48, 87, 101, 171-2;
     occupied by Sa'id Khan 351-7, 362;
     commandants of 25, 32, 44;
     gifts sent to 633;
     comings and goings to and from 32, 58, 64, 102-3-6-8-9, 113, 145,
       150, 165-8, 170, *183, 399;
     Babur's comings and goings to and from 55, 66, 71, 114-9, 174;
     hint of another visit 358 and n. 2;
     (_see_ Farghana).

   Andikan (Farghana), 161 _see_ Andijan.

   Andikhud (w. of Balkh, Khurasan), fighting near 46, 260;
     plan to defend 191;
     Sayyids of 266-7-8;
     a commandant of 279;
     a traitor in 325.

   Anwar, ? Unwara (near Agra), Babur at 589, 641.

   Aqar-tuzi (Samarkand), a battle near 34.

   Aq-bura-rud (Farghana), rapid descent of 5 n. 3.

   Aq-kutal (between Soghd and Tashkint), a force passes 111.

   Aq-qachghai (Aura-tipa, Samarkand), a rapid message through 25.

   Aq-su (Aura-tipa, Samarkand), Ahmad _Miranshahi_ dies on 33.

   Aq-su (Eastern Turkistan), 20 n. 5, 29 n. 5.

   'Arabia, a bird of 497.

   Arat (Kabul), App. G. xxv.

   Archa-kint (Farghana), a road through 116.

   Archian-qurghan (Farghana), Tambal enters 117;
     scene of the Chaghatai Khans' defeat 117 n. 2, *182, *351 (where
       read Archian for "Akhsi"), 356 (here read near Akhsi).

   Argand-ab (Qandahar) irrigation off-takes of 332 n. 4, 333 n. 4.

   Ari-_pargana_, Arrah (Bihar, India), Babur in 664-6.

   Arind-water, Rind (U.P. India), Babur on 684.

   Arupar (U.P. India), _see_ Rupar.

   Arus-, Urus-, Arys-su (W. Turkistan), a battle near 16.

   Asfara (Farghana), described 7;
     Persian-speaking Sarts of 7 and n. 3;
     a holder of 115;
     Babur takes refuge in 7 and sends gifts to Highlanders of 633
       and n. 4;
     Babur captures 53;
     Babur in a village of 123.

   Asfiduk (Samarkand), Babur in 131-2.

   Aspara or Ashpara (Mughulistan), Abu-sa'id _Miran-shahi_ leads an army
       to 20.

   Astar-ab (e. of Pul-i-chiragh, Fr. map Maimene), tribes in 255.

   Astarabad (Khurasan), partridge-cry in 496;
     oranges of 510;
     a poet of 290 n. 3;
     Husain _Bai-qara_ and 46, 95, 259, 260, 261, 272;
     assignments of 61-9, 70, 94;
     commandants in 272 (Nawa'i), 275;
     two Bai-qaras put to death in 262, 266.

   Atak, "Attock" (on the Indus), locates Nil-ab 206 n. 3, and Baba Wali
       _Qandahari's_ shrine 332 n. 4.

   Atar (Kabul), located 211;
     Babur at 343, 422-3.

   Auba, Ubeh, "Obeh" (on the Heri-rud), a holder of 274.

   Aud (U.P. India), _see_ Oude, Oudh.

   Aulaba-tu (Ghazni), Babur at 323.

   Aulia-ata (E. Turkistan), 2 n. 1.

   Aulugh-nur (Kabul), located 209;
     a route past 209;
     on the "nur" of the name App. F, xxiii;
     Babur at 421-5.

   Aunju- or Unju-tupa (Farghana), Babur at 110.

   Aurangabad (Haidarabad, Dakhin, India), a grape of 77 n. 2.

   Aura-tipa (between Khujand and the Zarafshan, Samarkand), its names
       Aurush and Aurushna 77;
     an alp of 25;
     Dikh-kat a village of 149, 154;
     locates Khwas 17;
     escapes to 124, 141, 156;
     transfers of, to 'Umar 'Shaikh 17,
       to Ahmad 27, 30, 35,
       to Muh. Husain _Dughlat_ 97;
     Ahmad dies in 33;
     The Khan in 92;
     Babur's family in 136;
     Babur in 98-9, 124, 149 (2);
     enemies of Babur in 152, 154.

   Aurganj or Urgenj (Khwarizm), a claim to rule in 266.

   Aurgut (Samarkand), surrenders to Babur, 68.

   Aush, Ush (Farghana), described 4;
     a trick of the ragamuffins of 6;
     course of its water 10;
     appointments to 32, 65;
     a raid near 25;
     an arrival from 112;
     fugitive to 168;
     dependencies of 109, 110;
     Tambal and 103-7, 123;
     Babur's men in 114;
     oppression of 172;
     good behaviour at 176; Babur at 108, 161-2-4-7-9 (advice to go to).

   Autrar, Utrar, "Otrar" (W. Turkistan), _see_ Yangi.

   Autruli, Atrauli (U.P. India), Babur at 587.

   Auz-kint (Farghana), refuge in planned, for the child Babur, 29;
     Mughuls take refuge in 105;
     Jahangir, with Tambal, and 103, 114-6-8, 123;
     Babur and 29, 108-9, 118, 161-2-9;
     Babur's note on 162.

   Awighur (Farghana), a holder of 118, 125 n. 2.

   Azarbaijan (on the Caspian), taken by White Sheep 49;
     cold of 219;
     a comer from 280;
     Timur's workmen in 520.


   Baba Hasan _Abdal_, _i.e._, Baba Wali _Qandahari_ (Qandahar),
       irrigation-channels towards 332-6;
     shrine of the saint near Atack (Attock) 332 n. 4.

   Baba Ilahi (Herat), Husain _Bai-qara_ dies at 256;
     (_see_ Fr. map Herat, Baboulei).

   Baba Khaki (Herat), a rapid message from
     Farghana to 25;
     an army at 326;
     located 25 n. 2, 326 n. 1.

   Baba Luli (Kabul), Babur advances towards 315.

   Baba Qara (Bajaur _q.v._), spring of 371;
     ?identical with Khwaja Khizr 371 n. 1;
     valley of 367 n. 3.

   Baba Tawakkul's Langar (Farghana), the younger Khan halts at 168.

   Baba Wali (Atak, Attock), _see_ Baba Hasan.

   Babur-khana (Panj-ab), 450 n. 5.

   Baburpur (U.P. India), Babur at 644 n. 6.

   Bachrata var. (Farghana), a ferry crossed near 116, 170 (by Babur).

   Badakhshan, Farghana's s. boundary 1;
     Hindu-kush divides Kabul from 204;
     trees of 221;
     locates Kafiristan 46; Kabul trade of 202;
     Babur sends sugar-cane to 208;
     a poet of 288; Rusta Hazara of 196;
     unprofitable to Babur 480;
     reference to his conquest of 220;
     Greek descent of its Shahs 22, 242;
     a series of rulers in 47-9, 208 n. 8, 243, 340, *426, *433, *697;
     a plan for defence of 191;
     Auzbegs and 242, 294;
     considered as a refuge for Babur 340;
     various begims go to 21-2-4, 48;
     Nasir's affairs in 242-3, 321-2;
     a letter of victory sent to 371;
     Babur plans going to 412;
     Babur and Mahim visit Humayun in 426, 436;
     Sa'id _Chaghatai's_ affairs with 412, *695-6;
     *Humayun's desertion of 690, 707;
     *offered to Khalifa 697 and n. 1;
     *contingent disposition of 706.

   Badam-chashma (Kabul), climatic change at pass of 203; Babur at 229,
       409, 445.

   Badayun (U.P. India), appointments to 267, 582.

   Badghis (Khurasan, n. of Herat), Auzbegs defeat Bai-qaras in 275;
     Babur in 296, 307.

   Bad-i-pich-pass, Bad-pakht? (Kabul), a route through 209; Babur goes
       through 343, 421;
     places an inscription in 343.

   Badr-au-_buluk_, Tag-au (Kabul), described 221;
     water of 227 n. 1;
     a route through 209;
     Babur in 421.

   Badru-ferry (Ghogra, Saru); 667 n. 5.

   Badshah-nagar (U.P. India), Babur's visit gives the name to 678 n. 1.

   Bagar (Rajputana), a holder of 573;
     identified 573 n. 2.

   "Baghdad," a variant for Bughda 40 and n. 2.

   Baghlan (Qunduz), nomads leave Kabul for 402.

   Bahar or Bihar (Kabul), seat of a tribe 413;
     Babur at 414.

   Bahat, Bihat, Jhelum-river (Panj-ab), course of 485;
     Babur on 382, *441, 453;
     crossed in fear of him 382.

   Bahraich (U.P. India), revenue of 521;
     locates Ghazra crossings 669.

   Bajaur (N.W.F.P. India), concerning its name 367 n. 4, 571 n. 3;
     once a Kabul dependency 207;
     wines and fruit of 372, 510-1;
     monkeys and birds of 492-3-4;
     beer made in 423;
     a test of women's virtue in 211;
     Babur and 367 to 370, 371-3, 377, *429;
     repopulation of 375;
     tribute of 400;
     Dost Beg's valour at 370, 397;
     Khwaja Kalan and 370, 411, 422-3;
     Bibi Mubarika left in 376;
     arrivals from 401.

   Bakkak-pass (between Yaka-aulang and the Heri-rud valley), Babur's
       perilous crossing of 309;
     an alternative pass (Zirrin) 310 n. 2.

   Baksar _sarkar_ (U.P. India), revenue of 521.

   Baksara (U.P. India), Babur at *603, 660.

   Baladar, Biladar (U.P. India), Babur at 686.

   Bala-hisar (Kabul), present site of 198 n. 4;
     (_see_ Citadel).

   Bala-jui (Kabul), maker and name of 200 and n. 5.

   Ballia (U.P. India), sub-divisions of 637 n. 1, 664 n. 8, 667 n. 2.

   Balkh (Oxus valley), border-countries of 76, 261, 204;
     heat in 520;
     a melon-grower of 686;
     its trade with Kabul 202;
     holders of 18, 61-9, 257, 263, 275;
     exploits at 50, 93, 270;
     Husain _Bai-qara_ and 70, 191;
     Khusrau Shah and 93-4, 110, 270;
     Shaibani and 294-6, 300, *363;
     Kitin-qara and 545-6;
     'Ubaid and 622;
     *Isma'il _Safawi_ and 359, 363;
     Muhammad-i-zaman and *364, 385, *428;
     Babur and 220, *359, *426-7, *442-4-5-6, 463 and n. 3, 546 n. 1,
       625.

   Balkh-ab, headwaters of 216; Babur crosses 295.

   Balnath Jogi's hill (Panj-ab), Babur near 452.

   Bamian (Khurasan ? w. of Ghur-bund, Kabul), mountains of 215;
     how reached from Kabul 205;
     Khusrau Shah and 96 (where for "Qasim" read Kamal);
     Babur and 189, 311, *351, 409.

   Bam-valley (Herat), a _langar_ in 308 n. 1;
     Babur in 296, 297 n. 1.

   Banakat, Fanakat = Shahrukhiya (Tashkint) 2 n. 5, 76.

   Banaras, Benares (U.P. India), crocodiles near 502;
     threatened 652-4;
     Babur near 657.

   Banas-river (India), course of 485.

   Bandir, Bhander (C. India), a fruit of 507;
     Babur at 590-8.

   Band-i-salar Road (Farghana), Babur on 55, 116.

   Bangarmawu, Bangarmau (U.P. India), Babur near 601.

   Bangash _tuman_ (Kabul), described 220, 209, 233, 405;
     a holder of 27, 252;
     plan of attack on 229, 231-3, 382.

   Bannu plain (N.W.F.P. India), a limit of Kabul territory 200;
     a waterless plain near 234;
     date of the modern town 232 n. 5;
     Babur and 218, 231-2, 382, 394.

   Banswara (Rajputana), an old name of 573 n. 1.

   Banur (Patiala, Panj-ab), Babur on (Ghaggar) torrent of 464.

   (The) Bar (Panj-ab), 380 n. 4.

   Baraich (U.P. India), _see_ Bahraich.

   Barak or Birk (?N.W.F.P. India), mentioned as between Dasht and Farmu
      l 235.

   Barakistan, Birkistan (Zurmut, Kabul), a tomb in 220;
     ? tongue of 207.

   Bara-koh (Farghana) described 5; position of 5 n. 2.

   Baramula (Kashmir), a limit of Sawad territory 372 n. 3.

   Baran-su,[2944] Panjhir-su (Kabul), affluents to 210-1;
     the bird-migrants' road 224;
     migration of fish in 225;
     bird-catching on 228;
     routes crossing 209, 342;
     locates various places 207 n. 5, 215, App. E, xvii;
     --passers along 195, 242;
     Babur and 254, 420, _see_ Koh-daman.

   Baran _wilayat_ (Kohistan, Kabul), Babur in 253, 320, 405.

   Bara (N.W.F.P. India), road of 411;
     Babur fords the water of 230.

   Bari (Rajputana), hills of 486;
     hunting-grounds in 509 n. 2;
     Babur at 509, 585.

   Barik-ab (affluent of the "Kabul-river"), Babur on 409, 414, 446.

   Bast, Bost, Bust (on the Helmand, Afghanistan), Husain _Bai-qara's_
       affairs at 94, 260.

   Bastam ('Iraq), a w. limit of Khurasan 261 (where read Bastam);
     captured 622.

   Bateswar (U.P. India), ferry of 643 n. 3.

   Bazar and Taq (India), _see_ Dasht.

   Bazarak (Hindu-kush), described 205.

   Beg-tut (Kabul), earthquake action near 247.

   Benares (India), _see_ Banaras.

   Bengal, Bangala (India), particulars of the rules and customs in 482;
     envoys to and from 637, 640, 665;
     army of 663; Babur at ease about 677, 679 n. 7;
     traversed by the Ganges 485;
     a bird of 495;
     fruits of 504.

   Between-two-waters (Farghana), _see_ Aiki-su-ara.

   Betwi-river, Betwa (C. India) described 597.

   Bhander (C. India), _see_ Bandir.

   Bhilsan (C. India), Sanga's 483;
     Babur's plan against 598.

   Bhira (Panj-ab), history of 382;
     revenue of 521;
     tribes of 387;
     Baluchis in 383;
     locates places 379, 380, 381;
     limit of Ludi Afghan lands 481,
       and of Babur's in Hindustan 520;
     servants from 616, 678;
     arrivals from 228, 391, 419;
     local soldiery 389, 539,
       rhinoceros in 490, Babur and 377-8, 382-3-7, *429, 478;
     he stays in the fort of 384;
     safeguards people of 383, 478;
     sends prisoners into 461;
     summons by Mahim of an escort from 650;
     a governor 386-8, 392-9.

   Bhujpur (Bihar, India), Babur at 662.

   Biah-su, Beas (Panj-ab), course of 485; Babur crosses 458.

   Biana, Bayana (Rajputana), mountains in 486;
     red-stone of 532, 611;
     water-raising in 487;
     a dependency of 563;
     locates places 539, 613;
     disaffection to Babur of 523-9;
     taken 530-8, 540-5;
     a gun made to use against it 537;
     praise of its soldiers 548, 550;
     an appointment to 579;
     asked for 613;
     Babur at 577, 581;
     his workmen in 520;
     revenue from assigned to support his tomb *709.

   Bianwan _pargana_ (U.P. India), assignment on 540.

   Bibi Mah-rui (Kabul), Babur at 314.

   Bigram, Bikram (Panj-ab), four ancient sites so-named 230 n. 2;
     Babur at 230, 394, 450-1.

   Bihar (India), a limit of Afghan lands in Hind 480-1,
       and of Babur's 520;
     revenue of 521;
     Babur and 639, 656, 677-9;
     an assignment on 676;
     mentioned as if Babur's 561;
     Muhammad-i-zaman and 661-3-4;
     an earlier Ludi capture of 675;
     a diwan of 661.

   Bihiya (Bihar, India), Babur at 662-7 n. 2.

   Bih-zadi (Kabul), Babur at 398, 416-8;
     wine fetched from 417;
     19th century vinegar of 417 n. 2.

   Bijanagar, Vijaynagar (Dakhin, Deccan, India), a ruler of 483.

   Biladar (U.P. India), _see_ Baladar.

   Bilah (Panj-ab), Babur at 237.

   Bilkir? (Kabul), Babur at 420.

   Bilwah ferry (Ganges), Babur at 658.

   Bimruki _pargana_ (Panj-ab), a holder of 453.

   Birk and Birkistan, _see_ Barak.

   Bishkharan (Farghana), good fighting at 28;
     Babur at or near 117-8, 170.

   Bish-kint (on the Khujand-Tashkint road), Tambal at 145, 154;
     Babur at 151.

   Bi-sut (Kabul), Bi-sutis migrated to Bajaur 375.

   Bolan-pass (Baluchistan), *Shah Beg's entrance to Sind 429.

   "Bottam" (? debouchement of the Zar-afshan), a word used by Ibn Hankal
       76 n. 6.

   Budana-_quruq_ (Samarkand), described 82;
     Babur at 131 (here Quail-reserve).

   Buhlulpur (Panj-ab), Babur at 454.

   Bukhara (Transoxiana), described 82;
     w. limit of Samarkand 76,
       and of Soghd 84;
     deficient water-supply of 77;
     trade with Kabul 202;
     wines of 83;
     melons of 10, 82;
     bullies in 7;
     Babur sends sugar-cane to 208;
     various rulers of 35, 38, 112;
     governors in 40, 52, 121;
     taken by Shaibani 125;
     various attacks on 63-5, 124, *356-7-9, *354, *359, *360;
     Babur's capture of 21, 704 n. 3;
     Mahdi Khwaja and 704 n. 3;
     various comings and goings from and to 62-3-4, 135, 534.

   Bulan (Kabul), a route through 209.

   Buli (Rajputana), revenues of 521.

   Burhanpur (C. India), Babur on water of 592-8.

   Burh-ganga (Old Ganges), its part in the battle of the Ghogra 667
       n. 2, 674 n. 6, 667 n. 2.

   Burka-yilaq (Aura-tipa _q.v._), Babur at the fort of 92, 124.

   Busawar (Rajputana), Babur at 548 (where read Busawar) 581.

   Bu-stan-sarai (Kabul), Babur at 251-4.

   Bu-stan-sarai (Samarkand), 62;
     Babur at 74, 134.

   But-khak (Kabul), damming of its water 647;
     Babur at 409, 446 n. 4.

   Buz-gala-Khana (Samarkand), _see_ Aitmak-daban.


   Chach, _see_ Tashkint.

   Chachawali (U.P. India), Babur at 649.

   Chach-charan (on the Heri-rud), a holder of 274;
     Babur at 308.

   Chaghanian (Hisar-shadman), located 48 n. 5;
     an earlier extension of the name 188 n. 4;
     Nundak dependent on 471;
     a meadow (_aulang_) of 129;
     a ruler in 47;
     Khusrau Shah at 93;
     Babur in 188.

   Chaghan-sarai _buluk_, Chighan-sarai (Kabul), described 212;
     water of 211-2;
     name of 212 n. 2;
     a governor of 227;
     Babur's capture of 211 (where for "920" _read_, *366-7 n. 3.)

   Chahar _see_ Char.

   *Chak-chaq pass (Hisar-shadman), Babur traverses 359.

   Chaldiran (Persia), cart-defence in the battle of 469 n. 1.

   Chambal-river (C. India), course of 485;
     Babur on 509, 585-9, 607, 614;
     Shah-i-jahan pours wine into 298 n. 3.

   Champaran (Bihar, India), revenue of 521.

   Chanaran (n.w. of Mashhad), Husain _Bai-qara's_ victory at 260;
     located 260 n. 1
       and Ferte _q.v._ p. 39 n. 2.

   Chandawal (Bajaur, N.W.F.P.), of its name 367 n. 3;
     torrent of 372;
     Babur hunts near 372.

   Chandawar, Chandwar (U.P. India), correct name of 642 n. 8;
     water-raising in 487;
     comings and goings from and to 531, 552, 582;
     Babur at 589, 642-3;
     he loses it 557, 581.

   Chandiri (C. India), described 582-3-6;
     hills of 486;
     death of a holder of 573;
     mentioned to fix dates 269, 483, 605;
     Babur's capture of 589, 590-2-4-8.

   Chapar-kuda (U.P. India), identity of with Chaparghatta 650 n. 1;
     a start from 659 n. 5;
     Babur at 650.

   Char-dar _col_ (Hindu-kush), 204 n. 4.

   Char-dih plain (w. of Kabul-town), the Kabul-river traverses 200 n. 4;
     *overlooked from Babur's tomb 710.

   Charikar, Char-yak-kar (Kabul), altitude of 204 n. 4;
     name of _ib._ 295 n. 1;
     Judas-trees of 216 n. 3.

   Char-jui ferry (Oxus), 95 (where "Aubaj" is wrong).

   Char-shamba = Wednesday (Oxus valley _see_ Fr. map Maimene), 71 n. 2.

   Char-su (Samarkand), an execution in 196.

   Char-yak (Fr. map Maimene), over-run 295, 94 (where for "San-chirik"
       _read_ San and Char-yak).

   Chashma-i-tura pass (Kabul), Babur at 403-4.

   Chash-tupa (Kabul), Babur at 320.

   Chatsu (Rajputana), revenue of 521.

   Cha-tu var. Jal-tu (Kabul), Babur at 228.

   Chatur-muk (U.P. India), a Ghogra-crossing at 669, 677.

   Chaupara (N.W.F.P. India), an Indus ferry at 206;
     a limit of Bannu 233;
     Babur near 234.

   Chaupara (U.P. India), ferry of 677-9.

   Chausa (Bihar, India), a death at 273 n. 3;
     Babur at *603, 659, 660.

   Chausa or Jusa (C. India), Babur at 581.

   Chichik-tu (Balkh-Herat road), located 300;
     Babur at 296.

   Chihil-dukhtaran (Farghana), 107, 162;
     (Heri) 296, 301;
     (Kabul), 107 n. 1.

   Chihil-qulba (Kabul), Babur hunts near 420.

   Chikman-sarai (Andikhud, Oxus valley), a defeat at 46, 260, 268.

   Chin, China, Kabul trade with 203;
     a Chini cup 407;
     [for "China" _see_ Khitai].

   Chin-ab, Chan-ab, tract and river (Chen-ab, Panj-ab), course of 485;
     the Bar in 380 n. 4;
     a Turk possession 380-2;
     Babur resolves to regain 380;
     he on the river *441, 453;
     envoys to him from 386;
     his family reach 659;
     an appointment to 386.

   China-qurghan (Kabul), Babur at 407.

   Chiniut or Chiniwat (Panj-ab), a Turk possession 380-2;
     Babur resolves to regain 380.

   Chiragh-dan (Upper Heri-rud), Babur at 309;
     _see_ Add. Note p. 309 for omitted passage.

   Chirkh (Kabul), described 217;
     a mulla of 284;
     a soldier of 669, 678.

   Chir-su, Chir-chik (Tashkint lands), Ahmad _Miran-shahi's_ disaster at
       17, 25, 31-4-5.

   Chitr (Panj-ab), Babur at 645.

   Chitur, Chitor (Rajputana), hills of 486;
     Babur's plan against 598;
     Rana Sanga's 483, 617.

   Chunar (U.P. India), advance on 652-4;
     arrival from 657;
     appointments 682-3;
     Babur at 658;
     road measured from 659;
     question of identity 682 n. n.

   Chupan-ata (Samarkand), 72 n. 3, 76 (Kohik), 76 n. 4;
     Babur crosses 124;
     [_see_ Kohik].

   Chutiali (Duki, Qandahar), Babur at 238-9.

   Cintra (Portugal), oranges of 511 n. 4.

   Citadel (_arg_) of Kabul, 201;
     Bala-hisar 198 n. 4;
   --of Samarkand, 77;
     position of 78 n. 6;
     Babur in 134, 141.


   Dabusi (Samarkand), Auzbeg victories at 40, 124, 137.

   Dahanah (_see_ Fr. map Maimene), corn from 295;
     traversed 194-7, 243, 295.

   Dakka (Kabul), App. E. xx;
     [_see_ note to Baran-su].

   Dakkan, Dakhin, Deccan (India), rulers in 482;
     ? Dakni = Dakkani 619, 631, Add. Note pp. 619, 631.

   Daman (N.W.F.P. India), _see_ Dasht.

   Damghan (Persia), a w. limit of Khurasan 261;
     Bai-qaras captured in 263;
     Auzbegs defeated at 618, 622.

   Dandan-shikan pass (Khurasan), Babur crosses 294.

   Dara-i-bam (Badghis, Khurasan), Babur in 296.

   Dara-i-gaz (s. of Balkh), a recall from 14.

   Dara-i-Ghazi Khan (Panj-ab), 233 n. 3.

   Dara-i-khwush (Kabul), Babur in 27, 251-3.

   Dara-i-nur (Kabul) described 210;
     unique character of 210, 241, App. F;
     wines of 210, 410, App. G, xxv;
     monkeys of 211, 492;
     name of App. F, xxiii, xxiv;
     a holder of 227, 344;
     attacked 241;
     Babur in 422.

   Dara-i-pur-amin (Kabul), Babur at 342 (where for "anim" _read_ amin).

   Dara-i-suf (Khurasan), character of 222.[2945]

   Dara-i-zang (Khurasan), defence for planned 191.

   Dara-i-zindan (Kabul-Balkh road), mountains of 222;
     located 189 n. 6;
     Babur in 189.

   Darband (Caspian Sea), 564 n. 5.

   Darband-i-ahanin (Hisar-shadman), a limit of territory 47;
     a name of Qulugha, Quhqa, 194;
     *Babur at 353;
     Najm Sami near 359.

   Dar-i-gham canal (Samarkand) described 76, 84;
     Babur on 124-5;
     (_see_ Kohik-water).

   Daruta (Kabul), Babur at 421-2.

   Darwaza (Bajaur ? N.W.F.P. India), a road through 376.

   Dasht (Plain), Daman, Bazar and Taq (N.W.F.P. India), names of 229
       n. 1, 233 and n. 1;
     (Mehtar Sulaiman) mountains of 223;
     limits Bannu 233;
     a route through 206;
     Babur and 229, 235-7, 394.

   Dasht-i-shaikh, Kurrat-taziyan (Kohistan, Kabul) described 215.

   Dawar (Kohistan, Kabul), Babur at 421;
     perhaps Dur-nama 421 n. 5.

   Dhar (C. India), observatory in 79.

   Dibalpur (Panj-ab), revenue of 521;
     water-wheels in 486, 532;
     commandants in 442-3, 463;
     Babur captures 208, *441, 575-8.

   Dih-i-afghan (Kabul), a rebel in 345;
     a goer to 402.

   Dih-i-ghulaman (Kabul), Babur at 413.

   Dih-i-yaq'ub (Kabul), narrows of 200;
     water of 241;
     Babur at 409, 445.

   Dihli, mountains of 485;
     the capital of Hindustan 463;
     a Ludi possession 481;
     revenue of 521;
     Miwat and 577;
     'Alam Khan and 455-6;
     Ibrahim marches from 465;
     Sanga gives Babur rendezvous near 529;
     Babur takes possession of 475;
     appointments to 476;
     submissive 523;
     mentioned as Babur's 561;
     Khwaja Kalan's inscription in 525;
     an arrival from to Babur 526;
     treasure of 583, *695 n. 1, 617.

   Dikh-kat (Aura-tipa, Samarkand), described 149, 152;
     an arrival in 151;
     Babur in 149, 150, 633 n. 4.

   Dilmau var. (U.P. India), comings and goings from and to 534-7, 681-4;
     variants of name of 681 n. 3.

   Din-kot, Dhankot (N.W.F.P. India), location and name of 206 n. 6;
     limit of Koh-i-jud 380
       and of Bannu 233;
     routes through 206, 399.

   Dirapur (U.P. India), Babur in 649.

   Diri pass (Kabul), a route through 209.

   Diyul (Samarkand), allies of Babur in 138.

   Dizak (Samarkand), Babur a fugitive in 148;
     a governor of 26.

   "Doab," _see_ Miyan-du-ab.

   Du-aba (U.P. India), Gangetic changes in 667 n. 2.

   Dugdugi (U.P. India), Babur at 651-2.

   Dughaba river (Khurasan), head-waters of 216.

   Duki (Qandahar), mountains of 223, 236;
     Babur in 218, 238, 382.

   Dulpur, "Dholpur" (Rajputana), mountains of 486;
     Ibrahim _Ludi's_ begs in 593;
     Babur and 520, 552, 585, *603-6, 614, 634-5-9, 689;
     accounts of work in 606, 634, 642;
     a view from 610.

   Dun (Jaswan, Panj-ab); 'Alam Khan in 457;
     Babur in 461-2.

   Dungarpur (Rajputana), old name of 573 n. 1.

   Dur-nama or -nama'i (Kohistan, Kabul), described 215;
     Babur at 420;
     (_see_ Dawar).

   Durrin- or Diurrin-tangi (Kabul), a limit of Shah-i-Kabul 200, 417.

   Du-shamba (Badakhshan), Humayun at 621.

   Dushi (n. of Hindu-kush), Khusrau Shah submits to Babur at 51, 191-5.


   Egypt, _see_ Misr.

   Etawa, Itawa (U.P. India), hostile to Babur 523-9, 530;
     appointments to 530-3, 579, 582;
     comings and goings from and to 541, 645, 689;
     Babur at 644, 686.


   Faizabad (Badakhshan), *? Babur and Mahin at 436.

   Fakhru'd-din-aulum (Balkh-Herat road), Babur at 296;
     (_see_ Fr. map Maimene).

   Fanakat, Banakat = Shahrukhiya (Tashkint), passed by the Sir-darya 2;
     identity of 2 n. 5, 7 n. 5.

   Fan-tagh (Hisar-shadman), Lake Iskandar in 129;
     Babur in 130.

   Farab (W. Turkistan?), a mulla of 643.

   Faraghina (Farghana), Babur at 168.

   Farghana mod. Kokand, description of 1 to 12;
     extent of 2 n. 3;
     included in Trans-oxiana 76;
     Alps of 223;
     nick-name of 289;
     winter-route into 2, *183;
     capitals of 3, 10, 162;
     an e. limit of Samarkand 76;
     Kabul trade of 202;
     celebrities of 4, 7, 76, 90, 289;
     'Umar Shaikh's (I and II) 14-7, 24;
     Babur succeeds in 1, 29;
     invasions of 13, 20-9, 54, *183;
     proposal to dispossess Babur 168;
     an arrival in 28;
     an exit from 190;
     Babur's loss of 19 n. 1, *183;
     Babur's leaving 187;
     (_see_ Andijan).

   Far-kat (n. of Kindir-tau _q.v._), a refugee in 149;
     a mulla of 343;
     reached from Ghawa (Farghana, Fr. map, Gava), 179.

   Farmul _tuman_ (Kabul), described 220;
     a s. limit of Kabul 200;
     Urghun in 206 n. 2;
     roads through 206, 231-3-5;
     Shaikh-zadas of 220, 679 n. 7.

   Fathpur (U.P. India), Babur at 643, 686.

   Fathpur or Nathpur (U.P. India), a dependency of 680;
     lake of 681.

   Fathpur-Aswa (U.P. India), Babur at 651.

   Firuzabad (U.P. India), 643 n. 3.

   Firuz-koh (Ghur-Kabul road), Babur on 365.

   Firuzpur (-jhirka; Gurgaon, Panj-ab), described 580 n. 1;
     Babur at 580.

   Fulul (Badakhshan), Khusrau Shah and 60;
     Mughuls from, join Babur 192 (where _read_ Fulul).


   Gagar, Ghaggar, Kakar river (Patiala, Panj-ab), Babur visits and
       describes 464-5;
     called _rud_ (torrent) of Banur and Sanur 464.

   Gagar, Kakar (U.P. India), a constituent of the Gogra, Ghogra _q.v._;
     the word Gagar or Kakar used 602.

   Gamb(h)ir-water (India), Babur crosses 606.

   Gandak river (India), course of 485;
     defence of 663.

   Gandamak (Kabul), Babur at 394, 414, 446.

   Gang-river, Ganges (India), course of 485;
     changed course of 667 n. 2, 674 n. 6-7 n. 2, 682 n. 1;
     bridged by Babur 495, 599, 633;
     lands and chiefs east of 523, 628, 638, 651;
     various crossings made of 530, 544, 583-7, 598, 669, 681-4;
     Babur on 598 to 665, 666-7;
     a battle-station east of 371;
     Babur swims 603-5, 655, 660.

   Garm-chashma (Kabul), Babur at 229, 411, 448.

   Garm-sir (S. Afghanistan), *432; a bird of 496.

   Garzawan (Khurasan, Fr. map Maimene, Ghourzistan), mountains of 222;
     locates a place 69;
     a plan for defence of 191;
     Babur at 296 (where mis-spelled "Gurzwan").

   Gau- or Kau-water (Kabul), Kafiristan the source of 210.

   Gawar or Kawar (Kabul), position of 210.

   Ghain (Kabul), a punitive force against 253.

   Ghaj-davan (Bukhara), *besieged 360; *battle of 361, 279:
     a fugitive from 363.

   Gharjistan, Ghurjistan (Khurasan), mountains of 222;
     Babur near 308;
     Muhammad-i-zaman in 365.[2946]

   Ghawa (Farghana, Fr. map, Gava), Babur seeks the road to 179,
       180-1-*2.

   Ghazipur (U.P. India), crocodiles of 502;
     an assignment on 527;
     a holder of 669;
     threatened 544, 680;
     Babur at 659;
     his boats sent to 679.

   Ghazni = Kabul and Zabulistan, Ghaznin (Kabul); describes 217, 321;
     a N.W. limit to Hindustan 481;
     cold of 219, 526; game in 224;
     no honey from 203;
     firewood of 223;
     highwaymen on road to 228;
     wines of, taken to Hindustan 461, 551;
     repairs of a dam at 219, 646;
     a route to 206;
     locates Zurmut 220;
     a Shahrukhi's 382 (here Kabul); Aulugh Beg and 95 n. 2;
     Dost Beg buried at 396;
     various governors of 227, 253-4, 307, 343-4, 363, 397, 525;
     not subjected to Babur (912 AH.) 300;
     rebellion in (912 AH.) 363;
     Khwaja Kalan and 447, 526;
     Babur and 199, 228, 239, 240, 330, 526.

   Ghur (Khurasan), mountains of 222;
     w. limit to Kabul 200;
     road from Kabul to 214;
    a holder of 274.

   Ghuram (Panj-ab), an assignment of 525.

   Ghur-bund _tuman_ (Kabul), described 214;
     Nil-ab (Naulibis) in 206 n. 3;
     roads from 205;
     a tulip of 215;
     Babur in 195, 294, 314.

   Ghuri (Khurasan), position of 409;
     a route through 94;
     corn from 295;
     a failure in 546.

   Ghurjistan, _see_ Gharjistan.

   Ghwaliri pass (on the Gumal _q.v._, India), a surmised route through
       235 n. 2.

   Gibrik or Kibrik (Kafiristan), people of 207.

   Ginguta (Panj-ab), described 462;
     an occupation of 457.

   Girdiz (Kabul), head-quarters in Zurmut 220;
     tribesmen on road to 228, 403;
     a road for 405;
     locates a place 403;
     Khwaja Kalan's 525;
     Tang-i-waghchan a name for its pass 403 n. 1.

   Gogra, Ghogra, Gagar, Kakar river (U.P. India), _see_ Saru.

   Gosfand-liyar (n. of Bannu-plain), a sheep-road travelled by Babur
       233.

   Goshta (Kabul), 206 n. 4.

   Gualiar, Gwalior (C. India), described 607 to 612, 613-4;
     Babur's building in 520;
     hills of 486;
     revenue of 521;
     forms of the name 486;
     ruler of killed at Panipat 477;
     hostile to Babur 523-9 (where add "Gualiar" after Dulpur, l. 4 fr.
       foot), 539;
     assigned 539;
     gained 540;
     reinforced 547, 557;
     Babur's visit to 605, 552, 607 to 614;
     on envoy from 612;
     sedition in 688-9, 690, *692 n. 1.

   Gui-water, Gumti (U.P. India), course of 485 (where for "Gumti" _read_
       (Babur's) Gui);
     Babur on 601, 658, 683-4.

   Gujrat (Panj-ab), a tree of;
     a ruler in 481;
     affairs of 534-5.

   Guk-sarai (Samarkand), described 41 n. 2, 63, 77;
     ascension-stone in 77 n. 5;
     a Mirza sent to 41.

   Gul-i-bahar (Kohistan, Kabul), described (without name) 214-5;
     fish-catching in 226, Babur at 320-1, 406-7.

   Gumal valley and river (N.W.F.P. India), Babur and 235-6.

   Gumbazak pass (Khurasan; _see_ Fr. map Maimene), Babur at 294.

   Gumhaz-i-chaman (Farghana), Babur at 176.

   Gura-khattri (Panj-ab), Babur and 230, 294.

   Gurgan-su (s.e. of the Caspian), Husain _Bai-qara_ swims 259,
       260 n. 6.

   Guzar var. (Qandahar?), Babur at 332.


   Ha-darwesh waste (Farghana), described 9, 9, 151;
     *birthplace of Babur's legendary son 358 n. 2.

   Haft-bacha pass (Hindu-kush), described 205.

   Haji-ghat pass (Hindu-kush), turns Hindu-kush 205 n. 2.

   Hajipur (Bihar, India), Babur and 674;
     a governor of 663 n. 6.

   Haji-tarkhan = Astrakhan (on the Caspian), a chief of 258.

   Haldi-guzr (U.P. India), location of 668 n. 2, 669 n. 1, 671 n. 1;
     Babur's men cross 668-9, 675.

   Halwa-chashma (Khurasan), a victory at 260.

   Hamadan (Persia), a saint of 211; *a soldier of 700.

   Hamtatu pass (Panj-ab), Babur crosses 381.

   Hangu (N.W.F.P. India), Babur at 231-2.

   Harmand-, Halmand-river (Afghanistan), source of 216;
     a drowning in 307.

   Haru, Kacha-kot water (Panj-ab), Babur crosses 379, 452;
     an Indus-ford near 206 n. 5.

   Hash(t)-nagar (N.W.F.P. India), a limit of Kabul 200;
     desolate 207;
     rhinoceros in 490;
     birds of 497, 500;
     locates a place 376;
     Babur advised to raid 410-1.

   Hasht-yak (W. Turkistan), Babur near 151.

   Hatya (Panj-ab), limit of a clan 452 n. 5.

   Hazarasp (Khwarizm), a holder of 50.

   Heri, Herat (Khurasan), description of 304 to 306;
     Husain _Bai-qara's_ birthplace 256,
       conquest of 134,
       splendid rule in 273,
       ease in 261,
       feast in 264,
       delay of a pilgrim in 284,
       reception of fugitives 243,
       burial in 293;
     --joint-rule in 293, 326;
     weakness before Auzbeg attack on 296-9, 326;
     --Shaibani's capture of 207, 326-8-9;
     --Isma'il _Safawi's_ capture of *350-5;
     --'Ubaidu'l-lah _Auzbeg_ and *434;
     --'Ali-sher _Nawa'i_ in 4, 271, 286-7;
     Bana'i and 286-7;
     *Shah Beg and 365, 429, 430;
     Khwand-amir and *432, 605;
     fugitives from 331;
     governors of 24, 37, 274 (Koh-daman), 275, *633;
     envoys to Babur from *436;
     a Begim comes from 267;
     Mas'uma brought from 330;
     Babur at 300-1-2, 302 to 307;
     his marriage with Mahim in *704;
     --locates a place 25;
     fixes a date 258.

   Himar or Khimar (? Khurasan), a passer through 260.

   Hind, Hindustan, Hindustanat--a northern limit of Kabul 200;
     routes between it and Kabul 206;
     a journey to Makka made from Kabul through 26;
     trade and traders 202, 331, 416;
     Jats and Gujurs in 454;
     a saint honoured in 238;
     a raja of 219;
     comings and goings to and from 250, 265, 267, 368;
     Khwand-amir in *432, 605 and n. 6;
     --Astronomical Tables in 79;
     names for outside places used in 202;
     gold from 446;
     titles in 537;
     building style in 609;
     greetings in 640;
     mentioned by Babur in a verse 584;
     Hind-al named from 385;
     of Biana in 529;
     of the Betwa 597;
     --a seemingly limited use of the name Hindustan 386;
     of its three names used by Babur, Hind 26, 219, 385, 525, 532, 577,
         577 n. 6, 578,
       Hindustanat 485,
       Hindustan usually;
     --Hindustan the Less (?) 46 and 46 n. 4;
     --Ludi rise in 383;
     Ludi possessions in 463, 480;
     Ibrahim's accession in 385;
     *torn by faction 439;
     envoys to Babur from *426, *436;
     Babur's comments on its chiefs 219, 385, 459;
     Farmuli ascendancy in 220;
     begs in 387;
     armies in 547;
     --Timur's conquest of 382;
     his employment in Samarkand of workmen from 77;
     pictures of his victories in 78;
     tradition of a soldier in his army of 150;
     --Babur's persistent wish to regain Turk possessions in 340, 377,
       380-1-2, 478-9;
     working-out of his desire for *426;
     varied opposition to his aims 478;
     *his five expeditions to:--

       910 AH.--39, 229, 382;
       925 AH.--378 et seq., 478, 480;
       926 AH.--*428, *429;
         its frustration *429, *430, *441;
       930 AH.--575, *442;
         its frustration 442;
       932 AH.--*444, 445, 479;

     --one start frustrated in Kabul 913, AH. 341-3;
     'Alam Khan asks and obtains help in *439, *441, 455;
     Daulat Khan proffers allegiance *440;
     *Babur's prayer for a sign of victory *440;
     his fifth expedition fixes dates 269, 545;
     indications that only the fifth aimed at Dihli *429, *444, 480;
     his decisive victories, at Panipat 475,
       at Kanwa 574;
     references to his conquest 220, 561;
     some of his Begs wish to leave 524-5, 579, 584;
     his Hindustan poems 642, App. Q;
     his ease in and hints at leaving 617, 645, 686;
     his family brought to 646, 686;
     --the *_Akbar-nama_ chronicles no public events of 936-937 AH.
       in 682;
     *Babur's journey to Lahor (936 AH.) may point to his leaving
       Hindustan 707;
     *Humayun's arrival in 696, 707;
     *on Babur's intended disposal of Hindustan 702 to 708;
     *burial of his body in 709
       and later removal from 709-710;
     --Babur's description of Hindustan 478 to 531,
       _viz._:--Introduction, on earlier Tramontane expeditions into 478
         to 480,
       boundaries and capital of 480,
       rulers in 932 AH. 481,
       varied climate,
       character of and northern mountains 484;
     rivers and Aravalli range 485;
     irrigation 486,
       other particulars 487,
       --mammals 488,
       birds 493,
       aquatic animals 501,
       fruits 503,
       flowers 513;
     --seasons of the year 515,
       days of the week 516,
       division of time 516,
       weights and measures 517,
       modes of reckoning 518;
     --Hindus in 518;
     --defects and advantages of 518-9, 531, 532,
       revenues 520-1.

   Hindu-kush mountains, n. boundary of Kabul 200-4;
     connected ranges 210, 380;
     called Hindu-kush in Kabul 485;
     account of their prolongation in Hind (_i.e._ Himalayas), 485;
     roads and passes of 204-5;
     the clouds a hindrance to bird-migration 224;
     limits of territory fixed by 47-9, 194;
     an episode on 270 *Babur's crossing 930 AH. 442.

   Hisar-firuza (Panj-ab), revenue of 521;
     given to Humayun 465, 466, 528;
     opposition near 540.

   Hisar (-shadman; Transoxiana), mountains of 222;
     clans from 228;
     Kabul trade with 202;
     --Aba-bikr and 51;
     Mahmud and 47-9;
     Mas'ud and 52, 64, 71, 93-5, 261;
     Bai-sunghar and 52, 61, 96, 110-2;
     Husain and 48, 57-8-9, 61, 130, 191, 260-3, 275;
     Babur traverses 128, 130, 187-8,
       moves for *352,
       takes 37, 262, *352-3,
       defends *358, 471,
       attacked in 345, *361-2,
       leaves 362-3;
     --Mughuls leave 58
       and rebel 105;
     goers to 104, 141;
     Shaibani and 192, 244, *362;
     abandoned by the Auzbegs 622-4;
     Khusrau Shah and _see s.n._;
     *threefold catastrophe in 362;
     Humayun ordered to attack 625;
     Qasim _quchin_ and 66;
     a governor in 46-7;
     occupied for Babur 640.

   Hormuz (Persia), Farghana almonds imported to 9.

   Huni (Kabul), Babur at 405.

   Hupian pass, Upian (Kabul), Babur crosses 195;
     locates a place 647 n. 3.

   Hurur (Panj-ab), taken from Babur 464.

   Hushiar (Farghana), a subdivision of Asfara 7;
     Babur a refugee in 7, *181;
     his gifts to envoys from 633.


   Ilyak-su, Kafirnighan (Hisar-shadman), locates a place 48 n. 5.

   Indri (U. P. India), an arrival at 456.

   Indus, _see_ Sind-darya.

   'Iraq (Persia), Kabul trade with 202;
     various captures of 49, 51, 280, 336;
     envoys to and from 540, 583, 666;
     other comings and goings from and to 20, 46, 260-2-8, 275, 282-7,
       291-4 n. 3, 622;
     Babur's gifts to kinsfolk in 522.

   'Iraqain, _i.e._ 'Iraq-i-'ajam and 'Iraq-i-'arabi, places noted for
       cold in 219.

   'Iraq-pass (n. w. of Kabul), a presumed crossing of 294 n. 3.

   Irij or Irich (C. India), Babur at 590.

   Ishkimish (Qunduz?), not in Badakhshan 288;
     on a named route 321;
     military action at 60, 192, 243.

   Ispahan (Persia), a governor of 635 n. 6.

   Istalif (Kabul), described 216;
     a garden at 246;
     fishing at 226;
     Babur at 246, 406, 416-8.


   Jagdalik pass (Kabul), Babur crosses 229, 341, 414.

   Jahan-nama fort (Bhira, Panj-ab), Babur in 384 (where for "numa"
       _read_ nama).

   Jahan-nama hill (Dihli district), 485.

   Jahan-nama'i (Kabul), Babur at 421;
     _see_ Jui-shahi.

   Jajmau or Jajmawa (U. P. India), rebels in 533;
     a submission near 534.

   Jakin _pargana_ (U. P. India), Babur in 644.

   Jalandhar (Panj-ab), an appointment to 442.

   Jalisar, Jalesar (on the Jumna, U. P. India), Humayun at 531;
     Babur at 589, 640 (in both places _read_ Jalisar).

   Jalisar, Jalesar (on the Ghogra, U. P. India), Babur at 681;
     perhaps Chaksar 681 n. 4.

   Jalmish (w. frontier, Kabul), 205 n. 2.

   Jal-tu var. Cha-tu (Kabul), Babur at 228.

   Jam, mod. Jam-rud (N. W. F. P. India), Babur at 229, 230, 412.

   Jam (Khurasan), Hatifi's birthplace 288;
     how marked in maps 623 n. 8, *714;
     Jami the cognomen of Maulana 'Abdu'r-rahman _q.v._;
     Auzbeg defeat near 622 n.1, 625 n. 4, 635, 636 n. 2,
       details as to location of the battle 623 n. 8, 635 n. 4.

   Janara or Chanara (U. P. India), rebels take refuge in 682;
     not identified 682 n. 1.

   Janglik (Kabul), Babur at 251-3, 311-4 n. 1.

   Jaswan-dun (Panj-ab), described 462;
     Babur in 461-3.

   Jaunpur (U. P. India), _see_ Junpur.

   Jauz-wilayat (Khurasan), 46 n. 3.

   Jihlam, Jilam, Jhelum (Panj-ab), Babur near 453;
     _see_ Bahat for Jhelum river.

   Jud mountains (Panj-ab), _see_ Koh-i-jud.

   Juduk (Samarkand), Babur at 147.

   Jui-shahi (Kabul), Babur at 229, 394, 410, 422;
     (_see _Jahan-nama'i).

   Jumandna, mod. "Jumoheen" ? (U. P. India), Babur at 649.

   Jun-river, Jumna (India), course of 485;
     locates a place 532;
     a drowning in 582;
     Babur on or crossing 467, 475, 531, 605, 616, 638-9, 640, 650-5,
       684-6;
     he bathes in 644;
     orders his officers to cross 684;
     in flood 685.

   Junahpur, Junapur (U. P. India), an old form of Junpur or Jaunpur
       676 n. 4;
     used by Babur 276 (where read it for "Jaunpur"), 544, 636, 676, 682;
     _see infra_ Junpur.

   Junpur, Jaunpur (U. P. India), water of 658;
     formerly a Sharqi possession 481;
     revenue of 521;
     taken by Humayun 544;
     an assignment on 527;
     appointments to 276, 538, 544, 676, 682;
     arrivals from 636, 667.

   Jurgha-tu (Kabul), _see_ Qurgha-tu.

   Jusa or Chausa (C. P. India), Babur at 581.


   Kabul town and country, description of 199 to 227,
       --position and boundaries 199, 481,
       town and environs 200, fort 201, 344,
       bridges 198, 314, 417,
       trade 202,
       climate 77, 201-3, 223, 314, 584,
       snow in 208-9, 223, 314,
       dividing line between hot and cold climates 208, 220, 229,
       fruits 202, 510,
       cultivated lands 243,
       meadows 204,
       Hindu-kush roads 204,
       Lamghanat roads 201,
       Khurasan road 205,
       Hindustan roads 205, 206 n. 3, 231, 308, 629;
     highwaymen 205, 341,
       peoples 207, 221,
       subdivisions 207 to 221,
       dependencies 214-5,
       revenue 221,
       mountain-tracts 221,
       firewood 223,
       fauna 223, 496-8,
       bird-catching 224, fishing 225;
     --rivers of, Baran _q.v._--Kabul, Luhugur (Logar);
     _garm-sil_ 208, 484;
     unfitness for nomads 228, 402;
     use "Hindu-kush" in 485;
     use of "Kabul" in Agra 532;
     a mulla of 284;
     --given to 'Umar Shaikh 14;
     Aulugh Beg _Kabuli_ and 95 and n. 2 (where "2" should follow "Mirza"
       and not "son"), *185;
     Aba-bikr and 260;
     'Abdu-r-razzaq and 195;
     Muqim _Arghun_ and 195, 198-9, 227;
     Khusrau Shah and 192;
     --Babur's move to win it 7, 189, 191-7;
     his capture of 198-9;
     dates fixed, by the capture of, 19 n. 1, 21, 26, 39, 48, 227, 251,
       274, 282, 377, 383, 394,
       and by his possession of 27, 529;
     a sequel of its capture 243;
     reserved by him for himself 227, 227 n. 5, 627, 645-6;
     --his comings and goings to
       and from 27, 229, 241, 248-9, 294, 323, 325, 330, 339, *350,
       *363-4-5, 389, 395,
     403-4-5-7-8, 415-18-19,441-2-3;
     other comings and goings 51, 196, 228, 321, 349, 364-5, 385, 399,
       531, 539, 544, *696, 687, 699;
     men sent to 343, 413, 466, 476;
     various Begims arrive in or leave 36, 306, 339--265,
       397--21--264--267--269--606, 616;
     family journey from 646-7, 650-5-7-8, 686-7-9 n. 5;
     followers delay to go to 307;
     *landless men in 706;
     excess levy of grain on 228;
     its _sir_ (weight) 632;
     officers in 250, 270, 273, 382, 646 n. 3;
     newly-made begs of 458, 524;
     --anxiety for 300, 307;
     disloyalty in 313-320, 331, 345;
     *tranquil 349;
     *Mughuls of 357;
     of its troops 375, 550, 579, 625;
     --Babur in it the last ruling Timurid 340, *427;
     envoys to him in *439-440, *441, 529;
     his poverty in 525;
     learns the word _sangur_ in 232;
     family affairs in *603-4;
     --letters of victory sent to 371, 466, 580;
     other letters to and from 374, 541, 618, 639, 644-5, 6;
     gifts 463, 523, 642;
     Babur's seeming intention of return to 698 n. 5, *705-6-7;
     his chosen centre *705;
     the taking of his body to *709-10;
     his burial-garden and grave *710-11.

   Kabul-water, Nil-ab a name of 206 n. 3;
     fords of 206, 345, 411;
     App. E xvii, xix, xx;
     Babur on 451.

   Kabud (Soghd, Samarkand), 73, 98.

   Kacha-kot (Panj-ab), a holder of 250;
     Babur crosses water of (Haru) 379, 403, 452.

   Kachwa (C. India), described 590;
     Babur at 590-2.

   Kafiristan, mountains connecting with its own 480;
     former extent of 212 n. 3;
     borderlands of 210-1-2;
     wines of 211-2, 372;
     highwaymen of 205, 214;
     a _ghazi_ raid into 46.

   Kahadstan (Heri), Babur at 305;
     Shaibani at 329.

   Kahan (Sind, India), Shah Beg's capture of 398, *430-5.

   Kahlur (Simla Hill-state, India), taken for Babur 464;
     *its Raja visits him, 692-9.

   Kahmard or Kalmard (Kabul-Balkh route, Fr. map Maimene), a plan for
       defence of 191;
     a governor in 409, 546 n. 2;
     exposed to Auzbeg attack 409;
     various occurrences in it 239, 250, 295;
     Babur in 48, 189;
     households left in 189, 194-7;
     Babur loyal to Jahangir in 190, 239;
     he sends gifts to peasants of 633;
     (_see_ Ajar).

   Kahraj (N.W.F.P. India), Babur at 373-4.

   Kakar river (N. India), _see_ Gagar, Ghaggar.

   Kalabagh (Panj-ab), locates Dinkot 206, n. 5.

   Kalanjar (Panj-ab), perverted allegiance of 387 (where in n. 3
       _delete_ the second sentence).

   Kalanjar (U.P. India), revenue of 521;
     Mahuba a dependency of 685 n. 3.

   Kalanur (Panj-ab), a governor of 442;
     Babur and 451-8.

   Kalda-kahar (Panj-ab), described 381;
     Babur at 381-9, 391.

   Kalpi (U.P. India), revenue of 521;
     elephants in 488;
     dependencies of 649, 686;
     locates places 544, 590, 659;
     hostile to Babur 523;
     Babur in 590;
     boats from 598, 684.

   Kalpush (Khurasan), 622 n. 3.

   Kama _buluk_ (Kabul), described 213;
     water of 211.

   Kamari (Kabul), meadow of 204;
     Babur at 244;
     (on the Indus), Babur at 230.

   Kam-rud valley (Hisar-shadman), a flight through 58;
     Babur in 129-30.

   Kanar ferry (Jumna U.P. India), Babur at 589, 590-8.

   Kan-bai (Samarkand), locates places 52, 64;
     Mahmud (Khan) at 53, 111.

   Kandar, Kuhandar (Rajputana), besieged by Sanga, surrenders 530-9.

   Kand-i-badam (Farghana), described 8,
       locates a place 20;
     a governor of 115;
     passers through 44, 172;
     Babur at 92, *358 n. 2 (a legendary visit).

   Kandla or Kundla (U.P. India), revenue of 521;
     an assignment on 679.

   Kangra (Panj-ab), a "Bajaur" north of 511 n. 3.

   Kanhpur, "Cawnpore" (U.P. India), 649 n. 7.

   Kaniguram (Dasht-Kabul route), 235 n. 2.

   Kanwa, Kanwaha (Rajputana), Babur's victory of 549, 557 to 574,
       523 n. 3.

   Kanwahin (Panj-ab), Babur at 458.

   Karal (Panj-ab), Babur at 464.

   Kara-su, Qara-su? (Kabul), a tribe on 413.

   Karg-khana, _see_ Sawad.

   Kark ? (Kabul), Babur at 395.

   Karman ('Iraq), surrenders 51;
     an intruder in 260.

   Karma-na['s]a river (Bihar, India), ill-repute of 659;
     Babur on 659-60.

   Kar-mash mountain (Kabul), located 403;
     Babur near 403-5.

   Karmina (Samarkand), mentioned as a _wilayat_ 84.

   Karnal (U.P. India), *Babur at 701.

   Karnan (Farghana), a village of 161;
     locates place 162, 168 (where in section heading for "Kasan" _read_
       Karnan);
     a _darogha_ of 179-80;
     Babur and 179, *182.

   Karrah (U.P.I.), a dependency of 651;
     Babur at 652.

   Karrah-Manikpur (U.P. India), revenue of 521;
     elephants in 488;
     Humayun near 544.

   Kasan (Farghana), described 10;
     fixes a date 28;
     a raid near 26;
     a departure to 32;
     a holder of hostile to Babur 170;
     Babur at 104, 116.

   Kashghar (E. Turkistan), an e. limit of Farghana 1, of Samarkand 76;
     a border tribe of 55;
     *Kashghar-Farghana road 183;
     trade with Kabul 202,
       Andijani captives in 20 n. 3;
     rulers in 21, 29 n. 5, 32-7, 318, 415, 427, 695-6;
     Mughuls in *184, 351, 364;
     arrivals from 399, 415-6;
     Babur's kinsfolk in 21-4, 318, 409, 522;
     a devious journey through 399;
     a return from 408,
       and to 590.

   Kashmir, mountains of 380-7, 481;
     a bird of 494;
     lost dependencies of 484;
     Babur on name of 484,
     *sends an expedition to 692-3-8 n. 5, 701.
     Additional Note p. 693.

   Katlang (N.W.F.P. India), Babur at 377.

   Kattawaz-plain (Ghazni ?), torrent of 240;
     Babur in 323-5.

   Kawari-water (C. India), Babur crosses 607, 614.

   Kechef-dara (Khurasan), leads down to Mashhad 622 n. 3.

   Kesh = Shahr-i-sabz (Samarkand), described 3, 83;
     a blinded refugee in 95;
     Bana'i dismissed to 136;
     an arrival from 137;
     Babur and 125-8, 138.

   Keshtud (Hisar-shadman tract), Babur at 130.

   Khaibar-mountains (Kabul), route through 206;
     crossings of 250, 260, 492;
     Babur's crossings of 229, 382, 411-3.

   Khairabad (U.P. India), revenue of 521;
     Babur's army at 583.

   Khakan-ariq (Farghana), Babur on 165-7.

   Khalila (Soghd, Samarkand), Babur at 148.

   Khalishak (Qandahar), a water-head 332;
     Babur at 333.

   Khamalangan (Badakhshan), a holder of 242.

   Khamchan (Badakhshan), military move to 321.

   Khan-yurti (Samarkand), described 82;
     Babur at 67-8, 82, 124, 131.

   Kharabuk (Farghana), Babur near 163-8.

   Kharbin (s.e. of Ghazni), 323 n. 3.

   Khari (U.P. India), Babur at 580.

   Kharid _pargana_ (on the Saru = Ghogra), formerly on both banks of the
       river 561 n. 2, 664 n. 8, 674 n. 6;
     present limits 637, n. 1;
     position of town of 679 and n. 1;
     a (now) Bihar pargana of 674;
     Humayun plunders 544;
     capture of mentioned 561;
     Babur's man in 637;
     position of its army opposing Babur 664, 676 n. 5.

   Khartank (Samarkand), a celebrity of 76.

   Khasban plain (Farghana), Babur crosses 124.

   Khaslar (W. Turkistan), Babur at 151.

   Kawak road (Hindu-kush), 205;
     height of its pass 204, n. 4.

   Khawal-i-quti (_see_ Zirrin pass), Babur in 309.

   Khinjan (n. of Hindu-kush), roads to 205.

   Khirgird or Khirjard (Khurasan), Jami'sbirthplace 623, n. 8;
     battle of Jam fought near 623, 635.

   Khirs-khana (Kabul), Babur passes 417.

   Khitai = N. China, a caravan from 15;
     porcelain, etc. from 80, 157-9, 160;
     trade profits in 202.
     [N. B.--For all instances Babur's word is Khitai and not "China".]

   Khozar or Khuzar (Samarkand), mentioned as a _wilayat_ 84;
     lost by Auzbegs, 135, 359.

   Khuban or Khunan (Farghana), approx. site of Babur's first ranged
       battle 113.

   Khujand var. (Farghana), described 7;
     not counted by all as in Farghana 17;
     locates a place 55;
     holders of 35, 115;
     Ahmad _Miran-shahi_ takes 30;
     surrender to Babur of 53;
     Babur's first marriage made in it 35, 120;
     he in it 89, 90-1-2;
     a "poor place" 97-8;
     he halts in a village of 100;
     his legendary transit of 358 n. 2;
     a follower's compulsory journey to 124.

   Khujand-water, Saihun, Sir-darya _see_ Saihun.

   Khulm (Kabul-Balkh road, Fr. map Bokhara), vine-culture in 210 n. 6;
     places on its river 546 n. 2.

   Khuqan (Farghana), an arrival at 44;
     Babur at 161.

   Khurasan, Khurasanat (219),
       Hindustani use of the name 202;
     Kabul roads from 205, 300;
     Kabul trade with 202, 225;
     melons and oranges of 203, 510,
       compared with Kabul Koh-daman 216;
     _hammams_ in 79;
     medical practice in 246;
     refined manners of Khurasanis 303;
     nomads of 221;
     *enforced migration of Mughuls to 351;
     --Mahmud _Ghaznawi_ and 479;
     Abu-sa'id's Cadet Corps of 28, 50, App. H, xxvi, xxvii;
     Yunas Khan in 20;
     Aba-bikr defeated in 260;
     Mahmud expelled from 46;
     Mas'ud "did not stay in" 95 (where add the quoted words, l. 12,
       after "service");
     Badi'u'z-zaman returns to 70;
     Husain _Bai.qara_ and 57, 94, 259-60-80-3;
     Babur and 185-7-8, 255, 285-6, 295, 300, 330-2;
     Ma'suma in 36, 339;
     --troops of 61, 296;
     dismissals to 98, 128, 194-7, 319, 320;
     comings and goings from and to 15, 194, 197, *243, 264, 270, 331,
       363;
     distinguished men of 280-2-4, 291;
     Babur's kinsfolk in 246, 253, 522, 617;
     a verse well known in 328.

   Khurd (Khwurd)-Kabul (Kabul), wild asses in 224;
     river-dam of 647;
     Babur in 341.

   Khurram (Kabul-Balkh route), traitors to Babur near 546 (Fr. map
       Maimene, Khouram).

   Khush-ab (Panj-ab), Aba-bikr in 260;
     Babur regards it as his own 380-2;
     Baluchis in 383;
     an enemy to 383-4, 388;
     a governor of 388;
     a fugitive through 399.

   Khutan, Khotin (E. Turkistan), Ailchi the capital of 50 n. 2;
     Gurkhan a title of rulers in 84 n. 2;
     a ruler in 32.

   Khutlan (Hisar-shadman territory), river and alps of 60, 222;
     a saint's burial in 211;
     a ruler and holders of 47, 58, 93, 191-6;
     Babur's victory in 18.

   Khwaja 'Abdu's-samad (Kabul), 201.

   Khwaja Basta (Kabul), a water-course near 647.

   Khwaja Bikargan (Farghana), water of 99 n. 4.

   Khwaja Changal (Tahqan), 61; located 60 n. 4.

   Khwaja Char-taq (Qunduz) 244.

   Khwaja Didar (Samarkand), Babur's winters in 73-4;
     Shaibani near 130-1-5;
     Babur passes 147.

   Khwaja Hasan (Kabul), Babur passes 398, 418.

   Khwaja 'Imad (Hisar-shadman), Babur at 188.

   Khwaja Isma'il _Siriti_ (s.e. of the Kabul territory), mountains
       of 223;
     Babur at 323-4.

   Khwaja Kafshir (Samarkand), escapes by 62, 144.

   Khwaja Kardzan var. Kardzin (Samarkand), 65, 128;
     Shaibani at 138.

   Khwaja Khawand Sa'id (Kabul), wines of 203, 215.

   Khwaja Kitta (Farghana), Babur at 165.

   Khwaja Khizr (N.W.F.P. India), Babur at 372-6.

   Khwaja Khizr's Qadam-gah (Kabul), 201, 407.

   Khwaja Khizr's Mosque (Samarkand), 142.

   Khwaja-rabat (Samarkand), 73, 97, 127-8, 130-1.

   Khwaja Raushana'i's _Chashma_ (Kabul), 201.

   Khwaja Reg-i-rawan (Kohistan, Kabul), described 215;
     Babur at 420.

   Khwaja Riwaj (Kabul), rebels go to 245, 345.

   Khwaja Rustam (Kabul), Babur near 447.

   Khwaja Shabab (Kabul), Babur at 418.

   Khwaja Shamu's tomb (Kabul), 201.

   Khwaja Sih-yaran (Kabul), described 216;
     names of the "Three friends" 216, n. 4;
     Babur at 398, 405-6-20.

   Khwaja Zaid (n. of Hindu-kush), Babur at 195.

   Khwas (Samarkand border?), 'Umar Shaikh defeated at 17, 34;
     located 17 and n. 1.

   Khwarizm = Khiva, w. limit of Samarkand 76;
     and northern of Khurasan 261;
     cold in 219;
     Mahmud _Ghaznawi's_ over-rule in 479;
     Chin _Sufi_ defends 242, 255-6;
     Khusrau Shah's head sent to 244;
     a Bai-qara refugee in 397;
     governors of 256, 274;
     Muhammad _Salih_ of it 289 n. 4.

   Khwast, "Khost" (n. of Hindu-kush), mountains of 221;
     name and character of 221 n. 4;
     a mulla of 368;
     Mir-zadas of 412;
     comers and goers from and to 399, 403, 196 n. 5;
     piety of Khwastis 523 n. 1;
     *Mahim Begim's connection with 714;
     Babur at *363, 408.

   Kila-gahi (n. of Hindu-kush), a fugitive through 321.

   Kilirah? (U.P. India), Babur at 680.

   Kilif ferry (Oxus), Husain _Bai-qara_ and 57, 191.

   Kindir-tau, Kurama (Farghana's n.w. border-mountains), 8n. 5, 11 n. 6;
     --Kindirlik pass, when open 2 n. 4, *183;
     distinguished 116 n. 2;
     The Khans and 90, 161, 172;
     Babur crosses 54, 90, 161.

   Kind-kir (Kabul), described 424;
     (_see_ Masson, iii, 193).

   Kintit (U.P. India), identified 657 n. 2;
     Babur at 657.

   Kirki ferry (Oxus), 191.

   Kishm (Badakhshan), Auzbeg defeat at 295;
     Humayun near 621, 624 n. 1;
     ? *Babur winters in (919 AH.), 362.

   Kisri-taq (below Baghdad), height of 83.

   Kitib or Kib (Panj-ab), an appointment to 393.

   Koel, Kul, Kuil (U.P. India), _see_ Kul.

   Kohat (Panj-ab), Babur in 218-31-33-50, 382-94.

   Koh-bacha (var. ? a common noun; Kabul), tooth-picks gathered on 407.

   Koh-daman (Herat), an appointment to 274.

   Koh-daman (Kabul), described 215 to 217;
     Babur on 320, 405, 416, 420.

   Koh-i-jud, Salt-range (Panj-ab), described 379;
     places connecting with 381, 452;
     a note of Erskine's on 380 n. 2.

   Koh-khiraj (U.P. India), Babur at 653.

   Kohik, Chupan-ata _q.v._ (Samarkand), described 76 n. 4;
     gardens on 78, 80;
     bounds a meadow 82;
     Babur near 72.

   Kohik-su = Zar-afshan (Samarkand), course and name 76, 76 n. 4;
     bounds a meadow 82,
     and a _tuman_ 84;
     suggested drowning in 128 n. 2;
     Babur and 64, 130-1;
     swims it in flood 140.

   Koh-i-nur, Rocky-mountain (Kabul), _see_ Kunar.

   Koh-i-safed, Spin-ghur (Kabul), described 209;
     Pushtu name of 209 n. 2;
     App. E, xvii, xix, xx.

   Kohistan (Badakhshan), begs of 296;
     --(Kabul), villages of described 214 and n. 7;
     a _tuman_ of 213;
     _rara avis_ of 213 n. 7.

   Kohtin mountains (s. of Samarkand), limits possessions of territory 47.

   Kufin (Samarkand), 65.

   Kukcha-su (Badakhshan), 321.

   Kul, Kuil, Koel (U.P. India), a governor of 176;
     Babur's building-work in 520 (here Kuil),
       his envoy to 526,
       loss of 557, 576, visit to 586-7.

   Kul-ab (Badakhshan), a chief of 627 n. 2, *696.

   Kula-gram (Kunar, Kabul), Babur at 423.

   Kuldja (E. Turkistan), Almaligh the former capital of 2 n. 1;
     *The Khans escape after defeat by its road 183 (where _read_ Kuldja).

   Kul-kina or Gul-kina (Kabul), a place of revel 200-1, 395.

   Kul-i-malik (Bukhara), Babur defeated at 40, *357.

   Kunar with Nur-gal (Kabul), described 211;
     is Koh-i-nur (Rocky-mountain), the true name of, App. F, xxiii, xxiv;
     torrent of 212;
     beer made in 423; peacocks in 493;
     a test of woman's virtue in 212,
       governors in 227, 344;
     Babur in 343, 376, 423.

   Kundi (Lamghanat, Kabul), _see_ Multa-kundi.

   Kundih or Kundbah (Bihar, India), Babur at 674-7, 687 n. 5 (where read
       the name as above).

   Kura pass (Kabul), divides the hot and cold climates 220;
     Babur at 421.

   Kurarah (U.P. India), Babur at 651.

   Kurdum-daban (Farghana), 5 n. 3.

   Kuria (U.P. India), Babur at 651.

   Kurrat-taziyan (Kabul), _see_ Dasht-i-shaikh.

   Kusar (U.P. India), Babur at 652.

   Kushan (Persia), locates Radagan 622 n. 4.

   Kutila (Panj-ab), Babur gains 462;
     strength of 463.

   Kutila-lake, mod. Kotila-jhil (Gurgaon, Panj-ab), Babur at 580 and
       n. 1.

   Kuy-payan, Low-lane (Samarkand), 146.


   Lahur, Lahor (Panj-ab), revenues of 446, 521;
     snows seen from 485;
     water-wheels of 486, 532;
     locates Sialkot 429;
     Daulat Khan and 382-3, *428, *441-2-3, 451;
     Babur's envoy detained in 385;
     'Alam Khan and 444, 455-8;
     Babur's begs in 443, 453-4;
     sedition in 688;
     *Babur's visit to (936 AH.) 604 n. 1, *692-3-7-8-9, 707;
     Mahim and 650-9;
     *taken by Kamran (where for "935" _read_ 938).

   Lak-lakan (s. of Tashkint), a hostile meeting at 145.

   Laknau, Lakhnau, Luknau, "Lucknow" (U.P. India), a bird of 495;
     abandoned by Babur's men 594;
     Babur at 601;
     ? Biban and Bayazid approach it 677;
     ? news of capture of 679 and n. 2, 681;
     variants in name of 677 n. 3, 678 n. 1, 582 n. 6, App. T;
     _see_ Luknur.

   Lamghanat _tumans_ (Kabul), described 207-13;
     true use of the name 210;
     classification of 200;
     a tuman of 318;
     mountains of 222;
     tribes in 229, 242;
     fruits of 203, 424, 510-1;
     birds of 494-5, 500;
     fishing in 226;
     routes into 206-9;
     locates 208, 211;
     Babur in 414-19-21-*29;
     (_see_ Lamghan).

   Lamghan _tuman_ (Kabul), the name of 200 n. 1, 210;
     a fruit and tree of 508;
     limits a tribe 341;
     Babur's retreat to 21, 340;
     Babur in 407-14-19-21-*29.

   Lar (Persia) a native of 284.

   Laswaree, Battle of (1803 AD.) 578 n. 1.

   Lat-kint (Farghana), Babur at 108.

   Lawain (U.P. India), Babur at 656.

   Lombardy (Italy), wine culture in 210 n. 5.

   Luhugur, mod. Logar (Kabul), described 217;
     Chirkh its one village 217;
     a celebrity of 184, 217;
     vine-culture in 210 n. 6.

   Luknur (Rampur, U.P. India), revenue of 521;
     besieged by Biban 582;
     ? approached by Biban and Bayazid 677;
     ? news of its capture 679 and n. 2, 681.


   Macha (Upper Zar-afshan), located 149, 152;
     'Ali _Miran-shahi_ takes refuge in 55;
     Babur in 27, 67, 152-3.

   Macham (Farghana), a foot-hill 118, 125 n. 2.

   Madan-Banaras, Zamania (U.P. India), Babur at 658.

   Madina (Arabia), Babur sends gifts to 523.

   Madu, Mazu (Farghana), Babur takes 109.

   Madhakur (U.P. India), Babur at 548, 616 (where read as here).

   Maghak-pul (Samarkand), Babur at 68, 132.

   Mahan (Farghana), Babur at 123.

   Mahawin (Muttra; U.P. India), not submissive to Babur 523.

   Mahuba (U.P. India), rebels take flight to 685, 682 n. 1.

   Mahura-sangur (N.W.F.P. India), locates a tribe 376.

   Mahyar (N.W.F.P. India), 373 n. 6.

   Maidan (Kabul), the road to 228;
     earthquake action near 247;
     white marble of 710.

   Maidan-i-Rustam (Kabul), Babur at 405.

   Maing (U.P. India), Babur near 683.

   Makka (Arabia), Babur sends money gifts to 522,
       and a Qoran in his script 228 n. 3;
     pilgrims to 26, 267 n. 2, _etc._

   Malabar, a succession-custom in 482 n. 5.

   Malarna (Rajputana), revenue of 521.

   Malot, _see_ Milwat.

   Malwa (C. India), an observatory at 79;
     known in Babur's day as Mandau _q.v._ 79.

   Mama Khatun (Kabul), 405.

   Manas-ni (nai; Rajputana), other names of 578 n. 1;
     reputed outfall of 580; Babur on 578-9.

   Mandaghan (Khurasan), Babur at 295.

   Mandau, Mandu (C. India), capital of Malwa 482 n. 2;
     Malwa known as 79, 482;
     hills of 486;
     a ruler of 482;
     a holder of 593, 688 n. 2,
       downfall of sultans of 483;
     [Elphinstone Codex _passim_ and Haidarabad Codex, except on p. 79
       where "Mandu" occurs, write Mandau].

   Mandish, Mandesh (N.W.F.P. India), Babur at 375.

   Mandrawar _tuman_ (Kabul), described 210;
     one of the three constituents of the true Lamghanat 210;
     a village of 424;
     holders of 229, 344;
     Babur in 321, 421.

   Manikpur (U.P. India), revenue, of 521;
     elephants in 489.

   Maqam (N.W.F.P. India), perhaps mod. Mardan 377 n. 2;
     Babur near 377-8.

   Maragha (Azar-bayigan, Caspian Sea), astronomical Tables constructed
       at 79.

   Marghinan (Farghana), described 6;
     bullies of 7[2947];
     a celebrity of 7, 76;
     locates a place 7;
     comings and goings from and to 30, 97 n. 2, 173;
     lost to Babur 30;
     recovered by him 99-100;
     rebel attack on 101-2;
     Babur in 103, 123, 162-9, 172.

   Maruchaq (on the Murgh-ab, Khurasan), Auzbeg raiders defeated at 296.

   Marwar (Rajputana), Sanga's approach from 544 n. 5.

   Mashhad (Khurasan), a celebrity of 285;
     a Bai-qara holder of 263, 296, 329-30;
     held by Auzbegs 534, 623;
     Tahmasp's route to 622 n. 3.

   Masht (Ghazni?), a tribe in 323.

   Masjid-i-jauza (Farghana), described 5.

   Masjid-i-laqlaqa (Samarkand), described 80.

   Masjid-i-maquta' (Samarkand), described 79.

   Mastung, Quetta (Baluchistan), Shah Beg and 337, *427 (where read
       Mastung).

   Matarid (Samarkand), a celebrity of 75.

   Mawara'u'n-nahr, Transoxiana, name of the country of Samarkand 74;
     name includes Farghana 76;
     melons and wines of 82-3;
     bullies in 7 (_see s.n._ Marghinan for an omission);
     Leaders of Islam born in 7, 75-6;
     three strong forts in 3;
     an appointment in its interests 61, 85;
     in Auzbeg hands 427, 480, 618;
     *Babur's desire to regain 697 n. 1 (and _s.n._ Babur).

   Mehtar-Sulaiman range (Afghan border), a shrine on 238;
     Babur and 236-8.

   Merv, Marv (Khurasan), comings and goings from and to 135-7, 296, 301,
       *357, 623;
     chiefs of 261, 244;
     'Ali-sher winters in 287;
     Babur's sister in 18, *352;
     Shaibani defeated and killed near 318, *350;
     'Ubaid and 534, 618, 622.

   Mewat, Miwat (Rajputana), revenue of 521;
     hills of 486;
     account of 577-8-9;
     holders of 523, 551;
     Babur orders a raid on 551;
     Kanwa casualties on the road to 577;
     Babur at 578.

   Mian-du-ab, "Doab" (between Ganges and Jumna), revenue of 521;
     archers of 526-8, 551-7;
     a _pargana_ bestowed in 539;
     'Alam Khan goes to 457;
     Ibrahim advances into 467;
     Babur puts down a rebel in 576.

   Mian-kal, Miyan-kal (Samarkand), returns to Babur 135;
     Auzbegs in 622.

   Mian-kalai (N.W.F.P. India), Babur in 373;
     ? a du-ab 373 n. 6.

   Mian-wilayat, Miyan-wilayat (U.P. India), revenue of 521.

   Mich-gram (Kabul), a tribe in 413;
     Babur at 414.

   Mil (Kafiristan), position of 210.

   Milwat, Malot (Panj-ab), prisoners sent to 461.

   Milwat, Malot (U.P. India), Babur's capture of 457-8, 461.

   Minar-hill (Kabul), Babur crosses 314.

   Mir Ghiyas-langar (Khurasan), Babur at 307-8.

   Mirza-rabat, (Farghana), w. wind over 9 n. 2, *183.

   Misr, Egypt, compared with a Samarkand _tuman_ 84;
     *Napoleon's task in 356.

   Mita-kacha (Kohistan, Kabul), described 214.

   Mughulistan, mountains of 222;
     game in 325;
     Aspara in 20;
     Yunas Khan in 12;
     a Mughul _tuman_ enters 20;
     *Mughuls forced to go far from 351;
     a dweller in 114;
     Babur thinks of going to 158, *184.

   Muhammad Agha's village (Kabul), Babur at 405.

   Muhammad Chap's Bridge (Samarkand), 72.

   Muhammad-fajj (N.W.F.P. India), meaning of the name 229 n. 5;
     Babur at 231.

   Multa-kundi (Kabul), defined 211.

   Multan (Panj-ab), the Five-rivers meet near 485;
     a dependency of 237;
     fowlers migrated from 225;
     Aba-bikr at 260;
     Daulat Khan and 441-2;
     'Askari recalled from *603, 605;
     Kamran and 645, 699.

   Mungir (Bengal), Babur's envoy to 676.

   Munir (Bihar, India), Babur at 666-7, 670.

   Munughul-tagh (Farghana), variants in name of 8 n. 5;
     mines and malarial influence of 8;
     surmised action on wind of (here Mogol-tau) 9 n. 2;
     (_see_ Abu'l-ghazi, Desmaisons p. 12).

   Muqur (Afghanistan), Babur at 345.

   Mura-pass (Hisar-shadman), 58 n. 1;
     Babur crosses 129 (not named).

   Murgh-ab river and fort (Khurasan), Husain _Bai-qara_ and 191, 260;
     Babur on 285, 297-9, 300;
     Shaibani at 327.

   Murghan-koh (Qandahar), position of 332 n. 4;
     Babur at 336.

   Muri and Adusa, Baburpur (U.P. India), Babur at 644.

   Muttra (U.P. India), _see_ Mahawin.


   Naghr or Naghz (Kabul), a s. limit of Kabul 200;
     position of 206, 231-3.

   Nagur, Nagor (Rajputana), revenue of 521.

   Nakhshab (Samarkand), _see_ Qarshi.

   Namangan (Farghana), new canal of App. A, ii, n. 1;
     Babur near 117.

   Nanapur (U.P. India), Babur at 657.

   Nani (Ghazni), Babur at 240;
     old Nani plundered 254.

   Napoleon's* task in Egypt compared 356.

   Nardak* (U.P. India), a hunting-ground 701.

   Narin (n. of Hindu-kush), a fugitive through 321.

   Narin-river (n. arm of Saihun), 88 n. 2, App. A, ii.

   Narnul (U.P. India), an assignment on 677.

   Nasukh (Farghana), Babur at 92.

   Nathpur or Fathpur (U.P. India), Babur near 680-1.

   Naugram (U.P. India), Babur meets his sister at 689 n. 3.

   Nijr-au _tuman_ (Kabul), described 213;
     mountains of 222;
     products of 203, 213;
     boiled wine in 213;
     a dependency of 220;
     locates Ala-sai 220;
     Babur in 253, 420-1,
       his frontier-post of 213 n. 2.

   Nil-ab (Indus), various instances of the name 206 n. 3;
     a tribal limit 378, 387;
     routes to Kabul from 206;
     old Nil-ab located 392;
     comings and goings from and to 250, 265, 399, 419, 422, 647, 659;
     given to Humayun 391;
     Babur at 392,
       counts his army at 451.

   Nile (The),* used as an illustration 9 n. 2;
     Alexander takes the Indus for 206 n. 3.

   Ning-nahar _tuman_ (Kabul) described 207-9;
     its book-name Nagarahar 207;
     meaning of the name 208, App. E;
     not included in the Lamghanat 210;
     a dependency of 213;
     waters of 209, App. E;
     wintering tribes 242;
     a bird of 493;
     division of hot and cold climates n 229;
     Bagh-i-wafa laid out in 208;
     holders of 227, 317, 344, 421;
     an arrival from 345;
     Babur at 342.

   Nirah-tu or Tirah-tu, Kaliun (Heri), Shaibani's family in 343.

   Nirhun (Bihar, India), Babur at 674.

   Nirkh-pass, Takht-pass (Kabul), Babur crosses 228.

   Nishapur (Khurasan), mentioned as on a route 622 n. 3.

   Nishin-meadow (Heri), Husain _Bai-qara_ and 95, 261.

   Nu-kint (Farghana), locates an enemy 116;
     threatened 170.

   Nuliba (U.P. India), Babur at 657.

   Nundak, H.S. Nawandak (Chaghanian _q.v._), located 471;
     Barlas family of 51 (where "Badakhshan" is wrong);
     Babur near 129;
     Auzbegs retire to 471.

   Nur-gal (Kabul), described 211;
     meaning of its name, App. F, xxiii;
     holders of 227, 334;
     Babur at 343, 423.

   Nur-lam (Kabul), _see_ App. F, xxiii.

   Nur-valley (Kabul), _see_ Dara-i-nur.

   Nush-ab (Farghana), Babur near 114.


   Otrar (W. Turkistan), _see_ Autrar.

   Oude, Oudh, Aud, Adjodhya (U.P. India), revenue of 521;
     river-crossings to 669;
     locates places 601-2, 679 n. 2;
     army of 684-5;
     a bird of 495;
     appointment to 544;
     ? Babur at 680 and n. 2;
     his Mosque in App. U.


   Pakli, Pakhli (Panj-ab), formerly part of Kashmir 484.

   Palghar (Samarkand), limit of Samarkand on upper Zar-afshan 152.

   Pamghan range and village, Paghman (Kabul), described 215-6;
     village destroyed by earthquake 247;
     Shah Begim's 318;
     *snows seen from Babur's burial-garden 710.

   Pamir routes, *spring re-opening of 695.

   Pani-mali or -mani (N.W.F.P. India), the road to 376.

   Panipat (Panj-ab), battles at 472 n. 1;
     Babur's victory at 457, 469, 470-1-2, 534.

   Panj-ab (India), of the name App. E, xx;
     *Babur's power in 426, 430;
     *Daulat Khan's strength in 412, 443;
     Babur's journey to (937 AH.), 604 n. 1, *698.

   Panj-dih, Pand-dih (Khurasan), Auzbeg raiders beaten at 296.

   Panjhir, Panj-sher _tuman_ (Kabul), described 214;
     pass-roads of 195-6, 205;
     highway-men of 214;
     river of 407;
     a _darogha_ in 250.

   Panj-kura (N.W.F.P. India), Babur at 373-4.

   Pap (Farghana), holds fast for Babur 91, 101;
     affairs in 171-4-6 n. 3.

   Parandi-pass (Hindu-kush), described 205;
     height of 204 n. 4.

   Parashawar, Peshawar (N.W.F.P. India), a limit of Kabul 200;
     beauty of flowers near 393;
     rhinoceros of 490;
     partridges in 496;
     Bigram near 230 n. 2;
     Babur and 382, 393, 410-2.

   Parhala (Panj-ab), a Kakar stronghold 387-9;
     described and taken by Babur 396-7.

   Parsaru-river (U.P. India), Babur on 682-3.

   Parsrur, Parsarur (Panj-ab), an assignment on 684;
     Babur at 458;
     G. of India form of name Pasrur 684 n. 1.

   Parwan (Kohistan, Kabul), described 214-5;
     wind of 201, 224;
     road and pass of 205;
     fishing in 226, 406;
     wines and flowers of 215.

   Pashaghar (Samarkand), described 97;
     a native of 188;
     Babur at 97-8, 148.

   Patakh-i-ab-i-shakna (Kabul), meaning of the name 403 n. 2;
     Babur at 403.

   Pawat-pass (Mehtar Sulaiman range), Babur crosses 238.

   Pehlur, Phillaur (Panj-ab), Babur at 458.

   Pesh-gram (N.W.F.P. India), Babur at 373.

   Piag, Allahabad (U.P. India), Babur at 654-5;
     incident of his march from 657.

   Pichghan (Kabul), bird-catching in 220;
     punitive attack on 253.

   Pich-i-Kafiristan (n. of Kabul country), wines of 212;
     hostile to Babur 212.

   Pir Kanu, _see_ Sakhi-sarwar.

   Pul-i-chiragh, Bil-i-chiragh (Balkh-Herat road), located 69;
     a victory at 69, 260.

   Pul-i-salar (Herat), 329-30.

   Pul-i-sangin (Hisar-shadman), *Timur's and Babur's victories at 353-4.

   Pushta-i-'aish (Farghana), forces near 106, 165.


   Qaba (Farghana), swamp of 31;
     invaded 30;
     Babur at 123, 162.

   Qa'badian (Hisar-shadman), Babur at 188;
     taken for him 640.

   Qabil's tomb, _i.e._ Cain's (Kabul), Babur at 415.

   Qain (Khurasan), held by a Bai-qara 296, 301.

   Qaisar (s.w. of Maimene, _see_ Fr. map), Babur at 296.

   Qalat-i-ghilzai (Qandahar), Babur takes 248-9, 339;
     road south from 333;
     a governor of 340;
     fugitives join Babur near 331;
     Hindustan traders at 331.

   Qalat-i-nadiri (n. of Mashhad, Khurasan), birthplace of Nadir Shah 263
       n. 4, 329 n. 4;
     Bai-qara holders of 263, 329.

   Qanauj (U.P. India), revenue of 521;
     appointments in 265, 582;
     hostile both to Ibrahim and to Babur 523-9;
     military occurrences at 530, 557, 582-9, 594-8.

   Qandahar (Afghanistan), sometimes reckoned as part of Ghazni 217;
     a s. limit of Khurasan 261;
     irrigation-waters of 332-6;
     heat of compared 520;
     Kabul trade with 202;
     routes to 206, 308;
     --governors in 264, 274;
     Arghuns in 71, 227, 326, 336, 429;
     Husain _Bai-qara's_ failure at 94;
     --Babur's campaigns against 220, 246-8, 330-9, *365, *426-28-36-39;
     unremunerative to him 480;
     his rock-residence (Chihil-zina) near 333-5, App. J;
     Shaibani's siege of 21, 331-9, 340-3;
     Nasir in 338;
     Kamran in 583, *694-9, *706;
     --Khwand-amir leaves 605;
     a rapid journey to 621, *705;
     Lord Roberts on his first view of 333 n. 1;
     ruins of in 1879 AD. 430.

   Qara-bagh (Kabul), Babur at 196;
     ? a rebel of 687.

   Qara-bagh-meadow (Qandahar), flood-waters of 240;
     spoils shared out at 339;
     ? a rebel of 687.

   Qara-bugh (Samarkand), Babur at 147.

   Qara-bulaq (Samarkand), Babur at 66-7;
     a punishment at 66, 153.

   Qara-darya (s. arm of Saihun), now supplies Andijan 3 n. 6;
     88 n. 2;
     App. A, ii.

   Qara-kul (Samarkand), mentioned 84;
     irrigation of 76-7;
     a governor of 40;
     lost and regained by Auzbegs 135-7.

   Qara-kupa pass, ? Malakand (N.W.F.P. India), Babur on 376.

   Qara-nakariq ? (Kabul), a route through 209.

   Qarluq _wilayat_ (Panj-ab), a governor of 403.

   Qarshi, Nashaf, Nakhshab (Samarkand), described 84;
     Tarkhans in 62, 88, 135 (here ? Kesh, p. 138);
     Auzbegs and 135, *353-4;
     Babur's wish to spare and Najm Sani's massacre 359-60, 361.

   Qara-rabat (n. of Herat), Bai-qara defeat at 327.

   Qara-su, Siyah-ab (Kabul), Babur fords 396;
     (N.W.F.P. India), he crosses 450;
     (s. arm of Zar-afshan, Samarkand) 78;
     course of 82;
     a meadow on 81;
     known as Ab-i-rahmat 78.

   Qara-tigin (n. of Hisar-shadman), passers through 58, 112, *349;
     Babur plans to go through to Kashghar 129;
     *his Mughul assailants retire to 362.

   Qara-tu (Kabul), located 208-9;
     Babur at 395, 409, 425.

   Qargha-yilaq (Kabul), low hills of 320.

   Qiaq-tu (Ghazni ?), Babur at 323.

   Qibchaq road and pass (Hindu-kush), described 205;
     Babur on 197.

   Qilaghu (Kabul), Babur at 413.

   Qiriq-ariq (Kabul), Babur at 410, 448.

   Qila'-i-Ikhtiyaru'd-din, Ala-qurghan (Herat), Babur rumoured captive
       in 313;
     Bai-qara families abandoned in 327.

   Qila'-i-zafar, Shaf-tiwar (Badakhshan), former name Shaf-tiwar 242;
     sends an envoy to Babur 618;
     a rapid journey from 621;
     offered to Mirza Khan 21, *349;
     a Chaghatai fugitive through 349;
     opposes the Auzbegs 242;
     --Humayun's departures from (932 AH.) 545,
       *(935 AH.) 694-5;
     *Hind-al in charge 696-7;
     *beleaguered by Sa'id 697;
     *made over to Sulaiman 699.

   Qizil-su, Surkh-ab, _q.v._ (n. of Hindu-kush), locates a road 205;
     a fugitive on 321;
     Babur near 192-3.

   Quhlugha, Quhqa (Hisar-shadman), _see_ Dar-band-i-ahanin.

   Qulba meadow (Samarkand), described 82;
      80;
     a murder in 128;
     Babur in 72, 141.

   Qunduz (Badakhshan), n. limit of Kabul 200;
     pass-roads 204-5;
     head-waters of 216;
     tribes of 228, 402;
     Mughuls of 345, 361;
     a ruler in 47;
     Husain _Bai-qara_ and 48, 50-7, 61, 94, 191, 260, 275;
     Khusrau Shah and 57, 60, 70-4, 93, 110, 141, 196, 244;
     Shaibani and 192, 242-4;
     goings to 270, 546;
     Babur and 51, 318, *352-3, *362-3, *427-80;
     letters of victory sent to 371;
     his sister sent to 18, *352.

   Qurgha-tu (Kabul), a route through 376.

   Quruq-sai (Kabul), located by context 208-9, 341, 395;
     Babur at 341, 395, 414.

   Qush-khana (Hisar-shadman), an encounter at 71.

   Qush-khana meadow (Qandahar), Babur in 338.

   Qush-gumbaz (Kabul), Babur at 229, 241, 447.

   Qush-nadir or nawar (Kabul), Babur at 247, 417.

   Qutluq-qadam's tomb and bridge (Kabul), position of 208;
     Babur at 198, 395.


   Rabat-i-duzd or -dudur (n. of Herat), a Bai-qara defeat at 263.

   Rabat-i-khwaja (Samarkand), head-quarters of Shavdar 97;
     Babur's men in 73;
     Babur in 97, 130-1, 127-8.

   Rabat-i-sarhang (Farghana), Tambal in 108, 110.

   Rabat-i-Soghd (Samarkand), a battle near 111.

   Rabat-i-surkh (Kabul), Babur at 341.

   Rabat-i-zauraq or -ruzaq (Farghana), Babur at 165, 396.

   Rabatik-aurchin (Farghana), _see_ Aiki-su-ara.

   Radagan (n.w. of Mashhad), Tahmasp at 622;
     name and location of 622 nn. 4, 5, 623 nn. 4, 7.

   Ragh (Badakhshan), uprisings in 242, 321.

   Rahap river, ? Rapti (India), course of 485.

   Raising (C. India), Babur's intention against 598.

   Rant(h)ambur (Rajputana), revenue of 521;
   hills of 486; Sanga's 483.

   Rapri (U.P. India), a _pargana_ of 644;
     a dependency of 686;
     military vicissitudes at 523-30-57-81-82-98;
     Babur at 643.

   Rashdan (Farghana), birthplace of the author of the Hidayat 7, 76.

   Ravi river (Panj-ab) 458; source of 485.

   Rechna du-ab (Panj-ab), *Babur in 429.

   Rivers of Hindustan 485.

   Rohtas (Panj-ab), a tribal limit 452 n. 5.

   Rum (Turkey-in-Asia), Kabul trade with 202;
     a medical remedy of 657;
     Rumi defence of connected carts 469, 550, 564, 635.

   Rupar (Panj-ab), Babur at 464.

   Rusta-hazara, ? a tribe name (Badakhshan), men of join Babur 196;
     (Elph. and Hai. MSS. Rusta, Ilminski, p. 153, Rustakh;
     is it Rustaq _infra_ ?).

   Rustam-maidan (Kabul), described 405;
     Babur at 405.

   Rustaq (Badakhshan), revolts against Auzbegs 242;
     _see_ Rusta-hazara _supra_.


   Sabzawar (Khurasan), a return from 261;
     on a route 622 n. 3.

   Saf-koh (Kabul-Herat route), Babur on 295-6.

   Safed-koh (Kabul), _see_ Koh-i-safed.

   Saighan (Khurasan; _see_ Fr. map Maimene), on the summer-road by
       Shibr-tu 205;
     Babur in 294.

   Saihun-darya, Sir-darya, Khujand-water (Transoxiana), course of 2, 84
       n. 5, App. A, ii;
     the Khans and 13, 31, 156, 172;
     various crossings of 101-16;
     a proposed limit of lands 118-62;
     Babur's crossings of 151 (on ice), 161, 170-9, *183;
     his men's success on 102;
     his father's defeat on 16;
     _see_ Narin and Qara-darya for constituents of.

   Sai-kal (Kabul), Babur at 342.

   Sairam (n. of Tashkint), locates Yagha 159;
     holders of 17, 35;
     name of used as a password 164;
     *withstands the Auzbegs 358.

   Sajawand (Kabul), celebrities of 217;
     Babur at 241.

   Sakan (Farghana), a ferry near 161.

   Sakhan (Ghazni), ruined dam of 219.

   Sakhi-sawar (Dara-i-Ghazi Khan, India), Pir Kanu's tomb at 238;
     Babur at 238.

   Salt-range (Panj-ab), _see_ Koh-i-jud.

   Samana (Panj-ab), river of 465;
     fixes a limit 638;
     an appointment to 528;
     *a surmised source of historic information 693;
     *a complaint from to Babur and punitive results 700.

   Samarkand (mod. Asiatic Russia), description of 74-86;
     names of 74, 75 and n. 4;
     sub-divisions, _see_ Bukhara, Karmina, Kesh, Khozar, Qara-kul,
       Qarshi = Nashaf and Nakhshab, Shavdar or Shadwar, Soghd;
     meadows of 67-8, 70-77, 81-2, 128, 131;
     buildings and constructions in:--
       (1) Timur's 77-8 and _s.n._ Gardens,
       (2) Aulugh Beg's 78-9, 80, 133, 142-4,
       (3) others 75-7 nn. 6-8;
     -- Alps of 222;
     cold in 202-4;
     a comparison of 216;
     fruits 8, 510;
     bullies 7;
     Aimaqs 221;
     trade with Kabul 202;
     name locates places or fixes dates 1, 2, 25, 44-9, 136, 150-1-2,
       244, 284, 289;
     Corps of Braves 28, App. H, xxvii;
     _tughchis_ 28;
     rulers of 13, 35, 41-6, 52, 65, 74, 90, 111, 121-7, 147, 152, 479,
       622;
     governors of 37, 131;
     comings and goings to and from 15, 20-2-4, 64, 88, 136-7, 148-9,
       256, 300, 402-3;
     refugees to 46, 51, 58, 95 (plan for), 271;
     an execution in 51, 196;
     a raid near 16;
     'Umar Shaikh and 12, 15;
     Tarkhan revolt in 61-3;
     besieged for a bride 64;
     Abu-sa'id takes 20-8;
     Mahmud _Chaghatai_ and 23, 88, 122;
     -- Babur _aet._ 5, taken to 35-7;
     his desire for 97-8, *706;
     desired by others 64, 111-2;
     his attempts on 64-6-8, 72-4, 92-3-7, 112-5-9, 131-2, *354;
     invited to 122-3-4;
     captures of 18, 35-9, 40, 74, 88, 132-4, 266, 277-9, *355, 471;
     his surprise capture compared 134-5[2948];
     rule in 86-7, 135, 147;
     leaves it to help Andijan 88-9, 190;
     defeated at 133-141;
     besieged in and surrenders 141-7, 168, 24;
     leaves it 147, 358, 471;
     -- Shaibani receives it in gift 125;
     loss and gain of 74, 147, 168;
     occupation of 125-8, *183, 256, 300, 325-8, 360;
     -- *Haidar _Dughlat_ in 357;
     Merv Mughuls near 357;
     Humayun attempts to recover 625, 639;
     -- envoys from to Babur 438, 630-1, 642;
     gifts to 522;
     Babur's 1st _Diwan_ and the _Mubin_ sent to 402, App. Q, viii, *438.

   Samnan (Persia), a fruit of 6.

   Sambhal (U.P. India), revenue of 521;
     snows seen from 485;
     hostile to Babur 523;
     Babur's 528, 547;
     abandoned by his men 557;
     Babur at 586-7;
     deaths of officers in 675, 683 n. 4, 687;
     Humayun's fief 697, *700-2.

   Sam-sirak (s. of Tashkint), The Khan's army counted near 154;
     hunting near 156;
     Babur at 152.

   San (Balkh territory ?), plundered 94, 295 (p. 94 for "San-chirik",
       _read_ San and Char-yak).

   Sanam (C. India), river of 465.

   Sang (Farghana), Babur at 176, *183.

   Sang-i-aina (Farghana), described 7.

   Sang-i-barida (Kabul), Babur passes 407.

   Sang-i-lakhshak (Qandahar), Babur at 333.

   Sang-i-surakh (Kabul), Babur passes 228;
     and (Dasht-Farmul road) _do._ 235.

   Sangdaki pass (Panj-ab), Babur crosses 379, 392.

   Sangzar (Samarkand), Babur and 92, 124, 131;
     (p. 92, l. 9, _read_ "to Sangzar by way of Yar-yilaq").

   Sanji-taq (Kabul), a pleasure resort 200 n. 6.

   Sanjid-dara (Kabul), Babur at 196, 406.

   Sanur (C. India), torrent of 464.

   Sapan (Farghana), a hostile force at 101.

   Saqa (Farghana), Babur's victory near 113.

   Sarai Munda (U.P. India), Babur at 651.

   Sarai Baburpur (U.P. India), _see_ Muri and Adusa.

   Sarakhs (on the Heri-rud), Auzbeg capture of 534.

   Saran (Bihar, India), revenue of 521;
     held by a Farmuli *602, 675; an assignment on 679;
     locates troops 672 n. 4.

   Sarangpur (C. India), Sanga's 483;
     Babur's intention against it 598.

   Sara-taq pass (Hisar-shadman), described 129;
     mentioned on routes 40 n. 4, 58, 129;
     Babur crosses 129.

   Sar-bagh (Kabul-Balkh route), traitors to Babur near 546;
     (_see_ Fr. map Maimene).

   Sar-i-dih (Ghazni), dam of 218;
     Babur at 240, 323.

   Sarigh-chupam (Badakhshan), *annexed to Kashghar 695;
     *Haidar _Dughlat_ at 697.

   Sar-i-pul, Bridge-head (Kabul), Babur at 314;
     (Samarkand), an army at 65;
     Babur defeated at 18, 137-8 to 141, 188.

   Sarju affluent of the Gogra, _q.v._ 602 n. 1.

   Sarsawa spring (U.P. India), Babur at 467.

   Saru-darya, Gagar, Gogra, Ghogra (India), two constituent rivers Sird
       (Sarda) and Gagar (or Kakar) 602, 1677 n. 2;
     course of (Gagar) 485;
     confluence and _du-ab_ with Gang (Ganges) 665-6-7, 677 n. 2;
     narrowed below and above the confluence 668 n. 1, 674 nn. 1, 2;
     rhinoceros and water-hogs of 490, 502;
     --  various crossings of 544, 668, 671-4-5-7, 685;
     Babur crosses after his victory on 674-7-9;
     leaves it 682;
     Battle of the Gogra 671-7.

   Saru-qamsh (Khurasan), an ascribed site of the battle of Jam 635 n. 4.

   Sarwar (U.P. India), revenue of 521; Biban and Bayazid sent towards
       642;
     an assignment on 679; 682 n. 1;
     Babur at ease about 679.

   Sawad (N.W.F.P. India), a limit fixed 400;
     trees of 222;
     various products of 492-4, 510-11;
     brewing in 422;
     desolate 207;
     a test of women's virtue in 211;
     chiefs of 372-4;
     Yusuf-zai in 410, App. K, xxxvii, an arrival from 399;
     Babur and 373-6-7, 411-2.

   Sawa-sang (Qandahar), Babur over-runs 249.

   Sawati, ? an adjective=of Sawad, _q.v. kargkhana_ and Babur's
       rhino-hunting in 378, 450.

   Sayyidpur ? or Sidhpur (Panj-ab), Babur takes 429.

   Sehonda, Seondha (C. India), revenue of 521.

   Shaf-tiwar (Badakhshan), _see_ Qila'-i-zafar.

   Shahabad (Panj-ab), Babur at 466.

   Shah-i-Kabul mountain, Sher-darwaza (Kabul), located 200-1;
     *Babur buried on 710.

   Shahmang ? (Panj-ab), once part of Kashmir 484.

   Shahr-i-sabz (Samarkand), _see_ Kesh.

   Shahr-i-safa (Hisar-shadman), a holder of 188;
     (Qandahar), Babur at 332-3.

   Shahrukhiya = Fanakat _q.v._ (Tashkint), a limit of Samarkand 76;
     names of 2 n. 5, 7 n. 5, 13, 76;
     holders of 13, 17;
     various military occurrences at 21-4, 16, 54, 7, 23, 151;
     Champion's-portion taken at 53.

   Shakdan (Badakhshan), a force at 295.

   Shal = Quetta (Baluchistan), Shah Beg goes to 337, *427.

   Sham, Syria, a Samarkand _tuman_ compared with 84.

   Shamsabad (U.P. India), exchanges of 477, 594-8, 613;
     an assignment on 677.

   Sham-tu (n. of Hindu-kush), on a route 192.

   Shash (W. Turkistan), _see_ Tashkint.

   Shatlut river, ? Sutlej (Panj-ab), Babur crosses 457.

   Shavdar or Shadwar _tuman_ (Samarkand), described 84;
     a fort of 68;
     head-quarters in 97;
     a Tarkhan in 122;
     joins Babur 125.

   Sherkot (Bhira, Panj-ab), a holder of 382.

   Sherukan ? (Ghazni?), a fight near 397.

   Sherwan (n.e. of Mashhad, Persia), a native of 284;
     (_see_ Fr. map Maimene).

   Shibarghan (Khurasan), besieged 94;
     defence planned 191;
     battle near 260.

   Shibr-tu pass (Hindu-kush), described 205;
     height of 204 n. 4;
     meaning of name 205 n. 2;
     crossed 242, 321;
     Babur crosses 294, 311;
     (for an omission on p. 205, _see_ Add. Note p. 205).

   Shiraz (Persia), Yunas Khan in 20;
     (Samarkand), a Commandant of 130;
     Babur near 64-6, 73;
     raided by Shaibani 92; 98.

   Shiwa (Kabul-river), Babur at 343.

   Sniz (Kabul-Ghazni road), Babur near 248.

   Shorkach (Ghazni ?), locates a place 323 n. 3.

   Shulut (Kabul), App. F, xxiv.

   Shunqar-khana mountains (n.w. rampart of Zar-afshan valley), Babur
       crosses 130.

   Shutur-gardan (Samarkand), described 142 n. 1, 143.

   Sialkot (Panj-ab), revenue of 521;
     officers of 98, *442-3;
     *attacked 443;
     Babur and *429-52-54-58.

   Sidhpur (Panj-ab), _see_ Sayyidpur.

   Sihkana (Afghanistan), a tribe in 323.

   Sihrind, Sahrind, Sirhind (Panj-ab), revenue of 521;
     names of 383 n. 1;
     rivers rising n. of 485;
     fixes a limit 638;
     fixes a date 457;
     snows seen from 485;
     a holder of 383;
     an assignment on 582;
     Babur and *441-64, *693-9, *700-1.

   Sikandar's dam (C.P. India), described 606;
     Babur at 585.

   Sikandara (U.P. India), Babur at 587.

   Sikandaraebad (U.P. India), Babur passes 588.

   Sikandarpur (U.P. India), a ferry station of 677;
     an official of 668;
     Babur at 679.

   Sikri (U.P. India), hills of 485;
     *Babur keeps Ramzan at 351, changes name of 548 n. 2;
     selects it for his camp (933 AH.) 548;
     Babur at 549, 581-5-8, 600, 615-6;
     revenues of support his tomb *709.

   Sind (India), *Shah Beg and 427-9.

   Sind-darya, Indus, of "Nil-ab" as a name of 206 n. 3;
     fords and ferries of 206;
     tributaries of 216, 485;
     rhinoceros of 490;
     limits lands 206 n. 6, 231-3, 380, 392, 484, 525;
     -- *Shah Beg and 431;
     -- *Babur's compulsion to seek territory across 706;
     Babur on 230-7-8, 378-92, *452-3;
     mentions it in verse 525-6.

   Singar-water, Sengar (U.P. India), Babur bathes in 649.

   Sinjid-dara (Kabul), Babur in 196, 406.

   Sir-ab or Sar-i-ab (n. of Hindu-kush), a pass-route to 205;
     a defeat near 51, 196.

   Sir-auliya (U.P. India), Babur at 654.

   Sird, Sirda, Sarda (U.P. India), a constituent of the Gagar, Gogra,
       Ghogra 602.

   Sirhind (Panj-ab), _see_ Sihrind.

   Sirkai, ? Sirakhs (Khurasan), Shaibani near 327.

   Sistan (Khurasan), a s. limit of Khurasan 261;
     plan of defence for 326.

   Siwalik-hills, or Sawalak (N. India), Babur on the name 485.

   Siwi, Sibi (Baluchistan), an official in 238;
     an incursion into 260;
     Siwistan, *427.

   Siyah-ab, _see_ Qara-su.

   Siyah-koh (Kabul), located (unnamed) 209;
     various names of 209 n. 3.

   Siyah-sang (Kabul), meadow of 201;
     *scene of an Afghan massacre, App. K, xxvi.

   Soghd _tuman_ (Samarkand), described 84, 147;
     Babur and 64, 135, 147.

   Son-water (Bihar, India), an enemy near 658;
     crossed for Babur 662;
     Babur on 666.

   Spin-ghur (Afghanistan), _see_ Safed-koh.

   Suf-valley (Khurasan), _see_ Dara-i-suf.

   Sugandpur (U.P. India), Babur at 686.

   Suhan-nuri, or Suhar-nuri (Kabul), App. G, xxv.

   Suhan-su (Panj-ab), a tribe on 380;
     Babur on 379, 391.

   Sukh (Farghana), Babur's refuge in 7, 130 n. 1, 176 n. 1, *184-5;
     gifts to envoys from 633.

   Sukhjana (C.P. India), Babur near 614.

   Sulaiman-range (Afghan border), _see_ Mehtar Sulaiman.

   Sultania (Persia), cold of 219.

   Sultanpur (Kabul), Babur at 409-13-47.

   Sultanpur (Panj-ab), founder of 442-61;
     a return to 457;
     *taken from Babur 443.

   Sunkar (Rajputana), Babur at 581.

   Surkh-ab (n. of Hindu-kush), _see_ Qizil-su.

   Surkh-ab, Qizil-su (Hisar-shadman), Babur's victory on 352-3.

   Surkh-ab and rud, Qizil-su (Kabul), 207 n. 5;
     Bagh-i-wafa on 208, Adinapur-fort on 209;
     wild-ass near 224;
     Babur crosses 395;
     ruins near App. E, xvii.

   Surkh-rabat (Kabul), _see_ Rabat-i-surkh.

   Susan-village (Kabul), Babur at 422.

   Sutluj and Shutlut (_sic_ Hai. MS.), Sutlej-river (Panj-ab), limits
       lands 383;
     course of 485;
     crossed 457;
     Trans-Sutluj revenues 521.

   Syria, _see_ Sham.


   Tabriz (Persia), cold of 204-19;
     Yunas Khan in 20.

   Tag-au (Kabul), _see_ Badr-au.

   Tahangar (Rajputana), hostile to Babur 538.

   Takana (? Khurasan), a fight at 260.

   "Takhta Qarachi" (Samarkand), 83 n. 2;
     _see_ Aitmak-daban.

   Takht-i-sulaiman (Farghana) 5 n. 2.

   Taliqan, Taikhan (Oxus), a Bai-qara at 60;
     Mughuls from 192.

   Tal Ratoi (Nathpur, U.P. India), 681 n. 1.

   Tang-ab (Farghana), Babur at 100;
     located 99 n. 4.

   Tang-i-waghchan pass (Kabul), _see_ Girdiz.

   Tank, Taq (N.W.F. Province), _see_ Dasht.

   Taraz or Tarar (E. Turkistan), _see_ Yangi.

   Tarnak river (Qandahar), _see_ Turnuk.

   Tarshiz (Khurasan), Husain _Bai-qara's_ victory at 259 and n. 5 (where
       _read_ p. 524).

   Tashkint, Tashkend (Russia-in-Asia), of its names 2 n. 5, 7 and n. 5,
       *184;
     its book-names Shash and Chach 13, 76;
     ravines of App. A, ii;
     holders of 32-5, 115, 154, 161;
     a rebel at 36;
     Khalifa sent to 90;
     name of used as a pass-word 164;
     Shaibani's capture of (908 AH.) 23-4, *184;
     holds out for Babur (918 AH.) 356-8, 396;
     its Auzbeg Sultans at Jam 622.

   Tash-rabat (n. of Heri), Babur at 301.

   Tatta (Sind, India), course of the Indus through 485;
     playing cards sent to 584.

   Tazi var. Yari (Ghazni-Qalat road), Babur at 248.

   Tibet, Babur locates 485.

   Tijara (Rajputana), a chief town in Miwat 578;
     given to Chin-timur 578-9, 688.

   Tika-sikritku, Goat-leap (Farghana), 'Umar Shaikh defeated at 16.

   Til, Thal (Kohat, N.W.F.P. India), Babur at 232.

   Tiimur Beg's Langar (Kabul), Babur at 313.

   Tipa (Kabul), assigned for a camp 199;
     earthquake damage in 247;
     an exit from 254.

   Tirak-pass (Farghana), 15 n. 5.

   Tirhut (Bihar, India), revenue of 521.

   Tirmiz (Hisar-shadman territory), a s. limit of Samarkand 76, Begims
       of 37, 47-8;
     Husain _Bai-qara_ and 5, 191;
     a governor of 74;
     Baqi _Chaghaniani's_ 188, 249;
     a sayyid of *704-5;
     Najm _Sani_ at 359;
     entered for Babur 640.

   Tir-muhani (Bihar, India), mentioned 679, 675 n. 1, 687 and n. 2;
     the _Habibu's-siyar_ finished at 687 n. 2.

   Tizin-dara (Kabul), 208 n. 4.

   Tochi-valley (N.W.F.P. India), ? to be traversed by Babur 231.

   Toda-bhim (Rajputana), Babur at 581;
     Sanga at 545 (where "Agra district" is wrong).

   Tons-river, Tus-su (U.P. India), Babur on 656, 683.

   Tramontana (between the Oxus and Hindu-kush), army of 447; *706.

   Tughluqabad (Dihli), Babur at 476.

   Tul-pass and road (Hindu-kush), account of 205;
     height of 204 n. 4.

   Tun (Khurasan), a Bai-qara holder of 296, 301.

   Tup (Kabul-Herat road), Babur at 295.

   Tuquz-aulum (Oxus), a defence question 191.

   Turfan (Chinese Turkistan), Babur plans going to 158.

   Turkistan, course of the Saihun in 2-3;
     trade with Kabul 202;
     gold-cloth of 641 n. 5;
     Shaibani and 65 n. 3, 73-4, 135;
     his vow in Hazrat Turkistan 356;
     *'Ubaid in 354.

   Turnuk, Tarnak (Qandahar), 332 n. 3;
     a holder of 340.

   Tus-su (U.P. India), _see_ Tons.

   Tus ('Iraq), an astronomer of 79;
     Shaibani attacks 534.

   Tuta (U.P. India), Begims from Kabul pass 616.

   Tutluq-yul, Mulberry-road (Farghana), Babur on 165.

   Tutun-dara (Kabul), water taken from 647.


   Udyanapura (Kabul), App. E, xxi;
     _see_ Adinapur.

   Ujjain (Malwa, C. India), an observatory in 79.

   'Uman-sea, receives the Indus 485.

   'Umarabad (Khurasan), an ascribed site of the battle of Jam 635 n. 4.

   Unju-tupa (Farghana), _see_ Aunju-tupa.

   'Uqabain (Kabul), site of the Bala-hisar 201.

   Urgenj (Khwarizm), _see_ Aurganj.

   Urghun (Kabul), _see_ Aurghun.

   Urus-su (W. Turkistan), _see_ Arus.

   Ush (Farghana), _see_ Aush.

   Ushtur-shahr (Kabul), Babur in 195, 294, 314.

   'Utrar, Otrar, Autrar (W. Turkistan), _see_ Yangi.


   Varsak (Badakhshan), position of 523 n. 1, Babur's gifts to 523.

   Vierney, Vernoe (E. Turkistan), position on site of old Almatu 2 n. 1.


   Wakhsh (Hisar-shadman), Auzbegs at 352, 362.

   Walian pass (Hindu-kush), account of 205;
     height of 204 n. 4.

   Warukh (Farghana), account of 7.

   Wasmand fort (Samarkand), Babur at 132.

   Wazr-ab (Hisar-shadman), 58 n. 1.


   Yada-bir (Kabul), Babur at 394, 411, 448.

   Yaftal (Badakhshan), a force at 321.

   Yagha or Yaghma (n. of Tashkint), tombs at 139;
     Babur at 139.

   Yai (Khurasan), tribes in 255.

   Yaka-aulang (w. of Bamian, _see_ Fr. map Maimene), Jahangir goes to
        294;
     passes from Heri-rud valley to 310 n. 2;
     Babur in 311.

   Yak-langa (Kabul), Babur crosses 445.

   Yam (Samarkand), Babur at 67;
     84 n. 3.

   Yan-bulagh (Kabul), Babur on road of 425.

   Yangi-hisar (Kashghar), *a death-bed repentance at 362.

   Yangi = Taraz (E. Turkistan), depopulated 2;
     book-name of 2 and n. 1;
     an army at 20.

   Yangi = Utrar, Otrar (W. Turkistan), a mistaken entry of in some MSS.
       2 n. 1.

   Yangi-yul pass (Hindu-kush), described 205.

   Yari (Ghazni-Qalat road), _see_ Tazi.

   Yari (Zar-afshan), Babur crosses the bridge to 130.

   Yarkand (E. Turkistan), *696.

   Yar-yilaq (Samarkand), Timur's "head" of Soghd 84;
     fights near 35, 122;
     villages of 97-8;
     submits to Babur 98;
     Babur in 64, 92, 125, 130-1.

   Yasan (Farghana), _see_ Khasban.

   Yasi-kijit (Farghana), Babur's men defeated at 27, 105.

   Yilan-auti or Yilan-aut (Samarkand), Babur at 147.

   Yilan-chaq (n. of Hindu-kush), a tribe of 196.

   Yiti-kint (Farghana), mandrake in 11;
     of its position 11 n. 6;
     Yunas Khan's headquarters 20 n. 5.


   Zabul, Zabulistan, a name of Ghazni _q.v._

   [Z.]ahaq fort, "Zohak" (s. of Bamian), Babur at 294;
     (_see_ Fr. map Maimene).

   Zamania (U.P. India), _see_ Madan-Banaras.

   Zamin (Samarkand), locates places 34, 64;
     Babur at 97.

   Zamin-dawar (Qandahar), Arghun chiefs in 71, 337-9;
     Zu'n-nun's 274;
     taken by Babur 27;
     plan to defend 326.

   Zar-afshan river, Kohik-su _q.v._ (Samarkand), described 76 and nn.
       4, 5;
     Macha village on 149 n. 4;
     Babur crosses 67, 130;
     *Najm _Sani_ crosses 360.

   Zardak-chul (w. of Balkh), over-run 94.

   Zarqan or Zabarqan (Farghana), Babur at 161.

   Zindan valley (Kabul-Balkh road), _see_ Dara-i-zindan.

   Zirrin-pass (between Heri-rud valley and Yaka-aulang), Babur misses
       it 309-10.

   Zurmut _tuman_ (Kabul), described 220;
     floods in 240;
     Girdiz head-quarters in 220.



Index III. General


   Abbreviated names 29.

   Abdu'l-wahhab _Ghaj-davani_ see _Waqi'-nama-i-padshahi_.

   Ablution--before death 188;
     reservoirs 208, 217, 580, 639, 683.

   Abu-talib _Husaini_ or Abu'l-husain _Turbati_
       _see_ _Malfuzat-i-timuri_.

   _Abushqa_, a Turki--Turkish Dict.--quotes verses as Babur's 438;
       quotes Khw. Kalan 526;
       the Baburi-script App. Q, lxiii.

   Account-rolls of palm leaves 510.

   Adoption--of a son 170;
     prae-natal 374, App. L.

   _Afghanistan and the Afghans_, H. W. Bellew--vine-culture 210;
     decoy-ducks 225 (_where_, _in n. 5_, _read title as above_).

   _Afghan Poets of the XVII Century_, C. E. Biddulph--Khush-ab _Khattak_
       mentions Babur 439.

   Afzal Khan _Khattak_--(_Raverty's Notes_ _q.v._)--Nil-ab
       (_ferry-station_) 206.

   Agriculture--seed-corn and money advances 86;
     young millet grazed 215;
     methods of vine culture 210;
     water-raising appliances 388, 486-7;
     irrigation, "running waters":--Farghana 4, 5, 7,
       Samarkand 76-7, 147;
     Hindustan 486-7, 519-31-81,
       Qandahar 332-6,
       Chandiri 596;
     --canals:--Farghana 67,
       Samarkand 76, 147;
     --grain, corn:--Farghana 2, 3, 55, 114-46,
       Kabul 203, 228, 373-4,
       [green corn] 394,
       Qandahar 333,
       Hash-nagar 410,
       Bara 414,
       Bhira 381;
     --raft of corn seized on the Sind 392;
     horse-corn fails on a march 238-9;
     (rice) 342-74-94, 410.

   _Akbar-nama_, Shaikh Abu'l-fazl _'Allamiy_, (_trs. H. Beveridge_)--(_see
         notes on pp. given_) +meanings+:--_bat-qaq_ 31;
       _nihilam_ and _tasqawal_ 45;
       Tardika 568;
       Tarkhan 34;
       _fil-i-darya'i_ App. M. xlvii;
     --+persons+:--13, 22, 263-4, 346, 552, 562, 641, 657;
     --+various places+:--191, 206, 441, 523, App. J, xxxv;
     --winter access to Farghana 2;
     Nizami quoted 44;
     an inscription of Babur's 343;
     Rumi defences 469;
     the(Koh-i-nur) diamond 477;
     a cognomen 566;
     risks to MSS. App. D, x;
     Akbar-nama material *441-5, *691-3;
     Babur supplemented 639;
     length of work on it *692 n.;
     Mubin passage translated in the "Fragments" (_q.v._) *437-8;
     Babur's self-devotion *701;
     his choice of a successor *702 to 705,
       mentioned Preface xxxiii;
     translated from by Jahangir (?) xlv.

   'Ali-sher _Nawa'i's_ comforts 287.

   _Allgemeine Erdkunde_, Carl Ritter--Bara-koh 5;
     Babur's _farsi-gui_ useful 7;
     Akhsi distances App. A, v.

   _'Amal-i-salih_, Muh. Salih--Shah-jahan's destruction of wine 298;
     _tuigun_ (bird) 418.

   _Amanitates exoticae_, Engelbertus Kaempfer--_Ijtihad_ 284.

   Amusements _see_ Games.

   _Ancient Geography of India_, Major-Gen. Sir Alex. Cunningham--(_see
       nn. on pp. named_) Shibr-tu 205;
     Nil-ab 206;
     Kohistan villages 214;
     Gurkhattri 230;
     Bigram 230;
     Udyan-apura App. E, xxi.

   _Annals and Antiquities of Rajastan_ Col. James Tod--Sanga's force 547;
     negociations with Babur 550;
     appearance 558;
     Salahu'd-din (Silhadi) 562.

   Antidotes--lime-juice 511,
       Lemnian earth 543.

   _Anwar-i-suhaili_, Husain Wa'izu 'l-kashifi--quoted 22;
     Firdausi quoted 557,
       Add. N, P. 557.

   Apostates 577-8, 590-1.

   Arabic Sciences 283-5.

   _'araq_ see fermented drinks, _s.n._ Wine.

   Archery[2949]--[_see nn. on pp. named_], _good bowmen_ 16, 22, 26,
         34 (2),
       cross-bowman 53, 263;
     remarkable feats 276, 279;
     --_archer's marks_:--_ilbasun_ (duck), _qabaq_ (gourd), _tuquq_ (hen)
         34,
       _takhta_ (target);
     _qabaq-maidan_ 276;--
     _arrows_:--_auq_ 22, 34, 255,
       _etc._, _giz_ 213, 225,
       _khadang_ (white poplar) 13,
       _tir-giz_ 11
       (_where preface n. 2 by the name_), 34;
     arrow-barb, _paikan_ 22,
       -notch, _gosha_ App. C, -flight 8, 140;
     flights of arrows 52;
     rain of, 138;
     quiver T. _saghdaq_ 160, 166,
       P. _tarkash_ 526;
     an arrow-borne letter 361;
     --_bows_:--Chachi bow (_kaman_) 13;
     cross-bow _takhsh-andaz_, _kaman-i-guroha_ 55, 263;
     _narmdik yai_, an easy-bow 420;
     _qatiq yai_, a stiff-bow 490;
     --bows ruined by Hindustan climate 519, *700;
     --_various_:--_chapras_, _daur_, _gosha_, _kaman-khana_, _kardang_
       explained App. C;
     _gosha-gir_, a repairing-tool 166, App. C;
     Turkish bow-making a fine craft App. C, ix;
     dismounting to shoot 52;
     --_to bow-string_ (T. _kirish salmaq_) 110.

   Architecture Timuriya and Timurid Pr. xxxi.

   _Archiv fuer Asiatische Litteratur_ H. J. Klaproth (_q.v._)--Kasan
       gardens 10;
     his extracts from the Bukhara Compilation MSS. Pr. xxxix, xlvii.

   _Ariana Antiqua_, H. H. Wilson--_Masson's art. Actinapur Region_ 227,
       Nagarahara App. E, xvii.

   _Army of the Indian Moghuls_, W. Irvine--trepanning 109;
     misled 470;
     on _muljar_ (_q.v._) 592;
     "_shatur_" explained 593;
     _firingi_ (gun) 473,
       pontoon-bridges 600.

   _'Aruz-i-saifi_, Maulana Sayyid Mahmud _Saifi_
      of Bukhara, (_trs. Blochmann and Ranking_)--a note by Rieu 288;
     Saifi's pupil Bai-sunghar 111;
     his high number of ruba'i measures App. Q, lxvi.

   _Asia Portuguesa_, Manuel de Faria y Sousa--Habshi succession custom
       482.

   _Astronomy and Astrology_--Tables and Observatories 74, 79, Pr. xxx;
     Canopus (Suhail) 195;
     forecasts 139, 551;
     houses of Scorpio 633;
     Pole-star a guide 323,
       its altitude at Chandiri 597;
     Capricorn 597.

   _Ayin-i-akbari_, Abu-fazl (_trs. Blochmann, Jarrett_)--(_see nn. on pp.
       named_);
     Climates 1;
     _qilij_ (cognomen) 29;
     observatories 79;
     guns 473;
     clepsydra 516;
     kitchen rules 541;
     fruits 3, 501-3-4-5, 512;
     _chalma_ 624;
     hunting deer 630;
     _bahri_ (falcon) 632;
     _milak_ (gold, cloth) 641;
     _yak-tai_ (unlined) 652;
     --+(weights and measures)+ _khar-war_ 228,
       _tanab_ 630,
       _sang_=_tash_ 632;
     --a title 209;
     a child traveller 265;
     Barlas begs 270;
     +(places)+ Kabul 207, 221;
       Kacha-kot 250;
       Sidhpur 429;
       Nagarahara App. E, xxiii;
       Buhlulpur 454;
       Kanwahin 458;
       Milwat (Malot) 461;
       Jahan-nama 485;
       Chausath 581;
       Lakhnur 582;
       Sikandra Rao 587,
       Godi, Gui 601;
     --+(persons)+ 285, 653, 666, App. P, lvi;
     --Babur's expedition to Kashmir 693.

   _Agar-i-sanadid_, Sayyid Ahmad Khan--places Babur visited 475;
     Mahdi Khwaja and Amir Khusrau's tomb 704.


   +Noticeable words+:
     --P. _ab-duzd_ 109 = P. _du-tahi_ 62, 595-6;
     _aiki-su-ara_ = P. _miyan-du-ab_ (Mesopotamia) _i.a_ 88;
     _aimaq_ (clan) 51, 196, 207-15-55, Add. Note P. 49; M.
     _alachi_ whence _Alacha_ 23;
     _arghamchi_ 614; _ash-kina_ (stew) 4;
     _audaliq_ (odalisque) = P. _ghunchachi_ _q.v._;
     _aughlan_ (child, boy, non-regnant chief) 19;
     _augh-laqchi_ 39;
     _aurchin_ 44, 88;
     _aung_, _ung_ (Prester John's title) 23;
     _aupchin_ 176, 282;
      Auz-beg, -khan, -kint, _i.a_ 162, (_see_ A.N. trs. i, 160, 170);
     _ayik-aut_ = P. _mihr-giyah_ (mandrake) 11.


   _The Babur-nama_, Zahiru'd-din Muh. Babur (Lion) Mirza and (later)
       Padshah _Ghazi_.

   I. SECTIONS OF THE BOOK:--(_The record of prae-accession
   years is lost Pr. xxxvi_); (1) +Farghana+ 1-182, (Trs. N.
   [_bridging a gap_] 182-185); (2) +Kabul+ 187-346, (Trs. N.
   347-366), 367-425, (Trs. N. 426-444); (3) +Hindustan+ 445-602,
   (Trs. N. 603-4), 605-690, (Trs. N. 691-716);

   SUB-SECTIONS:--(_a_) +Descriptions+ of Farghana 1-12, Kabul
   199-227, Herat 304-5, Hindustan 480-521, Chandiri 592, 596,
   Gualiar 605-614; (_b_) +Biographies+ of Yunas Khan 19-24 (_see
   infra, displacements_), of Miran-shahis _viz._ 'Umar Shaikh
   13-19, 24-28, Ahmad 33-40, Mahmud 45-51, Bai-sunghar 110-112,
   of Husain _Bai-qara_ 256-292, of amirs _etc._ 24, 37, 49, 270;

   II. LACUNAE:--(_other than mentioned above_); minor in 935 AH.
   _see_ dating and nn. on pp. 617, 621, 630, 636, 687, and for
   surmised patching from fragments of 934 AH. 654, 655, 680; (1)
   +References to events of the gaps+ _see_ nn. on pp. 105, 364
   --208, 441, 575 --381 --408, 422 --(of 934 AH.) 603, 617, 618, 621
   --an Akbar-nama indication 639; (2) +Varia concerning the
   gaps+:--Causes of, Pr. xxxiv; misinterpreted xxxv; results in
   present displacement xxxvi;

   III. VARIA CONCERNING THE BOOK:-- (1) +Date of composition+,
   [_see nn. on pp. named_]; 48, 50, 79, 98 --102, 105 --139, 154,
   176, 190 (l. 5 fr. ft.) 198 --203-4-6-8 --214-18-19-20 (_para.
   3_), 269-76-78-85 --313 ("now" _para. 2_), 314 ("now" l. 4),
   315 (l. 2), 318 (_para._ 2), 337 (l. 16), 373 (l. 8 fr. ft.),
   374; (2) +Literary style and idiom+:-- plain diction 2, precise
   wording _e.g._ 5, 79, 475, 485, appreciation of words 67, 265,
   283, 627, comments on style _e.g._ 22, 67, and pronunciation
   210, 484, early diary differs in wording from the narrative
   367; lapses into courtly Persian 445, 537, 539; (3)
   +Grammatical details+:-- relatives not used Add. Note, P. 167;
   uses of "we" and "I" 104, 118; distinctions of meaning
   expressed by Ar. and T. plurals _e.g._ 5, 80; uses of the
   presumptive tense 37, 75, 162, 167, 577 (cf. Shaw's Grammar);
   examples of idiom 29, 44, 66, 75, Add. Note, P. 167
   (_gharicha_); (4) +Varied information+ _see_ Preface _passim_;
   (5) +Babur's notes+: --Khwaja Maulana-i-qazi 29 --Ibrahim Saru
   52 --Champion's portion 53 --Guk-sarai 63 --Fazil Tarkhan 133
   --Auz-kint 163 --Pass-words 169 --Multa-kundi 211 --Military terms
   334 --Piri Beg 336 --Badakhshan 340 --Sl. Ma'sud M. 382 --Campaign
   of 910 AH. 382 --Daulat Khan 383 --_daqiqa_ 516 --_pol_ 517
   --Mulla Apaq 526 --_kuroh_ (from the _Mubin_) 630 --_tash_ weight
   632;

   IV. WORK DONE ON THE BOOK:-- (1) +Turki Codices+ _see_ Preface,
   Cap. III, Part II and Table xli; --(_a_) _Haidar Mirza's
   Codex_--its importance Pr. xxxiv, xxxv, xxxviii, xli, xlii (No.
   iv); (_b_) _Elphinstone Codex_--archetypes 405, Pr. xli, xlii,
   xliii (No. v); its losses of pages 445; defacement 129, 325,
   415, 548; Erskine's use of it Add. Note, P. 287; reliance on
   it _in loco_ 1, 187, 445; preserves Humayun's attested notes
   447-52-67, 510-14 and attributed notes 216, 494, 507 --also a
   quatrain on Mughuls 140; "Rescue-passage" not in it App. D;
   divergency from it in the Kasan Imprint _ib._ xiv; a former
   owner 706; referred to in nn. on pp. 7, 10, 12, 14, 23-6-8,
   31-6, 44-7-8, 60-4, 75, 88, 112-3, 133 (Shaibaq), 143-8, 154
   (_dim_), 159, 161-4-9; Preface xli, xlii, xliii (No. v),
   xlvii; _cf._ JRAS _Notes infra_; (_c_) _Haidarabad Codex_,
   published in Facsimile by the Gibb Trust, ed. A. S.
   Beveridge--basis of the _B.N. in English_ 1, 187, 445, Preface
   xxvii; appears a direct copy of Babur's autograph Codex 47,
   103, 515; contains (Jahangir's?) Rescue-passage App. D;
   divergency of Kasan Imprint from it _ib._ xiv; referred to in
   nn. on pp. 2, 8, 9, 10, 12, 133 (Shaibaq), 14, 18, 23 (careful
   pointing clears away a doubt), 28, 31, 36, 40 (Baghdad
   corrected to Bughda), 60-4, 75, 88, 132, 140-6-8, 153 (a
   mistake?), 154 (_dim_), 159, 164 (_sairt kishi_), 165, 168,
   177 (Pers. _dictum_), App. A, i (Akhsi); Preface xxvii, xxxiii
   (title), xxxv, xli (Table), xlvi (No. x), xlvii;--[2950]

   (2) +Persian work+:-- (_a_) _Tabaqat-i-baburi_, described 445;
   made known to Erskine 520; its deference to Babur App. P,
   lvii; shews a date 496; shews nature of an illness (B.'s) 446;
   specifies drinking-days 447, 450; gives a useful pen-name 448;
   Buhlulpur 454; of a gun 489; Varsak and Khwastis 523; Naukar
   or Tuka 525; Babur points "Sikri" to read _shukri_ 548; styles
   him "Nawab" 560 _etc._; describes a porpoise as _bahri_ App.
   M, xlvii; helps as to "Luknur" App. T, lxxiv; (_b_)
   _Waqi'at-i-baburi_ (Acts of Babur), (_the first Pers. Trs.
   1583_), Payanda-hasan _Mughul_ of Ghazni and Muh-quli _Mughul_
   of Hisar--explicit 187, 198; useful variants 267, 624, 645; a
   puzzling phrase 549, and passage 617; title Pr. xxxiii;
   described liii (No. vi); (_c_) _Waqi'at-i-baburi_ (Acts of
   Babur), (_the second Pers. Trs. 1589_), 'Abdu'r-rahim M.
   _Turkman_--misleading glosses 2 n. 1, 3 n. 1; _tash_ misread
   312 _etc._; verses doubtfully Babur's 312; a gloss unsupported
   337; a difficult passage 617; a fine illustrated copy (B.M.
   3714) 155, 298, 325; Erskine's account of its diction (quoted)
   Pr. xliv (No. vii); on its title xxxiii;

   (3) +Persian-English work+:--_The Memoirs of Baber_, Leyden and
   Erskine (1826)--[_see nn. on pp. named_]; +Varia+:-- Leyden's
   slight collaboration 287, 367, 380, Add. Note, P. 287, Pr.
   xlviii, Cap. iv, [L. and E. _Memoirs_]; two notes by Leyden
   10, 219; not fully representative of Babur's autobiography 2,
   Cap. iv; advance in help (MSS. and other) since Erskine worked
   347, 620-22, App. T, lxxiii; his own MSS. 680; Indian guidance
   632, 661; dating agrees with Babur's 629; misled by his
   Persian source [_q.v._ 3 _etc._] and by a scribe's slip 544;
   his help to Ilminski 1, 187, 326, Pr. lv; misleads by uniform
   "Luknow" App. T; omissions 2, 632, 468, 559 (_important_); a
   prayer reproduced in its words 316; quoted 715; --+questioned
   readings+:--143, 223-5-9, 324-7, 333-7, 369, 400-16, Add. Note,
   P. 416, 446-49-57-62-67 (shaving-passage), 478,
   523-34-49-55-59-61, 608-9, 617-19-26-38-40-46-47; --[_Numerous
   verbal explanations and other notes are reproduced as
   Erskine's and each identified_];

   (4) +Turki-English work+:--_The Babur-nama in English_
   (_Memoirs of Babur_), Annette S. Beveridge--_see_ Preface and
   other contents of these volumes.

   _Babar_, Stanley Lane Poole--the Eight Stars 139; a misled note 468.

   _Babur und Abu'l-fazl_, Teufel [_ZDMG, 1862_]--an opinion negatived
       119;
     useful critique on "Fragments" (_q.v._) Preface Cap. III, Part III
       and App. D; Mubin MS. used by Berezine 438;
     Babur-nama title 653, Pr. xxxiii.

   _Bahar-i-'ajam_ (Pers. Dict.) _see_ Dictionaries.

   _Baz-nama_ (Book of Sport), Muhibb-i-'ali _Barlas_--its author's
       descent 276;
     _l_ exchanged with _n_ (_cf._ _Luhani and Nuhani_) _ib._

   Belin M.--[_Journal Asiatique xvi, xvii_] 257-8, 271-82-92.

   _Bengali Household Stories_, Macculoch--a sign of obedience 275.

   Beveridge Annette S.--JRAS. Notes in referred to _in loco_:--MSS. of
       the B.N. Turki text 1900;
     Further Notes 1902,
       Haidarabad Codex and all others 1905, 1906;
     Elphinstone Codex 1907;
     Material for a definitive text and account of Kehr's Codex and its
       Persian alloy 1908;
     Kehr's Latin Version of part of his source _i.e._
       the _Waqi'-nama-i-padshahi_ (Bukhara Compilation _q.v._) 1908,
       Klaproth's _Archiv_ 1909, and (expected) on the confused identity
       of the Bukhara Compilation with the _Babur-nama_ 1922;
     --(2) Grounds for making a new translation Preface Cap. IV;
     the mistaken identity of Kehr's source (_supra_) Cap. III[2951];
     of the _Babur-nama_, Preface _passim_.

   Beveridge Henry--(1) +Notes _in loco_+:--_tabalghu_ 11;
       Baba-i-kabuli 14;
       Quintets 15, 288;
       a mistake by Firishta 15;
       Lotus-eaters 42;
       Daulat-shah 46; Hafiz parodied 201;
       Byron's _tambourgi_ 247;
       Jami plagiarized 258;
       _Khazinatu'l-asfiya_ quoted 211;
       Timur's burial-position 266;
       syphilis 279;
       an illegal marriage 329;
       Babur's satirical verse and Shaikh Zain 448;
       _Zafar-nama_ (?) quoted 485;
       "_kaka_" 502;
       Khw. Khusrau's couplet 503;
       the name "Cintra" for an orange 512;
       Timur on Hindustan 526;
       fate of Ibrahim _Ludi's_ mother 543;
       _tamgha_ 553;
       a pun 571;
       versus traced 571, 625-6;

   Ibn Batuta quoted 591;
     date of Babur's visit to Lahor from Agra 604;
     Khwand-amir 605;
     Rahim-dad 608, 688;
     Mahdi Khw. 704;
     Scorpio and Libra 623;
     Battle of Jam 635;
     "bulky Oolak" 663;
     Kashmir expedition 693;
     a poor MS. App. P, lv;
     Shaikh Zain's deference _ib._ lvii;
     --(2) +Translations+:
       --(_a_) Akbar-nama _q.v._ and Tuzuk-i-jahangiri _q.v._
       --(_b_) revision of Persian _farman_ 553, and the Kanwa
                Letter-of-victory 559;
     --(3) +Articles referred to+:
       --(_a_) A.Q.R. 1899, _Babur's Diamond, was it the Koh-i-nur?_ 447;
         1901, _An Afghan Legend_ 375, App. K;
         1910, _Paper-mills of Samarkand_ 81;
         1911, _Oriental Cross-bows_ 140, 142;
         _Babur's Diwan_ (Rampur MS.) 439;
         _Some verses by the Emperor Babur_ 439
         --1915, Silhadi and the _Mirat-i-sikandari_ 614;
       --(_b_) Calcutta Review 1884, _the Patna Massacre_ 672;
         --JASB. 1898, _Bayazid Biyat_ 691;
         --1905, _The Emperor Babur's legendary son_ 558;
         --1884, _Authorship of the Dabistan_;
         --1916, _Tarikh-i-salatin-i-afaghana_ 693;
       --(_c_) JRAS. 1900, _On the word nihilam_ 45, 224
         --1901, _Pers. MSS. in Indian Libraries_ 348
         --1910, _On the word mutaiyim_ 16, 275
         --1913-14, _Coinage of Husain Bai-qara_ App. H, xxvi
         --1916, _Rashahat-i-'ainu'l-hayat_ 620;
     --(4) +Other related articles+:--
       (_a_) A. S. Q.--_Emperor Babur and the Habibu's-siyar_ 1906;
         _Emp. B. and Khwand-amir_ 1909 (_2 parts_);
         _Emp. B.'s opinion of India_ 1917;
         _Attempt to poison B._ _ib._;
         _Was 'Abdu'r-rahim the translator of B.'s Mems. into Persian?_
            1900 (_2 parts_);
       (_b_) JRAS.--_The B.N. "Fragments"_ 1908;
         _Date of Shah Hasan Arghun's death_ 1914;
         _An obscure quatrain by Bana'i_ 1917;
         _The Mongol title Tarkhan_ _ib._;
         _Tarkhan and Tarquinius_ 1918[2952];
     --(5) +His help+: _see_ Postscript of Thanks, Preface lxi.

   The Bible--untrimmed beard 552;
     moon-stroke 608.

   _Bibliotheque Orientale_, B. d'Herbelot--(_see nn. on pp. named_),
       'Umar Shaikh 13;
     Satuq-bughra Khan 29; Mahmud _Miran-shahi_ 46;
     Mataridiyah and Ash'ariyah Sects 75-6;
     Isma'il _Khartank_ 76;
     Nasiru'd-din _Tusi_ 79;
     Nil-ab 206;
     "Qizil-bash" explained 630.

   _Biographie Universelle_, Langlesart. _Babour_ xlv.

   _Biographies of Ladies_ (_Sprenger's Cat._)--two women-poets 286.

   _Birds of India_, T. C. Jerdon--partridge-tippets 496;
     cries _ib._;
     bustard 498;
     _manek_ 499;
     _likhh_ (florican) App. N;
     _kabg-i-dari_and _chiurtika_ (snow-cock) _ib._

   "Blessed Ten" 562.

   Blochmann H. (_JASB. 1873_)--Babur's Mosque in Sambhal 687;
     _see_ _Ayin-i-akbari._

   Blood-ransom 461;
     retaliation 64, 102, 119, 194, 251-53, 424.

   Boats--383-5-7-8, 407-10-22-23-54, 589, 652-4-5-6-8-9, 660, 662;
     Babur names his Ganges flotilla 663, 669, 670-1-4-9, 681-4;
     pontoon bridge 599, 633.

   Book-names--Akhsikit = Akhsi 9;
     Banakat = Shahrukhiya 76;
     Chach and Shash = Tash-kint 13, 76;
     Galiur or Galiwar = Gualiar 605;
     Nashaf and Nakhshab = Qarshi 84;
     Nagarahara = Ning-nahar 207;
     Taraz = Yangi 2.

   Book-room--Ghazi Khan _Ludi's_ 460.

   Books (_no titles_)--Exposition of the _Nafahat_ 284;
     On Jurisprudence 285,
       --prosody 271,
       --rhyme 285,
       --riddles 289.

   _Botany of the Afghan Delimitation Commission_, Aitchison--regional
       grasses 222;
     _qarqand_ = _sax-aol_(_?_) 223.

   Brahminical thread 561.

   Bridge of boats _see_ Boats.

   _Buddhist Records_, S. Beal--Greater Udyana-pura App. E, xxi;
     sugarcane in Lamghan 203 (_where read Beal_).

   Browne, Professor Edward Granville--the Haidarabad Codex Facsimile,
       Preface xlvi (No. x).

   Building-stone--Samarkand 83,
     Kabul 710,
     Chandiri 597,
     Dulpur 606,
     Gualiar 608,
     Biana 611.

   "Bukhara Compilation," known as "_Babur-nama_"
       see _Waqi'nama-i-padshahi_.

   Bullies of Marghinan (Marghilan) 7 (_where in line 1, add_, "They are
       notorious in Ma-wara'u'n-nahr for their bullyings").

   _Burhan-i-qati'_ (Pers. Dict.) _see_ Dictionaries.

   _Buried Cities of Khotan_, Sir M. Aurel Stein--Aq-bura-rud 4.

   _Bu-stan_, Sa'di--couplets quoted 139, 152, 626.


   +Noticeable words+:--
    (P.-Ar.-T.) _baghat_, _baghlar_, _baghcha_ and _begat_, _beglar_ 5,
        80, 478;
     _baghish_ 59, 69;
     _bakhshi_ (in M. surgeon) 169;
     _bashliqlar_ (commanders) 119;
     _batman_ (a weight) 261;
     _batqaq_ (slough of despond) 31;
     _bai_ (rich man) 127;
     _bairi_ (old servant) 30;
     _bi_ = beg 127-8;
     _bildurga_ 225;
     _b:d-hindi_ = P. _sih-bandi_ (Byde Horse) 470;
     _bilak_ 446;
     _bughu-maral_ 8, 10;
     _bughda_ (cutlass) 40;
     _bulak_ and _baluq_ 196, 17 and 221;
     _bush_ (bosh) 507.


   _Cabool_ (Kabul), Sir Alex. Burns--(_see nn. on pp. named_);
     wind and running sands 201, 215;
     climate 204;
     _kabg-i-dari_ 213;
     Kohistan 214;
     millet 215;
     Babur's Burial-garden 710.

   Cadell, Jessie E.--quoted Preface xxvii.

   Cadet-corps formed 28, App. H, xxvii.

   Cairn _i.e._ "Babur Padshah's Stone-heap" 446, Preface xxxvii.

   Candles and candlesticks--none in Hind 518;
     offensive substitutes _ib._

   Canopus _see_ Suhail.

   Capitals of Farghana--Andijan 3,
       Akhsi 10,
       Auz-kint 162.

   Caravans--15, 202, 250, 331.

   Carruthers, Mr. Douglas--help from App. B, vii.

   Carving--Babur no carver 304.

   Caste-names--518.

   Catalogues:--(_see nn. on pp. named_);
     " Coins of the Shahs of Persia (B.M.), R. S. Poole--Babur's surmised
         vassal coin 355, App. H, xxx, Preface xxxv;
     " Feronia Nursery Calcutta, Seth--Jack-fruit 506;
       _sang-tara_ orange 511;
     " Library of the King of Oudh, A. Sprenger--Biographies of Ladies 286;
       _Shah u Darwesh_ 290;
       Ahli 290;
     " Library of Tippoo Sultan, C. Stewart--_Tabaqat-i-nasiri_ 479;
     " _Manuscrits Turcs de l'Institut des langues orientales_, W. D.
         Smirnov--_Malfuzat-i-timuri_ 653;
       Babur's writings _ib._
     " Persian MSS. (B.M.), C. Rieu--Shash and Fanakat 2, 7;
       Khw. Kamal 8;
       Akhsikiti 9;
       'Abdu'l-lah _Barlas_ 51;
       Saifi 111, 288;
       Halwa-spring 260;
       Nizami 271;
       Daulat-shah 274;
       _Baz-nama_ 276;
       Suhaili 277;
       Marwarid 278;
       Amir Hamza 280;
       'Ata'u'l-lah 282;
       Taftazani 283;
       _Khamsatin_ 288;
       Husain _Nishapuri_ 288;
       Yusuf of Farghana 289;
       Hilali 290;
       a scribe-poet 291;
       _Suluku'l-muluk_ 348;
       Nawa'i's Diwans arranged 419;
       Histories of Tahmasp 622;
       _Habibu's-siyar_ finished 687;
       _Tarikh-i-salatin-i-afaghana_ 693, 701;
       --Kasan Imprint misleads 259;
       a questioned reading 266;
     " Persian MSS. in the I.O. Library, H. Ethe--Khw. Hijri 153;
       Husain _Nishapuri_ 288;
       _Shah u Darwesh_ 290;
       a scribe-poet 293[2953];
     " Turki MS. in B.M., C. Rieu--the author of the _Sang-lakh_ App.
         A, v;
       the _Shaibani-nama_ 289.

   Catamites 26, 42-5-9, 278, 396 (_cf._ 174 n.).

   _Cathay and the way thither_, ed. Sir H. Yule (Hakluyt Society vol.
       i, p. 20)--running-sands 215.

   _Caubul_ (Kabul), Hon. Mountstewart Elphinstone--millet 215;
     Judas-tree 216;
     Indus ford (_Nil-ab_) 378;
     "Nangrahaur" App. E, xix.

   "Chaghatai Castles" 208.

   Chaghatai families--'Ali-sher _Nawa'i_ a member of one, Preface xxxi.

   Chaghatai-Osmanisches Woerterbuech _see_ Dictionaries.

   Chaghataische Sprach-studien, H. Vambery--(_mil._) pass-words
       (_auran_) 219;
     meaning of _gepanzert_ 221,
       _bildurga_ 225,
       _sighnaq_ App. Q, lxiv.

   Champion's portion won and explained 53.

   _Charikar_, T. C. Haughton--Kohistan of Kabul 214-5.

   Charles XII's sobriquet Iron-head 14.

   _Char-ulus_ (Four hordes), Aulugh Beg Mirza, Preface xxx.

   _Childe Harold's Pilgrimage_--tambourgi 247.

   _Chinese Turkistan_, P. W. Church--maral 8.

   Chingiz-tura (_ordinances_) respected 155, 298.

   _Chiniut_, D. G. Barkley [_JRAS._ 1899]--its position 380.

   Chirkas sword 65.

   Chishti order 666.

   _Chrestomathie Turque_, Berezine--the _Mubin_ quoted 438, 630.

   Chronograms 85, 135, 152, 217, 344, 427, 575, 596.

   Cider 83.

   Circumcision 14, 69.

   Coincidences 71, 123, 261, 686.

   Coins--_ashrafi_ 446-60;
     _dam_ 383;
     _kipki_ 296;
     _sikka_ (coined money ?) 277;
     _shahrukhi_ 379-83, 400, 408, 417-46-78-9, 523;
     _tang_ 641;
     _tanka_ "black" (_i.e._ _copper_) 521,
       "white" (_i.e._ _silver_) 338-9, 344, 446, 521-7, 641, App.
       P, lvii;
     "red and white" (money) 522;
     Babur's "vassal coins" 354-5-6, App. H, xxx.

   Confections--_ma'jun_:--used in excess 16;
     gifts of 373;
     parties on non-drinking-days 447;
     eating of 377-83-84-88-93, 410-12-15-16-18, 420-2, 448-50, 580-8,
       615-50-59-83;
     _kamali_ 373.

   Congregational Prayer--unbroken attendance at 283.

   Countermark [_Bih-bud_] on coins 277, App. H, xxv, xxvi, xxix.

   _Cross-bow_, Sir W. F. Payne-Gallwey--archers' marks 34;
     bow-shot distances 140;
     what may apply to Babur's _zarb-zan_ and _tufang_ 667.

   Cunningham, Maj.-Gen. Sir Alex. _see_ _Indian Eras_ and Reports on
       Arch. Survey.

   Customs--Musalman scruples about burial-places 246;
     the Champion's-portion 53;
     circumambulation of tombs 54, 285, 301-5-6, 475,
       and of the sick 701;
     amongst combatants' wives 22, 268;
     dipping 16 times in bathing 151;
     levirate marriage 23;
     mourning rites 32, 246, 293;
     a nativity-feast 344;
     nine a mystic number _see s.n._ nine;
     an ordeal of virtue 211;
     divining from sheep-blade-bones 233;
     pillars of heads 232, _i.a._ 573-6;
     rock-inscription 153;
     signs of submission 53, 232-3, 248;
     succession in Bengal 482-3 n. 5;
     unveiling a bride 37;
     gifts from those marrying 43, 400;
     gifts by wives _q.v._

   Cyclopaedia of Archery _see_ _Kulliyatu'r-rami_.

   Czar Vassili III--Babur's embassy to, App. Q, lxiii.


   +Noticeable words+:--_Chachi_ 13;
     _chaghir_ 83, 298;
     _chapuk_, slash-face 68;
     P. _char-dara_ 80, 629;
     _chaughan_ (polo) 26;
     P. _chalma_ 624;
     H. _chaukandi_ = Ar. _ghurfat_ and P. _char-dara_ (?) 629-63;
     _chapkun_ 324;
     _chiqar_ (exit) 44;
     _yinka-chicha_ 616;
     _chuhra-jirga_ 50, 227,
     App. H, xxvi-vii.


   _Dabistan_, Mir Zu'l-fiqar 'Ali'u'l-husaini (_pen-name Mubad_)--Nanak
       founder of the Sikh religion 461;
     Radiyan sect 622;
     [concerning the authorship of the book _see_ JRAS. H.B.'s art.
       _q.v.s.n._].

   Darwesh-life--soldiering abandoned for 262;
     return to 583.

   Dating by events:--Battle of the Goat-leap 16,
       Dispersion of Airzin 20,
     Battle of Kanbai 111-2 [_T.R. trs._ 119];
     the dating of 935 AH. 605, App. S.

   Defremery C.--[_J. des Savans_ 1873], art. _Les Memoires de Baber_
       (P. de C.) 562.

   _De Paris a Samarcande_, Madame Ujfalvy--(_see nn. on pp. named_);
     Bara-koh 5, 6;
     Samarkand 74-5;
     _qara yighach_ (hard-wood elm) 81;
     paper-pulping mortars 81.

   De Sacy, A. L. Silvestre (_Nat. et Ex._ 265, 285)--Husain Shaikh Timur
       273 (_cf._ _Daulat-shah_ (Browne) 538-9);
     date of Hilali's death 290.

   _Dialects of the Hindu-kush_, Col. J. Biddulph--Khowari 211;
     forms of "nine" App. E, xix.

   Dictionaries, Lexicons, Vocabularies:--[_see nn. on pp. named_];
     " of Antiquities, W. W. Smith--clepsydra 516;
     " Arabic-English Lexicon, E. W. Lane--_akhmail_ 336;
     " _Arabes, Supplement aux Dictionnaires_, R. Dozy--_bahri_ (a falcon)
         App. M, xlvi;
     " _Bahar-i-'ajam_ (Pers. Dict.), Rai Tikchana Bahar--a sign of fear
         232;
       the Taftazani Shaikhs of Islam 283;
     " _Burhan-i-qati'_ (Pers. Dict.), Muh. Husain b.
         Khalfa'u't-tabrizi--_izara_ (dado) 80;
     " _Chaghatai-osmanisches Woerterbuch_, Shaikh Sulaiman Effendi
         (ed. Kunos)--_tunqitar_ 464;
       _qutan_ App. N, 1;
       _sighnaq_ App. Q, lxiv;
     " English-Persian, A. N. Wollaston--a rare meaning 648;
     " Hindustani-English, D. Forbes--changed name of an orange 511;
       "needle-melting" citron 513;
       great millet (maize?) 514;
       names of days 516;
       gongman _ib._;
     " Hindustani-English, J. Taylor [ed. W. Hunter]--"sang-tara" and
         "Cintra" App. O lii;
     " of Islam, J. P. Hughes--turbans 15;
       eating of food 44;
       _mazhab_ 463;
       the Eight Paradises 646;
       legal endowment 701;
     " Oriental Biographical, T. W. Beale [_ed._ _Keene_]--Khw. Nasir
         _Tusi_ 79;
     " of Oriental Quotations, C. Field--a common couplet 22;
     " Persian-English, F. Steingass--176, 202, 286, (_metres_) 514, 527,
         630;
         _qizil-bash_ 643;
     " Persico-Latinum Lexicon, I. A. Vullers--_shash-par_ 160;
       _kaka_ 502;
       _gharau_ 514;
       _rad_ (_whence Radagan_) 622;
     " Pushtu-English, H. J. Raverty--Multakund 211;
     " _Sang-lakh_ (Turki-Persian), Muh. Mahdi Khan--described App. B, v;
       _kharpala_ (the "Qarshi birdie") _ib._;
       contains verses entered as by Babur 439;
     " Sanscrit-Bengali-English, Haughton--a stork 499;
       gula-prawn 502;
     " of Towns (_Majama'u'l-buldan_), Yaqut--"Akhsikis" 9, 10;
     " _Turc Orientale_, A. Pavet de Courteille--Babur's verses quoted
         439, 526;
       a wag-tail 501;
       a meaning 626;
       Babur's script App. Q, lxiii;
     " Turki Vocabulary, R. B. Shaw--_kuk-bura_ (a game) 39;
       _qurugh_, reserved land 81;
       _aupchinlik_, 4 horse-shoes and their nails 176;
       _charuq_, brogues, and _chapan_, long coat 187;
       _qalpaq_, felt wide-awake 258;
       _qush-begi_, a Court official 278;
       _shaghawal_ ib. 463;
       _jiran_, a deer 491;
       _qin_, scabbard 503;
       _akhta-begi_, master-gelder 538;
       _buljar_, a rendezvous _etc._ 592;
       --Part II. J. Scully--_qodan_, water-hen 224;
       _kiklik_ (_caccabis_, _chikur_) 496;
       _'aqqa_, magpie 501;
       _qirich_, swift 501;
       _buia_, a plant 505;
       _aman-qara_ (perhaps maize) 504;
       _airkak-qumush_, male-reed 514.

   Diseases and accidents:--(_a_) +Babur's+ saddle turns 147;
     sciatica 253-4;
     boils 254, 657-60;
     dislocated wrist 409-13-20;
     tooth breaks 424;
     ear-ache 310, 601-8-15;
     fall of river bank 655;
     fall of tent 678;
     wounds of head 150-167,
       --leg 167-9,
       --arm-pit 176;
     +his illnesses+:--unspecified (923) 365;
     catarrhal discharge (_rezandalik_) 446-49-51;
     fever (903 AH.) 88-9, (911) 247, (925) 399 to 401, (934) 585-6-8,
       603-4, (935) 619-20, (937) 702-3-5;
     (_b_) +Of others+:--child-birth 36;
     small-pox 48;
     "violent illness" 45;
     frost-bite 116, 311;
     cold 151;
     ulcerated hand 125;
     siphylis 279;
     pestilence 524;
     paralysis 620;
     malarial fever 4, 8;
     fever 33, 246.

   Diversity of place-names through trs. _see_ (_e.g._) Qizil = Surkh,
       Safed = Spin.

   Dividing line of the Afghans and Khurasan 200.

   Divorces 267-8, 329.

   _Diwan-i Babur Padshah_, [_ed. Sir E. D. Ross_]--not Babur's earliest
       collection 438-9, 447;
     appears referred to 642;
     verses suiting his moods and deeds 604, 626-44, 705;
     verses of the Diwan in the B.N. 526-75-84-89;
     the _Walidiyyah-risala_ and B.'s new ruler 643;
     Elizabethan conceits 645;
     concerning the Rampur MS. App. Q, (illustration); 585; 635.

   _Diwan-i Khwaja Hafiz_ [_ed. H. Brockhaus, trs. W. Clarke_]--a couplet
       411.

   _Diwan-i Nuru'd-din 'Abdu'r-rahman Jami_--a quatrain plagiarized 257.

   Diwan-writers mentioned by Babur--Ahi 289;
     Ahli 290;
     'Ali-sher _Nawa'i_ (Pers.) 272;
     Husain _Bai-qara_ (_Turki_) 259;
     Kami 290;
     Saifi 288;
     Suhaili 277;
     Mahmud _Barlas_ 51;
     Mahmud _Miran-shahi_ 46.

   Domestic animals--ass 144;
     buffalo 231, 393, 454, 490;
     camel:--_khachar_ 74, 249,
       _tiwa_ 232-5, 240, 376-91;
     camels counted 391;
     flesh eaten 251;
     cost of keep 489;
     gift of 382;
     --cattle 150, 231-4-5-8, 333-96, 454;
     symbol of submission 232;
     --dog 144, 224;
     elephant _s.n._ Nat. Hist.;
     horse _see s.n._;
     mule 194, 338;
     sheep 50-5, 71, 228, 234-5-8-9, 249-50, 394;
     swine 211;
     yak 55, 490 (here _bahri-qutas_) App. M;
     --fowls 82, 213;
     goose 82;
     pigeon 13, 259, 401.

   Domestic appliances--china 80, 195, 407;
     festal ornament 304, App. I;
     drinking cups 489, 298 and 552;
     fuel 223, 311;
     goatskins 371, 421;
     gong 515;
     knife 44;
     lamp 518;
     litter 254 and 401, 331 n. 3, 268;
     rope 509;
     spoon 44, 73 n. 1, 407, 509;
     table-cloth 44, 132;
     tooth-pick 407;
     torch 213-34, 387-8, 518.

   Dreams--Babur's 132, (attributed) 132 n. 2, App. D, xi;
     another's App. D, xii.

   Dress, articles of--_bash-ayaq_ = _sar-u-pa_ (head to foot) _i.a._
       159, 393;
     bathing-cloth (_futa_) 275, 527;
     brogues (_charuq_) 187;
     caps:--black lambskin (_qara-quzi burk_) 258,
       ermine (_as burk_) 150,
       _Mughul burk_ 15, 179;
       _muftul_ or _muftunluq Mughul burk_ 159;
       helm-cap (_duwulgha burk_) 167;
     --_char-qab_ 304, 527;
     clasp (_qulab_) 156;
     girdle (_tak-bund_) 156, (_bil-bagh_ lit. waist-band) 298,
       (_kamr-bund_) 642;
     cymar (_khimar_) 561;
     coats and tunics:--_jama_ 652,
       surtout (_jiba_) 303, 632,
       long coat (_chapan_) 187,
       sheep-skin coat (_postin_) 181;
     short tunic (_nimcha_) 652;
     tunic and coat (_tun_) 14, 51, 159, 166, 371, 400;
     clothes-in-wear (_artmaq_, _artmaq_) 339;
     torque (_tauq_) 561;
     head-wear (_bashliq_) 632;
     _lung_ (_dhoti_) 519;
     rain-cloak (_kiping_) 389;
     feather tippet 496;
     turban 14, 33, 101, 258;
     turban-aigrette 225, 325;
     wide-awake (_qalpaq_);
     vest (_kunglak_) 171.

   Drums--nagaret 144, 155, 250, 337, 369, 628;
     of departure 235, morning 392, saddle 163-4;
     drumming sound [at the Running Sands] 315;
     dismissal of 595;
     tambour-player 247.

   _Durch Asien's Wuesten_, Sven Hedin--Farghana wind 9.

   Dynasties--Bahmani 482;
     Qilich 29;
     Tughluq 451;
     Shaibani's destruction of 39;
     "Mughul
   Dynasty" a misnomer in Hind 158 (_see s.nn. Turk and Mughul_).


   +Noticeable words:+--
     _daban_, a difficult defile;
     _dada_ 157 (_see taghai_);
     Ar. _daur_, warp of a bow, App. C;
     _dim_ [_T root de_, _telling_] = P. _san_, numbering 154[2954], 161,
        468, Add. Note, P. 54.


   Ear-rings 510 (_where add (in l. 5) an omitted passage entered in App.
       O, liv_).

   _Economic Products of India_, Watts--date-plum 210;
     fish-drugs 226;
     oranges var. 512.

   Editors mentioned _in loco_--A. S. Beveridge, G. B.'s _Humayun-nama_,
       and Fac-simile of the Haidarabad Codex;
     H. Brockhaus, _Die Lieder des Hafis_;
     E. G. Browne, _Tazkiratu'sh-shu'ara_ (Memoirs of Poets),
       _Tarikh-i-guzida_ (Select History);
     C. M. Fraehn, _Shajarat-i Turk_ (Genealogical Tree of the Turk);
     N. I. Ilminski, _Baber-nama_ (Kasan Imprint);
     I. Kunos, Shaikh Sulaiman _Effendi's_ Vocabulary;
     D. C. Phillott, _Tazkirat-i Tahmasp_;
     E. D. Ross, _Babur's Diwan_ (Rampur MS.), and Three Turki MSS. from
       Kashghar;
     C. Schafer, _Siyasat-nama_;
     R. C. Temple, _Peter Munday's Travels_;
     F. Veliaminof-Zernov, _Abushqa_;
     H. Yule, Wood's _Journey_.

   _Einblicke in das Farghana Thal_--A. I. v. Middendorf--winds 9.

   Elphinstone, Hon. M.--his Codex _see s.n. Babur-nama_.

   Embassy from Babur to Moscow App. Q, lxiii.

   _Embassy to Timur_, Ruy Gonsalves di Clavigo (_trs. Sir C.
       Markham_)--Hindustan the Less 46;
     kneeling in greeting 54;
     Samarkand 74-5-8;
     Kesh 83.

   _Encyclopaedia Britannica_--range of temperature 204;
     Faridu'd-din _'Attar_ 271;
     rhinohorns 408;
     maize when first in Asia 509.

   _Encyclopaedia of Islam_--Rene Basset's art. Al-busiri 620.

   Erskine William--Preface xxxiii, xliii-iv-viii-ix, Cap. IV,
       [_see Memoirs of Baber and History of India_].

   _Essays_, Lord Bacon--Isma'il _Safawi's_ personal beauty 441.

   Etiquette and decorum--well-mannered 45, 271-3-6, 303;
     knees not crossed 33;
     feet hidden 34;
     deference to elders 303;
     epistolary 332;
     farewell 330;
     --+Interviews+:--kneeling 61-9, 301, 408;
       looking one another in the eyes (_i.a._) 54, 64;
       embrace 160;
     +--Meetings+:--The Khans with Babur 54, 159, 169;
       the two Khans 160;
       Timuriya reception 59;
     Babur and the Bai-qara Mirzas 297-8-9, and elder Begims 301-97;
     his reception of Khusrau Shah 193,
       Daulat Khan 459,
       Nasrat Shah's envoy 640-1.

   Exemplars of Babur--Preface, Cap. I.

   _Expedition scientifique Francaise_, C. E. Ujfalvy--_yighach_
       (_measure_) 4;
     Aush (Ush) 5;
     Bara-koh 5;
     Babur's serviceable "Farsi-gui" 7;
     misreading (?) App. A, ii;
     distances near old Akhsi _ib._ v;
     Samarkand 74;
     Ab-burdan 152.

   _Explorations in Turkistan_, R. Pumpelly--Aq-bura-rud (_Huntingdon's
       art._) 5;
     Akhsi App. A, i, v.


   _Fair at Sakhi-sarwar_, Michael Macauliffe--238.

   _Famous Monuments of Central India_, Sir Lepel H. Griffin--Gualiar 605.

   _Fan-valley_, W. R. Rickmers--[_JRGS. 1907_], Sara-taq-daban 129;
     Ab-burdan 152.

   _Farhang-i-azfari_ [_Turki-Pers. Dict._] _nihilam_ explained 45.

   _Fauna of British India_, Oates and Blanford--flying-squirrel and
       snow-cock 213 nn. 5, 6, 7;
     various birds 495, 497, 501.

   Festivals--Babur's Ramzan rule 584;
     Id-i-fitr 66, 235, 311, 351, 410, 584, 683, 689;
     Id-i-qurb-an 154;
     Nu-roz 236;
     approximation of Nu-roz and Id-i-fitr 236.

   Fifth-share (_Khams_) 324.

   Five-days' World 50, 128, 328.

   _Flora Indica_, W. Roxburgh--spikenard 392;
     _mahuwa_ 505;
     _gular_ 508;
     _chirunji_ _ib._;
     _kiura_ 514.

   "Florio Beg _Beneveni_", Secretary to a Russian Mission, Preface xliv.

   Folk-lore--test of a dead woman's virtue 212;
     blizzard-raising spring 219;
     "commerce with the Spheres" 275;
     eye-bewitchment 664;
     omen as to sex of an unborn babe App. L;
     succession customs 482.

   Food (_ex. birds and fruits_)--bread 148 (_cf. A.N. trs. i, 421 for
       spiced bread, also Memoirs p. 144 n._);
     brochettes (_kabab_) 148, 415;
     betel 440;
     camel-flesh 493;
     carrots 542;
     cheese 394;
     meat cold 411;
     date-palm cheese 508;
     dried meat 542;
     fritters 541;
     haggis 506;
     hare 542;
     honey 203, 409, 440;
     lotus seed 660;
     mango preserve 440;
     millet porridge 181;
     pistachio nuts 508 (cf. _s.n._ Nat. Hist.).

   _A Frontier Campaign_, Lord Fincastle--_khahr_ = _shahr_ 367;
     Katgola and Panj-kura 374.

   Frontier-posts 213.


   Games and amusements--acrobats 635;
     cards 584;
     chess 38, 275-84-87;
     dancing 276-99, 303;
     dancing-girls 522, 634;
     dice 16, 275-8;
     draughts 16, 278;
     feats of archery _q.v._;
     fights of cocks 259, rams 259, elephants 631, camels 631;
     improvisation and recitation of verse 16, 26, Preface xxx;
     _kuk-bura_ 39;
     leap-frog 26;
     pigeon-flying 13, 259;
     polo (_chaughan_) 26;
     wrestling 292, 660-83, Index I. _s. nn._ Dost-i-yasin, Sadiq;
     hawking and fowling _see s.n._

   Gardens--+Andijan+:--Char-bagh 29,
       Hafiz Beg's 108,
       Birds' 168,
       Aush 5,
       Asfara 7,
       Kasan 10;
     Tashkint:--Haidar Kukul-dash's 54,
       Poplar 145, 146;
     +Samarkand+:--Heart-expanding 78, 82,
       New 62, 138,
       North, Paradise, Plane-tree 78,
       Plain's 92,
       Porcelain, World-picture 78,
       Darwesh Tarkhan's 80, 81;
     +Kabul+:--Almshouse 315,
       Avenue 647,
       Babur's Burial-garden 709 _see_ illustrations,
       Char-bagh 249-51-54, 346-97-98, 416-7-8,
       Haidar _Taqi's_ 198, 401,
       Khalifa's 315,
       Little 198,
       Paradise 315-6-7,
       Plane-tree 401, 418,
       Private 346-97,
       Rendezvous (?) 346,
       Violet 395, 415-7;
     +Koh-daman+:--Istalif 216-7, 398, 416,
       New Year's 246, Royal 418;
     +Ning-nahar+:--447,
       Adinapur 207 and n. 5,
       Char-bagh, Fidelity 207 n. 5, 208, 394, 409, 414-21-22, 443-7;
       Qara-tu 395;
     +Herat+:--'Ali-sher's 305,
       Marigold, Town, White 306, Raven's 134, 306;
     +Hindustan+:--_Safa_ (purity) 381, 665,
       (Agra), Char-bagh, Eight-paradises 531-3-7, 543-4, 548, 616-34-86,
         Gold-scattering 640-41, 689 n. 3, *708,
       Garden of Rest 709,
       (+Dulpur+) Char-bagh 603-6-15,
       Lotus 639, (on the Gagar) 465,
       (Sikri) 581-4,
       (+Gualiar+) 607-10-12-13-14.

   Gardening _see_ "Indian" and "Manual".

   The Gate--Lordship in 24;
     Babur's 26, 32;
     the place of judgment 24, 197, 259;
     Gate-house 43;
     between-the-doors 24, 100, 133;
     waiting in 277;
     gate-ward post 166.

   _Gates of India_, Sir T. H. Holdich--a Central Asian claim to Greek
       descent 22;
     headwaters in Koh-i-baba 216;
     a route 310.

   Gazetteers:--[_see nn. on pp. named_];

   " of India [ed. 1908-9]--Observatories 79;
     Nil-ab 206; Gur-khattri 230;
     Pir Kanu 238;
     Sawati 378;
     Parhala 387;
     Nagarahara App. E, xvii, xx (Bellew);
     the Gagar (Kakar, Ghagghar) 465;
     Bagar 573;
     Chandawar, Chandwar 581-9, 643;
     Lukhnur 582;
     Sarwan 587;
     Sikandra Rao _ib._;
     Gualiar 605, 610, 611;
     Parsarur 684;--Gujur 250;
     Kakar 386;
     Luhani (var.) 455;
     Mundahir 700;
     --brackish streams 384;
     a ruined range 486;
     a hunting-ground (Bari) 509;
     Juna(h)pur = Junpur 676;
     --tree squirrel 492;
       frogs 503;
       _yak_ App. M, xlvii.

     District Gs. of India:--Allahabad, (H. G. Neville), 653;
     'Azamgarh, ("), 680;
     Ballia, ("), 664, 667;
     Etawa, (Drake-Brockmann), 644 nn. 2, 6;
     Fathpur, (H. G. Neville), 651;
     Fyzabad, (") 656, App. U;
     Ghazipur, (Drake-Brockmann), 658;
     Gualiar, C. E. Luard, 590-4-7, 605-9, 610-12-13-14;
     Gurgaon, (F. Cunningham), 578-80;
     Jihlam, ("), 452, 461;
     Mainpuri, (E. R. Neave), 643-4;
     Rawalpindi, (F. A. Robertson), 452;
     Saran, (L. L. S. O'Malley), 664;
     Shahabad (D. B. Allen), 664;
     Sultanpur, (H. G. Neville), 683;
     Ulwar, Alwar (P. W. Powlett), 557-8.

   Gazetteers of the Province of Oude, App. T, lxxv, lxxvi.

   " of the Turkistan Region, Col. L. F. Kostenko
     --+Farghana:+--passes 2;
       fruits 3;
       cooking recipe 4;
       fever 4;
       running-waters 5;
       Aq-bura-rud 5;
       Khujand 7, 8;
       Mogol-tau 8;
       Sang-ferry 176;
     --+Samarkand:+--74;
       extent of town 75, 145;
       Kohik-su 76;
       paper-making 81;
       Ab-burdan 15;
       three passes 83, 90, 129;
       Lake Iskandar 129;
     --distances 4, 6, 75, 84;
       ravines App. A, ii;
       various _ib._ v;
       rapid riding 25;
       _kuk-bura_ 37;
       Sarts and their tongues 6, 7;
       Central Asian claim to Greek descent 22.

   _Geographie_, Abu'l-feda [_trs. Reinaud_]--land cultivated by the
       Zar-afshan (Kohik) 76;
     Nasir _Tusi_ 79;
     names of Qarshi 84.

   _Geography and History of Bengal_, H. Blochmann--Habshi
       succession-customs 452.

   " _of the Qandahar Inscription_, T. Beames [JRAS. 1898]--revision
         incomplete App. T. xxxiv.

   " _Oriental_ [_Ashkalu'l-bilad_] Ibn Hauqal,
         [_trs. Ouseley_]--absorption of the Sir 3;
     "Banakas" 9;
     Akhsi App. A, ii, iii;
     Kohik irrigation 76;
     Samarkand Gates 77;
     Qarshi names 84.

   Geographical unit, [_village and its cultivated land_] 3.

   _Geschichte von schoenen Redekuenste Persiens_, Freiherr v.
       Hammer-Purgstall--Hilali 290;
     _Shah u Darwesh_ 290;
     Sam Mirza's jeer 648.

   _Ghiyasu'l-lughat_ (Pers. Dict.), Muh. Ghiyasu'd-din
       _Rampuri_--_kardi_-peach 504.

   Ghulam-i-muhammad (_collaborator with Raverty_)--Nijr-au 213;
     Nil-ab 206;
     Babur's frontier-posts 213;
     a route 208.

   Gibb, E. J. Wilkinson, Memorial Trust--Preface xlvii.

   _Glossary of Terms_, H. H. Wilson--_ser_ (_sir_)-measure 517;
     _tanab_-measure 630.

   _The Golden Bough_, T. G. Frazer--a succession custom 482.

   _Goswara Inscription_, Kittoe and Kielhorn [_I.A. 1888_]--App. E,
       xviii-ix, xxii.

   Grant, Mr. Ogilvie--his help App. B, vii.

   _Great Diamonds of the World_, E. W. Streeter--its Koh-i-nur account
       incomplete 477.

   Greek descent, 22, 341.

   Guest-begs 141, 227.

   Gul-badan Begim (_Lady Rosebody_) _see_ H. N.

   _Gulistan_, Sa'di [_trs. Eastwick_]--quoted 42, 152-8, 190, 313.

   _Gulzar-i-Bihar_, Ajodhya Prasad--rulers in Tirhut and Darbanga App.
       P, lvii;
     varied by Sir G. A. Grierson (_I. A._ 1885) _ib._ n. 1.


   +Noticeable words:+--
      P. _gosha_, bow-tip and notch App. C;
      P. _gosha-gir_, an archer's repairing-tool 160-6, App. C, =
         _chapras_ and _kadang_; P. _ghunchachi_ 17.


   _Habibu's-siyar_, Khwand-amir--[_see nn. on pp. named_];
     relations with the _Babur-nama_ 57, 127, 256, 328;
     value as a source 70, 348, 426;
     not used for _The Memoirs_ 347;
     used by Babur 11, 256-91;
     completion of 687;
     --Kinsmen of Babur 13,[2955] 18, 34-5, 46-8, 50, 61, 90, 111, 127;
     --Babur 29, 147, 184, 297, 354-7, 432-7, 704;
     --various persons 25, 38, 47, 50-4-8, 72, 98, 111, 128, 249, 396;
     [Bih-bud] 227 and App. H, xxvi, 579, 621;
     _varia_ 133, 244-96, 327-8-9, 463 (_n. where read Tamarisk_), 469,
       617-22;
     --Herat 305;
     Char-shamba 71;
     _kisak_ 66;
     Nizami 85 (_where in n. read l. 2_), H.S. iii, 44, 167.

   _Haft Iqlim_, Amin Ahmad _Razi_--celebrities of Chirkh 217.

   Hand-book to Dihli, H. J. Keene--places visited by Babur 475.

   " to Bengal, Murray's--observatories 79;
     Dihli 475, 704.

   " to the Panj-ab, Murray's--Qandahar Inscription App. J, xxxiii.

   Hawking and fowling--experts in 31-8, 40-5, 67, 270-3-6;
     birds with dogs 224;
     a story 254;
     lost hawk 394;
     Babur's gift of a goshawk (_qarchigha_) 385;
     Ahmad _Miran-shahi_ and goshawks 34, Add. Note, P. 34.

   Herat's high standard of proficiency 283, Preface xxx;
     _see_ Index II.

   _Herat, On the city of_, Col. C. E. Yule [_JASB. 1887_]--280, 305-6.

   " B. de Meynard (J. A. xvi)--257, 305-6-7, 326.

   _Hidayat_, Burhanu'd-din 'Ali _Qilich_ (_trs. C. Hamilton_)--its
       author's birth-place 7, 76;
     held in honour 76;
     his descendant 29;
     _Khams_, the Fifth 324.

   _Hidayatu'r-rami_ (The Archer's Guide), Aminu'd-din (T. O. MS.
       2768)--_nawak_ 142;
     _gosha-gir_ App. C, viii;
     (_cf._ _AQR. 1911_, _H.B.'s art. Oriental Cross-bows_).

   _High Tartary_, R. Shaw--_tanga_, (_coin_) App. P, lvii.

   Hindu-shahi rulers in Kabul 200.

   Hindustani uses of "Khurasan" 202 and other words 455-88-91-92-99
       (_where for yak-rang read bak-ding_);
     pronunciation 380, 484.

   Hinks, Mr. A. E. (_R.G.S._), estimate of distance from Kishm to
       Qandahar 621.

   _Histoire de Chingiz Khan_, F. Petis de la Croix, the elder--Guk-sarai
       63, Ascension Stone 77.

   _Histoire du Khanat de Khokand_, L. Cahun--Farghana winds 9.

   " _du Khanat de Khokand_, Gen. V. R. Nalivkine--Sarts 6;
     Akhsi App. A, i, iv, v;
     tradition of Babur's abandoned child 358.

   " _de Timur Beg_, F. Petis de la Croix, the younger--Samarkand Gates
       and walls 77 (_see Zafar-nama_).

   _Historical Sketches_, Col. Mark Wilks--_wulsa_ (flight _en masse_)
       486-7 (_where for "ulwash" read ulwan_);
     Add. Notes, P. 487.

   Histories:--(_see nn. on pp. named_).

   " of Bukhara, A. Vambery--descent of chiefs 244.

   " of Gujrat, E. C. Bayley trs. _see Mirat_.

   " of India, Elliott and Dowson--Tarkhans 31 (_where add (n. 4)
       references vol. i, 300, 320-1, 498_);
     Farmulis 456, 675;
     Bugials 452;
     _varia_ 274, 440-77, 652-9, 693;
     places 191, 219, 457, 582, 699;
     earthquake 247;
     Mian = Shaikh 457;
     a B. N. source 348, 428-39, 621;
     _The Malfuzat-i-timuri_ 653;
     supers-session of B.'s sons proposed 703.

   " of India, Baber, W. Erskine--148-94, 247, 332-8, 343-6, 361, 440-78,
       520-2, 562, 651, 702;
     gunpowder 369;
     coins and Revenue List 446-78, 520-22, 627, App. P, lv;
     value of the book 428.

   " of Musical Sounds, C. Carus-Wilson--215.

   " of Ottoman Poetry, E. J. Gibbs--double meaning in composition App.
       Q, lxiv.

   _Hobson-Jobson_, Sir H. Yule (_ed. Crookes_)--(_see nn. on pp.
       named_), Byde (_var._) Horse 470;
     the Koh-i-nur 477;
     black-buck 491;
     gynee-cow 492;
     partridge cries 496;
     rock-pigeon (baghri-qara?) 498;
     coucal 500;
     _koel_ 501;
     mango 503;
     plantain 504;
     "mohwa" 505;
     _kishmish_ 505;
     _jambu_ 506;
     jack-fruit 506;
     toddy 509;
     an orange 511;
     shoe-flower 513;
     ghurry (clepsydra) 516;
     _ser_ (measure) 517;
     "bowly" (_baoli_) 533;
     "talookdar" 621;
     "cuscuss"-grass 631;
     "moonaul" (monal) App. N, xlix;
     "choki" App. V, lxxxi.

   Holy War--against Kafiristan 46;
     Babur's against Sanga 547 _et seq._ and Chandiri 589;
     references to 579-83, 637.

   Horse-accoutrement--Mughul 160;
     mail 140-67, 380;
     saddle-bags 338.

   Horses--_tipuchaqs_;--a breeder of 38;
     mentioned 235, 303 and 336 (grey), 383 (almond-coloured), 401,
       captured at Qandahar 338;
     --Kabul horse-trade 202;
     horses bred for sale 235;
     how fed in a siege 145;
     eaten on a journey 148;
     swim the Zarafshan in mail 140;
     in snow 253, 308-11;
     single-file in snow 314;
     women's use of during a battle 268;
     murrians 31;
     abandoned 239, 379;
     invalided to Kabul 376-8;
     trodden down by elephants 457;
     restorative treatment 666;
     --tribute in 228, _etc._;
     raided by Babur 313;
     galloping-ground for 222;
     steps counted to estimate a distance 666;
     --_qush-at_, a change-horse led by a rider 453;
     corn and grass for 186, 221-2-3, 238; 311, 394;
     unfit grass 222;
     anatomical similarity with the rhinoceros 490.

   Hot-bath, _hamman_--Samarkand 78,
     Akhsi 173,
     Kabul 346,
     Babur finds none in Hindustan 518,
     constructs in Agra, 532, 634,
     in Dulpur 614, 639.

   Households and families--various 32, 123, 125-9, 141;
     Babur's sent to him 71-2, 151-3;
     (B.'s) 184, 306;
     marching for Kabul 189, 191-7;
     Mughuls' come to B.'s army 192-4;
     B. safeguards 199, 460-1;
     driven like sheep 242 (2);
     Bai-qaras desert 327;
     Shaibani anxious about 135, 343;
     B.'s come to Hind 645-6, 650-7-8, 665-75-89;
     his wives and children 711-4.

   Houses--high 221,
     windowed 201;
     in Chandiri 597;
     in Gualiar 608.

   Huma, a fabulous bird 26.

   Hunting:--circle (_jirga_) 114, 325, 424-50, 657;
     Babur's hunting 296, 602, 707.

   _Humayun-nama_, Bayazid Biyat--a commanded book 691.

   _Humayun-nama_, Gul-badan Begim--(_trs. and ed. A. S. Beveridge_)--[_see
       nn. on pp. named_];
     Adik Sl. 23;
     a betrothal 48;
     Khan-zada 147;
     Mah-chuchuk 199, 342;
     Apaq B. 301;
     Mahdi Khw. 381, 688, 703-4, 579;
     'Asas (1) 387, (2) 552;
     Mama Atun 148, 407;
     various men 408 and 640, 526;
     a begim's manly pursuits 263;
     Mahim B. 344, 686;
     Mirza Khan 433 (_where, l. 2 fr. ft. read grand-"mother"_);
     Babur's sons 436, App. J, xxxv, 619, App. L, xliii, 545;
     B.'s daughters 441, 522, 708, 713;
     Babur's wounds 167, 524, 616, 630;
     his self-devotion 701, (illustration 702, Preface xxxii;)
     his death 708-9;
     removal of body to Kabul 709;
     --references to the H.N. 347, 689, 691-4, Pref. xxviii;
     its Biographical App. 13, 705, 711.


   Ibn Batuta _see_ Travels.

   " Hauqal _see_ Geography.

   _Illustrated London News_--fortress gun and stone ammunition 595;
     rafts 673.

   _Indian Eras_, Sir Alex. Cunningham--intercalary months 515;
     discrepant dates App. S, lxxi.

   _Indian Forest Trees_, D. Brandis--[_see nn. on pp. named_],
       date-plum 210;
     cypress 222;
     weeping-willow App. I, xxxii;
     "mohwa" 505;
     bullace-plum 507;
     orange-like fruits 510;
     ebony-tree 585.

   _Indian Hand-book of Gardening_, G. T. F. Speede--_sinjid_ (jujube) 203;
     _amluk_ (date-plum) 210;
     _sambal_ (spikenard) 392;
     "keeras" (cherry) 501;
     _kamrak_ (_averrhoa carambola_) 506;
     _sang-tara_ (orange) 511;
     under-ground jack-fruit App. O, lii.

   Inscriptions--Babur's atAb-burdan 152,
     Bad-i-pich pass 343,
     Qandahar App. T;
     --on Ajodhya Mosque App. U;
     on B.'s tomb 710.

   _Inscriptions de Caboul_, J. Darmesteter [_J.A. 1888_]--in Babur's
       Burial-garden 710.

   Intercession--Babur's, through Ahrari 620;
     through Imam 'Ali, 702.

   "Islam"'s foes killed 370;
     its army 564.

   Ivory 489.


   Jogis--at Gur-khattri 230.

   _Journal of Travel_, W. Griffiths--red apple 507;
     _cicadae_ s. of Ghazni App. N, l.

   _Journey from Bengal to England_, G. Forster--division of climates
       229 (_where for "Travels" read Journey_).

   _Journey to the Sources of the Oxus_, J. Wood (_ed. Yule_)--Kabul 199;
     Running-sands 201, 215;
     Hindu-kush passes (_Yule's Introduction_) 204;
     dun sheep 224;
     Nagarahara regions App. E, xxiii.

   _Journeys in Biluchistan, Afghanistan and the Panj-ab_,
       E. Masson--(_see nn. on pp. named_), Kabul 199, 200, 201,
       (fruits) 203-4;
     Shibr 215;
     Panjhir 205;
     Nil-ab (in Ghur-bund) 216;
     Adinapur 207;
     Chaghatai castles 208;
     a meaning of "Lam" 210;
     Running-sands 215;
     Judas-tree 216;
     --places 405, 412-17-45, 647;
     routes 231, 417;
     sign of submission 232;
     Nagarahara App. E, xvii;
     "Babur Padshah's stone-heap" (cairn) 416;
     Preface p. xxxviii.

   _Journey to India overland_, A. Conolly--Kabul 199;
     _rawaj_ (rhubarb) 203.


   Kabul _see_ "Cabool" and "Caubul".

   "Kafir"--uses of the word 481-3; 518, 577.

   _Kafirs of the Hindu-kush_, Robertson--their wines 212.

   _Kaiser Akbar_, Count F. v. Noer (_trs. A. S. Beveridge_)--finance
       reform 282.

   Kehr, Dr. G. J. [_scribe of the Pet. F. O. School Codex of the
       "Bukhara Babur-nama"_] see _Waqi'-nama-i-padshahi_.

   The _Khamsatin_ (Two Quintets)--a reader of 15;
     imitated 288.

   _Khazinatu'l-asfiya_ [Treasury of Saints], Ghulam-i-sarwar--Khwajaki
       Khw. 67;
     Mir Sayyid 'Ali _Hamadani's_ grave 211;
     Pir Kanu 238;
     Jalalu'd-din _Purani_ 306;
     Sharafu'd-din _Muniri_ 666.

   _Khutba_--read disloyally 52, 328;
     Babur's compact 354-6;
     read in Dihli for him 476.

   The (Koh-i-nur) diamond 477, 702.

   Klaproth Jules--Preface xxxix, xlvii;
     [_see_ _Archiv_ and _Memoires relatifs etc._].

   _Kulliyatu'r-rami_ (Cyclopaedia of Archery), Muh. Budha'i--_nawak_ 142;
     _gosha-gir_ App. C, viii;
     (_cf. Oriental Cross-bows, H.B. AQR. 1911_).


   +Noticeable words:+--_khachar_ 74, 249; _khak-bila_
   (leap-frog) 26; _Khan-dada_; _kisak_ (old person) 66; _kim_
   (yeast) 423; _kiyik_ 6, 8, 10, 224, 491; _khimar_ = cymar
   (scarf) 561; _kuilak_ syn. _kunglak_ (pullover vest, jersey)
   171-5; _kukbura_ see _aughlaqchi_; _kur-khana_; Qarshi = Ar.
   _qasr_ 84; _kurush_, looking in the eyes, interviewing _i.a._
   54, 64, 640 (_cf. quchush_, embracing); _kusaru_[?] 369;
   _kushluq_ 250.


   _La Grande inscription de Qandahar_, J. Darmesteter (_JAS. 1890_),
       App. J, xxxiii-iv.

   _Lahor to Yarkand_, Hume and Henderson--_yak_ App. M, xlvii.

   Laidlaw (_JASB 1848_)--nasal utterance App. E.

   Lane's Lexicon _see_ Dictionaries.

   Langles art. Babour Preface xiv.

   Law (Muhammad's)--on blood-vengeance 194, 251-8;
     Shaibani's disregard of 329;
     Husain _Bai-qara's_ regard for 258;
     Babur's orthodox observance shown _e.g._ 25, 44, 111, 262, 370-7,
       483, 547-51-74-89-96, and in the _Mubin and Walidiyyah-risala_
       _q.v._;
     his orthodox reputation (_epitaph_) 711;
     his observance as to intoxicants 302, beyond his 23rd year 299,
       302-3-4;
     his return to obedience (933) in 44th year 551-5;
     referred to 203 (_verse_) 645-7-8;
     his breaches of Law:--against types of verse 447,
       repented 448;
       against wine, _see s.n._ Wine.

   _Les Mosquees de Samarcande_, Pet. Archeol. S.--74-8-7.

   _Les six voyages en Turquie, en Perse, et aux Indes_, Jean Baptiste
       le Tavernier--the coin _casbeke, kipki_ 296.

   _Letters of Lady Mary W. Montagne_--lovers' marks 16.

   Letters--Nawa'i's imitation of Jami's collection 271;
     Babur keeps a letter of 910 to 935 AH. 190;
     his royal-letters (_farman_) 463-4, 526, 617 (_with autograph
       marginal couplet_), others (_khat_t) 331-2;
     to Khw. Kalan 411 (_with autograph couplet_), 603 n. 3, 627, and
       (_reproduced_) 645;
     to Humayun (_reproduced_) 624;
     to Kamran 645-6, Preface xxxv, xliii;
     to Mahim 374, 541;
     Letters-of-victory:--Kabul 319,
       Bajaur 371,
       Hisar-firuza 466,
       Kanwa 559-74, 580.

   Levirate marriage 23, 267.

   Levy on stipendiaries 617.

   Lexicon Persico-Latinum, I. A. Vullers _see_ Dictionaries.

   Leyden John--tentative trs. of the Bukhara Compilation, Preface
       xlvii-viii-ix, lviii.

   _Life and Letters of Ogier G. de Busbecq_ [_trs.
       Forster & Daniel_]--explains "Sultanim" 29.

   _L'Inde des Rajas_, L. Rousselet--Gualiar 605.

   _Linguistic Survey of India_, Sir G. A. Grierson--forms of "nine"
       App. E, xviii.

   Loess 3, 30, App. A, ii.

   Looting of assigned individuals 328.

   Lord [JASB 1838]--Ghurbund 205;
     Running-sands 215.

   "Lords of the Elephant" 563-73.

   Lordship in the Gate _see_ Gate.

   _Lotophagi_, a fruit they ate 210;
     quoted 42.

   Lover's-marks 16, Add. Note, P. 16.

   _Lubbut't-tawarikh_, Yahya _Kazwini_--an early (brief) source 349;
     dates the battle of Ghaj-davan 361.


   +Noticeable words+:--
     _lam_ (fort) 210;
     _likh_, _luja_, _lukha_ (a bird) 498, App. N, xlvii.


   _Ma'asir-i-rahimi_ (a Life of 'Abdu'r-rahim Mirza _q.v._),
       'Abdu'l-baqi _Nahavandi_--Babur's wife Salha 713.

   _Ma'asiru'l-'umra_, Shah-navaz-Khan--Mu'azzam-nagar = Din-kot 206.

   McGregor, Col. H. G.--meaning of "_ningrahar_" and
       "_nungnihar_" = 9 streams, App. E, xix.

   Magic--rain making with the jade-stone (_yada-tash_) 27, 67, 654;
     the stone used to ensure victory 623;
     Babur's talisman to stop rain 423.

   _Majalis-i-nafa'is_, 'Ali-sher _Nawa'i_--mentions 'Abdu'l-lah
       _Barlas_ 51.

   _Making of a Frontier_, A. G. A. Durand--Greek descent 22.

   _Malfuzat-i-timuri_ (Timur's Turki Annals)--not discredited by
       no-mention in the mutilated B.N. 653;
     Yunas Khan and the book Preface xxix;
     an incentive to Babur xxx,
       perhaps also at xxxii;
     their acceptance in a Persian translation by Shah-jahan xlvi.[2956]

   _Mammals of India_, T. E. Jerdon--hog-deer 491.

   _Manners and customs of the modern Egyptians_, E. W. Lane--drinkables
       298.

   _Manual of Gardening_, Firminger--cherries 203;
     _kamrak_ fruit 506;
     an orange 511;
     _sada-fal_ 512.

   Manufactures of Samarkand, cramoisy and paper 81, 305.

   _Marmion_ (_Scott's Notes to_), wild geese checked in flight 214.

   Marriage, compelled 386;
       levirate 23, 267;
       legitimate 269;
     illegal 329.

   The _Masnawi_ of Jalalu'd-din _Rumi_ (_trs. E. H. Whinfield_)--read
       by 'Umar Shaikh 15, Preface xxx.

   _Materials for the History of India_, Nassau Lees--amongst the sources
       for filling out Babur-nama gaps 428.

   _Matla'u's-sa'dain_, 'Abdu'r-razzaq (_N. et Ex. xiv_)--Timurid
       suzerainty acknowledged in Dihli [in 814-1411] 459.

   Meal-hours--big breakfast 389;
      nooning 614-861.

   Measures--+Linear+:--_ailik_ (finger-breadth) 489, 630;
       _arghamchi_ (rope) 614;
       arrow's-flight (_i.a._ bow-shot), _i.a._ 8, 640;
       from gate-ward to Gate 316;
       _gaz_ 611 n. 3;
       _kuroh_ _i.a._ 76;
       _qadam_ (step, pace) 75, 630, (of a horse) 666;
       _qari_ 7, 208-9, 489, 550, 611-29-30-31;
       _qarish_ (inch) 489;
       _qulach_ 406-93;
       _shar'i_ 76, 200;
       spear's length 196, 377, 474;
       _tanab_ (rope) 630;
       _tutam_ (hand-breadth) 630;
       _yighach_ (Prs. trs. _farsang_) 4, 7, 9, 10, 25, 55, 76, 82-3-4,
         99, 138, 208-17-18, 323, App. A, v. n. 1;
     --+Time+:--Hindustan divisions of the year 515 to 517;
       boiling of milk 175, 237;
     --+Weight+:--batman 263, 276;
       _man_ 699;
       misqal 421-77, 632;
       _rati_ 477 n. 6, 517;
       _tash_ (stone, silver & gold) 632;
       Kabul _sir_ (_ser_) 632, 546;
       Table of weights of Hind 517-8;
       _tula_ 517-41;
       --ass-load (_kharwar_) 228, 338-9, 374;
     --+Numeration+ (Indian) 518;
     --+Capacity+:--_x_ mills water-power _i.a._ 208, 216, 462-5, 581;
       (coins by the) quiverful 632.

   Medical and surgical remedies:--dried plums (_prunes_) 82;
     water dropped from cotton 89;
     trepanning 106-9;
     seton, bandage (_yildiz_) 169;
     powder for bone-growing 169;
     water-melon and narcissus 246, 399, 401;
     rose-water (_jul-ab_) 400;
     antidotes to poison 511, 543;
     tonic powders 606;
     opium 608, 661;
     quicksilver 618;
     pepper-steaming 657, 660.

   _Mediaeval geography and history of Central and Western Asia_,
       E. Bretschneider--Almaligh and other old towns 2;
     Simiz-kint [_Fat-village_], a name of Samarkand 75;
     _Nuyan_ explained 131.

   _Memoires relatifs a l'Asie_ (_ii, 134_), J. Klaproth--its valuable
       extracts from the Bukhara Compilation, Preface, Cap. III,
       Part III;
     Babur's letter to Kamran, App. J, xxxv, (_see Archivs_).

   Memory, retentive, 290.

   _Merv Oasis_, O'Donovan--Radagan 622.

   _Metamorphoses_, Ovid--Scorpio and Libra 623.

   Migration enforced--of Mughuls of the Horde 20, 350-1;
     of Tramontane tribes 202-70, 322;
     of villagers to Bajaur 375,
       and planned to Sialkot.

   Military:--+Armies, size of+:--Mahmud (Ghazni) 479;
       Shihabu'd-din _Ghuri_ 480;
       Auz-beg 480;
       Daulat Khan _Ludi_ 451;
       Babur, Qandahar 334,
         Bhira 480,
         Panipat 452-80;
       Ibrahim _Ludi_ 463-80;
       Sanga 547;
       Tahmasp at Jam 635;
     --Babur's force in various encounters (200 to 300) 91;
       (240) 100;
       (1000) 87;
       (240) 334-7;
       (10 to 15) 140;
       (100) 147;
       (10 to 15) 166;
         (3) _ib._;
         (1) 167;
       (100) 173;
       (20 to 25) 177;
         (1) 178;
     --+Commands+:--Mingligh (1000) 52;
       Nuyan (_Mughuli_) 151;
       Tuman-begi (10,000) 17;
       Yuz-atlik (_Centurion of horse_) 143;
       Quchin 32;
     --+Army array:+--108-13-55-98;
       234-381;
       468-71, 557-8;
       Babur's organization and terms 334;
       flanking-movement (_tulghuma_) 139,
         described 140, 473, 568;
       rallying-point 547;
       rendezvous (_buljar_) 122-3, 592, 638;
       at the Sind-ferry 461-2;
       postings 113-39, 372, 595, 662-68;
     --+Various+:--A.S. Corps 674;
       army-list 451-2;
       camp-bazar 67-8;
       Corps of Braves 28, App. H, xxvii;
       discipline 66-7;
       necessaries for holding a fort 145;
       numbering (_dim_) 154-61, 468, (_san_) 451-2;
       pass-words 164;
       pillars of heads 232, 324-71, 404;
       war-cries 138-44-55-63-66;
       ways and means 228, 617;
       --Rajput fighting customs 595;
         massacres of "Pagans" 370, 484, 596;
     --+Appliances and constructions+:--axe (tool) 108, 379;
       catapult 59;
       camp defence:--ditch and branch 60-1, 110-17, 138, (908 AH.) 162,
         Rumi defence of linked carts _infra_ (932 AH.) 469-70, 550-58;
       draw-bridge (_pul-i-rawan_) 171-76;
       flaming-fire 595;
       guns _see_ fire-arms;
       ladders (_shatu_) 130-31-43-71, 368-70, 593;
       mantelet (_tura_) 108-13-55, 368, 469, 593;
       mines 53-9, 343-70;
       moat 10;
       pit 198;
       head-strike (_sar-kob_) 53-9;
       spade or shovel (_kitman_) 108;
       smoke 59;
       wheeled-tripod 550-7;
     --+Armour+:--helm 166-7, 396;
       cuirass (mail or wadded) _i.a._ 195, 315-96;
       the word _jiba_ 495;
       Qalmaq _jiba_ 175;
       coat of mail (_joshan_) 195;
       horse-mail (_kichim_) _see_ horse;
       arm-protector, the 4 plates of mail, attachment (_gharicha_) 167,
         315, 396;
     --+Arms+:--battle-axe (_baltu_) 160, 370;
       broad dagger (_jamdar_) 528;
       hanger (_khanjar_) 528;
       Hindu knife (_kard_) 528;
       lance (_neza_) 370;
       six-flanged mace (_shash-par_) 160;
       rugged mace (_piyazi_, _Sanglakh Dict. f. 312b_, _kisgin_) 160;
       _casse-tate_ mace (_kistin_) 160;
       scabbard (_qin_) 167;
       sword (_qilich_) 160-61-67, 315-70-96, 453;
       broad sword (_yasi qilich_) 150;
       (_see Archery_);
     --+Carts+ (_araba_) for Rumi defence:--(Panipat) ordered collected
         468;
       700 brought and used as described 468-9;
       --misleading omission from (E.'s) _Memoirs_ 468 n. 3;
       --progress of the defences 469-70;
         mantelets used 469;
         (position of guns 473-74);
       --(Kanwa) carts supplemented by wheeled tripods 550;
         place of carts in the march out 550-57-58;
         carts the frontal protection 550-58;
         well-made in Rumi fashion 550;
         [posts of matchlockmen and canoneers along the line of carts
           569];
         carts in the battle 564-697, 471;
         centre troops move from behind them 570-71;
         carts advanced in front of Babur 571;
       --(Jam) Tahmasp's Rumi defence 623, 635-36;
     --+Fire-arms+:--_firingi_ (swivel-gun, _pierrier_) 472, 667;
       mortars (_qazan_) 59
       --the Ghazi cast 536,
         tested 547
         --used 570-99
         --ineffective at Chandiri 592-5
         --its elephant-traction 489;
       mortars and (_add_) carts landed 651
         --used in the Gogra battle (_where "tope"_) 669-70-71;
       a larger mortar made, bursts 588;
       --_zarb-zan_ (culverin) 473
         --used at Panipat 474,
           Kanwa 564-9, 71,
           the Ganges-bridge 599,
           Eastern campaign 651-6;
       --_tufang_, _tufak_ (matchlock) used 368-9, 466-9, 558-64-70-71-73,
         599, 628-67-8-9;
       Tahmasp's 622-35;
       --gunners and matchlockmen 368,
         their pay 617
         and wellbeing 647;
       "fire-working" Bengalis 672;
       --_muljar_ (gun emplacement) 593, 628
         (_for buljar_?), 668;
     --+Stone-missiles+:--hurled by hand 109, 370, 595;
       legendary dropping of by birds 563;
       discharged from catapults 59,
         from mortars and matchlocks 109, 369, 431-73, 571-88-93-95-99,
           617-67-70-79;
     --+Transport:+--pack animals 235;
       camels 232-5, 378, (_counted_) 391, 601-56
         (_see Domestic animals_);
       elephants 489;
       carts (_baggage_) 237, 376-77, 468, 636, 700,
         (_gun_) 592-99,
         (_unspecified_) 601-51-56.

   Minerals:--ribbon jasper 6;
     turquoise 8, 12;
     iron 12;
     jade 27, 67;
     ruby 194;
     silver and lapis-lazuli 214;
     lead and copper 485.

   _Mirat-i-jahan-numa_, Shaikh Muh. _Baqa_--Khwand-amir's journey to
       Hind 505.

   _Mirat-i-sikandari_, 'Ali Muh. Khan (_trs. E. Clive Bayley_)--Gujrat
       affairs 535;
     persons 562 and 614, 612;
     Gualiar jewels 613.

   Mirror-stone, (_Farghana_) 7.

   _Miscellaneous Works_, Greaves--Observatories 79.

   Mohl, Jules--date of revision of _Tarikh-i-firishta_ 694 (_E. and D.'s
       Hist. of India iv, 209_).

   _Mongolia_, N. Prejevalsky (_trs. E. Delmar-Morgan_)--_aimaq_ 49,
       explained Add. Notes P. 49.

   Moon-stroke 608.

   _Mountain-passes leading into the valley of Bamian_, Lt.-Gen. E. Kaye,
       C.B. [PRGS. 1879]--birds 213.

   _Mubin_ (Exposition), Babur--date of composition (928 AH.) 426, 437;
     described 437-8;
     Babur's choice of its title 630, 653;
     thought during its composition 449;
     quoted 630;
     sent to Samarkand 653.

   +Mughuls and Babur+:--a faithful Mughul 87-8;
     Mughuls enter his service 58-9, 189, 190-2-4, 245;
     support Jahangir against him _see i.a. snn._ Tambal, 'Ali-dost;
     offer to supplant him by Sa'id _Chaghatai_ 351;
     sent to help him 101-4,
       oppose him 115;
     desert him 86-7, 104-5;
     Five Rebellions against him 105, 208, 313-4, 345-9, 361-2-3, 397;
     his following purged of them 427;
     his comments on them 66, 104-5, 115-40, 172;
     a Mughul chief's dying comment on them 363;
     "Mughul dynasty" a misnomer 158.

   _Muhammadan Dynasties_, Stanley Lane-Poole--Table of Timurids 262;
     various 479-82;
     certain Auzbeg deaths 636.

   Mu'inu'd-din al Zamji (_J.A. xvi, 476, de Meynara's art._)--Kichik
       Mirza's Egyptian information 257.

   _Muntakhabu'l-lubab_, Muh. Hashim _Kh(aw)afi_ Khan--[_see nn. on pp.
       named_], a source for filling Babur-nama gaps 208;
     Sihrind, Sar-i-hind 383;
     siege of Chandiri 596;
     varies Babur's chronogram of the victory 596.

   _Muntakhabu't-tawarikh_, 'Abdu'l-qadir _Badayuni_ (_trs. Ranking,
       Lowe_) Hasan _Hijri_ 153;
     Babur's Script 228, App. Q, lxii, arrow-sped couplet 361;
     _Mubin_ 437-8;
     Chronogram of Sikandar _Ludi's_ death 427;
     the haunted field of Panipat 472;
     Hasan _Miwati_ 523;
     Shaikh Guran 526;
     Farighi 621;
     Muh. _Ghaus_ 690;
     quotes Babur's Funeral Ode 709.

   "Musalman" as used by Babur 99, 104, 268, 481,
     and by Shaikh Zain 553-5.

   _Musalman Numismatics_, O. Codrington--various coins 632 [_see JRAS.
       1913-4_].

   Music--+instruments+:--'_aud_ (lute) 292, 395;
       _chang_ (jews'-harp) 303;
       drum _see s.n._;
       _ghachak_ (guitar) 291;
       _nai_ (flute) 291, 303;
       _qanum_ (dulcimer) 278;
       _qubuz_ (guitar) 39;
     --+modes+:--76 n. 5, 136, 287, 422;
     --+performers+:--39, 278, 286-7, 291, 292, 422 (Babur);
       at entertainments _passim_;
       --Bana'i's rapid progress as a musician 287.


   +Noticeable words+:--
     _aimaq_ 51 _etc._ Add. Note P. 51;
     _ming_ = P. _hazara_ 52;
     _ming-begi_ see _quchin_;
     _mihman-beg_ 227.


   Nadir Shah Pref. xlvii.

   _Nagarahara_, Simpson [JASB. xiii?]--App. E. xxiii.

   _Narrative of the Journey of the Embassy to Kashghar_ (_Yarkand_),
       H. W. Bellew--Satuq-bughra Khan 29.

   Nasal utterance--its seeming products "_ning_" (var.) = nine, App. E,
       xviii, xix, and "Tank" = Taq 233.

   Natural History--+Beasts+:--those common to Kabul and Hind 222;
       wild ass 224, 325;
       wild buffalo 490, 657;
       _bughu-maral_ 8, 10, 114, 373, 491, 500;
       --elephant described 488,
         encounters with rhino and camel 451, 631, 657,
         in battle 463-70, 457-66-68, 529, 668,
         in hunting 657,
         killed by a fleeing foe 662,
         killed in Makka 563,
         statues of, at Gualiar 609,
         various 590, 628-58;
       --ermine-weasel 492;
       yellow fox 114;
       flying-fox (bat) 500 (_and n. 6 where read f. 135_);
       _gaini_ cattle 492;
       goat 16, 83;
       hare 10, 114;
       --_kiyik_:--black buck, hog-deer and a smaller deer 222, 491,
         _aq kiyik_ (white) 6, 8, 10, 491,
         _qizil kiyik, arqarghalcha_ (dun sheep) 224, 491;
       --tree-mouse 492;
       monkey, ape 211, 222, 492;
       musk-rat 214;
       _nil-gau_ 222, 490;
       pig 114;
       _quchqar_ (ram) 492;
       _karg_ (rhinoceros) 378, 450-1-89, 557;
       squirrel 492;
       flying squirrel 213[2957];
       tiger 393, 664;
       _yak_ (_qutas_) 55, 155,
         _bahri qutus_ 485, 490, App. M.
     --+Birds+:--migration 220-4;
       catching 220-4-5;
       common to Hind and Kabul 220;
       decoy-birds 225;
       impeded flight 214, 496;
       special notes on App. B and N;
       combined sex-name 500;
       _ding_ (adjutant) 398, 498;
       _bak-ding_[2958] (adjutant) 499;
       _baghri-qara_ _see_ sand-grouse and App. N.;
       Indian bustard and Great bustard 498;
       Large _buzak_ (black ibis) 499;
       white _buzak_ 499, 500 l. 2;
       buzzard (T. _sar_) 499, 500[2959];
       chameleon-bird _see lukha_;
       cranes var. 224, 499;
       crow var. 500;
       ducks var. 224, 500;
       egret (_qarqara_) 224;
       golden eagle (_burgut_) 373, 500;
       florican 498[2960];
       goshawk (T. _qarchigha_ and _qirghicha_) 34, Add. Note, P. 34,
         385;
       grey heron (_auqar_) 224, 499;
       jungle-fowl var. 497;
       _kabg-i-dari_ 214, 496-7, App. N, xlix (_see lukha_);
       kuil, koel 501;
       Indian loriquet 494 n. 5;
       _lukha_ var. 213, 222, 496, Add. Note, P. 496
         (_see kabg-i-dari_);
       magpie 500;
       green magpie 501;
       _manek_ (beef-steak bird) 499;
       _monal_ 496, 497, App. N, _phul-paikar_ 497;
       _bulbul_ (nightingale) 420, 501;
       northern-swallow 495;
       parrot var. 493-4;
       partridge var. 421-93-96-97;
       peacock 493;
       pelican (_qutan_) 224, App. N, 1;
       pheasant (_qir-ghawal_) 3, 8, 10, 34, 114, 493-97 (_chir_);
       _qil-quyirugh_ (_Qarshi-birdie_) 84, App. B;
       quail var. 34, 497-8;
       sand-grouse (_baghri-qara_) 84, 498,[2961] App. B;
       _sarigh-aush_[2962] 373;
       _sharak_;
       --Himalayan starling? 495 n. 3;
       _pindawati_ 495;
       house-_mina_ 495 (_add n. ref. 5_);
       pied-_mina_ _ib._--sparrow (_chuchuq_) 8;
       snow-cock 213, 421, App. N, 1, (_see_ _lukha_ and _chiurtika_
         _ib._);
       white stork 499;
       _karcha_ (swift) 501;
       wag-tail 498, 501;
       wild fowl 497;
       little green wood-pecker 501;
       _zummaj_ 500 ("eagle," _add_ Its colour is black);
     --+Fish and amphibia+:--migration 225;
       catching 225-7, 406, 682;
       of Hindustan fish 503;
       cray fish 502;
       unnamed 663;
       frog 503;
       porpoise 502;
       crocodile var. 501-2, 663;
     --+Various+:--lizard 501-2;
       locust (_chiurtika_) 421, App. N, 1;
       mosquito 204;
       snakes, 8, 147, 406;
     +Flowers+:--Farghana 5, 10;
       Kabul 215-7;
       Peshawar 393;
       Hind 513-5;
       --_arghwan_ (red, the Judas-tree) 216-7, 305,
         (yellow) 217;
       hibiscus 513;
       jasmine 515;
       oleander 514, 580, 610;
       roses 5, 321 (couplet), 513;
       screw-pine 516;
       tulips 5, 215, 321;
       violets 5;
     --+Fruits+:--Farghana 2, 3, 6, 8, 10;
       Samarkand 77, 82-4;
       Kabul 202-3-8-9-10-12-16-18-20-21;
       Hind 503 to 513, App. O;
       --'_ain-alu_ 506;
       almond 6, 7, 9, 223, 507-8;
       _alu-balu_ 203;
       apple 2, 8, 77, 202-20, 507;
       apricot 6, 202;
       _badrang_ 203;
       plantain (banana) 208, 504;
       cherry 203;
       _chirunji_ 508;
       citron var. 203-8-10, 501-11;
       clustered-fig 508;
       coco-nut 509;
       colocynth-apple (_wild gourd_) 410-11 (_where for khuntal read
         hunzal_);
       coriander 211;
       corinda 507;
       date-palm 410-24, 506-8;
       date-plum (T. _qara-yimish_) 203-10;
       fig 508;
       grape 3, 77, 202-3-10-12-18-21, 507-8, 646-86-87;
       jack-fruit 506;
       _jaman_ 506, 606;
       _jilghuza_ (pine-seeds) 203-13;
       jujube (_sinjid_) 196, 203;
       _chikda_ 506;
       _kamrak_ 506 (_where add, It has no stone_);
       lemon 512, 614;
       lime var. 512;
       lote-fruit 507;
       lotus-seed (_dudah_) 666;
       mango 503;
       melon var. 10, 82-4, 92, 411, 645-6, 686-7;
       mimusops 505;
       myrobalan 508;
       _nashpati_ 3;
       orange var. 203-10-11, 414, 510, 512, Add. N. P. 512, 614, App.
         O, liii;
       pear 203;
       peach 203;
       pistachio 508;
       plum 82;
       monkey-jack 506-7;
       pomegranate 6, 8, 77, 202-8, 507;
       quince 202, 507-12;
       tamarind 505 (_n. ref. to buia_);
       walnut 203, 508;
     --+Trees and plants+:--_aman-qara_, maize (?) 504,
       small almond 233,
       _buia_ 505,
       _buta-kuh_ 221,
       clover, trefoil, _sih-barga_, _yurunchqa_ 6, 209, 346,
       conifers, archa, 221-2,
       cypress 81, 222,
       _dhak_ 472;
       ebony-tree 585, 614,
       hardwood-elm 81,
       grass (_cuscus_) 631 n. 2,
       holm-oak 213-16-23,
       madder 218,
       _mahuwa_ 505-8,
       male-reed 514,
       mandrake and its similars 11,
       mastic 213-23,
       millet 81, 215,
       mulberry (_tut_) 248, 494,
       olive 222,
       palmyra palm 509, App. O, liv,
       Pinus Gerardiana, _jilghuza_ 203-13,
       plane 216, 398,
       poplar var. 13, 15, (_turuk_) 145 and 156, 414 (_where for
         "purslain" read poplar_),
       _qarqand_ 223,
       reed 514,
       rice 210, 342,
       rhubarb 203, 345, 507,
       spikenard 392,
       sugar-cane 208, 388,
       _tabalghu_ 11,
       tamarisk 14, 463 (_where, wrongly, "Tamarind"_);
       --willow 217, 306,
         (weeping) 304, App. I,
         (_amal-bid_) 512;
     --+Physical various--Climate+:--change on the Kindirlik-pass (?) 2;
       meeting places of hot and cold in Kabul 208 and 229, 220;
       both near the town 202;
       good climate Aush 4-6,
         Kasan 10,
         Soghd 84,
         Kabul 263;
     --+Climes+:--Farghana and Samarkand in the 5th 1, 74;
       Kabul in the 4th 199;
       --cold, Akhsi 116,
         Hasht-yak 151,
         Ghazni 219, 526,
         Khwarizm 219,
         upper Heri-rud valley 311,
         Kabul 314;
     --+Various+:--dust-storm 520, 32-6;
       earthquake 247, 367;
       solar eclipse 659;
       ice,--Sir-darya crossed on 151;
       Kabul ice-houses 215;
       near Parhala 452;
       none had in Hind 518;
       --+malaria+:--Andijan 4,
         Khujand 8;
       --+rain+:--384, 425;
         rain-making _see_ magic;
         rain-talisman 423;
         rainy season (various) 405, 507, 514-19, 677-8;
       --+snow+:--208, 215, 252, 314, 373;
         Himalayan snows 485;
         perilous journey in snow 309-11;
         snowfall of Samarkand and Kabul compared 77;
       --+wind:+--Farghana 9 and n. 2, 151;
         Kabul 201;
         upper Heri-rud valley 310;
         Hind 520, pestilential 524, 532, 654-7,
           does damage to Babur's writings 658.

   Nestorian Church 2.

   _New account of the East Indies_ (Edin. 1727), Alex. Hamilton--Malabar
       succession customs 482.

   _Nigar-nama-i-hind_, Sayyid Ghulam-i-'ali--a British monument
       at Panipat 472.

   Nine a mystic number--9 Tarkhan privileges 250;
     9 allowed offences 250;
     gifts by nines;
     [Cf. _Shajaratu'l-atrak, Miles trs. p. 530_, for the root of
       reverence for the number nine].

   _Notes on Afghanistan and Baluchistan_, H. G. Raverty--[_see nn. on pp.
       named_], Kabul rulers and river 200;
     river called Nil-ab 206;
     'Aqabain 201;
     Adinapur-region 207;
     Ghazni magic spring 219;
     migration of fowlers 225;
     Timur's pillars of heads 232;
     place of Zu'n-nun's death 327;
     "Kakar" 386;
     "Patakh" (= _bat-qaq_ = quagmire) 403;
     But -khak a vahara-site 409;
     --+Various places+ 206, 220, (Gum-rahan) 236, 238-47-48 (2),
       "Chariakar" (_Char-yak-kar_) 295, 345-73, 403, (Zabul) 405;
     --+Routes+ 206-9, 212, 228-35-54;
     book needs revision 330-67;
     a collaborator 213.

   _Notes on the Chugani and neighbouring tribes of Kafiristan_, Col.
       H. S. Tanner (_JRGS. 1881_)--map mentioned 209;
     Dara-i-nur 210, App. F;
     Ning-nahar App. E, xix.
     [_Cf. Index II s.n. chiqan._]

   _Notes on some monuments in Afghanistan_, H. H. Hayden--Babur's Grave
       (illustration) 710, App. V, lxxx.

   _Nouvelle Geographie_; _L'Asie Anterieure_, Reclus--[_see nn. on pp.
       named_], Farghana 4, 5, 9;
     distances (Akhsi) App. A, v, (Tirmiz-Hisar) 57;
     Samarkand 74, 83, 88;
     Mil-i-radagan 622;
     Kadgar (_i.a._ Qajar) 666;
     _sighnaq_ = fort App. Q, lxiv;
     _daban_ and other pass-names 54.


   +Noticeable words+:--
     P. _nabira_ 66, 72;
     _nihilam_ (game-driving) 45;
     M. _nuyan_ 131, 224-73.


   Observatories _see_ Astronomy.

   Omens--of the sex of an unborn child App. L;
     of success 466, 558.

   _Onau_, Sir Charles Elliot--Badshah-nagar named from Babur's halt 675.

   "Oolak" (baggage-boat), perhaps from T. _aulugh_, great 663.

   Open-table, maintainers of 39, 45-9, 119, 227.

   Opium-eater 385.

   _Oriental Biographical Dictionary_, T. W. Beale (_ed. Keene_) _see_
       Dictionaries.

   _Oriental Proverbs_, T. Roebuck--the "five-days' world" 50.


   +Noticeable words+:--
      M. Oghlat = T. Dughlat = Qungur-at of Auzbegs 22.


   Padshah--uses of the word 1;
     title assumed by Babur 344.

   _Padshah-nama_, 'Abdu'l-hamid--_lacunae_ in an early copy of the
       _Babur-nama_ App. D, x.

   _Padshah-nama_, Muhammad Amin _Kazwini_--Babur's gardens in and near
       Kabul App. V;
     [cf. _Malfuzat-i-timuri_].

   Pagan _see_ Kafir.

   Painting and painters--22, 78, 111, 272-91.

   _Painting and Painters of Persia_, Martin--Bih-zad 291.

   Pargiter, Mr. F. E.--on "_wulsa_" 487-8, Add. Note, P. 487.

   Pass-names 54.

   Pass-words _see_ Military.

   Penmanship and scripts--good writers 28, 111, 278, 291;
     the Baburi-script 228, 642, App. Q, lxii.

   Pen-names--'Adili 111,
     Ahi 289,
     Ahli 290,
     'Aruzi 288,
     Badakhshi 288,
     Bana'i 286,
     Bayani 278,
     Fani and Nawa'i 272,
     Faraqi 137,
     Gharbati 261,
     Hatifi 288,
     Hilali 290,
     Husaini 259,
     Kami 290,
     Sharaf 448,
     Suhaili 277,
     Tufaili 278,
     Wafa'i 38, etc.

   _Persia and the Persian Question_, Lord Curzon--its "Radkan"
       explained 622.

   Persian Grammar, J. T. Platts (_ed. Ranking_) lunar months App. L, lxx.

   _Persian Poets_, Sir W. Ouseley--Khwaja Kamal 8.

   "Pharoah" used as an epithet 39.

   _Poems of Nizami_ (_Mecon and Lahor eds._)--_Haft Paikar_ quoted 6;
     _Khusrau u Shirin_:--parricide 85, Add. Note, P. 85;
     death inevitable 182 [_here Turki_], App. D, xi [_here Pers.; Macon
       ed. iii, 1589_];
     Fate an avenging servitor 251, Add. Note, P. 251 [_f. 281 in MS. of
       317 ff._];
     swift action a maker of victory 625;
     lovers' marks Add. Note, P. 16;
     --the _Khamsatin_ 15, 288.[2963]

   _Poems of Nuru'd-din 'Abdu'r-rahman Jami_--an exposition of the
       _Nafahat_ 284;
     the metre of the _Subhatu'l-abrar_ adopted in the
         _Shaibani-nama_ 289,
       and in the _Walidiyyah-risala_ 620 (_where read rahman for
         "rahim"_).

   _Poems of Kipling_--"My Lord the Elephant" 208;
     "The Border-thief" 308;
     "If----" 320.

   Poison--suspected 302, 576;
     given to Babur 541;
     revealed by rhino-horn 489;
     antidotes, lime-juice 511,
       Lemnian Earth 543.

   _Political Mission to Afghanistan and Seistan_, H. W. Bellew--birds
       at Ab-istada 240;
     Qandahar 430, App. J, xxxiii.

   _Polyglot List of Birds_, E. Denison Ross, Ph. D.--373, 495-6-7-8,
       500, App. M, xlvi.

   _Popular Religion of Northern India_, W. Crooks--Sarsawa 467.

   Prayers, The Five--'Umar Shaikh's observance of 15;
     voluntary Sunnat-prayer 100;
     Babur (_aet._ 12) less neglects the after-midnight prayer 44;
     Ahmad _Miran-shahi_ observes on drinking-days 33;
     a reverse case 111;
     Erskine on their "performance" 258;
     time expressed by their names _passim_.

   Prisoners--rebels killed 69, 113;
     war-captives killed 233, 466-8;
     set free 37, 237, 313, 371, 413;
     traitors pardoned 317-9, 320, 345.

   _Projectile-throwing engines of the ancients_,
       Sir W. F. Payne-Gallwey--stone ammunition 667.

   Promotions--to begs rank from the household-circle 104;
     household beg to Great Beg 86, 104;
     _yasawal_ to beg 273;
     to begship 87, 114, 278;
     _qurchi_ to _qur-begi_ 252;
     brave to beg 396;
     --a beg self-made 118;
     ('Askari) to preside in Diwan 628;
     (a Mirza) to royal insigna 662, 706;
     to use of the _tugh_ (standard), frequent.

   Proverbs and sayings--90, 117, 24-5-8, 145-66-77-82-84-90-93, 223-7-8,
       254, 310, 453-94, 542-3, 703.

   Punishments--beard shaved off 404;
     blinding 50, 63, 95, 194, 266;
     bow-stringing 110, 194;
     quartering 238, 454, 543;
     hanging 345;
     impalement 341;
     nose-slitting 234, 383;
     parade mutilated 404, 234;
     shooting 543;
     skinning alive 542;
     for disloyalty 70, 113.

   Puns and Quips--44, 115, 136-7, 150, 189, 287, 391, 529, 648.


   +Noticeable words+:--
      P. _pahr_ and _pas_ distinguished 634;
      _postin_ 10.


   _Qandahar in 1879_ AD., Le Mesurier--the old town 431;
     stone-ammunition _ib._

   _Qandahar_ see _La grande inscription de Q._

   _Qasidatu'l-burda_, Al-busiri--Babur works from its motive 620;
     [cf. Rene Basset].

   _qibla_--discrepancy 79.

   _qizil-bash_ (red-head) 266, 618-22-30-35.

   The Qoran (_trs. G. Sale_)--quoted by Babur 194, 316, 449;
     read by or to him, remedially, 401, Add. Note, P. 401, 585;
     copied by him in his Script 228;
     obeyed as to the Khams (5th) of booty 324;
     referred to by him 517;
     --'Umar Shaikh a reader of 15, Preface xxx;
     transcribers of 38, 481;
     recited 246, 301;
     frequent quotations by Shaikh Zain 553 to -6, 559 to -74;
     quoted on a Samarkand arch 77;
     sworn on 179, 557;
     Shaibani makes exposition of 329;
     a collection of homonymous verses 285;
     Sale's Intro, referred to 562-3.

   Quatremere, E.--(_N. et Ex._) 446-59, (_J. des Savans, 1843_) 605.

   _Qiranu's-sa'dain_, Amir Khusrau--a couplet quoted 503 (H.B.).


    +Noticeable words:+--
      _qabaq_ 34;
      _qachar_ (punned on) 44;
      _qari_ (a measure) 7;
      _qara-tiyaq_ 101, 103;
      _qazaqlar_ (guerilla times) 35;
      _qaptal_ (part of a saddle) 253;
      _quba-yuzluq_ (fat-faced) 14;
      _qurchi_ (armourer, life-guardsman) _i.a._ 188, 288;
      _quchin_ = _ming-begi_ 26, 40;
      _qurghan_ (walled-town) _i.a._ 3, 5, 8, 10;
      _quruq_ (reserved land) 81, 168, 197;
      _qushuq_ (improvised dance and song) 24;
      _qumiz_ (fermented mare-milk) 155;
      _quchush_ (embrace) 160;
      _qulach_ (a measure) 406.


   _Races of Afghanistan_, H. W. Bellew--Khilich 29 (_where read title
       as above_).

   Raft--(Farghana) 161, 180;
     (Kabul) 410-11-12-21-22-23, 447-8.

   _Ramacarita_, H. Sastri (_Memoirs, AS Bengal_) Nagarahara App. E,
       xxiii.

   Rampur MS. of Babur's Diwan, Preface 1, App. Q.

   Rapid travel--Aura-tipa to Baba Khaki 25;
     Kishm to Qandahar 621;
     Kabul to Agra 621.

   _Rashahat-i-'ainu'l-hayat_ [_Tricklings from the Fount of Life_]
       'Ali _Kashifi_-- Khwajaki Khwaja 62;
     Ahrari 620;
     [_not known to Erskine_].

   _Rauzatu's-safa_, Mir Khwand--referred to (?) 11;
     Baba-i-kabuli 14;
     Hazaraspi 50;
     a chronogram 85;
     the Chaghatai Khans (908 AH.) 161.

   _Recueils d'Itineraires_, Th. Radloff--fruit as food in C. Asia 3, 114;
     position of Yiti-kint 11;
     elevation to Khanship 21;
     Pul-i-mougak 68 (Khorochkine's art.);
     battle-cries 163.

   Reports:--
     " _on the Ghilzai country_, J. S. Broadfoot [ed. W. Broadfoot]--birds
          at Ab-istada 240;
     " _of the Indian Archeological Survey_, Cunningham & Ferguson--[_see
          nn. on pp. named_], places Babur visited 475-6;
       a Gualiar dynasty's term of rule 477;
       Chandiri 592-7, App. R, (plan);
       Gualiar 605-7 to 13;
       App. R, (plan);
       Sambhal 687;
       --Annual Report 1914--_kos-minar_ 629;
     " _on Karnal_, D. Ibbetson--Mundahirs 700;
     " _of Mission to Kashghar_, Col. J. Biddulph's art.--_maral_ 8;
     " _Persian Boundary Commission_, W. T. Blanford's art.--_Pteroclas
            arenarius_ App. B, vi;
       --A. Gerard's art.--irrigation-channels of Aush (Ush) 4;
     " _Settlement Operations etc._, Reid--old alluvium on the Gogra
            667;
       narrowing of the river 669;
     Reports (_I. O. Library_) I, VI, VII, J. Wood--vine-culture 210;
         Ghur-bund 214;
         _bootr_ (a plant) 222;
         climate-shed 229;
       --VI, VII, D. Leach--204-5-6-13-38;
       --IX, X, Alex. Burnes--Kabul 199;
         unchanging trade-habits of Luhanis 235.

   "Rescue-passage" 182, App. D;
     Preface xlv (No. viii).

   _Revenue Accounts_ (_Bengal_), F. Gladwin--dating of 935 AH. 629,
       App. S;
     _tanab_-measure 630.

   _Revenue resources of the Mughal Empire_, E. Thomas--coin-values 446;
     _tamgha_ 553;
     Sikandari _tanka_ 577.

   Revenues various--Farghana 12,
     Tatar Khan _Ludi's_ 383,
     Kabul-town 250,
     Hindustan 520, App. P.

   _Rhetorique_, Garcin de Tassy--_combinaisons enigmatiques_ 202.

   _Ride from Samarkand to Herat_, N. Grodekoff (_trs.
       Marvin_)--Pul-i-chiragh 69;
     Char-shamba 71.

   _Riyazu's-salatin_, Ghulam-i-husain--a Ludi alliance 482.

   Roads measured--Agra-Kabul 629;
     Munir to camp by horse-paces 666;
     Chunar eastwards 659.

   ruler, _mistar_--a new one for copying the _Walidiyyah-risala_ 643.

   _Russian Policy in Central Asia_, Grigorief (_Schuyler's Turkistan_
       App. IV)--Babur's embassy to Moscow App. Q, lxiii;
     Peter the Great's embassy to Bukhara Preface p. liii.


   Sachau, C.--on the _Malfuzat-i-timuri_ 653.

   _Sahih-i-bukhari_, Isma'il _Khartank_--his native land 76.

   Sainthood--courage a witness to 90.

   _Siyaru'l-muta'akhirin_, Ghulam-i-husain Khan--trepanning 105.

   Salt, fidelity to 125, 440.

   Samarkand begs--action of 52, 62, 86, 124-5.

   Samarkandis--displeased with a Mirza 42;
     overjoyed at his death 52;
     no scarcity in a siege 64;
     move against Bukhara 65;
     oppose Babur 72;
     their orthodoxy 75;
     joy at Babur's return 131-3.

   Sanctuary 63.

   _Sang-lakh_ _see_ Dictionaries.

   Sart, Sairt--Babur's serviceable use of the name 6, 7, 149;
     a "Sairt"'s blunder 169.

   _Science of Language_, Max Mueller--guest-tribes 227.

   Scottish service for the _Babur-nama_, Preface xlvii, xlviii.

   _Second Afghan War (Official Account)_--its maps 201-6, 229, 314-32;
     Char-dih 200;
     Qandahar App. J, xxxiii;
     'Ali-masjid 450;
     a valuable book in following Babur's campaigns, 333.

   _Second Journey through Persia_, J. J. Morier (Haji Baba)--a bird App.
       B, vi.

   Sects, Muhammadan--Mataridiyah, Ash'ariyah, Abu Hanifa's 75-6,
       Shafi'i 283;
     Radiyan 625.

   _Shahi Kings of Kabul_, Sir Aurel Stein--200.

   _Shah-nama_, Firdausi [_trs. Warner_] Chachi bow, _khadang_ arrows 13;
     much read 15;
     Baqi Tarkhan sketched 40;
     a couplet 557;
     a quatrain 571.

   _Shaibani-nama_, Muh. Salih Mirza [_ed. Vambery_]--[_see nn. on pp.
       named_], writes "Shaibani" not Shaibaq 12;
     Sh.'s marriages, with Babur's sister 17-8, 147,
       and with Zuhra _Auzbeg_ 126-8;
     his dealings with Zuhra's son 'Ali 126-8,
       with Babur 144-6-7,
       with the Chaghatai Khans 182-3-4;
     later action 191-2;
     --Tambal 145, 244;
       others 40, 62, 101, 196;
     Chin Sufi 242-56;
     Khusrau Shah's jewels 144;
     Oghlat (Dughlat) 22;
     Chirkas sword 65;
     Khwast a hell 221,
       _baghri qara_ App. B, v, vii;
     the book and its author 64, 120-1-7 [_cf. Tuhfa-i-Sami I.O. 655,
       f. 342_].

   _Shajarat-i Turk_, Abu'l-ghazi Mirza [_ed. Fraehn, trs.
       Desmaisons_]--[_see nn. on pp. named_], "Nurim" Sherim _etc._ 29;
     an archer's mark 34;
     _san_ = _dim_ 154;
     _tughai_, _tuqai_ (bend of a river) 643;
     a Shaban sultan 265;
     of Babur's descent _see_ its Introduction.

   _Shajaratu'l-atrak_, Aulugh _Beg Shahrukhi_ (trs. Miles)--Babur's
       descent _see_ its Introduction.

   _Sharaf-nama_, Sharaf Khan (_trs. F. E. Charmoy_)--Battle of Jam 635.

   Sharafu'd-din 'Ali _Yazdi_--his book on enigmas 201;
     his _Zafar-nama_ (see _s.n._) Preface xxix.

   Shaving--Babur's first 187;
     Humayun notes his in the B.N. 466;
     beard shaved as punishment 404;
     untrimmed by vow 552;
     head shaved 408, 649.

   Shi'a heresy--instances 258-62-86, 111 (and return);
     Babur's fatal Shi'a alliance, 347-54-55-61, Preface xxxv.

   Sikh religion--Nanak's exposition to Babur 461;
     Nanak and Daulat Khan _ib._

   _Siyasat-nama_ [_Traite de gouvernement_], Wazir Nizamu'l-mulk, [_ed.
       C. Schefer_]--use of a whip in making count of an army 154.

   Slaves--slave-women retaliate on their owner's murderers 63,
       are captured at the Samarkand ditch 73,
       taken by crocodiles 502;
     slave-agents in poisoning Babur 541;
     --Shah Beg's faithful slave _see_ Sambhal;
     the chief-slave 346;
     slave-trade between Hind and Kabul 202;
     --Mingli Bibi, a slave-woman 269.

   Song by Wordsworth recalled--the "undying fish" 305.

   _Spanish Literature_, Ticknor--Montalvan on Lope de Vega 287.

   _Sport and politics under an Eastern sky_, Lord Ronaldshay--_maral_ 8.

   _" and Travel_, F. C. Selous--_maral_ 8.

   Square seal--Abu-sa'id's 28.

   Standards (_tugh_, _qutas-tugh_)--acclaimed 155;
     bestowed 372 _etc._;
     Babur's 140-66 _etc._

   _Suluku'l-muluk_, Fazl b. Ruzbahan _Isfahani_--value as a source 348;
     supports the form "Babur" 356.

   _Supplement etc._, R. Dozy _see_ Dictionaries.

   Swimming--man and horse in mail 140, 237;
     man and horse bare 237;
     competition 401;
     on bundles of reeds 673;
     Babur's (in mail) 140, 603-55-660-61.


   +Noticeable words+:--
      P. _sar-i-sabz_, green-head 66, 703;
      P. _sar-kob_ 53-9[2964];
      _sangur_ 232;
      _sighnaq_, a script App. Q, lxiii.


   _Tabaqat-i-akbari_, Nizamu'd-din Ahmad--[_see nn. on pp. named_],
       Baburi Script 228, App. Q, lxii;
     _Jang-jang_ 370;
     date of Shah Beg's death 437;
     Hazaras serve Babur 457;
     Gujrat affairs 535;
     Multan affairs 699;
     Babur's Kashmir force 692-8;
     the author's father 691;
     proposed supersession in Hind of Babur's sons 644-88-92-93,
       discussed 702 ff.;
     the book plagiarized 693.

   " _-i-baburi_, Shaikh Zainu'd-din _Khawafi_ _see_ B.N. and Zain.

   " _-i-nasiri_, Minhaj [_trs. Raverty_] Satuq-bughra Khan 29 [_where
       read Tabaqat_];
     Chandwal 537;
     quoted by Babur 479;
     described by Erskine 279;
     used in Appendix E, xxiii.

   _tamgha_ (_lit. stamp_), a transit or customs duty 250;
     forms the revenue of Kabul town _ib._;
     Husain _Bai-qara_ marks his stamps _Bih bud_ (_valid_) 271;
     remission of 553-95;
     a _tamghachi_ clerk 629.

   _Tarikh-i-'alam-arai_, Mir Sikandar--[_see nn. on pp. named_], its
       Safawi outlook 349;
     Tahmasp's Auzbeg campaign 622;
     Battle of Jam 623;
     insignificant appearance of 'Ubaidu'l-lah 636.

   " _-i-badayuni_ see _Muntakhabu't-tawarikh_.

   " _-i-daudi_, 'Abdu'l-lah--"Shaikh" and "Mian" interchangeable titles
       457.

   " _-i-firishta_, Muh. Qasim _Firishta_ [_trs. Major-Gen.
       J. Briggs_]--'Umar Shaikh 13;
     a mistake 15;
     Babur's reluctance to rank himself with Timur 134;
     his single combats 329;
     his sobriquet Qalandar 523;
     his Embassy to Persia 540;
     his siege of Chandiri 596;
     --Yar-i-'ali _Balal_ 91;
     Ghazi Khan's literary culture 460;
     the cognomen _jan-dar_ 566;
     Badru-ferry over Gogra 667;
     --value of the book as a source 208, 349, 694;
     date of its revision 694.

   _Tarikh-i-Gualiarwar_, Jalal _Hisari_ and Hira-man--Gualiar 605;
     Khw. Rahim-dad 607, 688, 704.

   " _-i-Haji Muh_. _'Arif Qandahari_--account of Qandahar 348.

   " _-i-Khan-i-jahan Ludi_, Ni'amatu'l-lah--helped in his book by Haibat
         Khan 693.

   " _-i-rashidi_, [Muh. ] Haidar Mirza _Dughlat_ [_ed. Ney Elias, trs.
         E. D. Ross_]--+Places+:--Almaligh 2;
       Yiti-kint 11;
       Qilat-i-nadari 263;
       Qila'-i-zafar 21;
       Herat 306;
       Qandahar [Insc.] App. J, xxxv;
     +Tribes _etc._+:--tuman-begs 17;
       _quchin_ 26;
       _chuhra-jirga_ App. H, xxvii;
       Chaghatais and Mughuls distinguished 320;
       Chaghatai or Timurid supremacy 344,
       Begchiks 50, 712
         or Chiras 155;
       Tarkhans 31;
       Greek descent 317;
       Jigraks 55;
       Turkman Hazaras 311;
     +Persons+:--12--App. A, iii; 21, 23, 32, 48, 62;
       Jahangir 183, 254-94-302, 195-242-56, 249-272, 273; 330-41-96-7,
         409; 641; 694-6;
     +Varia+:--fruit as food 3;
       _yak_, _qutas_ App. M, xlvii;
       on joint-rule 293;
       epoch-making events 20, 35, 158, 182, 350;
     +Babur+:--name 17;
       character 194, 320;
       Script App. Q, lxii;
       disastrous expedition (910 AH.) 241;
       relationships 246;
       single combats 349;
       Tramontane campaign 349 to 366;
       hospitality to exiles 350;
       a frontier affair 412;
       onset of last illness 706;
     +Haidar+:--his life saved 21;
       descent and other particulars 22;
       excuses his father 317;
       his list of tribes and chiefs valuable 415;
       his book of great and, perhaps, unique value for Babur's
        _lacunae_ 347-8;
       referred to Preface xxxiv, xxxviii;
       his Codex xli, xlii (No. iv).

   " _-i-salatin-i-afaghana_, Ahmad Yadgar [_part-trs. E. & D. vol.
       I_]--Hindustan in 929 AH. 439-40;
     Panipat 474;
     Babur's visit to Lahor (936 AH.) 604-98 to 700, 703-6;
     Mundahirs 700;
     anachronism 707;
     Babur's "selection" of a successor 707;
     importance of its contribution for filling a _lacuna_ 693, 702-6.

   " _-i-shahrukhi_, Niyaz Muh. _Khukandi_--tradition of a babe abandoned
        358.

   " _-i-sher-shahi_, 'Abbas Khan _Sarwani_--"Shaikh" and "Mian" 457;
     'Azam Humayun 477;
     Sher Khan _Sur_ 659, 664.

   " _-i-Sind_, Muh. Ma'sum _Bhakkari_--a chief authority 336, 428;
     Shah Beg 338, 427, (death) 437;
     sieges of Qandahar 431 to 436;
     the Inscription App. J, xxxiii.

   Tarkhan--suitable meaning 31 [where add ref. E. & D.'s H. of I. i,
       300, 20, 21, 498]
     privileges nine 250;
     not given to all Arghun chiefs 249 n. 2;
     a merchant Tarkhan 133;
     marriages 49, Preface xxviii;
     revolt 61 to 64, 86, 112;
     see _s.n. Nine_ & H. Beveridge's note on Etruscan names.

   _Tarkhan-nama_ or _Arghun-nama_, Sayyid Jamal--a useful source 428.

   _Tawarikh-i-guzida_--(Select Histories)--fashions of sitting and
       kneeling 33, 54-9;
     Tulun Khwaja _Mughul_ 66;
     supplements the B. N. 127.

   " _-i-hafi-i-rahmat-khani_ (_part-trs. H. Beveridge_ AQR.
        1901)--Bibi Mubar-ika's marriage with Babur 375, App. K,
        _An Afghan Legend_.

   _Tazkiratu'sh-shu'ara_ (_Memoirs of Poets_) Daulat-shah
       (_ed. Browne_)--[_see nn. on pp. named_], Akhsikiti 9;
     dates of Mahmud _Miran-shahi's_ boyhood 46;
     Ahmad _Mushtaq_ 47;
     Hazaraspi 50;
     a couplet 85;
     Husain _Bai-qara_ 259-60-73;
     Gazur-gahi's good birth 281;
     Rabat-i-sangbast 301-30;
     Bih-bud Beg App. H, xxvi-vii;
     Radagan-(town) 622;
     Jami's birthplace 623;
     --the author in the battle of Chikman-sarai 46;
     one of his collaterals 274.

   " _-i-Sultan Satuq-bughra Khan_--a seeming descendant 29.

   " _-i-Tahmasp_, Shah Tahmasp _Safawi_ (_ed. D. C. Phillott_)--Div
       Sultan 635;
     battle of Jam 636.

   " _-i-Waqi'at_ (_var._) Jauhar (_trs. C. Stewart_)--outside literary
       criticism 619;
     a date at which Babur's body lay near Kabul 709.

   +Tents+--_alachuq_ 188;
     _autagh_ 339;
     _aq-awi = chadar_ 169-88, 239, (flooded) 339, 678;
     _char-taq_ 264;
     _khar-gah_ ( = _kibitka_, and _alachuq_ ?) 239, 678;
     --_shamiana_ (awning) 358;
     _tungluq_ (roof-flap) 678;
     _pesh-khana_ 678.

   _Thesaurus_, Meninsky--_baghriqara_ cry App. B, vi;
     _bahri-qutas_ App. M, xlvi.

   Thomas, F. W., Ph.D.--his help App. J, lxxiv with Preface lii.

   Thorn-defences 487.

   Timur-pulad, buys a Codex of the _W'aqi'nama-i-padshahi_ _q.v._

   _Three (Turki) MSS. from Kashghar_ [_ed. Sir E. Denison Ross_]--the
       title _Jun-wang_ 567.

   _Through unknown Pamirs_, O. Olufsen--yak App. M, xlvii.

   The Times--on diverse names of a single place 209.

   Tongues and utterance--Andijan Turki 4;
     Farsi (Persian)-speaking Sarts of Asfara 7;
     Kabul's polyglot tongues 207;
     Mughuli-speaking Hazaras;
     Babur on clipped Hindustani utterance 380,
       and on the words Kas and Sawalak 485.

   Trade--202-35, 331, 416-85.

   Traditions--4, 5;
     one versed in 283-4.

   Translators:--Babur [_Wal.-ris._];
     E. C. Bayley (_Mirat_);
     A. S. Beveridge [_s.n._];
     H. Beveridge [_s.n._];
     H. Blochmann [_s.n._];
     H. S. Jarrett [_Ayin_];
     J. Briggs [_Tar.-i-fir._];
     F. C. Charmoy [_Sharaf-n._];
     W. Clarke [Diwan-i-H.];
     A. P. de Courteille [_Mems._];
     Delmar-Morgan [_Mong._];
     Desmaisons [_Shaj.-i-Turk_];
     E. B. Eastwick [_Gul._];
     H. M. Elliot and J. Dowson [_H. of I._];
     Forster & Daniel [_Life of O. de B._];
     C. Hamilton [_Hidayat_];
     W. H. Lowe & G. S. A. Ranking [_Munt._];
     H. E. Lloyd [_Travels_];
     G. du Laurens [_Voyages_];
     C. E. Markham [_Embassy_];
     R. Marvin [_Ride_];
     W. Ouseley [_Or. Geo._];
     F. Pelis de la Croix, _elder & younger_ [_Histoire_];
     G. S. A. Ranking [see _Lowe; and 'Aruz_];
     H. G. Raverty [_Tab.-i-n._];
     M. Reinaud [_Geo._];
     G. Sale [_Qoran_];
     B. R. Sanguinetti & T. Lee [_Travels_];
     H. Sastri [_Rama._];
     C. Stewart [_Taz._];
     A. Vambery [_Shai.-n._];
     Warner [_Shah-n._];
     E. H. Whinfield [_Mas. and 'Umar_].

   Transliteration 2.

   Transmigration 518.

   _Travels in Bukhara_, Sir Alex. Barnes--[_see nn. on pp. named_],
       _nuzla_, a Panj-ab disease 446;
     water-fall fishing 227;

   " _in Europe and Asia_, Peter Mundy (_ed. Sir R. Temple_)--_baoli_
       (a well) 533;
     Gualiar 605.

   " _in India_, Pietro della Valle--the morning-draught 395.

   " _of Ibn Batuta_ (_trs. Sanguinetti & Lee_)--Samarkand the Protected
       City 75, Add. N.P. 75;
     Kajwarra 590;
     Rahim-dad 693; 704.

   " _in Kashmir_, G. T. Vigne--_yak_ and _kosh-gau_ App. M, xlv-vii.

   " _in Panj-ab_ (_etc._), Mohan Lall--Herat 305-6;
     Qandahar Insc. App. J;
     Babur's burial-place 710.

   " _of the Russian Mission_, G. Timkovsky [_trs. H. E. Lloyd_] fruit as
       food 3.

   " _on the Upper and Lower Amoor_, T. W. Atkinson--_maral_ 8.

   _Tribes and Castes of the N. W. P. and Oude_, W. Crooke--Jats 454;
     Nuhani (or Luhani) 455;
     Jaghat (serpent) 456;
     Tank 481.

   Tribes and other groups:--
     +Afghan+:--'Abdu'r-rahman 403;
       Afridi 411-2;
       Aughan 217-20;
       Auruq-zai 526;
       Bilut 248;
       Birki 207;
       Dilah-zak 231, 367-94, 412-3;
       Dilah-zak Ya'qub-khail 394;
       Gagiani 251;
       Ghilji 323-31;
       'Isa-khail 233;
       Jasawal _var._ Jaswan 462;
       Jalwani _see_ Index I;
       Khattak 439;
       Khirilchi 208-20-49-413;
       Khizr-khail 413;
       Khugiani 220;
       Kiwi 233;
       Kurani, Karani, Kararani 233, 477;
       Landar 220;
       Ludi 481, Index I;
       Ludi _khasa-khail_ _i.e._ Sahu-khail 465;
       Ludi Sarang-khani 540, 654;
       Luhani _see_ Nuhani;
       Mahmand 221, 323-31-45;
       Muhammad-zai 376 (_where read as here_);
       Nia-zai 233;
       Nuhani 235 (_cf. 455 n. 3_), Index I;
       Pani 540;
       Pashai(?) 207;
       Samu-khail (Khirilchi?) 412;
       Sur 233;
       Tarkalani 242, 424;
       Turi 220;
       Waziri 413;
       Yusuf-zai 231, 371-3-5-6, 400-10-19;
       --Afghans of Bhira 399,
         Ghazni 218,
         Sind riverain 218-36,
         Kabul 207-21;
       --Afghan thieves 208, 341;
       Afghan warrings in Hind 426,
         and power 480-1;
       serving Babur 522;
       bad-mannered 451;--
     +Auz-beg+ ("_Uzbeg_"):--2, 37, 135, 622, Index I;
       Auz-beg Qazzaq ("_Cossack_") 23;
       Auz-beg Mankfit 195;--
     +Chaghatai+ (_i.e._ Chaghatai Khan's tribal appanage):--extinct but
         for their Khans in 1547 (953 AH.) _Tar. Rash._ trs. 149;
       near Heri 320, 689;
       its Kohbur clan 55;
       high families in, Sighal 66, 72, Nawa'i's (_Index I_);
       distinguished from Mughuls 320, 351,
         Turks 340;--
     +Mughuls of the Horde+:--105-92;
       _tumans_ (_groups of 10,000_):--Barin 19, 473;
         Begchik 155;
         Chiras 158;
         Sagharichi 20;
       _sub-divisions_ (?):--Bishaghi (_var._) 473;
         Darban 60;
         Itaraji 161, 415;
         Jalair 91;
         Kunchi 20;
         Qalmaq 23;
         Manghit 101[2965];
       --Mughul devastation 2, 98, 172, 362;
       faithlessness 105, 140 _etc._;
       conduct on the Chir 17, 31-4;
       the Horde divided 19;
       its dislike for cultivated lands 12;
       its _aimaqs_ in open land 221-54-55;
       return from enforced migration 20, 350-1;--
     +Turk+:--Afshar 354;
       Auighur (_Awighur_, _Uighur_) 40, 118;
       its Ishrit clan 40, 65;
       Barlas 51, 429, Index I;
       Barlas Duldai 25, 37;
       Darya-khani 231, 589;
       Istilju 353;
       Khilij 482;
       Qipchaq 19, 49;
       --Turks of Andijan 4,
         Kabul-lowlands 207-15-21;
       early Turk rulers of Kabul 200;
       contrasted with Sarts 149;
       --Uses of the name, "Mughul and Turk" 158, 402,
         "Chaghatai and Turk" 340;
       "Turk and Timurid" one 380-2-4-8-9;
       probable statement of B.'s descent 320;
       his claim to rule in Hind, based on Turk descent 380-2-4, 476-9;
       Turk warning to Biana 529;--
     +Turkman+:--White-sheep Horde 49 (_where read White for "Black"_);
       --its Baharlu clan 49;
         its Balal 911 and Bayandar 279;
       --Black-sheep Horde 10;
         Qajar 666;
         Turkmans serve Babur 47, 279, 361;
           --features 111;
       --Hazaras (_infra_);
       Turuq-shar 101;--

     +Various+:--'Arab 207, 522, 631;
       Arlat (Turk?) 265;
       Ashpari 101;
       Asiqanchi [_var._ Saqanchi] 197;
       Baluchi 383, 459, 522;
       Bengali (race) 482;
       Bugial 452;
       Kafir 212-3, 342-72, 421;
       Kakar (_var._) 387-9;
       Kas 484;
       Kib (or Kitib) 393;
       Meos 577;
       Farsi (Persian, race) 7, 207, 507-55;
       Ghiyas-wal (or -dal) 393;
       Gujur 250, 379-87, 454;
       Habshi 483;
       Janjuha-khail and Jud-khail 379-80-87;
       Jats 250, 387, 454;
       Jigrak (_var._) 55, 101;
       Nikdiri (_var._) 196-7, 200-1-7, 275, 326, 430 (_cf. E. & D. iv,
         304, Tukdari_)
       Nil-abi 379 (_see Index II_);
       Paraji 207;--
       Rajput;--
       Chuhan 573,
       Tank sept 481;--
       Tajik 6, 207, 420, 535;--
     +Hazara+ (1000):--Gadai or Kidi 250,
       Qarluq 391-3, 403;
       Rustaq [or Rusta] 196;
       Sl. Mas'udi 221-8, 525;
       Turkman 27, 214-51, 311 to 313;
       +Hazaras+:--w. of Kabul 200-7-22, 430;
         e. of the Sind 457, 522;
         in the open country of Ghazni 218,
           Kabul 221,
           Heri-rud valley 308;
         refuge taken amongst 95;
         traversed 254.

   Tribute--Jigrak 55,
     Ghazni 240,
     Yusuf-zai 375,
     Bhira 384,
     Kakar 391,
     Bajaur and Sawad 400,
     Balkh 402;
     Nijr-au 421;
     Koh-i-jud 379.

   _Tuhfa-i-sami_ (_a Turki anthology_), Sam M. _Safawi_--Marwarid 278;
     syphilis 279;
     a jeer 648.

   The twelve Imams, 258, 354.

   Turki tongue, Preface xxvii, Cap. iv.

   _Turkistan_, Alex. Petzhold--Sarts 6.

   " E. Schuyler--[_see nn. on pp. named_],
     +Farghana+:--extent of 2,
       various 5, 6, 8;
       (wind) 9;
       (out-of-doors life) 29;
       _kuk-bura_ (a game) 39;
       Old Akhsi App. A;
       Sarts 6;--
     +Samarkand+:--67, 74-5-7, 83,
       (Aurgut) 68;
       Kesh 83;
     +Various+:--Sara-taq pass 129;
       Lake Iskandar _ib._ Hazrat Turkistan (shrine) 356;
       a distance 9;
       a lizard 501;--
       Babur's Moscow Embassy App. Q, lxiii;
       Gregorief's _Russian Policy_, (_App. iv trs._) Preface, liii.

   " Franz v. Schwarz--autumn fever 4;
     running-waters 4,
     recipe for _ma'jun_ 16;
     _yighach_ (measure) 4;
     a Kirghis measure 196;
     loess constructions 30;
     _charkh_ (a hunting bird) 224;
     Mogol-tau 8;
     duties of the Lord of the Gate 24;
     _kuk bura_, _baiga_ 39;
     Greek descent 22; various App. A, v.

   _Tuzuk-i-jahangiri_, Jahangir Padshah (_trs. Rogers and
       Beveridge_)--Bugials 452;
     Daulat Khan _Ludi_ 461;
     measures 189;
     birds 497;
     _kishmish_ 515;
     couplet 670;
     metrical amusement App. Q, lxvi-vii;
     its titles for Babur varied _ib._ lxi;
     Jahangir's additions to the B.N. App. D, xiii, Preface xlv
       (No. viii), lii;
     his pilgrimage to B.'s burial-garden App. V, lxxx;
     his stay in B.'s Garden _ib._


   +Noticeable words+:--
     _tabalghu_, a tree 11;
     _tash-chantai_, outside bag (?) 160;
     _tash_, stone confused with _tash_, outer 3, 43, 78, 80, 160;
     _tauri_, complete, enclosed 109, 280, 501 (_where this better
        describes the koel's song_);
     _tipuchaq_ a horse and its points 38;
     _tir-giz_, arrow 34;
     _tirik_ 36, 362;
     P. _tu_, turn of a hill 205-8 _etc._;
     _tuluk_ vegetable food, other than grain 114;
     _tun-yarim_, half-dark 100;
     _tura_ (ordinances) 38;
     _tura_ (army mantelets) 108-13-55, 368, 469, 593;
     _tuman_, 10,000, a district command 17;
     _tuq-bai_, one using a standard 313;
     _tulghuma s.n._ Military;
     _tusqawal_ 224, 314;
     _tughai_ and _tuqai_ 643.


   _'Umar Khayyam's Quatrains_ (_trs. E. H. Whinfield_)--a couplet Babur's
       words recall 203.

   _Upper Basin of the Kabul-river_, Sir C. Markham (_PRGS.
       1879_)--Hindu-kush passes 204,
     maps of Koh-i-baba 216.


   Veliaminof-Zernof, editor of the _Sharaf-nama_ 635 and _Abushqa_
       App. Q, lxiii.

   _Vergleichunge-Tabellen des Muh. and Christlichen Zeitrechnung_,
       F. Wuestenfeld--dates of 935 AH. 629, App. S.

   Verses:--of untraced authorship 332, 316 and 670;
     verse-making 15, 22, 38-9, 46, 54, 111, 136-7, 154;
     Babur's opinion of Nawa'i's Turki verse 271;
     Shaibani's verses made public 329;
     composition on a model 448;--
     Metrical amusements 585-6, App. Q, lxv-vi.

   Vikramaditya Era 79 (where _read_ began).

   Virgil--citron-juice as an antidote 511;
     Scorpio and Libra 623.

   _Visit to Ghuzni_ (_etc._), G. T. Vigne--[_see nn. on pp. named_],
     boundary between Afghans and Khurasan 200;
     Kabul-river _ib._;
     'Uqabain 201;
     rhubarb 203;
     sahibi-grapes 203;
     Dur-nama 215;
     Running-sands 215;
     Pamghan villages 216;
     _arghwan_ 217;--
     various:--218-9, 224, 227;
     "Tank" for Taq 233;
     routes 208, 235;
     Bilah on the Indus 237; _see_ App. E, xxiii.

   _Visit to Kafiristan_, W. W. Macnair (_PRGS. 1884_)--Ning-nahar App.
       E, xxiii.

   _Voyage dans le Turkistan_, Fedtschenko (_trs. G.
       du Laurens_)--Sang-aina, Mirror-stone, 7.

   " _dans l'Asie septentrionale_, P. S. Pallas--_aq kiyik, argali_
       (Ovis poli) 6.

   " _des Pelerins Bouddhistes_, S. A. Julien--Nanganahara App. E, xviii.

   _Voyages en Perse et autres lieux d'Orient_, Jean
       Chardin--lovers'-marks 16;
     square seal 28;
     Sikiz-yilduz, Eight-stars 139;
     _kipki_ "casbeke" (a coin) 296;
     epistolary etiquette 332.


   _Waqi'-nama-i-padshahi_ (Record of Royal Acts), 'Abdu'l-wahhab
       _akhund_ of Ghajdavan (1709)--(_found mentioned as the Babur-nama,
       the "Bukhara Babur-nama" and the "Bukhara Compilation"_)--for its
       seeming author's colophon JRAS. 1900, p. 474 and Preface lvii;
     its divergence from the true text Preface xxxix,
     its element of true text (Kamran's tattered Codex) li;
     its dual purpose xxxix, lxii;
     its character xl;
     its stop-gaps xlv;
     its use by Leyden xlviii;
     +Described+ (_as it is in Kehr's transcript_):--Preface, Cap. III,
       Parts I and III; its history liii, author and colophon lvii,
      (_cf._ JRAS. 1900, p. 474);
       its identity confused with Babur's true text Preface, Cap. III,
       Part III;
     ITS DESCENDANTS AND OFFTAKES Table lvii;--
       (_a_) Petrograd F. O. Codex (_an indirect copy_ (?)), described
               by purchaser as _Babur-nama_, Preface xliii-iv;
       (_b_) Pet. F. O. School of Oriental Languages Codex, entitled
              _Babur-nama_, scribe G. J. Kehr--referred to _in
              loco_:--diction of the Farghana Section 1, of the Kabul
              Sect. 187, of the Hindustan Sect. 445;
         its Persified character exemplified 147, 150, 167, and Add.
           Note, 177, (_cf. JRAS. 1908, pp. 76, 88_);
         its Latin version App. J, xxxv, Preface liv;--
         Other references 9, 18, 19, 44-8, 88, 164, 169;
       +Full contents+:--Preface lii;
         their reconstruction by Ilminski lii-iv, (_cf. his own Preface
           JRAS. 1900 and a separate form in B.M., I.O., R.A.S. Libraries,
           etc._);
         the "Fragments" Preface xlv (No. viii), lii, (_in loco_) 438,
            549, (_a discussion_) 574, 630, 640 (_cf._ JRAS. 1900-6-8);
       (_c_) The "_Babur-nama_" Imprint (_constructed and edited by_)
               N. I. Ilminski--referred to _in loco_, App. D, 227-59, 336,
               420, App. I, xxxii;
         modelled on the L. and E. _Memoirs of Baber_ 326, 337, App. T,
           lxxiv, Preface lii (_cf. Ilminski's Preface ref. supra_), 574;
         Preface:--its Kasan publication li;
           its deviation from its sole basis (_Kehr's Codex_) lii;
           Ilminski's work and some results lii, with n. 1 mid-page, liv;
           his doubts and achievement of a Turki reading book _see_ hi
             s own Preface ref. _supra_;
       (_d_) _Memoires de Baber_, (_French trs. of Ilminski's
                Babur-nama_) A. Pavet de Courteille--referred to _in
                loco_, 215, 227, 346, 347, 407, 446, 478, 489, 559, 632,
                App. T, lxxviii, App. M, xlv;--
         the _Mubin_ not recognized 449, 630;
         an illness 619;
         mistakenly controverted 468;
         surmised ground on which it accepted the "Rescue Passage" App.
           D, xiv;
         its help in considering Shaikh Zain's compositions 553, 559;--
         questioned readings 223-5, 327-33-69, 421 (_chiurtika_), 462-70,
           534, 617-19-38-40-47;
         a surmise discussed 574;--
         reviewed by Defremery 562;
         its title Preface xxxiii, translation li, source liv, diction
           lix.

   Water--water-thief 109,
     -road 595;
     dug for 234;
     under-ground courses of 417.

   Wedding-gifts--43, 400.

   Wednesday (_Char-shamba_)--coincidences of the day 71.

   Wells--chambered (_wain_, _baoli_) 532-3;
     dug 548, 552;
     purified when new 634.

   White cloth--traded 202;
     booty 233-4-5-7-8.

   Whiteway, Mr. R. S.--his help App. B, vii.

   Wilayat = Kabul 414.

   _With the Kuram Field-Force_, J. A. S. Colquhoun--a route 231.

   Wine (_i.e. any fermented liquor_)--_'araq_ (spirit) 385-6-7-8,
       453-61-76;
     mahuwa-flower 505;
     beer 423;
     cider (_chagir_) 83, Add. Note, P. 83;
     wines of Bukhara 83,
       Heri 265,
       Kabul:--Ala-sai 221,
       Dara-i-nur 210, 410, App. G;
       Ghazni 461,
       Kabul-_tuman_ 203,
       Nijr-au 213;--
       Kafiristan 211-12, 372;--
     +rules in use+:--drinking-days 33-4, 111, 447;
       one liquor only 386;
       no-pressure on a non-drinker 406-10;
     +wine-parties+:--Babur protests against excess 398;
       excludes drunkards 419,
       is disgusted by drunken uproar 386
       and by beer-intoxication 423;
       gives his followers freedom to do as Heratis did 304;
       givers of "wines", Khw. Kalan 371-5, 461,
       Shah Beg 400,
       the Bai-qara Mirzas 299, 302,
       Khw. Muh. 'Ali 411 (a business-party), 413;--
     +Babur's breaches of Law+ not committed till _cir._ his 28th year
         83, 355;
       resisted temptation in Herat 299, _etc._--
       his parties associated with beauty of scene, _e.g._ autumnal
         414-16-18;
       in his gardens 412, 406 and 420;
       under a plane-tree 405,
       at Istalif 406,
       near an illuminated camp 450;
       after and before long marches (_frequent_); mention made of
         (925 AH.) 375-85-88, 408-10-14-15-16-17-19;
       (926 AH.) 420-1-2-3-4;
       (932 AH.) 447, 450-53-61;
       (933 AH.) 537;--
       drinks a few cups to console 418,
       out of courtesy in a charmless place 424;
       "morning" 395-8, 415-20-22;
       gallops when not sober 388-98;--
     +Other Law-breakers+ Preface xxix, 16, 33-4, 45, 70, 134, 259-68-73,
         (woman) 36, 417;
       Heratis 259,
       Hisaris 42,
       Pich-Kafirs 22;--
     +Parties accompanied+ by improvisation 26,
       dancing 299, music (_usually_);
     (_for return to obedience see Law and Index I s.n. Babur_).

   Wordsworth's "undying fish" recalled 305.

   Workmen--Timur's 77, 520;
     Babur's 520, 634.

   Wray, Mr. Cecil and Mr. Leonard--their help 495, 502.


   Yajuj and Majuj (_Gog and Magog_) 560.

   Yaqut _see_ Dictionary of Towns.


   +Noticeable words+:--
     _Yada-tash_, jade-stone _see_ Magic;
     _yaghrunchi_, divination from sheep's-blades 233;
     _yighach_, tree, wood 11, 81;
     _yighach_ _see_ Measures;
     _yigit_, a brave 16, 53, 70, App. H, xxvii;
     _yilaq_, alp see _i.a._ Yar- and Burka-;
     _yinka-chicha_, maternal-uncle's mother-in-law (?);
     _yinkalik_, levirate 23, 267, 306, 616;
     _yukunmak_, to bend the knee 301;
     _yusunluq_, hereditary 23.

   _Zafar-nama_ (Book of Victory _i.e._ Timur's) Maulana Sharafu'd-din
       'Ali _Yazdi_--[_see nn. on pp. named_], places 10, 74-8, 83-4;
     persons 39, 272;
     meaning of Sawalak 485;
     Timur's capture of Qarshi 134;
     his burial at a saint's feet 266;
     his workmen 77, 520;
     partly translated in _Histoire de Timur Beg q.v._;
     the book and its main basis, the _Malfuzat-i-timuri_ Preface xxix,
       xxx,
     its author xxxiii.

   Zainu'd-din _Khawafi_ (Shaikh Zain)'s writings--
     (1) _Tabaqat-i-baburi q.v._;
     (2) _Mubin_, a Commentary on Babur's _Mubin_ 438;
     (3) _Farman_ announcing Babur's renouncement of wine and remission
           of _tamgha_-tax 553;
     (4) _Fath-nama_ of the victory at Kanwa 559 to 574;
       Babur's reason for inserting it (4) in his book 559;
       the sole Letter of victory so preserved 561;
       grounds against supposing Babur wrote a plain Turki account of the
         battle 574.


OMISSIONS FROM TRANSLATION AND FOOTNOTES.

   p. 7 l.1 "turbulent" _add_ They are notorious in   Mawara'u'n-nahr for
      their bullyings.

   p. 27 l.5 "(1504)" _add_ when, after taking Khusrau Shah, we besieged
      Muqim in Kabul.

   p. 31 l.1 "paid" _add_ no (attention).

   p. 43 l.9 _enter_ f. 24_b_.

   _ib._ l.8 fr. ft. "Taghai" _add_ and Auzun Hasan.

   p. 45 Sec. c, l.2 "good" _add_ he never neglected the Prayers.

   p. 48 l.16 "grandmother" _add_ Khan-zada Begim.

   p. 52 l.4 fr. ft. "childhood" _add_ and had attained the rank of Beg.

   p. 88 l.9 Hasan _add_ and Sl. Ahmad Tambal.

   p. 92 l.8 "on" _add_ to Sang-zar.

   p. 95 l.12 "service" _add_ did not stay in Khurasan but.

   p. 128 l.18 "two" _add_ young (sons).

   p. 131 l.12 "Jan-wafa" _add_ Mirza.

   p. 134 l.7 fr. ft. "that" _add_ night that.

   _ib._ l.3 fr. ft. "was" _add_ in my 19th (lunar) year.

   p. 136 l.5 "was" _add_ in my 19th (lunar) year.

   p. 139 l.11 fr. ft. _read_ Jani Beg Sultan.

   p. 141 l.10 "Khusrau Shah" _add_ my highly-favoured beg Qambar-i-ali
      _the Skinner Mughul_, not acting at such a time as this according
      to the favour he had received, came and took his wife from
      Samarkand; he too went to Khusrau Shah.

   p. 143 l.16 "that" _add_ near Shutur-gardan.

   p. 152 l.12 fr. ft. "dead" _add_ A few days later we went back
      to Dikh-kat.

   p. 164 Sec. d, l.6 fr. ft. "for" _add_ Sairam.

   p.201 l.12 _read_ Kabul-fort.

   p. 205 l.10 fr. ft. _read_ "are closed for" 4 or 5 months in winter.
      After crossing Shibr-tu people go on through Ab-dara. In the heats,
      when the waters come down in flood, these roads have the same rule
      as in winter ("because" _etc._).

   p. 217 l.11 "Sih-yaran" _add_ It became a very good-halting-place.
      I had a vineyard planted on the hill above the seat.

   p. 221 Sec. h, at the beginning _insert_ The mountains to the eastward
      of the cultivated land of Kabul are of two kinds as also are those
      to its westward ("Where the mountains" _etc._).

   p. 230 last line "men" _add_ Khusrau _Gagiani_.

   p. 247 l.1 "Qush-nadir" _add_ meadow.

   p. 308 l.14 "ground" _add_ Moreover it snowed incessantly and after
      leaving Chiragh-dan, not only was there very deep snow but the road
      was unknown.

   p. 391 March 18th "darogha-ships" _add_ Sangur Khan Qarluq and
      Mirza-i-malui Qarluq came leading 30 or 40 men of the Qarluq elders,
      made offering of a horse in mail, and waited on me. Came also the
      army of the Dilah-zak Afghans.

   p. 393 March 25th l.2 "out" _add_ from the river's bank.

   p. 454 l.5 "boat" _add_ There was a party; some drinking _'araq_, some
      beer. After leaving the boat at the Bed-time Prayer, there was more
      drinking in the _khirgah_ (tent). For the good of the horses, we
      gave them a day's breathing on the bank of this water.

   p. 468 l.3 "sent" _add_ Yunas-i-'ali and Ahmadi and ("'Abdu'l-lah").

   p. 484 l.1 "Rao" _add_ with four or five thousand Pagans.

   p. 498 (_s.n._ florican), "colour" _add_ The flesh of the florican is
      very delicate. As the _kharchal_ (Indian buzzard) resembles the
      _tughdaq_ (great buzzard) so the _charz_ (florican) resembles the
      _tughdiri_.

   _ib._ (_s.n._ sand-grouse) "Tramontana" _add_ the blackness of its
     breast is less deep, its cry also is sharper.

   p. 500 after l. 11 "eagle" _add_ (new para.) Another is the buzzard
     (T. _sar_); its tail and back are red.

   p. 506 (_s.n._ _kamrak_) "long" _add_ It has no stone.

   p. 507 n. 3 "name" _add_ also; "plantain" _add_ (banana).

   p. 510 l. 5 see App. O, p. liv for _addendum_.

   p. 529 l. 4 fr.ft. "Dulpur" _add_ Gualiar.

   p. 595 l. 19 "other" read 2 or 3 (places); the Pagans in the _du-tahi_
      began to run away; "the _du-tahi_ was taken."

   p. 603 l. 7 fr.ft. "(366_b_)" _add_ and between Ghazipur and Banaras
      (p. 502).

   p. 674 l. 2 "river" _add_ in his mail.

   p. 678 l. 2 "amirs" _add_ Sultan.

   p. 679 l. 8 fr.ft. "given" _add_ It was settled that a son of each of
      them should be always in waiting in Agra; l. 7 fr.ft. "Araish"
      _add_ and two others; l. 2 fr.ft. "Saru" _add_ towards Oude.

   p. 689 l. 2 fr.ft. "laks" _add_ and a head-to-foot (dress).

   App. Q l. 1 "interpret" add those of.


CORRIGENDA.

   _To ensure notice many of these are entered in the Indices._

   Pages

   6 l.4 "meadow" _read_ plain (_maidan_).

   11 n.4, "siyar" unaccented; (H.S.) ii _read_ iii n.n. pp. 18, 38, 48,
      244.

   12 n.4 l.3 "attack in" _read_ attacking.

   14 l.3 "and" _read_ who.

   16 l.10 n. ref. "3" _tr. to_ "amorous".

   24 n.1 "932" _read_ 923.

   27 para. 2 _read_ "Baba 'Ali Beg's Baba-quli".

   28 l.8 "leaders" _read_ Mughul mirzadas.

   29 n.6 l.5 "then" _read_ his.

   37 l.8 "916" _read_ 917; and tr. nn. 2 and 3.

   38 l.9 "favour" _run on_ to Ahmad.

   44 l.9 55 l.12 _delete_ "Sayyid".

   46 l.12 _read_ Chikman.

   49 l.3 "Black" _read_ White.

   51 l.12 fr. ft. "Badakhshan" _read_ Hisar.

   55 "f. 34" _read_ f. 32_b_.

   57 l.1, enter f. 33 and _move_ "f. 33_b_" to 58 l.2.

   61 l.4 "Beg" _read_ Baba-quli Beg.

   68 l.10 fr. ft. _tr._ n. ref. 4 to "Aurgut".

   69 n.2, read _aunutung_; and _tr._ _nakunid_ and _bakunid_.

   79 l.5 tr. n. ref. 3 to _qibla_; in author's n. _read_ Batalmius;
      and in n.4 _read_ _Ayin_.

   85 l.9 _read_ 851 A.H.-1447 A.D.; l.3 fr. ft. _move_ "Jumada I, 22,
      855 A.H." to p.86 l.1, after "years".

   94 l.6 "Chirik" _read_ Char-yak.

   95 l.2 fr. ft. "Aubaj" _read_ Char-jui.

   96 last line "Qasim" _read_ Kamal (or Kahal).

   109 l.16 "qasim" _read_ qadus.

   _ib._ n.5 l.3 _read_ grand "father".

   117 n.2 "909" _read_ 908.

   122 n.4 "_bulghar_" _read_ _buljar_.

   129 l.14 "_daban_" _read_ _kutal_.

   131 ll.3-4 fr. ft. _read_ Khan-quli and Karim-dad.

   134 l.3 fr. ft. and 136 l.5 _read_ in my 19th (lunar) year.

   144 para. 3 "rain" _read_ grain.

   148 n.2 "f. 18" _read_ f. 118.

   149 l.17 _read_ Khanim.

   154 n.3 "f. 183_b_" _read_ f. 103_b_ and for f. 264_b_ _read_ f. 264.

   168 Sect. heading "Kasan" _read_ Karnan.

   175 l.11 _read_ Mirza-quli.

   183 last line "Kulja" _read_ Khuldja.

   192 l.3 _read_ Taliqan.

   194 l.12 _read_ Quhlugha.

   _ib._ n.3 _read_ Bai-sunghar.

   204 l.16 _read_ Curriers'.

   205 l.5 _read_ Sir; l.13 _read_ Wa(lian); l.14 _read_ Qibchaq.

   205 l.10 fr. ft. "three or four" _read_ four or five (cf. omissions
            p. 205).

   211 para. 3, end, "920" _read_ 924.

   212 n.2 l.2 _read_ _chiqmaq_.

   213 n.5 "_parwan_" _read_ _parran_; and nn.5, 6, 7 _read_ Blanford.

   244 ll.8 and 25 "page" _read_ preferably, brave; l.19 _read_
            gallopers.

   273 n.2 _read_ grand-"daughter".

   282 n.3 l.2 "345" _read_ 348-9.

   289 l.5 "wonderful" _read_ metaphorist.

   342 mid-page _read_ Pur-amin.

   344 last line "Appendix" _read_ Trs.' note 711.

   351 l.15 "Akhsi" _read_ Archian.

   387 n.3 _delete_ sentence 2.

   410 last line "_khuntul_" _read_ _hunzal_.

   414 l.2 "18th" _read_ 13th; and l.2 fr. ft. "purslain" _read_ poplar.

   438 l.15 "son" _read_ grandson.

   447 n.3 para. 2 l.1 "month" _read_ week.

   470 n.l. 5 fr. ft. "p.66" _read_ p. 166.

   482 n.3 "Gujrat" _read_ Malwa.

   485 sec. e l.7 "Gumti" _read_ Gui.

   499 l.17 "_yak-rang_" _read_ _bak-ding_ (see Add. Note P. 499).

   500 l.15 _s.n._ crow "_qarcha_" _read qargha_; n.6 "f. 136"
            _read_ f. 135.

   505 l.6 tr. n. ref. "2" to, _buia_.

   520 n.1 "1854" _read_ 1845.

   534 l.2 fr. ft. "and" _read_ 932.

   535 l.2 fr. ft. _delete_ "others".

   579 l.8 "April 13th" _read_ April 3rd.

   591 n.2 "_qurughir_" _read_ _quruqtur_.

   604 n.l.1 _read_ _Afaghana_.

   616 l.5 _read_ Madhakur; and Sect. m "_qara-su_" _read_ _darya
           qaraghi_ or _qaraghina_.

   620 l.7 _rahim_ _read_ _rahman_.

   621 l.11 after "servants" _read_ Beg-gina "had come".

   622 l.12 _read_ Siunjuk; l.13 Tashkint.

   631 l.13 _delete_ the parenthesis (see Add. Note P. 631).

   632 l.4 _read_ Farrukh.

   636 l.7 "rest" _read_ eight others.

   640 l.1 _read_ quli.

   643 (Feb. 4th) "Muhammad" _read_ Mahmud.

   644 n.5 "323" _read_ 232.

   699 l.13 "935" _read_ 938.

   713 l.3 _read_ Saliha; and l.11 fr. ft.
   Miran-shahi.


ADDITIONAL NOTES

   P. 16 l. 11.--Nizami mentions "lover's marks" where a rebel chieftain
   commenting on Khusrau's unfitness to rule by reason of his
   infatuation for Shirin, says, "_Hinoz az'ashiqbazi garm dagh ast._"
   (H.B.)

   P. 22 n. 2.--Closer acquaintance with related books leads me to delete
   the words "Chaghatai Mughul" from Haidar _Dughlat's_ tribal
   designations (p. 22, n. 2, l. 1). (1) My "Chaghatai" had warrant (now
   rejected) in Haidar's statement (T.R. trs. p. 3) that the Dughlat
   amirs were of the same stock (_abna'-i-jins_) as the Chaghatai
   Khaqans. But the Dughlat off-take from the common stem was of earlier
   date than Chingiz Khan's, hence, his son's name "Chaghatai" is a
   misnomer for Dughlats. (2) As for "Mughul" to designate Dughlat, and
   also Chaghatai chiefs--guidance for us rests with the chiefs
   themselves; these certainly (as did also the Begchik chiefs) held
   themselves apart from "Mughuls of the horde" and begs of the horde--as
   apart they had become by status as chiefs, by intermarriage, by
   education, and by observance of the amenities of civilized life. To
   describe Dughlat, Chaghatai and Begchik chiefs in Babur's day as
   Mughuls is against their self-classification and is a discourtesy. A
   clear instance of need of caution in the use of the word Mughul is
   that of 'Ali-sher _Nawa'i Chaghatai_. (Cf. Abu'l-ghazi's accounts of
   the formation of several tribes.) (3) That "Mughul" described for
   Hindustanis Babur's invading and conquering armies does not
   obliterate distinctions in its chiefs. Mughuls of the horde followed
   Timurids when to do so suited them; there were also in Babur's armies
   several chiefs of the ruling Chaghatai family, brothers of The Khan,
   Sa'id (_see_ Chin-timur, Aisan-timur, Tukhta-bugha). With these must
   have been their following of "Mughuls of the horde".

   P. 34 l. 12.--"With the goshawks" translates _qirchigha bila_ of the
   Elph. MS. (f. 12_b_) where it is explained marginally by _ba bazi_,
   with the falcon or goshawk. The Hai. MS. however has, in its text,
   _piazi bila_ which may mean with arrows having points (_Sanglakh_ f.
   144_b_ quoting this passage). Ilminski has no answering word (_Mems._
   i, 19). Muh. _Shirazi_ [p. 13 l. 11 fr. ft.] writes _ba bazi
   miandakhtan_.

   P. 39.--The _Habibu's-siyar_ (lith. ed. iii, 217 l. 16) writes of
   Sayyid Murad _Aughlaqchi_ (the father or g.f. of Yusuf) that he (who
   had, Babur says, come from the Mughul horde) held high rank under
   Abu-sa'id Mirza, joined Husian _Bai-qara_ after the Mirza's defeat
   and death (873 A.H.), and (p. 218) was killed in defeat by Amir 'Ali
   _Jalair_ who was commanding for Yadgar-i-muhammad _Shah-rukhi_.

   P. 49.--An _Aimaq_ is a division of persons and not of territory. In
   Mongolia under the Chinese Government it answers to khanate. A Khan
   is at the head of an _aimaq_. Aimaqs are divided into _koshung_,
   _i.e._ banners (_Mongolia_, N. Prejevalsky trs. E. Delmar Morgan, ii,
   53).

   P. 75 and n. 1.--For an explanation, provided in 94 AH., of why
   Samarkand was called _Baldat-i-mahfuza_, the Guarded-city, see
   Daulat-shah, Browne's ed. _s.n._ Qulaiba p. 443.

   P. 85 n. 2.--The reference to the _Habibu's-siyar_ confuses two
   cases of parricide:--'Abdu'l-latif's of Aulugh Beg (853-1447) to which
   H.S. refers [Vol. III, Part 2, p. 163, l. 13 fr. ft.] with (one of
   7-628) Shiruya's of Khusrau Parviz (H.S. Vol. I, Part 2, p. 44, l. 11
   fr. ft.) where the parricide's sister tells him that the murderer of
   his father (and 15 brothers) would eventually be punished by God, and
   (a little lower) the couplet Babur quotes (p. 85) is entered (H.B.).

   P. 154 n. 3.--The Persian phrase in the _Siyasat-nama_ which describes
   the numbering of the army (T. _dim kurmak_) is _ba sar-i-taziana
   shumurdan_. Schafer translates _taziana_ by _cravache_. I have
   nowhere found how the whip was used; (cf. S.N. Pers. text p. 15 l.
   5).

   P. 171 n. 1.--Closer acquaintance with Babur's use of _darya_, _rud_,
   _su_, the first of which he reserves for a great river, casts doubt
   on my suggestion that _darya_ may stand for the Kasan-water. But the
   narrative supports what I have noted. The "upper villages" of Akhsi
   might be, however, those higher up on the Saihun-darya (Sir-darya).

   P. 189 and n. 1.--A third and perhaps here better rendering of _bi
   baqi_ is that of p. 662 (_s.d._ April 10th), "leaving none behind."

   P. 196.--The _Habibu's-siyar_ (lith. ed. iii, 250 l. 11 fr. ft.)
   writes of _baradaran_ of Khusrau Shah, Amir Wali and Pir Wali. As it
   is improbable that two brothers (Anglice) would be called Wali, it
   may be right to translate _baradaran_ by brethren, and to understand
   a brother and a cousin. Babur mentions only the brother Wali.

   P. 223 ll. 1-3 fr. ft.--The French translation, differing from
   'Abdu'r-rahim's and Erskine's, reads Babur as saying of the ranges
   separating the cultivated lands of Kabul, that they are _comme des
   ponts de trefle_, but this does not suit the height and sometimes
   permanent snows of some of the separating ranges.--My bald "(great)
   dams" should have been expanded to suit the meaning (as I take it to
   be) of the words _Yur-unchaqa pul-dik_, like embankments (_pul_)
   against going (_yur_) further; (so far, _uncha_). Cf. Griffiths'
   _Journal_, p. 431.

   P. 251.--Nizami expresses the opinion that "Fate is an avenging
   servitor" but not in the words used by Babur (p. 251). He does this
   when moralizing on Farhad's death, brought about by Khusrau's trick
   and casting the doer into dread of vengeance (H. B.).

   P. 266 n. 7.--On p. 266 Babur allots three daughters to Papa Aghacha
   and on p. 269 four. Various details make for four. But, if four, the
   total of eleven (p. 261) is exceeded.

   P. 276 para. 3.--Attention is attracted on this page to the unusual
   circumstance that a parent and child are both called by the same
   name, Junaid. One other instance is found in the _Babur-nama_, that
   of Babur's wife Ma'suma and her daughter. Perhaps "Junaid" like
   "Ma'suma" was the name given to the child because birth closely
   followed the death of the parent (_see_ _s.n._ Ma'suma).

   P. 277.--Concerning Bih-bud Beg the _Shaibani-nama_ gives the
   following information:--he was in command in Khwarizm and Khiva when
   Shaibani moved against Chin _Sufi_ (910 AH.), and spite of his name,
   was unpopular (Vambery's ed. 184, 186). Vambery's note 88 says he is
   mentioned in the (anonymous) prose _Shaibani-nama_, Russian trs. p.
   lxi.

   P. 372 l. 2 fr. ft.--Where the Hai. MS. and Kasan Imp. have _mu'araz_,
   rival, E. and de C. translate by representative, but the following
   circumstances favour "rival":--Wais was with Babur (pp. 374-6) and
   would need no representative. His arrival is not recorded; no
   introductory particulars are given of him where his name is first
   found (p. 372); therefore he is likely to have joined Babur in the
   time of the gap of 924 AH. (p. 366), before the siege of Bajaur-fort
   and before 'Ala'u'd-din did so. The two Sawadi chiefs received gifts
   and left together (p. 376).

   P. 393 l. 4.--In this couplet the point lies in the double-meaning of
   _ra'iyat_, subject and peasant.

   P. 401.--Under date Thursday 25th Babur mentions an appointment to
   read _fiqah sabaqi_ to him. Erskine translated this by "Sacred
   extracts from the Qoran" (I followed this). But "lessons in theology"
   may be a better rendering--as more literal and as allowing for the use
   of other writings than the Qoran. A correspondent Mr. G. Yazdani
   (Gov. Epigraphist for Muslim Inscriptions, Haidarabad) tells us that
   it is customary amongst Muslims to recite religious books on
   Thursdays.

   P. 404 l. 7 fr. ft.--Baba Qashqa (or Qashqa)'s family-group is
   somewhat interesting as that of loyal and capable men of Mughul birth
   who served Babur and Humayun. It must have joined Babur in what is
   now the gap between 914 and 925 AH. because not mentioned earlier and
   because he is first mentioned in 925 AH. without introductory
   particulars. The following details supplement _Babur-nama_
   information about the group:--(1) Of Baba Qashqa's murder by
   Muhammad-i-zaman _Bai-qara_ Gul-hadan (f. 23) makes record, and
   Badayuni (Bib. Ind. ed. i, 450) says that (_cir._ 952 AH.) when
   Baba's son Haji Muh. Khan _Kuki_ had pursued and overtaken the rebel
   Kamran, the Mirza asked, as though questioning the Khan's ground of
   hostility to himself, "But did I kill thy father Baba Qashqa?"
   (_Pidrat Baba Qashqa magar man kushta am?_).--(2) Of the death of Baba
   Qashqa's brother "Kuki", Abu'l-fazl records that he was killed in
   Hindustan by Muhammad Sl. M. _Bai-qara_ (952 AH.), and that Kuki's
   nephew Shah Muh. (_see_ p. 668) retaliated (955 AH.) by
   arrow-shooting one of Muh. Sl. Mirza's sons. This was done when Shah
   Muh. was crossing Minar-pass on his return journey from sharing
   Humayun's exile in Persia (_see_ Jauhar).--(3) Haji Muh. Khan _Kuki_
   and Shah Muhammad Khan appear to have been sons of Baba Qashqa and
   nephews of "Kuki" (_supra_). They were devoted servants of Humayun
   but were put to death by him in 958 AH.-1551 AD. (cf. Erskine's _H.
   of I. Humayun_).--(4) About the word _Kuki_ dictionaries afford no
   warrant for taking it to mean foster-brother (_kokah_). Chingiz Khan
   had a beg known as Kuk or Kouk (or Guk) and one of his own grandsons
   used the same style. It may link the Baba Qashqa group with the
   Chingiz Khanid Kuki, either as descendants or as hereditary
   adherents, or as both. (_See_ Abu'l-ghazi's _Shajarat-i-Turk_, trs.
   Desmaisons, Index _s.n._ _Kouk_ and also its accounts of the origin
   of several tribal groups.)

   P. 416.--The line quoted by 'Abdu'l-lah is from the _Anwar-i-suhaili_,
   Book II, Story i. Eastwick translates it and its immediate context
   thus:--

     "People follow the faith of their kings.
      My heart is like a tulip scorched and by sighings flame;
      In all thou seest, their hearts are scorched and stained
        the same." (H.B.)

   The offence of the quotation appears to have been against Khalifa,
   and might be a suggestion that he followed Babur in breach of Law by
   using wine.

   P. 487 n. 2.--The following passages complete the note on _wulsa_
   quoted by Erskine from Col. Mark Wilks' _Historical Sketches_ and
   show how the word is used:--"During the absence of Major Lawrence from
   Trichinopoly, the town had been completely depopulated by the removal
   of the whole _Wulsa_ to seek for food elsewhere, and the enemy had
   been earnestly occupied in endeavouring to surprise the garrison."
   (Here follows Erskine's quotation _see in loco_ p. 487). "The people
   of a district thus deserting their homes are called the _Wulsa_ of
   that district, a state of utmost misery, involving precaution against
   incessant war and unpitying depredation--so peculiar a description as
   to require in any of the languages of Europe a long circumlocution,
   is expressed _in all the languages of Deckan and the south of India
   by a single word_. No proofs can be accumulated from the most
   profound research which shall describe the immemorial condition of
   the people of India with more precision than this single word. It is
   a bright distinction that the _Wulsa_ never departs on the approach
   of a British army when this is unaccompanied by Indian allies."--By
   clerical error in the final para. of my note _ulvash_ is entered for
   _ulvan_ [Molesworth, any desolating calamity].

   P. 540 n. 4.--An explanation of Babur's use of Shah-zada as Tahmasp's
   title may well be that this title answers to the Timurid one
   Mir-zada, Mirza. If so, Babur's change to "Shah" (p. 635) may
   recognize supremacy by victory, such as he had claimed for himself in
   913 AH. when he changed his Timurid "Mirza" for "Padshah".

   P. 557.--Husain _Kashifi_, also, quotes Firdausi's couplet in the
   _Anwar-i-suhaili_ (Cap. I, Story XXI), a book dedicated to Shaikh
   Ahmad _Suhaili_ (p. 277) and of earlier date than the _Babur-nama_.
   Its author died in 910 AH.-1505 AD.

   P. 576 n. 1.--Tod's statement (quoted in my n. 1) that "the year of
   Rana Sanga's defeat (933 AH.) was the last of his existence" cannot
   be strictly correct because Babur's statement (p. 598) of intending
   attack on him in Chitor allows him to have been alive in 934 AH.
   (1528 AD.). The death occurred, "not without suspicion of poison,"
   says Tod, when the Rana had moved against Irij then held for Babur;
   it will have been long enough before the end of 934 AH. to allow an
   envoy from his son Bikramajit to wait on Babur in that year (pp. 603,
   612). Babur's record of it may safely be inferred lost with the
   once-existent matter of 934 AH.

   P. 631.--My husband has ascertained that the "Sayyid Dakni" of p. 631
   is Sayyid Shah Tahir _Dakni_ (_Deccani_) the Shiite apostle of
   Southern India, who in 935 AH. was sent to Babur with a letter from
   Burhan Nizam Shah of Ahmadnagar, in which (if there were not two
   embassies) congratulation was made on the conquest of Dihli and help
   asked against Bahadur Shah _Gujrati_. A second but earlier mention of
   "Sayyid _Dakni_" (_Zakni_, _Rukni?_) _Shirazi_ is on p. 619. Whether
   the two entries refer to Shah Tahir nothing makes clear. The
   cognomen Shirazi disassociates them. It is always to be kept in mind
   that preliminary events are frequently lost in gaps; one such will be
   the arrivals of the various envoys, mentioned on p. 630, whose places
   of honour are specified on p. 631. Much is on record about Sayyid
   Shah Tahir _Dakni_ and particulars of his life are available in the
   histories by Badayuni (Ranking trs.) and (Firishta Nawal Kishor ed.
   p. 105); B.M. Harleyan MS. No. 199 contains his letters (_see_ Rieu's
   Pers. Cat. p. 395).

   P. 699 and n. 3.--The particulars given by the _Tabaqat-i-akbari_
   about Multan at this date (932-4 AH.) are as follows:--After Babur
   took the Panj-ab, he ordered Shah Hasan _Arghun_ to attempt Multan,
   then held by one Sl. Mahmud who, dying, was succeeded by an infant
   son Husain. Shah Hasan took Multan after a 16 (lunar) months' siege,
   at the end of 934 AH. (in a B.N. _lacuna_ therefore), looted and
   slaughtered in it, and then returned to Tatta. On this Langar Khan
   took possession of it (H.B.). What part 'Askari (_aet._ 12) had in the
   matter is yet to learn; possibly he was nominated to its command and
   then recalled as Babur mentions (935 AH.).


FOOTNOTES

   [2861] The fist indicates Translator's matter.

   [2862] See Abu'l-ghazi's _Shajarat-i-turki_ on the origin and
   characteristics of the tribe (Desmaisons trs. Index _s.n._
   Ouighur, especially pp. 16, 37, 39).

   [2863] This date is misplaced in my text and should be
   transferred from p. 83, l. 3 fr. ft. to p. 86, l. 1, there to
   follow "two years".

   [2864] A fuller reference to the H.S. than is given on p. 85
   n. 2, is ii, 44 and iii, 167.

   [2865] Cf. _s.n._ 'Abdu'l-lah Mirza _Shah-rukhi_ for a date
   misplaced in my text.

   [2866] The date 935 AH. is inferred from p. 483.

   [2867] Cf. Badayuni's _Muntakhabu't-tawarikh_ and Ranking's
   trs. i, 616 and n. 4, 617.

   [2868] Ferte translates this sobriquet by _le devoue_ (_Vie de
   Sl. Hossein Baikara_ p. 40 n. 3).

   [2869] At p. 22 n. 8 fill out to Cf. f. 6_b_ (p. 13) n. 5.

   [2870] For an account of his tomb see Schuyler's _Turkistan_,
   1, 70-72.

   [2871] Or Aigu (Ayagu) from _ayagh_, foot, perhaps expressing
   close following of Timur, whose friend the Beg was.

   [2872] Daulat-shah celebrates the renown of the Jalair section
   (_farqa_) of the Chaghatai tribes (_aqwam_) of the Mughul
   horde (_aulus_, _ulus_), styles the above-entered 'Ali Beg a
   veteran hero, and links his family with that of the Jalair
   Sultans of Baghdad (Browne's ed. p. 519).

   [2873] See H. S. lith. ed. iii, 224, for three men who
   conveyed helpful information to Husain.

   [2874] Later consideration has cast doubts on his
   identification with Darwesh-i-'ali suggested, p. 345 n. 4.

   [2875] On p. 69 n. 2 for _aunulung_ read _aunutung_ and
   reverse _bakunid_ with _nakunid_.

   [2876] On p. 49 l. 3 for "Black Sheep" read White Sheep.

   [2877] Like his brother Hind-al's name, Alur's may be due to
   the taking (_al_) of Hind.

   [2878] See the _Tabaqat-i-akbari_ account of the rulers of
   Multan.

   [2879] On p. 85 l. 9 for "872 AH.-1467 AD.", read 851 AH.-1447
   AD.

   [2880] On p. 79 transfer the note-reference "3" to _qibla_.

   [2881] See Daulat-shah (Browne's ed. p. 362) for an
   entertaining record of the Mirza's zeal as a sportsman and an
   illustrative anecdote by Shaikh 'Arif _'azari_ _q.v._ (H.B.).

   [2882] I have found no statement of his tribe or race; he and
   his brother are styled Khwaja (H.S. lith. ed. iii, 272); he is
   associated closely with Ahmad Tambal _Mughul_ and Mughuls of
   the Horde; also his niece's name Aulus Agha translates as Lady
   of the Horde (_ulus_, _aulus_). But he may have been a
   Turkman.

   [2883] The MS. variants between 'Ali and -quli are confusing.
   What stands in my text (p. 27) may be less safe than the
   above.

   [2884] Baba Qashqa was murdered by Muhammad-i-zaman
   _Bai-qara_. For further particulars of his family group see
   Add. Notes under p. 404.

   [2885] Sultan Baba-quli Beg is found variously designated Quli
   Beg, Quli Baba, Sl. 'Ali Baba-quli, Sultan-quli Baba and
   Baba-quli Beg. Several forms appear to express his filial
   relationship with Sultan Baba 'Ali (_q.v._).

   [2886] Down to p. 346 Babur's statements are retrospective;
   after p. 346 they are mostly contemporary with the dates of
   his diary--when not so are in supplementing passages of later
   date.

   [2887] He may be the father of Mun'im Khan (Blochmann's
   Biographies A.-i-A. trs. 317 and n. 2).

   [2888] See note, Index, _s.n._ Muhammad Zakaria.

   [2889] He is likely to have been introduced with some
   particulars of tribe, in one of the now unchronicled years
   after Babur's return from his Trans-oxus campaign.

   [2890] His wife, daughter of a wealthy man and on the mother's
   side niece of Sultan Buhlul _Ludi_, financed the military
   efforts of Bayazid and Biban (_Tarikh-i-sher-shahi_, E. and D.
   iv, 353 ff.).

   [2891] My translation on p. 621 l. 12 is inaccurate inasmuch
   as it hides the circumstance that Beg-gina alone was the
   "messenger of good tidings".

   [2892] In taking Biban for a Jilwani, I follow Erskine, (as
   inferences also warrant,) but he may be a Ludi.

   [2893] For the same uncertainty between Bihar and Pahar see E.
   and D.'s History of India iv, 352 n. 2.

   [2894] Firishta lith. ed. i, 202.

   [2895] For "Mu'min" read Mumin, which form is constant in the
   Hai. MS.

   [2896] He may be Hamida-banu's father and, if so, became
   grandfather of Akbar.

   [2897] Ilminsky, _anlu_, Erskine, _angu_. Daulat-shah mentions
   a Muhammad Shah _anju_ (see Brown's ed. Index _s.n._).

   [2898] On p. 22 n. 2 delete "_Chaghatai Mughul_" on grounds
   given in Additional Note, Page 22.

   [2899] For Humayun's annotation of the _Babur-nama_, see
   General Index _s.n._ Humayun's Notes.

   [2900] For a correction of dates, see _s.n._ Aulugh Beg.

   [2901] On p. 279 l. 3 from foot read "There was also Ibrahim
   _Chaghatai_" after "Muhammad-i-zaman Mirza".

   [2902] _Addendum_:--p. 49 l. 4, read "wife" of Muhammadi "son"
   of Jahan-shah.

   [2903] His name might mean Welcome, _Bien-venu_.

   [2904] Khusrau-shah may be the more correct form.

   [2905] The "afterwards" points to an omission which
   Khwand-amir's account of Husain's daughters fills (lith. ed.
   iii, 327).

   [2906] No record survives of the Khwaja's deeds of daring
   other than those entered above; perhaps the other instances
   Babur refers to occurred during the gap 908-9 AH.

   [2907] This may be a tribal or a family name. Abu'l-ghazi
   mentions two individuals named "Kouk". One was Chingiz Khan's
   grandson who is likely to have had descendants or followers
   distinguishable as _Kuki_. See Add. Note P. 673 on Kuki fate.

   [2908] Cf. E. and D. for "Karani" (_e.g._ vol. iv, 530). The
   Hai. MS. sometimes doubles the _r_, sometimes not.

   [2909] See _Waqi'at-i-mushtaqi_, E. and D. iv, 548.

   [2910] Shaikhim _Suhaili_ however was named Ahmad (277) not
   Muhammad.

   [2911] The record of the first appears likely to be lost in
   the _lacuna_ of 934 AH.

   [2912] See _Shaibani-nama_, Vambery's ed. Cap. xv, l. 12, for
   his changes of service, and Sam Mirza's _Tuhfa-i-sami_ for
   various particulars including his classification as a
   Chaghatai.

   [2913] He died serving Babur, at Kul-i-malik (H.S. iii,
   344).--Further information negatives my suggestion (201 n. 7)
   that he and Mir Husain (p. 288 and n. 7) were one.

   [2914] "Zaitun is the name of the Chinese city from which
   satin was brought (_hodie_ Thsiuancheu or Chincheu) and my
   belief is that our word satin came from it" (Col. H. Yule, E.
   and D. iv, 514).

   [2915] My text omits to translate _yigit_ (_aughul_) and thus
   loses the information that Yahya's sons Baqi and Zakaria were
   above childhood, were grown to fighting age--braves--but not yet
   begs (see Index _s.n._ _chuhra_).

   [2916] See Add. Notes under p. 39.

   [2917] See Add. Notes under p. 266.

   [2918] For emendation of 266 n. 7, see Add. Notes under P.
   266.

   [2919] On p. 49 l. 3 for "Black" read White; and in l. 3 read
   ("wife of") Muhammadi son of ("Jahan-shah").

   [2920] Cf. H.S. Ferti's trs. p. 70 for the same name Qaitmas.

   [2921] His capture is not recorded.

   [2922] He joined Babur with his father Yar-i-'ali _Balal_
   (_q.v._) in 910 AH. (Blochmann's Biographies, A.-i-A. trs.
   315).

   [2923] Concerning the date of his death, see Additional Notes
   under p. 603.

   [2924] Since my text was printed, my husband has lighted upon
   what shows that the guest at the feast was an ambassador sent
   by Burhan Nizam Shah of Ahmadnagar to congratulate Babur on
   his conquest of Dihli, namely, Shah Tahir the apostle of
   Shiism in the Dakkan. He is thus distinguished from Sayyid
   Dakni, (Rukni, Zakni) _infra_ and my text needs suitable
   correction. (See Add. Notes under p. 631 for further
   particulars of the Sayyid and his embassy.)

   [2925] For further particulars see Add. Note under p. 688.

   [2926] For "H.S. ii" read iii (as also in some other places).

   [2927] Down to p. 131 the Hai. MS. uses the name Shaibani or
   Shaibani Khan; from that page onwards it writes Shaibaq Khan,
   in agreement with the Elphinstone MS.--Other names found are
   _e.g._ Gulbadan's Shahi Beg Khan and Shah-bakht. (My note 2 on
   p. 12 needs modification.)

   [2928] The title "Aughlan" (child, boy) indicates that the
   bearer died without ruling.

   [2929] This cognomen was given because the bearer was born
   during an eclipse of the moon (_ai_, moon and the root _al_
   taking away); _see_ Badayuni Bib. Ind. ed. i, 62.

   [2930] Here _delete_ "Sultan-nigar Khanim", who was his
   grandmother and not his mother.

   [2931] On p. 433 n. 1 her name is mistakenly entered as that
   of Sulaiman's mother.

   [2932] Concerning this title, see Add. Notes under p. 540.

   [2933] He may be the Tulik Khan _quchin_ of the
   _Ma'asiru'l-umra_ i, 475.

   [2934] Haidar Mirza gives an interesting account of his
   character and attainments (T.R. trs. p. 283).

   [2935] See Additional Note under P. 372.

   [2936] See Additional Notes under P. 51.

   [2937] Here the Hai. MS. and Ilminsky's Imprint add "Nasir".

   [2938] The natural place for this Section of record is at the
   first mention of Yunas Khan (p. 12) and not, as now found,
   interrupting another Section. See p. 678 and n. 4 as to
   "Sections".

   [2939] The entries of 934 and 935 may concern a second man
   'Ali-i-yusuf.

   [2940] Perhaps skilled in the art of metaphors and tropes
   (_'ilmu'l-badi'_).

   [2941] My text has _julgasi_, but I am advised to omit the
   genitive _si_; so, too, in aiki-su-ara-si, Rabatjk-aurchin-i
   _q.v._

   [2942] Cf. _s.n._ Ahangaran-julga n. as to form of the name.

   [2943] Asterisks indicate Translator's matter.

   [2944] Babur uses this name for, Anglice, the Kabul-river as
   low as nearly to Dakka.

   [2945] "The Dara-i-suf, often mentioned by the Arabian
   writers, seems to lie west of Bamian" (Erskine, _Memoirs_, p.
   152 n. 1).

   [2946] Babur's itinerary gives Gharjistan a greater eastward
   extent than the Fr. map Maimene allows, thus agreeing with
   Erskine's surmise (_Memoirs_ p. 152 n. 1).--The first syllable
   of the name may be "Ghur".

   [2947] On p. 7, l. 1, after "turbulent", _add_, " They are
   notorious in Mawara'u'n-nahr for their bullying."

   [2948] On p. 134 for "(I was) 19" _read_ in my 19th (lunar)
   year.

   [2949] Cf. _Life of Busbecq_ (Forster and Daniels) i, 252-7,
   for feats of Turkish archery.

   [2950] For the Bukhara (Babur-nama) Compilation _see_
   _Waqi'-nama-i-padshahi_; as also for its Codices, descendants
   and offtakes, _viz._ Ilminski's "_Babur-nama_" and de
   Courteille's _Memoires de Baber_.

   [2951] The confusion of identity has become clear to me in
   1921 only.

   [2952] One of the nine great gods of the Etruscans was called
   Turan. Etr. _Tur_ means strong, a strong place (fortress);
   with it may connect L. _turma_ (troop) and the name of
   Virgil's Rutulian hero Turmus may root in the Mongol tongue.
   Professor Jules Marthe writes in _La Langue Etrusque_ (Pref.
   vi), "Il m'a paru qu'il y avait entre l'Etrusque et les
   langues finns-ougriennes d'etroites affinites" (hence with the
   Mongol tongue). "Tarkhan" is "Turkhan" in Miles trs. p. 71 of
   the _Shajaratu'l-atrak_ (H. B.).

   [2953] This Cat. contains the Turki MS. of the Bukhara
   Compilation, once owned by Leyden.

   [2954] where, in n. 3, for f. 183_b_ and f. 264_b_ _read_ f.
   103_b_ and f. 264.

   [2955] For "H.S. ii" read H.S. iii--also on p. 244.

   [2956] On this peg may be hung the following note:--The
   _Padshah-nama_ (_q.v._) calls the author and presenter of the
   above translation "Abu-talib" _Husaini_ (Bib. Ind. ed. vol. i,
   part 2, p. 288), but its index contains many references
   seemingly to the same man as Khwaja Abu'l-husain _Turbati_.
   The P. N. says the book which it entitles
   _Waqi'at-i-sahib-qiran_ (The Acts of Timur), was in Turki, was
   brought forth from the Library of the (Turk) Governor of Yemen
   and translated by Mir Abu-talib _Husaini_; that what Timur had
   done with this book of counsel (_dastan-i-nasa'ih_) when he
   sent it to his son Pir-i-muhammad, then succeeding (his
   brother) Jahangir [in Kabul, the Ghaznis, Qandahar, _etc._]
   Shahjahan also did by sending it, out of love, to his son
   Aurangzib who had been ordered to the Deccan.

   [2957] In n. 5 for "_parwan_" read _parran_, and _read_
   Blanford.

   [2958] Which _read_ (l. 17) for _yak rang_. The name
   _bak-ding_ appears due to the clapping of the bird's mandibles
   and its pompous strut; (cf. Ross' _Polyglot List_, No. 336).

   [2959] Following the _zammaj_ insert "Another is the buzzard
   (T. _Sar_); its back and tail are red". (_Cf._ Omission List
   under p. 500.)

   [2960] _See_ Omission List under p. 498.

   [2961] After "Tramontane", _add_ Its breast is less deeply
   black.

   [2962] The bird being black, its name cannot be translated
   "yellow-bird"; as noted on p. 373 _sarigh_ = thief; [_saragh_
   or _sarigh_ means a bird's song].

   [2963] For references to Nizami's text, I am indebted to Mr.
   Beveridge's knowledge of the poems.

   [2964] Cf. Mr. G. Murray's trs. (Euripides i, 86) suggesting
   that the Wooden Horse was a _sar-kob_.

   [2965] Abu'l-ghazi classes Manghit with Mughul tribes, Radloff
   with Turk tribes (_Recueils p. 325_), Erskine says, "modern
   Nogais."

_Stephen Austin and Sons, Ltd., Printers, Hertford._