TO A CHILD


  The greatest poem ever known
  Is one all poets have outgrown:
  The poetry, innate, untold,
  Of being only four years old.

  Still young enough to be a part
  Of Nature's great impulsive heart,
  Born comrade of bird, beast and tree
  And unselfconscious as the bee--

  And yet with lovely reason skilled
  Each day new paradise to build;
  Elate explorer of each sense,
  Without dismay, without pretence!

  In your unstained transparent eyes
  There is no conscience, no surprise:
  Life's queer conundrums you accept,
  Your strange divinity still kept.

  Being, that now absorbs you, all
  Harmonious, unit, integral,
  Will shred into perplexing bits,--
  Oh, contradictions of the wits!

  And Life, that sets all things in rhyme,
  May make you poet, too, in time--
  But there were days, O tender elf,
  When you were Poetry itself!




  TO A VERY YOUNG GENTLEMAN


  My child, what painful vistas are before you!
    What years of youthful ills and pangs and bumps--
  Indignities from aunts who "just adore" you,
    And chicken-pox and measles, croup and mumps!
  I don't wish to dismay you,--it's not fair to,
    Promoted now from bassinet to crib,--
  But, O my babe, what troubles flesh is heir to
    Since God first made so free with Adam's rib!

  Laboriously you will proceed with teething;
    When teeth are here, you'll meet the dentist's chair;
  They'll teach you ways of walking, eating, breathing,
    That stoves are hot, and how to brush your hair;
  And so, my poor, undaunted little stripling,
    By bruises, tears, and trousers you will grow,
  And, borrowing a leaf from Mr. Kipling,
    I'll wish you luck, and moralize you so:

  If you can think up seven thousand methods
    Of giving cooks and parents heart disease;
  Can rifle pantry-shelves, and then give death odds
    By water, fire, and falling out of trees;
  If you can fill your every boyish minute
    With sixty seconds' worth of mischief done,
  Yours is the house and everything that's in it,
    And, which is more, you'll be your father's son!


  [Illustration: _What years of youthful ills and pangs and bumps_--]




  TO AN OLD-FASHIONED POET

  (Lizette Woodworth Reese)


  Most tender poet, when the gods confer
    They save your gracile songs a nook apart,
  And bless with Time's untainted lavender
    The ageless April of your singing heart.

  You, in an age unbridled, ne'er declined
    The appointed patience that the Muse decrees,
  Until, deep in the flower of the mind
    The hovering words alight, like bridegroom bees.

  By casual praise or casual blame unstirred
    The placid gods grant gifts where they belong:
  To you, who understand, the perfect word,
    The recompensed necessities of song.




  BURNING LEAVES IN SPRING


  When withered leaves are lost in flame
    Their eddying ghosts, a thin blue haze,
  Blow through the thickets whence they came
    On amberlucent autumn days.

  The cool green woodland heart receives
    Their dim, dissolving, phantom breath;
  In young hereditary leaves
    They see their happy life-in-death.

  My minutes perish as they glow--
    Time burns my crazy bonfire through;
  But ghosts of blackened hours still blow,
    Eternal Beauty, back to you!




  BURNING LEAVES, NOVEMBER


  These are folios of April,
    All the library of spring,
  Missals gilt and rubricated
    With the frost's illumining.

  Ruthless, we destroy these treasures,
    Set the torch with hand profane--
  Gone, like Alexandrian vellums,
    Like the books of burnt Louvain!

  Yet these classics are immortal:
    O collectors, have no fear,
  For the publisher will issue
    New editions every year.




  A VALENTINE GAME

  (_For Two Players_)


  They have a game, thus played:
  He says unto his maid
      _What are those shining things_
      _So brown, so golden brown?_
  And she, in doubt, replies
      _How now, what shining things_
      _So brown?_

  But then, she coming near,
  To see more clear,
  He looks again, and cries
  (All startled with surprise)
      _Sweet wretch, they are your eyes,_
      _So brown, so brown!_

  The climax and the end consist
  In kissing, and in being kissed.




  FOR A BIRTHDAY


  At two years old the world he sees
    Must seem expressly made to please!
  Such new-found words and games to try,
  Such sudden mirth, he knows not why,
    So many curiosities!

  As life about him, by degrees
  Discloses all its pageantries
  He watches with approval shy
    At two years old.

  With wonders tired he takes his ease
  At dusk, upon his mother's knees:
  A little laugh, a little cry,
  Put toys to bed, then "seepy-bye"--
  The world is made of such as these
    At two years old.


  [Illustration: _A Birthday_]




  KEATS

  (1821-1921)


  When sometimes, on a moony night, I've passed
    A street-lamp, seen my doubled shadow flee,
  I've noticed how much darker, clearer cast,
    The full moon poured her silhouette of me.

  Just so of spirits. Beauty's silver light
    Limns with a ray more pure, and tenderer too:
  Men's clumsy gestures, to unearthly sight,
    Surpass the shapes they show by human view.

  On this brave world, where few such meteors fell,
    Her youngest son, to save us, Beauty flung.
  He suffered and descended into hell--
    And comforts yet the ardent and the young.

  Drunken of moonlight, dazed by draughts of sky,
    Dizzy with stars, his mortal fever ran:
  His utterance a moon-enchanted cry
    Not free from folly--for he too was man.

  And now and here, a hundred years away,
    Where topless towers shadow golden streets,
  The young men sit, nooked in a cheap cafA(C),
    Perfectly happy ... talking about Keats.




  TO H. F. M.

  A SONNET IN SUNLIGHT


  This is a day for sonnets: Oh how clear
    Our splendid cliffs and summits lift the gaze--
  If all the perfect moments of the year
    Were poured and gathered in one sudden blaze,
    Then, then perhaps, in some endowered phrase
  My flat strewn words would rise and come more near
    To tell of you. Your beauty and your praise
  Would fall like sunlight on this paper here.

  Then I would build a sonnet that would stand
    Proud and perennial on this pale bright sky;
  So tall, so steep, that it might stay the hand
    Of Time, the dusty wrecker. He would sigh
  To tear my strong words down. And he would say:
  "That song he built for her, one summer day."




  QUICKENING


  Such little, puny things are words in rhyme:
    Poor feeble loops and strokes as frail as hairs;
  You see them printed here, and mark their chime,
    And turn to your more durable affairs.
    Yet on such petty tools the poet dares
  To run his race with mortar, bricks and lime,
    And draws his frail stick to the point, and stares
  To aim his arrow at the heart of Time.

  Intangible, yet pressing, hemming in,
    This measured emptiness engulfs us all,
  And yet he points his paper javelin
    And sees it eddy, waver, turn, and fall,
  And feels, between delight and trouble torn,
  The stirring of a sonnet still unborn.




  AT A WINDOW SILL


  _To write a sonnet needs a quiet mind...._
  I paused and pondered, tried again. _To write...._

  Raising the sash, I breathed the winter night:
  Papers and small hot room were left behind.
  Against the gusty purple, ribbed and spined
  With golden slots and vertebrA| of light
  Men's cages loomed. Down sliding from a height
  An elevator winked as it declined.

  Coward! There is no quiet in the brain--
  If pity burns it not, then beauty will:
  Tinder it is for every blowing spark.
  Uncertain whether this is bliss or pain
  The unresting mind will gaze across the sill
  From high apartment windows, in the dark.




  THE RIVER OF LIGHT

  I. Broadway, 103rd to 96th.


  Lights foam and bubble down the gentle grade:
  Bright shine chop sueys and rA'tisseries;
  In pink translucence glowingly displayed
  See camisole and stocking and chemise.
  Delicatessen windows full of cheese--
  Above, the chimes of church-bells toll and fade--
  And then, from off some distant Palisade
  That gluey savor on the Jersey breeze!

  The burning bulbs, in green and white and red,
  Spell out a _Change of Program Sun., Wed., Fri._,
  A clicking taxi spins with ruby spark.
  There is a sense of poising near the head
  Of some great flume of brightness, flowing by
  To pour in gathering torrent through the dark.




  THE RIVER OF LIGHT

  II. Below 96th


  The current quickens, and in golden flow
  Hurries its flotsam downward through the night--
  Here are the rapids where the undertow
  Whirls endless motors in a gleaming flight.
  From blazing tributaries, left and right,
  Influent streams of blue and amber grow.
  Columbus Circle eddies: all below
  Is pouring flame, a gorge of broken light.

  See how the burning river boils in spate,
  Channeled by cliffs of insane jewelry,
  Painting a rosy roof on cloudy air--
  And just about ten minutes after eight,
  Tossing a surf of color to the sky
  It bursts in cataracts upon Times Square!




  OF HER GLORIOUS MADNESS


  The city's mad: through her prodigious veins
  What errant, strange, eccentric humors thrill:
  Day, when her cataracts of sunlight spill--
  Night, golden-panelled with her window panes;
  The toss of wind-blown skirts; and who can drill
  Forever his fierce heart with checking reins?
  Cruel and mad, my statisticians say--
  Ah, but she raves in such a gallant way!

  Brave madness, built for beauty and the sun--
  In such a town who can be sane? Not I.
  Of clashing colors all her moods are spun--
  A scarlet anger and a golden cry.
  This frantic town where madcap mischiefs run
  They ask to take the veil, and be a nun!




  IN AN AUCTION ROOM

  (_Letter of John Keats to Fanny Browne, Anderson Galleries,_
  _March 15, 1920._)

  To Dr. A. S. W. Rosenbach.


  _How about this lot?_ said the auctioneer;
  _One hundred, may I say, just for a start?_
  Between the plum-red curtains, drawn apart,
  A written sheet was held.... And strange to hear
  (Dealer, would I were steadfast as thou art)
  The cold quick bids. (_Against you in the rear!_)
  The crimson salon, in a glow more clear
  Burned bloodlike purple as the poet's heart.

  Song that outgrew the singer! Bitter Love
  That broke the proud hot heart it held in thrall;
  Poor script, where still those tragic passions move--
  _Eight hundred bid: fair warning: the last call:_
  The soul of Adonais, like a star....
  _Sold for eight hundred dollars--Doctor R.!_




  EPITAPH FOR A POET WHO WROTE NO POETRY

  "It is said that a poet has died young in the breast
of the most stolid."--Robert Louis Stevenson.


  What was the service of this poet? He
  Who blinked the blinding dazzle-rays that run
  Where life profiles its edges to the sun,
  And still suspected much he could not see.
  Clay-stopped, yet in his taciturnity
  There lay the vein of glory, known to none;
  And moods of secret smiling, only won
  When peace and passion, time and sense, agree.

  Fighting the world he loved for chance to brood,
  Ignorant when to embrace, when to avoid
  His loves that held him in their vital clutch--
  This was his service, his beatitude;
  This was the inward trouble he enjoyed
  Who knew so little, and who felt so much.




  SONNET BY A GEOMETER

  THE CIRCLE


  Few things are perfect: we bear Eden's scar;
  Yet faulty man was godlike in design
  That day when first, with stick and length of twine,
  He drew me on the sand. Then what could mar
  His joy in that obedient mystic line;
  And then, computing with a zeal divine,
  He called IEuro 3-point-14159
  And knew my lovely circuit 2 IEuro r!

  A circle is a happy thing to be--
  Think how the joyful perpendicular
  Erected at the kiss of tangency
  Must meet my central point, my avatar!
  They talk of 14 points: yet only 3
  Determine every circle: =Q. E. D.=




  TO A VAUDEVILLE TERRIER SEEN ON A LEASH, IN THE PARK


  Three times a day--at two, at seven, at nine--
  O terrier, you play your little part:
  Absurd in coat and skirt you push a cart,
  With inner anguish walk a tight-rope line.
  Up there, before the hot and dazzling shine
  You must be rigid servant of your art,
  Nor watch those fluffy cats--your doggish heart
  Might leap and then betray you with a whine!

  But sometimes, when you've faithfully rehearsed,
  Your trainer takes you walking in the park,
  Straining to sniff the grass, to chase a frog.
  The leash is slipped, and then your joy will burst--
  Adorable it is to run and bark,
  To be--alas, how seldom--just a dog!


  [Illustration: _You must be rigid servant of your art!_]




  TO AN OLD FRIEND

  (For Lloyd Williams.)


  I like to dream of some established spot
  Where you and I, old friend, an evening through
  Under tobacco's fog, streaked gray and blue,
  Might reconsider laughters unforgot.
  Beside a hearth-glow, golden-clear and hot,
  I'd hear you tell the oddities men do.
  The clock would tick, and we would sit, we two--
  Life holds such meetings for us, does it not?

  Happy are men when they have learned to prize
  The sure unvarnished virtue of their friends,
  The unchanged kindness of a well-known face:
  On old fidelities our world depends,
  And runs a simple course in honest wise,
  Not a mere taxicab shot wild through space!




  TO A BURLESQUE SOUBRETTE


  Upstage the great high-shafted beefy choir
    Squawked in 2000 watts of orange glare--
    You came, and impudent and deuce-may-care
  Danced where the gutter flamed with footlight fire.

  Flung from the roof, spots red and yellow burned
    And followed you. The blatant brassy clang
    Of instruments drowned out the words you sang,
  But goldenly you capered, twirled and turned.

  Boyish and slender, child-limbed, quick and proud,
    A sprite of irresistible disdain,
    Fair as a jonquil in an April rain,
  You seemed too sweet an imp for that dull crowd....

  And then, behind the scenes, I heard you say,
  "_O Gawd, I got a hellish cold to-day!_"


  [Illustration:

  _You came, and impudent and deuce-may-care_
  _Danced where the gutter flamed with footlight fire._]




  THOUGHTS WHILE PACKING A TRUNK


  The sonnet is a trunk, and you must pack
    With care, to ship frail baggage far away;
    The octet is the trunk; sestet, the tray;
  Tight, but not overloaded, is the knack.
  First, at the bottom, heavy thoughts you stack,
    And in the chinks your adjectives you lay--
    Your phrases, folded neatly as you may,
  Stowing a syllable in every crack.

  Then, in the tray, your daintier stuff is hid:
    The tender quatrain where your moral sings--
  Be careful, though, lest as you close the lid
    You crush and crumple all these fragile things.
  Your couplet snaps the hasps and turns the key--
  Ship to The Editor, marked C. O. D.




  STREETS


  I have seen streets where strange enchantment broods:
  Old ruddy houses where the morning shone
  In seemly quiet on their tranquil moods,
  Across the sills white curtains outward blown.
  Their marble steps were scoured as white as bone
  Where scrubbing housemaids toiled on wounded knee--
  And yet, among all streets that I have known
  These placid byways give least peace to me.

  In such a house, where green light shining through
  (From some back garden) framed her silhouette
  I saw a girl, heard music blithely sung.
  She stood there laughing, in a dress of blue,
  And as I went on, slowly, there I met
  An old, old woman, who had once been young.




  TO THE ONLY BEGETTER

  I


  I have no hope to make you live in rhyme
  Or with your beauty to enrich the years--
  Enough for me this now, this present time;
  The greater claim for greater sonneteers.
  But O how covetous I am of NOW--
  Dear human minutes, marred by human pains--
  I want to know your lips, your cheek, your brow,
  And all the miracles your heart contains,
  I wish to study all your changing face,
  Your eyes, divinely hurt with tenderness;
  I hope to win your dear unstinted grace
  For these blunt rhymes and what they would express.
  Then may you say, when others better prove:--
  "_Theirs for their style I'll read, his for his love._"




  TO THE ONLY BEGETTER

  II


  When all my trivial rhymes are blotted out,
  Vanished our days, so precious and so few,
  If some should wonder what we were about
  And what the little happenings we knew:
  I wish that they might know how, night by night,
  My pencil, heavy in the sleepy hours,
  Sought vainly for some gracious way to write
  How much this love is ours, and only ours.
  How many evenings, as you drowsed to sleep,
  I read to you by tawny candle-glow,
  And watched you down the valley dim and deep
  Where poppies and the April flowers grow.
  Then knelt beside your pillow with a prayer,
  And loved the breath of pansies in your hair.




  PEDOMETER


  My thoughts beat out in sonnets while I walk,
  And every evening on the homeward street
  I find the rhythm of my marching feet
  Throbs into verses (though the rhyme may balk).
  I think the sonneteers were walking men:
  The form is dour and rigid, like a clamp,
  But with the swing of legs the tramp, tramp, tramp
  Of syllables begins to thud, and then--
  Lo! while you seek a rhyme for _hook_ or _crook_
  Vanished your shabby coat, and you are kith
  To all great walk-and-singers--Meredith,
  And Shakespeare, Wordsworth, Keats, and Rupert Brooke!
  Free verse is poor for walking, but a sonnet--
  O marvellous to stride and brood upon it!




  HOSTAGES

  "He that hath wife and children hath given
hostages to fortune."--BACON.


  Aye, Fortune, thou hast hostage of my best!
  I, that was once so heedless of thy frown,
    Have armed thee cap-A -pie to strike me down,
  Have given thee blades to hold against my breast.
  My virtue, that was once all self-possessed,
    Is parceled out in little hands, and brown
    Bright eyes, and in a sleeping baby's gown:
  To threaten these will put me to the test.

  Sure, since there are these pitiful poor chinks
    Upon the makeshift armor of my heart,
      For thee no honor lies in such a fight!
  And thou wouldst shame to vanquish one, me-thinks,
    Who came awake with such a painful start
      To hear the coughing of a child at night.


  [Illustration: _Hostages._]




  ARS DURA


  How many evenings, walking soberly
  Along our street all dappled with rich sun,
  I please myself with words, and happily
  Time rhymes to footfalls, planning how they run;
  And yet, when midnight comes, and paper lies
  Clean, white, receptive, all that one can ask,
  Alas for drowsy spirit, weary eyes
  And traitor hand that fails the well loved task!

  Who ever learned the sonnet's bitter craft
  But he had put away his sleep, his ease,
  The wine he loved, the men with whom he laughed
  To brood upon such thankless tricks as these?
  And yet, such joy does in that craft abide
  He greets the paper as the groom the bride!




  O. HENRY--APOTHECARY

  ("O. Henry" once worked in a drug-store in Greensboro, N.C.)


  Where once he measured camphor, glycerine,
  Quinine and potash, peppermint in bars,
  And all the oils and essences so keen
  That druggists keep in rows of stoppered jars--
  Now, blender of strange drugs more volatile,
  The master pharmacist of joy and pain
  Dispenses sadness tinctured with a smile
  And laughter that dissolves in tears again.

  O brave apothecary! You who knew
  What dark and acid doses life prefers
  And yet with friendly face resolved to brew
  These sparkling potions for your customers--
  In each prescription your Physician writ
  You poured your rich compassion and your wit!




  FOR THE CENTENARY OF KEATS'S SONNET (1816)

  "On First Looking Into Chapman's Homer."


  I knew a scientist, an engineer,
  Student of tensile strengths and calculus,
  A man who loved a cantilever truss
  And always wore a pencil on his ear.
  My friend believed that poets all were queer,
  And literary folk ridiculous;
  But one night, when it chanced that three of us
  Were reading Keats aloud, he stopped to hear.

  Lo, a new planet swam into his ken!
  His eager mind reached for it and took hold.
  Ten years are by: I see him now and then,
  And at alumni dinners, if cajoled,
  He mumbles gravely, to the cheering men:--
  _Much have I travelled in the realms of gold._




  TWO O'CLOCK


  Night after night goes by: and clocks still chime
    And stars are changing patterns in the dark,
  And watches tick, and over-puissant Time
    Benumbs the eager brain. The dogs that bark,
  The trains that roar and rattle in the night,
    The very cats that prowl, all quiet find
  And leave the darkness empty, silent quite:
    Sleep comes to chloroform the fretting mind.

  So all things end: and what is left at last?
    Some scribbled sonnets tossed upon the floor,
  A memory of easy days gone past,
    A run-down watch, a pipe, some clothes we wore--
  And in the darkened room I lean to know
    How warm her dreamless breath does pause and flow.




  THE COMMERCIAL TRAVELLER


  Ah very sweet! If news should come to you
  Some afternoon, while waiting for our eve,
  That the great Manager had made me leave
  To travel on some territory new;
  And that, whatever homeward winds there blew,
  I could not touch your hand again, nor heave
  The logs upon our hearth and bid you weave
  Some wistful tale before the flames that grew....

  Then, when the sudden tears had ceased to blind
  Your pansied eyes, I wonder if you could
  Remember rightly, and forget aright?
  Remember just your lad, uncouthly good,
  Forgetting when he failed in spleen or spite?
  Could you remember him as always kind?




  THE WEDDED LOVER


  I read in our old journals of the days
  When our first love was April-sweet and new,
  How fair it blossomed and deep-rooted grew
  Despite the adverse time; and our amaze
  At moon and stars and beauty beyond praise
  That burgeoned all about us: gold and blue
  The heaven arched us in, and all we knew
  Was gentleness. We walked on happy ways.

  They said by now the path would be more steep,
  The sunsets paler and less mild the air;
  Rightly we heeded not: it was not true.
  We will not tell the secret--let it keep.
  I know not how I thought those days so fair
  These being so much fairer, spent with you.




  TO YOU, REMEMBERING THE PAST


  When we were parted, sweet, and darkness came,
  I used to strike a match, and hold the flame
  Before your picture and would breathless mark
  The answering glimmer of the tiny spark
  That brought to life the magic of your eyes,
  Their wistful tenderness, their glad surprise.

  Holding that mimic torch before your shrine
  I used to light your eyes and make them mine;
  Watch them like stars set in a lonely sky,
  Whisper my heart out, yearning for reply;
  Summon your lips from far across the sea
  Bidding them live a twilight hour with me.

  Then, when the match was shrivelled into gloom,
  Lo--you were with me in the darkened room.




  CHARLES AND MARY

  (December 27, 1834.)


  Lamb died just before I left town, and Mr. Ryle of
the E. India House, one of his extors., notified it to me....
He said Miss L. was resigned and composed at the
event, but it was from her malady, then in mild type, so
that when she saw her brother dead, she observed on his
beauty when asleep and apprehended nothing further.

  --Letter of John Rickman, 24 January, 1835.


  I hear their voices still: the stammering one
  Struggling with some absurdity of jest;
  Her quiet words that puzzle and protest
  Against the latest outrage of his fun.
  So wise, so simple--has she never guessed
  That through his laughter, love and terror run?
  For when her trouble came, and darkness pressed,
  He smiled, and fought her madness with a pun.

  Through all those years it was his task to keep
  Her gentle heart serenely mystified.
  If Fate's an artist, this should be his pride--
  When, in that Christmas season, he lay dead,
  She innocently looked. "I always said
  That Charles is really handsome when asleep."




  TO A GRANDMOTHER


  At six o'clock in the evening,
    The time for lullabies,
  My son lay on my mother's lap
    With sleepy, sleepy eyes!
  (_O drowsy little manny boy,_
   _With sleepy, sleepy eyes!_)

  I heard her sing, and rock him,
    And the creak of the swaying chair,
  And the old dear cadence of the words
    Came softly down the stair.

  And all the years had vanished,
    All folly, greed, and stain--
  The old, old song, the creaking chair,
    The dearest arms again!
  (_O lucky little manny boy,_
   _To feel those arms again!_)




  DIARISTS


  They catalogue their minutes: Now, now, now,
    Is Actual, amid the fugitive;
  Take ink and pen (they say) for that is how
    We snare this flying life, and make it live.
  So to their little pictures, and they sieve
    Their happinesses: fields turned by the plough,
  The afterglow that summer sunsets give,
    The razor concave of a great ship's bow.

  O gallant instinct, folly for men's mirth!
    Type cannot burn and sparkle on the page.
  No glittering ink can make this written word
    Shine clear enough to speak the noble rage
  And instancy of life. All sonnets blurred
    The sudden mood of truth that gave them birth.




 THE LAST SONNET


  Suppose one knew that never more might one
  Put pen to sonnet, well loved task; that now
  These fourteen lines were all he could allow
  To say his message, be forever done;
  How he would scan the word, the line, the rhyme,
  Intent to sum in dearly chosen phrase
  The windy trees, the beauty of his days,
  Life's pride and pathos in one verse sublime.
  How bitter then would be regret and pang
  For former rhymes he dallied to refine,
  For every verse that was not crystalline....
  And if belike this last one feebly rang,
  Honor and pride would cast it to the floor
  Facing the judge with what was done before.




  THE SAVAGE


  Civilization causes me
  Alternate fits: disgust and glee.

  Buried in piles of glass and stone
  My private spirit moves alone,

  Where every day from eight to six
  I keep alive by hasty tricks.

  But I am simple in my soul;
  My mind is sullen to control.

  At dusk I smell the scent of earth,
  And I am dumb--too glad for mirth.

  I know the savors night can give,
  And then, and then, I live, I live!

  No man is wholly pure and free,
  For that is not his destiny,

  But though I bend, I will not break:
  And still be savage, for Truth's sake.

  God damns the easily convinced
  (Like Pilate, when his hands he rinsed).




  ST. PAUL'S AND WOOLWORTH


  I stood on the pavement
    Where I could admire
  Behind the brown chapel
    The cream and gold spire.

  Above, gilded Lightning
    Swam high on his ball--
  I saw the noon shadow
    The church of St. Paul.

  And was there a meaning?
    (My fancy would run),
  Saint Paul in the shadow,
    Saint Frank in the sun!




  ADVICE TO A CITY


  O city, cage your poets! Hem them in
    And roof them over from the April sky--
  Clatter them round with babble, ceaseless din,
    And drown their voices with your thunder cry.

  Forbid their free feet on the windy hills,
    And harness them to daily ruts of stone--
  (In florists' windows lock the daffodils)
    And never, never let them be alone!

  For they are curst, said poets, curst and lewd,
    And freedom gives their tongues uncanny wit,
  And granted silence, thought and solitude
    They (_absit omen!_) might make Song of it.

  So cage them in, and stand about them thick,
    And keep them busy with their daily bread;
  And should their eyes seem strange, ah, then be quick
    To interrupt them ere the word be said....

  For, if their hearts burn with sufficient rage,
    With wasted sunsets and frustrated youth,
  Some day they'll cry, on some disturbing page,
    The savage, sweet, unpalatable truth!




  THE TELEPHONE DIRECTORY


  No Malory of old romance,
    No Crusoe tale, it seems to me,
  Can equal in rich circumstance
    This telephone directory.

  No ballad of fair ladies' eyes,
    No legend of proud knights and dames,
  Can fill me with such bright surmise
    As this great book of numbered names!

  How many hearts and lives unknown,
    Rare damsels pining for a squire,
  Are waiting for the telephone
    To ring, and call them to the wire.

  Some wait to hear a loved voice say
    The news they will rejoice to know
  At Rome 2637 J
    Or Marathon 1450!

  And some, perhaps, are stung with fear
    And answer with reluctant tread:
  The message they expect to hear
    Means life or death or daily bread.

  A million hearts here wait our call,
    All naked to our distant speech--
  I wish that I could ring them all
    And have some welcome news for each!




  GREEN ESCAPE


  At three o'clock in the afternoon
    On a hot September day,
  I began to dream of a highland stream
    And a frostbit russet tree;
  Of the swashing dip of a clipper ship
    (White canvas wet with spray)
  And the swirling green and milk-foam clean
    Along her canted lee.

  I heard the quick staccato click
    Of the typist's pounding keys,
  And I had to brood of a wind more rude
    Than that by a motor fanned--
  And I lay inert in a flannel shirt
    To watch the rhyming seas
  Deploy and fall in a silver sprawl
    On a beach of sun-blanched sand.

  There is no desk shall tame my lust
    For hills and windy skies;
  My secret hope of the sea's blue slope
    No clerkly task shall dull;

  And though I print no echoed hint
    Of adventures I devise,
  My eyes still pine for the comely line
    Of an outbound vessel's hull.

  When I elope with an autumn day
    And make my green escape,
  I'll leave my pen to tamer men
    Who have more docile souls;
  For forest aisles and office files
    Have a very different shape,
  And it's hard to woo the ocean blue
    In a row of pigeon holes!


  [Illustration:

  _My eyes still pine for the comely line_
  _Of an outbound vessel's hull._]




  VESPER SONG FOR COMMUTERS

  (_Instead of "Marathon" the commuter may substitute_
  _the name of his favorite suburb_)


  The stars are kind to Marathon,
  How low, how close, they lean!
  They jostle one another
  And do their best to please--
  Indeed, they are so neighborly
  That in the twilight green
  One reaches out to pick them
  Behind the poplar trees.

  The stars are kind to Marathon,
  And one particular
  Bright planet (which is Vesper)
  Most lucid and serene,
  Is waiting by the railway bridge,
  The Good Commuter's Star,
  The Star of Wise Men coming home
  On time, at 6:15!




  THE ICE WAGON


  I'd like to split the sky that roofs us down,
  Break through the crystal lid of upper air,
  And tap the cool still reservoirs of heaven.
  I'd empty all those unseen lakes of freshness
  Down some vast funnel, through our stifled streets.

  I'd like to pump away the grit, the dust,
  Raw dazzle of the sun on garbage piles,
  The droning troops of flies, sharp bitter smells,
  And gush that bright sweet flood of unused air
  Down every alley where the children gasp.

  And then I'd take a fleet of ice wagons--
  Big yellow creaking carts, drawn by wet horses,--
  And drive them rumbling through the blazing slums.
  In every wagon would be blocks of coldness,
  Pale, gleaming cubes of ice, all green and silver,
  With inner veins and patterns, white and frosty;
  Great lumps of chill would drip and steam and shimmer,
  And spark like rainbows in their little fractures.

  And where my wagons stood there would be puddles,
  A wetness and a sparkle and a coolness.
  My friends and I would chop and splinter open
  The blocks of ice. Bare feet would soon come pattering,
  And some would wrap it up in Sunday papers,
  And some would stagger home with it in baskets,
  And some would be too gay for aught but sucking,
  Licking, crunching those fast melting pebbles,
  Gulping as they slipped down unexpected--
  Laughing to perceive that secret numbness
  Amid their small hot persons!

  At every stop would be at least one urchin
  Would take a piece to cool the sweating horses
  And hold it up against their silky noses--
  And they would start, and then decide they liked it.

  Down all the sun-cursed byways of the town
  Our wagons would be trailed by grimy tots,
  Their ragged shirts half off them with excitement!
  Dabbling toes and fingers in our leakage,
  A lucky few up sitting with the driver,
  All clambering and stretching grey-pink palms.

  And by the time the wagons were all empty
  Our arms and shoulders would be lame with chopping,
  Our backs and thighs pain-shot, our fingers frozen.
  But how we would recall those eager faces,
  Red thirsty tongues with ice-chips sliding on them,
  The pinched white cheeks, and their pathetic gladness.
  Then we would know that arms were made for aching--

  I wish to God that I could go tomorrow!




  AT A MOVIE THEATRE


  How well he spoke who coined the phrase
    _The picture palace!_ Aye, in sooth
  A palace, where men's weary days
    Are crowned with kingliness of youth.

  Strange palace! Crowded, airless, dim,
    Where toes are trod and strained eyes smart,
  We watch a wand of brightness limn
    The old heroics of the heart.

  Romance again hath us in thrall
    And Love is sweet and always true,
  And in the darkness of the hall
    Hands clasp--as they were meant to do.

  Remote from peevish joys and ills
    Our souls, _pro tem_, are purged and free:
  We see the sun on western hills,
    The crumbling tumult of the sea.

  We are the blond that maidens crave,
    Well balanced at a dozen banks;
  By sleight of hand we haste to save
    A brown-eyed life, nor stay for thanks!

  Alas, perhaps our instinct feels
    Life is not all it might have been,
  So we applaud fantastic reels
    Of shadow, cast upon a screen!




  SONNETS IN A LODGING HOUSE


  I

  Each morn she crackles upward, tread by tread,
    All apprehensive of some hideous sight:
  Perhaps the Fourth Floor Back, who reads in bed,
    Forgot his gas and let it burn all night--
  The Sweet Young Thing who has the middle room,
    She much suspects: for once some ink was spilled,
  And then the plumber, in an hour of gloom,
    Found all the bathroom pipes with tea-leaves filled.

  No League of Nations scheme can make her gay--
    She knows the rank duplicity of man;
  Some folks expect clean towels every day,
    They'll get away with murder if they can!
  She tacks a card (alas, few roomers mind it)
  _Please leave the tub as you would wish to find it!_


  II


  Men lodgers are the best, the Mrs. said:
  They don't use my gas jets to fry sardines,
  They don't leave red-hot irons on the spread,
  They're out all morning, when a body cleans.
  A man ain't so secretive, never cares
  What kind of private papers he leaves lay,
  So I can get a line on his affairs
  And dope out whether he is likely pay.
  But women! Say, they surely get my bug!
  They stop their keyholes up with chewing gum,
  Spill grease, and hide the damage with the rug,
  And fry marshmallows when their callers come.
  They always are behindhand with their rents--
  Take my advice and let your rooms to gents!


  [Illustration:

  _A man ain't so secretive, never cares_
  _What kind of private papers he leaves lay_--]




  THE MAN WITH THE HOE (PRESS)


  About these roaring cylinders
    Where leaping words and paper mate,
  A sudden glory moves and stirs--
    An inky cataract in spate!

  What voice for falsehood or for truth,
    What hearts attentive to be stirred--
  How dimly understood, in sooth,
    The power of the printed word!

  These flashing webs and cogs of steel
    Have shaken empires, routed kings,
  Yet never turn too fast to feel
    The tragedies of humble things.

  O words, be strict in honesty,
    Be just and simple and serene;
  O rhymes, sing true, or you will be
    Unworthy of this great machine!




  DO YOU EVER FEEL LIKE GOD?


  Across the court there rises the back wall
  Of the Magna Carta Apartments.
  The other evening the people in the apartment opposite
  Had forgotten to draw their curtains.
  I could see them dining: the well-blanched cloth,
  The silver and glass, the crystal water jug,
  The meat and vegetables; and their clean pink hands
  Outstretched in busy gesture.

  It was pleasant to watch them, they were so human;
  So gay, innocent, unconscious of scrutiny.
  They were four: an elderly couple,
  A young man, and a girl--with lovely shoulders
  Mellow in the glow of the lamp.
  They were sitting over coffee, and I could see their hands talking.

  At last the older two left the room.
  The boy and girl looked at each other....
  Like a flash, they leaned and kissed.

  Good old human race that keeps on multiplying!
  A little later I went down the street to the movies,
  And there I saw all four, laughing and joking together.
  And as I watched them I felt like God--
  Benevolent, all-knowing, and tender.




  RAPID TRANSIT

  (To Stephen Vincent BenA(C)t.)


  Climbing is easy and swift on Parnassus!
  Knocking my pipe out, I entered a bookshop;
  There found a book of verse by a young poet.
  Comrades at once, how I saw his mind glowing!
  Saw in his soul its magnificent rioting--
  Then I ran with him on hills that were windy,
  Basked and laughed with him on sun-dazzled beaches,
  Glutted myself on his green and blue twilights,
  Watched him disposing his planets in patterns,
  Tumbling his colors and toys all before him.
  I questioned life with him, his pulses my pulses;
  Doubted his doubts, too, and grieved for his anguishes.
  Salted long kinship and knew him from boy-hood--
  Pulled out my own sun and stars from my knapsack,
  Trying my trinkets with those of his finding--
  _And as I left the bookshop_
  _My pipe was still warm in my hand._




  CAUGHT IN THE UNDERTOW


  Colin, worshipping some frail,
    By self-deprecation sways her:
  Calls himself unworthy male,
    Hardly even fit to praise her.

  But this tactic insincere
    In the upshot greatly grieves him
  When he finds the lovely dear
    Quite implicitly believes him.




  TO HIS BROWN-EYED MISTRESS

  _Who Rallied Him for Praising Blue Eyes in His Verses_


  If sometimes, in a random phrase
    (For variation in my ditty),
  I chance blue eyes, or gray, to praise
    And seem to intimate them pretty--

  It is because I do not dare
    With too unmixed reiteration
  To sing the browner eyes and hair
    That are my true intoxication.

  Know, then, that I consider brown
    For ladies' eyes, the only color;
  And deem all other orbs in town
    (Compared to yours), opaquer, duller.

  I pray, perpend, my dearest dear;
    While blue-eyed maids the praise were drinking,
  How insubstantial was their cheer--
    It was of yours that I was thinking!




  PEACE


  What is this Peace
    That statesmen sign?
  How I have sought
    To make it mine.

  Where groaning cities
    Clang and glow
  I hunted, hunted,
    Peace to know.

  And still I saw
    Where I passed by
  Discarded hearts,--
    Heard children cry.

  By willowed waters
    Brimmed with rain
  I thought to capture
    Peace again.

  I sat me down
    My Peace to hoard,
  But Beauty pricked me
    With a sword.

  For in the stillness
    Something stirred,
  And I was crippled
    For a word.

  There is no peace
    A man can find;
  The anguish sits
    His heart behind.

  The eyes he loves,
    The perfect breast,
  Too exquisite
    To give him rest.

  This is his curse
    Since brain began.
  His penalty
    For being man.

    May, 1919




  SONG, IN DEPRECATION
  OF PULCHRITUDE



  Beauty (so the poets say),
    Thou art joy and solace great;
  Long ago, and far away
    Thou art safe to contemplate,

  Beauty. But when now and here,
    Visible and close to touch,
  All too perilously near,
    Thou tormentest us too much!

  In a picture, in a song,
    In a novel's conjured scenes,
  Beauty, that's where you belong,
    Where perspective intervenes.

  But, my dear, in rosy fact
    Your appeal I have to shirk--
  You disturb me, and distract
    My attention from my work!




  MOUNTED POLICE


  Watchful, grave, he sits astride his horse,
    Draped with his rubber poncho, in the rain;
  He speaks the pungent lingo of "The Force,"
    And those who try to bluff him, try in vain.

  Inured to every mood of fool and crank,
    Shrewdly and sternly all the crowd he cons:
  The rain drips down his horse's shining flank,
    A figure nobly fit for sculptor's bronze.

  O knight commander of our city stress,
    Little you know how picturesque you are!
  We hear you cry to drivers who transgress:
    "_Say, that's a helva place to park your car!_"


  [Illustration: _Mounted Police._]




  TO HIS MISTRESS, DEPLORING THAT
  HE IS NOT AN ELIZABETHAN GALAXY


  Why did not Fate to me bequeath an Utterance Elizabethan?
  It would have been delight to me
  If _natus ante_ 1603.

  My stuff would not be soon forgotten
  If I could write like Harry Wotton.

  I wish that I could wield the pen
  Like William Drummond of Hawthornden.

  I would not fear the ticking clock
  If I were Browne of Tavistock.

  For blithe conceits I would not worry
  If I were Raleigh, or the Earl of Surrey.

  I wish (I hope I am not silly?)
  That I could juggle words like Lyly.

  I envy many a lyric champion,
  I. e., viz., e. g., Thomas Campion.

  I creak my rhymes up like a derrick,
  I ne'er will be a Robin Herrick.

  My wits are dull as an old Barlow--
  I wish that I were Christopher Marlowe.

  In short, I'd like to be Philip Sidney,
  Or some one else of that same kidney.

  For if I were, my lady's looks
    And all my lyric special pleading
  Would be in all the future books,
    And called, at college, _Required Reading_.




  THE INTRUDER


  As I sat, to sift my dreaming
    To the meet and needed word,
  Came a merry Interruption
    With insistence to be heard.

  Smiling stood a maid beside me,
    Half alluring and half shy;
  Soft the white hint of her bosom--
    Escapade was in her eye.

  "I must not be so invaded,"
    (In an anger then I cried)--
  "Can't you see that I am busy?
    Tempting creature, stay outside!

  "Pearly rascal, I am writing:
    I am now composing verse--
  Fie on antic invitation:
    Wanton, vanish--fly--disperse!

  "Baggage, in my godlike moment
    What have I to do with thee?"
  And she laughed as she departed--
    "I am Poetry," said she.




  TIT FOR TAT


  I often pass a gracious tree
    Whose name I can't identify,
  But still I bow, in courtesy
    It waves a bough, in kind reply.

  I do not know your name, O tree
    (Are you a hemlock or a pine?)
  But why should that embarrass me?
    Quite probably you don't know mine.


  [Illustration: _Courtesy_]




  SONG FOR A LITTLE HOUSE


  I'm glad our house is a little house,
    Not too tall nor too wide:
  I'm glad the hovering butterflies
    Feel free to come inside.

  Our little house is a friendly house.
    It is not shy or vain;
  It gossips with the talking trees,
    And makes friends with the rain.

  And quick leaves cast a shimmer of green
    Against our whited walls,
  And in the phlox, the courteous bees
    Are paying duty calls.




  THE PLUMPUPPETS


  When little heads weary have gone to their bed,
  When all the good nights and the prayers have been said,
  Of all the good fairies that send bairns to rest
  The little Plumpuppets are those I love best.

  _If your pillow is lumpy, or hot, thin and flat,_
  _The little Plumpuppets know just what they're at;_
  _They plump up the pillow, all soft, cool and fat--_
    _The little Plumpuppets plump-up it!_

  The little Plumpuppets are fairies of beds:
  They have nothing to do but to watch sleepy heads;
  They turn down the sheets and they tuck you in tight,
  And they dance on your pillow to wish you good night!

  No matter what troubles have bothered the day,
  Though your doll broke her arm or the pup ran away;
  Though your handies are black with the ink that was spilt--
  Plumpuppets are waiting in blanket and quilt.

  _If your pillow is lumpy, or hot, thin and flat,
  The little Plumpuppets know just what they're at;
  They plump up the pillow, all soft, cool and fat--
  The little Plumpuppets plump-up it!_


  [Illustration: _The Plumpuppets_]




  DANDY DANDELION


  When Dandy Dandelion wakes
    And combs his yellow hair,
  The ant his cup of dewdrop takes
    And sets his bed to air;
  The worm hides in a quilt of dirt
    To keep the thrush away,
  The beetle dons his pansy shirt--
    They know that it is day!

  And caterpillars haste to milk
    The cowslips in the grass;
  The spider, in his web of silk,
    Looks out for flies that pass.
  These humble people leap from bed,
    They know the night is done:
  When Dandy spreads his golden head
    They think he is the sun!

  Dear Dandy truly does not smell
    As sweet as some bouquets;
  No florist gathers him to sell,
    He withers in a vase;
  Yet in the grass he's emperor,
    And lord of high renown;
  And grateful little folk adore
    His bright and shining crown.




  THE HIGH CHAIR


  Grimly the parent matches wit and will:
  Now, Weesy, three more spoons! See Tom the cat,
  _He'd_ drink it. You want to be big and fat
  Like Daddy, don't you? (Careful now, don't spill!)
  Yes, Daddy'll dance, and blow smoke through his nose,
  But you must finish first. Come, drink it up--
  (_Splash_!) Oh, you _must_ keep both hands on the cup.
  All gone? Now for the prunes....
                               And so it goes.

  This is the battlefield that parents know,
  Where one small splinter of old Adam's rib
  Withstands an entire household offering spoons.
  No use to gnash your teeth. For she will go
  Radiant to bed, glossy from crown to bib
  With milk and cereal and a surf of prunes.




  LOVE AT FIRST SIGHT


  Not long ago I fell in love,
    But unreturned is my affection--
  The girl that I'm enamored of
    Pays little heed in my direction.

  I thought I knew her fairly well:
    In fact, I'd had my arm around her;
  And so it's hard to have to tell
    How unresponsive I have found her.

  For, though she is not frankly rude,
    Her manners quite the wrong way rub me:
  It seems to me ingratitude
    To let me love her--and then snub me!

  Though I'm considerate and fond,
    She shows no gladness when she spies me--
  She gazes off somewhere beyond
    And doesn't even recognize me.

  Her eyes, so candid, calm and blue,
    Seem asking if I can support her
  In the style appropriate to
    A lady like her father's daughter.

  Well, if I can't then no one can--
    And let me add that I intend to:
  She'll never know another man
    So fit for her to be a friend to.

  Not love me, eh? She better had!
    By Jove, I'll make her love me one day;
  For, don't you see, I am her Dad,
    And she'll be three weeks old on Sunday!


  [Illustration:

  _ ... It's hard to have to tell_
  _How unresponsive I have found her._]




  AUTUMN COLORS


  The chestnut trees turned yellow,
  The oak like sherry browned,
  The fir, the stubborn fellow,
  Stayed green the whole year round.

  But O the bonny maple
  How richly he does shine!
  He glows against the sunset
  Like ruddy old port wine.




  THE LAST CRICKET


  When the bulb of the moon with white fire fills
    And dead leaves crackle under the feet,
  When men roll kegs to the cider mills
    And chestnuts roast on every street;

  When the night sky glows like a hollow shell
    Of lustered emerald and pearl,
  The kilted cricket knows too well
    His doom. His tiny bagpipes skirl.

  Quavering under the polished stars
    In stubble, thicket, and frosty copse
  The cricket blows a few choked bars,
    And puts away his pipe--and stops.




  TO LOUISE

  (A Christmas Baby, Now One Year Old.)


  Undaunted by a world of grief
  You came upon perplexing days,
  And cynics doubt their disbelief
  To see the sky-stains in your gaze.

  Your sudden and inclusive smile
  And your emphatic tears, admit
  That you must find this life worth while,
  So eagerly you clutch at it!

  Your face of triumph says, brave mite,
  That life is full of love and luck--
  Of blankets to kick off at night,
  And two soft rose-pink thumbs to suck.

  O loveliest of pioneers
  Upon this trail of long surprise,
  May all the stages of the years
  Show such enchantment in your eyes!

  By parents' patient buttonings,
  And endless safety pins, you'll grow
  To ribbons, garters, hooks and things,
  Up to the Ultimate Trousseau--

  But never, in your dainty prime,
  Will you be more adored by me
  Than when you see, this Great First Time,
  Lit candles on a Christmas Tree!

    December, 1919.


  [Illustration:

  _... When you see, this Great First Time,_
  _Lit candles on a Christmas Tree!_]




  CHRISTMAS EVE


  Our hearts to-night are open wide,
  The grudge, the grief, are laid aside:
    The path and porch are swept of snow,
    The doors unlatched; the hearthstones glow--
  No visitor can be denied.

  All tender human homes must hide
  Some wistfulness beneath their pride:
    Compassionate and humble grow
      Our hearts to-night.

  Let empty chair and cup abide!
  Who knows? Some well-remembered stride
    May come as once so long ago--
    Then welcome, be it friend or foe!
  There is no anger can divide
      Our hearts to-night.




  EPITAPH ON THE PROOFREADER OF
  THE ENCYCLOPEDIA BRITANNICA


  Majestic tomes, you are the tomb
  Of Aristides Edward Bloom,
  Who labored, from the world aloof,
  In reading every page of proof.

  From A to And, from Aus to Bis
  Enthusiasm still was his;
  From Cal to Cha, from Cha to Con
  His soft-lead pencil still went on.

  But reaching volume Fra to Gib,
  He knew at length that he was sib
  To Satan; and he sold his soul
  To reach the section Pay to Pol.

  Then Pol to Ree, and Shu to Sub
  He staggered on, and sought a pub.
  And just completing Vet to Zym,
  The motor hearse came round for him.

  He perished, obstinately brave:
  They laid the Index on his grave.




  THE MUSIC BOX


  At six--long ere the wintry dawn--
    There sounded through the silent hall
  To where I lay, with blankets drawn
    Above my ears, a plaintive call.

  The Urchin, in the eagerness
    Of three years old, could not refrain;
  Awake, he straightway yearned to dress
    And frolic with his clockwork train.

  I heard him with a sullen shock.
    His sister, by her usual plan,
  Had piped us aft at 3 o'clock--
    I vowed to quench the little man.

  I leaned above him, somewhat stern,
    And spoke, I fear, with emphasis--
  Ah, how much better, parents learn,
    To seal one's censure with a kiss!

  Again the house was dark and still,
    Again I lay in slumber's snare,
  When down the hall I heard a trill,
    A tiny, tinkling, tuneful air--

  His music-box! His best-loved toy,
    His crib companion every night;
  And now he turned to it for joy
    While waiting for the lagging light.

  How clear, and how absurdly sad
    Those tingling pricks of sound unrolled;
  They chirped and quavered, as the lad
    His lonely little heart consoled.

  _Columbia, the Ocean's Gem_--
    (Its only tune) shrilled sweet and faint.
  He cranked the chimes, admiring them
    In vigil gay, without complaint.

  The treble music piped and stirred,
    The leaping air that was his bliss;
  And, as I most contritely heard,
    I thanked the all-unconscious Swiss!

  The needled jets of melody
    Rang slowlier and died away--
  The Urchin slept; and it was I
    Who lay and waited for the day.


  [Illustration: _The Music Box_]




  TO LUATH

  (_Robert Burns's Dog_)


  _"Darling Jean" was Jean Armour, a "comely country lass" whom Burns
met at a penny wedding at Mauchline. They chanced to be dancing in the
same quadrille when the poet's dog sprang to his master and almost
upset some of the dancers. Burns remarked that he wished he could get
any of the lasses to like him as well as his dog did.

  Some days afterward, Jean, seeing him pass as she was bleaching clothes
on the village green, called to him and asked him if he had yet got any
of the lasses to like him as well as his dog did.

  That was the beginning of an acquaintance that coloured all of
Burns's life._

  --NATHAN HASKELL DOLE.


  Well, Luath, man, when you came prancing
    All glee to see your Robin dancing,
  His partner's muslin gown mischancing
    You leaped for joy!
  And little guessed what sweet romancing
    You caused, my boy!

  With happy bark, that moment jolly,
  You frisked and frolicked, faithful collie;
  His other dog, old melancholy,
    Was put to flight--
  But what a tale of grief and folly
    You wagged that night!

  Ah, Luath, tyke, your bonny master
  Whose lyric pulse beat ever faster
  Each time he saw a lass and passed her
    His breast went bang!
  In many a woful heart's disaster
    He felt the pang!

  Poor Robin's heart, forever burning,
  Forever roving, ranting, yearning,
  From you that heart might have been learning
    To be less fickle!
  Might have been spared so many a turning
    And grievous prickle!

  Your collie heart held but one notion--
  When Robbie jigged in sprightly motion
  You ran to show your own devotion
    And gambolled too,
  And so that tempest on love's ocean
    Was due to you!

  Well, it is ower late for preaching
  And hearts are aye too hot for teaching!
  When Robin with his eye beseeching
    By greenside came,
  Jeanie--poor lass--forgot her bleaching
    And yours the blame!




  THOUGHTS ON REACHING LAND


  I had a friend whose path was pain--
    Oppressed by all the cares of earth
  Life gave him little chance to drain
    His secret cisterns of rich mirth.

  His work was hasty, harassed, vexed:
    His dreams were laid aside, perforce,
  Until--in this world, or the next....
    (His trade? Newspaper man, of course!)

  What funded wealth of tenderness,
    What ingots of the heart and mind
  He must uneasily repress
    Beneath the rasping daily grind.

  But now and then, and with my aid,
    For fear his soul be wholly lost,
  His devoir to the grape he paid
    To call soul back, at any cost!

  Then, liberate from discipline,
    Undrugged by caution and control,
  Through all his veins came flooding in
    The virtued passion of his soul!

  His spirit bared, and felt no shame:
    With holy light his eyes would shine--
  See Truth her acolyte reclaim
    After the second glass of wine!

  The self that life had trodden hard
    Aspired, was generous and free:
  The glowing heart that care had charred
    Grew flame, as it was meant to be.

  A pox upon the canting lot
    Who call the glass the Devil's shape--
  A greater pox where'er some sot
    Defiles the honor of the grape.

  Then look with reverence on wine
    That kindles human brains uncouth--
  There must be something part divine
    In aught that brings us nearer Truth!

  So--continently skull your fumes
    (Here let our little sermon end)
  And bless this X-ray that illumes
    The secret bosom of your friend!




  A SYMPOSIUM


  There was a Russian novelist
    Whose name was Solugubrious,
  The reading circles took him up,
    (They'd heard he was salubrious.)

  The women's club of Cripple Creek
    Soon held a kind of seminar
  To learn just what his message was--
    You know what bookworms women are.

  The tea went round. After five cups
    (You should have seen them bury tea)
  Dear Mrs. Brown said what she liked
    Was the great man's _sincerity_.

  Sweet Mrs. Jones (how free she was
    From all besetting vanity)
  Declared that she loved even more
    His broad and deep _humanity_.

  Good Mrs. Smith, though she disclaimed
    All thought of being critical,
  Protested that she found his work
    A wee bit _analytical_.

  But Mrs. Black, the President,
    Of wisdom found the pinnacle:
  She said, "Dear me, I always think
    Those Russians are so _cynical_."

  Well, poor old Solugubrious,
    It's true that they had heard of him;
  But neither Brown, Jones, Smith, nor Black
    Had ever read a word of him!


  [Illustration: _Solugubrious_]




  TO A TELEPHONE OPERATOR WHO
  HAS A BAD COLD


  How hoarse and husky in my ear
    Your usually cheerful chirrup:
  You have an awful cold, my dear--
    Try aspirin or bronchial syrup.

  When I put in a call to-day
    Compassion stirred my humane blood red
  To hear you faintly, sadly, say
    The number: _Burray Hill dide hudred!_

  I felt (I say) quick sympathy
    To hear you croak in the receiver--
  Will you be sorry too for me
    A month hence, when I have hay fever?




  NURSERY RHYMES FOR THE
  TENDER-HEARTED

  (Dedicated to Don Marquis.)


  I


  Scuttle, scuttle, little roach--
  How you run when I approach:
  Up above the pantry shelf.
  Hastening to secrete yourself.

  Most adventurous of vermin,
  How I wish I could determine
  How you spend your hours of ease,
  Perhaps reclining on the cheese.

  Cook has gone, and all is dark--
  Then the kitchen is your park:
  In the garbage heap that she leaves
  Do you browse among the tea leaves?

  How delightful to suspect
  All the places you have trekked:
  Does your long antenna whisk its
  Gentle tip across the biscuits?

  Do you linger, little soul,
  Drowsing in our sugar bowl?
  Or, abandonment most utter,
  Shake a shimmy on the butter?

  Do you chant your simple tunes
  Swimming in the baby's prunes?
  Then, when dawn comes, do you slink
  Homeward to the kitchen sink?

  Timid roach, why be so shy?
  We are brothers, thou and I.
  In the midnight, like yourself,
  I explore the pantry shelf!


  [Illustration:

  _In the midnight, like yourself,_
  _I explore the pantry shelf!_]




  NURSERY RHYMES FOR THE
  TENDER-HEARTED


  II


  Rockabye, insect, lie low in thy den,
  Father's a cockroach, mother's a hen.
  And Betty, the maid, doesn't clean up the sink,
  So you shall have plenty to eat and to drink.

  Hushabye, insect, behind the mince pies:
  If the cook sees you her anger will rise;
  She'll scatter poison, as bitter as gall,
  Death to poor cockroach, hen, baby and all.




  NURSERY RHYMES FOR THE
  TENDER-HEARTED


  III


  There was a gay henroach, and what do you think,
  She lived in a cranny behind the old sink--
  Eggshells and grease were the chief of her diet;
  She went for a stroll when the kitchen was quiet.

  She walked in the pantry and sampled the bread,
  But when she came back her old husband was dead:
  Long had he lived, for his legs they were fast,
  But the kitchen maid caught him and squashed him at last.




  NURSERY RHYMES FOR THE
  TENDER-HEARTED


  IV


  I knew a black beetle, who lived down a drain,
  And friendly he was though his manners were plain;
  When I took a bath he would come up the pipe,
  And together we'd wash and together we'd wipe.

  Though mother would sometimes protest with a sneer
  That my choice of a tub-mate was wanton and queer,
  A nicer companion I never have seen:
  He bathed every night, so he must have been clean.

  Whenever he heard the tap splash in the tub
  He'd dash up the drain-pipe and wait for a scrub,
  And often, so fond of ablution was he,
  I'd find him there floating and waiting for me.

  But nurse has done something that seems a great shame:
  She saw him there, waiting, prepared for a game:
  She turned on the hot and she scalded him sore
  And he'll never come bathing with me any more.




  THE TWINS


  Con was a thorn to brother Pro--
    On Pro we often sicked him:
  Whatever Pro would claim to know
    Old Con would contradict him!


  [Illustration: _The Twins_]




  A PRINTER'S MADRIGAL

  (_Extremely technical_)


  I'd like to have you meet my wife!
    I simply cannot keep from hinting
  I've never seen, in all my life,
    So fine a specimen of printing.

  Her type is not some =bold-face= font,
    Set solid. Nay! And I will say out
  That no typographer could want
    To see a better balanced layout.

  A nice proportion of white space
    There is for brown eyes to look large in,
  And not a feature in her face
    Comes anywhere too near the margin.

  Locked up with all her sweet display
    Her form will never pi. She's like a
  Corrected proof marked _stet, O. K._--
    And yet she loves me, fatface =Pica!=

  She has a fine one-column head,
    And like a comma curves each eyebrow--
  Her forehead has an extra lead
    Which makes her seem a trifle highbrow.

  Her nose, _italicized brevier_,
    Too lovely to describe by penpoint;
  Her mouth is set in _pearl_: her ear
    And chin are comely Caslon ten-point.

  Her cheeks (a pink parenthesis)
    Make my pulse beat 14-em measure,
  And such typography as this
    Would make =De Vinne= scream with pleasure.

  And so, of all typefounder chaps
    Her father's best, in my opinion;
  She is my NONPAREIL (IN CAPS)
    And I (in lower case) her _minion_.

  I hope you will not stand aloof
    Because my metaphors are shoppy;
  Of her devotion I've a proof--
    I tell the urchin, _Follow Copy_!




  THE POET ON THE HEARTH


  When fire is kindled on the dogs,
    But still the stubborn oak delays,
  Small embers laid above the logs
    Will draw them into sudden blaze.

  Just so the minor poet's part:
    (A greater he need not desire)
  The charcoals of his burning heart
    May light some Master into fire!




  O PRAISE ME NOT THE COUNTRY


  O praise me not the country--
  The meadows green and cool,
  The solemn glow of sunsets, the hidden silver pool!
      The city for my craving,
      Her lordship and her slaving,
      The hot stones of her paving
          For me, a city fool!

  O praise me not the leisure
  Of gardened country seats,
  The fountains on the terrace against the summer heats--
      The city for my yearning,
      My spending and my earning.
      Her winding ways for learning,
          Sing hey! the city streets!

  O praise me not the country,
  Her sycamores and bees,
  I had my youthful plenty of sour apple trees!
      The city for my wooing,
      My dreaming and my doing;
      Her beauty for pursuing,
          Her deathless mysteries.

  O praise me not the country,
  Her evenings full of stars,
  Her yachts upon the water with the wind among their spars--
      The city for my wonder,
      Her glory and her blunder,
      And O the haunting thunder
          Of the Elevated cars!


  [Illustration: Seascape]




  A STONE IN ST. PAUL'S GRAVEYARD

  (New York)


    _Here Lyes the Body of_
    _Iohn Jones the Son of_
    _Iohn Jones Who Departed_
    _This Life December the 13_
    _1768 Aged 4 Years & 4 Months & 2 Days_

  Here, where enormous shadows creep,
    He casts his childish shadow too:
  How small he seems, beneath the steep
    Great walls; his tender days, so few,
  Lovingly numbered, every one--
  John Jones, John Jones's little son.

  O sunlight on the Lightning's wings!
    Yet though our buildings skyward climb
  Our heartbreaks are but little things
    In the equality of Time.
  The sum of life, for all men's stones:
  He was John Jones, son of John Jones.




  THE MADONNA OF THE CURB


  On the curb of a city pavement,
    By the ash and garbage cans,
  In the stench and rolling thunder
    Of motor trucks and vans,
  There sits my little lady,
    With brave but troubled eyes,
  And in her arms a baby
    That cries and cries and cries.

  She cannot be more than seven;
    But years go fast in the slums,
  And hard on the pains of winter
    The pitiless summer comes.
  The wail of sickly children
    She knows; she understands
  The pangs of puny bodies,
    The clutch of small hot hands.

  In the deadly blaze of August,
    That turns men faint and mad,
  She quiets the peevish urchins

    By telling a dream she had--
  A heaven with marble counters,
    And ice, and a singing fan;
  And a God in white, so friendly,
    Just like the drug-store man.

  Her ragged dress is dearer
    Than the perfect robe of a queen!
  Poor little lass, who knows not
    The blessing of being clean.
  And when you are giving millions
    To Belgian, Pole and Serb,
  Remember my pitiful lady--
    Madonna of the Curb!


  [Illustration:

  _The wail of sickly children_
    _She knows; she understands_
  _The pangs of puny bodies,_
    _The clutch of small hot hands._]




  THE ISLAND


  _A song for England?_
    _Nay, what is a song for England?_

  Our hearts go by green-cliffed Kinsale
    Among the gulls' white wings,
  Or where, on Kentish forelands pale
    The lighthouse beacon swings:
  Our hearts go up the Mersey's tide,
    Come in on Suffolk foam--
  The blood that will not be denied
    Moves fast, and calls us home!

  Our hearts now walk a secret round
    On many a Cotswold hill,
  For we are mixed of island ground,
    The island draws us still:
  Our hearts may pace a windy turn
    Where Sussex downs are high,
  Or watch the lights of London burn,
    A bonfire in the sky!

  What is the virtue of that soil
    That flings her strength so wide?
  Her ancient courage, patient toil,
    Her stubborn wordless pride?
  A little land, yet loved therein
    As any land may be,
  Rejoicing in her discipline,
    The salt stress of the sea.

  Our hearts shall walk a Sherwood track,
    Our lips taste English rain,
  We thrill to see the Union Jack
    Across some deep-sea lane;
  Though all the world be of rich cost
    And marvellous with worth,
  Yet if that island ground were lost
    How empty were the earth!

  _A song for England?_
  _Lo, every word we speak's a song for England._




  SUNDAY NIGHT


  Two grave brown eyes, severely bent
    Upon a memorandum book--
  A sparkling face, on which are blent
    A hopeful and a pensive look;
  A pencil, purse, and book of checks
    With stubs for varying amounts--
  Elaine, the shrewdest of her sex,
    Is busy balancing accounts.

  Sedately, in the big armchair,
    She, all engrossed, the audit scans--
  Her pencil hovers here and there
    The while she calculates and plans;
  What's this? A faintly pensive frown
    Upon her forehead gathers now--
  Ah, does the butcher--heartless clown--
    Beget that shadow on her brow?


  A murrain on the tradesman churl
    Who caused this fair accountant's gloom!
  Just then--a baby's cry--my girl
    Arose and swiftly left the room.
  Then in her purse by stratagem
    I thrust some bills of small amounts--
  She'll think she had forgotten them,
    And smile again at her accounts!


  [Illustration:

  _Ah, does the butcher--heartless clown--_
    _Beget that shadow on her brow?_]



  ENGLAND, JULY 1913

  To Rupert Brooke


  O England, England ... that July
  How placidly the days went by!

  Two years ago (how long it seems)
  In that dear England of my dreams
  I loved and smoked and laughed amain
  And rode to Cambridge in the rain.
  A careless godlike life was there!
  To spin the roads with _Shotover_,
  To dream while punting on the Cam,
  To lie, and never give a damn
  For anything but comradeship
  And books to read and ale to sip,
  And shandygaff at every inn
  When _The Gorilla_ rode to Lynn!
  O world of wheel and pipe and oar
  In those old days before the War.

  O poignant echoes of that time!
  I hear the Oxford towers chime,
  The throbbing of those mellow bells
  And all the sweet old English smells--

  The Deben water, quick with salt,
  The Woodbridge brew-house and the malt;
  The Suffolk villages, serene
  With lads at cricket on the green,
  And Wytham strawberries, so ripe,
  And _Murray's Mixture_ in my pipe!

  In those dear days, in those dear days,
  All pleasant lay the country ways;
  The echoes of our stalwart mirth
  Went echoing wide around the earth
  And in an endless bliss of sun
  We lay and watched the river run.
  And you by Cam and I by Isis
  Were happy with our own devices.

  Ah, can we ever know again
  Such friends as were those chosen men,
  Such men to drink, to bike, to smoke with,
  To worship with, or lie and joke with?
  Never again, my lads, we'll see
  The life we led at twenty-three.
  Never again, perhaps, shall I
  Go flashing bravely down the High
  To see, in that transcendent hour,
  The sunset glow on Magdalen Tower.

  Dear Rupert Brooke, your words recall
  Those endless afternoons, and all
  Your Cambridge--which I loved as one
  Who was her grandson, not her son.
  O ripples where the river slacks
  In greening eddies round the "backs";
  Where men have dreamed such gallant things
  Under the old stone bridge at _King's_.
  Or leaned to feed the silver swans
  By the tennis meads at _John's_.
  O Granta's water, cold and fresh,
  Kissing the warm and eager flesh
  Under the willow's breathing stir--
  The bathing pool at _Grantchester_....
  What words can tell, what words can praise
  The burly savor of those days!

  Dear singing lad, those days are dead
  And gone for aye your golden head;
  And many other well-loved men
  Will never dine in Hall again.
  I too have lived remembered hours
  In Cambridge; heard the summer showers
  Make music on old _Heffer's_ pane
  While I was reading Pepys or Taine.
  Through _Trumpington_ and _Grantchester_

  I used to roll on _Shotover_;
  At _Hauxton Bridge_ my lamp would light
  And sleep in _Royston_ for the night.
  Or to _Five Miles from Anywhere_
  I used to scull; and sit and swear
  While wasps attacked my bread and jam
  Those summer evenings on the Cam.
  (O crispy English cottage-loaves
  Baked in ovens, not in stoves!
  O white unsalted English butter
  O satisfaction none can utter!)...

  To think that while those joys I knew
  In Cambridge, I did not know you.

    July, 1915.




 CASUALTY


  A well-sharp'd pencil leads one on to write:
  When guns are cocked, the shot is guaranteed;
  The primed occasion puts the deed in sight:
  Who steals a book who knows not how to read?

  Seeing a pulpit, who can silence keep?
  A maid, who would not dream her ta'en to wife?
  Men looking down from some sheer dizzy steep
  Have (quite impromptu) leapt, and ended life.




  A GRUB STREET RECESSIONAL


  O noble gracious English tongue
  Whose fibers we so sadly twist,
  For caitiff measures he has sung
  Have pardon on the journalist.

  For mumbled meter, leaden pun,
  For slipshod rhyme, and lazy word,
  Have pity on this graceless one--
  Thy mercy on Thy servant, Lord!

  The metaphors and tropes depart,
  Our little clippings fade and bleach:
  There is no virtue and no art
  Save in straightforward Saxon speech.

  Yet not in ignorance or spite,
  Nor with Thy noble past forgot
  We sinned: indeed we had to write
  To keep a fire beneath the pot.

  Then grant that in the coming time,
  With inky hand and polished sleeve,
  In lucid prose or honest rhyme
  Some worthy task we may achieve--

  Some pinnacled and marbled phrase,
  Some lyric, breaking like the sea,
  That we may learn, not hoping praise,
  The gift of Thy simplicity.




  PRELIMINARY INSTRUCTIONS FOR A
  FUNERAL SERVICE: BEING A
  POEM IN FOUR STANZAS


  Say this poor fool misfeatured all his days,
  And could not mend his ways;
  And say he trod
  Most heavily upon the corns of God.

  But also say that in his clabbered brain
  There was the essential pain--
  The idiot's vow
  To tell his troubled Truth, no matter how.

  Unhappy fool, you say, with pitiful air:
  Who was he, then, and where?
  Ah, you divine
  He lives in your heart, as he lives in mine.




  [Illustration: To bed]