NIGHTFALL

by

ANTHONY PRYDE







CHAPTER I


"Tea is ready, Bernard," said Laura Clowes, coming in from the
garden.

It was five o'clock on a June afternoon, but the hall was so dark
that she had to grope her way.  Wanhope was a large, old-fashioned
manor-house, a plain brick front unbroken except in the middle, where
its corniced roof was carried down by steps to an immense gateway of
weathered stone, carved with the escutcheon of the family and their
Motto: FORTIS ET FIDELIS. Wistarias rambled over both sides,
wreathing the stone window-frames in their grape-like clusters of
lilac bloom, and flagstones running from end to end, shallow, and so
worn that a delicate growth of stonecrop fringed them, shelved down
to a lawn.

Indoors in the great hall it was dark because floor and staircase
and wall and ceiling were all lined with Spanish chestnut-wood,
while the windows were full of Flemish glass in purple and sepia
and blue.  There was nothing to reflect a glint of light except a
collection of weapons of all ages which occupied the wall behind
a bare stone hearth; suits of inlaid armour, coats of chainmail
as flexible as silk, assegais and blowpipes, Bornean parangs and
Gurkha kukris, Abyssinian shotels with their double blades,
Mexican knives in chert and chalcedony, damascened swords and
automatic pistols, a Chinese bronze drum, a Persian mace of the
date of Rustum, and an Austrian cavalry helmet marked with a
bullet-hole and a stain.

Gradually, as her eyes grew used to the gloom Laura found her way
to her husband's couch.  She would have liked to kiss him, but
dared not: the narrow mocking smile, habitual on his lips, showed
no disposition to respond to advances.  Dressed in an ordinary
suit of Irish tweed, Bernard Clowes lay at full length in an easy
attitude, his hands in his pockets and his legs decently extended
as Barry, his male nurse, had left them twenty minutes ago: a
big, powerful man, well over six feet in height, permanently
bronze and darkly handsome, his immense shoulders still held back
so flat that his coat fitted without a wrinkle--but a cripple
since the war.

Laura Clowes too was tall and slightly sunburnt,  but thin for
her height, and rather plain except for her sweet eyes, her silky
brown hair, and--rarer gift!--the vague elegance which was a
prerogative of Selincourt women.  She rarely wore expensive
clothes, her maid Catherine made most of her indoor dresses,
and yet she could still hold her own, as in old days, among
women who shopped in the Rue de la Paix.  This afternoon, in her
silk muslin of the same shade as the trail of wistaria tucked
in where the frills crossed over her breast, she might have gone
astray out of the seventeenth century.

"Tea is in the parlour," said Mrs. Clowes. "Shall I wheel you
round through the garden?  It's a lovely day and the roses are
in their perfection, I counted eighty blooms on the old Frau
Karl.  I should like you to see her."

"I shouldn't.  But you can drag me into the parlour if you like,"
said Bernard Clowes--a grudging concession: more often than not
he ate his food in the hall.  His wife pushed his couch, which
ran on cycle wheels and so lightly that a child could propel it,
into her sitting-room and as near as she dared to the French
windows that opened without step or ledge on the terrace
flagstones and the verdure of the lawn.  Out of doors, for some
obscure reason, he refused to go, though the garden was sweet
with the scent of clover and the gold sunlight was screened by
the milky branches of a great acacia.  Still he was in the fresh
air, and Laura hastily busied herself with her flowered Dresden
teacups, pretending unconsciousness because if she had shown the
slightest satisfaction he would probably have demanded to be
taken back. Her mild duplicity was of course mere make believe:
the two understood each other only too well: but it was wiser to
keep a veil drawn in case Bernard Clowes should suddenly return
to his senses.  For this reason Laura always spoke as if his
choice of a coffined life were only a day or two old.  Had he
said--as he might say at any moment--"Laura, I should like to
go for a drive," Laura would have been able without inconsistency
to reply, "Yes, dear: what time shall I order the car?" as though
they had been driving together every evening of their married
life.

"What have you been doing today?" Clowes  asked, sipping his tea
and looking out of the window.  He had shut himself up in his
bedroom with a headache and his wife had not seen him since the
night before.

"This morning I motored into Amesbury to change the library
books and to enquire after Canon Bodington. I saw Mrs. Bodington
and Phoebe and George--,"

"Who's George?"

"Their son in the Navy, don't you remember?  The Sapphire is in
dry dock--"

"How old is he?"

"Nineteen," said Mrs. Clowes.

"Oh.  Go on."

"I don't remember doing anything else except get some stamps at
the post office.  Stay, now I come to think of it, I met Mr.
Maturin, but I didn't  speak to him.  He only took off his hat to
me, Bernard. He is seventy-four."

"Dull sort of morning you seem to have had," said Bernard Clowes.

"What did you do after lunch?"

"With a great want of intelligence, I strolled down to Wharton to
see Yvonne, but she was out. They had all gone over to the big
garden party at Temple Brading.  I forgot about it--"

"Why weren't you asked?"

"I was asked but I didn't care to go.  Now that I am no longer in
my first youth these expensive crushes cease to amuse me."
Bernard gave an incredulous sniff but said nothing.  "On my way
home I looked in at the vicarage to settle the day for the school
treat.  Isabel has made Jack Bendish promise to help with the
cricket, and she seems to be under the impression that Yvonne
will join in the games.  I can hardly believe that anything will
induce Yvonne to play Nuts and May, but if it is to be done that
energetic child will do it.  No, I didn't see Val or Mr.
Stafford.  Val was over at Red Springs and Mr. Stafford was
preparing his sermon."

"Have you written any letters?"

"I wrote to father and sent him fifty pounds.  It was out of my
own allowance. He seems even harder up than usual.  I'm afraid
the latest system is not profitable."

"I should not think it would be, for Mr. Selincourt," replied
Bernard Clowes politely. "Monte Carlo never does pay unless one's
pretty sharp, and your father hasn't the brains of a flea.  Was
that the only letter you wrote?"

"Yes--will you have some more bread and butter?"

"And what letters did you get?"  Clowes pursued his leisured
catechism while he helped himself daintily to a fragile sandwich.
This was all part of the daily routine, and Laura, if she felt
any resentment, had long since grown out of showing it.

"One from Lucian.  He's in Paris--"

"With--?"

"No one, so far as I know," Laura replied, not affecting to
misunderstand his jibe.  Lucian Selincourt was her only brother
and very dear to her, but there was no denying that his career
had its seamy side.  He was not, like her father, a family
skeleton--he had never been warned off the Turf: but he was
rarely solitary and never out of debt. "Poor Lucian, he's hard
up too. I wish I could send him fifty pounds, but if I did he'd
send it back."

"What other letters did you have?"

Mrs. Clowes had had a sheaf of unimportant notes, which she was
made to describe in detail, her husband listening in his hard
patience.  When they were exhausted Laura went on in a hesitating
voice, "And there was one more that I want to consult you about.
I know you'll say we can't have him, but I hardly liked to refuse
on my own imitative, as he's your cousin, not mine.  It was from
Lawrence Hyde, offering to come here for a day or two."

"Lawrence Hyde?  Why, I haven't seen or heard of him for years,"
Clowes raised his head with a gleam of interest.  "I remember him
well enough though.  Good-looking chap, six foot two or three and
as strong as a horse.  Well-built chap, too.  Women ran after
him.  I haven't seen him since we were in the trenches together."

"Yes, Bernard.  Don't you recollect his going to see you in
hospital?"

"So he did, by Jove!  I'd forgotten that.  He'd ten days' leave
and he chucked one of them away to look me up.  Not such a bad
sort, old Lawrence."

"I liked him very much," said Laura quietly.

"Wants to come to us, does he?  Why?  Where does he write from?"

"Paris.  It seems he ran across Lucian at Auteuil--"

"Let me see the letter."

Laura give it over.  "Calls you Laura, does he?" Clowes read it
aloud with a running commentary of his own.  "H'm: pleasant
relationship, cousins-in-law. . . 'Met Lucian . . . chat about
old times'--is he a bird of Lucian's feather, I wonder?  He
wasn't keen on women in the old days, but people change a lot
in ten years . . . 'Like to come and see us while he's in
England . . . run over for the day'--bosh, he knows we should
have to put him up for a couple of nights! . . . 'Sorry to hear
such a bad account of Bernard'--Very kind of him, does he want
a cheque?  Hallo!  'Lucian says he is leading you a deuce of a
life.' Upon my word!"  He lowered the letter and burst out
laughing--the first hearty laugh she had heard from him for many
a long day.  Laura, who had given him the letter in fear and
trembling and only because she could not help herself, was
exceedingly relieved and joined in merrily.  But while she was
laughing she had to wink a sudden moisture from her eyelashes:
this glimpse of the natural self of the man she had married went
to her heart.  "Is it true?" he said, still with that friendly
twinkle in his eyes.  "Do I lead you the deuce of a life, poor
old Laura?"

"I don't mind," said Laura, smiling back at him.  She could have
been more eloquent, but she dared not.  Bernard's moods required
delicate handling.

"He's a cool hand anyhow to write like that to a woman about her
husband.  But Lawrence always was a cool hand. I remember the
turn-up we had in the Farringay woods when I was twelve and he
was fourteen.  He nearly murdered me. But I paid him out," said
Bernard in a glow of pleasurable reminiscence.  "He was too
heavy for me. Old Andrew Hyde came and dragged him off.  But
I marked him: he was banished from his mother's drawingroom for
a week--not that he minded that much . . . Aunt Helen was a
pretty woman.  Gertrude and I never could think why she married
Uncle Andrew, but I believe they got on all right, though she was
a big handsome woman--a Clowes all over--while old Andrew
looked like any little scrub out of Houndsditch.  Never can tell
why people marry each other, can you?" Bernard was becoming
philosophical.  I suppose if you go to the bottom it's Nature
that takes them by the scruff of the neck and gives them a gentle
shove and says 'More babies, please.' She doesn't always bring it
off though, witness you and me, my love.--  But I say, Laura, I
like the way you handed over that letter!  Thought it would do me
good, didn't you?  Look here, I can't have my character taken
away behind my back!  You tell him to come and judge for
himself."

"You'll get very tired of him, Berns," said Laura doubtfully.
"You always say you get sick of people in twenty-four hours: and
I can't take him entirely off your hands--you'll have to do your
share of entertaining him.  He's your cousin, not mine, and it'll
be you he comes to see."

"I shan't see any more of him than I want to, my dear, on that
you may depend," said Bernard with easy emphasis.  "If he
invites himself he'll have to put with what he can get.  But
I can stand a good deal of him.  Regimental shop is always
amusing, and Lawrence will know heaps of fellows I used to know,
and tell me what's become of them all.  Besides, I'm sick to
death of the local gang and Lawrence will be a change.  He's got
more brains than Jack Bendish, and from the style of his letter
he can't be so much like a curate as Val is."  Val Stafford was
agent for the Wanhope property.  "Oh,  by George!"

"What's the matter?"

Bernard threw back his head and grinned broadly with half shut
eyes.  "Ha, ha! by Gad, that's funny--that's very funny.  Why,
Val knows him!"

"Knows Lawrence?  I never heard Val mention his name."

"No, my love, but one can't get Val to open his lips on that
subject. Lawrence and I were in the same battalion.  He was there
when Val got his ribbon."

"Really?  That will be nice for Val, meeting him again."

"Oh rather!" said Bernard Clowes. "On my word it's a shame and
I've half a mind . . .. No, let him come: let him come and be
damned to the pair of them!  Straighten me out, will you?" He was
liable like most paralytics to mechanical jerks and convulsions
which drove him mad with impatience.  Laura drew down the
helplessly twitching knee, and ran one firm hand over him from
thigh to ankle.  Her touch had a mesmeric effect on his nerves
when he could endure it, but nine times out of ten he struck it
away. He did so now. "Go to the devil!  How often have I told
you not to paw me about?  I wish you'd do as you're told.  What
do you call him Lawrence for?"

"I always did.  But I'll call him Captain Hyde if you like--"

"'Mr.,' you mean: he's probably dropped the 'Captain.' He was
only a 'temporary.'"

"For all that, he has stuck to his prefix," said Laura smiling.
"Lucian chaffed him about it. But Lawrence was always rather a
baby in some ways: clocked socks to match his ties, and
astonishing adventures in jewellery, and so on.  Oh yes, I knew
him very well indeed when I was a girl.  Mr. and Mrs. Hyde were
among the last of the old set who kept up with us after father
was turned out of his clubs.  I've stayed at Farringay."

"You never told me that!"

"I never thought of telling you. Lawrence hasn't been near us
since we came to Wanhope and I don't recollect your ever
mentioning his name.  You see I tell you now."

"How old were you when you stayed at Farringay?"

"Twenty-two.  Lawrence and I are the same age."

"And you knew him well, did you?"

"We were great friends," said Mrs. Clowes, tossing a lump of
sugar out of the window to a lame jackdaw. She had many such
pensioners, alike in a community of misfortune.  "And, yes,
Berns, you're right, we flirted a little--only a little: wasn't
it natural?  It was only for fun, because we were both young and
it was such heavenly weather--it was the Easter before war broke
out.  No, he didn't ask me to marry him!  Nothing was farther
from his mind."

"Did he kiss you?"

Laura slowly and smilingly shook her head. "Am I, Yvonne?"

"But you liked the fellow?"

"Oh yes, he was charming.  A little too much one of a class,
perhaps: there's a strong family likeness, isn't there, between
Cambridge undergraduates?  But he was more cultivated than a good
many of his class.  We used to go up the river together and read
--what did one read in the spring of 1914?  Masefield, I suppose,
or was it Maeterlinck?  Rupert Brooks came with the war.  Imagine
reading 'Pelleas et Melisande' in a Canadian canoe!  It makes one
want to be twenty-two again, so young and so delightfully
serious."  It was hard to run on while the glow faded out of
Bernard's face and a cold gloom again came over it, but sad
experience had taught Laura that at all costs, under whatever
temptation, it was wiser to be frank.  It would have been easier
for the moment to paint the boy and girl friendship in neutral
tints, but if its details came out later, trivial and innocent
as they were, the economy of today would cost her dear tomorrow,
Her own impression was that Clowes had never been jealous of her
in his life.  But the pretence of jealousy was one of his few
diversions.

"I dare say you do wish you were twenty-two again," he said,
delicately setting down his tea cup on the tray--all his
movements, so far as he could control them, were delicate and
fastidious. "I dare say you would like a chance to play your
cards differently.  Can't be done, my, girl, but what a good
fellow I am to ask Lawrence to Wanhope, ain't I? No one can say
I'm not an obliging husband.  Lawrence isn't a jumping doll. He's
six and thirty and as strong as a horse.  You'll have no end of a
good time knitting up your severed friendship .. 'Pon my word,
I've a good mind to put him off. . I shouldn't care to fall foul
of the King's Proctor."

"Will you have another cup of tea before I ring"

"No, thanks . . . Do I lead you the deuce of a life, Lally?"

"You do now and then," said his wife, smiling with pale lips.

"It isn't that I'm sensitive for myself, because I know you don't
mean a word of it, but I rather hate it for your own sake.  It
isn't worthy of you, old boy.  It's so--so ungentlemanly."

"So it is.  But I do it because I'm bored.  I am bored, you know.
Desperately!" He stretched out his hand to her with such haggard,
hunted eyes that Laura, reckless, threw herself down by him and
kissed the heavy eyelids.  Clowes put his arm round her neck,
fondling her hair, and for a little while peace, the peace of
perfect mutual tenderness, fell on this hard-driven pair.  But
soon, a great sigh bursting from his breast, Clowes pushed her
away, his features settling back into their old harsh lines of
savage pain and scorn.

"Get away! get up! do you want Parker to see you through the
window?  If there's a thing on earth I hate it's a dishevelled
crying woman.  Write to Lawrence.  Say I shall be delighted to
see him and that I hope he'll give us at least a week. Stop.
Warn him that I shan't be able to see much of him because of
my invalid habits, and that I shall depute you to entertain
him.  That ought to fetch him if he remembers you when you were
twenty-two."

Laura was neither dishevelled nor in tears: perhaps such scenes
were no novelty to her.  She leant against the frame of the open
window, looking out over the sunlit garden full of flowers, over
the wide expanse of turf that sloped down to a wide, shallow
river all sparkling in western light, and over airy fields on
the other side of it to the roofs of the distant village strung
out under a break of woody hill.

"Are you sure you want him?  He used to have a hot temper when he
was a young man, and you know, Berns, it would be tiresome if
there were any open scandal."

"Scandal be hanged,"  said Bernard Clowes. "You do as you're
told."  His wife gave an almost imperceptible shrug of the
shoulders as if to disclaim further responsibility.  She was
breathing rather hurriedly as if she had been running, and her
neck was so white that the shadow of her sunlit wistaria threw a
faint lilac stain on the warm, fine grain of her skin.  And the
haggard look returned to Bernard's eyes as he watched her, and
with it a wistfulness, a weariness of desire, "hungry, and
barren, and sharp as the sea."  Laura never saw that hunger in
his eyes.  If he spared her nothing else he spared her that.

"You do as I tell you, old girl," his harsh voice had softened
again. "There won't be any row.  Honestly I'd like to have old
Lawrence here for a bit, I'm not rotting now.  He had almost four
years of it--almost as long as I had.  I'll guarantee it put a
mark on him.  It scarred us all. It'll amuse me to dine him and
Val together, and make them talk shop, our own old shop, and see
what the war's done for each of us: three retired veterans,
that's what we shall be, putting our legs under the same
mahogany: three old comrades in arms." He gave his strange,
jarring laugh. "Wonder which of us is scarred deepest?"




CHAPTER II


WANHOPE and Castle Wharton--or, to give them their due order,
Wharton and Wanhope, for Major Clowes' place would have gone
inside the Castle three times over--were the only country
houses in the Reverend James Stafford's parish.  The village
of Chilmark--a stone bridge, crossroads, a church with Norman
tower and frondlike Renaissance tracery, and an irregular line
of school, shops, and cottages strung out between the stream and
chalky beech-crested hillside occupied one of those long, winding,
sheltered crannies that mark the beds of watercourses along the
folds of Salisbury Plain.  Uplands rose steeply all along it
except on the south, where it widened away into the flats of
Dorsetshire.  Wharton overlooked this expanse of hunting country:
a formidable Norman keep, round which, by gradual accretion, a
dwelling-place had grown up, a history of English architecture
and English gardening written in stone and brick and grass and
flowers.  One sunny square there was, enclosed between arched
hedges set upon pillars of carpenters' work, which still kept the
design of old Verulam: and Yvonne of the Castle loved its little
turrets and cages of singing birds, and its alleys paved with
burnet, wild thyme, and watermints, which perfume the air most
delightfully, not passed by as the rest, but being trodden upon
and crushed.

Wanhope also, though modest by comparison, had a good deal of
land attached to it, but the Clowes property lay north up the
Plain, where they sowed the headlands with red wheat still as
in the days of Justice Shallow.  The shining Mere, a tributary
of the Avon, came dancing down out of these hills: strange
pastoral cliffs of chalk covered with fine sward, and worked by
the hands of prehistoric man into bastions and ramparts that
imitated in verdure the bold sweep of masonry.

Mr. Stafford was a man of sixty, white-haired and of sensitive,
intelligent features.  He was a High Churchman, but wore a felt
wideawake in winter because when he bought it wideawakes were
the fashion for High Churchmen.  In the summer he usually roved
about his parish without any hat at all, his white curls flying
in the wind.  He was of gentle birth, which tended to ease his
intercourse with the Castle.  He had a hundred a year of his own,
and the living of Chilmark was worth 175 pounds net.  So it may
have been partly from necessity that he went about in clothes at
which any respectable tramp would have turned his nose up: but
idiosyncrasy alone can have inspired him to get the village tailor
to line his short blue pilot jacket with pink flannelette.  "It's
very warm and comfortable, my dear," he said apologetically to his
wife, who sat and gazed at him aghast, "so much more cosy than
Italian cloth."

On that occasion Mrs. Stafford was too late to interfere, but as
a rule she exercised a restraining influence, and while she lived
the vicar was not allowed to go about with holes in his trousers.
After her death Mr. Stafford mourned her sincerely and cherished
her memory, but all the same he was glad to be able to wear his
old boots.  However, he had a cold bath every morning and kept
his hands irreproachable, not from vanity but from an inbred
instinct of personal care.  Yvonne of the Castle, who spoke her
mind as Yvonne's of the Castle commonly do, said that the fewer
clothes Mr. Stafford wore the better she liked him, because he
was always clean and they were not.

Mr. Stafford had three children; Val, late of the Dorchester
Regiment, Rowsley an Artillery lieutenant two years younger,
and Isabel the curate, a tall slip of a girl of nineteen.  They
were all beloved, but Val was the prop of the family and the
pride of his father's heart.  Invalided out of the Army after
six weeks' fighting, with an honourable distinction and an
irremediably shattered arm, he had been given the agency of the
Wanhope property, and lived at home, where the greater part of
his three hundred a year went to pay the family bills.  Most of
these were for what Mr. Stafford gave away, for the vicar had no
idea of the value of money, and was equally generous with Val's
income and his own.

Altogether Mr. Stafford was a contented and happy man, and his
only worry was the thought, which crossed his mind now and then,
that Chilmark for a young man of Val's age was dull, and that the
Wanhope agency led nowhere.  If Val had been an ambitious man!
But Val was not ambitious, and Mr Stafford thanked heaven that
this pattern son of his had never been infected by the vulgar
modern craze for money making. His salary would not have kept him
in luxury in a cottage of his own, but it was enough to make the
vicarage a comfortable home for him; and, so long as he remained
unmarried, what could he want more, after all, than the society
of his own family and his kind country neighbours?

Rowsley, cheerfully making both ends meet in the Artillery on an
allowance from his godmother, was off his father's hands.
Isabel?  Mr. Stafford did not trouble much about Isabel, who was
only a little girl.  She was a happy, healthy young thing, and
Mr. Stafford was giving her a thoroughly good education.  She
would be able to earn her own living when he died, if she were
not married, as every woman ought to be.  (There was no one for
Isabel to marry, but Mr. Stafford's principles rose superior to
facts.)  Meantime it was not as if she were running wild: that
sweet woman Laura Clowes and the charming minx at the Castle
between them could safely be left to form her manners and see
after her clothes.

One summer afternoon Isabel was coming back from an afternoon's
tennis at Wharton.  Mrs. Clowes brought her in the Wanhope car as
far as the Wanhope footpath, and would have sent her home, but
Isabel declined, ostensibly because she wanted to stretch her
legs, actually because she couldn't afford to tip the Wanhope
chauffeur.  So she tumbled out of the car and walked away at a
great rate, waving Laura farewell with her tennis racquet.
Isabel was a tall girl of nineteen, but she still plaited her
hair in a pigtail which swung, thick and dark and glossy, well
below her waist.  She wore a holland blouse and skirt, a sailor
hat trimmed with a band of Rowsley's ribbon, brown cotton
stockings, and brown sandshoes bought for 5/11-3/4 of Chapman,
the leading draper in Chilmark High Street.  Isabel made her own
clothes and made them badly.  Her skirt was short in front and
narrow below the waist, and her sailor blouse was comfortably but
inelegantly loose round the armholes.  Laura Clowes, who had a
French instinct of dress, and would have clad Isabel as Guinevere
clad Enid, if Isabel had not been prouder than Enid, looked after
her with a smile and a sigh: it was a grief to her to see her
young friend so shabby, but, bless the child! how little she
cared--and how little it signified after all!  Isabel's poverty
sat as light on her spirits as the sailor hat, never straight,
sat on her upflung head.

Isabel knew every one in Chilmark parish.  Pausing before a knot
of boys playing marbles: "Herbert," she said sternly, "why
weren't you at school on Sunday?" Old Hewett, propped like a
wheezy mummy against the oak tree that shaded the Prince of
Wales's Feathers, brought up his stiff arm slowly in a salute to
the vicar's daughter. "'Evening," said Isabel cheerfully, "what a
night for rheumatics isn't it?"  Hewitt chuckled mightily at this
subtle joke. "'Evening, Isabel," called out Dr. Verney, putting
up one finger to his cap: he considered one finger enough for a
young lady whom he had brought into the world.  Isabel knew every
one in Chilmark and every one knew her.  Such a range of
intensive acquaintance is not so narrow as people who have never
lived in a country village are apt to suppose.

Past the schoolhouse, past the wide stone bridge where Isabel
loved to hang over the parapet watching for trout--but not
tonight, for it was late, and Isabel after a "company tea" wanted
her supper: by a footpath through the churchyard, closely mown
and planted with rosebushes: and so into the church, where, after
dropping a hurried professional curtsey to the altar, she set
about her evening duties. Isabel called herself the curate, but
she did a good deal which is not expected of a curate, such as
shutting windows and changing lesson-markers, propping up the
trebles when they went astray in the pointing of the Psalms,
altering the numbers on the hymn-board, writing out choir papers,
putting flowers in the vases and candles in the benediction
lights, playing the organ as required and occasionally blowing
it. . . . Before leaving the church she fell on her knees, in
deference to Mr. Stafford and the text by the door, and said a
prayer.  What did she pray?  "O Lord bless this church and all
who worship in it and make father preach a good sermon next
Sunday. I wish I'd been playing with Val instead of Jack, we
should have won that last set if Jack hadn't muffed his
services. . . .  Well, this curate was only nineteen."

And then, coming out into the fading light, she locked the north
door behind her and went off whistling like a blackbird, if a
blackbird could whistle the alto of Calkin's Magnificat in B
flat. . . . Five minutes climbing of the steep brown floor of
the beechwood, and she was out on uplands in the dying fires of
day.  It had been twilight in the valley, but here the wide plain
was sunlit and the air was fresh and dry: in the valley even the
river-aspens were almost quiet, but here there was still a sough
of wind coming and going, through the dry grass thick set with
lemon thyme and lady's slipper, or along the low garden wall
where red valerian sprouted out of yellow stonecrop.

A wishing gate led into the garden, and Isabel made for an open
window, but halfway over the sill she paused, gazing with all her
soul in her eyes across the vicarage gooseberry bushes.  That
grey suit was Val's of course, but who was inside the belted coat
and riding breeches?  "Rows-lee!" sang out Isabel, tumbling back
into the garden with a generous display of leg.  The raiders rose
up each holding a handful of large red strawberries melting ripe,
and Isabel, pitching in her racquet on a sofa, ran across the
grass and enfolded her brother in her arms.  Rowsley, dark and
slight and shrewd, returned her hug with one arm, while carefully
guarding his strawberries with the other--"You pig, you perfect
pig!" wailed Isabel.  "I was saving them for tea tomorrow,
Laura's coming and I can't afford a cake.  Oh joy, you can buy me
one!  How long can you stay?"

"Over the week end: but I didn't come to buy you cakes, Baby. I
haven't any money either. I came because I wanted you to buy me
cakes."

"O well never mind, I'll make one," Isabel joyously slipped her
hand through Rowsley's arm. "Then I can get the flour from the
baker and it won't cost anything at all--it'll go down in the
bill. Well give me one anyhow, now they're picked it would be a
pity to waste them." She helped herself liberally out of Val's
hand.  "Now stop both of you, you can't have any more."

She linked her other arm in Val's and dragged her brothers out of
the dangerous proximity of the strawberry beds.  Val sat down on
a deck chair, one leg thrown over the other, Rowsley dropped at
full length on the turf, and Isabel doubled herself up between
them, her arms clasped round her knees.  "How's the Old Man?" she
asked in friendly reference to Rowsley's commanding officer.
"Oh Rose, I knew there was something I wanted to ask you.  Will
Spillsby be able to play on the Fourth?"  Spillsby, a brother
subaltern and a famous bat, had twisted his ankle at the nets,
and Rowsley in his last letter had been uncertain whether he
would be well enough to play the Sappers at the annual fixture.

Happily Rowsley was able to reassure his young sister: the ankle
was much better and Spillsby was already allowed to walk on it.
Isabel then turned her large velvet eyes--gazelle eyes with a
world of pathos in their velvet gloom on her elder brother.
"Coruscate, Val," she commanded.  "You haven't said anything at
all yet.  We should all try to be bright in the home circle.  We
cannot all be witty, but-Ow!  Rowsley, if you pull my hair I
shall hit you in the--in the place where the Gauls fined their
soldiers if they stuck out on parade.  Oh, Val, that really isn't
vulgar, I found it in Matthew Arnold!  Their stomachs, you know.
They wouldn't have fined you anyhow.  You look fagged, darling--
are you?"

"Not so much fagged as hungry," said Val in his soft voice. "It's
getting on for nine o'clock and I was done out of my tea. I went
in to Wanhope, but Laura was out, and Clowes was drinking whisky
and soda. I cannot stand whisky at four in the afternoon, and
Irish whisky at that.  There'll be some supper going before long,
won't there?"

"Not until half past nine because Jimmy has his Bible class
tonight."  Jimmy was Mr. Stafford: and perhaps a purist might
have objected that Mrs. Clowes and Yvonne Bendish had not done
all they might have done to form Isabel's manners. "I'm so sorry,
darling," she continued, preparing to leap to her feet.  "Shall I
get you a biscuit?  There are oatmeals in the sideboard, the kind
you like, I won't be a minute--"

"Thanks very much, I'd rather wait.  Did you see Mrs. Clowes
today? Clowes said she was at the Castle."

"So she was, sitting with Mrs. Morley in an angelic striped
cotton.  Mrs. Morley was in mauve ninon and a Gainsborough hat.
Yvonne says Mr. Morley is a Jew and made his money in I. D. B.'s,
which I suppose are some sort of stocks?" Neither of her brothers
offered to enlighten her, Rowsley because he was feeling
indolent, Val because he never said an unkind word to any one.
Isabel, who was enamoured of her own voice flowed on with little
delay: "If he really is a Jew, I can't think how she could marry
him; I wouldn't. Mrs. Morley can't be very happy or Laura
wouldn't go and talk to her.  Laura is so sweet, she always sits
with people that other people run away from.  Oh Val, did Major
Clowes tell you their news?" Isabel might refer to her father as
Jimmy and to Rowsley's commander as the Old Man, but she rarely
failed to give Bernard Clowes his correct prefix.

"No--is there any?"

"Only that they have some one coming to stay with them.  Won't he
have a deadly time?" Isabel glanced from Val to Rowsley in the
certainty of a common response. "Imagine staying at Wanhope!
However, he invited himself, so it's at his own risk.  Perhaps
he's embarrassed like you, Rose, and wants Laura to feed him.
It's rather fun for Laura, though--that is, it will be, if Major
Clowes isn't too hopeless."

Strange freemasonry of the generations!  Mr. Stafford's children
loved him dearly and he was wont to say that there were no
secrets at the vicarage, yet they lived in a conspiracy of
silence, and even Val, who was mentally nearer to his father's
age, would have been loth to let Mr. Stafford know as much as
Isabel knew about Wanhope.  It was assumed that Val's job was the
very job Val wanted.  Mr. Stafford had indeed a suspicion that it
was not all plain sailing:  Bernard Clowes retained just so much
of the decently bred man as to be courteous to his wife before a
mere acquaintance, but the vicar came and went at odd hours, and
he observed now and then vague intimations--undertones from
Bernard himself, an uncontrollable shrinking on Laura's part, an
occasional hesitation or reluctance in Val--which hinted at
flying storms.  But Val, the father supposed, could make
allowance for a cripple: Bernard was so much to be pitied that no
man would resent an occasional burst of temper!  And there his
children left him. The younger generation can trust one another
not to interfere, but when the seniors strike in, with their cut
and dry precedents and rule of thumb moralities, who knows what
mischief may follow?  Elder people are so indiscreet!

"It's a cousin of Major Clowes,"  Isabel continued, "but they
haven't met for years and years--not since the war.  Laura knows
him too, she met him before she was married and liked him very
much indeed.  She's looking forward to it--that is, she would be
if she had spirit enough to look forward to anything."

"Clowes never said a word to me about it," remarked Val.

"Didn't he?" Isabel unfolded herself and stood up. "That means he
is going to be tiresome.  I must run now, it's five past nine.
Which will you both have, cold beef or eggs?"

"Oh, anything that's going," said Val.

"Eggs," said Rowsley, "not less than four.  Without prejudice to
the cold beef if it's underdone.  Hallo!"

"What?"

"What's the matter with your skirt?"

"Nothing," said Isabel shortly.  She screwed her head over her
shoulder in a vain endeavour to see her own back.  "It's
perfectly all right."

"It would be, on a scarecrow." Isabel stuck her chin up.  "Have
you been over to the Castle in that kit, Baby?  Well, if Yvonne
won't give you some of her old clothes, you might ask the
kitchenmaid."

"The kitchenmaid has more money than I have," said Isabel
cheerfully.  "Is it so very bad?  It's clean anyway, I washed and
ironed it myself."

"It looks very nice and so do you," said Val. Isabel eyed him
with a softened glance: one could rely on Val to salve one's
wounded vanity, but, alas!  Val did not know home-made from
tailor-made. Reluctantly she owned to herself that she had more
faith in Rowsley's judgment.  "It seems rather short though," Val
added. "I suppose you will have to go into long frocks pretty
soon, won't you, and put your hair up?"

"Oh bother my hair and my dresses!" said Isabel with a great
sigh.  "I will pin my hair up when I get some new clothes, but
how can I when I haven't any money and Jim hasn't any money and
neither of you have any money?  Don't you see, idiot," this was
exclusively to Rowsley, "when I pin my hair up I shall turn into
a grown up lady?  And then I shall have to wear proper clothes.
At present I'm only a little girl and it doesn't signify what I
wear. If any one will give me five pounds I'll pin my hair up
like a shot.  Oh dear, I wonder what Yvonne would say if Jack
expected her to outfit herself for five pounds? I do wish some
one would leave me 10,000 pounds a year.  Get up now, you lazy
beggar, come and help me lay the supper.  It's Fanny's evening
out."

She pulled Rowsley to his feet and they went off together leaving
Val alone on the lawn: good comrades those two, and apparently
more of an age, in spite of the long gap between them, than
Rowsley and Val, who was the eldest by only eighteen months.  And
Val sat on alone, while stains of coral and amber faded out of
the lavender sky, and a rack of sea clouds, which half an hour
ago had shone like fiery ripples, dwindled away into smoke--mist
--a mere shadow on the breast of the night. Stars began to
sparkle, moths and humming cockchafers sailed by him, a chase of
bats overhead endlessly fell down airy precipices and rose in
long loops of darkling flight: honeysuckle and night-scented
stock tinged with their sweet garden perfume the cool airs from
the moor.

Val lit a cigarette, a rare indulgence.  If cigarettes grew on
gooseberry bushes Val would have been an inveterate smoker, but
good Egyptians were a luxury which he could not often afford
The Wanhope agency was ample for his needs, though underpaid as
agencies go: but there was Rowsley, always hard up, uncomplaining,
but sensitive, as a young fellow in his position is sure to be, and
secretly fretting because he could not do as other men did: and there
was Isabel, for whom Val felt the anxiety Mr. Stafford ought to have
felt, and was trying to make the provision Mr. Stafford ought to have
made: and then there was the vicar himself, who laid out a great deal
of money in those investments for which we are promised cent per cent
interest, but upon a system of deferred payment.

Tonight however Val lit a cigarette, and then a second, to the
surprise of Isabel, who saw the red spark on the lawn.  She
thought her brother must be tired, and perhaps it really was the
long day without food that made him so restless in mind and so
uneasy.  Bernard Clowes had been more than usually cranky that
afternoon.  Even the patient Val had had thoughts of throwing up
his job when the cripple made him go through his week's accounts,
scrutinizing every entry and cross-examining him on every
transaction in such a tone as the head of a firm might employ to
a junior clerk suspected of dishonesty.  It was Bernard's way:
it meant nothing: but it was irksome to Val, especially when he
could not soothe himself by dropping into Laura's quiet parlour
for a cup of tea.  Yet his irritation would not have lingered
through a cigarette if Isabel's news had not revived it.  This
cousin of Bernard's!  Val had not much faith in any cousin of
Bernard Clowes: nor in the kindness of life.

Val was a slight, fair, pleasant-looking man of eight or nine and
twenty, quiet of movement, friendly-mannered and as inconspicuous
as his own rather worn grey tweeds: one of a class, till he
raised his eyes: and then?  There was something strange in Val's eyes
when they were fully raised, an indrawn arresting brilliance
difficult to analyse: imaginative and sympathetic, as if he were at
home in dark places: the quality of acceptance of pain.

Adepts in old days knew by his eyes a man who had been on the
rack.  Stafford had been racked: and by the pain that is half
shame, the keenest, the most lacerating and destructive of
wounds.  He had suffered till he could suffer no more, and
tonight in the starlit garden he, suffered still, without hope,
or rebellion, or defence.

Indoors Rowsley and Isabel, with the rapidity of long use, laid
the cloth, and Isabel fetched cold beef from the larder and
butter and eggs from the dairy, while Rowsley went down the
cellar with a jug and a candle and drew from the cask a generous
allowance of beer.  "Come along in, old Val," said Isabel,
reappearing at the open window, "You and Rose are both famishing
and I'm not," this was a pious fiction, "so you can begin and
I'll wait for Jimmy.  I dare say he's gone wandering off
somewhere and won't be in till ten."

Val came across the dark, cool lawn and climbed over the window
sill.  A shabby room, large and low: a faded paper, grey toning
to blue: a carpet of faded roses on a grey ground: the shaded
Dresden lamp and roselit supper table shining like an island in
a pool of shadow, and those two beloved heads, both so dark and
smooth and young, tam cara capita!  Neither of them suspected
that Val was unhappy.  His feeling for them was more fatherly
than fraternal, and Rowsley, strange to say, fell in with Val's
attitude, coming to his brother for money as naturally as most
young men go to their parents.  Val sat at the head of the table
because Mr. Stafford could not carve.  "There!" said Isabel,
giving him his plate.  "Mustard?  I've just made it so you
needn't look to see if it's fresh.  Watercress: I picked it
myself.  Lettuce.  Cream and vinegar and sugar.  Beer.  Now do
you feel happy?  Lord love you, dear, I like to see you eat."

She sat on the arm of Mr. Stafford's mahogany chair.  "What time
do you want breakfast? Seven o'clock?  Major Clowes wouldn't come
down at seven if he were your agent.  Can you get back to tea
tomorrow?  Laura may bring the cousin up to tea with her and she
wants him to meet you."

"Very good of her.  Why?"

"Oh, because he was in the Army too and all through the war.  He
went out with the first hundred thousand.  He's much older than
you are--the same age as Laura.  Oh, wait a minute!" exclaimed
Isabel in the tone in which a Frenchwoman says Tenez. I forgot.
She thinks you must have met him, Val."

"Possibly," said Val.

"Was he in the Dorchesters?" asked Rowsley--much more
interested than his brother,  no doubt because he was not so
hungry as Val, who was giving all his attention to his supper.

"No, in the Winchesters," said Isabel.  "Do I mean the
Winchesters,   Val?  What was Major Clowes' old regiment?"

"Clowes was in the Wintons."

Isabel nodded. "Then so was the cousin.  And Laura says he was
out there when the Wintons were in the next bit of trench north
of the Dorchesters.  He was there when--when you were wounded."
Such was Val Stafford's modesty that in the family circle it was
not in etiquette to refer in other terms to that famous occasion.

"I don't remember any fellow named Clowes and I never knew
Bernard Clowes had a cousin out there," said Val, mixing himself
a salad.

"Oh, his name isn't Clowes.  It's Ryde or Pride or something like
that.  I'm sorry to be so vague, but Jack Bendish and Yvonne and
Mrs. Morley were all talking at once.  Lawrence Pied--Fried--"

"Lawrence Hyde?"

"Yes, that's it!  Then you really do remember him?"

"Er--yes.   Is that lamp smoking, Rowsley?  You might turn it
down a trifle, I can't reach."

"Let me, let me?--  What was he like?"

"Who--Hyde?  Oh," said Val vaguely, "he was like the rest of us
--very tired."

"Tired?" echoed Isabel with a blank face, "but, Val darling, he
couldn't have been only tired!  What should you think he was like
when he wasn't tired?"

"That is a question I have occasionally asked myself," Val
answered with his faint indecipherable smile.  "My dear child,
I only saw him once or twice.  He was a senior captain and
commanded his company. I was a very junior lieutenant."

"Still he was there at the time," reflected Isabel. "O Rose! if
he's anything like nice, which is almost past praying for in
Major Clowes' cousin, let's beguile him into the gooseberry
bushes and make him tell us all about it!  Val is very dear to
his family, but no one, however tenderly attached to him, could
call him a brilliant raconteur.  Now Mr. Hyde won't have any
modest scruples.  Val, if there is a slug in that lettuce I wish
you would say so. It would hurt my feelings less than for you to
sit looking at it in a stony silence.  Was he good-looking?"

"Possibly he might be," said Val, "when he scraped the dirt off."
 After a moment he added, "He was very decent to me."

"Was he?  Then he was nice?"

"Gnat,"  said Rowsley from the middle of his third egg.  Isabel
rounded him indignantly.

"I'm not gnatting!  I'm not asking Val anything about himself, am
I? Val can't possibly mind telling me about another man in
another regiment.  You eat your eggs, there's a good boy, before
they get cold.--  Laura says the Dorchesters dined the Winchesters
once when they were in billets.  Was that when you and Mr. Hyde
were there?"

"Captain Hyde," Val corrected his young sister.  "Yes, we both
graced the festive board.  It was too festive for me.  We had
Buszard's soup and curried chicken and real cream, and more
champagne than was good for us.  But it was not on that occasion
that Hyde was so decent to me.  The day I--the day Dale went
down--" Rowsley nodded to him as he raised his glass of beer to
his lips--"thank you, Rose.--  As I was saying, that evening I
ran across Hyde between the lines.  The Dorsets and Wintons had
gone over the top together, and he had been left behind with a
bullet in his chest.  I was done to the world, but he had some
brandy left and shared it with me.  If it had not been for Hyde I
should never have brought Dale in."

"Well, I've never heard that before," said Rowsley to his fourth
egg.

Isabel was silent, and her eyes in the shadow of a momentary
gravity were the eyes of a woman and not of a child.  She raised
them to look out at the evening sky, indigo blue against the
lamplit interior, or faintly primrose in the west, and wondered
for the thousandth time why it was still such an effort to Val to
refer to his brief military experience.  Soft country noises came
in, peaceful and soothing: the short shrill shriek of a bat, the
rustle of a branch of rose-leaves moving like a hand over the
window panes, a faint breathing of wind from the moor.  Surely
the scar of war ought to be healed by now!  Isabel kept these
thoughts to herself: young as she was, her solitary life--for
a woman alone among men is always to some extent solitary--had
trained her to a clear perception of what had better not be said.

"When is Hyde coming?" asked Val, going on with his salad.

"Tomorrow, didn't you hear me say Laura is going to bring him
here to tea?  He's staying at his own place, Farringay--I think
from the way Laura spoke it is what one calls a place--and they
expect him by the morning train.  Laura's to meet him in the
car."

"Did you ask her to bring him in to tea,"  said Rowsley, frowning
over the marmalade jar, "when Val is safe to be out and you
didn't know I should be here?"

"Yes: oughtn't I to have?"

"No."

"Is there anything else you would like to speak to me about?"
said Isabel after a pregnant silence. "Dear Rowsley, you seem
determined to look after my manners and morals!  I asked him to
please Laura. She's nervous of Major Clowes.  Jack and Yvonne
are coming too."

"Oh I don't see that it signifies," said Val.  Mrs. Clowes
wouldn't have accepted if it weren't all right. I don't see that
you or I need worry if she doesn't.  Isabel is old enough to pour
out tea for herself.  In any case, as it happens, you'll be here
if I'm not, and I dare say Jimmy will look in for ten minutes."

"You are sweet, Val," said Isabel gratefully.

"Oh I don't say Rowsley's not right!  Prigs generally are: and
besides now I come to think of it, Laura did look faintly amused
when I asked her. But these stupid things never occur to me till
afterwards!  After all, what am I to do?  I can't manufacture a
chaperon, and it would be very bad for the parish if the vicar
never entertained.  And it's not as if Captain Hyde were a young
man; he's thirty-six if he's a day."




CHAPTER III


When the sea retreats after a storm one finds on the beach all
sorts of strange flotsam.  Bernard Clowes was a bit of human
wreckage left on the sands of society by the storm of the war.
When it broke out he was a second lieutenant in the Winchester
Regiment, a keen polo player and first class batsman who rarely
opened a book.  He was sent out with the First Division and
carried himself with his usual phlegmatic good humour through
almost four years of fighting from Mons to Cambrai.

In the March break-through he had his wrist broken by a rifle-bullet
and was invalided home, where he took advantage of his leave to get
married, partly because most of the men he knew were already married,
and partly to please his sister. There were no other brothers, and
Mrs. Morrison, a practical lady, but always a little regretful of her
own marriage with Morrison's Boot and Shoe Company, recommended him
with the family bluntness to arrange for an olive branch before the
Huns got him.

Laura, a penniless woman two years his senior and handicapped by
her disreputable belongings, was not the wife Gertrude Morrison
would have chosen for him: still it might have been worse, for
Laura was well-born and personally irreproachable, while Clowes,
hot-blooded and casual, was as likely as not to have married a
chorus-girl.  If any disappointment lingered, Gertrude soothed
it by trying over in her own mind the irritation that she would
be able to produce in Morrison circles: "Where he met her?
Oh, when she was staying with her married sister at Castle
Wharton . . . .Yvonne, the elder Selincourt girl, married into
the Bendish family."

Bernard did not care a straw either for the paternal handicap or
for the glories of the Wharton connection.  He took his
love-affair as simply as his cricket and with the same bold
confidence. Laura was what he wanted; she would fit into her
surroundings at Wanhope as delicately as an old picture fits
into an old frame, and one could leave her about--so he put
it to himself--without fear of her getting damaged.  When Tom
Morrison, shrewd business man, dropped a hint about the rashness
of marrying the daughter of a scamp like Ferdinand Selincourt,
Bernard merely stared at him and let the indiscretion go in
silence.  He can scarcely be said to have loved his bride, for
up to the time of the wedding his nature was not much more
developed than that of a prize bull, but he considered her a
very pretty woman, and his faith in her was a religion.

So they were married, and went to Eastbourne for their honeymoon:
an average match, not marked by passion on either side, but
destined apparently to an average amount of comfort and good
will.  They had ten gay days before Laura was left on a victoria
platform, gallantly smiling with pale lips and waving her
handkerchief after the train that carried Bernard back to the
front.

Five months later on the eve of the Armistice he was flung out
of the service, a broken man, paralysed below the waist, cursing
every one who came near him and chiefly the surgeons for not
letting him die.  No one ever desired life more passionately than
Bernard desired death.  For some time he clung to the hope that
his mind would wear his body out.  But his body was too young,
too strong, too tenacious of earth to be betrayed by the renegade
mind.

There came a day when Clowes felt his youth welling up in him
like sap in a fallen tree: new energy throbbed in his veins, his
heart beat strong and even, it was hard to believe that he could
not get off his bed if he liked and go down to the playing fields
or throw his leg over a horse.  This mood fastened on him without
warning in a Surbiton hospital after a calm night without a
sleeping draught, when through his open window he could see green
branches waving in sunlight, and hear the cries of men playing
cricket and the smack of the driven ball: and it was torture.
Tears forced their way suddenly into Bernard's eyes.  His nurse,
who had watched not a few reluctant recoveries, went out of the
room.  Then his great chest heaved, and he sobbed aloud, lying
on his back with face unhidden, his wide black eyes blinking at
the sweet pale June sky.  No chance of death for him: he was good
for ten, twenty, fifty years more:  he could not bear it, but it
had to be borne.  He tried to pull himself up: if he could only
have reached the window!  But the arms that felt so strong were
as weak as an infant's, while the dead weight of his helpless
legs dragged on him like lead.  The only result of his struggle
was a dreadful access of pain.  Reaction followed, for he had
learnt in his A B C days not to whimper when he was hurt, and by
the time the nurse returned Clowes had scourged himself back to
his usual savage tranquillity.  "Can I have that window shut,
please?" he asked, cynically frank. "I used to play cricket
myself."

Laura Clowes in this period went through an experience almost
equally formative. Two years older than Bernard, she was also
more mature for her years and had developed more evenly, and from
the outset her engagement and marriage had meant more to her then
to Bernard, because her girlhood had been unhappy and they provided
a way of escape.  Her sister Yvonne had met Jack Bendish at a
race-meeting and he had fallen madly in love with her and married
her in a month in the teeth of opposition.  That was luck--heaven-sent
luck, for Yvonne on the night before her marriage had broken down
utterly and confessed that if Jack had not saved her she would have
gone off with the first man who asked her on any terms, because she
was twenty-nine and sick to death of wandering with her father on the
outskirts of society.  Subsequently Yvonne had after a hard fight won
a footing at Wharton for herself and her sister, and there Laura had
met Clowes, not such a social prize as Jack, but rich and able to
give his wife an assured position.  She was shrewd and realized that
in himself he had little to offer beyond a handsome and highly
trained physique and a mind that worked lucidly within the limits of
a narrow imagination but she was beyond all words grateful to him,
and he fascinated her more than she realized.

The ten days at Eastbourne opened her eyes.  Bernard enjoyed
every minute of them and was exceedingly pleased with himself
and proud of his wife, but for Laura they were a time of heavy
strain.  Innocent and shy, she had feared her husband, only to
discover that she loved him better than he was capable of loving
her.  Laura was not blind.  She understood Bernard and all his
limitations, the dangerous grip that his passions had of him,
his boyish impatience, his wild-bull courage, and his inability
to distinguish between a wife and a mistress: she was happiest
when he slept, always holding her in his arms, exacting even in
sleep, but so naively youthful in the bloom of his four and
twenty summers, and, for the moment, all her own.  She loved him
"because I am I--because you are you," and her tenderness was
edged with the profound pity that women felt in those days for
the men who came to them under the shadow of death.  It was her
hope that the strong half-developed nature would grow to meet her
need.  It grew swiftly enough: in the forcing-house of pain he
soon learned to think and to feel: but the change did not lead
him to his wife's heart.

Laura had married a man of a class and apparently normal to a
fault: she found herself united now to incarnate storm and
tempest.  The first time she saw him at Surbiton, he drove her
out in five minutes with curses and insult.  Why?  Laura,
wandering about half-stunned in the visitors' room, had no idea
why.  She stumbled against the furniture: she looked at the
photographs of Windermere and King's College Chapel and the
Nursing Staff on the walls: she took up Punch and began to read
it.  Laura was no dreamer, she had never doubted that her husband
would rather have the use of his legs again than all the feminine
devotion in the world, but she had hoped to soothe him, perhaps
for a little while to make him forget:  it had not crossed her
mind that her anguish of love and service would be rejected.
Enlightenment was like folding a sword to her breast.

By and by his nurse came down to her, a young hard-looking woman
with tired eyes.  She had little comfort to give, but what she
gave Laura never forgot, because it was the truth without any
conventional or sentimental gloss.  "You're having a bad time
with him, aren't you?" she said, coldly sympathetic.  "It won't
last.  Nothing lasts.  You mustn't think he's left off caring for
you.  I expect he was very fond of you, wasn't he?  That's the
trouble. Some men take invalid life nicely and let their wives
fuss over them to their hearts' content, but Major Clowes is one
of those tremendously strong masculine men that always want to be
top dog.  Besides, you're young and pretty, if you don't mind my
saying so, and you remind him of what he's done out of . . .
Twenty-four, isn't he?  Don't give way, Mrs. Clowes,  you've a
long road before you; these paralysis cases are a frightful
worry, almost as bad for the friends as they are for the patient;
but if you play up it'll get better instead of worse.  He'll get
used to it and so will you.  One gets used to anything."

Even so: time goes on and storms subside.  Bernard Clowes came
out of the hospital and he and his wife settled down on friendly
terms after all. "It's not what you bargained for when you
married me," said the cripple with his hard smile. "However, it's
no good crying over spilt milk, and you must console yourself
with the fact that there's still plenty of money going.  But I
wish we'd had a little more time together first." He pierced her
with his black eyes, restless and fiery.  "I dare say you would
have liked a boy.  So should I.  Nevermind, my girl, you shan't
miss much else."

Wanhope, the family property, was buried deep in Wiltshire, three
or four miles from a station.  Laura liked the country: Wanhope
let it be, then: and Wanhope it was, with the additional
advantage that Yvonne was at Castle Wharton within a stroll.
Laura liked a wide house and airy rooms, a wide garden, plenty of
land, privacy from her neighbours: all this Wanhope gave her, no
slight relief to a girl who had been brought up between Brighton
and Monte Carlo. The place was too big to be run without an
agent?  No drawback, the agent: on the contrary, Clowes looked
out for a fellow who would be useful to Laura, a gentleman, an
unmarried man, who would be available to ride with her or make a
fourth at bridge--and there by good luck was Val Stafford ready
to hand.  Born and reared in the country, though young and
untrained, Val brought to his job a wide casual knowledge of
local conditions and a natural head for business, and was only
too glad to squire Laura in the hunting field.  For Laura must
hunt: as Laura Selincourt she had hunted whenever she was offered
a mount, and she was to go on doing as she had always done.
Laura would rather not have hunted, for the freshness of her
youth was gone and the strain of her life left her permanently
tired, and she pleaded first expense, then propriety.  "Don't be
a damned fool," replied Bernard Clowes.  So Laura went riding
with Val Stafford.

"Come in," said Major Clowes in a rasping snarl, and Laura came
into her husband's room and stumbled over a chair.  The windows
were shuttered and the room was still dark at eleven o'clock of a
fine June morning.  Laura, irrepressibly annoyed, groped her way
through a disorder of furniture, which seemed, as furniture
always does in the dark, to be out of place and malevolently full
of corners, and without asking leave flung down a shutter and
flung up a window.  In a field across the river they were cutting
hay, and the dry summer smell of it breathed in, and with it the
long rolling whirr of a haymaking machine and its periodical
clash, most familiar of summer noises.  And the June daylight lit
up the gaunt body of Bernard Clowes stretched out on a water
mattress, his silk jacket unbuttoned over his strong, haggard
throat.  "Really, Berns," said Laura, flinging down a second
shutter, "I don't wonder you sleep badly.  The room is positively
stuffy!  I should have a racking headache if I slept in it."

"Well, you don't, you see," Bernard replied politely.  "Stop
pulling those blinds about.  Come over here." Laura came to him.
"Kiss me," said Clowes, and she laid her cool lips on his cheek.
Clowes received her kiss passively: even Laura,  though she
understood him pretty well, never was sure whether he made her
kiss him because he liked it or because he thought she did not
like it.

"Where are you off to now?" asked Clowes, pushing her away: "you
look very smart. I like that cotton dress.  It is cotton, isn't
it?" he rubbed the fabric gingerly between his finger and thumb.
"Did Catherine make it?  That girl is a jewel. I like that gipsy
hat too, it's a pretty shape and it shades your eyes.  I call
that sensible, which can't often be said for a woman's clothes.
You have good eyes, Laura, well worth shading, though your figure
is your trump card.  I like these fitting bodices that give a
woman a chance to show what shape she is.  All you Selincourt
women score in evening gowns.  Yvonne has a topping figure,
though she's an ugly little devil.  She has an American
complexion and her eyes aren't as good as yours.  Where did you
say you were going?"

"To the station to meet Lawrence. I promised to fetch him in the
car."

"Lawrence?  So he's due today, is he?  I'd forgotten all about
him.  And you're meeting him?  Oh yes, that explains the dress
and hat,  I thought you wouldn't have put them on for my
benefit."

"Dear, it's only one of the cotton frocks I wear every day, and I
couldn't go driving without a hat, could I?"

"Can't conceive why you want to go at all."  Laura was silent.
"If Lawrence must be met, why can't Miller go alone?" Miller was
the chauffeur.  "Undignified, I call it, the way you women run
after a man nowadays.  You think men like it but they don't."

Laura wondered if she dared tell him not to be silly.  He might
take it with a grin, in which case he would probably relent and
let her go: or--?  The field of alternative conjecture was wide.
In the end Laura, whose knee was still aching from her adventure
with the chair, decided to chance it.  But--perhaps because they
were suffused with irritation--the words had no sooner left her
lips than she regretted them.

"I won't have it." Bernard's heavy jaw was clenched like a
bloodhound's. "It's not decent running after Hyde while I'm tied
here by the leg. I won't have you set all the village talking.
There's the Times on my table.  Stop. Where are you going?"

"To ring the bell.  It's time Miller started. You don't want your
cousin to find no one there to meet him--not even a cart for his
luggage."

"He can walk.  Do him good: and Miller can fetch the luggage
afterwards.  You do as I tell you.  Take the Times.  Sit down in
that chair with your face to the light and read me the leading
articles and the rest of the news on Page 7. Don't gabble: read
distinctly if you can--you're supposed to be an educated woman,
aren't you?"

Poor Laura had been looking forward to her drive.  She had taken
some innocent pleasure in choosing the prettiest of her morning
dresses, a gingham that fell into soft folds the colour of a
periwinkle, and in rearranging the liberty scarf on her drooping
gipsy straw, and in putting on her long fringed gauntlets and
little country shoes.  Her husband's compliments made her wince,
Jack Bendish had eyes only for his wife, Val Stafford's
admiration was sweet but indiscriminate: but she remembered
Lawrence as a connoisseur.  And worse than the sting of her own
small disappointment were the breaking of her promise to
Lawrence, the failure in hospitality, in common courtesy.

And for the thousandth time Laura wondered whether it would not
have been better for Bernard, in the long run, to defy his
senseless tyranny.  He was at her mercy: it would have been easy
to defy him.  Easy, but how cruel!  A trained nurse would have
made short work of Bernard's whims, he would have been washed and
brushed and fed and exercised and disregarded--till he died
under it?   Perhaps.  It was safer at all events to let him go
his own way.  He could never hope to command his regiment now:
let him get what satisfaction he could out of commanding his
wife!  She would have preferred a form of sacrifice which looked
less like fear, but there was little sentiment in Bernard, and
love must not pick and choose.  For it was love still, the old
inexplicable fascination: in the middle of one of his tirades,
when he was at his most wayward, she would lose herself in the
contemplation of some small physical trait, the scar of a burn on
his wrist or the tiny trefoil-shaped birthmark on his temple, as
if that summed up for her the essence of his personality, and
were more truly Bernard Clowes then his intemperate insignificance
of speech. . . . Even when others suffered for it she yielded to
Bernard, because she loved him and because he suffered so infinitely
worse than they.

For denial maddened him.  He raised himself on his arm, crimson
with anger, his chest heaving under the thin silken jacket which
defined his gaunt ribs--"Sit down, will you, damn you?" Because
Laura believed that she and she only stood between  her husband
and despair, she yielded and began to read out the Times leader
in a voice that was perfectly gentle and placid.

Bernard sank back and watched her like a cat after a mouse.  He
was under no delusion: he knew she was not cowed or nervous, but
that the spring of her devotion was pity--pity ever fed anew by
his dreadful helplessness: and it was this knowledge that drove
him into brutality.  The instincts of possession and domination
were strong in him, and but for the accident that wrenched his
mind awry he would probably have made himself a king to Laura,
for, once her master, he would have grown more gentle and more
tender as the years went by, while Laura was one of those women
who find happiness in love and duty: not a weak woman, not a
coward, but a humble-minded woman with no great opinion of her
own judgment, who would have liked to look up to father, brother,
sister, husband, as better and wiser than herself. But in his
present avatar he could not master her: and Clowes, feeling as
she felt, seeing himself as she saw him, came sometimes as near
madness as any man out of an asylum.  He was not far off it now,
though he lay quiet enough, with not one grain of expression in
his cold black eyes.

The 11:39 pulled up at Countisford station, and Lawrence Hyde got
out of a first class smoking carriage and stood at ease, waiting
for his servant to come and look after him.  "There'll be a car
waiting from Wanhope, Gaston--"

"Zere no car 'ere, M'sieu--ze man say."

"What, no one to meet me?" Evidently no one: there were not half
a dozen people on the flower-bordered platform, and those few
were country folk with bundles and bags.  Lawrence strolled out
into the yard, hoping that his servant's incorrigibly lame
English might have led to a misunderstanding.  But there was no
vehicle of any kind, and the station master could not recommend a
cab.  Countisford was a small village, smaller even than
Chilmark, and owed the distinction of the railway solely to its
being in the flat country under the Plain.  "But you don't mean
to say," said Lawrence incredulous, "that I shall have to walk?"

But it seemed there was no help for it, unless he preferred to
sit in the station while a small boy on a bicycle was despatched
to Chilmark for the fly from the Prince of Wales's Feathers; and
in the end Lawrence went afoot, though his expression when faced
with four miles of dusty road would have moved pity in any heart
but that of his little valet.  Hyde was one of those men who
change their habits when they change their clothes.  He did not
care what happened to him when he was out of England, following
the Alaskan trail in eighty degrees of frost, or thrashing round
the Horn in a tramp steamer, but when he shaved off his beard,
and put on silk underclothing and the tweeds of Sackville Street,
he grew as lazy as any flaneur of the pavement.  Gaston however
was not sympathetic. He was always glad when anything unpleasant
happened to his master.

Leaving Gaston to sit on the luggage, Lawrence swung off with his
long even stride, flicking with his stick at the bachelor's
buttons in the hedge.  He could not miss his way, said the
station master: straight down the main road for a couple of
miles, then the first turning on the left and the first on the
left again.  Some half a mile out of Countisford however Lawrence
came on a signpost and with the traveller's instinct stopped to
read it:

              WINCANTON              8 M.
              CASTLE WHARTON         3 1/2 M.
              CHILMARK               3 M.

So ran the clear lettering on the southern arm.  Eastwards a much
more weatherbeaten arm, pointing crookedly up a stony cart track,
said in dim brown characters: "CHILMARK 2 M." Plainly a short cut
over the moor!  Better stones underfoot than padded dust: and
Lawrence struck uphill swiftly, glad to escape from the traffic
of the London road.  But he knew too much about short cuts to be
surprised when, after climbing five hundred feet in twice as many
yards--for the gradients off the Plain are steep--he found
himself adrift on the open moor, his track going five ways at
once in the light dry grass.

He halted, leaning on his stick.  He was on the edge of the
Plain: below him stretched away a great half-ring of cultivated
country, its saliencies the square tower of a church jutting over
a group of elms, or the glint of light on a stream, or pale
haystacks dotted round the disorderly yard of a grange--the
tillage and the quiet dwellings of close on a thousand years.
On all this Lawrence Hyde looked with the reflective smile of an
alien.  It touched him, but to revolt.  More than a child of the
soil he felt the charm of its tranquillity, but he felt it also
as an oppression, a limitation: an ordered littleness from which
world-interests were excluded.  He was a lover of art and a
cosmopolitan, and though the lowland landscape was itself a piece
of art, and perfect in its way, Hyde's mind found no home in it.
Yet, he reflected with his tolerant smile, he had fought for it,
and was ready any day to fight for it again--for stability and
tradition, the Game Laws, the Established Church, and the
rotation of crops.  He was the son of an English mother and had
received the training of an Englishman.  A rather cynical smile,
now and then, at the random and diffident ways of England was the
only freedom he allowed to the foreign strain within him.

And when he looked the other way even this faint feeling of
irritation passed off, blown away by the wind that always blows
across a moor, thin and sweet now, and sunlit as the light curled
clouds that it carried overhead through the profound June blue.
Acres upon acres of pale sward, sown all over with the blue of
scabious and the lemon-yellow of hawkweed, stretched away in
rolling undulations like the plain of the sea; dense woods hung
massed on the far horizon, beech-woods, sapphire blue beyond the
pale silver and amber, of the middle distance, and under them a
puff of white smoke from a passing train, or was it the white
scar of a quarry?  He could not be sure across so many miles of
sunlit air, but it must have been smoke, for it dissolved slowly
away till there was no gleam left under the brown hillside.  Here
too was stability, permanence: the wind ruffling the grass as it
had done when the Normans crossed their not far distant Channel,
or rattling over hilltops through leather-coated oak groves which
had kept their symmetry since their progenitors were planted by
the Druids.  Here was nothing to cramp the mind: here was the
England that has absorbed Celt, Saxon, Fleming, Norman,
generation after generation, each with its passing form of
political faith: the England of traditional eld, the beloved
country.

In the meanwhile Lawrence had to find Chilmark.  He had neither
map nor compass and was unfamiliar with the lie of the land, but,
mindful of the station master's directions to go south and turn
twice to the left, he shaped a course south-east and looked for a
shepherd to ask his way of.  At present there were no shepherds
to be seen and no houses; here and there a trail of smoke marked
some hidden hamlet, sunk deep in cup or cranny, but which was
Chilmark he could not tell.  Down went the track, plunging
towards a stream that brawled in a wild bottom: up over a rough
hillside ruby-red with willowherb: then down again to a pool
shaded by two willows and a silver birch, and lying so cool and
solitary in its own cloven nook, bounded in every direction by
half a furlong of chalky hillside, that Lawrence was seized with
a desire to strip and bathe, and sun himself dry on the brilliant
mossy lawn at its brink.  But out of regard for the Wanhope lunch
hour he walked on, following a trickle of water between reeds and
knotgrafis, till in the next winding of the glen he came on a
house: only a labourer's cot, two rooms below and one above, but
inhabited, for smoke was coming out of the chimney.  Lawrence
turned up a worn thread of path and knocked with his stick at the
open door.

It was answered by a tall young girl with a dirty face, wearing a
serge skirt pinned up under a dirty apron.  The house was dirty
too: the smell of an unwashed, unswept interior came out of it,
together with the wailing of a fretful baby.  "I've missed my
way on the moor," said Lawrence, inobtrusively holding his
handkerchief to his nose. "Can you direct me to Chilmark?"

"Do you mean Chilmark or Castle Wharton?  Oh Dorrie, don't cry!"
She lifted the babe on her arm and stood gazing at Lawrence in a
leisured and friendly manner, as if she wondered who he were. "It
isn't far, but it's a long rambling village and there are any
number of paths down.  And if you want the Bendishes--" Evidently
she thought he must want the Bendishes, and perhaps Lawrence's
judgment was a little bribed by her artless compliment, for at
this point he began to think her pretty in an undeveloped way:
certainly she had lovely eyes, dark blue under black lashes,
which reminded him of other eyes that he had seen long ago--but
when?  He could not remember those wistful eyes in any other
woman's face.

"I'm making for Wanhope--Major Clowe's house."

"Oh, but then you must be Captain Hyde," exclaimed Miss
Stafford:  "aren't you? that Mrs. Clowes was expecting."

"My name is Hyde.  No one met me at the station" in spite of
himself Lawrence could not keep his grievance out of his voice
"so, as there are no cabs at Countisford, I had to walk."

"Oh! dear, how sad: and on such a hot day too!  You'll be so
tired." Was this satire?  Pert little thing!  Lawrence was
faintly amused--not irritated, because she was certainly very
pretty: what a swan's throat she had under her holland blouse,
and what a smooth slope of neck!  But for all that she ought to
have sirred him.

"So you know Mrs. Clowes, do you?" He said with as much
politeness as a little girl deserves who has lovely eyes and a
dirty face.  It had crossed his mind that she might be one of the
servants at Wanhope: he knew next to nothing of the English
labouring classes, but was not without experience of lady's
maids.

"Yes, I know her," said Isabel.  She hung on the brink of
introducing herself--was not Captain Hyde coming to tea with her
that afternoon?--but was deterred by a very unusual feeling of
constraint.  She was not accustomed to be watched as Hyde was
watching her, and she felt shy and restless, though she knew not
why.  It never entered her head that he had taken her for Dorrie
Drury's sister.  She was dressed like a servant, but what of
that?  In Chilmark she would have remained "Miss Isabel" if she
had gone about in rags, and it would have wounded her bitterly to
learn that she owed the deference of the parish rather to her
rank as the vicar's daughter, who visited at Wanhope and Wharton,
than to any dignity of her own.  In all her young life no one had
ever taken a liberty with Isabel.  And, for that matter, why
should any one take a liberty with Dorrie Drury's sister?
Isabel's father would not have done so, nor her brothers, nor
indeed Jack Bendish, and she was too ignorant of other men to
know what it was that made her so hot under Hyde's eyes.  "But
you'll be late for lunch. Wait half a minute and I'll run up with
you to the top of the glen."

Lawrence watched her wrap her charge carefully in a shawl, and
fetch milk from the dresser, and coax till Dorrie turned her
small head, heavy with the cares of neglected babyhood, sideways
on the old plaid maud and began to suck.  Apparently he had
interrupted the scrubbing of the kitchen floor,  for the tiles
were wet three quarters of the way over, and on a dry oasis stood
a pail, a scrubbing brush, and a morsel of soap.  Among less
honourable odours he was glad to distinguish a good strong whiff
of carbolic.

Isabel meanwhile had recovered from her little fit of shyness.
She pulled off her apron and pulled down her skirt (it had been
kilted to the knee), rinsed her hands under a tap, wiped her face
with a wet handkerchief, and came out into the June sunshine
bareheaded, her long pigtail swinging between drilled and slender
shoulders.  "Yours are London boots," she remarked as she
buttoned her cuff.  "Do you mind going over the marsh?"

"Not at all."

"Not if you get your feet wet?" Lawrence laughed outright.  "But
it's a real marsh!" said Isabel offended: "and you're not used to
mud, are you?  You don't look as if you were." She pointed down
the glen, and Lawrence saw that some high spring, dammed at its
exit and turned back on itself, had filled the wide bottom with a
sponge of moss thickset with flowering rush and silken fluff of
cotton grass.  "There's no danger in summertime, the shepherds
often cross it and so do I.  Still if you're afraid--"

"I assure you I'm not afraid," said Lawrence, looking at her so
oddly that Isabel was not sure whether he was angry or amused.
Nor was Lawrence.  She had struck out of his male vanity a
resentment so crude that he was ashamed of it, ashamed or even
shocked?  He was not readily shocked.  A pure cynic, he let into
his mind, on an easy footing, primitive desires that the average
man admits only behind a screen.  Yet when these libertine
fancies played over Isabel's innocent head they were distasteful
to him:  as he remembered once, in a Barbizon studio, to have
knocked a man down for a Gallic jest on the Queen of Heaven
although Luke's Evangel meant no more to him than the legend of
Eros and Psyche.  But one can't knock oneself down--more's the
pity!

"Oh, all right," said Isabel impatiently.  He was watching her
again!  "But do look where you're going, this isn't Piccadilly.
You had better hold my hand."

Lawrence was six and thirty.  At eighteen he would have snatched
her up and carried her over: at thirty-six he said: "Thanks very
much," touched the tips of her fingers, let them fall. . . .
Unfortunately however he weighed more than Isabel or the
shepherds, and, half way across, the green floor quietly gave way
under him: first one foot immersed itself with a gentle splash
and then the other--"Oh dear" said Isabel, seized with a great
disposition to laugh. Lawrence was not amused.  His boots were
full of mud and water and he had an aching sense of injured
dignity.  The bog was not even dangerous: and ankle-deep,
calf-deep, knee-deep he waded through it and got out on the
opposite bank, bringing up a cloud of little marsh-bubbles on his
heels.  Isabel would have given all the money she had in the
world--about five shillings to go away and laugh, but she had
been well brought up and she remained grave, though she grew very
red.

"I am so sorry!" she faltered, looking up at Lawrence with her
beautiful sympathetic eyes (one must never say I told you so).
"I never thought you really would go in.  You must be very heavy!
Oh! dear, I'm afraid you've spoilt your trousers, and it was all
my fault.  Oh! dear, I hope you won't catch cold.  Do you catch
cold easily?"

"Oh no, thanks.  Do you mind showing me the way to Wanhope?"

Isabel without another word took the steep hillside at a run. In
her decalogue of manners to refuse an apology was an unpardonable
sin.  How differently Val would have behaved!  Val never lost his
temper over trifles, and if anything happened to make him look
ridiculous he was the first to laugh at himself.  At this time in
her life Isabel compared Val with all the other men she met and
much to his advantage.  She forgot that Lawrence was not her
brother and that no man cares to be made ridiculous before a
woman, or rather she never thought of herself as a woman at all.

She pointed east by south across the Plain.  "Do you see that
hawk hovering?  Carry your eye down to the patch of smoke right
under him, in the trees: those are the Wanhope chimneys.  If you
go straight over there till you strike the road, it will bring
you into Chilmark High Street.  Go on past Chapman the draper's
shop, turn sharp down a footpath opposite the Prince of Wales's
Feathers, cross the stream by a footbridge, and you'll be in the
grounds of Wanhope."

"Thank you," said Lawrence, "your directions are most precise."
He had one hand in his pocket feeling among his loose silver:
tips are more easily given than thanks, especially when one is
not feeling grateful, and he was accustomed to pay his way
through the world with the facile profusion of a rich man.  Still
he hesitated: if he had not the refined intuition that would have
made such a blunder impossible to Val Stafford, he had at all
events enough intelligence to hesitate.  There is a coinage that
is safer than silver, and Lawrence thought it might well pass
current (now that she had washed her face) with this fair
schoolgirl of sixteen, ruffled by sun and wind and unaware of her
beauty.  He would not confess to himself that the prospect of
Isabel's confusion pleased him.

He bent his head, smiling into Isabel's eyes. "You're a very kind
little girl.  May I--?"

"No," said Isabel.

The blood sprang to her cheek, but she did not budge, not by a
hair's breadth.  "I beg your pardon," said Lawrence, standing
erect. He had measured in that moment the extent of his error,
and he cursed, not for the first time, his want of perception,
which his ever-candid father had once called a streak of
vulgarity. Defrauded of the pleasure he had promised himself
from the contact of Isabel's smooth cheek, he grew suddenly very
tired of her.  Young girls with their trick of attaching
importance to trifles are a nuisance!

He forced a smile.  "I beg your pardon, I had no idea--  I see
you're ever so much older than I thought you were.  Some day I
shall find my way up here again and you must let me make my peace
with a box of chocolates." He raised his hat--he had not done so
when she opened the door--and swung off across the moor, leaving
the vicar's daughter to go back and scrub Mrs. Drury's floor as
it had never been scrubbed before in its life.  The honours of
the day lay with Isabel, but she was not proud of them, and her
face flamed for the rest of the morning.  "You're worse than
Major Clowes!" she said violently to the kitchen tap.




CHAPTER IV


"How do?" Bernard Clowes was saying an hour later.  "So good of
you to look us up."

Lawrence, coming down from his own room after brushing his muddy
clothes, met his cousin with a good humoured smile which covered
dismay.  Heavens, what a wreck of manhood!  And how chill it
struck indoors, and how dark, after the June sunshine on the
moor! Delicately he took the hand that Clowes held out to him--
but seized in a grip that made him wince.  Clowes gave his curt
"Ha ha!"

"I can still use my arms, Lawrence.  Don't be so timid, I shan't
break to pieces if I'm touched.  It's only these legs of mine
that won't work.  Awkward, isn't it?  But never mind that now,
it's an old story.  You had a mishap on the moor, the servants
tell me?  Ah! while I think of it, let me apologize for leaving
you to walk from the station.  Laura, my wife, you know, forgot
to send the car.  By the by, you know her, don't you?  She says
she met you once or twice before she married me."

Like most men who surrender to their temperaments, Lawrence was
as a rule well served by his intuitions.  Now and again they
failed him as with Isabel, but when his mind was alert it was a
sensitive medium.  He dropped with crossed knees into his chair
and glanced reflectively at Bernard Clowes, heu quantum
mutatus. . . . When the body was wrecked, was there not nine
times out of ten some corresponding mental warp?  Bernard's
fluent geniality struck him as too good to be true--it was not
in Bernard's line: and why translate a close friendship into
"meeting once or twice"? Was Bernard misled or mistaken, or was
he laying a trap?--Not misled: the Laura Selincourt of Hyde's
recollection was not one to stoop to petty shifts.

"'Once or twice?'"  Lawrence echoed: "Oh, much oftener than that!
Mrs. Clowes and I are old friends, at least I hoped we were.  She
can't be so ungracious as to have forgotten me?"

"She seems to have, doesn't she?"  Bernard with his inscrutable
smile let the question drop.  "Just touch that bell, will you,
there's a good fellow? So sorry to make you dance attendance--
Hallo, here she is!"

Laura had been waiting in the parlour, under orders not to enter
till the bell rang.  She had heard all, and wondered whether it
was innocence or subtlety that had walked in and out of Bernard's
trap.  She remembered Hyde was much like other fourth-year
University men except that he was not egotistical and not shy:
he had altered away from his class, but in what direction it was
difficult to tell: there was no deciphering the pleasant
blankness of his features or the conventional smile in his black
eyes.

"I haven't seen you for fourteen years," she said, giving him her
hand.  "Oh Lawrence, how old you make me feel!"

"Shall I swear you haven't changed?  It would be a poor
compliment."

"And one I couldn't return.  I shouldn't have known you, unless
it were by your likeness to Bernard."

"Am I like Bernard?" said Lawrence, startled.

"That's a good joke, isn't it?" said Clowes. "But my wife is
right.  If I were not paralysed, we should be a good bit alike."

Under the casual manner, it was in that moment that Hyde saw his
cousin for what he was: a rebel in agony.  There was a tragedy at
Wanhope then, Lucian Selincourt had not exaggerated.  Though
Lawrence was not naturally sympathetic, he felt an unpleasant
twinge of pity, much the same as when his dog was run over in the
street: a pain in the region of the heart, as well defined as
rheumatism.  In Sally's case, after convincing himself that she
would never get on her legs again, he had eased it by carrying
her to the nearest chemist's: the loving little thing had licked
his hand with her last breath, but when the brightness faded out
of her brown eyes, in his quality of Epicurean, Lawrence had not
let himself grieve over her.  Unluckily one could not pay a
chemist to put Bernard Clowes out of his pain!  "This is going to
be deuced uncomfortable," was the reflection that crossed his
mind in its naked selfishness.  "I wish I had never come near the
place. I'll get away as soon as I can."

Then he saw that Bernard was struggling to turn over on his side,
flapping about with his slow uncouth gestures like a bird with a
broken wing. "Let me--!" Laura's "No, Lawrence!" came too late.
Hyde had taken the cripple in his arms, lifting him like a child:
"You're light for your height," he said softly.  He was as strong
as Barry and as gentle as Val Stafford.  Laura had turned
perfectly white.  She fully expected Clowes to strike his cousin.
She could hardly believe her eyes when with a great gasp of
relief he flung his arm round Hyde's neck and lay back on Hyde's
shoulder.  "Thanks, that's damned comfortable--first easy moment
I've had since last night," he murmured: then, to Laura, "we must
persuade this fellow to stop on a bit.  You're not in a hurry to
get off, are you, Lawrence?"

"Not I. I'll stay as long as you and Laura care to keep me."

"I and Laura, hey?"

Bernard's flush faded: he slipped from Hyde's arm.

"H'm, yes, you're old friends, aren't you?  Met at Farringay?
I'd forgotten that." He shut his eyes.  "And Laura's dying to
renew the intimacy.  It's dull for her down here. Take him into
the garden,  Lally.  You'll excuse me now, Lawrence, I can't talk
long without getting fagged.  Wretched state of things, isn't it?
I'm a vile bad host but I can't help it.  At the present moment
for example I'm undergoing grinding torments and it doesn't amuse
me to make conversation, so you two can cut along and disport
yourselves in any way you like. Give Lawrence a drink, will you,
my love? . . . . Oh no, thanks, you've done a lot but you can't
do any more, no one can, I just have to grin and bear it. Laura,
would you mind ringing for Barry?   I'm not sure I shall show up
again before dinner-time.  It's no end good of you, old chap, to
come to such a beastly house. . ."

He pursued them with banal gratitude till they were out of
earshot, when Lawrence drew a deep breath as if to throw off
some physical oppression.  Under the weathered archway, down the
flagged steps and over the lawn. . . . How still it was, and how
sweet!  The milk-blooms in the spire of the acacia were beginning
to turn faintly brown, but its perfume still hung in the valley
air, mixed with the honey-heavy breath of a great white double
lime tree on the edge of the stream.  There were no dense woods
at Wanhope, the trees were set apart with an airy and graceful
effect, so that one could trace the course of their branches; and
between them were visible hayfields from which the hay had
recently been carried, and the headlands of the Plain--fair
sunny distances, the lowlands bloomed over with summer mist, the
uplands delicately clear like those blue landscapes that in early
Italian pictures lie behind the wheel of Saint Catherine or the
turrets of Saint Barbara.

"A sweet pretty place you have here. I was in China nine weeks
ago.  Everlasting mud huts and millet fields.  I must say there's
nothing  to beat an English June."

"Or a French June?" suggested Laura, her accent faintly sly.
"Lucian said he met you at Auteuil."

"Dear old Lucian!  He seemed very fit, but rather worried about
you, Laura--may I call you Laura?  We're cousins by marriage,
which constitutes a sort of tie.  Besides, you let me at
Farringay."

"Farringay. . . . What a long while ago it seems!  I can't keep
up any pretence of juvenility with you, can I?  We were the same
age then so we're both thirty-six now.  Isn't it strange to think
that half one's life is over?  Mine doesn't seem ever to have
begun.  But you wouldn't feel that: a man's life is so much
fuller than a woman's.  You've been half over the world while
Berns and I have been patiently cultivating our cabbage patch.
I envy you: it would be jolly to have one's mind stored full of
queer foreign adventures and foreign landscapes to think about in
odd moments, even if it were only millet fields."

"I've no ties, you see, nothing to keep me in England.  Come to
think of it, Bernard is my nearest male relative, since my father
died five years ago."

"I heard of that and wanted to write to you, but I wasn't sure of
your address"

"I was in Peru.  They cabled to me to come home when he was taken
ill, but I was up country and missed it.  The first news I had
was a second cable announcing his death.  It was unlucky."

"For both of you," said Laura gently, "if it meant that he was alone
when he died." Sincere herself, Mrs. Clowes exacted from her friends
either sincerity or silence, and her sweet half-melancholy smile
pierced through Hyde's conventional regrets. He was silent, a little
confused.

They were near the river now, and in the pale shadow of the lime
tree Laura sat down on a bench, while Hyde threw himself on a
patch of sunlit turf at her feet.  Most men of his age would have
looked clumsy in such an unbuttoned attitude, but Hyde was an
athlete still, and Laura, who was fond of sketching, admired his
vigorous grace.  She felt intimate with him already: she was not
shy nor was Lawrence, but this was an intimacy of sympathy that
went deeper than the mere trained ease of social intercourse: she
could be herself with him: she could say whatever she liked.
And, looking back on the old days which she had half forgotten,
Laura remembered that she had always felt the same freedom from
constraint in Hyde's company: she had found it pleasant fourteen
years ago, when she was young and had no reserves except a
natural delicacy of mind, and it was pleasant still, but strange,
after the isolating adventure of her marriage.  Perhaps she would
not now have felt it so strongly, if he had not been her
husband's cousin as well as her friend.

She sat with folded hands watching Lawrence with a vague, observant
smile.  Drilled to a stately ease and worn down to a lean hardihood
by his life of war and wandering, he was, like his cousin, a big,
handsome man, but distinguished by the singular combination of black
eyes and fair hair.  Was there a corresponding anomaly in his
temperament?  He looked as though he had lived through many
experiences and had come out of them fortified with philosophy--that
easy negative philosophy of a man of the world, for which death is
only the last incident in life and not the most important. Of
Bernard's hot passions there was not a sign.  Amiable?  Laura fancied
that so far as she was concerned she could count on a personal
amiability: he liked her, she was sure of that, his eyes softened
when he spoke to her.  But the ruck of people?  She doubted whether
Lawrence would have lost his appetite for lunch if they had all been
drowned.

The pleasant, selfish man of the world is a common type, but she
could not confine Lawrence to his type.  He basked in the sun:
with every nerve of his thinly-clad body he relinquished himself
to the contact of the warm grass: deliberately and consciously he
was savouring the honied air, the babble of running water, the
caress of the tiny green blades fresh against his cheek and hand,
the swell of earth that supported his broad, powerful limbs.
This sensuous acceptance of the physical joy of life pleased
Laura, born a Selincourt, bred in France, and temperamentally out
of touch with middle-class England.

Whether one could rely on him for any serviceable friendship
Laura was uncertain.  As a youth he had inclined to idealize
women, but she was suspicious of his later record.  Good or bad
it had left no mark on him.  Probably he had not much principle
where women were concerned.  Few of the men Laura had known in
early life had had any principles of any sort except a common
spirit of kindliness and fair play.  Her brother was always
drifting in and out of amatory entanglements--the hunter or the
hunted--and he was not much the worse for it so far as Laura
could see.  Perhaps Hyde was of the game stamp, in which case
there might well be no lines round his mouth, since lines are
drawn by conflict: or perhaps a wandering life had kept him out
of harm's way.  It made no great odds to Laura--she had not the
shrinking abhorrence which most women feel for that special form
of evil: it was on the same footing in her mind as other errors
to which male human nature is more prone than female, a little
worse than drunkenness but not so bad as cruelty.  From her own
life of serene married maidenhood such sins of the flesh seemed
as remote as murder.

The strong southern light broke in splinters on the dancing
water, and was mirrored in reflected ripplings, silver-pale,
tremulous, over the shadowy understems of grass and loosestrife
on the opposite bank.  "And I never gave you anything to drink
after all!" said Laura after a long, companionable silence.  "Why
didn't you remind me?"

"Because I didn't want it.  Don't you worry: I'll look after
myself. I always do.  I'm a charming guest, no trouble to any
one."

"At least have a cigarette while you're waiting for lunch!  I'm
sorry to have none to offer you."

"Don't you smoke now?  You did at Farringay."

"No, I've given it up. I never much cared for it, and Bernard
does so hate to see a woman smoking. He is very old-fashioned in
some ways."

"And do you always do as Bernard likes?" Lawrence asked with an
impertinence so airy that it left Laura no time to be offended.
"--It was a great shock to me to find him so helpless.  Is he
always like that?"

"He can never get about, if that's what you mean." It was not all
Hyde meant, but Laura had not the heart to repress him; she felt
that thrill of guilty joy which we all feel when some one says
for us what we are too magnanimous to say for ourselves.  "He
lies indoors all day smoking and reading quantities of novels."

"Fearfully sad.  Very galling to the temper.  But there are a lot
of modern mechanical appliances, aren't there, that ought to make
him fairly independent?"

"He won't touch any of them."

"Sick men have their whims.  But can't you drag him out into the
sun?  He ought not to lie in that mausoleum of a hall."

"He has never been in the garden in all our years at Wanhope."

Lawrence took off his straw hat to fan himself with.  It was not
only the heat of the day that oppressed him.  "Poor, wretched
Bernard!  But I dare say I should be equally mulish if I were in
his shoes.  By the by, was he really in pain just now?"

"Really in pain?" Laura echoed.  "Why--why should you say that?"
She no longer doubted Lawrence Hyde's subtlety.  "'He's
constantly in pain and he scarcely ever complains."

"Oh? I didn't know one suffered, with paralysis."

"He has racking neuritis in his shoulders and back."

"That's bad.  I'm afraid he can't be much up to entertaining
visitors.  Does he hate having me here?"

"No! oh no!  I know he sometimes seems a little odd," said poor
Laura, wishing her guest were less clear-sighted: and yet before
he came she had been hoping that Lawrence would divine the less
obvious aspects of the situation, and perhaps, since a man can do
more with a man like Bernard than any woman can, succeed in
easing it.  "But can you wonder?  Struck down like this at five
and twenty! and he never was keen on indoor interests--sport and
his profession were all he cared about.  Please, Lawrence, make
allowances for him--he had been looking forward so much to your
coming here!  A man's society always does him good, and you know
how few men there are in this country: we have only the vicar,
and the doctor, and Jack Bendish and people who stay at the
Castle.  And if you only realized how different he was with you
from what he is with most people, you would be flattered!  He
won't let any one touch him as a rule, except Barry,  whom he
treats like a machine.  But he was quite grateful to you--he
seemed to lean on you."

"Did he?"

She had made Lawrence feel uncomfortable again in the region of
the heart, but he was deliberately stifling pity, as five years
ago, in a Peruvian fonda, he had subdued his filial tenderness
and grief.  He was not callous: if he had had the earlier cable
he would have sailed for home without delay.  But since Andrew
Hyde was dead and would never know whether his son wept for him
or not, Lawrence set himself to repress not only tears but the
fount of human feeling that fed them.  He had dabbled enough in
psychology to know that natural emotions, if not indulged, may
only be driven down under the surface, there to work havoc among
the roots of nerve life.  Lawrence however had no nerves and no
fear of Nemesis, and no inclination to sacrifice himself for
Bernard, and he determined, if Wanhope continued to inspire these
oppressive sensations to send himself a telegram calling him
away.

He changed the subject.  "It's a long while since I've heard
stockdoves cooing.  And, yes, that's a nightingale.  Oh, you
jolly little beggar!" His face fell into boyish creases when he
smiled. "Do you remember the nightingales at Farringay?  Laura--
may I say it?--while rusticating in Arden you haven't forgotten
certain talents you used to possess.  The dress is delightful,
but where the masterhand appears is in the way it's worn.  That
carries me back to Auteull."

"Nonsense!" said Laura, changing her attitude, but not visibly
displeased.

"Oh I shan't say don't move"  Lawrence murmured.  "The slippers
also. . . . Are there many trout in this river, I wonder?  Hallo!
there's a big fellow rubbing along by that black stone!   Must
weigh a cool pound and a half. I suppose the angling rights go
with the property?"

"You can fish all day long if you like: the water is ours, both
sides of it, as far south as the mill above Wharton and a good
half-mile upstream.  The banks are kept clear on principle,
though none of us ever touch a line.  The Castle people come
over now and then: Jack Bendish is keen, and he says our sport
is better than theirs because they fish theirs down too much.
Val put some stock in this spring."

"Val?"

"You seem to fit in so naturally," Laura smiled, "that I forget
you've only just come.  Val is Bernard's agent, and I ought not
to have omitted him from our list of country neighbours, but he's
like one of the family.  Bernard wants you, to meet him because
he was near you in the war.  But I don't know that you'll have
much in common: Val was very junior to you, and he's not keen on
talking about it in any case.  So many men have that shrinking.
Have you, I wonder?"

"I'm afraid I don't take impressions easily. Didn't your friend
enjoy it?"

"He had no chance.  He had only six or seven weeks at the front;
he was barely nineteen, poor boy, when he was invalided out.
That was why Bernard offered him the agency--he was delighted to
lend a helping hand to one of his old brother officers."

"Wounded?"

"Yes, he had his right arm smashed by a revolver bullet.  Then
rheumatic fever set in, and the trouble went to the heart, and he
was very ill for a long time.  I don't suppose he ever has been
so strong as he was before.  What made it so sad was the splendid
way he had just distinguished himself," Laura continued.  She
gave a little sketch of the rescue of Dale, far more vivid than
Val had ever given to his family.  "Perhaps you can imagine what
a fuss Chilmark made over its solitary hero!  We're still proud
of him.  Val is always in request at local shows: he appears on
the platform looking very shy and bored.  Poor boy!  I believe he
sometimes wishes he had never won that embarrassing decoration."

"What's his name?"

"Val Stafford.  Why--do you remember him?"

"Er--yes, I do," said Lawrence.  He took out his cigar case and
turned from Laura to light a cigar.  "I knew a lot of the
Dorchesters. . . Amiable-looking, fair boy, wasn't he?"

"Middle height, and rather sunburnt.  But that description fits
such dozens!  However, I'm taking you up to tea there this
afternoon, if the prospect doesn't bore you, so you'll be able to
judge for yourself.  He has a young sister who threatens to be
very pretty.  Are you still interested in pretty girls, M. le
capitaine?"

"Immensely." Hyde lay back on one arm, smoking rather fast. "I
see no immediate prospect of my being bored, thanks.  Rather fun
running into Stafford again after all these years! I shall love a
chat over old times."  He raised his black eyes, and Laura
started.  Was it her fancy, or a trick of the sunlight, that
conjured up in them that sparkle of smiling cruelty, gone before
she could fix it?  "You say he doesn't care to talk about his
military exploits?  He always was a modest youth, I should love
to see him on a recruiting platform.  Wait till I get him to
myself, he won't be shy with me.  Did you tell him I was coming?"

"I told his sister Isabel, who probably told him. I haven't seen
him since, he hasn't happened to come in; I suppose the hay
harvest has kept him extra busy--Dear me! why, there he is!"

In the field across the stream a young man on horseback had come
into view.  Catching sight of Laura he slipped across a low
boundary wall, his brown mare, a thoroughbred, changing her feet
in a ladylike way on the worn stones, and trotted down to the
riverbank, raising his cap.

"Coming in to lunch, Val?" Laura called across the water.

"Thank you very much, I'm afraid I shan't have time."

"But you haven't been in since Sunday!"  Laura's accent was
reproachful.  "Why are you forsaking us?  We need you more than
the farm does!"

Val's pleasant laugh was the avoidance of an answer.  "So sorry!
But I can't come in now, Laura: I have to go over to Countisford
to talk to Bishop about the new tractor, and I want to get back
by teatime.  Isabel tells me you're bringing Captain Hyde up to
see us." He raised his cap again, smiling directly at Lawrence,
who returned the salute with such gay good humour that Laura was
able to dismiss that first fleeting impression from her mind.
So this was Val Stafford, was it?  And a very personable fellow
too! Hyde had not foreseen that ten years would work as great a
change in Val as in himself, or greater.

"I was going to call on you in due form, sir, but my young
sister hasn't left me the chance.  You haven't forgotten me, have
you?"

"No, I remember you most distinctly.  Delighted to meet you
again."

"Thank you.  The pleasure is mutual.  Now I must push on or I
shall be late."

"He can use his arm, then," said Lawrence, as Val rode away,
jumping his mare over a fence into the road.  "Shaves himself and
all that, I suppose?  He rides well."

"A great deal too well! and rides to hounds too, but he ought not
to do it, and I'm always scolding him.  He can't straighten his
right arm, and has very little power in it.  He was badly thrown
last winter, but directly he got up he was out again on Kitty."

"Living up to his reputation." Lawrence flicked the ash from his
cigar.  "I should have known him anywhere by his eyes."

"He has kept very young, hasn't he?  An uneventful life without
much anxiety does keep people young," philosophized Laura.  "I
feel like a mother to him.  But you'll see more of him this
afternoon."

"So I shall," said Lawrence, "if he isn't detained at
Countisford."




CHAPTER V


The reason why Lawrence found Isabel scrubbing Mrs. Drury's
floor was that Dorrie's pretty, sluttish little mother had been
whisked off to the Cottage Hospital with appendicitis an hour
earlier.  She was in great distress about Dorrie when Isabel,
coming in with the parish magazine, offered to stay while Drury
went to fetch an aunt from Winterbourne Stoke.  When Drury drove
up in a borrowed farm cart, Isabel without expecting or receiving
many thanks dragged her bicycle to the top of the glen and pelted
off across the moor.  Her Sunbeam was worn and old, so old that
it had a fixed wheel, but what was that to Isabel?  She put her
feet up and rattled down the hill, first on the turf and then on
the road, in a happy reliance on her one serviceable brake.

Her father was locked in his study writing a sermon: Isabel
however tumbled in by the window.  She sidled up to Mr. Stafford,
sat on his knee, and wound one arm round his neck.  "Jim
darling," she murmured in his ear, "have you any money?"

"Isabel," said Mr. Stafford, "how often have I told you that I
will  not be interrupted in the middle of my morning's work?  You
come in like a whirlwind, with holes in your stockings--"

Isabel giggled suddenly.  "Never mind, darling, I'll help you
with your sermon.  Whereabouts are you?  Oh!--'I need not tell
you, my friends, the story we all know so well'--Jim, that's
what my tutor calls 'Redundancy and repetition.' You know quite
well you're going to tell us every word of it.  Darling take its
little pen and cross it out--so--with its own nasty little
cross-nibbed J--"

"What do you mean by saying you want money,"  Mr. Stafford
hurriedly changed the subject, "and how much do you want?  The
butcher's bill came to half a sovereign this week, and I must
keep five shillings to take to old Hewitt--"

"I want pounds and pounds."

"My dear!" said Mr. Stafford aghast.  He took off his spectacles
to polish them, and then as he put them on again, "If it's for
that Appleton boy I really can't allow it.  There's nothing
whatever wrong with him but laziness"

"It isn't for Appleton.  It's for me myself."  Isabel sat up
straight, a little flushed.  "I'm growing up.  Isn't it a
nuisance? I want a new dress!  I did think I could carry on till
the winter, but I can't.  Could you let me have enough to buy one
ready-made?  Chapman's have one in their window that would fit me
pretty well.  It's rather dear, but somehow when I make my own
they never come right.  And Rowsley says I look like a scarecrow,
and even Val's been telling me to put my hair up!"

"Put your hair up, my child?  Why, how old are you? I don't like
little girls to be in a hurry to turn into big ones"

"I'm not a little girl," said Isabel shortly.  "I'm nineteen."

"Nineteen? no, surely not!"

"Twenty next December."

"Dear me!" said Mr. Stafford, quite overcome. "How time flies!"
He set her down from his knee and went to his cash box.  "If Val
tells you to put your hair up, no doubt you had better do it." He
paused.  "I don't know whether Val said you ought to have a new
frock, though?  I can't bear spending money on fripperies when
even in our own parish so many people--" Some glimmering
perception reached him of the repressed anguish in Isabel's eyes.
"But of course you must have what you need.  How much is it?"

"1. 11. 6."

"Oh, my dear!  That seems a great deal."

"It isn't really much for a best dress," said poor Isabel.

"But you mustn't be extravagant, darling," said Mr. Stafford
tenderly.  "I see other girls running about in little cotton
dresses or bits of muslin or what not that look very nice--much
nicer on a young girl than 'silksand fine array.' Last time
Yvonne came to tea she wore a little frock as simple as a
child's"

"She did," said Isabel.  "She picked it up in a French sale.  It
was very cheap--only 275 francs."

"Eleven pounds!" Mr. Stafford held up his hands.  "My dear, are
you sure?"

"Quite," said Isabel. Mr. Stafford sighed. "I must speak to
Yvonne.  'How hardly shall they...'"  He took a note out of his
cash box. "Can't you make that do--?" he was beginning when a
qualm of compunction came upon him.  After all it was a long time
since he had given Isabel any money for herself, and there must
be many little odds and ends about a young girl's clothing that
an elderly man wouldn't understand.  He took out a second note
and pressed them both hurriedly into Isabel's palm.  "There! now
run off and don't ask me for another penny for the next
twelvemonth!" he exclaimed, beaming over his generosity though
more than half ashamed of it.  "You extravagant puss, you! dear,
dear, who'd have a daughter?"

Isabel gave him a rather hasty though warm embrace (she was
terribly afraid that his conscience would prick him and that he
would take the second note away again), and flew out of the
window faster than she had come in.  The clock was striking a
quarter past one, and she had to scamper down to Chapman's to buy
the dress, and a length of lilac ribbon for a sash, and a packet
of bronze hairpins, and be back in time to lay the cloth for two
o'clock lunch.  If it is only for idle hands that Satan finds
mischief, he could not have had much satisfaction out of Isabel
Stafford.

Soon after four Mrs. Clowes stepped from her car, shook out her
soft flounces, and led the way across the lawn, Lawrence Hyde in
attendance.  The vicarage was an old-fashioned house too large
for the living, its long front, dotted with rosebushes, rising up
honey-coloured against the clear green of a beech grove.  There
are grand houses that one sees at once will never be comfortable,
and there are unpretentious houses that promise to be cool in
summer and warm in winter and restful all the year round: of such
was Chilmark vicarage, sunning itself in the afternoon clearness,
while faded green sunblinds filled the interior with verdant
shadow, and the smell of sweetbrier and Japanese honeysuckle
breathed round the rough-cast walls.

Isabel had laid tea on the lawn, and Mrs. Clowes smiled to herself
when she saw seven worn deck chairs drawn up round the table; she was
always secretly amused at Isabel in her character of hostess, at the
naive natural confidence with which the young lady scattered
invitations and dispensed hospitality.  But when Isabel came forward
Laura's covert smile passed into irrepressible surprise.  She raised
her eyebrows at Isabel, who replied by an almost imperceptible but
triumphant nod.  In her white and mauve embroidered muslin, her dark
hair accurately parted at the side of her head and drawn back into
what she called a soup plate of plaits, Isabel no longer threatened
to be pretty.  Impelled by that singularly pure benevolence which a
woman who has ceased to hope for happiness feels for the eager
innocence of youth, Laura drew her close and kissed her.  "My sweet,
I'm so glad," she whispered. A bright blush was Isabel's only answer.
Then Mrs. Clowes stepped back and indicated her cavalier, very big
and handsome in white clothes and a Panama hat: "May I introduce--
Captain Hyde, Miss Stafford," with a delicate formality which
thrilled Isabel to her finger-tips.  Let him see if he would call her
a little girl now!

Lawrence recognized Isabel at a glance, but he was not abashed.
He scarcely gave her a second thought till he had satisfied
himself that Val Stafford was not present.  Lawrence smiled, not
at all surprised: he had had a presentiment that Val, the modest
easy-going Val of his recollections, would be detained at
Countisford: too modest by half, if he was shy of meeting an old
friend!  Rowsley Stafford was doing the honours and came forward
to be introduced to Lawrence, a ceremony remarkable only because
they both took an instantaneous dislike to each other.  Lawrence
disliked Rowsley because he was young and well-meaning and the
child of a parsonage, and Rowsley disliked Lawrence because a
manner which owed some of its serenity to his physical advantages,
and his tailor, and his income, irritated the susceptibilities of
the poor man's son.

Poor men's sons were often annoyed by Lawrence Hyde's manner.
Not so Jack Bendish, sprawling in a deck chair which had no
sound pair of notches: not so his wife, Laura's sister, Yvonne of
the Castle, curled up on a moth-eaten tigerskin rug, and clad in
raiment of brown and silver which even Mr. Stafford would not
have credited to Chapman's General Drapery and Grocery Stores.
Isabel was innocently surprised when the Bendishes found they had
met Captain Hyde in town.  Laura's smile was very faintly tinged
with bitterness: she knew of that small world where every one
meets every one, though she had been barred out of it most of her
life, first by her disreputable father and then by the tragedy of
her marriage: Rowsley pulled his tooth-brush moustache and said
nothing.  He was young, but not so young as Isabel, and there
were moments when he felt his own footing at the Castle to be
vaguely anomalous.

However, the talk ran easily.  Lawrence, as was inevitable, sat
down by Yvonne Bendish: she did not raise an eyelash to summon
him, but it seemed to be a natural law that the rich unmarried
man should sit beside her and talk cosmopolitan scandal, and show
a discreet appreciation of her clothing and her eyes.  Meanwhile
the other four conversed with much greater simplicity upon such
homely subjects as the coming school treat and the way Isabel had
done her hair, Rowsley's regimental doings, and a recent turn-up
between Jack Bendish as deputy M. F. H. and Mr. Morley the Jew.

Bernard Clowes had described Mrs. Jack Bendish as a plain little
devil, but as a rule the devilry was more conspicuous than the
plainness.  She was a tall and extremely slight woman, her
features insignificant and her complexion sallow, but her figure
indecorously beautiful under its close French draperies.  And yet
if she had let Lawrence alone he would have gone over to the
other camp. How they laughed, three out of the four of them, and
what marvellous good tea they put away!  The little Stafford girl
had a particularly infectious laugh, a real child's giggle which
doubled her up in her chair.  Lawrence had no desire to join in
the school treat and barnyard conversation, but he would have
liked to sit and listen.

"If no one will have any more tea," said Isabel, jumping up and
shaking the crumbs out of her lap, "will you all come and eat
strawberries?"

"Isn't Val coming in?" asked Laura.

"Not till after five.  He said we weren't to wait for him: he was
delayed in getting off.  He sent his love to you, Laura, and he
was very sorry."

"His love!" said Yvonne Bendish.

"My dear Isabel, I'm sure he didn't," said Laura laughing.

"Kind regards then," said Isabel: "not that it signifies, because
we all do love you, darling.  Val's always telling me that if I
want to be a lady when I grow up I must model my manners on yours.
Not yours, Yvonne."

"After that the least I can do is to wait and give him his tea
when he does appear," said Laura. "It's very hot among the
strawberry beds, and I'm a little tired: and I haven't seen Val
for days."

"No more have I," said Yvonne in her odd drawl, "and I'm tired
too."  Mrs. Jack Bendish was made of whipcord: she had been
brought up to ride Irish horses over Irish fences and to dance all
night, after tramping the moors all day with a gun.  "I'll stay with
you and rest.  Jack, you run on.  Bring me some big ones in a cabbage
leaf.  And, Captain Hyde, you'll find them excellent with bread and
butter." By which Lawrence perceived that his interest in the other
camp had not gone unobserved, and that was the worst of Yvonne:
but--and that was the best of Yvonne: there was no tinge of spite in
her jeering eyes.

So the sisters remained on the lawn, and Jack Bendish, a
perfectly simple young man, walked off with Rowsley to pick a
cabbage leaf.  Isabel was demureness itself as she followed with
Captain Hyde. The embroidered muslin gave her courage, more
courage perhaps than if she could have heard his frank opinion of
it.  "The trailing skirt of the young girl," said Miss Stafford
to herself, "made a gentle frou-frou as she swept over the velvet
lawn." A quoi revent les junes filles?  Very innocent was the
vanity of Isabel's dreams.  She was not strictly pretty, but she
was young and fresh, and the spotless muslin fell in graceful
folds round her tall, lissome figure.  To the jaded man of the
world at her side . . . .  Alas for Isabel!  The jaded man of
the world was a trifle bored: he was easily bored.  He liked
listening to Miss Stafford's artless merriment but he had no
desire to share in it; what had he to say to a promoted
schoolgirl in her Sunday best?

He began politely making conversation.  "What a pretty place this
is!" It seemed wiser not to refer even by way of apology to the
indiscretion of the morning.  "You have a beautiful view over the
Plain.  Rather dreary in winter though, isn't it?"

"I like it best then," said Isabel briefly.  "Don't you want any
strawberries?" She indicated the netted furrows among which
little could be seen of Rowsley and Jack Bendish except their
stern ends.

"No, thanks, I had too much tea." Isabel checked herself on the
brink of reminding him that he had eaten only two cucumber
sandwiches and a macaroon.  In Lawrence Hyde's society her
conversation had not its usual happy flow, she felt tonguetied
and missish.  "How close you are to the Downs here!" They were
following a flagged path between espalier pear trees, and beds of
broccoli and carrots and onions, and borders full of old standard
roses and lavender and sweet herbs and tall lilies; at the end
appeared a wishing gate in a low stone wall, and beyond it,
pathless and sunshiny, the southern stretches of the Plain.  "Are
you a great gardener, Miss Isabel?"

"Some," said Isabel. "I look after my pet vegetables.  The
flowers have to look after themselves.  My father has eruptions
of industry."  She overflowed into a little laugh.  "We don't
encourage him in it.  He had a bad attack of weeding last spring,
and pulled up all my little salads by mistake."  Now that small
tale, she reflected, would have tickled Jack Bendish, but Captain
Hyde, though he smiled at it dutifully, did not seem to be
amused.

"Oh bother you!" Isabel apostrophised him mentally.  "You're not
the grandson of a duke anyhow. I expect you would be nicer if you
were."

She folded her arms on the gate and gazed across the Plain.  The
village below was not far off, but they could see nothing of it,
buried as it was in the river-valley and behind a green arras of
beech leaves: in every other direction, far as the eye could see,
leagues of feathery pale grass besprinkled with blue and yellow
flowers went away in ribbed undulations, occasionally rolling up
into a crest on which a company of fir trees hung like men on
march.  The sun was pale and smudged, the sky veiled: on its
silken pallor floated, here and there, a blot of dark low cloud,
and the clear distances presaged rain.

"May I--?" Lawrence took out his cigarettes. Isabel gave a
grudging assent.  She could not understand how any one could be
willing to taint the sweet summering air that had blown over so
many leagues of grass and flowers.  "Dare I offer you one?"
Lawrence asked, tendering his case.  It was of gold, and bore his
monogram in diamonds. Isabel eyed it scornfully.  Jack Bendish's
was only silver and much scratched and dinted into the bargain.
Now Jack Bendish was the grandson of a duke.

"'No thank you," said Miss Stafford.  "I detest smoking."

 To this Lawrence made no reply at all, no doubt, thought Isabel,
because he did not consider it worth one.  She was proportionally
surprised and a trifle flattered when he replaced the cigarette
to which he had just helped himself. "'The young girl had not
realized her own power.  She was only just coming into her
woman's kingdom.  Her heart beat faster and a vermilion blush
dyed her pale cheek."' Isabel's favourite authors were Stevenson
and Mr. Kipling, but her mental rubric insisted on clothing itself
in the softer style of Molly Bawn.

"I don't detest other people's smoking," she explained in a
rather penitent tone.

"Let's get out on the downs," said Lawrence.  He swung the gate
to and fro for her, then took off his hat and strolled slowly by
her side through the rustling grass.  "Really," he said, more to
himself than to her, "there are places in England that are very
well worth while."

"Worth while what?"

"Er--worth coming to see.  I suppose there isn't much shooting
to be had except rabbits." He swung an imaginary gun to his
shoulder and sighted it at a quarry which seemed to Isabel to be
equally imaginary.  "See him?  Under that heap of stones left of
the beech ring." Isabel's vision was both keen and practised, but
she saw nothing till the rabbit showed his white scut in a
flickering leap to earth.

"You have jolly good eyes," she conceded, still rather
grudgingly.

"So have bunnies, unluckily.  Major Clowes tells me there's
pretty good shooting over Wanhope. I suppose your brother looks
after it, for of course Clowes can do nothing.  It was a great
stroke of luck for my cousin, getting hold of a fellow like Val."

"I don't know about that.  It was a great stroke of luck for
Val."

"I want so much to meet him.  I'm disappointed at missing him this
afternoon. I remember him perfectly in the army, though he was
only a boy then and I wasn't much more myself.  He must be close
on thirty now.  But when I met him this morning it struck me he
hadn't altered much."  Isabel, looking up eager-eyed, felt
faintly and mysteriously chilled.  Was there a point of cruelty
in Hyde's smile? as there was now and then in his cousin's: she
had seen Bernard Clowes watching his wife with the same secret
glow.

"Val is old for his age," she said.  "He always seems much older
than my other brother, although there are only two or three years
between them."

"Probably his spell in the army aged him.  It must have been a
formative experience."

This time Isabel had no doubt about it, there was certainly a
touch of cruel irony in Hyde's soft voice.  Her breath came fast.
"Why do you say that": she cried--"say it like that?"

The smile faded: Lawrence turned, startled out of his self-possession.
"Like what?"

"As if you we're sneering at Val!"

"I?--  My dear Miss Isabel, aren't you a little fanciful?"

Isabel supposed so too, on second thoughts: how could any man
sneer at a record like Val's: unless indeed it were with that
peculiarly graceless sneer which springs from jealousy?  And,
little as she liked Captain Hyde, she could not think him weak
enough for that. She blushed again, this time without any rubric,
and hung her head.  "I'm sorry! But you did say it as if you
didn't mean it.  Perhaps you think we make too much fuss over
Val?  But in these sleepy country villages exciting things don't
happen every day.  I dare say you've had scores of adventures
since that time you met Val.  But Chilmark hasn't had any.  That
makes us remember."

"My dear child," said Lawrence with an earnest gentleness foreign
to his ordinary manner, "you misunderstood me altogether.  I
liked your brother very much.  Remember, I was there when he won
his decoration--" He broke off.  An intensely visual memory had
flashed over him.  Now he knew of whom Isabel had reminded him
that morning:  she had her brother's eyes.

"At the very time?  Were you really?  Do, do, do tell me about
it!  Major Clowes never will--he pretends he can't remember."

"Has Val never told you?"

"Hardly any more than was in the official account--that he was
left between the lines after one of our raids, and went back in
spite of his wound to bring in Mr. Dale.  He had to wait till
after dark?"  Lawrence nodded.. "And 'under particularly trying
conditions.' Why was that?"

"Because Dale was so close to the German lines. He was entangled
in their wire."

Isabel shuddered.  "It seems so long ago.  One can't understand
why such cruelties were ever allowed.  Of course they will never
be again." This naive voice of the younger generation made
Lawrence smile.  "And Val had to cut their wire?"

"To peel it off Dale, or peel Dale off it--what was left of him.
He didn't live more than twenty minutes after he was brought in."

"Did you know Dale?"

"Not well: he was in my cousin's company, not in mine."

"And was Val under fire at the time?"

"Under heavy fire.  The Boches were sending up starshells that
made the place as light as day."

"I can't understand how Val could do it with his broken arm."

"His arm wasn't broken when he cut their wires."

"Oh!  When was it then?"

Hyde flicked with his stick at the airy heads of grass that rose
up thin-sown out of a burnished carpet of lady's slipper.  His
manner was even but his face was dark.  "He had it splintered by
a revolver--shot on his way home, near our lines."

"Oh!  But the Army doctors said the shot must have been fired at
close quarters?"

"There, you see I'm not much of an authority,  am I?  No doubt,
if they said so, they were right.  The fact is I was knocked out
myself that afternoon with a rifle bullet in the ribs.  It was a
hot corner for the Wintons and Dorsets."

"Were you?  I'm sorry." Isabel ran her eyes with a touch of
whimsical solicitude over Hyde's tall easy figure and the
exquisite keeping of his white clothes.  Difficult to connect him
with the bloody disarray of war!  "Were you too left lying
between the lines?"

"With a good many others, English and German.

"There was a fellow near me that hadn't a scratch.  He was
frightened--mad with fear: he lay up in the long grass and wept
most of the day.  I never hated any one so much in my life.  I
could have shot him with pleasure."

"German, of course?"

Hyde smiled.  "German, of course."

"If he had been English he would have deserved to be shot," said
Isabel briefly: then, reverting to a subject in which she was far
more deeply interested, "Rowsley--my second brother--said I
wasn't to cross-examine you: but it was a great temptation,
because one never can get anything out of Val.  And after all
we've the right to be proud of him!  Even then, when every one
was so brave, you would say, wouldn't you, that Val earned his
distinction? It really was what the Gazette called it, 'conspicuous
gallantry'?"

"It was a daring piece of work," said Lawrence, reddening to his
hair.  He fought down a sensation so unfamiliar that he could
scarcely put a name to it, and forced himself on: "We were all proud
of him and we none of us forget it.  Don't tell him I said so,
though.  It isn't etiquette.  You won't think I'm trying to minimize
what Val did, will you, if I say that we who were through the
fighting saw so many horrible and ghastly things . . ."  Again his
voice failed.  He was aware of Isabel's bewilderment, but he was
seeing more ghosts than he had seen in all the intervening years of
peace, and they came between him and the sunlit landscape and
Isabel's young eyes.  War! always war! human bodies torn to rags in a
moment, and the flowers of the field wet with a darker moisture than
rain: the very smell of the trenches was in his nostrils, their odour
of blood and decay.  What in heaven's name had brought it all back,
and, stranger still, what had moved him to speak of it and to betray
feelings whose very existence was unknown to him and which he had
never betrayed before?

The silence was brief though to Lawrence it seemed endless.  He
drove the ghosts back to quarters and finished quietly: "Well, we
won't talk about that, it's not a pleasant subject.  Only give
Val my love and tell him if he doesn't look me up soon I shall
come and call on him.  We're much too old friends to stand on
ceremony."

"All right, I will," said Isabel.

There was a shrub of juniper close by, and she felt under its
sharp branches.  "Do you like honeysuckle?" She held up a fresh
sprig fragrant with its pale horns, which she had tracked to
covert by its scent.  Lawrence was not given to wearing
buttonholes, but he understood the friendly and apologetic
intention and inclined his broad shoulder for Miss Stafford to
pass the stem through the lapel of his coat.  Isabel had not
intended to pin it in for  him, but she was generally willing to
do what was expected of her.  She took a pin from her own dress
(there were plenty in it), and fastened the flower deftly on the
breast of Captain Hyde's white jacket.

And so standing before him, her head bent over her task, she
unwittingly left Lawrence free to observe the texture of her
skin, bloomed over with down like a peach, and the curves of her
young shoulders, a little inclined to stoop, as young backs often
are in the strain of growth, but so firm, so fresh, so white
under the thin stuff of her bodice:  below her silken plaits, on
the nape of her neck, a curl or two of hair grew in close rings,
so fine that it was almost indistinguishable from its own shadow.
Swiftly, without warning, Lawrence was aware of a pleasurable
commotion in his veins, a thrill that shook through him like a
burst of gay music.  This experience was not novel, he had felt
it three or four times before in his life, and on the spot, while
it was sending gentle electric currents to his finger-tips, he
was able to analyse its origin--item, to warm weather and
laziness after the strain of his Chinese journey, so much: item,
to Isabel's promise of beauty, so much: item, to the disparity
between her age and his own, to her ignorance and immaturity, the
bloom on the untouched fruit, so much more.  But there was this
difference between the present and previous occasions when he had
fallen or thought of falling in love, that he desired no victory:
no, it was he and not Isabel who was to capitulate, leaning his
forehead upon her young hand. . . . And he had never seen her
till that morning, and the child was nineteen, the daughter of a
country vicarage, brought up to wear calico and to say her
prayers!  more, she was Val Stafford's sister, and she loved her
brother.  Lawrence gave himself a gentle shake.  At six and
thirty it is time to put away childish things. "Thank you very
much.  Is that Mrs. Clowes calling us?"

It was Laura Clowes and Yvonne Bendish, and Lawrence, as he
strolled back with Isabel to the garden gate, had an uneasy
suspicion that the episode of the honeysuckle had been overseen.
Laura was graver than usual, while Yvonne had a sardonic spark in
her eye.  "I'm afraid it's no use waiting any longer, Isabel,"
said Laura.

"What do you think, Lawrence?  It's after six o'clock."

"Hasn't Val come?" said Isabel.

"No, he must have been kept at Countisford.  It's a long ride for
him on such a hot day.  Perhaps Mrs. Bishop made him stay to
tea."

"As if he would stay with any old Mrs. Bishop when he knew you were
coming here!" said Isabel scornfully.  "Poor old Val, I shan't tell
him how you misjudged him, he'd be so hurt.  But I'll send him down,
shall I, to see you and Captain Hyde after supper?--Tired?  Oh no,
he's never too tired to go to Wanhope."

She kissed Laura, gave Lawrence her sweetest friendly smile, and
returned to the lawn, where Yvonne had apparently taken root upon
her tigerskin.  Isabel heard Rowsley say, "Make her shut up,
Jack," but before she could ask why Yvonne was to be shut up the
daughter of Lilith had opened fire on the daughter of Eve.  "And
what did you think of Lawrence Hyde?" Mrs. Bendish asked,
stretching herself out like a snake and examining Isabel out of
her pale eyes, much the colour of an unripe gooseberry.  "Was he
very attractive?  Oh Isabel! oh Isabel!  I should not have
thought this of one so young."

Isabel considered the point. "I can't understand him," she said
honestly. "I liked parts of him.  He isn't so--so homogeneous as
most people are.

"Did he ask you for the honeysuckle?"

"No, I gave it to him for a peace offering.  I hurt his feelings,
and afterwards I was sorry and wanted to make it up with him.
But would you have thought he had any feelings? any, that is,
that anything I said would hurt?"

"Certainly not," from Rowsley.

"Any woman can hurt any man," said Yvonne.  "But, of course, you
aren't a woman, Isabel.  What was the trouble?"

"Oh, something about the war."

"No, my child, it wasn't about the war.  It was something that
stung up his vanity or his self-love.  Lawrence isn't a
sentimentalist like Jack or Val."  Here Jack Bendish got as far
as an artless "Oh, I say!" but his wife paid no attention.
"Lawrence never took the war seriously."

"But he did," insisted Isabel.  "He coloured all over his face--"

She paused, realizing that Mrs. Bendish, under her mask of
scepticism, was agog with curiosity.  Isabel was not fond of
being drawn out.  Lawrence had given her his confidence, and she
valued it, for with all her ignorance of society she had seen too
much of plain human nature to suppose that he was often taken off
his guard as he had been by her: and was she going to expose him
to Yvonne's lacerating raillery?  A thousand times no!  "I
misunderstood something he said about Val," she continued with
scarcely a break, and falling back on one of those explanations
that deceive the sceptical by their economy of truth.  "It was
stupid of me, and awkward for him, so I had to apologize."

"I see.  Come, Jack." Yvonne rose to her feet,  more like a snake
than ever in her flexibility and swiftness, and held Isabel to
her for a moment, her arm round her young friend's waist.  "But
if you pin any more buttonholes into Captain Hyde's coat," the
last low murmur was only for Isabel's ear, "he will infallibly
kiss you: so now you are forewarned and can choose whether or no
you will continue to pay him these little attentions."

Isabel was not disturbed.  She had early formed the habit of not
attending to Mrs. Bendish, and she unwound herself without even
changing colour.

"You always remind me of Nettie Hills at the Clowes's lodge," she
retorted.  "Mrs. Hills says she's that flighty in the way she
carries on, no one would believe what a good sensible girl she is
under all her nonsense, and walks out with her own young man as
regular as clockwork."




CHAPTER VI


And that evening Val Stafford came to pay his respects to his old
comrade in arms.  Lawrence had travelled so much that it never
took him long to settle down.  Even at Wanhope he managed within
a few hours to make himself at home.  A trap sent over to
Countisford brought back his manservant and an effeminate
quantity of luggage, and by teatime his room was strewn from end
to end with a litter of expensive trifles more proper to a pretty
woman than to a man.  Mrs. Clowes, slipping in to cast a
housewifely glance to his comfort, held up her hands in mock
dismay.  "You must give yourself plenty of time to dust all this
tomorrow morning, Caroline," she said to the house-maid.  She
laughed at the gold brushes and gold manicure set, the polished
array of boots, the fine silk and linen laid out on his bed, the
perfume of sandalwood and Russian leather and eau de cologne.
"And I hope you will be able to make Captain Hyde's valet
comfortable.  Did he say whether he liked his room?"

"I reelly don't know, ma'am,"  replied the truthful Caroline.
"You see he's a foreigner, and most of what he says, well, it
reelly sounds like swearing.

"Madame." It was Gaston himself, appearing from nowhere at
Laura's elbow, and saluting her with an empressement that was
due, if Laura had only known it, to the harmony of her flounces.
Laura eyed the little Gaston kindly.  "You are of the South,
are you not?" she said in her soft French, the French of a
Frenchwoman but for a slight stiffness of disuse: "and are you
comfortable here, Gaston?  You must tell me if there is anything
you want."

Gaston was grateful less for her solicitude than for the sound
of his own language.  When she had left the room he caught up a
photograph, thrust it back into his master's dressingcase, and
spat through the open window--"C'est fini avec toi, vieille
biche," said he: "allons donc! j'aime mieux celle-ci par
exemple."

But, though Laura laughed, it was with indulgence.  While Isabel
and Lawrence were conversing among the juniper bushes, the
Bendishes had given Mrs. Clowes a sketch of Hyde which had
confirmed her own impressions.  Although he liked good food and
wine and cigars, he liked sport and travel too, and music and
painting and books.  His eighty-guinea breechloaders were dearer
to him than the lady of the ivory frame.  Who was the lady of the
ivory frame?  Gaston would have been happy to define with the
leer of the boulevards the relations between his master and
Philippa Cleve.  Gaston had no doubt of them, nor had Frederick
Cleve; Philippa had high hopes; Lawrence alone hung fire.  If he
continued to meet her and she to offer him lavish opportunities
the situation might develop, for Lawrence was not sufficiently
in earnest in any direction to play what has been called the
ill-favoured part of a Joseph, but in his heart of hearts, this
Joseph wished Potiphar would keep his wife in order.  And,
strange to say, Yvonne was not far wide of the mark.  She
believed that Joseph was a sinner but not a willing one: and Jack
Bendish, a little astray among these feminine subtleties,
assented after his fashion--"Hyde's rather an ass in some
ways," he said simply, "but he's an all-round sportsman."

Thus primed, Laura was able to draw out her guest, and dinner
passed off gaily, for Bernard Clowes was no dog in the manger,
and listened with sparkling eyes to adventures that ranged from
Atlantic sailing in a thirty-ton yacht to a Nigerian rhinoceros
shoot.  Nor was Lawrence the focus of the lime-light-he was
unaffectedly modest; but when, in expatiating on a favourite
rifle, he confessed to having held fire till a charging
rhinoceros bull was within eight and twenty yards of him, Bernard
could supply the footnotes for himself. "I knew she wouldn't let
me down," said Lawrence apologetically.  "Ah! she was a bonnie
thing, that old gun of mine.  Ever shoot with a cordite rifle?"
Bernard shook his head.  "I'd like you to see my guns," Lawrence
continued, too shrewd to be tactful. "I'll have them sent down,
shall I? Or Gaston shall run up and fetch 'em. He loves a day in
town."

Under this bracing treatment Bernard became more natural than
Laura had seen him for a long time, and he stayed in the
drawingroom after dinner, chatting with Lawrence and listening to
his wife at the piano, till Laura thought the Golden Age had come
again.  How long would it last?  Philosophers like Laura never
ask that question.  At all events it lasted till half past nine,
when the sick man was honestly tired and the lines of no
fictitious pain were drawn deep about his mouth and eyes.

Mrs. Clowes went away with her husband, who liked to have her at
hand while Barry was getting him to bed, and Lawrence had
strolled out on the lawn, when a shutter was thrown down in
Bernard's room and Laura reappeared at the open window.
"Lawrence, are you there?" she asked, shading her eyes between
her hands.

"Here," said Lawrence removing his cigar.

"Will you be so very kind as to unlock the gate over the
footbridge?  If Val does look us up tonight he's sure to scramble
over it, which is awkward for him with his stiff arm."

She dropped a key down to Lawrence.  A voice--Bernard's called
from within, "Good night, old fellow, thanks for a pleasant
evening.  I'm being washed now."

The night was overcast, warm, quiet, and very dark under the
trees: there was husbandry in heaven, their candles were all out.
And by the bridge under the pleated and tasselled branches of an
alder coppice the river ran quiet as the night, only uttering an
occasional murmur or a deep sucking gurgle when a rotten stick,
framed in foam, span down the silken whirl of an eddy: but
down-stream, where waifs of mist curled like smoke off a grey mirror,
there was a continual talking of open water, small cold river voices
that chattered over a pebbly channel, or heaped themselves up and
died down again in the harsh distant murmur of the weir.  The
quantity of water that passed through the lock gates should have been
constant from minute to minute, but the roar of it was not constant,
nor the pitch of its note, which fell when Lawrence stood erect, but
rose to a shrill overtone when he bent his head: sometimes one would
have thought the river was going down in spate, and then the volume
of sound dwindled to a mere thread, a lisp in the air.  Lawrence was
observing these phenomena with a mind vacant of thought when he heard
footsteps brushing through the grass by the field path from the
village.  Val had come, then, after all!

Val had naturally no idea that any one was near him.  He had
reached the gate and was preparing to vault it when out of the
dense alder-shadow a hand seized his arm.  "So sorry if I
startled you."  But Val was not visibly startled.  "Mrs. Clowes
sent me, down to let you in."

"Did she?  Very good of her, and of you," returned Val's voice,
pleasant and friendly.  "She always expects me to walk into the
river.  But, after all, I shouldn't be drowned if I did.  Is
Clowes gone to bed?"

"He's on his way there.  Did you want to see him?"

"I'll look in for five minutes after Barry has tucked him up.
Have you been introduced to Barry yet?  He's quite a character."

"So I should imagine.  He came in to cart Bernard off, and did
something clumsy, or Bernard said he did, and Bernard cuffed his
head for him.  Barry didn't seem to mind much.  Why does he stay?
Is it devotion?"

"He stays because your cousin pays him twice what he would get
anywhere else.  No, I shouldn't call Barry devoted.  But he does
his work well, and it isn't anybody's job."

"I believe you," Lawrence muttered.

"Warm tonight, isn't it?  No, thanks, I won't have anything to
drink--  I've only just finished supper.  By the by, let me
apologize for my absence this afternoon.  I was most awfully
sorry to miss you, but I never got away from Countisford till
after half past five, and my mare cast a shoe on the way back.
Then I tried to get her shod in Liddiard St. Agnes, which is one
of those idyllic villages that people write books about, and
there I found an Odd-fellows' fete in full swing.  The village
blacksmith was altogether too harmonious for business, so not
being able to cuff his head, like your cousin, I was obliged to
walk home.

"Really'?  Have a cigar if you won't have anything else." Val
accepted one, and in default of a match Lawrence made him light
it from his own.  He was entirely at his ease, though the
situation struck him as bizarre, but he did not believe that Val
was at ease, no, not for all his natural manner and fertility in
commonplace.  Lawrence was faintly sorry for the poor devil, but
only faintly: after all, an awkward interview once in ten years
was a low price to pay for that night which Lawrence never had
forgotten and never would forget. He had an excellent memory,
photographic and phonographic, a gift that wise men covet for
themselves but deprecate in their friends.

Lawrence was no Pharisee, but he was not a Samaritan either.  He
had deliberately set himself to pull up any stray weeds of moral
scruple that lingered in a mind stripped bare of Christian ethic,
a task harder than some realize, since thousands of men who have
no faith in Christ practise virtues that were not known for
virtues by the Western world before Christ came to it.  But every
man is his own special pleader, and Lawrence, whose theory was
that one man is as good as another, retained a good hearty
prejudice against certain forms of moral failure, and excused it
on the ground that it was rather a taste than a principle. He
looked directly into Stafford's eyes as the red glow of the cigar
flamed and faded between the two heads so close together, and in
his own eyes there was the same point of smiling ironic cruelty
that Isabel had read in them--the same as Stafford himself had
read in them not so many years ago.  But apparently Stafford read
nothing in them now.

"Sit down, won't you? you've had a fagging day."  Lawrence
indicated the chairs left on the lawn.  "Hear me beginning to
play the host!  As a matter of fact, you must know your way about
the place far better than I do.  Although we're cousins, Bernard
and I have seen next to nothing of each other since we were boys
at school.  You, Val, must know him better than any one except
his wife.  I want you to tell me about him.  I'm in dangerous
country and I need a map."

"I should be inclined to vary the metaphor a little and call him
an uncharted sea," Val smiled as he threw one leg over the other
and settled himself among his cushions.  He was dead tired,
having been up since six in the morning and on his feet or in
the saddle all day.  "But I'm at your service, subject always to
the proviso that I'm Bernard's agent, which makes my position
rather delicate.  What is it you want to know?"

Since it was whether Clowes behaved decently to his wife,
Lawrence shifted in his chair and flicked the ash from his cigar.
"Imprimis, whether Bernard has a trout rod I can borrow.  I
didn't know there was any fishing to be had or I'd have brought
my own."

"You can have mine: I scarcely ever touch a line now.  Certainly
not in hay-harvest!  I'll send it down for you the first thing--"
Was it possible that he was as insouciant as he professed to be?

"Oh, thanks very much," Hyde cut in swiftly, but I couldn't
borrow yours.  I'll find out if Clowes can't lend me one."

"As you please." Stafford left it at that and passed on. "But I
don't fancy Bernard has ever thrown a line in his life, he is too
energetic to make a fisherman.  By the way, I suppose you won't
be staying any length of time at Wanhope?"

Lawrence smiled, the wish was father to the thought: that was
more like the Val of old times!

"That depends--mainly on my cousin, to be frank: I suspect he'll
soon get sick of having a third person in the house."

"Oh, probably.  But you needn't take any notice of that."
Lawrence looked up in surprise.  "But, perhaps, that is none of
my business.  Or will you let me give you one warning, since
you've asked for a map?  Don't be too prompt to take Bernard at
his word.  He may be very rude to you and yet not want you to go.
He sacks Barry every few weeks. In fact now I come to think of it
I'm under notice myself, for last time I saw him he told me to
look out for another job.  He said what he wanted was a practical
man who knew a little about farming."

"And you stay on?  Quite right, if it suits your book."
Unconsciously putting the worst construction on everything Val
said or did, Lawrence's conclusion was that probably Val, an
amateur farmer, was paid, like Barry, twice what he was worth in
the market.  "But it wouldn't suit mine.  However, I don't
imagine Bernard will try it on with me. I'm not Barry.  If he
hits me I shall hit him back."

"Oh, will you?" returned Val, invisibly amused. "I'm not sure
that wouldn't be a good plan.  It has at least the merit of
originality.  All the same I'm afraid Mrs. Clowes wouldn't like
it, she is a standing obstacle in the way of drastic measures."

"But why do you want me to stay?" Lawrence asked more and more
surprised.

"Well, here is what brought me up tonight, when I knew Bernard
would be on his way to bed.  Will you--" he leaned forward, his
hands clasped between his knees--"stick it out, whatever happens,
for a week or two, and keep your eyes open?  Life at Wanhope
isn't all plain sailing."

"Plain sailing for Bernard?"

"Or for his wife."

"You speak as the friend of the house who sees both sides?"

"They're forced on me."

"I'll stay as long as I'm comfortable," said Lawrence, cynically
frank.  "More I can't promise."

Val leant back with an imperceptible shrug.  He was disappointed
but not surprised: there was in Hyde a vein of hard selfishness--
not a weakness, for the egoism which openly says "I will consult
my own convenience first" is too scornful of public opinion to be
called weak, but an acquired defensive quality on which argument
would have been thrown away.  Val's arm dropped inert, he was
tired, not in body alone, but by the strain of contact with
another mind, hostile, and pitiless, and dominant.

And Lawrence also was content to sit silent, lulled by the rising
and falling murmur of the stream, and by that agreeably cruel
memory. . . .   He had no inclination to recall it to Val, but it
lent an emotional piquancy to their intercourse.  He had the whip
hand of Val through the past, and perhaps the present also.
Lawrence had been struck by Val's allusion to Mrs. Clowes.  He
was the friend of the house, was he?  Now the position of a
friend of the house who shields a wife from her husband is
notoriously a delicate one.

Val roused himself.  "Well, we'll drop this.  I must now say two
words on a different subject: I'd rather let it alone, and so I
dare say would you, but we shall meet a good deal off and on
while you're here, and it had better be got over.  I'm sorry if I
embarrass you--"

"Set your mind at rest," said Lawrence, silkenly brutal.  "You
don't embarrass me at all."

He threw away his cigar and got up laughing, and as Val also rose
Lawrence gently slapped him on the back. "I know what you're
driving at--that you've not forgotten that small indiscretion
of yours, or ceased to regret it.  Don't you worry, Val!  You
always were one of the worrying sort, weren't you?  But you need
never refer to it again, and I won't if you don't." Surely a
generous, a handsome offer!  But Stafford only touched with the
tips of his fingers the ringed and manicured hand of the elder
man.

"Thank you!  But I wasn't going to say anything of the sort.  The
fact is that for a long while I've been making up my mind to see
you some time when you were in England: there was no hurry,
because so long as my father's alive I can do nothing, but when I
heard you were coming to Wanhope the opportunity was too good to
be missed.  Railway fares," Val added with a preoccupied smile,
"are a consideration to me.  So don't walk away yet, Hyde,
please.  I have such a vivid recollection of the last time we met.
Between the lines at dawn.  Do you remember?"

"Everything, Val."

"You were badly hurt, but before you fainted you dragged a
promise out of me."

"Dragged it out of you?" Lawrence repeated: "that's one way of
putting it!"

"But I made some feeble resistance at the time," said Val mildly.
"My head wasn't clear then or for a long while after, but I had
a--a presentiment that it was a mistake.  You meant it kindly."
Had he?  Lawrence laughed.  He had never been able, to analyse
the complex of instincts and passions that had determined his
dealings with Stafford on that dim day between the lines.

"You were in a damned funk weren't you, Val?"

Stafford gave a slight start, the reaction of the prisoner under
a blow.  But apart from the coarse cynicism of it, which
irritated him, it was no more than he had foreseen, and from then
on till the end he did not flinch.

"Yes, anything you like: you can't overstate it. But my point is
that I gave you my parole.  Will you release me from it?"

"Good God!" said Lawrence.

He had never been more surprised in his life. "Come in: let us
talk this over in the light."




CHAPTER VII


Through the open windows of the drawingroom, where candlesticks
of twisted silver glimmered among Laura's old, silvery brocades,
and dim mirrors, and branches of pink and white rosebuds blooming
deliciously in rose-coloured Dubarry jars, the two men came in
together, Lawrence keenly on the watch.  But observation was
wasted on Stafford who had nothing to conceal, who was merely
what he appeared to be, a faded and tired-looking man of middle
height, with blue eyes and brown hair turning grey, and wellworn
evening clothes a trifle rubbed at the cuffs. It was difficult to
connect this gentle and unassuming person with the fiery memory
of the war, and Lawrence without apology took hold of Stafford's
arm like a surgeon and tried to flex the rigid elbow-muscles, and
to distinguish with his fingers used to handling wounds the hard
seams and hollows below its shrunken joint.  The action, which
was overbearing was by no means redeemed by the intention, which
was brutal.

"Surely after all these years you don't propose to confess, Val?"

"I should like to make some sort of amends."

"Too late: these things can never be undone."

"No, of course not.  Undone? no, nothing once done can be undone.

"But one needn't follow a wrong path to the bitter end.  You made
me give you that promise for the sake of discipline and morale.
But of the men who were in the trenches with us that night how
many are left?  Your battalion were pretty badly cut up at
Cambrai, weren't they?  And the survivors are all back in civil
life like ourselves.  If it were to come out now there aren't
twenty men who would remember anything about it: except of course
here in Chilmark, where they know my people so well."

"But you surely don't contemplate writing to the War Office?
I've no idea what course they would take, but they'd be safe to
make themselves unpleasant. I might even come in for a reprimand
myself!  That's a fate I could support with equanimity, but what
about you?  If I were you I shouldn't care to be hauled up for an
interview!"

"Really, if you'll forgive my saying so, I don't want to enter
into contingencies at all.  Give me my promise back, Hyde,
there's a good fellow, it's worth nothing now to anyone but the
owner."

"What about your own people?" said Lawrence, his hands in his
pockets, and falling unawares into the tone of the orderly room.
"You'll do nothing while your father's alive: I'm glad you've
sense enough for that: but what about your brother and sister?
You're suffering under some unpractical attack of remorse, Val,
and like most penitent souls you think of nothing but yourself."

"On the contrary, I shrink very much from bringing distress on
other people.  I'm well aware," said Val slowly, "that a man who
does what I've done forfeits his right to take an easy way out."

"An easy way?"

"Believe me, I haven't found the way you imposed on me an easy
one."

"Poor wretch!" said Lawrence under his breath.  Stafford heard,
perhaps he was meant to hear: and he glanced out over the dark
turf on which the windows traced a golden oblong, over the trees,
dark and mysterious except where the same light caught and
bronzed the tips of their branches.  In its glow every leaf stood
out separate and defined, clearer than by day through the
contrast of the immense surrounding darkness: and so it had been
in that bit of French forest years ago, when the wild bright
searchlights lit up its plague-spotted glades.  Civilians talk
glibly of courage and cowardice who have never smelt the odour
of corruption. . . .

"What's your motive?  Some misbegotten sense of duty?"

"Partly," said Val, turning from the window.  How like his eyes
were to his young sister's!  The impression was unwelcome, and
Lawrence flung it off.  "I ought never to have given way to you.
I ought to have faced Wynn-West and let him deal with me as he
thought fit.  After all, I was of no standing in the regiment.
A boy of nineteen--what on earth would it have signified?  I
was so very young."

Nineteen! yes, one called a lad young at nineteen even in those
pitiless days.  Under normal conditions he would have had two or
three years' more training before he was required to shoulder the
responsibilities and develop the braced muscles of manhood.

"Anyhow it's all over now--"

"No, you forget." A wave of colour swept over Val's face but his
voice was steady.  "Through me the regiment holds a distinction
it hasn't earned, and the distinction is in hands that don't
deserve to hold it. That isn't consonant with the traditions of
the service."

"Oh, when it comes to the honour of the Army--!" Lawrence jeered
at him.  "There speaks the soldier born and bred.  But I was only
a 'temporary.' Give me a personal reason."

"Well, I can do that too!  I hate sailing under false colours.
The good folk of Chilmark; my own people; Bernard, Laura . . . ."
Lawrence's eyes began to sparkle: when a man's voice deepens over
a woman's name--! "Oh, I dare say nothing will ever come of it,"
Val resumed after a moment: "my father may live another thirty
years, and by that time I should be too old to stand in a white
sheet.  Or perhaps I shall only tell one or two people--"

"Mrs. Clowes?"

"I beg your pardon?"

"You would like to tell my cousin and his wife?"

"I should like to feel myself a free agent, which I'm not now,
because I'm under parole to you."

"And so you will remain," said Lawrence coldly.

"You mean that?"

"Thoroughly.  I've no wish to distress you, Val, but I'm no more
convinced now than I was ten years ago that you can be trusted to
judge for yourself.  You were an impulsive boy then with remarkably
little self-control: you're--forgive my saying so--an impulsive man
now, capable of doing things that in five minutes you would be
uncommonly sorry for.  How long would Bernard keep your secret?  If
I'm not much mistaken you would lose your billet and the whole county
would hear why.  The whole thing's utter rubbish.  You make too much
of your ribbon: you--I--it would never have been given if Dale's
father hadn't been a brass hat."

Stafford was ashy pale. "I know you think you're just."

"No, I don't. I'm not just, my good chap: I'm weakly, idiotically
generous.  In your heart of hearts you're grateful to me.  Now
let's drop all this.  Nothing you can say will have the slightest
effect, so you may as well not say it." He stood by Val's chair,
laughing down at him and gently gripping him by the shoulder.
"Be a man, Val! you're not nineteen now.  You've got a comfortable
job and the esteem of all who know you--take it and be thankful:
it's more than you deserve.  If you must indulge in a hair shirt,
wear it under your clothes.  It isn't necessary to embarrass other
people by undressing in public."

Thought is free: one may be at a man's mercy and in his debt and
keep one's own opinion of him, impersonal and cold.  With a faint
smile on his lips Val got up and strolled over to the piano.
"Hullo, what's all this music lying about?" he said in his
ordinary manner.  "Has Laura been playing?  Good, I'm so glad:
Bernard can hardly ever stand it.  See the first fruits of your
bracing influence!  Oh, the Polonaises . . ."  And then he in
his turn began to play, but not the melancholy fiery lyrics that
had soothed Laura's unsatisfied heart.  Val, a thorough musician,
went for sympathy to the classics.  Impulsive?  There was not
much impulse left in this quiet, reticent man, who with his old
trouble fresh on him could sit down and play a chorale of Bach or
a prelude of Mozart, subordinating his own imperious anguish to
the grave universal daylight of the elder masters.  Long since
Val had resolved that no shadow from him should fall across any
other life.  He had foresworn "that impure passion of remorse,"
and so keen an observer as Rowsley had grown up in his intimacy
without suspecting anything wrong.  Unfortunately for Val,
however, he still suffered, though he was now denied all
expression, all relief: the wounded mind bled inwardly.  It was
no wonder Val's hair was turning grey.

Lawrence, no mean judge of music, understood much--not all--of
the significance of Val's playing.  He was an imaginative man--
far more so than Val, who would have lived an ordinary life and
travelled on ordinary lines of thought but for the war, which
wrenched so many men out of their natural development.  But it
was again unfortunate for Val that the sporting instinct ran
strong in Captain Hyde.  He was irritated by Val's grave superior
dignity, and deep and unacknowledged there was working in him the
instinct of the bully, the love of cruelty, overlaid by layer on
layer of civilization, of chivalry, of decency, yet native to the
human heart and quick to reassert itself at any age: in the boy
who thrashes a smaller boy, in the young man who takes advantage
of a woman, in the fighter who hounds down surrendered men.

He settled himself in a chair close to the piano. "Val, I'm very
glad to have met you.  Having taken so much upon me," he was
smiling into Val's eyes, "I've often wondered what had become of
you.  This," he lightly touched Val's arm, "was a cruel handicap.
I had to disable you, but it need not have been permanent."

"Do you mind moving? you're in my light."

He shifted his chair by an inch or so.  "After all, what's a single
failure of nerve?  Physical causes--wet, cold, indigestion, tight
puttees--account for nine out of ten of these queer breakdowns.
At all events you've paid, Val, paid twice over: when I read your
name in the Honours List I laughed, but I was sorry for you.  The
sword-and-epaulets business would have been mild compared to that."

"Cat and mouse, is it?" said Val, resting his hands on the keys.

"What?"

"I'm not going to stand this sort of thing, Hyde, not for a
minute."

"I don't know what you mean," said Lawrence, reddening slowly to
his forehead.  But it was a lie: he was not one of those who can
overstep limits with impunity.  The streak of vulgarity again!
and worse than vulgarity: Andrew Hyde's sardonic old voice was
ringing in his ears, "Lawrence, you'll never be a gentleman."

"All right, we'll leave it at that.  Only don't do it again."
Lawrence was dumb.  "Here's Mrs. Clowes."

Val rose as Laura came in, released at length from attendance on
her husband. "I heard you playing," she said, giving him her hand
with her sweet, friendly smile. "So you've introduced yourself to
Captain Hyde?  I hope you were nice to him, for my gratitude to
him is boundless. I haven't seen Bernard looking so fit or so
bright for months and months!  Now sit down, both of you, and
we'll have cigarettes and coffee.  Ring, Val, will you--? it's
barely half past ten.

"I can only stay for one cigarette, Laura: I must get home to
bed."

"But, my dear boy, how tired you look!" exclaimed Laura.  "You do
too much--I'm sure you do too much.  He wears himself out,
Lawrence--oh! my scarf!" She was wearing a silver scarf over her
black dress, and as she moved it fluttered up and caught on the
chain round her throat. "Unfasten me, please, Val," she said,
bending her fair neck, and Val was obliged laboriously to
disentangle the silken cobweb from the spurs of her clear-set
diamonds, a process which fascinated Lawrence, whose mind was
more French than English in its permanent interest in women.
Certainly Val's office of friend of the family was not less
delicate because Laura, secure in her few years seniority,
treated him like a younger brother!  Watching, not Val, but Val's
reflection in a mirror,  Lawrence overlooked no shade of
constraint, no effort that Val made to avoid touching with his
finger-tips the satin allure of Laura's exquisite skin.  "Poor
miserable Val!" Suspicion was crystallizing into certainty.  "Or
is it poor Bernard?   No, I swear she doesn't know.  Does he know
himself?"

A servant had brought in coffee, and Lawrence in his quality of
cousin poured out two cups and carried them over to Laura and to
Val.  "Well, I'm damned!" murmured Lawrence as Val refastened the
clasp of the chain.  "Picturesque, all this.--  Here, Val, here's
your coffee."

"But do you know each other so well as that?" exclaimed Laura,
arching her wren's-feather eyebrows.

"I was an infant subaltern when Hyde knew me," said Val laughing,
"and he was a howling swell of a captain.  Do you remember that
night you all dined with us, sir, when we were in billets?  We
stood you champagne--"

"Purchased locally.  I remember the champagne."

"Dine with us tomorrow night," said Laura. "Do! and bring
Isabel." Lawrence gave an imperceptible start: for the last hour
he had forgotten Isabel's existence except when her eyes had
looked at him out of her brother's face.  "The child will enjoy
it, I never knew any one so easily pleased; and you and Lawrence
and Bernard can rag one another to your heart's content.  Yes,
you will, I know you will, Army men always do when they get
together; and you're all boys, even Bernard, even you with your
grey hair, my dear Val; as for Lawrence, he's only giving himself
airs."

"Yes, do bring your sister," said Lawrence. "She is the most
charming young girl I've met for years, if a man of my mature age
may say so.  She is so natural, a rare thing nowadays: the modern
jeune fille is a sophisticated product."

"Bravo, Lawrence!" cried Mrs. Clowes, clapping her hands.  "Now,
Val, didn't I tell you Isabel was going to be very, very pretty?
That's settled, then, you'll both come: and, to please me," she
looked not much older than Isabel as she took hold of the lapel
of Val's coat, "will you wear your ribbon?  I know you hate
wearing it in civilian kit!  But I do so love to see you in it:
and it's not as if there would be any one here but ourselves."

Lawrence swung round on his heel and walked away.  One may enjoy
the pleasures of the chase and yet draw the line at watching an
application of the rack, and it sickened him to remember that his
own hand had given a turn to the screw.  It had needed that brief
colloquy to let him see what Stafford's life was like at Wanhope,
and in what slow nerve-by-nerve laceration amends were being
made.  He admired the gallantry of Stafford's reply.

"My dear Laura, I would tie myself up in ribbon from head to foot
if it would give you pleasure.  I'll wear it if you like, though
my superior officer will certainly rag me if I do."

"No, I shan't," said Lawrence shortly.




CHAPTER VIII


"And now tell me,"  murmured Mrs. Clowes in the mischievously
caressing tone that she kept for Isabel, "did mamma's little girl
enjoy her party?"

"Rather!" said Isabel--with a great sigh, the satisfied sigh of
a dog curling up after a meal. "They were lovely strawberries.
And what do you call that French thing?  Oh, that's what a
vol-au-vent is, is it?  I wish I knew how to make it, but probably
it's one of those recipes that begin 'Take twelve eggs and a quart of
cream.' I wish nice things to eat weren't so dear, Jimmy would love
it.  Captain Hyde took two helps--did you see?--big ones!  If he
always eats as much as he did tonight he'll be fat before he's fifty,
which will be a pity.  He ate three times what Val did."

"Is that what you were thinking of all the time?  I noticed you
didn't say very much."

"Well, I was between Captain Hyde and Major Clowes, and they
neither of them think I'm grown up," explained Isabel.  "They
talked to each other over the top of me.  Oh no, not rudely,
Major Clowes was as nice as he could be" (Isabel salved her
conscience by reflecting that this was verbally true since Major
Clowes could never he nice), "and Captain Hyde asked me if I was
fond of dolls--"

"My dear Isabel!"

"Or words to that effect.  Oh! it's perfectly fair, I'm not grown
up, or only by fits and starts.  Some of me is a weary forty-five
but the rest is still in pigtails.  It's curious, isn't it?
considering that I'm nearly twenty.  Let's go through the wood,
my stockings are coming down."  Out of sight of the house in a
clearing of the loosely planted alder-coppice by the bridge, she
pulled them up, slowly and candidly: white cotton stockings
supported by garters of black elastic.  "After all," she
continued, "I'm housekeeper, and in common politeness we shall
have to dine you back, so I really did want to see what sort of
things Captain Hyde likes.  But it's no use, he won't like
anything we give him.  Not though we strain our resources to the
uttermost. Laura! would Mrs. Fryar give me the receipt for that
vol-au-vent? I don't suppose we could run to it, but I should
love to try."

"Mrs.  Fryar would be flattered," said Laura, finding a chair in
the forked stem of a wild apple-tree,  while Isabel sat plump
down on the net of moss-fronds and fine ivy and grey wood-violets
at her feet.  "But, my darling, you're not to worry your small
head over vol-au-vents!  Lawrence will like one of your own roast
chickens just as well, or any simple thing--"

"Oh no, Lawrence won't!" Isabel gave a little laugh.  "Excuse my
contradicting you, but Lawrence isn't a bit fond of simple
things.  That's why he doesn't like me, because I'm simple,
simple as a daisy.  I don't mind--much," she added truthfully.
"I can survive his most extended want of interest.  After all
what can you expect if you go out to dinner in the same nun's
veiling frock you wore when you were confirmed, with the tucks
let down and the collar taken out?  O! Laura,  I wish someone
would give me twenty pounds on condition that I spent it all on
dress!  I'd buy--I'd buy--oh,--silk stockings, and long
gloves, and French cambric underclothes, and chiffon nightgowns
like those Yvonne wears (but they aren't decent: still that
doesn't matter so long as you're not married, and they are so
pretty)!  And a homespun tailor-made suit with a seam down the
back and open tails: and--and--one of those real Panamas that
you can pull through a wedding ring: and--oh! dear, I am greedy!
It must be because I never have any clothes at all that I'm
always wanting some. I ache all over when I look at catalogues.
Isn't it silly?"

If so it was a form of silliness with which Mrs. Clowes was in
full sympathy.  In her world, to be young and pretty gave a woman
a claim on Fate to provide her with pretty dresses and the
admiration of men.  As for Yvonne, till she married Jack Bendish
she had never been out of debt in her life.  "No, it's the most
natural thing on earth," said Laura.  "How I wish--!"

"No, no," said Isabel hastily.  "It's very, very sweet of you,
but even Jimmy wouldn't like it: and as for Val I don't know what
he'd say!  Poor old Val, he wants some new evening clothes
himself, and it's worse for him than for me because men do so
hate to look shabby and out at elbows.  He's worn that suit for
ten years.  My one consolation is that Captain Hyde couldn't wear
a suit he wore ten years ago.  It would burst."

"Isabel!  really!  you ridiculous child, why have you such a
spite against poor Lawrence?  Any one would think he was a
perfect Daniel Lambert!  Do you know he's a pukka sportsman and
has shot all over the world?  Lions and tigers, and rhinoceros,
and grizzly bears, and all sorts of ferocious animals!  He's
promised me a black panther skin for my parlour and he's
persuaded Bernard to call in Dr. Verney for his neuritis, so I
won't hear another word against him!"

"Has he?  H'm. . . . No, I haven't any prejudice against him: in
fact I like him," said Isabel, smiling to herself.  "But he
reminds me of Tom Wallis at the Prince of Wales's Feathers.  Do
you remember Tom?   'Poor Tom,' Mrs. Wallis always says, 'he went
from bad to worse.  First it was a drop too much of an evening:
and then he began getting drunk mornings: and then he 'listed for
a soldier!' Not that Captain Hyde would get drunk, but he has the
same excitable temperament. . . .  Laura!"

"What is it?" said Mrs. Clowes, framing the young face between
her hands as Isabel rose up kneeling before her.  In the
quivering apple-tree shadow Isabel's eyes were very dark, and
penetrating and reflective too, as if she had just undergone one
of those transitions from childhood to womanhood which are the
mark and the charm of her variable age.  Laura was puzzled by her
judgment of Lawrence Hyde, so keen, yet so wide of the truth as
Laura saw it: "excitable" was the last thing that Laura would
have called him, and she couldn't see any likeness to Tom Wallis.
But one can't argue over a man's character with a child. "Why so
serious?"

"This evening, at dinner, weren't there some queer
undercurrents?"

"Undercurrents!" Laura drew her hands away. She looked startled
and nervous.  "What sort of undercurrents?"

"When they were chaffing Val about his ribbon. Oh, I don't know,"
said Isabel vaguely.  Laura drew a breath of relief. "I was sorry
you made him wear it.  But he'd cut his hand off to please you,
darling.  You don't really realize the way you can make Val do
anything you like."

"Nonsense," said Laura, but with an indulgent smile, which was
her way of saying that it was true but did not signify.  She was
no coquette, but she preferred to create an agreeable impression.
Always in France, where women are the focus of social interest,
there had been men who did as Laura Selincourt pleased, and the
incense which Val alone continued to burn was not ungrateful to
her altar.  "As if Val would mind about a little thing like
that."

Isabel shook her head.  "Perhaps you weren't attending.  Major
Clowes was very down on him for wearing it--chaffing him, of
course, but chaffing half in earnest: a snowball with a stone in
it.  Naturally Val wasn't going to say you made him--"

"No, but Lawrence did: or I should have cut in myself."

"Yes, after a minute, he interfered, and then Major Clowes shut
up, but it was all rather--rather queer, and I'm sure Val hated
it.  You won't make him do it again, will you?  Val's so odd.
Laura--don't tell any one--I sometimes think Val's very
unhappy."

"Val, unhappy?  You fanciful child, this is worse than Tom
Wallis! What should make Val unhappy?  He might be dull," said
Laura ruefully.  "Life at Wanhope isn't exciting!  But he's keen
on his work and very fond of the country.  Val is one of the most
contented people I know."

A shadow fell over Isabel's face, the veil that one draws down
when one has offered a confidence to hands that are not ready to
receive it.  "Then it must be all my imagination." She abandoned
the subject as rapidly as she had introduced it. "O! dear, I am
sleepy." She stretched herself and yawned, opening her mouth wide
and shutting it with a little snap like a kitten.  "I was up at
six to give Val his breakfast, and I've been running about all
day, what with the school treat next week, and Jimmy's new
night-shirts that I had to get the stuff for and cut them out,
and choir practice, and Fanny taking it into her head to make
rhubarb jam.  How can London people stay up till twelve or one
o'clock every night?  But of course they don't get up at six."

"Have a snooze in my hammock," suggested Laura. "I see Barry
coming, which means that Bernard is going off and I shall have to
run away and leave you, and probably the men won't come out for
some time.  Take forty winks, you poor child, it will freshen you
up."

"I never, never go to sleep in the daytime," said Isabel firmly.
"It's a demoralizing habit.  But I shouldn't mind tumbling into
your hammock, thank you very much." And, while Mrs. Clowes went
away with Barry, she slipped across to Laura's large comfortable
cot, swung waist-high between two alders that knelt on the river
brink.

Isabel sprawled luxuriously at full length, one arm under her
head and the other dropped over the netting: her young frame was
tired, little flying aches of fatigue were darting pins and
needles through her knees and shoulders and the base of her
spine.  The evening was very warm and the stars winked at her,
they were green diamonds that sparkled through chinks in the
alder leafage overhead: round dark leaves like coins, and
scattered in clusters, like branches of black bloom.  Near at
hand the river ran in silken blackness, but below the coppice,
where it widened into shallows, it went whispering and rippling
over a pebbly bottom on its way to the humming thunder of the
mill.  And in a fir-tree not far off a nightingale was singing,
now a string of pearls dropping bead by bead from his throat, now
rich turns and grace-notes, and now again a reiterated metallic
chink which melted into liquid fluting:

              Vogek im Tannenwald
              Pfeifet so hell:
              Pfeifet de Wald aus und ein,
         wo wird mein Schatze sein?
         Vogele im Tannenwald pfeifet so hell.

Isabel was still so young that she felt the beauty more deeply
when she could link it with some poetic association, and as she
listened to the nightingale she murmured to herself "'In some
melodious plot of beechen green with shadows numberless'--but
it isn't a beech, it's a fir-tree," and then wandering off into
another literary channel, "'How thick the bursts come crowding
through the leaves!  Eternal passion--eternal pain' . . . but I
don't believe he feels any pain at all.  It is we who feel pain.
He's not been long married, and it's lovely weather, and there's
plenty for them to eat, and they're in love . . . what a heavenly
night it is!  I wish some one were in love with me.  I wonder if
any one ever will be.

"How thrilling it would be to refuse him!  Of course I couldn't
possibly accept him--not the first: it would be too slow,
because then one couldn't have any more.  One would be like
Laura.  Poor Laura!  Now if she were in that tree"--Isabel's
ideas were becoming slightly confused--"it would be natural for
her to be melancholy--only if she were a bird she wouldn't care,
she would fly off with some one else and leave Major Clowes, and
all the other birds would come and peck him to death.  They
manage these things better in bird land."  Isabel's eyes shut but
she hurriedly opened them again.  "I'm not going to go to sleep.
It's perfectly absurd.  It can't be much after nine o'clock.  I
dare say Captain Hyde will come out before so very long . . . I
should like to talk to him again by myself.  He isn't so
interesting when other people are there. I wonder why I told
Laura he was getting fat?  He isn't: he couldn't be, to travel
all over the world and shoot black panthers.  And if he did take
two helps of vol-au-vent, you must remember, Isabel, he's a big
man--well over six feet--and requires good support.  He
certainly is not greedy or he would have tried to pick out the
oysters: all men love oysters.

"He was nice about Val's ribbon, too . . . wish I understood
about that ribbon.  Val was grateful: he said 'Thanks, Hyde'
while Major Clowes was speaking to Barry.  Laura isn't stupid,
but she never understands Val.  'Contented?' My dearest darling
Val!  If he were being roasted over a slow fire he would be
'contented' if Laura was looking on.  That's the worst of being
perfectly unselfish: people never realize that you're unselfish
at all.  Wives don't seem to hear what their husbands say.  Often
and often Major Clowes is absolutely insulting to Val, before
Laura and before me.  But Laura always looks on Val as a boy.
Perhaps if Captain Hyde hears it going on he'll interfere and
shut Major Clowes up as he did tonight.  He can manage Major
Clowes . . . which is clever of him! 'A strong, silent man'--as
a matter of fact he talks a good deal. . . . But I loved him for
sitting on Major Clowes.  I'd rather he were nice to Val than to
me.

"But he might be nice to me too. . . .

"He was, yesterday afternoon.  How he coloured up! He was
absolutely natural for the minute.  That can't often happen.
People who don't like giving themselves away are thrilling when
they do."

Another yawn came upon her.

"O! dear, I really mustn't go to sleep.  What a lulling noise you
make, you old river!  I don't think I can get up at six tomorrow.
This hammock is as comfortable as a bed.  'The young girl
reclined in a graceful attitude, her head pillowed on her slender
hand, her long dark lashes entangled and resting on her ivory
cheek.' Well, they couldn't rest anywhere else: unless they were
long enough to rest on her nose. 'Her--her breathing  was soft
and regular . . .'"  It became so.  Isabel slept.

Val would rather have owed no gratitude to a man he disliked so
much as Hyde.  When Bernard was wheeled away, an interchange of
perfunctory civilities was followed by a constrained silence,
which Val broke by rising.  "Hyde, if you'll excuse me, I'll say
five words to Bernard before Barry begins getting him to bed.
There's a right of way dispute going on that he liked me to keep
him posted up in."

"Do," said Lawrence vaguely. He brushed past Val and escaped into
the garden.

Lawrence was enjoying his stay at Wanhope, but tonight he felt
defrauded, though he knew not why.  He had had an agreeable day.
In the morning Jack Bendish had appeared on horseback and Lawrence
had ridden over with him to lunch at Wharton, a sufficiently amusing
experience, what with the crabbed high-spirited whims of Jack's
grandfather and the old-fashioned courtesy of Lord Grantchester, and
Yvonne's romantic toilette: later Laura had joined them and they had
played bowls on the famous green: in the cool of the evening he had
strolled home with Laura through the fields.  Dinner too had been
amusing in its way, the wines were excellent, the parlour maid waited
at table like a deft ghost, and he recognized in Mrs. Fryar an artist
who was thrown away alike on Bernard's devotion to roast beef and
Val's inability to remember what he ate.  Yet Lawrence was left
vaguely discontented.

Bernard's manner to Val had set his teeth on edge.  Bernard could
have meant no harm: no one had ever known the truth except
Lawrence and Val, and possibly Dale with such torn shreds of
consciousness as H. E. and barbed wire had left him: but in all
innocence Bernard had set the rack to work as deftly as Lawrence
could have done it himself.  Lawrence pitied--no, that was a
slip of the mind: he was not so weak as to pity Stafford, but
their intercourse was difficult, genant.

And Isabel Stafford too: Clowes had left her out of the
conversation as though she were a child, and though Lawrence
tried to bring her in she remained, so to say, in the nursery
most of the time, speaking when she was spoken to but without any
of her characteristic freshness and boldness.  She was the
schoolgirl that Clowes expected her to be.  Her very dress
irritated Lawrence, as if he had seen a fine painting in a tawdry
frame, or a pearl of price foiled by a spurious setting.  He had
not felt any glow at all, and was left to suppose his fancy had
played him a trick.  Disappointing! and now there was no chance
of revising his impression, for apparently she had gone away with
Laura--who should have known better than to leave Captain Hyde
to his own devices.  But probably Miss Stafford had refused to
face the men alone: it was what a little shy country girl would
do.

Isabel's arm hanging over the edge of the hammock, and pearly
white in the dark, was his first warning of her presence.  He
crossed the wood with his hunter's step and found her lapped in
dreams, the starlight that filtered between the alder branches
chequering her with a faint diaper of light and shade.  Only the
very young can afford to be, seen asleep, when the face sinks
back into its original repose, and lines and wrinkles reappear in
the loss of all that smiling charm of expression which may efface
them by day.  Laura, asleep, looked old and haggard.  But Isabel
presented a blank page, a face virginally pure, and candid, and
lineless: from the attitude of her young body one would have
thought she was constructed without bones, and from her serenity
it might have been a child who slept there in the June night, so
placidly entrusting herself to its mild embrace.  Vividly aware
that he had no right to watch her, Lawrence stood watching her,
though afraid at every breath that she would wake up: it was hard
to believe that even in her sleep she could remain insensible of
his eyes.  Here was the authentic Isabel, the girl who had
enchanted him on the moor: the incarnation of that classic beauty
by which alone his spirit was capable of being touched to fine
issues.  The alder branches quivered, their clusters of black
shadow fell like an embroidered veil over the imperfections of
her dress, but what light there was shone clear on her head and
throat, and the pearly moulding of her shoulder, based where her
sleeve was dragged down a little by the tension of her weight
upon it.  All the mystery of womanhood and all its promise of
life in bud and life not yet sown lay on this young girl asleep
in the starshine.  Lights flashed up in the house, figures were
moving between the curtains: Laura had left Bernard, soon she
would come out into the garden and call to Isabel, and Isabel
would wake and his chance be lost.  His chance?  Isabel had
rashly incurred a forfeit and would have to pay.  The frolic was
old, there was plenty of precedent for it, and not for one moment
did Lawrence dream of letting her off.  A moth, a dead leaf might
have settled on her sleeping lips and she would have been none
the wiser, and just such a moth's touch he promised himself, the
contact of a moment, but enough to intoxicate him with its
sweetness, and the first--yes, he believed it would be the
first: not from any special faith in Isabel's obduracy, but
because no one in Chilmark was enough of a connoisseur to
appreciate her.  Yes, the first, the bloom on the fruit, the
unfolding of the bud, he promised himself that: and warily he
stooped over Isabel, who slept as tranquil as though she were in
her own room under the vicarage eaves.  Lawrence held his breath.
If she were to wake?  Then?--Oh, then the middleaged friend of
the family claiming his gloves and his jest!  But Lawrence was
not feeling middle-aged.

"O! dear," said Isabel, "I've been asleep!"

She sat up rubbing her eyes.  "Laura, are you there?" But no one
was there.  Yet, though she was alone, in the solitude of the
alder shade Isabel blushed scarlet.  "What a ridiculous dream!
worse than ridiculous, What would Val say if he knew?  Really,
Isabel, you ought to be whipped!" She slipped to her feet and
peered suspiciously this way and that into the shadowy corners of
the wood.  Not a step: not the rustle of a leaf: no one.

Yet Isabel's cheeks continued to burn, till with a little
frightened laugh she buried them in her hands. "O! it was--
it was a dream--?"




CHAPTER IX


Lawrence's reflections when he went to bed that night were more
insurgent and disorderly than usual.  In his negative philosophy,
when he shut the door of his room, it was his custom to shut the
door on memory too--to empty his mind of all its contents except
the physical disposition to sleep.  He cultivated an Indian's
self-involved and deliberate vacancy.  On this his second night
at Wanhope however--Wanhope which was to bring him a good many
white nights before he was done with it--he lay long awake,
watching the stars that winked and glittered in the field of his
open window, the same stars that were perhaps shining on Isabel's
pillow. . . .

Isabel: it was on her that his thoughts ran with a tiring
persistency against which his common sense rebelled.  A kiss!
what was it after all?  A Christmas forfeit, a prank of which
even Val Stafford could have said no worse than that it was
beneath the dignity of his six and thirty years:  only too
flattering for such a little country girl, sunburnt, simple, and
occasionally tongue-tied.  The lady of the ivory frame (whom
Lawrence had fished out of her seclusion and set up on his
dressing table, to the disgust of Caroline: who was a Baptist,
and didn't care to dust a person who wore so few clothes), the
lady of the ivory frame was far handsomer than Isabel, or at
least handsome in a far more finished style.

Lawrence had the curiosity to get out of bed and carry Mrs. Cleve
to the window.  Yes, she certainly was an expensive luxury, this
smiling lady, her eyes large and liquid, her waved hair rippling
under its diamond aigrette, her rather wide, eighteenth century
shoulders dimpling down under a collar of diamonds to the half
bare swell of her breast: and for an amateur of her type she was
charming, with her tired, sophisticated glance and her fresh
mouth, like a rouged child: but it was borne in on Lawrence that
she was not for him.  He had kissed her two or three times, as
occasion served and she seemed to desire it, but he had never
lain awake afterwards, nor had his heart beaten any faster, no,
not even in the summerhouse at Bingley when she was fairly in his
arms.  He pitched the photograph into a drawer.  Frederick Cleve
was safe, for him.

Strolling out on the balcony,  Lawrence folded his arms on the
balustrade.  The night was hot: perhaps that was why he could not
sleep.  By his watch it was ten minutes past two.  The moon was
near her setting.    She lay on her back with tumbled clouds all
round her: mother & pearl clouds, quilted, and tinged with a
sheen of opal.  He wondered whether Bernard was asleep: poor
Bernard, lying alone through the dreary hours.   Perhaps it was
because Lawrence was not at all like a curate that Bernard had
already made his cousin free of certain dark corners which Val
had never been allowed to explore.  "My wife?  She's not my
wife," Clowes had said, staring up at Lawrence with his wide
black eyes.  "She's my nurse."  And he went on defining the
situation with the large coarse frankness which he permitted
himself since his accident, and which did not repel Lawrence, as
it would have repelled Val or Jack Bendish, because Lawrence
habitually used the same frankness in his own mind.  There was
some family likeness between the cousins, and it came out in
their common contempt for modern delicacy, which Bernard called
squeamishness and Lawrence damned in more literary language as
the Victorian manner.

The moon dipped lower over the trees while Lawrence took one of
his sharp turns of self-analysis.  Most men live in a haze, but
Lawrence was naturally a clear thinker, and he had neither a warm
heart nor a sentimental temperament to blind him.  Cleve was
safe: but with his Rabelaisian candour and cultivated want of
scruple Lawrence reflected that Cleve had been anything but safe
at Bingley.  Whence the change?  From Isabel Stafford!  Lawrence
shrugged his shoulders: he was accustomed to examine himself in a
dry light of curiosity, and no vice or weakness shocked him,  but
here was pure folly.

What was he doing at Wanhope?  "I'm contracting attachments," he
reflected, unbuttoning his silk jacket to feel the night air cool
on his chest, a characteristic action: wind, sunshine, a
wandering scent,  the freshness of dew, all the small sensuous
pleasures that most men neglect, Lawrence would go out of his way
to procure.   "I'm breaking my rule." Long ago he had resolved
never to let himself get fond of any one again, because in this
world of chance and change, at the mercy of a blindly striking
power, the game is not worth the candle: one suffers too much.

As for Miss Stafford, one need not be a professed stole to draw
the line at a little country girl, pious to insipidity and simple
to the brink of silliness.  Here Lawrence, not being one of those
who deny facts when they are unwelcome, caught himself up: she
was not insipid and her power over him was undeniable.  Twice
within forty-eight hours she had defeated his will, and what was
stranger was that each time he had surrendered eagerly, feeling
for the moment as though it didn't matter what he said or did
before Isabel.--It was at this point of his analysis that Lawrence
began to take fright.  "You rascal," he said to himself, "so that's
why you're off Mrs. Cleve, is it?  What is it you want--to marry the
child?  You would be sick to death of her in six weeks--and haven't
you had enough of giving hostages to Fortune?"

Hostages to fortune: that pregnant phrase frightens men who fear
nothing else in heaven or earth.  But not one of Hyde's friends
knew that he had ever given fortune a hostage.  He was not
reserved as a rule: indeed he was always willing to argue creed
and code with a frankness rare in the self-conscious English
race: he was never shy and there was little in him that was
distinctively English.  But he was too subtle and inconsistent
for the average homogeneous Englishman, and not even the comrades
of trench and tent knew much about his private life.  Lawrence
was one of those products of a high civilization which have in
them pretty strong affinities with barbarism,--but always with a
difference.  The noble savage tortures his enemy out of hate or
revenge: Lawrence, more sophisticated in brutality, was capable
of doing it by way of a psychological experiment.  The savage
takes a short cut from desire to possession:  Lawrence though his
blood ran hot curbed it from caution, because in modern life
women are a burden and a drag.

This was the trained and tempered Lawrence Hyde, a personage of
great good humour and numitigable egoism.  This was the companion
of easy morals with whom Lawrence was on familiar terms.  But on
that first white night at Wanhope Lawrence grew dimly aware of
the upheaval of deeper forces, as if his youth were stirring in
its grave.  When Laura Clowes smiled at him with her gallant
bearing: when Bernard gripped his hand in wishing him good night:
when Val in the middle of the psychological experiment pierced
him with his grave tired eyes, all sorts of feelings long dormant
and believed to be dead came to life in Lawrence: pity, and
affection, and remorse and shame.  "Hang the fellow!" Lawrence
reflected.  "He's too like his sister.  And Isabel?  She is a
child."  Whose voice was it that answered, "This is the woman I
have been waiting for all my life?"

And then, turning at bay, he came to a sufficiently cynical
conclusion.  "No nonsense!" he said to himself.  "Your trouble is
that she's twenty and you're six and thirty, which is a dangerous
age.  But you don't want to marry her, and there's no middle
course.  Fruit defendu, mon ami: hands off!  If you can't be
sensible you'll have to shift out of Wanhope and compromise on
Mrs. Cleve."

The rain held off, and after breakfast--a cheery meal at which
Bernard for the first time for many months appeared dressed and
in a good temper--Lawrence fulfilled the main duty of a guest by
going for a walk.

He came by footbridge and field path into the High Street, where
he was immediately buttonholed by the vicar.  Lawrence had a
fixed idea that all priests were hypocrites: they must be, since
as educated men they could not well believe the fables they were
paid to teach!  But it was hard to associate hypocrisy with Mr.
Stafford, whose fond ambition it was to nail Lawrence Hyde to
lecture on his Chinese travels before the Bible Class.  "Oh, nothing
religious," he explained, holding his victim firmly by the coat as
Lawrence edged away.  "Only half an hour's story-telling to put a few
new ideas into their heads--as if you were talking to a young brother
of your own.  I'm always trying to get them to emigrate, but they
need a great deal of shoving."  Lawrence said they could not emigrate
to China, and, further, that he didn't regard them as brothers.  "How
narrow you are, some of you University men!" sighed Mr. Stafford.
"What a concept of society!  But," brightening, "you're not so bad as
you're painted.  Come, come! a fifth-of-August recruit can't very
well deny that we're all brothers in arms?" Before Lawrence escaped
he was not sure that he hadn't pledged himself to an address on
"Fringes of the Empire," with special reference to the C.U.M.C.A.

It was too sunny to fish, but the trout lured him, and from the
cross-roads by the stone bridge he struck into a footpath that
led upstream into the hills, behind whose green spurs Chilmark
before long was out of sight.  Here it was lonely country.
Sometimes on a headland the sun flashed white over a knot of
labourers, scything the hay where no machine could go: sometimes
a shepherd's cote gleamed far off above the pale wattlings of a
fold:  but as he wound on--and on into the Plain there was no
sign of man in all the hot landscape, and no motion but the
bicker of the stream over its stony bed, and the hum of insect
life busy on its millions of dark and tiny vibrant wings.  Not a
breath of wind stirred among these grassy valleys, and Lawrence,
feeling warm, had sat down by a pool under a sapling birchtree,
when he heard a step on the path.  It was Isabel Stafford.

He had hardly seen her again overnight, for Val had carried his
young sister away before ten o'clock.  He waited for her in the
rare shadow of the birchtree, a tall powerful figure in a white
drill suit of the tropics, his fair skin and black eyes shaded by
a wide Panama hat.  Isabel as she drew near was vexed to find
herself blushing.  She was a little shy of Captain Hyde, a little
averse to meet his sparkling eyes.

"Isn't it hot?" she said, frankly wiping her face with a large
handkerchief.  "This is a favourite pool of mine, I often sit
here when I come this way.  I never saw such beautiful dragonflies,
did you?  They must be nearly as big as hummingbirds."

Over the brown mirror of the pool a troop of great dragonflies
were ceaselessly darting to and fro, their metallic wings making
a faint whirr as they looped in blinding mazes through the air
that glowed blue with their splendour.  "Very beautiful," said
Lawrence.

"Are you out for a walk?  I'm on my way to Wancote." Here panic
fell on Isabel, the panic that lies in wait for young girls: if
he were to think she thought he ought to offer to escort her!
"I'm late, I must go on now.  Good-bye!"

Lawrence stood looking down at her, impassive, almost sombre, but
for the hot glow in his eyes.  His caution had gone overboard.
"Mayn't I come too?"

"Oh. . . ."

"Do let me."

"If you--if you like."

The valley narrowed as it receded, the upland air began to
sparkle with a myriad prismatic needles that glittered from the
wings of flies and beetles, and from dewdrops on patches of turf
still as grey as hoarfrost in the shadow on the edge of a wood,
and from wayside hollies whose leaf-points were all starred in
silver.  The blue bow overhead was stainless, not a cloud in it
nor a mist: azure, azure, and unfathomable, like the heart of
man, or the justice of God.--Isabel was not shy now but alert
and radiant, as if she had caught a sparkle from the air: and
expansive, as women are when they are sure of pleasing.  "'For
the jaded man of the world at her side, the young girl's rustic
freshness was her chief charm.  She was so different from the
beautiful but heartless mondaines he had known in Town.  No
diamonds glittered round her slender throat, and her hands,
though small and well-shaped, were tanned by the summer sun.  But
for the jaded-man-of-the-world, weary of sparkling epigram or
caustic repartee, her simple chatter held a fascination of its
own.' I don't believe," reflected Isabel, coming down mentally to
plain prose, "he'd mind if I talked to him about the dinner or
last week's washing bill."

She did not in fact enter on any such intimate topic, but
conversed sedately about parish politics and the beauties of the
Plain.  "This is a very lonely part," she said, "there are
scarcely any houses.  I'm taking the magazine to one of Major
Clowes' shepherds.  It's rather interesting going there.  He's
mad."

"Mad!"

"As a March hare.  He's perfectly harmless of course, and an
excellent shepherd.  In lambing time he looks after the ewes like
a mother, Val says his flock hardly ever lose a lamb.  But he's a
thrilling person to district-visit.  Last time I went he had the
Prince of Wales staying with him."

"Why on earth don't they put him in an asylum?"

"Do you know much about country villages?" Isabel enquired.  "I
thought not.  They never put any one in an asylum till after he's
got into trouble, and not always then if he doesn't want to go:
just as they never build a bridge over a level crossing till one
or two people have been killed.  We had a woman in Chilmark that
was much madder than poor dear Ben is.  She took a knife out of
her drawer once when I was there and told me she was going to cut
her throat with it.  She made me feel the edge to see how sharp
it was.  At last she cut the children's throats instead of her
own, and then they put her away, but none of them died and she's
out again now. She's supposed to be cured.  You see a County
asylum doesn't keep people longer than it must because the money
comes out of the rates."

"Do you mean to say," Lawrence fastened on the point that struck
him most forcibly, "that your father lets you go to such places
by yourself?"

"Oh yes: why not?  He would think it showed want of faith to
prevent me.  He's very sensible about things like that," said
Isabel without affectation.  "There are always typhoid and
diphtheria about in the autumn, but Jimmy never fusses.  It
wouldn't be much use if he did, with him and Val always in and
out of infected houses."

"Pure fatalism--" said Lawrence, hitting with his stick at the
flowers by their path.  "Your brother ought to put his foot
down--" Isabel seized his arm.

"Take care!--  There was a bee in it.  You really are most
careless Captain Hyde! I shan't take you for any more walks if
you do that.  I dare say it was one of my own bees, and he had
the very narrowest escape!  And Val wouldn't dream of interfering.
Ben and I are the best of friends.  Besides, it's Mrs. Janaway I
really go to see, poor dear,  she don't ever hear a bit o' news from
week's end to week's end.  Wouldn't you be glad to see me," her eyes
were destitute of challenge but not of humour, "if you lived three
miles deep in the Plain, alone with your husband and the Prince of
Wales?"

"I should be delighted to see you at any time."

Isabel, not knowing what to do with this speech, let it alone.
"And the dog: I mustn't forget the dog.  They have a thoroughbred
Great Dane.  Mr. Bendish gave Ben the puppy because it was the
worst of the litter and they thought it would die: but it didn't
die--no animal does that Ben gets hold of--and he's too fond of
it now to part with it, though a dog fancier from Amesbury has
offered him practically his own price for it."

"I should like to see the Dane."

"Well, you will, if you come with me.  There's the cottage."

They had turned a bend and the head of the dale lay before them,
a mere dimpling depression between breasts of chalky grass.  Set
close by the way on a cross-track, which forded the brook by
stepping stones and went on over the downs to Amesbury, stood a
small, square, tumbledown cottage, its door opening on primeval
turf, though behind it a plot of garden enclosed in a quickset
hedge provided Mrs. Janaway with cabbages and gooseberries and
sour apples and room to hang out the clothes.

"Ben won't be in, but Billy will be looking after Clara.  Billy
is no good with the sheep, but he's death on tramps.  In fact if
I weren't here it wouldn't be too safe for you to go to the door.
A Dane can pull any man down: I've heard even Jack Bendish say he
wouldn't care to tackle him--"

Even Jack Bendish!  Lawrence smiled.  He felt the prick of
Isabel's blade, it amused him, automatically he reacted to it,
she made him want to fight the Dane first and Jack Bendish
afterwards--but he retained just too much of the ascendancy of
his six and thirty years to gratify her by self-betrayal.
"You're a very brave young lady," he said cheerfully, "but if I
were Val--"

He stopped short.  From the cottage window,  now not twenty yards
off, there had come a burst of the most appalling screams he had
ever heard in his life, the mechanical screaming of mortal agony.
Isabel went as white as chalk and even Hyde felt the blood turn
cold at his heart.  Next moment the door was torn open and out of
it came a big red-bearded man, dressed in a brown tweed jacket
and velveteen trousers tied at the knees, and prancing high in a
solemn jig.  In one hand he held up an iron stake and in the
other a rag of red and black carpet . . . the body of a woman in
a black dress, her arms and legs hanging down, her face a scarlet
mask that had ceased to scream.

"Keep back, Isabel," said Lawrence: then, running across the
turf, "Drop that, Janaway! drop her!" in the hard authoritative
voice of the barrack square.  With the fitful docility of the
mad, Janaway obeyed, and directly he did so Lawrence checked and
stood on the defensive, taking a moment to collect his wits--he
had need of them:  he had to make his head guard his hands.  He
was a tall powerful man, but so was the shepherd: to offset
Hyde's science, Janaway was mad and would be stopped by no
punishment short of a knock-out blow: and Lawrence carried only
an ordinary walking-stick, while Janaway had hold of an upright
from a bit of iron railing, five feet long and barbed like a
spear.

"If he whacks me over the head with that or jabs it into my
stomach, I'm done," Lawrence thought, and pat to the moment
Janaway, his mouth open and his teeth bare, rushed on him and
struck at his eyes.  Lawrence parried and sprang aside: but his
arm was jarred to the elbow.  "That was a close call.  Ha! my
chance now . . ."  Like a flash, as Janaway turned, Lawrence
ran in to meet him body to body, seized him by the lapels of his
coat, pinned down his arms, set one foot against his thigh, and
with no great exertion of strength, by the Samurai's trick of
falling with one's enemy, heaved him up and shot him clean over
his own shoulder: then, as they dropped together, struck with his
wrist a paralysing blow at the base of the spine.  Janaway's yell
of fury was choked into a rattling groan.

Lawrence was up in a twinkling, but the shepherd lay where he had
fallen, and Lawrence let him lie: he knew that, so handled, the
victim could be counted out of action, perhaps for good and all.
He stood erect, breathing deep.  Ben could wait, but what of Mrs.
Ben?  He was shocked to find Isabel already at her side on the
reddened turf.

Mechanically Lawrence picked up his stick before he went to join
her. Clara was huddled up over a pool of blood, her head between
her knees: not a pleasant sight for a young girl.  But Isabel,
though white and trembling, was collected.  "I can't feel her
heart, I--I'm afraid--"

She broke off.  Her glance had travelled beyond Lawrence and her
features were stiffening into a mask of fear.  "Oh, the dog, the
dog!"  she pointed past him.  "Billy, Billy, down, sir!"

From some eyrie on the hillside the Dane had watched without
emotion the legitimate spectacle of his master beating his
mistress: in the war of the sexes, a dog is ever on the man's
side.  But when the tables were turned Billy went to the rescue.
He was coming round the corner of the cottage when Isabel caught
sight of him, travelling in great bounds at the pace of a wolf,
but silent.  Lawrence had but just time to swing Isabel behind
him before the Dane leapt for his throat.  Lawrence struck him
over the head, but the blow glanced: so sudden, so thundering
came the impact that Lawrence all but went down under it: and
once down. . . .

The great jaws snapped one inch from his cheek, and before the
Dane could recover Lawrence had seized him by the throat and
fought him off.  Then Lawrence set his back against the cottage
wall and felt safer.  A second blow got home, and spoilt Billy's
beauty for ever:  it laid open his left eye and the left side of
his jaw. Undaunted, the Dane gave himself an angry shake, which
spattered Lawrence with blood, and gathered his haunches for a
second spring.  But by now Lawrence had clubbed his stick and was
beating him about the head with its heavy knobbed handle.  Swift
as the dog was, the man was swifter: they fought eye to eye, the
man forestalling every motion of the dog's whipcord frame:
Lawrence's blood was up, he would have liked to fight it out
bare-handed.  They would not have been ill-matched, for when the
Dane reared Lawrence overtopped him only by an inch or so, and
the weight of the steelclad paws on his breast tore open his
clothes and pinned him to the wall.  But Lawrence thrashed him
off his feet whenever he tried to rise, till at length the lean
muzzle sank with a low baffled moan.

Even then there was such fell strength in him that Lawrence dared
not spare him, and blow rained on blow.--"Don't kill him," said
Isabel.  "Put this over his head."

Lawrence took the length of serge she gave him and with
characteristic indifference to danger stooped over the dog, whose
spirit he admired, and tried to swathe his head in its heavy
folds.  But, torn, blinded, baffled, the Dane was undefeated.  He
wrenched his jaws out of their mufflings and rolled his head from
side to side, snapping right and left.  "Oh Billy," cried Isabel,
"you know me, lie down, dear old man!" A pure-bred dog when sight
and hearing are gone will recognize a familiar scent.  In an
agony of pity Isabel flung her arm over the heaving shoulders--

"Don't!" Lawrence dragged her off, but too late: the Dane's teeth
had snapped on her wrist.   The next moment he was lying on his
side with his brains beaten out.  Lawrence was willing to spare
his own enemy but not Isabel's.

"Oh," said Isabel, shivering and moaning, "oh, my poor old
Billy!"

"Damn your poor old Billy," said Lawrence: "let me look at your
arm."

He carried her indoors, leaving Janaway and his wife and the Dane
lying scattered on the sunlit turf.  He did not care one straw
whether they lived or died.  In the little front parlour, neat
and fresh with its window full of white muslin and red geraniums,
he laid Isabel on a sofa and rolled up her sleeve: the flesh was
not much torn but the Dane's fangs had sunk in deep and clean.
"How far are we from a doctor?"

"Four miles.  Why?  Billy wasn't mad.  I shall be all right
directly.   May I have some water to drink?"

"Curse these country hamlets," said Lawrence.  He could not carry
her four miles, nor was she fit to walk so far: but to fetch help
would mean an hour or so's delay.  He went into the kitchen to
filla tumbler from the pump, and found an iron wash-bowl in Clara
Janaway's neat sink, and a kettle boiling on the hob beside a
saucepan of potatoes that she had been cooking for dinner.
Isabel sat up and took the glass from his hand.

"I'm so sorry," she murmured, raising her beautiful dark eyes in
a diffident apology. "It was all my own fault." Lawrence slipped
a cushion under her head and drew her gently down.  "Oh, thank
you!  But please don't trouble about me. I do feel rather queer."
Lawrence thought it probable.  He had been bitten by a dog
himself and knew how horribly such a wound smarts.  "It was all
so--so very dreadful.  But I shall be all right directly.. Do go
back to the others: I'm afraid poor Clara--oh!   oh, Captain
Hyde!  What are you doing?"

"Set your teeth and shut your eyes," said Lawrence "it won't take
long.  Your beloved Billy wasn't a nice animal to be bitten by.
No, he wasn't mad, but his teeth weren't very clean, and we don't
want blood poisoning to set up.  Steady now." He pressed his lips
to her arm.

Isabel's hand lay lax in his grasp while he methodically sucked
the wound and rinsed his mouth from her tumbler.  He hurt her,
but she had been bred to accept pain philosophically.  "Is it
done?" she asked meekly when he released her.  "Not any more?"

"No, that's enough.  Now for a drop of warm water." He bathed the
wound thoroughly and in default of a better dressing bound it up
with his own handkerchief.  "I wish I had some brandy to give
you, but there isn't a drop in the place.  Your estimable friend
appears to have been a teetotaller.  I don't doubt he was a
pattern of all the virtues.--  But for that matter I couldn't give
the child publichouse stuff.--  Now, my little friend, if you'll
lie quiet for five minutes, I'll see what's going on outside."

"Please may I have my skirt?"

"Your what?"

"My serge skirt."

It had not struck Lawrence till then that she was dressed in a
white muslin blouse and a pink and blue striped petticoat.  "Do
you mean to say that was your skirt you gave me to tie up the
dog's head in?"

"I hadn't anything else," said Isabel still more apologetically,
and blushing--she was feeling very guilty, very much ashamed of
the trouble she had given: "and you don't know how fond Ben was
of Billy!"

"Oh, damn Billy!" said Lawrence for the second time.

He went out into the summer sunshine.  The dog, the fallen man,
the fallen woman, not one of  them had stirred a hair.  All was
peaceful and clear in every note of black and white and scarlet
on the turf plat where they lay as if on a stage, in their green
setting of dimpled hillside and beech grove and marsh.  There was
a sickly smell in the hot bright air which carried Lawrence back
to the trenches.

He went to examine the human wreckage.  No need to examine Billy
--his record for good or ill was manifestly closed: and Lawrence
had a sickening suspicion that Mrs. Janaway too had finished with
a world which perhaps had not offered her much inducement to
remain in it.  He lifted her up and laid her down again in a
decent posture, straightening her limbs and sweeping back her
clotted grey hair: no, no need to feel for the pulse in that
faded breast from which her husband had partly torn away the
neatly darned stuff bodice, so modest with its white tucker and
silver Mizpah brooch.  Lawrence composed its disorder with a
reverent hand, spreading his own coat over her face.

He went on to Ben, and was frankly disappointed to find that Ben
was not dead--far from it: he gave a deep groan when Lawrence
rolled him over: but it was a case of broken arm and collarbone,
if not of spinal injury as well.  Lawrence found a length of line
in the yard--Clara's clothes-line, in fact--and knotted it into
a triple cord, for, though no sane man could have got far in such
a state, it was on the cards that Janaway in his madness might
scramble up and wander away on the downs.  So Lawrence lashed him
hand and foot, and Ben blinked and grinned at the sun and
slavered over his beard.

It was while thus employed that Lawrence began to wonder what
would have happened if Isabel had come to Wancote alone.  She
might have run away.  But would she, while Ben was engaged in
carpet-beating?  Not she!  Lawrence was not a fanciful man: but
the red and grey remains of Clara Janaway would have set the
visualizing faculty to work in the mind of a ploughboy.  After
tying the last of a dozen knots, reef knots and none too loose,
he went to the back of the cottage where Isabel could not see him
and was swiftly and violently sick.

After that he felt better.  There was a pump in the yard, and he
rinsed his head and hands under it, and washed off as best he
could the stains of the fight, and re-knotted his scarf and shook
himself down into his disordered clothes before going back to
Isabel. And then it was that Isabel received of him a fresh
impression as though she had never known him before, one of those
vivid second impressions that efface earlier memories.

Val had always held paternal rank, Captain Hyde had been
introduced as Val's late superior officer, and so Isabel had
accepted him as Val's contemporary, of the generation before her
own.  But framed in the sunlit doorway, a very tall handsome man
in undress, his coat thrown off, his trousers belted on his lean
flanks, his wet shirt modelling itself over his powerful throat
and shoulders and sticking to his ribs,  Hyde might have been
only six or seven and twenty: and certainly his manner was not
middle-aged!  Val's language was refined enough for a curate, and
even Rowsley in his young sister's presence never went beyond a
sarcenet oath; but Hyde's frank fury was piquant to Isabel's not
very decorous taste.  When he came in, her pain and faintness
began to diminish as if a stream of warm fresh life were flowing
into her veins.

"Are you better, Miss Isabel?"

"Ever so much better, thank you.  Is--is Clara--?"

Cool, grave, and tranquil, Lawrence took her hand.  "Clara is
dead."  He felt her trembling, and found a form of consolation
which would have been slow to occur to his unprompted fancy.
"Better so, isn't it?  She wouldn't have been very happy after her
husband's trying to kill her."

"No, she wouldn't want them to put him in an asylum," Isabel
agreed, but in a subdued voice.  "Did you forget my skirt?"

"No, but it was rather in a mess with the unfortunate Billy, and
I'm afraid you'll have to do without it.  I'm going to take you
home now.  You can walk, can't you, with my help?  I'd like to
carry you a few steps, till we're out of sight of the cottage.
Put your arm round my neck." Isabel hesitated.  She had been
frightened out of her life and still felt cruelly shaken, but her
quick sense of the ridiculous protested against this deference
paid to her when she wasn't really hurt and it was all her own
fault.  What would Val have said?  But apparently Captain Hyde
was less exacting than Val.  "Ah! let me: it is an ugly little
scene outside and I don't want you to be haunted by it."

She resigned herself.  She had not yet begun to feel shy of
Lawrence, she was a child still, a child with the instincts of a
woman, but those instincts all asleep.  They quickened in her
when she felt the glow of his life so near her own, but there was
a touch of Miranda in Isabel, and no cautionary withdrawal
followed.

And Lawrence?  The trustfulness of a noble nature begets what it
assumes.  One need not ask what would have become of Miranda if
she had given her troth to an unworthy Ferdinand, because the
Mirandas of this world are rarely deceived.  Hyde was but a
battered Ferdinand.  He was a man of strong and rather coarse
fibre who had indifferently indulged tastes that he saw no reason
to restrain.  But he was changing: when he carried Isabel across
the sunlit grass plot, her beautiful grave childish head lying
warm on his shoulder, he had travelled far from the Hyde of the
summer house at Bingley.

"My word!" said Yvonne Bendish, startled out of her drawl.  "Is
it you,  Isabel?" She reined in and sat gazing with all her eyes
at the couple coming down the field path to Chilmark Bridge.
"Have you had an accident?  What's happened?"

"Excuse my hat," said Lawrence with rather more than his habitual
calm.  "How lucky to have met you.  There has been a shocking
business up at Wancote.  Perhaps you would take Miss Stafford
home?  She should be got to bed, I think."

Mrs. Jack Bendish was not soon ruffled, nor for long.  "Lift her
in," she said.  "Sorry I can't make room for you too, Captain
Hyde, you are as white as a ghost.  Very upsetting, isn't it? but
don't worry, girls of her age turn faint rather easily.  Her arm
hurt? . . ."  She pointed down the road with her whip.  "Dr.
Verney lives at The Laburnus, on the right, beyond the publichouse.
If you would be so kind as to send him up to the vicarage?"

She whipped up her black ponies and was gone.  Lawrence was
grateful to her for asking no questions, but he would rather have
taken Isabel direct to Val.  Romance in bud requires a delicate
hand.  Now Mrs. Jack Bendish had all the bourgeois virtues except
modesty and discretion.




CHAPTER X


The Wancote affair made a nine days' wonder in the Plain.  Indeed
it even got into the London papers, under such titles as "A
Domestic Tragedy" or "Duel with a Dog": and, while the Morning
Post added a thumbnail sketch of Captain Hyde's distinguished
career, the Spectator took Ben as the text of a "middle" on "The
Abuse of Asylum Administration in Rural Districts."

Lawrence himself, when he had despatched Hubert Verney to the
vicarage, would have liked to cut his responsibility.  But it
could not be done: first there was the village policeman to run
to earth and information to be laid before him, and then, since
Brown's first flustered impulse was to arrest all concerned from
Lawrence to Clara Janaway,  Lawrence had to walk down with him to
Wharton to interview Jack Bendish, as both the nearest magistrate
and the nearest sensible man.  But after pouring his tale into
Jack's sympathetic ear he felt entitled to wash his hands of the
affair.  Instead of going back to Wanhope with the relief party
he got Bendish to drop him at the field path to Wanhope: and he
slipped up to his room by a garden door, bathed, changed, and
came down to lunch without trace of discomposure.  Gaston,
curtly ordered to take his master's clothes away and burn them,
was eaten by curiosity, but in vain.

Even before his cousin, Lawrence did not own to his adventure
till the servants had left the room.  If it could have been kept
dark he would not have owned to it at all.  He did so only
because it must soon be common property and he did not care to be
taxed with affectation.

When, bit by bits his story came out across the liqueur glasses
and the early strawberries, Major Clowes laid his head back and
roared with laughter.  Lawrence was annoyed: he had not found it
amusing and he felt that his cousin had a macabre and uncomfortable
sense of humour.  But Bernard,  wiping the tears from his eyes,
developed unabashed his idea of a good joke.  "Hark to him!  Now
isn't that Lawrence all over?  What! can't you run down for
twenty-four hours to a hamlet the size of Chilmark but you must
bring your faics divers in your pocket?"

"It isn't my fault if you have dangerous lunatics at large," said
Lawrence, helping himself daintily to cream.  "If this is a
specimen of the way things go on in country districts, thank you,
give me a London slum.  The brute was as mad as a hatter.  He
ought to have been locked up years ago.  I can't conceive what
Stafford was about to keep him on the estate."

"All very fine," Bernard chuckled, "but I'd lay any odds Ben
didn't go for Mrs. Ben till he saw you coming."

"Adventures are to the adventurous," Laura mildly translated the
bitter jest.  Her mission in life was to smooth down Bernard's
rough edges.  "But that is too ugly, Berns.  You oughtn't to say
such a thing even in fun.  It was no fun for Lawrence."

"I don't object to an occasional scrap," said Lawrence.  "But
this one was overdone." He shivered suddenly from head to foot.

"Hallo, old man, I didn't know you had a nerve in your body!"
said Bernard staring at him.

Lawrence went on with his strawberries in an ungenial silence.
He was irritated by his momentary self betrayal. If he had cared
to explain it he would have had to confess that though personally
indifferent to adventures he disliked to have women mixed up in
them.  He was glad when Laura with her intuitive tact changed the
conversation, not too abruptly.

"All modern men have nerves.  I should think Lawrence had as few
as any, but it must have been a frightful scene.  I must run up
after lunch and see Isabel.  Poor child!  But she's wonderfully
brave.  All the Staffords were brought up to be stoical: if they
knocked themselves about as children they were never allowed to
cry.  Mr. Stafford is a fanatic on the point of personal courage.
Val told me once that the only sins for which his father ever
cuffed him were telling fibs and running away."

"Did he get cuffed often?" Lawrence enquired.

"Shouldn't wonder," said Bernard. "Val's one of your nervy men."

"Not after he was ten years old," said Laura smiling.  "But as a
little boy he was always in trouble.  Not the wisest treatment,
was it? for a delicate, sensitive child."

"Miss Isabel is not nervous," said Lawrence. "She is as cool a
young lady as I have ever seen. I believe she still owes me a
grudge for hitting Billy so hard." He dipped his fingers
delicately into his finger bowl.  "No, no more, thanks.  Did I
tell you that the brute of a Dane bit her?"

"Bit Isabel!"

"Made his teeth pretty nearly meet in her forearm.  She was
trying to soothe the dear dog.  Mr. Stafford's theories may be
ethically beautiful, but I object to their being carried to
extremes.  Frankly, I should describe your young friend as
idiotically rash," said Lawrence with a wintry smile.  "I
couldn't prevent her doing it because I hadn't the remotest
notion she was going to do it.  The Dane was practically mad with
rage.  I could have cuffed her myself with pleasure.  It was a
wild thing to do and not at all agreeable for me."

"But, my dear Lawrence, that is one way of looking at it!" Laura
protested, amused by his cool egoism, though she took it with the
necessary grain of salt.  "Bitten by that horrible dog?  My poor
Isabel! she loves dogs--I don't suppose she stopped to consider
her own feelings or yours."

"She ought to have had more sense."

"Hear, hear!" said Bernard.  "Half the trouble in the world comes
from women shoving in where they're not wanted.  It's a pleasure
to talk to you, Lawrence, after lying here to be slobbered over
by a pack of old women.  I always exclude you, my dear," he
nodded to Laura, "but the parson twaddles on till he makes me
sick, and Val's not much better.  What's a woman want with
courage?  Teach her to buy decent clothes and put 'em on
properly, and she's learning something useful.  I'll guarantee
Isabel only got in the way. But you, Lawrence," he measured his
cousin with an admiring eye, much as a Roman connoisseur might
have run over the points of a favourite gladiator, "I should have
liked to see you tackle the Dane.   You're a big chap--deeper in
the chest than I ever was, and longer in the reach.  What's your
chest measurement?--  Yes, you look it.  And nothing in your hand
but a stick?  By Jove, it must have been worth watching!  Hey,
Laura?"

"Bernard, you are embarrassing!  You will make even Lawrence shy.
But, yes," Laura laid her hand on Hyde's arm: "I should have
liked to watch you fight the Dane."

How long was it since any one had spoken to Lawrence in that warm
tone of affection?  Not since his father died.  From time to time
Mrs. Cleve or other ladies had flattered his senses or his
vanity, but none of them had ever looked at him with Laura's kind
admiring eyes.  Perhaps after all there was something to be said
for family life!  Tragic wreck as Clowes was, he would have been
far more to be pitied but for his wife: their marriage, crippled
and sterilized, was yet--as Lawrence saw it--a beautiful
relation.  Suppose he stood in that relation to Isabel?  Sitting
at table in the cool panelled diningroom, his careless pose
stiffening under Laura's touch, Lawrence for the first time began
to wonder whether he would not gain more in happiness than he
would lose in freedom if he were to make the child his wife.

"To make the child his wife." He was not really more of an egoist
than the average man, but he did assume that if he wanted her he
could win her.  His mistress was very young: it was her rose of
youth and her unquelled spirit that charmed him even more than
her beauty: and she had not sixpence to her name, while he was a
rich man.  He did not, as Bernard would have done, go on to plume
himself on his magnanimity, or infer that Isabel's gratitude
would give him a claim on her fealty over and beyond the Pauline
duty of wives.  In the immediate personal relation Lawrence was
visited by a saving humility.  But on the main issue he took, or
thought he took, a practical view.  A man in love cannot soberly
analyse his own psychological state, and Lawrence did not know
that he had fallen in love with Isabel at first sight or that the
germ of matrimonial intentions had lain all along in his mind.
Here and now he believed that he first thought of marrying her.

Then he would have to stay on at Wanhope.   And court Isabel
under the eyes of all Chilmark?  Under Bernard's eyes at all
events; they were already watching him.  Lawrence was irritated:
whatever happened, he was not going to be watched by his cousin
and chaffed and argued over and betted on.  In most points
indifferently frank, Lawrence was silent as the grave where sex
came into play.

"Thank you." He touched with his lips the hand that Laura had
innocently laid on his wrist.  "It can't really be fourteen
years, Laura, since you were staying at Farringay."

"Flatterer!" said Laura, smiling but startled, and rising from
her chair.  "This to an old married woman!"

"Ah! when I remember that I knew you before this fellow did--!"

"Here, I say," came Bernard's voice across the table, riotously
amused, "none o' that! none o' that!"

"Penalty for having a charming wife," laughed Lawrence, in his
preoccupation blind and deaf to danger signals.  He rose to open
the door for Laura.  "By the by, if you go to the vicarage this
afternoon, I'll stroll up with you, if I may.  I suppose I owe
the young lady that much civility!"

"I can't: I'm busy," said Laura hastily.  "That is, I don't know
what time I shall get away.  Go by yourself, don't wait for me."

"Rubbish," said Bernard.  "Much pleasanter for both of you to
have the walk together.  Lawrence doesn't want to go alone, do
you?" ("Rather not," said Lawrence heartily.) "And I don't want
you here, my love, if that's the trouble, I can't have you tied
to the leg of my sofa."

Later, when Lawrence had gone out on the lawn to smoke, Bernard
recalled Laura.  She came to him.  He took hold of her wrist and lay
smiling up at her.  "Nice relationship, isn't it, cousins-in-law?
So free and easy.  You--.  I watched you pawing him about.  So
affectionate.  He felt it too.  Did you see the start he gave?  He
twigged fast enough.  Think you can play that game under my nose, do
you?  So you can.  I don't care what you do. Take yourself off now
and take him with you."

"Don't pinch my wrist below the cuff, Bernard," said his wife. "I
can't wear gloves at tea."

"You can stop out all night for all I care," said Clowes.  "I'm
sick of the sight of you."

Then Laura knew that the Golden Age was over.

Isabel had refused to go to bed.  She had no nerves: she saw life
in its proper colours without refraction.  The dreadful scene at
Wancote had made its full impression on her, but she was not
beset like Hyde by visions of what might have been.  Still she
was tired and subdued, and when Verney had dressed her arm she
announced her intention of spending the afternoon in the garden
out of the way of kind enquiries: and she settled herself on an
Indian chair behind a thicket of lilac and syringa, while Val and
Rowsley and Yvonne brought books and cushions and chocolate and
eau de cologne to comfort beauty in distress.

But she had reckoned without the wicket gate in the garden wall,
which Lawrence let himself in by.   He caught sight of her as he
crossed the lawn and came up to her bare-headed.  "How are you?"
he asked without preface.  "Better now?"

His informality went against the grain of Isabel's taste: he had
no right to presume on a forced situation: with what fastidious
modesty Val would have drawn back!  She was tired, and she did
not want to be reminded of what had happened in the morning.  She
shut up her book, but kept a finger in the place.  "Thank you.
I'm sorry the others are all out."

"Mrs. Clowes sent me on ahead."

For the second time she had made Lawrence redden like a girl, and
his easy manner deserted him.  Isabel unconsciously let the book
slip from her hand.  The lives of the Forsythe family were less
absorbing than her own life when this fiery dramatic glow was
shed over it.  A singular smile flitted over her lips: "Well, you
may as well sit down now you are here," she observed.  Lawrence
sat down in a deck chair and Isabel's smile broadened: she was
laughing at him and teasing him with her eyes, though what she
said remained conventional to the point of primness.  "Is Laura
coming to see me?  How sweet of her!  But what a pity she
couldn't come with you!  Why couldn't she?"

"I believe she stayed to look after my cousin."

"How is Major Clowes?  Did he have a good night and was he in a--
was he cheerful today?"

"So-so: he's not a great talker, is he?"

Isabel's speaking face expressed dissent.   "Perhaps not when
he's in a good temper.  Oh, I'm so sorry, I'm always forgetting
he's your cousin."

"I'm prone to forget it myself.  I've seen so little of him."

 "('Though the blase-man-of-the-world had seen thousands of
superbly beautiful women in elegant creations by Paquin or Worth,
his gaze was riveted as by a mesmeric attraction on the innocent
young girl in her simple little white muslin frock, with her
lissome ankles and slim, sunburnt hands.')  Laura said you had
been a great traveller.  Shall you settle down in England?"

"Not unless I marry."

Isabel declined this topic, on which Mrs. Jack Bendish would have
expatiated.  "Laura says you have a lovely old house in
Somersetshire.  It must be jolly to have an ancestral house."

"Mine is not ancestral," said Lawrence amused. "My father bought
it forty years ago at the time of the agricultural depression.
It belonged to some county people--Sir Frank Fleet--who
couldn't afford to keep it up.  It is a lovely place, Farringay,
but it's full of Fleet ghosts and the neighbourhood doesn't let
me forget that I'm an alien."

"But how absurd! how narrow-minded!" exclaimed Isabel. "Houses
must change hands now and then, and I dare say your father was a
better landlord than the Fleets were.  Besides, see how much worse it
might have been!  There's Wilmerdings, here in Chilmark, that the
Morleys have taken: his name isn't Morley at all, Yvonne says it's
Moss in the City: but they foreclosed on the Orr-Matthews' mortgage
and turned them out, and that darling old place is delivered over to
a horrid little Jew!"

"Poor Morley!" said Lawrence laughing.  "I am a Jew myself."
Isabel was stricken dumb.  "I thought I had better tell you than
let you hear it from some one else.  No, don't apologize! these
things will happen, and I'm not deeply hurt, for I refuse to call
sibb with a Moss-Morley. I should never foreclose on any one's
mortgage.  My mother was an Englishwoman and my father was a
Levantine--half Jew, half Greek.  Have you never heard of Andrew
Hyde the big curio dealer in New Bond Street?  He was commonly
known as old Hyde-and-seek.  The Hyde galleries are famous.  As I
remember him he was a common-looking little old man with a
passion for art."

"Well, I'm sorry I said such a stupid thing," said Isabel, still
very red, "not because of hurting your feelings, for it isn't
likely that anything I said would do that--but because it was
stupid in itself, and narrow-minded, and snobbish.  It'll be a
lesson to me.  All the same, it's interesting."  She had
forgotten by now that she was an innocent-young-girl and Lawrence
a blase-man-of-the-world, and had slipped into a vein of intimacy
which was fast charming Lawrence out of all his caution.  "I
suppose you take after your father, and that's why you're so
unlike Major Clowes.  He is a Clowes, but you're a Hyde."

"What does that mean?"

Isabel waited a moment to think it out.  "You're more of a
cosmopolitan; I expect you have a passion for art too, like your
father. Major Clowes hasn't.  He doesn't care two pins for the
beauty of his old swords and daggers, he cares only for getting
all the different sorts.  You, perhaps, might care almost too
much." Lawrence dropped his eyes.  "And you vary more, you're
not always the same,  you have more facets: one can see you've
done all sorts of things and mixed with all sorts of people. I
suppose that's why you're so easily bored--I don't mean to be
rude!"

"At the present moment I am deeply interested.  Go on: it charms
me to be dissected to my face,  and by such an able hand."

"No: it's absurd and I never meant to begin it.  Of course I
don't know a bit what you're like."

"God forbid!" Lawrence murmured:--"Guess away and I'll tell you
if you're right."

"You won't play fair.  You won't own up and you'll get cross if I
do."

"Not I, I have the most amiable temper in the world."

"Now I wonder if that's true?" said Isabel, scrutinizing him
closely.  "Perhaps you wouldn't often take the trouble to get in
a wax.  Oh well," surrendering at indiscretion, "then I guess
that you care for very few people and for those few very much."

"Missed both barrels.  I like any number of people and I
shouldn't care if I never saw one of them again."

Isabel laughed. "I said you wouldn't play fair."

"Don't you believe me?"

"No, of course not.  You wouldn't say it if it were true."

Lawrence drew a deep breath and looked away.  Their nook of turf was
out of sight of the house,  sheltered from it behind a great thicket
of lilac and syringa, which walled off the lawn from the kitchen
garden full of sweet-smelling currant bushes and apple-trees laden
with green fruit.  The sleepy air was alive with gilded wasps, and
between the stiffly-drooping apple-branches, with their coarse
foliage, and the pencilled frieze of stonecrop and valerian waving
along the low stone boundarywall, there was a dim honey-coloured
expanse that stretched away like an inland sea, where, the afternoon
sunshine lay in a yellow haze over brown and yellow and blue tracts
of the Plain.  Nothing was to be heard but the drone of wings near at
hand and the whirr of a haycutter far down in the valley.  No one was
near and summer lay heavy on the land.

"I did care once. . I had a bad smash in my life when I was
little more than a boy." He dragged a heavy gold band from his
finger.  "That was my wedding ring."

"Oh ... I'm sorry!" faltered Isabel.  She was stunned by the
extraordinary confidence.

"I married out of my class.  It was when I was at Cambridge.  She
was a beautiful girl but she was not a lady.  Her father was a
tobacconist in the Cury, and Lizzie liked to serve in the shop.
As she didn't want to lose her character nor I my degree, we
compromised on secret nuptials. I took a house for her in Newham
where I could go and visit her. I ought not to tell you the rest
of the story."

"Oh yes, you can," said Isabel simply. "I hear all sorts of
stories in the village."

So childish in some ways, so mature in others, she saw that
Lawrence was longing to unbosom himself, and her instinct was to
listen quietly, for, after all, this, though the strangest, was
not the first such confidence that had been poured into her ear.
She and her brother Val were alike in occasionally hearing
secrets that had never been told to any one else.  Why?  Probably
because they never gave advice, never moralized, never thought of
themselves at all but only of the friend in distress. Isabel took
Hyde's hand and held it closely, palm to palm.  "Tell me all
about it."

"There was another fellow at Trinity who had been in the Sixth at
Eton with me, a year older than I was, a very brilliant man and
as hard as nails: Rendell, his name was: an athlete, a tophole
centre-forward, with a fascinating Irish manner and blazing blue
eyes.  To him I told my tale, because we were Damon and Pythias,
and I couldn't have kept a secret from him to save my life.  I
was an ingenuous youngster in those days: never was such a pal as
my pal!  He saw me through my marriage and afterwards I took him
with me once or twice to Myrtle Villa: it may illuminate the
situation if I say that it made me all the prouder of Lizzie when
I saw Rendell admired her: never was such an idyll as my manage a
trois! Unluckily, one evening when I turned up unexpectedly I
found them together."

"Oh! . . . What did you do?"

"Nothing.  There was nothing to be done. I wasn't going to ruin
myself by divorcing her.  Luckily the war broke out and Rendell
and I both enlisted the next day.  He was killed fighting by my
side at Neuve Chapelle, and I had the job of breaking the news to
Lizzie.  She was royally angry, poor Lizzle: told me I had no
right to be alive when a better man than myself was dead. I
agreed: Rendell was--the better man, though he didn't behave
well to me.  He died better than he lived.  Out there it didn't
seem to matter much.  He died in my arms."

"Did you forgive your wife?"

"I never lived with her again, if that's what you mean.  If I had
been willing, which I wasn't, she never would have consented.
She had the rather irrational prejudices of her type and class,
and persisted in regarding me, or professing to regard me, as
answerable for Rendell's death.  It wasn't true," said Lawrence,
turning his eyes on Isabel without any attempt to veil their
agony.  "If I'd meant to shoot him I should have shot him to his
face.  But I'd have saved him if I could.  How on earth could any
one do anything in such a hell as Neuve Chapelle?  That week
every officer in my company was either killed or wounded.  But
Lizzie had no imagination.  She couldn't get beyond the fact that
I was alive and he was dead."

"What became of her?"

"I'm sorry to say she went to the bad.  She had money from both
of us, but she spent it in public houses--didn't seem to care
what happened to her after losing Arthur: a wretched life: it
ended last January with her death from pneumonia after measles.
That was what brought me back to England; I couldn't stand coming
home before."

"Was it a relief when she died?"

"No, I was sorry," said Hyde.  His wide black eyes, devil-driven
beyond reticence, were riveted on Isabel's: apparently she no
longer existed for him except as the Chorus before whom he could
strip himself of the last rag of his reserve.  "It brought it all
back.  I was besotted when I married her, and I remembered all
that when I saw her dead. I forgot the other men.  It was just as
it was when Arthur died.  I couldn't do anything for him, and he
was in agony: he was shot through the stomach: it didn't seem to
matter then that he had robbed me of Lizzie.  I couldn't even get
him a drop of water to drink.  He died hard, did Rendell.  It
wasn't true, what Lizzie said.  I'd have given my life for him.
But I couldn't even make it easy for him to go."

"Poor Rendell," said Isabel softly, "and poor you!  Oh, I'm so
sorry--I'm so sorry!"

She was not afraid of Hyde now nor shy of him, she felt only an
immense pity for him--this man who for no conceivable reason and
without the slightest warning had flung the weight of his
terrible past on her young shoulders.  She longed to comfort him.
But he was inaccessibly far away, isolated, his voice rapid and
hard and clear, his manner normal: every nerve stripped bare but
still rigid.  Inexperienced as she was, Isabel had a shrewd idea
of his immediate need.  She took up the ring that Lawrence had
wrenched off and slipped it on his finger again.

"Don't do that," said Lawrence starting: "why do you do that?"

"But I shall love to see you wear it," said Isabel. "It's the
sign that you've forgiven them both."

"Have I?"

"Of course you have.  You loved them too much not to forgive."

"It is true.  But I hate myself for it," said Lawrence.  "I hate
your etiolated Christian ethics.  I don't believe in the
forgiveness of sins.  The complaisant husband, O God!  If I'd had
the spirit of a man, I should have shot Arthur the night--that
night--. . . .

 "But you loved him," said Isabel, "and your wife too.  You felt
revenge and hate and passion, but love was stronger: and love is
nobler than hate.  They betrayed you, but you never betrayed
them.  It wasn't unmanly of you, it was defeat and dishonour for
them, not for you, when Rendell, after that great wrong he had
done you, when you tried to make it easy for him to go."

"May I--?" said Lawrence.

He leaned his face down on her open palms, and she felt the tears
that she could not see.  He could not control them, and indeed
after the first racking agony, when he felt as though his will
were being torn out of him by the roots, he made no effort to
control them, releasing Isabel and dropping at full length upon
the turf.  Nothing else, no torment of his own thoughts, not
Rendell's last pangs nor his wife's beauty young again in death
had ever made Hyde weep: if Rendell had died hard, Lawrence had
lived equally hard, locking up his frightful trouble in his own
breast, escaping from it when he could, cursing it and fighting
against it when it threatened to overpower him.  But now he
surrendered to it and acknowledged to himself that it had broken
his life.  And he felt no shame, not one iota, nothing but a
profound soulagement: the proud reticent man, too vain to shed
tears in his own room alone, wept voluntarily before Isabel,
uncovering for her pity the wounds not only of grief but of rage
and humiliation.

Such an outbreak would have been impossible in a man of pure
English blood, and in a pure Oriental it would have manifested
itself differently, but Isabel had truly said of Hyde that his
temperament was not homogeneous: the mixed strain in him betrayed
him into strange incongruities of strength and weakness.  Isabel
shut her eyes to incongruity.  She gave him without stint the
pitying gentleness he thirsted for.  She refused now to contrast
him with her brother.  Certainly Val's judgment would have been
cutting and curt.  But just?  Hardly.  By instinct Isabel felt
that her brother's clear, sane, English mind had not all the
factors necessary for judging this collapse.

Her imagination was at work in the shadow: "'the night--that
night. . . ." How do men live through such hours?  She saw Lizzie
as a chocolate-box beauty, but redeemed from hebetude by her
robust youth: able to attract Hyde by his love of luxury and to
hold him by main force: uneducated, coarse, and cruel, but not
weak.  What a disastrous marriage! doomed from the outset, even
if no Rendell had come on the scene.  Isabel dismissed Rendell
rather scornfully: in that night at Myrtle Villa she felt pretty
sure that the duel had been fought out between husband and wife:
the very staging of it, picturesque for Lizzie Hyde and tragic
for her husband, must for the entrapped lover have taken a frame
of ignominious farce. A gleam shot through Isabel's eyes-as she
imagined Rendell trying to face Hyde, and Hyde sparing him and
sending him away untouched.  No, no! as between the two men, the
honours lay with Hyde.

But as between him and Lizzie?  There the reckoning was not so
easy.  His wife had set scars on him that would never wear out.
Dimly Isabel guessed that since coming out of her destructive
hands Hyde himself could be both coarse and cruel: the seed of
brutality must have been in him all along, but Myrtle Villa had
fertilized it.  If he married again, what would be required of
Lizzie's successor?  A strange deep smile gave to Isabel's young
lips the wisdom of the women of all the ages. Love that gives
without stint asking for no recompense: love that understands yet
will not criticize nor listen to criticism: love that dares to
deny its lover for his own sake.

After collapse came quiescence, and, after a long quiescence,
revival.  Hyde raised himself on his arm and felt for his
handkerchief--indifferent to Isabel's observation, or soothed by
it:  his features were ravaged.  Isabel drenched her own
handkerchief in Mrs. Bendish's eau-de cologne and gave it him,
dripping wet.  "Take this, it will do you  good."

"Thank you" said Lawrence, exhausted and subdued.

Becoming gradually rather more composed, he raised his eyes
again.  "What must you think of me? It is beyond apology.  Will
you ever forgive me?"

"There's nothing to forgive: I'm not hurt."

"You're rather young to hear such a history as mine."

She blushed.  "Val says it doesn't matter what one knows so long
as one doesn't think about it in the wrong way." With her sweet
friendly smile, she touched with her fingertip the lapel of his
coat: an airy gesture, but there was a fire as well as sweetness
in Isabel, and for his life Lawrence could not repress a start.
"You mustn't mind me, Captain Hyde.  You needn't mind, because
you couldn't help it.  One can keep a secret for twenty years but
not for ever, and for confessor I suppose any woman will do
better than a man, won't she?  It's not as though I should ever
tell any one else: I never will, I promise you that.  You'll go
away and never see me again, and it'll be as though no one knew
or as though I were dead."

Touching innocence!  Did she indeed imagine that after such a
scene . . .?

"But I do not care two straws," said Lawrence, "so spare your
consolations!  On the contrary, it has been a great relief to me.
It's as if you had unlocked a door.  The prisoner you have set
free thanks you.  I was only afraid it might have been too much
for you, but you're made of strong stuff.  Yet I don't suppose
you ever saw a man weep before: well, you've seen it now: mon
Dieu, mon Dieu, but I am tired!  But you've let yourself in for a
considerable responsibility."

"For what?"

"For me.  Do you think it can ever again be the same between us?"
On one knee by Isabel's chair, Hyde laughed down at her with his
brilliant eyes, irreticent and unsparing of timidity in others.
"Do you think I could have leaned my head on any hands but
yours?"

He came too near, he touched her.  Isabel had gone through a
great deal that day, but, with the cruel and sordid history of
Hyde's married life fresh in her mind, none of the material
horrors at Wancote had produced in her such a shuddering recoil
as now.  His wife had not been dead six months!  "Captain Hyde,
how dare you?"

"I beg your pardon."

Lawrence drew himself up, a good-humoured  smile on his lips: but
they were pale.  "I--I didn't mean to hurt you," faltered
Isabel, as the tension of his silence reached her.  What right
had she, a young girl, to impose her own code of delicacy on a
man of Hyde's age and standing?--Lawrence looked at her
searchingly and his eyes changed, the sad irony died out of them,
and rapidly, imperceptibly, he returned to his normal manner.

"Nor I to frighten you.  Why, what a child it is, after all!
Yes, your hands are strong, but they aren't practised yet.  Never
mind, you shall forget or remember anything you like, except this
one thing which it pleases me and may please you to remember that
I'm very glad you know the worst and weakest of me--"

"Isabel, are you there?"

Thus daily life revenges itself on those who forget its
existence.

"That is Val's voice," said Lawrence.  He stood up, no longer
pale.  "Heavens, I can't face him!"

"Oh dear!" said Isabel in dismay.  She was no more anxious for
them to meet than Lawrence was,  but Val's footstep on the turf
was dangerously near.  But he was making for the middle of the
lilac-hedge, for the red rose archway and the asphalt walk
between reddening apple trees: and Isabel was sitting near the
end, close to the garden wall.  She flew out of her chair, held
up a branch while  Lawrence squeezed between the wall and the
lilacs,  and flew back and curled up again.  The lilac leaves had
not finished twinkling and rustling when  Val appeared.

"How are you, invalid?  I came home early on purpose to look
after you." He was in well-worn grey  riding clothes, booted and
spurred, his whip in one hand and his gloves in the other: a
slight,  cool, well-knit figure of low tones and half-lights.
"Have you had a quiet afternoon?"

"So-so," said Isabel, crimson.

"You look flushed, my darling," said Val tenderly.  He sat down
at the foot of Isabel's Indian chair and laid a finger on her
wrist. "You don't  feel feverish, do you?" The light click of the
wicket gate, which meant that Lawrence was safely off the
premises, enabled Isabel to say no with a sigh of relief.  "It
must be the hot weather.  Hallo! what have we here?"

He held up the gold cigarette case which had dropped from Hyde's
coat when he was lying on the grass.

"Some of Mrs. Bendish's property by the look of it," remarked
Val. "Diamonds, begad!  I should have thought Yvonne had better
taste.  But it must be hers, though the cipher doesn't seem to
have a B in it.  I'll guarantee it isn't Rosy's."   He slipped it
into his pocket.  "I'll give it to Jack, I shall see him tonight
at the vestry-meeting."

"It belongs to Captain Hyde."

"How do you know?"

"He's been here this afternoon."

"How long did he stay?"

"What time is it?--  An hour and twenty minutes."

"What brought him?" said Val, bewildered.

Isabel was mute. . . "I don't know what you're talking about,
Isabel.  Has he been with you all that time?  Very stupid of him
when I particularly wanted you to have a quiet afternoon.  When
did he go?"

"He has only just gone."

"Just gone? I never saw him."

"He went by the wicket gate."

"But I came in by the wicket gate myself!" said Val.  His kind
serene eyes rested on his sister without a shadow of any thought
behind surprise.

"I left the mare with Rowsley in the village."

Isabel sat up suddenly and wound her arms round Val's neck. "I
sent him away when I heard you coming.  He dodged you behind the
lilacs. I didn't want to tell you he'd been here.  I never should
have told you if you hadn't found that case."

"You got rid of him--  This minute?  Because I came--?  Isabel!"
Stafford held her off.  "It is not possible--!  Listen to me: I
will have an answer.  I know Hyde.  Has he said anything to
offend you?"

"No! no! oh Val, don't be so angry!"

"Lucky for him," said Val, drawing a long breath and sitting down
again, his whip across his knee.  "My dear little sister, you
mustn't make mysteries out of nothing at all!  I'm sorry I
startled you, but you startled me: I didn't know what to make of
it. Hyde has not a very good name. . . . In fact I'd rather you
didn't see too much of him unless Rose or I were there: it was
cheek of him to come up this afternoon when I was out, considering
that he scarcely knows you: but I suppose he thinks the Wancote show
gives him right of entry.  That is the sort of thing a chap like Hyde
does think.  Now begin again and tell me what it's all about."

"Oh, nothing, Val, nothing!" said Isabel, laughing, though the
tears were not far from her eyes.  "I didn't know you could get
in such a wax if you tried!  It's as you say, a little mystery of
nothing at all.  I'd tell you like a shot if I could, but I can't
because it would be breaking a promise."

"Hyde had no earthly right to make you promise."

"It was of my own accord."

"It is all wrong," said Val.  "Promises and silly secrets between
a child like you and a fellow like Hyde!"  He was more grave and
vexed than Isabel had ever seen him.  "There must be no more of
it."

"There won't if I can help it!" said Isabel.  "I like Captain
Hyde--yes, I do: I know you don't, and I can quite see that he's
what Rose would call a bit of an outsider, but I'm sorry for him
and there's a great deal I like in him.  But I don't want to see
him again for years and years." She gave a little shiver of
distaste: if anything had been wanting to heighten the reaction
of her youth against Hyde's stained middle age, the evasions in
which he had involved her would have done it.  "Now don't scold
me any more!  I'm innocent, and I feel rather sad.  The world
looks unhomely this afternoon.  All except you!  You stay there
where I can watch you: you're so comfortably English, so nice and
cool and quiet!  There's no one like you, no one: the more I see
of other people the more I like you!  I'm so glad you don't wear
linen clothes and a Panama hat and rings.  I'd give you away if
you did with half a pound of tea.  No, it's no use asking me any
more questions because I shan't answer them: a promise is all the
more binding if one would rather not keep it.  No, and it's no
use fishing either, I can keep a secret as well as you can--"

She broke off before the white alteration in Val's face.

"Has--.

"No," said Isabel slowly: "no, he never mentioned your name."




CHAPTER XI


"Val"

"M'm."

"I say"

"What, then?"

"What's all this about the Etchingham agency?"

Val Stafford, smoking a well-earned pipe some hours later in the
evening sunlight on the vicarage lawn, looked up at his brother
over the Chronicle with a faint frown.  "Who?"

"Ah! who?" said Rowsley, squatting cross-legged on the turf.

"Jack began on it this afternoon, and I had to switch him off, for
I didn't care to own that it was news to me."

"There's nothing in it at present."

"The duke has offered me the management of his Etchingham
property," said Val unwillingly. "Oh no, not to give up Bernard:
Etchingham, you see, marches with Wanhope and the two could be
run together.  He was awfully nice about it: would take what time
I could give him: quite saw that Wanhope would have to come
first."

"How much?"

"Four hundred and an allowance for a house.  Five, to be precise,
which is what he is giving Mills: but of course I couldn't take
full time pay for a part-time job."

Rowsley whistled.

"Yes, it would be very nice," said Val, always temperate.  "It
would practically be 300 pounds, for I couldn't go on taking my
full 300 pounds from Bernard.  I should get him to put on a young
fellow to work under me."

"It would make a lot of difference to you, even so."

"To us," Val corrected him.  "Another pound a week would oil the
wheels of Isabel's housekeeping.   And--" he hesitated, but
having gone so far one might as well go on--"it would enable me
to do two things I've long set my heart on, only it was no use
saying so: give you another hundred and fifty a year and insure
my life in Isabel's favour.  It would lift a weight off my mind
if I could do that.  Suppose I were to die suddenly--one never
knows what would become of her?  She'll be able to earn her own
living after taking her degree in October, but women's posts are
badly paid and it's uncommonly hard to save.  Oh yes, old boy, I
know you'd look after her!  But I don't want her to be a drag on
you: it's bad enough now--you never grumble, but I know what
it's like never to have a penny to spare.  Times have changed
since I was in the Army, but nothing alters the fact that it's
uncommonly unpleasant to be worse off than other fellows. I hate
it for you--all the more because you don't grumble.  It is a
constant worry to me not to be able to put you in a better
position."

Rowsley had been too long inured to this paternal tenderness to
be sensible of its touching absurdity on the lips of a man not
much older than himself.  But he was not a selfish youth, and he
remonstrated with Val, though more like a son than a brother.
"Yes, I dare say, but where do you come in? A stiff premium for
Isabel and 50 pounds for Jim and 150 pounds for me doesn't leave
much change out of 300 pounds!"

"Oh, I've all I want.  Living at home, I don't get the chance of
spending a lot of pocket money."

"Why don't you close at once?"

"Because I can't get an answer out of Bernard. I've spoken to him
but he won't decide one way or the other.  And he's my master,
and I can't take on another job if he objects.  That's why I kept
it dark at home: what's the good of raising hopes that may be
disappointed?"

"Pity you can't chuck Bernard and take on Etchingham and the
five hundred."

"I should never do that," said Val in the rare tone of decision
which in him was final.  "After all these years I could never
leave Bernard in the lurch.  I owe him too much."

"As if the boot weren't on the other leg!" Rowsley muttered.  He
was not mercenary--none of Mr. Stafford's children were: he saw
eye to eye with Val in Val's calm preference of six to eight
hundred a year: but when Val carried his financial principles
into the realm of sentiment Rowsley now and then lost his temper.
His brother smiled at him, amused by his irritation, unmoved by
it: other men's opinions rarely had any weight with Val Stafford.

"Pax till it happens, at all events!  Honestly I don't think
Bernard means to object: he's been all smiles the last day or
two--Hyde's coming has shaken him up and done him good--"

"Oh!  Hyde!"

Val let fail his paper and looked curiously at Rowsley, whose
tone was a challenge.  "What is it now?"

"Do you like this chap Hyde?"

"That depends on what you mean by liking him.  He's not a bad
specimen of his class."

"What is his class?  Do you know anything of his people?"

"Of his family I know little except that he has Jew blood in him
and is very well off," Val could have told his brother where the
money came from, but forbore out of consideration for Lawrence,
who might not care to have his connection with the Hyde Galleries
known in Chilmark.  "He came here because Lucian Selincourt asked
him to see if he could do anything for Bernard."

"I can't see Hyde putting himself out of his way to oblige Mr.
Selincourt."

"If you ask me, Rose, I should say he had only just got back to
England and was at a loose end.  But there was a dash of good
nature in it: he's genuinely fond of Mrs. Clowes."

"So I gathered," said Rowsley.  His tone was pregnant.  Val sat
silent for a moment.

"What rubbish!  He hasn't seen her for eight or ten years."

"Since her marriage." Val shrugged his shoulders.  "Sorry, Val,
but I cannot see Hyde staying on at Wanhope out of cousinly
affection for Bernard Clowes.  It must be a beastly uncomfortable
house to stay in.  Nicely run and all that, and they do you very
well, but Bernard is distinctly an acquired taste.  Oh, my dear
chap!" as Val's silence stiffened, "no one suggests that Laura's
ever looked at the fellow!  But facts are facts, and Hyde is--
Hyde.  I'm not a bit surprised to hear he has Jew blood in him,"
Rowsley continued, warming to the discussion: he was a much
keener judge of character that the tolerant and easy-going Val.
"That accounts for the arty strain in him.  Yvonne says he's a
thorough musician, and Jack told me Lord Grantchester took to him
because he knew such a lot about pictures.  Well, so he ought!
He's a Londoner.  What does he know of the country?  Only what
you pick up at a big country-house party or a big shoot!  He's
not the sort of chap to stay on at Wanhope for the pleasure of
cheering up across-grained br--a fellow like Bernard.  Yes, he's
talking of staying on indefinitely: is going to send to town for
one of his confounded cars. . . .  And what other woman is there
in Chilmark that he'd walk across the road to look at?"

"I'm not sure you're fair to him."

Rowsley turned up to his brother an amused, rather sweet smile.
"Val, you'd pray for the devil?"

"Oh, Hyde isn't a devil! I came pretty close to him ten years
ago.  He has a streak of generosity in him: no one knows that
better than I do, for I'm in his debt.  What?  Oh! no, not in
money matters: is that likely?  But he's capable of . . .
magnanimity, one might call it," Stafford fastidiously felt after
precision: "no, he wouldn't pursue Laura; he wouldn't make her
life harder than it is already."

"He might propose to make it easier." Rowsley threw a daisy at a
cockchafer and missed it.  "You and I are sons of a parsonage.
We shouldn't run off with a married lady because it would be
against our principles." His thin brown features were twisted
into a faint grimace.  Rowsley, like Val, possessed a satirical
sense of humour, and gave it freer play than Val did.  "It's so
difficult to shake off early prejudices.  When Fowler and I were
at the club the other day, we met a horrid little sweep who waxed
confidential.  I said I couldn't make love to a married woman if
I tried, and Fowler said he could but held rather not, and we
walked off, but as I remarked to Fowler afterwards the funny
thing was that it was true.  I don't see anything romantic in the
situation.  It strikes me as immoral and disgusting.  But Hyde
wouldn't take a narrow view like mine.  He has to live up to his
tailor."

"Oh, really, Rose!" Val gave his unwilling laugh.  "You're like
Isabel, who can't forgive him for sporting a diamond monogram."

"No, but I'm interested.  I know Jack's limitations, and Jimmy's,
and yours, but Hyde's I don't know, and he intrigues me," said
Rowsley, lighting a cigarette with his agile brown fingers.
"Now I'll tell you the way he really strikes me.  He's not a bad
sort: I shouldn't wonder if there were more decency in him than
he'd care to get credit for.  But I should think," he looked up
at Val with his clear speculative hazel eyes, "that he's never in
his life taken a thrashing.  He's always had pots of money and
superb health.  I know nothing, of his private concerns, but at
all events he isn't married, and from what Jack says he's sought
safety in numbers.  No wife, no kids, no near relations--that
means none of the big wrenches.  No: I don't believe Hyde's ever
taken a licking in his life."

"You sound as if you would like to administer one."

"Only by way of a literary experiment," said Rowsley with his
mischievous grin.  He was of the new Army, Val of the old: it was
a constant source of mild surprise to Val that his brother read
books about philosophy, and psychology, and sociology, of which
pre-war Sandhurst had never heard: read poetry too, not Tennyson
or Shakespeare, but slim modern volumes with brown covers and
wide margins: and wrote verses now and then, and sent them to
orange-coloured magazines or annual anthologies, at which Val
gazed from a respectful distance.  "I don't owe him any grudge.
I'm not Bernard's dry-nurse!"

Val turned a leaf of his paper, but he was not reading it.

"I rather wish you hadn't said all this, Rowsley.  It does no
good: not even if it were true."

"Val, if it weren't such a warm evening I'd get up and punch your
head.  You're a little too bright and good, aren't you?  Yvonne
Bendish says it, and she's Laura's sister."

"Yvonne would say anything. I wish you had given her a hint to
hold her tongue.  She may do most pestilent mischief if she sets
this gossip going."

"It'll set itself going," said Rowsley.  "And, though I know the
Bendishes pretty well, I really shouldn't care to tell Mrs. Jack
not to gossip about her own sister.  You might see your way to
it, reverend sir, but I don't."

"If it came to Bernard's ears I wouldn't answer for the
consequences."

"Won't Bernard see it for himself?"

"If I thought that," said Val, "if I thought that. . . .

"You couldn't interfere, old man," said Rowsley with a shrewd
glance at his brother.  "Your hands are tied."

"H'm: yes, that's true." It was much truer than Rowsley knew.  "I
don't care," said Val, involuntarily crushing the paper in his
hand: "I would not let that stand in my way: I'd speak to Hyde."

"Are you prepared to take high ground? I can't imagine any one
less likely to be amenable to moral suasion, unless of course
you're much more intimate with him than you ever let on to me.
Perhaps you are," Rowsley added.  "He certainly is interested in
you."

"Hyde is?"

"Watches you like a cat after a mouse.  What's at the root of it,
Val?  Is it the original obligation you spoke of?  I'm not sure
that I should care to be under an obligation to Hyde myself.
Hullo,  are you off?" Val had risen, folding the newspaper,
laying it carefully down on his chair: in all his ways he was as
neat as an old maid.

"I have to be at the managers' meeting by half past eight, and
it's twenty past now."

Watching his brother across the lawn, Rowsley cudgelled his
brains to account for Val's precipitate departure.  The pretext
was valid, for Val was always punctual, and yet it looked like a
retreat--not to say a rout.  But what had he said to put Val to
flight?

Present at the managers' meeting were Val, still in breeches:
Jack Bendish in a dinner jacket and black tie: Garrett the
blacksmith, cursorily washed:  Thurlow, a leading Nonconformist
tradesman: and Mrs. Verney the doctor's wife.  Agenda: to instruct
the Correspondent to requisition a new scrubbing brush for the
Infants' School.  This done and formally entered in the Minutes by
Mrs. Verney,  the meeting resolved itself into a Committee of Ways
and Means for getting rid of the boys' headmaster without falling
foul of the National Union of Teachers; but these proceedings, though
of extreme interest to all concerned, were recorded in no Minutes.

The meeting broke up in amity and Bendish came out into the
purple twilight, taking Val's arm.  It was gently withdrawn.
"Neuritis again?"  said Jack.  "Why don't you try massage?" He
always asked the same question, and, being born to fifteen
thousand a year, never read between the lines of Val's vague
reply.  Val had a touch of neuritis in his injured arm two nights
out of seven, but he could not find the shillings for his train
fare to Salisbury, far less the fees of a professional masseuse.
Bendish, who could have settled that difficulty out of a week's
cigar bills, would have been shocked and distressed if Val had
owned to it, but it was beyond the scope of his imagination,
though he was a thoughtful young man and quietly did his best to
protect Val from the tax of chauffeurs and gamekeepers.  He
understood that poor men cannot always find sovereigns.  But he
really did not know that sometimes they cannot even find
shillings.  Tonight he said, "I can't think why you don't get a
woman over to massage you," and then, reverting to the peccant
master,  "Brown's a nuisance.  He has a rotten influence on the
elder boys.  He's thick with all that beastly Labour crowd, and I
believe Thurlow's right about his goings on with Warner's wife,
though I wasn't going to say so to Thurlow. I do wish he'd do
something, then we could fire him. But we don't want a row with
the N.U.T."

"You can't fire a man for his political opinions."

"Why not, if they're wrong?" said Bendish placidly.

His was the creed that Labour men are so slow to understand
because it is so slow to explain itself: not a blind prejudice,
but the reasonable faith of one who feels himself to belong to an
hereditary officer caste for whom privilege and responsibility go
hand in hand.  And an excellent working rule it is so long as
practice is not divorced from theory: so long as the average
member of the governing class acts up to the tradition of
government, be he sachem or daimio or resident English squire.
It amused Val: but he admired it.

"Brown is a thorn in Jimmy's side," he remarked, dropping the
impersonal issue. "I never in my life heard a man make such a
disagreeable noise on the organ. I tackled him about it last
Sunday.  He said it ciphered, but organs don't cipher in dry
weather, so I went to look at it and found three or four keys
glued together with candle grease."

"Filthy swine!  Are you coming round to Wanhope? I have to call
in on my way home, my wife's dining there."

Val made no reply.  "Are you coming up or not?  You look fagged,
Val," said Bendish affectionately. "Anything wrong?"

"No: I was only wondering whether I'd get you to take a message
for me, but I'd better go myself."

Bendish nodded.  "Just as you like.  Have you settled yet about
the Etchingham agency?"

"No, I'm waiting for Bernard."

"Hope you'll see your way to accepting.  My only fear is that it
would throw too much work on you; you're such a conscientious beggar!
but of course you wouldn't do for us all the odd jobs you do for poor
Bernard.  Seems to me," Jack ruminated, "the best plan would be for
you to have a car.  One gets about quicker like that and it wouldn't
be such a fag.  There's that little green Napier roadster, she'd come
in handy if we stabled her at Nicholson's."  He added simply, to
obviate any possible misunderstanding, "Garage bills our show, of
course."

"Thanks most awfully," said Val, accepting without false pride.
"I should love it, I do get tired after being in the saddle all
day.  It would more than make up for the extra work."

They were crossing the Wanhope lawn as he spoke, on their way to
the open French windows of the parlour, gold-lit with many
candles against an amethyst evening sky.  Laura, in a plain black
dress, was at the piano, the cool drenched foliage of Claude
Debussy's rainwet gardens rustling under her magic fingers.
Bernard was talking to Mrs. Jack Bendish, for the sufficient
reason that she disliked him and disliked talking to any one
while Laura played.  Her defiant sparkle, her gipsy features, her
slim white shoulders emerging from the brocade and sapphires of a
sleeveless bodice cut open almost to her waist, produced the
effect of a Carolus Duran lady come to life and threw Laura back
into a dimmed and tired middle age.  Jack's eyes glowed as they
dwelt on her.  His marriage had been a trial to his family, but
no one could deny that Yvonne had made a success of it, for Jack
worshipped her.--Lawrence, leaning forward in his chair, his
forehead on his hand to shield his eyes from the light, looked
exceedingly tired, and probably was so.

"Queer chap Hyde," said Bendish to Val as they waited on the
grass for the music to finish.  "Can't think what he's stopping
on for."

"Oh, Jack, for heaven's sake don't you begin on that subject!"

"Hey?  Oh!  No, by Jove.  Seems a shame, doesn't it?" returned
Bendish, taking the point with that rapid effortless readiness of
his class which made him more soothing to Val than many a
cleverer man.  "It all says itself, so what's the good of saying
it?  All the same I shan't be sorry when Hyde packs his movin'
tent a day's march nearer Jerusalem."  And with a casual wink at
Val he stepped over the threshold.  His judgment, so vague and
shrewd and sure of itself, represented probably the kindest view
that would be taken in Chilmark.

Their entrance broke up the gathering.  Jack carried off his
wife, and Barry appeared to wheel Bernard away to bed.  With a
word to Laura, Val followed the cripple to his room.  The Duke
was pressing for an answer, and long experience had taught Val
that for Bernard one time was as good as another: it was not
possible to count on his moods.  And there was not much to be
said; all pros and cons had been thrashed out before; the five
minutes while Barry was out of the room fetching Bernard's
indispensable hot-water bottles would give Val ample time to
secure Bernard's consent.--Laura had scarcely finished putting
away her music when Val came back, humming under his breath the
jangled tune that echoes night in the streets of Granada.  Laura
glanced at Lawrence, who had gone into the garden to smoke and
was passing and repassing the open window: no, he could not hear.
"Well, Val?"

"Let me do that for you, shall I?" said Val, lightly smiling, at
her. "Your ottoman has a heavy lid."

"Have you spoken to Bernard?"

"I have."

"And it's all right?"

"Yes" said Val, deftly flinging diamond-wise a glittering Chinese
cloth: "is that straight?--that is, for me.  I shan't take the
agency."

"Val!"

"Bernard agrees with me that the double work would be too heavy.
Of course I should like the money and I'm awfully sorry to
disoblige Lord Grantchester and Jack, but one has one's
limitations, and I don't want to knock up."

"It is too bad--too bad of Bernard,". said Laura, lowering her
voice as Lawrence lingered near the window.  "He doesn't half
deserve your goodness to him."

"Bosh!" said Val laughing.  "Where do these candlesticks go?  In
my heart of hearts I'm grateful to him.  I'm a cowardly beggar,
Laura, and I was dreading the big financial responsibility.  Oh
no, Bernard didn't put any pressure on me: simply offered me the
choice between Etchingham and Wanhope."

"They would pay you twice what you get from Bernard.  Oh, Val, I
wish you would take it and throw us over!"

"That's very unkind of you."

"Is this definite?"

"Quite: Bernard had thought it well over and made up his mind.  I
shouldn't speak to him about it if I were you."

"I shan't. I couldn't bear to."

"Bosh again--excuse me.  I must go home. Good-night, dear." He
held out his hand, wishing, in the repressed way that had become
a second nature to him, that Laura would not wring it so warmly
and so long.  In the first bitterness of disappointment--so much
the keener for his unlucky confidence to Rowsley--Val could not
stand sympathy.  Not even from Laura?  Least of all from Laura.
He nodded to her with a bright careless smile and went out into
the night.

But he had still one more mission to perform before he could go
home to break the bad news to Rowsley: a trying mission under
which Val fretted in repressed distaste. He came up to Lawrence
holding out the gold cigarette case.  "You dropped this at our
place when you were talking to my sister this afternoon."

"Did I?" Lawrence slipped it into his pocket. His manner was
perfectly calm.  "Thanks so much.--I hadn't missed it."  He had
no fear of having been betrayed, in essentials, by Isabel.

"I don't want to offend you," Val continued with his direct
simplicity of manner, "but perhaps you hardly realize how young
my sister is."

"Some one said she was nineteen, but why?"

"I don't know what you said to her, probably nothing of the
slightest consequence, but she's only a child, and you managed to
upset her.  To be frank, I didn't want her to see any one this
afternoon.  Oh, she's all right, but her arm has run her up a bit
of a temperature, and Verney wants her to keep quiet for a few
days.  It'll give her an excuse to keep clear of the inquest too.
This sounds ungrateful as well as ungracious, when we owe you so
much, but there's no ingratitude in it, only common sense."

"Oh, damn your common sense!" exclaimed Lawrence.

It was as laconic a warning-off as civility allowed: and it
irritated Lawrence beyond bearing to be rebuked by young
Stafford, whose social life stood in his danger, whom he could at
pleasure strip to universal crucifying shame.  But there was
neither defiance nor fear in Val: tranquil and unpretentious, in
his force of character he reminded Lawrence of Laura Clowes.  She
too had been attacked once or twice that evening by her husband,
and Lawrence had admired the way in which she either foiled or
evaded the rapier point, or took it to her bosom without
flinching.  This same silken courage, it seemed, Val also
possessed.  Both would stand up to a blow with the same grave
dignity and--perhaps--secret scorn.

Minutes passed.  Val waited because he chose not to be the first
to break silence, Lawrence because he was absorbing fresh
impressions with that intensity which wipes out time and place.
He was in the mood to receive them: tired, softened, and
quickened, from the tears of the afternoon.  After all Val was
Isabel's brother and possessed Isabel's eyes!  This drew Lawrence
to him by a double cord: practically, because it is inconvenient
to be on bad terms with one's brother-in-law, and mystically,
because in his profound romantic passion he loved whatever was
associated with her, down to the very sprig of honeysuckle that
she had pinned into his coat.  But for this cord his relations
with Stafford would have begun and ended in a casual regret for
the casual indulgence of a cruel impulse.  But Isabel's brother
had ex officio a right of entry into Hyde's private life, and,
the doors once opened, he was dazed by the light that Val let in.

It was after ten o'clock and dews were falling, falling from a
clear night.  "One faint eternal eventide of gems," beading the
dark turf underfoot and the pale faces of roses that had bloomed
all day in sunshine: now prodigal of scent only they hung their
heads like ghosts of flowers among dark glossy leaves.  Stars
hung sparkling on the dark field of heaven, stars threw down
their spears on the dark river fleeting to the star-roofed
distant Channel.  Stream and grass and leaf-buds were ephemeral
and eternal, ever passing and ever renewed, old as the stars, or
the waste ether in which they range: the green, sappy stem, the
dew-bead that hung on it, the shape of a ripple were the same now
as when Nineveh was a queen of civilization and men's flesh was
reddening alive in osier cages over altar fires on Wiltshire
downs. And all the sweetness, all the romance of an English
midsummer night seized the heart of Lawrence, a nomad, a returned
exile, and a man in love--as if he had never known England
before.

Or her inhabitants either!  Lawrence, without country, creed,
profession, or territorial obligation, was one of those sons of
rich men who form, in any social order, its loosest and most
self-centred class.  In his set, frank egoism was the only motive
for which one need not apologize.  But in Chilmark it was not
so. Far other forces were in play in the lives of the Stafford
family, and Laura Clowes, and Lord Grantchester and his wife and
Jack Bendish.  What were these forces?  Lawrence thought in
flashes, by imagery, scene after scene flitting before him out of
the last forty-eight hours.  Homespun virtues: unselfishness,
indifference to money values, the constant sense of filial,
fraternal, social responsibility . . . the glow in Jack's eyes
when they rested on his wife: Verney's war on cesspools: Leverton
Morley as scoutmaster: the Chinese lecture: rosebushes in the
churchyard, by the great stone cross with its list of names
beginning "George Potts, Wiltshire Rifles, aged 49," and ending
"Robert Denis Bendish, Grenadier Guards, aged 19: Into Thy Hands,
O Lord": old, old feudal England, closeknit, no pastoral of easy
virtues, yet holding together in a fellowship which underlies
class disunion: whose sons, from days long before the Conquest,
have always desired to go to sea when the cuckoo sang, and to
come home again when they were tired of the hail and salt
showers, because they could not bear to be landless and lordless
men. . . .

[Footnote]

     "Swylce geac mona geomran reorde, singe sumeres
     weard, sorge beade bittre in breosthord; pset se
     beorn ne wat, secg esteadig, hwset pa sume dreoga,
     pe pa wrseclastas widost lecga! . . . . pince him
     on mode pset he his monndryhten clyppe and cysse
     andon cneo lecge honda and heafod; ponne onwsecne,
     gesihp him beforan fealwe wegas, bapian brimfuglas."

     "Even so the cuckoo warns him with its sad voice,
     Summer's warden sings foreboding sorrow, bitter grief
     of heart.  Little knows the prosperous fellow what
     others are doing who follow far and wide the tracks
     of exile . . . Then dreams the seafarer that he clasps
     his lord and kisses him, and on his knee lays hand and
     head; but he awakes and sees before him the fallow
     waterways and the sea-fowls bathing."