Analysis of this table shows that in every case a difference between
the intensities of the first and second taps lengthens the first
interval in comparative estimation. In the case of subject _Mm_ a
difference in the intensities of the second and third taps lengthens
the second interval subjectively. But in the cases of the other two
subjects the difference shortens the interval in varying degrees.

The intensity difference established for the purposes of these
experiments was not great, being less than that established for the
work on the first two subjects, and therefore the fact that these
results are less decided than those of the first work was not
unexpected. The results are, however, very clear, and show that the
lengthening effect of a difference in intensity of the stimulations
limiting an interval has its general application only to the first
interval, being sometimes reversed in the second. From the combined
results we find, further, that a uniform change in the intensity of
three stimulations is capable of reversing the direction of the
constant error, an intensity change in a given direction changing the
error from positive to negative for some subjects, and from negative
to positive for others.


III. INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS.


We may say provisionally that the _change_ from a tactual stimulation
of one kind to a tactual stimulation of another kind tends to lengthen
subjectively the interval which the two limit. If we apply the same
generalization to the other sensorial realms, we discover that it
agrees with the general results obtained by Meumann[15] in
investigating the effects of intensity changes upon auditory time, and
also with the results obtained by Schumann[16] in investigations with
stimulations addressed alternately to one ear and to the other.
Meumann reports also that the change from stimulation of one sense to
stimulation of another subjectively lengthens the corresponding
interval.

   [15] _op. cit._ (II.), S. 289-297.

   [16] _op. cit._, S. 67.

What, then, are the factors, introduced by the change, which produce
this lengthening effect? The results of introspection on the part of
some of the subjects of our experiments furnish the clue which may
enable us to construct a working hypothesis.

Many of the subjects visualize a time line in the form of a curve. In
each case of this kind the introduction of a change, either in
intensity or location, if large enough to produce an effect on the
time estimation, produced a distortion on the part of the curve
corresponding to the interval affected. All of the subjects employed
in the experiments of Group 2 were distinctly conscious of the change
in attention from one point to another, as the two were stimulated
successively, and three of them, _Hy_, _Hs_ and _P_, thought of
something passing from one point to the other, the representation
being described as partly muscular and partly visual. Subjects _Mr_
and _B_ visualized the two hands, and consciously transferred the
attention from one part of the visual image to the other. Subject _Mr_
had a constant tendency to make eye movements in the direction of the
change. Subject _P_ detected these eye movements a few times, but
subject _B_ was never conscious of anything of the kind.

All of the subjects except _R_ were conscious of more or less of a
_strain_, which varied during the intervals, and was by some felt to
be largely a tension of the chest and other muscles, while others felt
it rather indefinitely as a 'strain of attention.' The characteristics
of this tension feeling were almost always different in the second
interval from those in the first, the tension being usually felt to be
more _constant_ in the second interval. In experiments of the third
group a higher degree of tension was felt in awaiting a light tap than
in awaiting a heavy one.

Evidently, in all these cases, the effect of a _difference_ between
two stimulations was to introduce certain changes in sensation
_during_ the interval which they limited, owing to the fact that the
subject expected the difference to occur. Thus in the third group of
experiments there were, very likely, in all cases changes from
sensations of high tension to sensations of lower, or vice versa. It
is probable that, in the experiments of the second group, there were
also changes in muscular sensations, partly those of eye muscles,
partly of chest and arm muscles, introduced by the change of attention
from one point to another. At any rate, it is certain that there were
certain sensation changes produced during the intervals by changes of
locality.

If, then, we assume that the introduction of additional sensation
change into an interval lengthens it, we are led to the conclusion
that psychological time (as distinguished from metaphysical,
mathematical, or transcendental time) is perceived simply as the
quantum of change in the sensation content. That this is a true
conclusion is seemingly supported by the fact that when we wish to
make our estimate correspond as closely as possible with external
measurements, we exclude from the content, to the best of our ability,
the general complex of external sensations, which vary with extreme
irregularity; and confine the attention to the more uniformly varying
bodily sensations. We perhaps go even further, and inhibit certain
bodily sensations, corresponding to activity of the more peripherally
located muscles, that the attention may be confined to certain others.
But attention to a dermal stimulation is precisely the condition which
would tend to some extent to prevent this inhibition. For this reason
we might well expect to find the error in estimation more variable,
the 'constant error' in general greater, and the specific effects of
variations which would affect the peripheral muscles, more marked in
'tactual' time than in either 'auditory' or 'optical' time. Certainly
all these factors appear surprisingly large in these experiments.

It is not possible to ascertain to how great an extent subject _Sh_
inhibited the more external sensations, but certainly if he succeeded
to an unusual degree in so doing, that fact would explain the absence
of effect of stimulation difference in his case.

Explanation has still to be offered for the variable effect of
intensity difference upon the _second_ interval. According to all
subjects except _Sn_, there is a radical difference in attitude in the
two intervals. In the first interval the subject is merely observant,
but in the second he is more or less reproductive. That is, he
measures off a length which seems equal to the standard, and if the
stimulation does not come at that point he is prepared to judge the
interval as 'longer,' even before the third stimulation is given. In
cases, then, where the judgment with equal intensities would be
'longer,' we might expect that the actual strengthening or weakening
of the final tap would make no difference, and that it would make very
little difference in other cases. But even here the expectation of the
intensity is an important factor in determining tension changes,
although naturally much less so than in the first interval. So we
should still expect the lengthening of the second interval.

We must remember, however, that, as we noticed in discussing the
experiments of Group 2, there is complicated with the lengthening
effect of a change the _bare constant error_, which appears even when
the three stimulations are similar in all respects except temporal
location. Compare _WWW_ with _SSS_, and we find that with all five
subjects the constant error is decidedly changed, being even reversed
in direction with three of the subjects.

Now, what determines the direction of the constant error, where there
is no pause between the intervals? Three subjects reported that at
times there seemed to be a slight loss of time after the second
stimulation, owing to the readjustment called for by the change of
attitude referred to above, so that the second interval was begun, not
really at the second stimulation, but a certain period after it. This
fact, if we assume it to be such, and also assume that it is present
to a certain degree in all observations of this kind, explains the
apparent overestimation of the first interval. Opposed to the factor
of _loss of time_ there is the factor of _perspective_, by which an
interval, or part of an interval, seems less in quantity as it recedes
into the past. The joint effect of these two factors determines the
constant error in any case where no pause is introduced between _ST_
and _CT_. It is then perfectly obvious that, as the perspective factor
is decreased by diminishing the intervals compared, the constant error
must receive positive increments, _i.e._, become algebraically
greater; which corresponds exactly with the results obtained by
Vierordt, Kollert, Estel, and Glass, that under ordinary conditions
long standard intervals are comparatively underestimated, and short
ones overestimated.

On the other hand, if with a given interval we vary the loss of time,
we also vary the constant error. We have seen that a change in the
intensity of the stimulations, although the relative intensity of the
three remains constant, produces this variation of the constant error;
and the individual differences of subjects with regard to sensibility,
power of attention and inhibition, and preferences for certain
intensities, lead us to the conclusion that for certain subjects
certain intensities of stimulation make the transition from the
receptive attitude to the reproductive easiest, and, therefore, most
rapid.

Now finally, as regards the apparent failure of the change in _SSW_ to
lengthen the second interval, for which we are seeking to account; the
comparatively great loss of time occurring where the change of
attitude would naturally be most difficult (that is, where it is
complicated with a change of attention from a strong stimulation to
the higher key of a weak stimulation) is sufficient to explain why
with most subjects the lengthening effect upon the second interval is
more than neutralized. The individual differences mentioned in the
preceding paragraph as affecting the relation of the two factors
determining the constant error, enter here of course to modify the
judgments and cause disagreement among the results for different
subjects.

Briefly stated, the most important points upon which this discussion
hinges are thus the following: We have shown--

    1. That the introduction of either a local difference or a
    difference of intensity in the tactual stimulations limiting
    an interval has, in general, the effect of causing the
    interval to appear longer than it otherwise would appear.

    2. That the apparent exceptions to the above rule are, (_a_)
    that the _increase_ of the local difference in the first
    interval, the stimulated areas remaining unchanged, produces a
    slight _decrease_ in the subjective lengthening of the
    interval, and (_b_) that in certain cases a difference in
    intensity of the stimulations limiting the second interval
    apparently causes the interval to seem shorter than it
    otherwise would.

    3. That the 'constant error' of time judgment is dependent
    upon the intensity of the stimulations employed, although the
    three stimulations limiting the two intervals remain of equal
    intensity.

To harmonize these results we have found it necessary to assume:

    1. That the length of a time interval is perceived as the
    amount of change in the sensation-complex corresponding to
    that interval.

    2. That the so-called 'constant error' of time estimation is
    determined by two mutually opposing factors, of which the
    first is the _loss of time_ occasioned by the change of
    attitude at the division between the two intervals, and the
    second is the diminishing effect of _perspective_.

    It is evident, however, that this last assumption applies only
    to the conditions under which the results were obtained,
    namely, the comparison of two intervals marked off by three
    brief stimulations.






PERCEPTION OF NUMBER THROUGH TOUCH.

BY J. FRANKLIN MESSENGER.


The investigation which I am now reporting began as a study of the
fusion of touch sensations when more than two contacts were possible.
As the work proceeded new questions came up and the inquiry broadened
so much that it seemed more appropriate to call it a study in the
perception of number.

The experiments are intended to have reference chiefly to three
questions: the space-threshold, fusion of touch sensations, and the
perception of number. I shall deny the validity of a threshold, and
deny that there is fusion, and then offer a theory which attempts to
explain the phenomena connected with the determination of a threshold
and the problem of fusion and diffusion of touch sensations.

The first apparatus used for the research was made as follows: Two
uprights were fastened to a table. These supported a cross-bar about
ten inches from the table. To this bar was fastened a row of steel
springs which could be pressed down in the manner of piano keys. To
each of these springs was fastened a thread which held a bullet. The
bullets, which were wrapped in silk to obviate temperature sensations,
were thus suspended just above the fingers, two over each finger. Each
thread passed through a small ring which was held just a little above
the fingers. These rings could be moved in any direction to
accommodate the bullet to the position of the finger. Any number of
the bullets could be let down at once. The main object at first was to
learn something about the fusion of sensations when more than two
contacts were given.

Special attention was given to the relation of the errors made when
the fingers were near together to those made when the fingers were
spread. For this purpose a series of experiments was made with the
fingers close together, and then the series was repeated with the
fingers spread as far as possible without the subject's feeling any
strain. Each subject was experimented on one hour a week for about
three months. The same kind of stimulation was given when the fingers
were near together as was given when they were spread. The figures
given below represent the average percentage of errors for four
subjects.

Of the total number of answers given by all subjects when the fingers
were close together, 70 per cent. were wrong. An answer was called
wrong whenever the subject failed to judge the number correctly. In
making out the figures I did not take into account the nature of the
errors. Whether involving too many or too few the answer was called
wrong. Counting up the number of wrong answers when the fingers were
spread, I found that 28 per cent. of the total number of answers were
wrong. This means simply that when the fingers were near together
there were more than twice as many errors as there were when they were
spread, in spite of the fact that each finger was stimulated in the
same way in each case.

A similar experiment was tried using the two middle fingers only. In
this case not more than four contacts could be made at once, and hence
we should expect a smaller number of errors, but we should expect
still to find more of them when the fingers are near together than
when they are spread. I found that 49 per cent. of the answers were
wrong when the fingers were near together and 20 per cent. were wrong
when they were spread. It happens that this ratio is approximately the
same as the former one, but I do not regard this fact as very
significant. I state only that it is easier to judge in one case than
in the other; how much easier may depend on various factors.

To carry the point still further I took only two bullets, one over the
second phalanx of each middle finger. When the fingers were spread the
two were never felt as one. When the fingers were together they were
often felt as one.

The next step was to investigate the effect of bringing together the
fingers of opposite hands. I asked the subject to clasp his hands in
such a way that the second phalanges would be about even. I could not
use the same apparatus conveniently with the hands in this position,
but in order to have the contacts as similar as possible to those I
had been using, I took four of the same kind of bullets and fastened
them to the ends of two æsthesiometers. This enabled me to give four
contacts at once. However, only two were necessary to show that
contacts on fingers of opposite hands could be made to 'fuse' by
putting the fingers together. If two contacts are given on contiguous
fingers, they are quite as likely to be perceived as one when the
fingers are fingers of opposite hands, as when they are contiguous
fingers of the same hand.

These results seem to show that one of the important elements of
fusion is the actual space relations of the points stimulated. The
reports of the subjects also showed that generally and perhaps always
they located the points in space and then remembered what finger
occupied that place. It was not uncommon for a subject to report a
contact on each of two adjacent fingers and one in between where he
had no finger. A moment's reflection would usually tell him it must be
an illusion, but the sensation of this illusory finger was as definite
as that of any of his real fingers. In such cases the subject seemed
to perceive the relation of the points to each other, but failed to
connect them with the right fingers. For instance, if contacts were
made on the first, second and third fingers, the first might be
located on the first finger, the third on the second finger, and then
the second would be located in between.

So far my attention had been given almost entirely to fusion, but the
tendency on the part of all subjects to report more contacts than were
actually given was so noticeable that I concluded that diffusion was
nearly as common as fusion and about as easy to produce. It also
seemed that the element of weight might play some part, but just what
effect it had I was uncertain. I felt, too, that knowledge of the
apparatus gained through sight was giving the subjects too much help.
The subjects saw the apparatus every day and knew partly what to
expect, even though the eyes were closed when the contacts were made.
A more efficient apparatus seemed necessary, and, therefore, before
taking up the work again in 1900, I made a new apparatus.

Not wishing the subjects to know anything about the nature of the
machine or what could be done with it, I enclosed it in a box with an
opening in one end large enough to allow the subject's hand to pass
through, and a door in the other end through which I could operate. On
the inside were movable wooden levers, adjustable to hands of
different width. These were fastened by pivotal connection at the
proximal end. At the outer end of each of these was an upright strip
with a slot, through which was passed another strip which extended
back over the hand. This latter strip could be raised or lowered by
means of adjusting screws in the upright strip. On the horizontal
strip were pieces of wood made so as to slide back and forth. Through
holes in these pieces plungers were passed. At the bottom of each
plunger was a small square piece of wood held and adjusted by screws.
From this piece was suspended a small thimble filled with shot and
paraffine. The thimbles were all equally weighted. Through a hole in
the plunger ran a thread holding a piece of lead of exactly the weight
of the thimble. By touching a pin at the top this weight could be
dropped into the thimble, thus doubling its weight. A screw at the top
of the piece through which the plunger passed regulated the stop of
the plunger. This apparatus had three important advantages. It was
entirely out of sight, it admitted of rapid and accurate adjustment,
and it allowed the weights to be doubled quickly and without
conspicuous effort.

For the purpose of studying the influence of weight on the judgments
of number I began a series of experiments to train the subjects to
judge one, two, three, or four contacts at once. For this the bare
metal thimbles were used, because it was found that when they were
covered with chamois skin the touch was so soft that the subjects
could not perceive more than one or two with any degree of accuracy,
and I thought it would take entirely too long to train them to
perceive four. The metal thimbles, of course, gave some temperature
sensation, but the subject needed the help and it seemed best to use
the more distinct metal contacts.

In this work I had seven subjects, all of whom had had some experience
in a laboratory, most of them several years. Each one took part one
hour a week. The work was intended merely for training, but a few
records were taken each day to see how the subjects progressed. The
object was to train them to perceive one, two, three, and four
correctly, and not only to distinguish four from three but to
distinguish four from more than four. Hence five, six, seven, and
eight at a time were often given. When the subject had learned to do
this fairly well the plan was to give him one, two, three, and four in
order, then to double the weight of the four and give them again to
see if he would interpret the additional weight as increase in number.
This was done and the results were entirely negative. The subjects
either noticed no difference at all or else merely noticed that the
second four were a little more distinct than the first.

The next step was to give a number of light contacts to be compared
with the same number of heavy ones--the subject, not trying to tell
the exact number but only which group contained the greater number. A
difference was sometimes noticed, and the subject, thinking that the
only variations possible were variations of number and position, often
interpreted the difference as difference in number; but the light
weights were as often called more as were the heavy ones.

So far as the primary object of this part of the experiment is
concerned the results are negative, but incidentally the process of
training brought out some facts of a more positive nature. It was
early noticed that some groups of four were much more readily
recognized than others, and that some of them were either judged
correctly or underestimated while others were either judged correctly
or overestimated. For convenience the fingers were indicated by the
letters _A B C D_, _A_ being the index finger. The thumb was not used.
Two weights were over each finger. The one near the base was called 1,
the one toward the end 2. Thus _A12 B1 C2_ means two contacts on the
index finger, one near the base of the second finger, and one near the
end of the third finger. The possible arrangements of four may be
divided into three types: (1) Two weights on each of two fingers, as
_A12 B12, C12 D12_, etc., (2) four in a line across the fingers, _A1
B1 C1 D1_ or _A2 B2 C2 D2_, (3) unsymmetrical arrangements, as _A1 B2
C1 D2_, etc. Arrangements of the first type were practically never
overestimated. _B12 C12_ was overestimated once and _B12 D12_ was
overestimated once, but these two isolated cases need hardly be taken
into account. Arrangements of the second type were but rarely
overestimated--_A2 B2 C2 D2_ practically never, _A1 B1 C1 D1_ a few
times. Once the latter was called eight. Apparently the subject
perceived the line across the hand and thought there were two weights
on each finger instead of one. Arrangements of the third type were
practically never underestimated, but were overestimated in 68 per
cent. of the cases.

These facts in themselves are suggestive, but equally so was the
behavior of the subject while making the answers. It would have hardly
done to ask the person if certain combinations were hard to judge, for
the question would serve as a suggestion to him; but it was easy to
tell when a combination was difficult without asking questions. When a
symmetrical arrangement was given, the subject was usually composed
and answered without much hesitation. When an unsymmetrical
arrangement was given he often hesitated and knit his brows or perhaps
used an exclamation of perplexity before answering, and after giving
his answer he often fidgeted in his chair, drew a long breath, or in
some way indicated that he had put forth more effort than usual. It
might be expected that the same attitude would be taken when six or
eight contacts were made at once, but in these cases the subject was
likely either to fail to recognize that a large number was given or,
if he did, he seemed to feel that it was too large for him to perceive
at all and would guess at it as well as he could. But when only four
were given, in a zigzag arrangement, he seemed to feel that he ought
to be able to judge the number but to find it hard to do so, and
knowing from experience that the larger the number the harder it is to
judge he seemed to reason conversely that the more effort it takes to
judge the more points there are, and hence he would overestimate the
number.

The comments of the subjects are of especial value. One subject (Mr.
Dunlap) reports that he easily loses the sense of location of his
fingers, and the spaces in between them seem to belong to him as much
as do his fingers themselves. When given one touch at a time and told
to raise the finger touched he can do so readily, but he says he does
not know which finger it is until he moves it. He feels as if he
willed to move the place touched without reference to the finger
occupying it. He sometimes hesitates in telling which finger it is,
and sometimes he finds out when he moves a finger that it is not the
one he thought it was.

Another subject (Dr. MacDougall) says that his fingers seem to him
like a continuous surface, the same as the back of his hand. He
usually named the outside points first. When asked about the order in
which he named them, he said he named the most distinct ones first.
Once he reported that he felt six things, but that two of them were in
the same places as two others, and hence he concluded there were but
four. This feeling in a less careful observer might lead to
overestimation of number and be called diffusion, but all cases of
overestimation cannot be explained that way, for it does not explain
why certain combinations are so much more likely to lead to it than
others.

In one subject (Mr. Swift) there was a marked tendency to locate
points on the same fingers. He made many mistakes about fingers _B_
and _C_ even when he reported the number correctly. When _B_ and _D_
were touched at the same time he would often call it _C_ and _D_, and
when _C_ and _D_ were given immediately afterward he seemed to notice
no difference. With various combinations he would report _C_ when _B_
was given, although _C_ had not been touched at the same time. If _B_
and _C_ were touched at the same time he could perceive them well
enough.

The next part of the research was an attempt to discover whether a
person can perceive any difference between one point and two points
which feel like one. A simple little experiment was tried with the
æsthesiometer. The subjects did not know what was being used, and were
asked to compare the relative size of two objects placed on the back
of the hand in succession. One of these objects was one knob of the
æsthesiometer and the other was two knobs near enough together to lie
within the threshold. The distance of the points was varied from 10 to
15 mm. Part of the time the one was given first and part of the time
both were given together. The one, whether given first or second, was
always given about midway between the points touched by the two. If
the subject is not told to look for some specific difference he will
not notice any difference between the two knobs and the one, and he
will say they are alike; but if he is told to give particular
attention to the size there seems to be a slight tendency to perceive
a difference. The subjects seem to feel very uncertain about their
answers, and it looks very much like guess-work, but something caused
the guesses to go more in one direction than in the other.

  Two were called less than one .... 16% of the times given.
   "    "     "      equal to   .... 48%    "         "
   "    "     "    greater than .... 36%    "         "

Approximately half of the time two were called equal to one, and if
there had been no difference in the sensations half of the remaining
judgments should have been that two was smaller than one, but two were
called larger than one more than twice as many times as one was called
larger than two. There was such uniformity in the reports of the
different subjects that no one varied much from this average ratio.

This experiment seems to indicate a very slight power of
discrimination of stimulations within the threshold. In striking
contrast to this is the power to perceive variations of distance
between two points outside the threshold. To test this the
æsthesiometer was spread enough to bring the points outside the
threshold. The back of the hand was then stimulated with the two
points and then the distance varied slightly, the hand touched and the
subject asked to tell which time the points were farther apart. A
difference of 2 mm. was usually noticed, and one of from 3 to 5 mm.
was noticed always very clearly.

I wondered then what would be the result if small cards set parallel
to each other were used in place of the knobs of the æsthesiometer. I
made an æsthesiometer with cards 4 mm. long in place of knobs. These
cards could be set at any angle to each other. I set them at first 10
mm. apart and parallel to each other and asked the subjects to compare
the contact made by them with a contact by one card of the same size.
The point touched by the one card was always between the points
touched by the two cards, and the one card was put down so that its
edge would run in the same direction as the edges of the other cards.
The result of this was that:

  Two were called less,  14 per cent.
   "    "     "   equal, 36   "   "
   "    "     " greater, 50   "   "

I then increased the distance of the two cards to 15 mm., the other
conditions remaining the same, and found that:

  Two were called less,  11 per cent.
   "    "     "   equal, 50   "   "
   "    "     " greater, 39   "   "

It will be noticed that the ratio in this last series is not
materially different from the ratio found when the two knobs of the
æsthesiometer were compared with one knob. The ratio found when the
distance was 10 mm., however, is somewhat different. At that distance
two were called greater half of the time, while at 15 mm. two were
called equal to one half of the time. The explanation of the
difference, I think, is found in the comments of one of my subjects. I
did not ask them to tell in what way one object was larger than the
other--whether longer or larger all around or what--but simply to
answer 'equal,' 'greater,' or 'less.' One subject, however, frequently
added more to his answers. He would often say 'larger crosswise' or
'larger lengthwise' of his hand. And a good deal of the time he
reported two larger than one, not in the direction in which it really
was larger, but the other way. It seems to me that when the two cards
were only 10 mm. apart the effect was somewhat as it would be if a
solid object 4 mm. wide and 10 mm. long had been placed on the hand.
Such an object would be recognized as having greater mass than a line
4 mm. long. But when the distance is 15 mm. the impression is less
like that of a solid body but still not ordinarily like two objects.

In connection with the subject of diffusion the _Vexirfehler_ is of
interest. An attempt was made to develop the _Vexirfehler_ with the
æsthesiometer. Various methods were tried, but the following was most
successful. I would tell the subject that I was going to use the
æsthesiometer and ask him to close his eyes and answer simply 'one' or
'two.' He would naturally expect that he would be given part of the
time one, and part of the time two. I carefully avoided any suggestion
other than that which could be given by the æsthesiometer itself. I
would begin on the back of the hand near the wrist with the points as
near the threshold as they could be and still be felt as two. At each
successive putting down of the instrument I would bring the points a
little nearer together and a little lower down on the hand. By the
time a dozen or more stimulations had been given I would be working
down near the knuckles, and the points would be right together. From
that on I would use only one point. It might be necessary to repeat
this a few times before the illusion would persist. A great deal seems
to depend on the skill of the operator. It would be noticed that the
first impression was of two points, and that each stimulation was so
nearly like the one immediately preceding that no difference could be
noticed. The subject has been led to call a thing two which ordinarily
he would call one, and apparently he loses the distinction between the
sensation of one and the sensation of two. After going through the
procedure just mentioned I put one knob of the æsthesiometer down one
hundred times in succession, and one subject (Mr. Meakin) called it
two seventy-seven times and called it one twenty-three times. Four of
the times that he called it one he expressed doubt about his answer
and said it might be two, but as he was not certain he called it one.
Another subject (Mr. George) called it two sixty-two times and one
thirty-eight times. A third subject (Dr. Hylan) called it two
seventy-seven times and one twenty-three times. At the end of the
series he was told what had been done and he said that most of his
sensations of two were perfectly distinct and he believed that he was
more likely to call what seemed somewhat like two one, than to call
what seemed somewhat like one two. With the fourth subject (Mr.
Dunlap) I was unable to do what I had done with the others. I could
get him to call one two for four or five times, but the idea of two
would not persist through a series of any length. He would call it two
when two points very close together were used. I could bring the knobs
within two or three millimeters of each other and he would report two,
but when only one point was used he would find out after a very few
stimulations were given that it was only one. After I had given up the
attempt I told him what I had been trying to do and he gave what seems
to me a very satisfactory explanation of his own case. He says the
early sensations keep coming up in his mind, and when he feels like
calling a sensation two he remembers how the first sensation felt and
sees that this one is not like that, and hence he calls it one. I pass
now to a brief discussion of what these experiments suggest.

It has long been known that two points near together on the skin are
often perceived as one. It has been held that in order to be felt as
two they must be far enough apart to have a spatial character, and
hence the distance necessary for two points to be perceived has been
called the 'space-threshold.' This threshold is usually determined
either by the method of minimal changes or by the method of right and
wrong cases.

If, in determining a threshold by the method of minimal changes--on
the back of the hand, for example, we assume that we can begin the
ascending series and find that two are perceived as one always until
the distance of twenty millimeters is reached, and that in the
descending series two are perceived as two until the distance of ten
millimeters is reached, we might then say that the threshold is
somewhere between ten and twenty millimeters. But if the results were
always the same and always as simple as this, still we could not say
that there is any probability in regard to the answer which would be
received if two contacts 12, 15, or 18 millimeters apart were given by
themselves. All we should know is that if they form part of an
ascending series the answer will be 'one,' if part of a descending
series 'two.'

The method of right and wrong cases is also subject to serious
objections. There is no lower limit, for no matter how close together
two points are they are often called two. If there is any upper limit
at all, it is so great that it is entirely useless. It might be argued
that by this method a distance could be found at which a given
percentage of answers would be correct. This is quite true, but of
what value is it? It enables one to obtain what one arbitrarily calls
a threshold, but it can go no further than that. When the experiment
changes the conditions change. The space may remain the same, but it
is only one of the elements which assist in forming the judgment, and
its importance is very much overestimated when it is made the basis
for determining the threshold.

Different observers have found that subjects sometimes describe a
sensation as 'more than one, but less than two.' I had a subject who
habitually described this feeling as 'one and a half.' This does not
mean that he has one and a half sensations. That is obviously
impossible. It must mean that the sensation seems just as much like
two as it does like one, and he therefore describes it as half way
between. If we could discover any law governing this feeling of
half-way-between-ness, that might well indicate the threshold. But
such feelings are not common. Sensations which seem between one and
two usually call forth the answer 'doubtful,' and have a negative
rather than a positive character. This negative character cannot be
due to the stimulus; it must be due to the fluctuating attitudes of
the subject. However, if the doubtful cases could be classed with the
'more than one but less than two' cases and a law be found governing
them, we might have a threshold mark. But such a law has not been
formulated, and if it had been an analysis of the 'doubtful' cases
would invalidate it. For, since we cannot have half of a sensation or
half of a place as we might have half of an area, the subject regards
each stimulation as produced by one or by two points as the case may
be. Occasionally he is stimulated in such a way that he can regard the
object as two or as one with equal ease. In order to describe this
feeling he is likely to use one or the other of the methods just
mentioned.

We might say that when the sum of conditions is such that the subject
perceives two points, the points are above the threshold, and when the
subject perceives one point when two are given they are below the
threshold. This might answer the purpose very well if it were not for
the _Vexirfehler_. According to this definition, when the
_Vexirfehler_ appears we should have to say that one point is above
the threshold for twoness, which is a queer contradiction, to say the
least. It follows that all of the elaborate and painstaking
experiments to determine a threshold are useless. That is, the
threshold determinations do not lead us beyond the determinations
themselves.

In order to explain the fact that a person sometimes fails to
distinguish between one point and two points near together, it has
been suggested that the sensations fuse. This, I suppose, means either
that the peripheral processes coalesce and go to the center as a
single neural process, or that the process produced by each stimulus
goes separately to the brain and there the two set up a single
activity. Somewhat definite 'sensory circles,' even, were once
believed in.

If the only fact we had to explain was that two points are often
thought to be one when they are near together, 'fusion' might be a
good hypothesis, but we have other facts to consider. If this one is
explained by fusion, then the mistaking of one point for two must be
due to diffusion of sensations. Even that might be admissible if the
_Vexirfehler_ were the only phenomenon of this class which we met. But
it is also true that several contacts are often judged to be more than
they actually are, and that hypothesis will not explain why certain
arrangements of the stimulating objects are more likely to bring about
that result than others. Still more conclusive evidence against
fusion, it seems to me, is found in the fact that two points, one on
each hand, may be perceived as one when the hands are brought
together. Another argument against fusion is the fact that two points
pressed lightly may be perceived as one, and when the pressure is
increased they are perceived as two. Strong pressures should fuse
better than weak ones, and therefore fusion would imply the opposite
results. Brückner[1] has found that two sensations, each too weak to
be perceived by itself, may be perceived when the two are given
simultaneously and sufficiently near together. This reënforcement of
sensations he attributes to fusion. But we have a similar phenomenon
in vision when a group of small dots is perceived, though each dot by
itself is imperceptible. No one, I think, would say this is due to
fusion. It does not seem to me that we need to regard reënforcement as
an indication of fusion.

   [1] Brückner, A.: 'Die Raumschwelle bei Simultanreizung,'
   _Zeitschrift für Psychologie_, 1901, Bd. 26, S. 33.

My contention is that the effects sometimes attributed to fusion and
diffusion of sensations are not two different kinds of phenomena, but
are identical in character and are to be explained in the same way.

Turning now to the explanation of the special experiments, we may
begin with the _Vexirfehler_.[2] It seems to me that the _Vexirfehler_
is a very simple phenomenon. When a person is stimulated with two
objects near together he attends first to one and then to the other
and calls it two; then when he is stimulated with one object he
attends to it, and expecting another one near by he hunts for it and
hits upon the same one he felt before but fails to remember that it is
the same one, and hence thinks it is another and says he has felt two
objects. Observers agree that the expectation of two tends to bring
out the _Vexirfehler_. This is quite natural. A person who expects two
and receives one immediately looks about for the other without waiting
to fixate the first, and therefore when he finds it again he is less
likely to recognize it and more likely to think it another point and
to call it two. Some observers[3] have found that the apparent
distance of the two points when the _Vexirfehler_ appears never much
exceeds the threshold distance. Furthermore, there being no distinct
line of demarcation between one and two, there must be many sensations
which are just about as much like one as they are like two, and hence
they must be lumped off with one or the other group. To the
mathematician one and two are far apart in the series because he has
fractions in between, but we perceive only in terms of whole numbers;
hence all sensations which might more accurately be represented by
fractions must be classed with the nearest whole number. A sensation
is due to a combination of factors. In case of the _Vexirfehler_ one
of these factors, viz., the stimulating object, is such as to suggest
one, but some of the other conditions--expectation, preceding
sensation, perhaps blood pressure, etc.--suggest two, so that the
sensation as a whole suggests _one-plus_, if we may describe it that
way, and hence the inference that the sensation was produced by two
objects.

   [2] Tawney, Guy A.: 'Ueber die Wahrnehmung zweier Punkte
   mittelst des Tastsinnes mit Rücksicht auf die Frage der Uebung
   und die Entstehung der Vexirfehler,' _Philos. Stud._, 1897, Bd.
   XIII., S. 163.

   [3] See Nichols: 'Number and Space,' p. 161. Henri, V., and
   Tawney, G.: _Philos. Stud._, Bd. XI., S. 400.

This, it seems to me, may account for the appearance of the
_Vexirfehler_, but why should not the subject discover his error by
studying the sensation more carefully? He cannot attend to two things
at once, nor can he attend to one thing continuously, even for a few
seconds. What we may call continuous attention is only a succession of
attentive impulses. If he could attend to the one object continuously
and at the same time hunt for the other, I see no reason why he should
not discover that there is only one. But if he can have only one
sensation at a time, then all he can do is to associate that
particular sensation with some idea. In the case before us he
associates it with the idea of the number two. He cannot conceive of
two objects unless he conceives them as located in two different
places. Sometimes a person does find that the two objects of his
perception are both in the same place, and when he does so he
concludes at once that there is but one object. At other times he
cannot locate them so accurately, and he has no way of finding out the
difference, and since he has associated the sensation with the idea of
two he still continues to call it two. If he is asked to locate the
points on paper he fills out the figure just as he fills out the
blind-spot, and he can draw them in just the same way that he can draw
lines which he thinks he _sees_ with the blind-spot, but which really
he only _infers_.

Any sensation, whether produced by one or by many objects, is one, but
there may be a difference in the quality of a sensation produced by
one object and that of a sensation produced by more than one object.
If this difference is clear and distinct, the person assigns to each
sensation the number he has associated with it. He gives it the name
two when it has the quality he has associated with that idea. But the
qualities of a sensation from which the number of objects producing it
is inferred are not always clear and distinct. The quality of the
sensation must not be confused with any quality of the object. If we
had to depend entirely on the sense of touch and always remained
passive and received sensations only when we were touched by
something, there is no reason why we should not associate the idea of
one with the sensation produced by two objects and the idea of two
with that produced by one object--assuming that we could have any idea
of number under such circumstances. The quality of a sensation from
which number is inferred depends on several factors. The number itself
is determined by the attitude of the subject, but the attitude is
determined largely by association. A number of facts show this. When a
person is being experimented on, it is very easy to confuse him and
make him forget how two feel and how one feels. I have often had a
subject tell me that he had forgotten and ask me to give him two
distinctly that he might see how it felt. In other words, he had
forgotten how to associate his ideas and sensations. In developing the
_Vexirfehler_ I found it much better, after sufficient training had
been given, not to give two at all, for it only helped the subject to
perceive the difference between two and one by contrast. But when one
was given continually he had no such means of contrast, and having
associated the idea of two with a sensation he continued to do so. The
one subject with whom I did not succeed in developing the
_Vexirfehler_ to any great extent perceived the difference by
comparing the sensation with one he had had some time before. I could
get him, for a few times, to answer two when only one was given, but
he would soon discover the difference, and he said he did it by
comparing it with a sensation which he had had some time before and
which he knew was two. By this means he was able to make correct
associations when otherwise he would not have done so. It has been
discovered that when a subject is being touched part of the time with
two and part of the time with one, and the time it takes him to make
his judgments is being recorded, he will recognize two more quickly
than he will one if there is a larger number of twos in the series
than there is of ones. I do not see how this could be if the sensation
of two is any more complex than that of one. But if both sensations
are units and all the subject needs to do is to associate the
sensation with an idea, then we should expect that the association he
had made most frequently would be made the most quickly.

If the feeling of twoness or of oneness is anything but an inference,
why is it that a person can perceive two objects on two fingers which
are some distance apart, but perceives the same two objects as one
when the fingers are brought near together and touched in the same
way? It is difficult to see how bringing the fingers together could
make a sensation any less complex, but it would naturally lead a
person to infer one object, because of his previous associations. He
has learned to call that _one_ which seems to occupy one place. If two
contacts are made in succession he will perceive them as two because
they are separated for him by the time interval and he can perceive
that they occupy different places.

When two exactly similar contacts are given and are perceived as one,
we cannot be sure whether the subject feels only one of the contacts
and does not feel the other at all, or feels both contacts and thinks
they are in the same place, which is only another way of saying he
feels both as one. It is true that when asked to locate the point he
often locates it between the two points actually touched, but even
this he might do if he felt but one of the points. To test the matter
of errors of localization I have made a few experiments in the
Columbia University laboratory. In order to be sure that the subject
felt both contacts I took two brass rods about four inches long,
sharpened one end and rounded off the other. The subject sat with the
palm of his right hand on the back of his left and his fingers
interlaced. I stimulated the back of his fingers on the second
phalanges with the sharp end of one rod and the blunt end of the other
and asked him to tell whether the sharp point was to the right or to
the left of the other. I will not give the results in detail here, but
only wish to mention a few things for the purpose of illustrating the
point in question. Many of the answers were wrong. Frequently the
subject would say both were on the same finger, when really they were
on fingers of opposite hands, which, however, in this position were
adjacent fingers. Sometimes when this happened I would ask him which
finger they were on, and after he had answered I would leave the point
on the finger on which he said both points were and move the other
point over to the same finger, then move it back to its original
position, then again over to the finger on which the other point was
resting, and so on, several times. The subject would tell me that I
was raising one point and putting it down again in the same place all
of the time. Often a subject would tell me he felt both points on the
same finger, but that he could not tell to which hand the finger
belonged. When two or more fingers intervened between the fingers
touched no subject ever had any difficulty in telling which was the
sharp and which the blunt point, but when adjacent fingers were
touched it was very common for the subject to say he could not tell
which was which. This cannot be because there is more difference in
the quality of the contacts in one case than in the other. If they
were on the same finger it might be said that they were stimulating
the same general area, but since one is on one hand and one on the
other this is impossible. The subject does not think the two points
are in the same place, because he feels two qualities and hence he
infers two things, and he knows two things cannot be in the same place
at the same time. If the two contacts were of the same quality
probably they would be perceived as one on account of the absence of
difference, for the absence of difference is precisely the quality of
oneness.

These facts, together with those mentioned before, seem to me to
indicate that errors of localization are largely responsible for
judgments which seem to be due to fusion or diffusion of sensations.
But they are responsible only in this way, they prevent the correction
of the first impression. I do not mean that a person never changes his
judgment after having once made it, but a change of judgment is not
necessarily a correction. Often it is just the contrary. But where a
wrong judgment is made and cannot be corrected inability to localize
is a prominent factor. This, however, is only a secondary factor in
the perception of number. The cardinal point seems to me the
following:

Any touch sensation, no matter by how many objects it is produced, is
one, and number is an inference based on a temporal series of
sensations. It may be that we can learn by association to infer number
immediately from the quality of a sensation, but that means only that
we recognize the sensation as one we have had before and have found it
convenient to separate into parts and regard one part after the other,
and we remember into how many parts we separated it. This separating
into parts is a time process. What we shall regard as _one_ is a mere
matter of convenience. Continuity sometimes affords a convenient basis
for unity and sometimes it does not. There is no standard of oneness
in the objective world. We separate things as far as convenience or
time permits and then stop and call that _one_ which our own attitude
has determined shall be one.

That we do associate a sensation with whatever idea we have previously
connected it with, even though that idea be that of the number of
objects producing it, is clearly shown by some experiments which I
performed in the laboratory of Columbia University. I took three
little round pieces of wood and set them in the form of a triangle. I
asked the subject to pass his right hand through a screen and told him
I wanted to train him to perceive one, two, three and four contacts at
a time on the back of his hand, and that I would tell him always how
many I gave him until he learned to do it. When it came to three I
gave him two points near the knuckles and one toward the wrist and
told him that was three. Then I turned the instrument around and gave
him one point near the knuckles and two toward the wrist and told him
that was four. As soon as he was sure he distinguished all of the
points I stopped telling him and asked him to answer the number. I had
four subjects, and each one learned very soon to recognize the four
contacts when three were given in the manner mentioned above. I then
repeated the same thing on the left hand, except that I did not tell
him anything, but merely asked him to answer the number of contacts he
felt. In every case the idea of four was so firmly associated with
that particular kind of a sensation that it was still called four when
given on the hand which had not been trained. I gave each subject a
diagram of his hand and asked him to indicate the position of the
points when three were given and when four were given. This was done
without difficulty. Two subjects said they perceived the four contacts
more distinctly than the three, and two said they perceived the three
more distinctly than the four.

It seems very evident that the sensation produced by three contacts is
no more complex when interpreted as four than when interpreted as
three. If that is true, then it must also be evident that the
sensation produced by one contact is no more complex when interpreted
as two than when interpreted as one. The converse should also be true,
that the sensation produced by two contacts is no less complex when
interpreted as one than when interpreted as two. Difference in number
does not indicate difference in complexity. The sensation of four is
not made up of four sensations of one. It is a unit as much as the
sensation of one is.

There remains but one point to be elaborated. If number is not a
quality of objects, but is merely a matter of attitude of the subject,
we should not expect to find a very clear-cut line of demarcation
between the different numbers except with regard to those things which
we constantly consider in terms of number. Some of our associations
are so firmly established and so uniform that we are likely to regard
them as necessary. It is not so with our associations of number and
touch sensations. We have there only a vague, general notion of what
the sensation of one or two is, because usually it does not make much
difference to us, yet some sensations are so well established in our
minds that we call them one, two or four as the case may be without
hesitation. Other sensations are not so, and it is difficult to tell
to which class they belong. Just so it is easy to tell a pure yellow
color from a pure orange, yet they shade into each other, so that it
is impossible to tell where one leaves off and the other begins. If we
could speak of a one-two sensation as we speak of a yellow-orange
color we might be better able to describe our sensations. It would,
indeed, be convenient if we could call a sensation which seems like
one with a suggestion of two about it a two-one sensation, and one
that seems nearly like two but yet suggests one a one-two sensation.
Since we cannot do this, we must do the best we can and describe a
sensation in terms of the number it most strongly suggests. Subjects
very often, as has been mentioned before, describe a sensation as
'more than one but less than two,' but when pressed for an answer will
say whichever number it most resembles. A person would do the same
thing if he were shown spectral colors from orange to yellow and told
to name each one either orange or yellow. At one end he would be sure
to say orange and at the other yellow, but in the middle of the series
his answers would likely depend upon the order in which the colors
were shown, just as in determining the threshold for the perception of
two points by the method of minimal changes the answers in the
ascending series are not the same as those in the descending series.
The experiments have shown that the sensation produced by two points,
even when they are called one, is not the same as that produced by
only one point, but the difference is not great enough to suggest a
different number.

If the difference between one and two were determined by the distance,
then the substitution of lines for knobs of the æsthesiometer ought to
make no difference. And if the sensations produced by two objects fuse
when near together, then the sensations produced by lines ought to
fuse as easily as those produced by knobs.

In regard to the higher numbers difficulties will arise unless we take
the same point of view and say that number is an inference from a
sensation which is in itself a unit. It has been shown that four
points across the ends of the fingers will be called four or less, and
that four points, one on the end of each alternate finger and one at
the base of each of the others, will be called four or more--usually
more. In either case each contact is on a separate finger, and it is
hardly reasonable to suppose there is no diffusion when they are in a
straight row, but that when they are in irregular shape there is
diffusion. It is more probable that the subject regards the sensation
produced by the irregular arrangement as a novelty, and tries to
separate it into parts. He finds both proximal and distal ends of his
fingers concerned. He may discover that the area covered extends from
his index to his little finger. He naturally infers, judging from past
experience, that it would take a good many points to do that, and
hence he overestimates the number. When a novel arrangement was given,
such as moving some of the weights back on the wrist and scattering
others over the fingers, very little idea of number could be gotten,
yet they were certainly far enough apart to be felt one by one if a
person could ever feel them that way, and the number was not so great
as to be entirely unrecognizable.






THE SUBJECTIVE HORIZON.

BY ROBERT MACDOUGALL.


I.


The general nature of the factors which enter into the orientation of
the main axes of our bodies, under normal and abnormal conditions, has
been of much interest to the psychologist in connection with the
problem of the development of space and movement perception. The
special points of attack in this general investigation have comprised,
firstly, the separation of resident, or organic, from transient, or
objective, factors; secondly, the determination of the special organic
factors which enter into the mechanism of judgment and their several
values; and thirdly, within this latter field, the resolution of the
problem of a special mechanism of spatial orientation, the organ of
the static sense.

The special problem with which we are here concerned relates to the
group of factors upon which depends one's judgment that any specified
object within the visual field lies within the horizontal plane of the
eyes, or above or below that plane, and the several functions and
values of these components. The method of procedure has been suggested
by the results of preceding investigations in this general field.

The first aim of the experiments was to separate the factors of
resident and transient sensation, and to determine the part played by
the presence of a diversified visual field. To do so it was necessary
to ascertain, for each member of the experimental group, the location
of the subjective visual horizon, and the range of uncertainty in the
observer's location of points within that plane. Twelve observers in
all took part in the investigation. In the first set of experiments no
attempt was made to change the ordinary surroundings of the observer,
except in a single point, namely, the provision that there should be
no extended object within range of the subject's vision having
horizontal lines on a level with his eyes.

The arrangements for experimentation were as follows: A black wooden
screen, six inches wide and seven feet high, was mounted between two
vertical standards at right angles to the axis of vision of the
observer. Vertically along the center of this screen and over pulleys
at its top and bottom passed a silk cord carrying a disc of white
cardboard, 1 cm. in diameter, which rested against the black surface
of the screen. From the double pulley at the bottom of the frame the
two ends of the cord passed outward to the observer, who, by pulling
one or the other, could adjust the disc to any desired position. On
the opposite side of the screen from the observer was mounted a
vertical scale graduated in millimeters, over which passed a light
index-point attached to the silk cord, by means of which the position
of the cardboard disc in front was read off. The observer was seated
in an adjustable chair with chin and head rests, and a lateral
sighting-tube by which the position of the eyeball could be vertically
and horizontally aligned. The distance from the center of the eyeball
to the surface of the screen opposite was so arranged that, neglecting
the radial deflection, a displacement of 1 mm. in either direction was
equal to a departure of one minute of arc from the plane of the eyes'
horizon.

The observer sat with the light at his back, and by manipulation of
the cords adjusted the position of the white disc freely up and down
the screen until its center was judged to be on a level with the eye.
Its position was then read off the vertical scale by the conductor
(who sat hidden by an interposed screen), and the error of judgment
was recorded in degrees and fractions as a positive (upward) or
negative (downward) displacement. The disc was then displaced
alternately upward and downward, and the judgment repeated. From the
time of signalling that the point had been located until this
displacement the observer sat with closed eyes. These determinations
were made in series of ten, and the individual averages are in general
based upon five such series, which included regularly the results of
sittings on different days. In some cases twice this number of
judgments were taken, and on a few occasions less. The number of
judgments is attached to each series of figures in the tables. In that
which follows the individual values and their general averages are
given as minutes of arc for (_a_) the constant error or position of
the subjective horizon, (_b_) the average deviation from the objective
horizon, and (_c_) the mean variation of the series of judgments.


TABLE I.

  Observer.      Constant Error.   Average Deviation.  Mean Variation.
      _A_  (100)         -19.74         38.78             10.67
      _C_   (90)         -18.18         23.89             10.82
      _D_  (100)         -19.84         33.98              7.95
      _E_   (50)         - 4.28         72.84              6.90
      _F_  (100)         +46.29         46.29              2.05
      _G_   (50)         +14.96         35.40              8.40
      _H_   (50)         -27.22         27.46              5.78
      _I_   (50)         + 6.62         53.34              7.45
      _K_   (50)         + 1.08         30.26              6.59
      _L_   (20)         -56.70         56.70             10.39

  Average:                -7.70         41.89              7.69


The average subjective horizon shows a negative displacement, the
exceptional minority being large. No special facts could be connected
with this characteristic, either in method of judgment or in the past
habits of the reactor. The average constant error is less than an
eighth of a degree, and in neither direction does the extreme reach
the magnitude of a single degree of arc. Since the mean variation is
likewise relatively small, there is indicated in one's ordinary
judgments of this kind a highly refined sense of bodily orientation in
space.


II.


In order to separate the resident organic factors from those presented
by the fixed relations of the external world, an adaptation of the
mechanism was made for the purpose of carrying on the observations in
a darkened room. For the cardboard disc was substituted a light
carriage, riding upon rigid parallel vertical wires and bearing a
miniature ground-glass bulb enclosing an incandescent electric light
of 0.5 c.p. This was encased in a chamber with blackened surfaces,
having at its center an aperture one centimeter in diameter, which was
covered with white tissue paper. The subdued illumination of this
disc presented as nearly as possible the appearance of that used in
the preceding series of experiments. No other object than this spot of
moving light was visible to the observer. Adjustment and record were
made as before. The results for the same set of observers as in the
preceding case are given in the following table:


TABLE II.

  Subject.       Constant Error.  Average Deviation.  Mean Variation.
      _A_   (50)    - 52.76          55.16               30.08
      _C_   (30)    -  7.40          42.00               35.31
      _D_   (50)    - 14.24          38.60               30.98
      _E_   (50)    - 43.12          86.44               30.19
      _F_  (100)    -  2.01          72.33               20.27
      _G_  (100)    - 21.89          47.47               32.83
      _H_   (50)    -  1.62          59.10               29.95
      _I_   (50)    - 32.76          41.60               24.40
      _K_   (50)    - 61.70         100.02               52.44
      _L_   (40)    -128.70         128.90               27.83

   Average:         - 36.62          67.16               31.43


Changes in two directions may be looked for in the results as the
experimental conditions are thus varied. The first is a decrease in
the certainty of judgment due to the simple elimination of certain
factors upon which the judgment depends. The second is the appearance
of definite types of error due to the withdrawal of certain
correctives of organic tendencies which distort the judgment in
specific directions. The loss in accuracy is great; the mean variation
increases from 7.69 to 31.43, or more than 400 per cent. This large
increase must not, however, be understood as indicating a simple
reduction in the observer's capacity to locate points in the
horizontal plane of the eyes. The two series are not directly
comparable; for in the case of the lighted room, since the whole
visual background remained unchanged, each determination must be
conceived to influence the succeeding judgment, which becomes really a
correction of the preceding. To make the two series strictly parallel
the scenery should have been completely changed after each act of
judgment. Nevertheless, a very large increase of uncertainty may
fairly be granted in passing from a field of visual objects to a
single illuminated point in an otherwise dark field. It is probable
that this change is largely due to the elimination of those elements
of sensation depending upon the relation of the sagittal axis to the
plane against which the object is viewed.

The change presented by the constant error can here be interpreted
only speculatively. I believe it is a frequently noted fact that the
lights in a distant house or other familiar illuminated object on
land, and especially the signal lights on a vessel at sea appear
higher than their respective positions by day, to the degree at times
of creating the illusion that they hang suspended above the earth or
water. This falls in with the experimental results set forth in the
preceding table. It cannot be attributed to an uncomplicated tendency
of the eyes of a person seated in such a position to seek a lower
direction than the objective horizon, when freed from the corrective
restraint of a visual field, as will be seen when the results of
judgments made in complete darkness are cited, in which case the
direction of displacement is reversed. The single illuminated spot
which appears in the surrounding region of darkness, and upon which
the eye of the observer is directed as he makes his judgment, in the
former case restricts unconscious wanderings of the eye, and sets up a
process of continuous and effortful fixation which accompanies each
act of determination. I attribute the depression of the eyes to this
process of binocular adjustment. The experience of strain in the act
of fixation increases and decreases with the distance of the object
regarded. In a condition of rest the axes of vision of the eyes tend
to become parallel; and from this point onward the intensity of the
effort accompanying the process of fixation increases until, when the
object has passed the near-point of vision, binocular adjustment is no
longer possible. In the general distribution of objects in the visual
field the nearer, for the human being, is characteristically the
lower, the more distant the higher, as one looks in succession from
the things at his feet to the horizon and _vice versa_. We should,
therefore, expect to find, when the eyes are free to move in
independence of a determinate visual field, that increased convergence
is accompanied by a depression of the line of sight, decreased
convergence by an elevation of it. Here such freedom was permitted,
and though the fixed distance of the point of regard eliminated all
large fluctuations in convergence, yet all the secondary
characteristics of intense convergence were present. Those concerned
in the experiment report that the whole process of visual adjustment
had increased in difficulty, and that the sense of effort was
distinctly greater. To this sharp rise in the general sense of strain,
in coöperation with the absence of a corrective field of objects, I
attribute the large negative displacement of the subjective horizon in
this series of experiments.


III.


In the next set of experiments the room was made completely dark. The
method of experimentation was adapted to these new conditions by
substituting for the wooden screen one of black-surfaced cardboard,
which was perforated at vertical distances of five millimeters by
narrow horizontal slits and circular holes alternately, making a scale
which was distinctly readable at the distance of the observer.
Opposite the end of one of these slits an additional hole was punched,
constituting a fixed point from which distances were reckoned on the
scale. As the whole screen was movable vertically and the observer
knew that displacements were made from time to time, the succession of
judgments afforded no objective criterion of the range of variation in
the series of determinations, nor of the relation of any individual
reaction to the preceding. The method of experimentation was as
follows: The observer sat as before facing the screen, the direction
of which was given at the beginning of each series by a momentary
illumination of the scale. In the darkness which followed the observer
brought the direction of sight, with open eyes, as satisfactorily as
might be into the plane of the horizontal, when, upon a simple signal,
the perforated scale was instantly and noiselessly illuminated by the
pressure of an electrical button, and the location of the point of
regard was read off the vertical scale by the observer himself, in
terms of its distance from the fixed point of origin described above.
The individual and general averages for this set of experiments are
given in the following table:


TABLE III.

  Observer.       Constant Error.  Average Deviation.  Mean Variation.
      _A_   (50)        +  7.75         20.07             19.45
      _C_     "         + 14.41         25.05              2.94
      _D_     "         + 14.42         34.54             29.16
      _E_     "         +108.97        108.97             23.13
      _F_     "         -  5.12         23.00              2.02
      _G_     "         + 20.72         34.80             10.23
      _H_     "         + 35.07         53.60             33.95
      _I_     "         + 25.52         30.68             22.49
      _K_     "         -  8.50         40.65             21.07

  Average:              + 23.69         41.26             17.16


The point at which the eyes rest when seeking the plane of the horizon
in total darkness is above its actual position, the positive
displacement involved being of relatively large amount.

In addition to the removal of the whole diversified visual field there
has now been eliminated the final point of regard toward which, in the
preceding set of experiments, the sight was strained; and the factor
of refined visual adjustment ceases longer to play a part in the
phenomenon. The result of this release is manifested in a tendency of
the eyes to turn unconsciously upward. This is their natural position
when closed in sleep. But this upward roll is not an uncomplicated
movement. There takes place at the same time a relaxation of binocular
convergence, which in sleep may be replaced by a slight divergence.
This tendency of the axes of vision to diverge as the eyes are raised
is undoubtedly connected biologically with the distribution of
distances in the higher and lower parts of the field of vision, of
which mention has already been made. Its persistence is taken
advantage of in the artificial device of assisting the process of
stereoscopic vision without instruments by holding the figures to be
viewed slightly above the primary position, so that the eyes must be
raised in order to look at them and their convergence thereby
decreased. It is by the concomitance of these two variables that the
phenomena of both this and the preceding series of experiments are to
be explained. In the present case the elimination of a fixed point of
regard is followed by a release of the mechanism of convergence, with
a consequent approximation to parallelism in the axes of vision and
its concomitant elevation of the line of sight.

The second fact to be noted is the reduction in amount of the mean
variation. The series of values under the three sets of experimental
conditions hitherto described is as follows: I. 7'.69; II. 31'.42;
III. 17'.16. This increase of regularity I take to be due, as in the
case of the lighted room, to the presence of a factor of constancy
which is not strictly an element in the judgment of horizontality.
This is a system of sensory data, which in the former case were
transient--the vision of familiar objects; and in the latter
resident--the recognition of specific experiences of strain in the
mechanism of the eye. The latter sensations exist under all three sets
of conditions, but they are of secondary importance in those cases
which include the presence of an objective point of regard, while in
the case of judgments made in total darkness the observer depends
solely upon resident experiences. Attention is thus directed
specifically toward these immediate sensational elements of judgment,
and there arises a tendency to reproduce the preceding set of
eye-strains, instead of determining the horizon plane afresh at each
act of judgment upon more general data of body position.

If the act of judgment be based chiefly upon sensory data connected
with the reinstatement of the preceding set of strains, progressions
should appear in these series of judgments, provided a constant factor
of error be incorporated in the process. This deflection should be
most marked under conditions of complete darkness, least in the midst
of full illumination. Such a progression would be shown at once by the
distribution of positive and negative values of the individual
judgments about the indifference point of constant error. As instances
of its occurrence all cases have been counted in which the first half
of the series of ten judgments was uniformly of one sign (four to six
being counted as half) and the second half of the opposite sign. The
percentages of cases in which the series presented such a progression
are as follows: In diffused light, 7.6%; in darkness, point of regard
illuminated, 18.3%; in complete darkness, 26.1%. The element of
constant error upon which such progressions depend is the tendency of
the eye to come to rest under determinate mechanical conditions of
equilibrium of muscular strain.

The relation of the successive judgments of a series to the
reinstatement of specific eye-strains and to the presence of an error
of constant tendency becomes clearer when the distribution of those
series which show progression is analyzed simultaneously with
reference to conditions of light and darkness and to binocular and
monocular vision respectively. Their quantitative relations are
presented in the following table:


TABLE IV.

  Illumination.   Per Cent. Showing Progress.  Binocular.  Monocular.

  In light.                 7.6 %                 50 %        50 %
  In darkness.             18.3                   34.2        65.8


Among judgments made in daylight those series which present
progression are equally distributed between binocular and monocular
vision. When, however, the determinations are of a luminous point in
an otherwise dark field, the preponderance in monocular vision of the
tendency to a progression becomes pronounced. That this is not a
progressive rectification of the judgment, is made evident by the
distribution of the directions of change in the several experimental
conditions shown in the following table:


TABLE V.
                                Light.                 Darkness.
  Direction of Change.  Binocular.   Monocular.  Binocular.  Monocular.
  Upward.                  50 %         100 %      38.4 %      65.0 %
  Downward.                50            00.0      61.6        35.0
  Const. Err.              -7.70        +11.66    -36.62       -3.38


When the visual field is illuminated the occurrence of progression in
binocular vision is accidental, the percentages being equally
distributed between upward and downward directions. In monocular
vision, on the contrary, the movement is uniformly upward and involves
a progressive increase in error. When the illuminated point is exposed
in an otherwise dark field the progression is preponderatingly
downward in binocular vision and upward in vision with the single eye.
The relation of these changes to phenomena of convergence, and the
tendency to upward rotation in the eyeball has already been stated.
There is indicated, then, in these figures the complication of the
process of relocating the ideal horizon by reference to the sense of
general body position with tendencies to reinstate simply the set of
eye-muscle strains which accompanied the preceding judgment, and the
progressive distortion of the latter by a factor of constant error due
to the mechanical conditions of muscular equilibrium in the resting
eye.


IV.


The influence of this factor is also exhibited when judgments made
with both eyes are compared with those made under conditions of
monocular vision. The latter experiments were carried on in alternate
series with those already described. The figures are given in the
following tables:


TABLE VI.

  JUDGMENTS MADE IN DIFFUSED LIGHT.

    Observer.  Constant Error.   Average Deviation.   Mean Variation.
    _A_ (50)     - 28.46                29.04               8.87
    _C_  "       +  7.54                14.86               8.01
    _D_  "       + 39.32                43.28              13.83
    _E_  "       + 50.46                65.26               9.86
    _F_  "       + 62.30                62.30               1.60
    _G_  "          0.00                45.28               9.66
    _H_  "       + 22.92                79.12               5.07
    _I_  "       + 14.36                51.96               8.02
    _K_  "       +  9.26                38.10               9.55
    _L_  "       - 61.10                61.10               6.36
    Average:     + 11.66                49.03               8.18


TABLE VII.

  JUDGMENTS IN ILLUMINATED POINT.

    Observer.  Constant Error.    Average Deviation.   Mean Variation.
    _A_ (50)     - 38.42                 51.96                32.64
    _C_ (30)     - 29.03                 41.23                35.75
    _D_ (20)     - 30.87                 34.07                17.24
    _E_ (50)     + 65.30                 75.86                29.98
    _F_  "       + 50.74                 50.74                 5.89
    _G_  "       + 66.38                 88.10                44.98
    _H_  "       + 65.40                 80.76                42.93
    _I_  "       -  0.02                 80.22                47.53
    _K_  "       - 44.60                 52.56                32.93
    _L_  "       - 71.06                 73.30                31.86
    Average:     - 3.38                  62.88                32.17


The plane of vision in judgments made with the right eye alone is
deflected upward from the true horizon to a greater degree than it is
depressed below it in those made with binocular vision, the respective
values of the constant errors being -7'.70 and +11'.66, a difference
of 19'.36. When the field of vision is darkened except for the single
illuminated disc, a similar reversion of sign takes place in the
constant error. With binocular vision the plane of the subjective
horizon is deflected downward through 36'.62 of arc; with monocular
vision it is elevated 3'.38, a difference of 40'.00, or greater than
in the case of judgments made in the lighted room by 20'.64. This
increase is to be expected in consequence of the elimination of those
corrective criteria which the figured visual field presents. The two
eyes do not, of course, function separately in such a case, and the
difference in the two sets of results is undoubtedly due to the
influence of movements in the closed eye upon that which is open; or
rather, to the difference in binocular functioning caused by shutting
off the visual field from one eye. The former expression is justified
in so far as we conceive that the tendency of the closed eye to turn
slightly upward in its socket affects also the direction of regard in
the open eye by attracting toward itself its plane of vision. But if,
as has been pointed out, this elevation of the line of sight in the
closed eye is accompanied by a characteristic change in the process of
binocular convergence, the result cannot be interpreted as a simple
sympathetic response in the open eye to changes taking place in that
which is closed, but is the consequence of a release of convergence
strain secondarily due to this act of closing the eye.

Several points of comparison between judgments made with binocular and
with monocular vision remain to be stated. In general, the process of
location is more uncertain when one eye only is used than when both
are employed, but this loss in accuracy is very slight and in many
cases disappears. The loss in accuracy is perhaps also indicated by
the range of variation in the two cases, its limits being for
binocular vision +46'.29 to -56'.70, and for monocular +62'.30 to
-61'.10, an increase of 20'.41. In the darkened room similar relations
are presented. The mean variations are as follows: binocular vision,
31'.42; monocular, 32'.17. Its limits in individual judgments are:
binocular, -1'.62 to -128'.70, monocular, +66'.38 to -71'.06, an
increase of 10'.36. In all ways, then, the difference in accuracy
between the two forms of judgment is extremely small, and the
conclusion may be drawn that those significant factors of judgment
which are independent of the figuration of the visual field are not
connected with the stereoscopic functioning of the two eyes, but such
as are afforded by adjustment in the single eye and its results.


VI.


The experimental conditions were next complicated by the introduction
of abnormal positions of the eyes, head and whole body. The results of
tipping the chin sharply upward or downward and keeping it so fixed
during the process of location are given in the following table, which
is complete for only three observers:


TABLE VIII.

  Observer.             Upward Rotation.           Downward Rotation.
                     C.E.     A.D.     M.V.      C.E.     A.D.     M.V.
  _L_ (50)         +43.98    43.98     5.62     +28.32   28.32    5.02
  _K_ (50)         -33.72    33.72    71.33     +19.49   19.49   55.22
  _L_ (20)         -39.10    45.90    33.60     -68.65   69.25   25.20
  Average:         - 9.61    41.20    36.85     -19.94   39.02   28.48
  Normal:          -64.14    67.08    33.51


The results of rotating the whole body backward through forty-five and
ninety degrees are given in the following table:


TABLE IX.

  Observer.              Rotation of 45°.           Rotation of 90°.
                     C.E.     A.D.     M.V.      C.E.     A.D.     M.V.
  _B_ (30)        +  4.10    24.57    18.56
  _D_ (30)        +291.03   291.03    61.86
  _G_ (50)        +266.78   266.78    22.83    +200.16  200.16   11.00
  _F_ (60)        +116.45   116.45    17.14    - 36.06   36.30    6.29
  _J_ (20)        +174.30   174.63    30.94
  Average:        +170.53   174.69    30.66


The errors which appear in these tables are not consistently of the
type presented in the well-known rotation of visual planes
subjectively determined under conditions of abnormal relations of the
head or body in space. When the head is rotated upward on its lateral
horizontal axis the average location of the subjective horizon,
though still depressed below the true objective, is higher than when
rotation takes place in the opposite direction. When the whole body is
rotated backward through 45° a positive displacement of large amount
takes place in the case of all observers. When the rotation extends to
90°, the body now reclining horizontally but with the head supported
in a raised position to allow of free vision, an upward displacement
occurs in the case of one of the two observers, and in that of the
other a displacement in the opposite direction. When change of
position takes place in the head only, the mean variation is decidedly
greater if the rotation be upward than if it be downward, its value in
the former case being above, in the latter below that of the normal.
When the whole body is rotated backward through 45° the mean variation
is but slightly greater than under normal conditions; when the
rotation is through 90° it is much less. A part of this reduction is
probably due to training. In general, it may be said that the
disturbance of the normal body relations affects the location of the
subjective horizon, but the specific nature and extent of this
influence is left obscure by these experiments. The ordinary movements
of eyes and head are largely independent of one another, and even when
closed the movements of the eyes do not always symmetrically follow
those of the head. The variations in the two processes have been
measured by Münsterberg and Campbell[1] in reference to a single
condition, namely, the relation of attention to and interest in the
objects observed to the direction of sight in the closed eyes after
movement of the head. But apart from the influence of such secondary
elements of ideational origin, there is reason to believe that the
mere movement of the head from its normal position on the shoulders up
or down, to one side or the other, is accompanied by compensatory
motion of the eyes in an opposite direction, which tends to keep the
axis of vision nearer to the primary position. When the chin is
elevated or depressed, this negative reflex adjustment is more
pronounced and constant than when the movement is from side to side.
In the majority of cases the retrograde movement of the eyes does not
equal the head movement in extent, especially if the latter be
extreme.

   [1] Münsterberg, H., and Campbell, W.W.: PSYCHOLOGICAL REVIEW,
   I., 1894, p. 441.

The origin of such compensatory reactions is connected with the
permanent relations of the whole bodily organism to the important
objects which surround it. The relations of the body to the landscape
are fairly fixed. The objects which it is important to watch lie in a
belt which is roughly on a horizontal plane with the observing eye.
They move or are moved about over the surface of the ground and do not
undergo any large vertical displacement. It is of high importance,
therefore, that the eye should be capable of continuous observation of
such objects through facile response to the stimulus of their visual
appearance and movements, in independence of the orientation of the
head. There are no such determinate spatial relations between body
position and the world of important visual objects in the case of
those animals which are immersed in a free medium; and in the
organization of the fish and the bird, therefore, one should not
expect the development of such free sensory reflexes of the eye in
independence of head movements as we know to be characteristic of the
higher land vertebrates. In both of the former types the eye is fixed
in its socket, movements of the whole head or body becoming the
mechanism of adjustment to new objects of observation. In the
adjustment of the human eye the reflex determination through sensory
stimuli is so facile as to counteract all ordinary movements of the
head, the gaze remaining fixed upon the object through a series of
minute and rapidly repeated sensory reflexes. When the eyes are closed
and no such visual stimuli are presented, similar reflexes take place
in response to the movements of the head, mediated possibly by
sensations connected with changes in position of the planes of the
semicircular canals.


VII.


If eye-strain be a significant element in the process of determining
the subjective horizon, the induction of a new center of muscular
equilibrium by training the eyes to become accustomed to unusual
positions should result in the appearance of characteristic errors of
displacement. In the case of two observers, _A_ and _H_, the eyes were
sharply raised or lowered for eight seconds before giving judgment as
to the position of the illuminated spot, which was exposed at the
moment when the eyes were brought back to the primary position. The
effect of any such vertical rotation is to stretch the antagonistic
set of muscles. It follows that when the eye is rotated in the
contrary direction the condition of equilibrium appears sooner than in
normal vision. In the case of both observers the subjective horizon
was located higher when judgment was made after keeping the eyes
raised, and lower when the line of sight had been depressed. In the
case of only one observer was a quantitative estimation of the error
made, as follows: With preliminary raising of the eyes the location
was +36'.4; with preliminary lowering, -11'.4.

When the illuminated button is exposed in a darkened room and is
fixated by the observer, it undergoes a variety of changes in apparent
position due to unconscious shifting of the point of regard, the
change in local relations of the retinal stimulation being erroneously
attributed to movements in the object. These movements were not of
frequent enough occurrence to form the basis of conclusions as to the
position at which the eyes tended to come to a state of rest. The
number reported was forty-two, and the movement observed was rather a
wandering than an approximation toward a definite position of
equilibrium. The spot very rarely presented the appearance of sidewise
floating, but this may have been the result of a preconception on the
part of the observer rather than an indication of a lessened liability
to movements in a horizontal plane. Objective movements in the latter
direction the observer knew to be impossible, while vertical
displacements were expected. Any violent movement of the head or eyes
dispelled the impression of floating at once. The phenomenon appeared
only when the illuminated spot had been fixated for an appreciable
period of time. Its occurrence appears to be due to a fatigue process
in consequence of which the mechanism becomes insensible to slight
changes resulting from releases among the tensions upon which constant
fixation depends. When the insensitiveness of fatigue is avoided by a
slow continuous change in the position of the illuminated spot, no
such wandering of the eye from its original point of regard occurs,
and the spot does not float. The rate at which such objective
movements may take place without awareness on the part of the observer
is surprisingly great. Here the fatigue due to sustained fixation is
obviated by the series of rapid and slight sensory reflexes which take
place; these have the effect of keeping unchanged the retinal
relations of the image cast by the illuminated spot, and being
undiscriminated in the consciousness of the observer the position of
the point of regard is apprehended by him as stationary. The
biological importance of such facile and unconscious adjustment of the
mechanism of vision to the moving object needs no emphasis; but the
relation of these obscure movements of the eyes to the process of
determining the plane of the subjective horizon should be pointed out.
The sense of horizontality in the axes of vision is a transient
experience, inner conviction being at its highest in the first moments
of perception and declining so characteristically from this maximum
that in almost every case the individual judgment long dwelt upon is
unsatisfactory to the observer. This change I conceive to be a
secondary phenomenon due to the appearance of the visual wanderings
already described.


VIII.


The influence of sensory reflexes in the eye upon the process of
visual orientation was next taken up in connection with two specific
types of stimulation. At top and bottom of the vertical screen were
arranged dark lanterns consisting of electric bulbs enclosed in
blackened boxes, the fronts of which were covered with a series of
sheets of white tissue-paper, by which the light was decentralized and
reduced in intensity, and of blue glass, by which the yellow quality
of the light was neutralized. Either of these lanterns could be
illuminated at will by the pressure of a button. All other
experimental conditions remained unchanged. The observers were
directed to pay no special regard to these lights, and the reports
show that in almost every case they had no conscious relation to the
judgment. The results are presented in the following table:


TABLE X.

                       Light Below.               Light Above.
  Observer.  Const.Err.  Av.Dev.  M.Var.  Const.Err.  Av.Dev.  M.Var.
  _C_ (40)      +156.37  156.37    19.67   +169.85    169.85   19.22
  _D_ (20)      + 39.30   43.30    17.95   + 46.65     47.35   15.41
  _F_ (30)      + 19.47   19.47     8.83   + 58.37     58.37    7.83
  _G_ (50)      + 66.11  112.76    14.65   +117.86    117.86   13.10
  _H_ (30)      -147.63  147.63    21.07   -105.30    105.30   30.31
  _J_ (20)      +  1.90   31.95    22.33   + 44.40     44.40   20.55
  Average:      + 22.59   85.28    17.42   + 55.30     90.52   17.74


The eye is uniformly attracted toward the light and the location of
the disk correspondingly elevated or depressed. The amount of
displacement which appears is relatively large. It will be found to
vary with the intensity, extent and distance of the illuminated
surfaces introduced. There can be little doubt that the practical
judgments of life are likewise affected by the distribution of light
intensities, and possibly also of significant objects, above and below
the horizon belt. Every brilliant object attracts the eye toward
itself; and the horizon beneath a low sun or moon will be found to be
located higher than in a clouded sky. The upper half of the ordinary
field of view--the clear sky--is undiversified and unimportant; the
lower half is full of objects and has significance. We should probably
be right in attributing to these characteristic differences a share in
the production of the negative error of judgment which appears in
judgments made in daylight. The introduction of such supplementary
stimuli appears to have little effect upon the regularity of the
series of judgments, the values of the mean variations being
relatively low: 17'.42 with light below, 17'.74 with it above.


IX.


In the final series of experiments the influence of limiting visual
planes upon the determination of the subjective horizon was taken up.
It had been noticed by Dr. Münsterberg in the course of travel in hill
country that a curious negative displacement of the subjective horizon
took place when one looked across a downward slope to a distant cliff,
the altitude (in relation to the observer's own standpoint) of
specific points on the wall of rock being largely overestimated.
Attributing the illusion to a reconstruction of the sensory data upon
an erroneous interpretation of the objective relations of the
temporary plane of the landscape, Dr. Münsterberg later made a series
of rough experiments by stretching an inclined cord from the eye
downward to a lower point on an opposite wall and estimating the
height above its termination of that point which appeared to be on a
level with the observing eye. He found an illusion present similar to
the case of an extended slope of country.

The first experiments of this group repeated those just described. The
previous mechanical conditions were varied only by the introduction of
a slender cord which was stretched from just below the eyes to the
bottom of the vertical screen. Full results were obtained from only
two observers, which are given in the following table:


TABLE XI.

   Observer.   Const. Err.  Av. Dev. Mean Var.  Exp. Conds.

  _C_  (30)        +123.92   123.92    11.94  Cord present and
  _G_  (30)         +66.47    66.47    15.56  consciously referred to.
  _C_  (30)        +126.90   126.90     6.31  Cord not present.
  _G_  (30)         +83.20    83.20     6.31
  _C_  (30)        +126.93   126.93     6.39  Cord present but not
  _G_  (30)         +86.63    86.63     9.40  consciously referred to.

  Averages.  I      +95.19    95.19    13.75
     "      II     +105.05   105.05     6.31
     "     III     +106.78   106.78     7.89


The effect of introducing such an objective plane of reference is
twofold: the mean variation is increased, and the plane of the
subjective horizon is displaced downwards. First, then, it acts as a
simple factor of disturbance; it distracts from those habitual
adjustments upon which the accuracy of the judgment depends. Secondly,
it enters as a source of constant error into the determination of the
subjective horizon, which is attracted toward this new objective
plane. In the third section of the table are given the results of
judgments made in the presence of such a plane but without conscious
reference to it.[2] The figures here are of intermediate value in the
case of the mean variation and of slightly greater value than the
first in that of the constant error. In other words, the introduction
of such a plane cannot be wholly overlooked, though it may be greatly
abstracted from.

[2] In the preceding experiments the cord was definitely to be taken
into account in making the judgment. The method of so doing was by
running the eye back and forth over the cord preliminary to
determining the location of the point.

The single cord was next replaced by a plane of blackened wood six
inches wide and extending from the observer to the vertical screen.
This strip was arranged in two ways: first, from the observer's chin
to the bottom of the screen, and secondly, from the feet of the
observer to a point on the screen a short distance below the plane of
the objective horizon. The individual and average results are given in
the following table:


TABLE XII.

   Observer.          Descending Plane.       Ascending Plane.

   _A._ (10)       +18.80  18.80   5.24     +35.10   35.10  8.27
   _E._ (20)       +79.30  79.30  11.56    +131.67  131.67 12.07
   _H._ (10)       -37.50  37.50  16.80     -46.90   46.90  7.90
   _K._ (30)       +71.40  71.40  12.85     +48.05   48.05  5.11
  Average:         +33.00  51.75  11.61     +41.95   65.43  8.34


The introduction of a descending plane lowers the apparent horizon;
that of an ascending plane elevates it. The general disturbance of
judgment appears distinctly greater in the case of a downward than in
that of an upward incline.

The results of a third variation of the experimental conditions may be
presented at once. In it the location of the subjective horizon under
normal conditions was compared with the results of adjustments made
when the screen bearing the white disc was rotated backward from the
observer through an angle of varying magnitude. The averages for each
of the two subjects are as follows:


TABLE XIII.

 Observer          Const. Err.  Av. Dev.  Mean Var.  Rotation.
   _F_    (20)       +130.50      130.50      3.20      20°
    "       "        +115.50      115.50      1.10      50°
   _J_    (20)       +443.10      443.10      9.47      45°


These experiments were carried on in the presence of the definitely
figured visual field of the lighted room, and the observers were
conscious of taking these permanent features into account as
correctives in making their judgments. Before proceeding, this defect
was remedied as far as possible by enclosing the apparatus of
experimentation, including the observer, between two walls of black
fabric. Nothing was to be seen but these two walls, and the inclined
plane which terminated the observer's view. The position of the screen
remained constant at an inclination of 45°. The upper bounding lines
of the enclosing walls, on the contrary, were adjusted in three
different relations to the plane of the gravity horizon. In the first
arrangement these lines were horizontal; in the second the ends next
to the observer were depressed five degrees; while in the final
arrangement these ends were elevated through a like angular distance.

The inclined position of the screen was of course observed by every
reactor, but of the changes in the enclosing walls no subject was
informed, and none discerned them on any occasion. Each observer was
questioned as to alterations in the experimental conditions after the
use of each arrangement, and at the close of the whole series inquiry
was made of each as to the planes of the upper boundaries of the
walls. On various occasions, but not customarily, the observer was
aware of a change of some kind in the whole set of conditions, but the
particular feature altered was not suspected. The results for all
three arrangements are given in the following table; of the sections
of this table the third is incomplete, full results having been
reached in the cases of only three observers:


TABLE XV.

                    Ascending Planes.             Descending Planes.
  Observer     Const. Err. Av. Dev. M. Var. Const. Err.  Av. Dev.  M. V.
  _C_ (50)       -  8.02    11.82     9.47   - 48.14     48.14     9.52
  _F_ (50)       + 78.88    78.88     2.89   + 25.54     25.54     1.98
  _G_ (50)       - 22.56    24.64     6.58   -101.20    101.20     7.39
  _H_ (50)       - 83.84    83.84    11.78   -230.20    230.20    11.88
  _J_ (50)       +315.64   315.64    18.16   +120.12    120.12     9.01
  Average:       + 55.96   102.96     9.78    -44.98    104.84     7.96

                                Horizontal Planes.
  Observer.       Const. Err.    Av. Dev.    Mean Var.
  _C_   (50)       - 27.86         27.86       9.58
  _G_   (50)       - 73.84         73.84       7.59
  _J_   (50)       +243.72        243.72      18.52


For every individual observer, the position of the disc on the screen
has been affected by each change in the direction of these visible
lines. In every case, also, its location when these boundaries lay in
a horizontal plane was intermediate between the other two. The
importance of such relations in the objects of the visual field as
factors in our ordinary determination of the subjective horizon is
made evident by these experimental results. They become construction
lines having assumed permanence in the world of visual-motor
experience. The conception of unchanging spatial relations in the
fundamental lines of perspective vision receives constant
reinforcement from the facts of daily experience. The influence of the
above-described changes in experimental conditions is mediated through
their effect upon the location of the focus of the limiting and
perspective lines of vision. As the plane of the upper boundaries of
the enclosing walls was elevated and depressed the intersection of the
two systems of lines was correspondingly raised and lowered, and in
dependence upon the location of this imaginary point the determination
of the position of the white disc was made, and the plane of
perspective positively or negatively rotated.

Why such perspective lines should enter into the process of judgment
it is not difficult to infer. The plane of perspective for human
beings is characteristically horizontal, in consequence of the
distribution of important objects within the field of visual
perception. Roughly, the belt of the earth's horizon contains the loci
of all human perspective planes. Both natural and artificial
arrangements of lines converge there. The systems of visual objects on
the earth and in the sky are there broken sharply off in virtue of
their practically vast differences in quality and significance for the
observer. The latter perspective probably never extends downward
illusorily to points on the earth's surface; and the former system of
objects is carried continuously upward to skyey points only on
relatively rare occasions, as when one mistakes clouds for mountains
or the upper edge of a fog-belt on the horizon for the rim of sea and
sky. The point of convergence of the fundamental lines of perspective
thus becomes assimilated with the idea of the visual horizon, as that
concept has fused with the notion of a subjective horizon. There can
be little doubt that the disposition of such lines enters constantly
into our bodily orientation in space along with sensations arising
from the general body position and from those organs more specially
concerned with the static sense.

Upon the misinterpretation of such objective planes depends the
illusion of underestimation of the height or incline of a hill one is
breasting, and of the converse overestimation of one seen across a
descending slope or intervening valley. The latter illusion is
especially striking, and in driving over forest roads (in which case
the correction of a wider range of view is excluded) the stretch of
level ground at the foot of a hill one is descending is constantly
mistaken for an opposing rise. This illusion is put into picturesque
words by Stevenson when he describes the world, seen from the summit
of a mountain upon which one stands, as rising about him on every side
as toward the rim of a great cup. The fitness of the image may be
proved by climbing the nearest hill. In all such cases a
reconstruction of the sensory data of judgment takes place, in which
the most significant factor is the plane determined by the positions
of the observing eye and the perspective focus. In these judgments of
spatial relationship, as they follow one another from moment to
moment, this plane becomes a temporary subjective horizon, and
according as it is positively or negatively rotated do corresponding
illusions of perception appear.






THE ILLUSION OF RESOLUTION-STRIPES ON THE COLOR-WHEEL.

BY EDWIN B. HOLT.


If a small rod is passed slowly before a rotating disc composed of two
differently colored sectors, the rod appears to leave behind it on the
disc a number of parallel bands of about the width of the rod and of
about the colors, alternately arranged, of the two sectors. These
appear not to move, but gradually to fade away.

This phenomenon was first observed by Münsterberg, and by him shown to
Jastrow,[1] who, with Moorehouse, has printed a study, without,
however, offering an adequate explanation of it.

   [1] Jastrow, J., and Moorehouse, G.W.: 'A Novel Optical
   Illusion,' _Amer. Jour. of Psychology_, 1891, IV., p. 201.


I. APPARATUS FOR PRODUCING THE ILLUSION.


Any form of color-wheel may be used, but preferably one which is
driven by electricity or clock-work, so that a fairly constant speed
is assured. Several pairs of paper discs are needed, of the ordinary
interpenetrating kind which permit a ready readjustment of the ratios
between the two sectors, as follows: one pair consisting of a white
and a black disc, one of a light-and a dark-colored disc (light green
and dark red have been found admirably suited to the purpose), and a
pair of discs distinctly different in color, but equal in luminosity.

The rod should be black and not more than a quarter of an inch broad.
It may be passed before the rotating disc by hand. For the sake of
more careful study, however, the rod should be moved at a constant
rate by some mechanical device, such as the pendulum and works of a
Maelzel metronome removed from their case. The pendulum is fixed just
in front of the color-disc. A further commendable simplification of
the conditions consists in arranging the pendulum and disc to move
concentrically, and attaching to the pendulum an isosceles-triangular
shield, so cut that it forms a true radial sector of the disc behind
it. All the colored bands of the illusion then appear as radial
sectors. The radial shields should be made in several sizes (from 3 to
50 degrees of arc) in black, but the smallest size should also be
prepared in colors matching the several discs. Such a disposition,
then, presents a disc of fused color, rotating at a uniform rate, and
in front of this a radial sector oscillating from side to side
concentrically with the disc, and likewise at a uniform rate. Several
variations of this apparatus will be described as the need and purpose
of them become clear.


II. PREVIOUS DISCUSSION OF THE ILLUSION.


Although Jastrow and Moorehouse (_op. cit._) have published a somewhat
detailed study of these illusion-bands, and cleared up certain points,
they have not explained them. Indeed, no explanation of the bands has
as yet been given. The authors mentioned (_ibid._, p. 204) write of
producing the illusion by another method. "This consists in sliding
two half discs of the same color over one another leaving an open
sector of any desired size up to 180 degrees and rotating this against
a background of a markedly different color, in other words we
substitute for the disc composed of a large amount of one color, which
for brevity we may call the 'majority color,' and a small amount of
another, the 'minority color,' one in which the second color is in the
background and is viewed through an opening in the first. With such an
arrangement we find that we get the series of bands both when the wire
is passed in front of the disc and when passed in back between disc
and background; and further experimentation shows that the time
relations of the two are the same. (There is, of course, no essential
difference between the two methods when the wire is passed in front of
the disc.)" That is true, but it is to be borne in mind that there is
a difference when the wire is passed behind the disc, as these authors
themselves state (_loc. cit._, note):--"The time-relations in the two
cases are the same, but the _color-phenomena_ considerably
_different_." However, "these facts enable us to formulate our first
generalization, viz., that for all purposes here relevant [_i.e._, to
a study of the _time-relations_] the seeing of a wire now against one
background and then immediately against another is the same as its now
appearing and then disappearing; a rapid succession of changed
appearances is equivalent to a rapid alternation of appearance and
disappearance. Why this is so we are unable to say," etc. These
authors now take the first step toward explaining the illusion. In
their words (_op. cit._, p. 205), "the suggestion is natural that we
are dealing with the phenomena of after-images.... If this is the true
explanation of the fact that several rods are seen, then we should,
with different rotation rates of disc and rod, see as many rods as
multiplied by the time of one rotation of the disc would yield a
constant, _i.e._, the time of an after image of the kind under
consideration." For two subjects, J.J. and G.M., the following
tabulation was made.

                                                         J.J.       G.M.
Av. time of rot. of disc when 2 images of rod were seen .0812 sec. .0750 sec.
  "       "        "       "  3    "       "    "    "  .0571  "   .0505  "
  "       "        "       "  4    "       "    "    "  .0450  "   .0357  "
  "       "        "       "  5    "       "    "    "  .0350  "   .0293  "
  "       "        "       "  6    "       "    "    "  .0302  "   .0262  "


"Multiplying the number of rods by the rotation rate we get for J.J.
an average time of after image of .1740 sec. (a little over 1/6 sec.)
with an average deviation of .0057 (3.2%); for G.M. .1492 (a little
over 1/7 sec.) with an average deviation of .0036 (2.6%). An
independent test of the time of after-image of J.J. and G.M. by
observing when a black dot on a rotating white disc just failed to
form a ring resulted in showing in every instance a longer time for
the former than for the latter." That this constant product of the
number of 'rods' seen by the time of one rotation of the disc equals
the duration of after-image of the rod is established, then, only by
inference. More indubitable, since directly measured on two subjects,
is the statement that that person will see more 'rods' whose
after-image persists longer. This result the present writer fully
confirms. What relation the 'constant product' bears to the duration
of after-image will be spoken of later. But aside from all
measurement, a little consideration of the conditions obtaining when
the rod is passed _behind_ the disc will convince any observer that
the bands are indeed after-images somehow dependent on the rod. We may
account it established that _the bands are after-images_.

From this beginning one might have expected to find in the paper of
Jastrow and Moorehouse a complete explanation of the illusion. On
other points, however, these authors are less explicit. The changes in
width of the bands corresponding to different sizes of the sectors and
different rates of movement for the rod and disc, are not explained,
nor yet, what is more important, the color-phenomena. In particular
the fact needs to be explained, that the moving rod analyzes the
apparently homogeneous color of the disc; or, as Jastrow and
Moorehouse state it (_op. cit._, p. 202): "If two rotating discs were
presented to us, the one pure white in color, and the other of ideally
perfect spectral colors in proper proportion, so as to give a
precisely similar white, we could not distinguish between the two; but
by simply passing a rod in front of them and observing in the one case
but not in the other the parallel rows of colored bands, we could at
once pronounce the former to be composite, and the latter simple. In
the indefinitely brief moment during which the rod interrupts the
vision of the disc, the eye obtains an impression sufficient to
analyze to some extent into its elements this rapid mixture of
stimuli." The very question is as to _how_ the eye obtains the
'impression sufficient to analyze' the mixture.

It may be shown at this point that the mistake of these authors lies
in their recognition of but one set of bands, namely (_ibid._, p.
201), 'bands of a color similar to that present in greater proportion'
on the disc. But, on the other hand, it is to be emphasized that those
bands are separated from one another, not by the fused color of the
disc, as one should infer from the article, but by _other bands_,
which are, for their part, of a color similar to that present in
_lesser_ proportion. Thus, bands of the two colors alternate; and
either color of band is with equal ease to be distinguished from the
fused color of the main portion of the disc.

Why our authors make this mistake is also clear. They first studied
the illusion with the smaller sector of the disc open, and the rod
moving behind it; and since in this case the bands are separated by
strips not of the minority but of the fused color, and are of about
the width of the rod itself, these authors came to recognize bands of
but one sort, and to call these 'images of the rod.' But now, with the
rod moving in front of the disc, there appear bands of two colors
alternately disposed, and neither of these colors is the fused color
of the disc. Rather are these two colors approximately the majority
and minority colors of the disc as seen at rest. Thus, the recognition
of but one set of bands and the conclusion (_ibid._, p. 208) that 'the
bands originate during the vision of the minority color,' are wholly
erroneous. The bands originate as well during the vision of the
majority color, and, as will later be shown, the process is
continuous.

Again, it is incorrect, even in the case of those bands seen behind
the open sector, to call the bands 'images of the rod,' for images of
the rod would be of the color of the rod, whereas, as our authors
themselves say (_ibid._, p. 201), the bands 'are of a color similar to
that present in greater proportion' on the disc. Moreover the 'images
of the rod' are of the most diverse widths. In fact, we shall find
that the width of the rod is but one of several factors which
determine the width of its 'images,' the bands.

Prejudiced by the same error is the following statement (_ibid._, p.
208): "With the majority color darker than the minority color the
bands are darker than the resulting mixture, and lighter when the
majority color is the lighter." If this is to be true, one must read
for 'the bands,' 'the narrower bands.'

Another observation found in this article must be criticised. It is
asserted that difference of shade between the two sectors of the disc,
as well as difference of color, is essential to the illusion. To
support this, four cases are given: two in which the sectors were so
similar in luminosity as to bring out the illusion but faintly; two in
which like luminosities yielded no illusion at all. The present writer
agrees that if the two sectors are closely similar in luminosity, the
illusion is fainter. He also selected a red and a green so near each
other in brightness that when a rod 4 mm. broad (which is the largest
rod that Jastrow and Moorehouse mention having used) was passed by
hand before the disc, no trace of a band could be seen. The pendulum,
however, bearing a shield considerably wider than 4 mm. (say of 15
degrees) and moving before the very same red and green shades, mixed
in the same proportions, yielded the illusion with the utmost
clearness. Colors of like luminosities yield the illusion less
strikingly, nevertheless they yield it.

Again (_op. cit._, p. 205), these authors say: "It has been already
observed that the distance between the bands diminishes as the
rotation rate and the rate of movement of the rod increases." But what
had been said before is (_ibid._, p. 203) that 'the bands are
separated by smaller and smaller spaces as the rate of movement of the
rod becomes slower and slower'; and this is equivalent to saying that
the distance between the bands diminishes as the rate of movement of
the rod decreases. The statements are contradictory. But there is no
doubt as to which is the wrong one--it is the first. What these
authors have called 'distance between the bands' has here been shown
to be itself a band. Now, no point about this illusion can be more
readily observed than that the widths of both kinds of band vary
directly with the speed of the rod, inversely, however (as Jastrow and
Moorehouse have noted), with the speed of the disc.

Perhaps least satisfactory of all is their statement (_ibid._, p. 206)
that "A brief acquaintance with the illusion sufficed to convince us
that its appearance was due to contrast of some form, though the
precise nature of this contrast is the most difficult point of all."
The present discussion undertakes to explain with considerable
minuteness every factor of the illusion, yet the writer does not see
how in any essential sense contrast could be said to be involved.

With the other observations of these authors, as that the general
effect of an increase in the width of the interrupting rod was to
render the illusion less distinct and the bands wider, etc., the
observations of the present writer fully coincide. These will
systematically be given later, and we may now drop the discussion of
this paper.

The only other mention to be found of these resolution-bands is one by
Sanford,[2] who says, apparently merely reiterating the results of
Jastrow and Moorehouse, that the illusion is probably produced by the
sudden appearance, by contrast, of the rod as the lighter sector
passes behind it, and by its relative disappearance as the dark sector
comes behind. He thus compares the appearance of several rods to the
appearance of several dots in intermittent illumination of the strobic
wheel. If this were the correct explanation, the bands could not be
seen when both sectors were equal in luminosity; for if both were
dark, the rod could never appear, and if both were light, it could
never disappear. The bands can, however, be seen, as was stated above,
when both the sectors are light or both are dark. Furthermore, this
explanation would make the bands to be of the same color as the rod.
But they are of other colors. Therefore Sanford's explanation cannot
be admitted.

   [2] Sanford, E.C.: 'A Course in Experimental Psychology,'
   Boston, 1898, Part I., p. 167.

And finally, the suggestions toward explanation, whether of Sanford,
or of Jastrow and Moorehouse, are once for all disproved by the
observation that if the moving rod is fairly broad (say three quarters
of an inch) and moves _slowly_, the bands are seen nowhere so well as
_on the rod itself_. One sees the rod vaguely through the bands, as
could scarcely happen if the bands were images of the rod, or
contrast-effects of the rod against the sectors.

The case when the rod is broad and moves slowly is to be accounted a
special case. The following observations, up to No. 8, were made with
a narrow rod about five degrees in width (narrower will do), moved by
a metronome at less than sixty beats per minute.


III. OUTLINE OF THE FACTS OBSERVED.


A careful study of the illusion yields the following points:

1. If the two sectors of the disc are unequal in arc, the bands are
unequal in width, and the narrower bands correspond in color to the
larger sector. Equal sectors give equally broad bands.

2. The faster the rod moves, the broader become the bands, but not in
like proportions; broad bands widen relatively more than narrow ones;
equal bands widen equally. As the bands widen out it necessarily
follows that the alternate bands come to be farther apart.

3. The width of the bands increases if the speed of the revolving disc
decreases, but varies directly, as was before noted, with the speed of
the pendulating rod.

4. Adjacent bands are not sharply separated from each other, the
transition from one color to the other being gradual. The sharpest
definition is obtained when the rod is very narrow. It is appropriate
to name the regions where one band shades over into the next
'transition-bands.' These transition-bands, then, partake of the
colors of both the sectors on the disc. It is extremely difficult to
distinguish in observation between vagueness of the illusion due to
feebleness in the after-image depending on faint illumination,
dark-colored discs or lack of the desirable difference in luminosity
between the sectors (cf. p. 171) and the indefiniteness which is due
to broad transition-bands existing between the (relatively) pure-color
bands. Thus much, however, seems certain (Jastrow and Moorehouse have
reported the same, _op. cit._, p. 203): the wider the rod, the wider
the transition-bands. It is to be noticed, moreover, that, for rather
swift movements of the rod, the bands are more sharply defined if this
movement is contrary to that of the disc than if it is in like
direction with that of the disc. That is, the transition-bands are
broader when rod and disc move in the same, than when in opposite
directions.

5. The total number of bands seen (the two colors being alternately
arranged and with transition-bands between) at any one time is
approximately constant, howsoever the widths of the sectors and the
width and rate of the rod may vary. But the number of bands is
inversely proportional, as Jastrow and Moorehouse have shown (see
above, p. 169), to the time of rotation of the disc; that is, the
faster the disc, the more bands. Wherefore, if the bands are broad
(No. 2), they extend over a large part of the disc; but if narrow,
they cover only a small strip lying immediately behind the rod.

6. The colors of the bands approximate those of the two sectors; the
transition-bands present the adjacent 'pure colors' merging into each
other. But _all_ the bands are modified in favor of the color of the
moving rod. If, now, the rod is itself the same in color as one of the
sectors, the bands which should have been of the _other_ color are not
to be distinguished from the fused color of the disc when no rod moves
before it.

7. The bands are more strikingly visible when the two sectors differ
considerably in luminosity. But Jastrow's observation, that a
difference in luminosity is _necessary_, could not be confirmed.
Rather, on the contrary, sectors of the closest obtainable luminosity
still yielded the illusion, although faintly.

8. A _broad_ but slowly moving rod shows the bands overlying itself.
Other bands can be seen left behind it on the disc.

9. But a case of a rod which is broad, or slowly-moving, or both, is a
special complication which involves several other and _seemingly_
quite contradictory phenomena to those already noted. Since these
suffice to show the principles by which the illusion is to be
explained, enumeration of the special variations is deferred.


IV. THE GEOMETRICAL RELATIONS BETWEEN THE ROD AND THE SECTORS OF THE
DISC.


It should seem that any attempt to explain the illusion-bands ought to
begin with a consideration of the purely geometrical relations holding
between the slowly-moving rod and the swiftly-revolving disc. First of
all, then, it is evident that the rod lies in front of each sector
successively.

Let Fig. 1 represent the upper portion of a color-wheel, with center
at _O_, and with equal sectors _A_ and _B_, in front of which a rod
_P_ oscillates to right and left on the same axis as that of the
wheel. Let the disc rotate clockwise, and let _P_ be observed in its
rightward oscillation. Since the disc moves faster than the rod, the
front of the sector _A_ will at some point come up to and pass behind
the rod _P_, say at _p^{A}. P_ now hides a part of _A_ and both are
moving in the same direction. Since the disc still moves the faster,
the front of _A_ will presently emerge from behind _P_, then more and
more of _A_ will emerge, until finally no part of it is hidden by _P_.
If, now, _P_ were merely a line (having no width) and were not
moving, the last of _A_ would emerge just where its front edge had
gone behind _P_, namely at _p^{A}_. But _P_ has a certain width and a
certain rate of motion, so that _A_ will wholly emerge from behind _P_
at some point to the right, say _p^{B}_. How far to the right this
will be depends on the speed and width of _A_, and on the speed and
width of _P_.

Now, similarly, at _p^{B}_ the sector _B_ has come around and begins
to pass behind _P_. It in turn will emerge at some point to the right,
say _p^{C}_. And so the process will continue. From _p^{A}_ to _p^{B}_
the pendulum covers some part of the sector _A_; from _p^{B}_ to
_p^{C}_ some part of sector _B_; from _p^{C}_ to _P^{D}_ some part of
_A_ again, and so on.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

If, now, the eye which watches this process is kept from moving, these
relations will be reproduced on the retina. For the retinal area
corresponding to the triangle _p^{A}Op^{B}_, there will be less
stimulation from the sector _A_ than there would have been if the
pendulum had not partly hidden it. That is, the triangle in question
will not be seen of the fused color of _A_ and _B_, but will lose a
part of its _A_-component. In the same way the triangle _p^{B}OpC_
will lose a part of its _B_-component; and so on alternately. And by
as much as either component is lost, by so much will the color of the
intercepting pendulum (in this case, black) be present to make up the
deficiency.

We see, then, that the purely geometrical relations of disc and
pendulum necessarily involve for vision a certain banded appearance of
the area which is swept by the pendulum, if the eye is held at rest.
We have now to ask, Are these the bands which we set out to study?
Clearly enough these geometrically inevitable bands can be exactly
calculated, and their necessary changes formulated for any given
change in the speed or width of _A_, _B_, or _P_. If it can be shown
that they must always vary just as the bands we set out to study are
_observed_ to vary, it will be certain that the bands of the illusion
have no other cause than the interception of retinal stimulation by
the sectors of the disc, due to the purely geometrical relations
between the sectors and the pendulum which hides them.

And exactly this will be found to be the case. The widths of the bands
of the illusion depend on the speed and widths of the sectors and of
the pendulum used; the colors and intensities of the bands depend on
the colors and intensities of the sectors (and of the pendulum); while
the total number of bands seen at one time depends on all these
factors.


V. GEOMETRICAL DEDUCTION OF THE BANDS.


In the first place, it is to be noted that if the pendulum proceeds
from left to right, for instance, before the disc, that portion of the
latter which lies in front of the advancing rod will as yet not have
been hidden by it, and will therefore be seen of the unmodified, fused
color. Only behind the pendulum, where rotating sectors have been
hidden, can the bands appear. And this accords with the first
observation (p. 167), that "The rod appears to leave behind it on the
disc a number of parallel bands." It is as if the rod, as it passes,
painted them on the disc.

Clearly the bands are not formed simultaneously, but one after another
as the pendulum passes through successive positions. And of course the
newest bands are those which lie immediately behind the pendulum. It
must now be asked, Why, if these bands are produced successively, are
they seen simultaneously? To this, Jastrow and Moorehouse have given
the answer, "We are dealing with the phenomena of after-images." The
bands persist as after-images while new ones are being generated. The
very oldest, however, disappear _pari-passu_ with the generation of
the new. We have already seen (p. 169) how well these authors have
shown this, in proving that the number of bands seen, multiplied by
the rate of rotation of the disc, is a constant bearing some relation
to the duration of a retinal image of similar brightness to the bands.
It is to be noted now, however, that as soon as the rod has produced a
band and passed on, the after-image of that band on the retina is
exposed to the same stimulation from the rotating disc as before, that
is, is exposed to the fused color; and this would tend to obliterate
the after-images. Thus the oldest bands would have to disappear more
quickly than an unmolested after-image of the same original
brightness. We ought, then, to see somewhat fewer bands than the
formula of Jastrow and Moorehouse would indicate. In other words, we
should find on applying the formula that the 'duration of the
after-image' must be decreased by a small amount before the numerical
relations would hold. Since Jastrow and Moorehouse did not determine
the relation of the after-image by an independent measurement, their
work neither confirms nor refutes this conjecture.

What they failed to emphasize is that the real origin of the bands is
not the intermittent appearances of the rod opposite the _lighter_
sector, as they seem to believe, but the successive eclipse by the rod
of _each_ sector in turn.

If, in Fig. 2, we have a disc (composed of a green and a red sector)
and a pendulum, moving to the right, and if _P_ represents the
pendulum at the instant when the green sector _AOB_ is beginning to
pass behind it, it follows that some other position farther to the
right, as _P'_, will represent the pendulum just as the last part of
the sector is passing out from behind it. Some part at least of the
sector has been hidden during the entire interval in which the
pendulum was passing from _P_ to _P'_. Clearly the arc _BA'_ measures
the band _BOA'_, in which the green stimulation from the sector _AOB_
is thus at least partially suppressed, that is, on which a relatively
red band is being produced. If the illusion really depends on the
successive eclipse of the sectors by the pendulum, as has been
described, it will be possible to express BA', that is, the width of
a band, in terms of the widths and rates of movement of the two
sectors and of the pendulum. This expression will be an equation, and
from this it will be possible to derive the phenomena which the bands
of the illusion actually present as the speeds of disc and rod, and
the widths of sectors and rod, are varied.

[Illustration: Fig 2.]

Now in Fig. 2 let the
  width of the band (_i.e._, the arc BA')       = Z
  speed of pendulum                             = r degrees per second;
  speed of disc                                 = r' degrees per second;
  width of sector AOB (_i.e._, the arc AB)      = s degrees of arc;
  width of pendulum (_i.e._, the arc BC)        = p degrees of arc;
  time in which the pendulum moves from P to P' = t seconds.

Now
                       arc CA'
                   t = -------;
                          r

but, since in the same time the green sector AOB moves from _B_ to B',
we know also that
                       arc BB'
                   t = -------;
                         r'
then
                   arc CA'      arc BB'
                   -------  =   -------,
                      r           r'

or, omitting the word "arc" and clearing of fractions,

                   r'(CA') = r(BB').
But now
                   CA' = BA' - BC,
while
                   BA' = Z and BC = p;
therefore
                   CA' = Z-p.
Similarly
                   BB' = BA' + A'B' = Z + s.

Substituting for _CA'_ and _BB'_ their values, we get

                   r'(Z-p) = r(Z+s),
or
                   Z(r' - r) = rs + pr',
or
                   Z = rs + pr' / r' - r.

It is to be remembered that _s_ is the width of the sector which
undergoes eclipse, and that it is the color of that same sector which
is subtracted from the band _Z_ in question. Therefore, whether _Z_
represents a green or a red band, _s_ of the formula must refer to the
_oppositely colored_ sector, _i.e._, the one which is at that time
being hidden.

We have now to take cognizance of an item thus far neglected. When the
green sector has reached the position _A'B'_, that is, is just
emerging wholly from behind the pendulum, the front of the red sector
must already be in eclipse. The generation of a green band (red sector
in eclipse) will have commenced somewhat before the generation of the
red band (green sector in eclipse) has ended. For a moment the
pendulum will lie over parts of both sectors, and while the red band
ends at point _A'_, the green band will have already commenced at a
point somewhat to the left (and, indeed, to the left by a trifle more
than the width of the pendulum). In other words, the two bands
_overlap_.

This area of overlapping may itself be accounted a band, since here
the pendulum hides partly red and partly green, and obviously the
result for sensation will not be the same as for those areas where red
or green alone is hidden. We may call the overlapped area a
'transition-band,' and we must then ask if it corresponds to the
'transition-bands' spoken of in the observations.

Now the formula obtained for Z includes two such transition-bands, one
generated in the vicinity of OB and one near OA'. To find the formula
for a band produced while the pendulum conceals solely one, the
oppositely colored sector (we may call this a 'pure-color' band and
let its width = W), we must find the formula for the width (w) of a
transition-band, multiply it by two, and subtract the product from the
value for Z already found.

The formula for an overlapping or transition-band can be readily found
by considering it to be a band formed by the passage behind P of a
sector whose width is zero. Thus if, in the expression for Z already
found, we substitute zero for s, we shall get w; that is,

              o + pr'      pr'
          w = ------- =  ------
              r' - r     r' - r
Since
          W = Z - 2w,
we have
              rs + pr'       pr'
          W = -------- = 2 ------,
               r' - r      r' - r
or
              rs - pr'
          W = --------            (1)
               r' - r


[Illustration: Fig 3.]

Fig. 3 shows how to derive _W_ directly (as _Z_ was derived) from the
geometrical relations of pendulum and sectors. Let _r, r', s, p_, and
_t_, be as before, but now let

    width of the band (_i.e._, the arc _BA') = W_;

that is, the band, instead of extending as before from where _P_
begins to hide the green sector to where _P_ ceases to hide the same,
is now to extend from the point at which _P_ ceases to hide _any
part_ of the red sector to the point where it _just commences_ again to
hide the same.

Then
                           W + p
                      t = ------- ,
                             r
and
                           W + s
                      t = ------- ,
                             r'

therefore
                 W + p      W + s
                ------- =  ------- ,
                   r          r'

              r'(W + p) = r(W + s) ,

             W (r' - r) = rs - pr' ,
and, again,
                          rs - pr'
                      W = -------- .
                           r' - r

Before asking if this pure-color band _W_ can be identified with the
bands observed in the illusion, we have to remember that the value
which we have found for _W_ is true only if disc and pendulum are
moving in the same direction; whereas the illusion-bands are observed
indifferently as disc and pendulum move in the same or in opposite
directions. Nor is any difference in their width easily observable in
the two cases, although it is to be borne in mind that there may be a
difference too small to be noticed unless some measuring device is
used.

From Fig. 4 we can find the width of a pure-color band (_W_) when
pendulum and disc move in opposite directions. The letters are used as
in the preceding case, and _W_ will include no transition-band.

[Illustration: Fig. 4]

We have

           W + p
       t = -----,
             r
and
           s - W
       t = -----,
             r'

       r'(W + p) = r(s - W) ,

       W(r' + r) = rs - pr' ,

           rs - pr'
       W = -------- .           (2)
            r' + r

Now when pendulum and disc move in the same direction,

            rs - pr'
       W = --------- ,          (1)
            r' - r

so that to include both cases we may say that

           rs - pr'
       W = -------- .           (3)
            r' ± r

The width (W) of the transition-bands can be found, similarly, from
the geometrical relations between pendulum and disc, as shown in Figs.
5 and 6. In Fig. 5 rod and disc are moving in the same direction, and

        w = BB'.

Now
             W - p
        t = ------- ,
              r'

             w
        t = --- ,
             r'

        r'(w-p) = rw ,

        w(r'-r) = pr' ,


                pr'
         w = ------- .          (4)
               r'-r


[Illustration: Fig. 5]

[Illustration: Fig. 6]

In Fig. 6 rod and disc are moving in opposite directions, and

         w = BB',

              p - w
         t = ------- ,
                r

              w
         t = --- ,
              r'

         r'(p - w) = rw ,

         w(r' + r) = pr' ,

                pr'
         w = -------- .
              r' + r            (5)

So that to include both cases (of movement in the same or in opposite
directions), we have that

                pr'
         w = -------- .
              r' ± r            (6)



VI. APPLICATION OF THE FORMULAS TO THE BANDS OF THE ILLUSION.


Will these formulas, now, explain the phenomena which the bands of the
illusion actually present in respect to their width?


1. The first phenomenon noticed (p. 173, No. 1) is that "If the two
sectors of the disc are unequal in arc, the bands are unequal in
width; and the narrower bands correspond in color to the larger
sector. Equal sectors give equally broad bands."

In formula 3, _W_ represents the width of a band, and _s_ the width of
the _oppositely colored_ sector. Therefore, if a disc is composed, for
example, of a red and a green sector, then

                         rs(green) -  pr'
               W(red) = ------------------ ,
                              r' ± r
and
                         rs(red) -  pr'
             W(green) = ------------------ ,
                              r' ± r

therefore, by dividing,

              W(red)     rs(green) -  pr'
            --------- = ------------------- .
             W(green)      rs(red) -  pr'

From this last equation it is clear that unless _s_(green) = _s_(red),
_W_(red) cannot equal _W_(green). That is, if the two sectors are
unequal in width, the bands are also unequal. This was the first
feature of the illusion above noted.

Again, if one sector is larger, the oppositely colored bands will be
larger, that is, the light-colored bands will be narrower; or, in
other words, 'the narrower bands correspond in color to the larger
sector.'

Finally, if the sectors are equal, the bands must also be equal.

So far, then, the bands geometrically deduced present the same
variations as the bands observed in the illusion.


2. Secondly (p. 174, No. 2), "The faster the rod moves the broader
become the bands, but not in like proportions; broad bands widen
relatively more than narrow ones." The speed of the rod or pendulum,
in degrees per second, equals _r_. Now if _W_ increases when _r_
increases, _D_{[tau]}W_ must be positive or greater than zero for all
values of _r_ which lie in question.

Now
                     rs - pr'
                W = --------- ,
                      r' ± r
and
                      (r' ± r)s [±] (rs - pr')
      D_{[tau]}W  = -------------------------- ,
                             (r ± r')

or reduced,
                      r'(s ± p)
                  = -----------
                      (r' ± r)²

Since _r'_ (the speed of the disc) is always positive, and _s_ is
always greater than _p_ (cf. p. 173), and since the denominator is a
square and therefore positive, it follows that

                 D_{[tau]}W > 0

or that _W_ increases if _r_ increases.

Furthermore, if _W_ is a wide band, _s_ is the wider sector. The rate
of increase of _W_ as _r_ increases is

                     r'(s ± p)
       D_{[tau]}W = -----------
                     (r' ± r)²

which is larger if _s_ is larger (_s_ and _r_ being always positive).
That is, as _r_ increases, 'broad bands widen relatively more than
narrow ones.'


3. Thirdly (p. 174, No. 3), "The width of The bands increases if the
speed of the revolving disc decreases." This speed is _r'_. That the
observed fact is equally true of the geometrical bands is clear from
inspection, since in

                    rs - pr'
               W = --------- ,
                     r' ± r

as _r'_ decreases, the denominator of the right-hand member decreases
while the numerator increases.


4. We now come to the transition-bands, where one color shades over
into the other. It was observed (p. 174, No. 4) that, "These partake
of the colors of both the sectors on the disc. The wider the rod the
wider the transition-bands."

We have already seen (p. 180) that at intervals the pendulum conceals
a portion of both the sectors, so that at those points the color of
the band will be found not by deducting either color alone from the
fused color, but by deducting a small amount of both colors in
definite proportions. The locus of the positions where both colors are
to be thus deducted we have provisionally called (in the geometrical
section) 'transition-bands.' Just as for pure-color bands, this locus
is a radial sector, and we have found its width to be (formula 6, p.
184)
                       pr'
               W = --------- ,
                     r' ± r

Now, are these bands of bi-color deduction identical with the
transition-bands observed in the illusion? Since the total concealing
capacity of the pendulum for any given speed is fixed, less of
_either_ color can be deducted for a transition-band than is deducted
of one color for a pure-color band. Therefore, a transition-band will
never be so different from the original fusion-color as will either
'pure-color' band; that is, compared with the pure color-bands, the
transition-bands will 'partake of the colors of both the sectors on
the disc.' Since
                       pr'
               W = --------- ,
                     r' ± r

it is clear that an increase of _p_ will give an increase of _w_;
_i.e._, 'the wider the rod, the wider the transition-bands.'

Since _r_ is the rate of the rod and is always less than _r'_, the
more rapidly the rod moves, the wider will be the transition-bands
when rod and disc move in the same direction, that is, when

                       pr'
               W = --------- ,
                     r' - r

But the contrary will be true when they move in opposite directions,
for then

                       pr'
               W = --------- ,
                     r' + r

that is, the larger _r_ is, the narrower is _w_.

The present writer could not be sure whether or not the width of
transition-bands varied with _r_. He did observe, however (page 174)
that 'the transition-bands are broader when rod and disc move in the
same, than when in opposite directions.' This will be true likewise
for the geometrical bands, for, whatever _r_ (up to and including _r_
= _r'_),

               pr'      pr'
              ----  >  ----
              r'-r     r'+r

In the observation, of course, _r_, the rate of the rod, was never so
large as _r'_, the rate of the disc.


5. We next come to an observation (p. 174, No. 5) concerning the
number of bands seen at any one time. The 'geometrical deduction of
the bands,' it is remembered, was concerned solely with the amount of
color which was to be deducted from the fused color of the disc. _W_
and _w_ represented the widths of the areas whereon such deduction was
to be made. In observation 5 we come on new considerations, _i.e._, as
to the color from which the deduction is to be made, and the fate of
the momentarily hidden area which suffers deduction, _after_ the
pendulum has passed on.

We shall best consider these matters in terms of a concept of which
Marbe[3] has made admirable use: the 'characteristic effect.' The
Talbot-Plateau law states that when two or more periodically
alternating stimulations are given to the retina, there is a certain
minimal rate of alternation required to produce a just constant
sensation. This minimal speed of succession is called the critical
period. Now, Marbe calls the effect on the retina of a light-stimulation
which lasts for the unit of time, the 'photo-chemical unit-effect.'
And he says (_op. cit._, S. 387): "If we call the unit of time
1[sigma], the sensation for each point on the retina in each unit of
time is a function of the simultaneous and the few immediately
preceding unit-effects; this is the characteristic effect."

   [3] 'Marbe, K.: 'Die stroboskopischen Erscheinungen,' _Phil.
   Studien._, 1898, XIV., S. 376.

We may now think of the illusion-bands as being so and so many
different 'characteristic effects' given simultaneously in so and so
many contiguous positions on the retina. But so also may we think of
the geometrical interception-bands, and for these we can deduce a
number of further properties. So far the observed illusion-bands and
the interception-bands have been found identical, that is, in so far
as their widths under various conditions are concerned. We have now to
see if they present further points of identity.

As to the characteristic effects incident to the interception-bands;
in Fig. 7 (Plate V.), let _A'C'_ represent at a given moment _M_, the
total circumference of a color-disc, _A'B'_ represent a green sector
of 90°, and _B'C'_ a red complementary sector of 270°. If the disc is
supposed to rotate from left to right, it is clear that a moment
previous to _M_ the two sectors and their intersection _B_ will have
occupied a position slightly to the left. If distance perpendicularly
above _A'C'_ is conceived to represent time previous to _M_, the
corresponding previous positions of the sectors will be represented by
the oblique bands of the figure. The narrow bands (_GG_, _GG_) are the
loci of the successive positions of the green sector; the broader
bands (_RR_, _RR_), of the red sector.

In the figure, 0.25 mm. vertically = the unit of time = 1[sigma]. The
successive stimulations given to the retina by the disc _A'C'_, say at
a point _A'_, during the interval preceding the moment _M_ will be

  green 10[sigma],
  red   30[sigma],
  green 10[sigma],
  red   30[sigma], etc.

Now a certain number of these stimulations which immediately precede
_M_ will determine the characteristic effect, the fusion color, for
the point _A'_ at the moment _M_. We do not know the number of
unit-stimulations which contribute to this characteristic effect, nor
do we need to, but it will be a constant, and can be represented by a
distance _x_ = _A'A_ above the line _A'C'_. Then _A'A_ will represent
the total stimulus which determines the characteristic effect at _A'_.
Stimuli earlier than _A_ are no longer represented in the after-image.
_AC_ is parallel to _A'C'_, and the characteristic effect for any
point is found by drawing the perpendicular at that point between the
two lines _A'C_ and _AC_.

Just as the movement of the disc, so can that of the concealing
pendulum be represented. The only difference is that the pendulum is
narrower, and moves more slowly. The slower rate is represented by a
steeper locus-band, _PP'_, than those of the swifter sectors.

We are now able to consider geometrically deduced bands as
'characteristic effects,' and we have a graphic representation of the
color-deduction determined by the interception of the pendulum. The
deduction-value of the pendulum is the distance (_xy_) which it
intercepts on a line drawn perpendicular to _A'C'_.

Lines drawn perpendicular to _A'C'_ through the points of intersection
of the locus-band of the pendulum with those of the sectors will give
a 'plot' on _A'C'_ of the deduction-bands. Thus from 1 to 2 the
deduction is red and the band green; from 2 to 3 the deduction is
decreasingly red and increasingly green, a transition-band; from 3 to
4 the deduction is green and the band red; and so forth.

We are now prepared to continue our identification of these
geometrical interception-bands with the bands observed in the
illusion. It is to be noted in passing that this graphic
representation of the interception-bands as characteristic effects
(Fig. 7) is in every way consistent with the previous equational
treatment of the same bands. A little consideration of the figure will
show that variations of the widths and rates of sectors and pendulum
will modify the widths of the bands exactly as has been shown in the
equations.

The observation next at hand (p. 174, No. 5) is that "The total number
of bands seen at any one time is approximately constant, howsoever the
widths of the sectors and the width and rate of the rod may vary. But
the number of bands is inversely proportional (Jastrow and Moorehouse)
to the time of rotation of the disc; that is, the faster the disc, the
more bands."

[Illustration: PSYCHOLOGICAL REVIEW. MONOGRAPH SUPPLEMENT, 17. PLATE V.
               Fig. 7. Fig. 8. Fig. 9.]

This is true, point for point, of the interception-bands of Fig. 7. It
is clear that the number of bands depends on the number of
intersections of _PP'_ with the several locus-bands _RR_, _GG_, _RR_,
etc. Since the two sectors are complementary, having a constant sum of
360°, their relative widths will not affect the number of such
intersections. Nor yet will the width of the rod _P_ affect it. As to
the speed of _P_, if the locus-bands are parallel to the line _A'C'_,
that is, of the disc moved _infinitely_ rapidly, there would be the
same number of intersections, no matter what the rate of _P_, that is,
whatever the obliqueness of _PP'_. But although the disc does not
rotate with infinite speed, it is still true that for a considerable
range of values for the speed of the pendulum the number of
intersections is constant. The observations of Jastrow and Moorehouse
were probably made within such a range of values of _r_. For while
their disc varied in speed from 12 to 33 revolutions per second, that
is, 4,320 to 11,880 degrees per second, the rod was merely passed to
and fro by hand through an excursion of six inches (J. and M., _op.
cit._, pp. 203-5), a method which could have given no speed of the rod
comparable to that of the disc. Indeed, their fastest speed for the
rod, to calculate from certain of their data, was less than 19 inches
per second.

The present writer used about the same rates, except that for the disc
no rate below 24 revolutions per second was employed. This is about
the rate which v. Helmholtz[4] gives as the slowest which will yield
fusion from a bi-sectored disc in good illumination. It is hard to
imagine how, amid the confusing flicker of a disc revolving but 12
times in the second, Jastrow succeeded in taking any reliable
observations at all of the bands. Now if, in Fig. 8 (Plate V.), 0.25
mm. on the base-line equals one degree, and in the vertical direction
equals 1[sigma], the locus-bands of the sectors (here equal to each
other in width), make such an angle with _A'C'_ as represents the disc
to be rotating exactly 36 times in a second. It will be seen that the
speed of the rod may vary from that shown by the locus _P'P_ to that
shown by _P'A_; and the speeds represented are respectively 68.96 and
1,482.64 degrees per second; and throughout this range of speeds the
locus-band of _P_ intercepts the loci of the sectors always the same
number of times. Thus, if the disc revolves 36 times a second, the
pendulum may move anywhere from 69 to 1,483 degrees per second without
changing the number of bands seen at a time.

   [4] v. Helmholtz, H.: 'Handbuch d. physiolog. Optik,' Hamburg
   u. Leipzig, 1896, S. 489.

And from the figure it will be seen that this is true whether the
pendulum moves in the same direction as the disc, or in the opposite
direction. This range of speed is far greater than the concentrically
swinging metronome of the present writer would give. The rate of
Jastrow's rod, of 19 inches per second, cannot of course be exactly
translated into degrees, but it probably did not exceed the limit of
1,483. Therefore, although beyond certain wide limits the rate of the
pendulum will change the total number of deduction-bands seen, yet the
observations were, in all probability (and those of the present
writer, surely), taken within the aforesaid limits. So that as the
observations have it, "The total number of bands seen at any one time
is approximately constant, howsoever ... the rate of the rod may
vary." On this score, also, the illusion-bands and the deduction-bands
present no differences.

But outside of this range it can indeed be _observed_ that the number
of bands does vary with the rate of the rod. If this rate (_r_) is
increased beyond the limits of the previous observations, it will
approach the rate of the disc (_r'_). Let us increase _r_ until _r_ =
_r'_. To observe the resulting bands, we have but to attach the rod or
pendulum to the front of the disc and let both rotate together. No
bands are seen, _i.e._, the number of bands has become zero. And this,
of course, is just what should have been expected from a consideration
of the deduction-bands in Fig. 8.

One other point in regard to the total number of bands seen: it was
observed (page 174, No. 5) that, "The faster the disc, the more
bands." This too would hold of the deduction-bands, for the faster the
disc and sectors move, the narrower and more nearly parallel to _A'C'_
(Fig. 7) will be their locus-bands, and the more of these bands will
be contained within the vertical distance _A'A_ (or _C'C_), which, it
is remembered, represents the age of the oldest after-image which
still contributes to the characteristic effect. _PP'_ will therefore
intercept more loci of sectors, and more deduction-bands will be
generated.


6. "The colors of the bands (page 175, No. 6) approximate those of the
two sectors; the transition-bands present the adjacent 'pure colors'
merging into each other. But _all_ the bands are modified in favor of
the moving rod. If, now, the rod is itself the same in color as one of
the sectors, the bands which should have been of the other color are
not to be distinguished from the fused color of the disc when no rod
moves before it."

These items are equally true of the deduction-bands, since a deduction
of a part of one of the components from a fused color must leave an
approximation to the other component. And clearly, too, by as much as
either color is deducted, by so much must the color of the pendulum
itself be added. So that, if the pendulum is like one of the sectors
in color, whenever that sector is hidden the deduction for concealment
will exactly equal the added allowance for the color of the pendulum,
and there will be no bands of the other color distinguishable from the
fused color of the disc.

It is clear from Fig. 7 why a transition-band shades gradually from
one pure-color band over into the other. Let us consider the
transition-band 2-3 (Fig. 7). Next it on the right is a green band, on
the left a red. Now at the right-hand edge of the transition-band it
is seen that the deduction is mostly red and very little green, a
ratio which changes toward the left to one of mostly green and very
little red. Thus, next to the red band the transition-band will be
mostly red, and it will shade continuously over into green on the side
adjacent to the green band.


7. The next observation given (page 175, No. 7) was that, "The bands
are more strikingly visible when the two sectors differ considerably
in luminosity." This is to be expected, since the greater the
contrast, whether in regard to color, saturation, or intensity,
between the sectors, the greater will be such contrast between the two
deductions, and hence the greater will it be between the resulting
bands. And, therefore, the bands will be more strikingly
distinguishable from each other, that is, 'visible.'


8. "A _broad_ but slowly-moving rod shows the bands lying over itself.
Other bands can also be seen behind it on the disc."

In Fig. 9 (Plate V.) are shown the characteristic effects produced by
a broad and slowly-moving rod. Suppose it to be black. It can be so
broad and move so slowly that for a space the characteristic effect is
largely black (Fig. 9 on both sides of _x_). Specially will this be
true between _x_ and _y_, for here, while the pendulum contributes no
_more_ photo-chemical unit-effects, it will contribute the newer one,
and howsoever many unit-effects go to make up the characteristic
effect, the newer units are undoubtedly the more potent elements in
determining this effect. The old units have partly faded. One may say
that the newest units are 'weighted.'

Black will predominate, then, on both sides of _x_, but specially
between _x_ and _y_. For a space, then, the characteristic effect will
contain enough black to yield a 'perception of the rod.' The width of
this region depends on the width and speed of the rod, but in Fig. 9
it will be roughly coincident with _xy_, though somewhat behind (to
the left of) it. The characteristic will be either wholly black, as
just at _x_, or else largely black with the yet contributory
after-images (shown in the triangle _aby_). Some bands will thus be
seen overlying the rod (1-8), and others lying back of it (9-16).

We have now reviewed all the phenomena so far enumerated of the
illusion-bands, and for every case we have identified these bands with
the bands which must be generated on the retina by the mere
concealment of the rotating sectors by the moving rod. It has been
more feasible thus far to treat these deduction-bands as if possibly
they were other than the bands of the illusion; for although the
former must certainly appear on the retina, yet it was not clear that
the illusion-bands did not involve additional and complicated retinal
or central processes. The showing that the two sets of bands have in
every case identical properties, shows that they are themselves
identical. The illusion-bands are thus explained to be due merely to
the successive concealment of the sectors of the disc as each passes
in turn behind the moving pendulum. The only physiological phenomena
involved in this explanation have been the persistence as after-images
of retinal stimulations, and the summation of these persisting images
into characteristic effects--both familiar phenomena.

From this point on it is permissible to simplify the point of view by
accounting the deduction-bands and the bands of the illusion fully
identified, and by referring to them under either name indifferently.
Figs. 1 to 9, then, are diagrams of the bands which we actually
observe on the rotating disc. We have next briefly to consider a few
special complications produced by a greater breadth or slower movement
of the rod, or by both together. These conditions are called
'complicating' not arbitrarily, but because in fact they yield the
bands in confusing form. If the rod is broad, the bands appear to
overlap; and if the rod moves back and forth, at first rapidly but
with decreasing speed, periods of mere confusion occur which defy
description; but the bands of the minor color may be broader or _may
be narrower_ than those of the other color.


VII. FURTHER COMPLICATIONS OF THE ILLUSION.


9. If the rod is broad and moves slowly, the narrower bands are like
colored, not with the broader, as before, but with the narrower
sector.

The conditions are shown in Fig. 9. From 1 to 2 the deduction is
increasingly green, and yet the remainder of the characteristic effect
is also mostly green at 1, decreasingly so to the right, and at 2 is
preponderantly red; and so on to 8; while a like consideration
necessitates bands from _x_ to 16. All the bands are in a sense
transition-bands, but 1-2 will be mostly green, 2-3 mostly red, and so
forth. Clearly the widths of the bands will be here proportional to
the widths of the like-colored sectors, and not as before to the
oppositely colored.

It may reasonably be objected that there should be here no bands at
all, since the same considerations would give an increasingly red band
from _B'_ to _A'_, whereas by hypothesis the disc rotates so fast as
to give an entirely uniform color. It is true that when the
characteristic effect is _A' A_ entire, the fusion-color is so well
established as to assimilate a fresh stimulus of either of the
component colors, without itself being modified. But on the area from
1 to 16 the case is different, for here the fusion-color is less well
established, a part of the essential colored units having been
replaced by black, the color of the rod; and black is no stimulation.
So that the same increment of component color, before ineffective, is
now able to modify the enfeebled fusion-color.

Observation confirms this interpretation, in that band _y-1_ is not
red, but merely the fusion-color slightly darkened by an increment of
black. Furthermore, if the rod is broad and slow in motion, but white
instead of black, no bands can be seen overlying the rod. For here the
small successive increments which would otherwise produce the bands
1-2, 2-3, etc., have no effect on the remainder of the fusion-color
plus the relatively intense increment of white.

It may be said here that the bands 1-2, 2-3, etc., are less intense
than the bands _x_-9, 9-10, etc., because there the recent or weighted
unit-effects are black, while here they are the respective colors.
Also the bands grow dimmer from _x_-9 to 15-16, that is, as they
become older, for the small increment of one color which would give
band 15-16 is almost wholly overridden by the larger and fresher mass
of stimulation which makes for mere fusion. This last is true of the
bands always, whatever the rate or width of the rod.


10. In general, equal sectors give equal bands, but if one sector is
considerably more intense than the other, the bands of the brighter
color will, for a broad and swiftly-moving rod, be the broader. The
brighter sector, though equal in width to the other, contributes more
toward determining the fusion-color; and this fact is represented by
an intrusion of the stronger color into the transition-bands, at the
expense of the weaker. For in these, even the decreased amount of the
stronger color, on the side next a strong-color band, is yet more
potent than the increased amount of the feebler color. In order to
observe this fact one must have the rod broad, so as to give a broad
transition-band on which the encroachment of the stronger color may be
evident. The process is the same with a narrow rod and narrow
transition-bands, but, being more limited in extent, it is less easily
observed. The rod must also move rapidly, for otherwise the bands
overlap and become obscure, as will be seen in the next paragraph.


11. If the disc consists of a broad and narrow sector, and if the rod
is broad and moves at first rapidly but more slowly with each new
stroke, there are seen at first broad, faint bands of the
minority-color, and narrow bands of the majority-color. The former
grow continuously more intense as the rod moves more slowly, and grow
narrower in width down to zero; whereupon the other bands seem to
overlap, the overlapped part being doubly deep in color, while the
non-overlapped part has come to be more nearly the color of the minor
sector. The overlapped portion grows in width. As the rate of the rod
now further decreases, a confused state ensues which cannot be
described. When, finally, the rod is moving very slowly, the phenomena
described above in paragraph 9 occur.

The successive changes in appearance as the rod moves more and more
slowly, are due to the factors previously mentioned, and to one other
which follows necessarily from the given conditions but has not yet
been considered. This is the last new principle in the illusion which
we shall have to take up. Just as the transition-bands are regions
where two pure-color bands overlap, so, when the rod is broad and
moves slowly, other overlappings occur to produce more complicated
arrangements.

These can be more compactly shown by diagram than by words. Fig. 10,
_a_, _b_ and _c_ (Plate VI.), show successively slower speeds of the
rod, while all the other factors are the same. In practice the
tendency is to perceive the transition-bands as parts of the broad
faint band of the minor color, which lies between them. It can be
seen, then, how the narrow major-color bands grow only slightly wider
(Fig. 10, _a_, _b_) until they overlap (_c_); how the broad
minor-color bands grow very narrow and more intense in color, there
being always more of the major color deducted (in _b_ they are reduced
exactly to zero, _z_, _z_, _z_). In _c_ the major-color bands overlap
(_o_, _o_, _o_) to give a narrow but doubly intense major-color band
since, although with one major, two minor locus-bands are deducted.
The other bands also overlap to give complicated combinations between
the _o_-bands. These mixed bands will be, in part at least,
minor-color bands (_q_, _q_, _q_), since, although a minor locus-band
is here deducted, yet nearly two major locus-bands are also taken,
leaving the minor color to predominate. This corresponds with the
observation above, that, '... the non-overlapped part has come to be
more nearly the color of the minor sector.'

A slightly slower speed of the rod would give an irreducible confusion
of bands, since the order in which they overlap becomes very
complicated. Finally, when the rod comes to move very slowly, as in
Fig. 9, the appearance suffers no further change, except for a gradual
narrowing of all the bands, up to the moment when the rod comes to
rest.

It is clear that this last principle adduced, of the multiple
overlapping of bands when the rod is broad and moves slowly, can give
for varying speeds of the rod the greatest variety of combinations of
the bands. Among these is to be included that of no bands at all, as
will be understood from Fig. 11 (Plate VII). And in fact, a little
practice will enable the observer so to adjust the rate of the (broad)
rod to that of the disc that no bands are observable. But care must be
taken here that the eye is rigidly fixated and not attracted into
movement by the rod, since of course if the eye moves with the rod, no
bands can be seen, whatever the rate of movement may be.

Thus, all the phenomena of these illusion-bands have been explained as
the result solely of the hiding by the rod of successive sectors of
the disc. The only physiological principles involved are those (1) of
the duration of after-images, and (2) of their summation into a
characteristic effect. It may have seemed to the reader tedious and
unnecessary so minutely to study the bands, especially the details
last mentioned; yet it was necessary to show how _all_ the possible
observable phenomena arise from the purely geometrical fact that
sectors are successively hidden. Otherwise the assertions of previous
students of the illusion, that more intricate physiological processes
are involved, could not have been refuted. The present writer does not
assert that no processes like contrast, induction, etc., come into
play to modify somewhat the saturation, etc., of the colors in the
bands. It must be here as in every other case of vision. But it is now
demonstrated that these remoter physiological processes contribute
nothing _essential_ to the illusion. For these could be dispensed with
and the illusion would still remain.

[Illustration: PSYCHOLOGICAL REVIEW. MONOGRAPH SUPPLEMENT, 17. PLATE VI.
               Fig. 10.]

If any reader still suspects that more is involved than the
persistence of after-images, and their summation into a characteristic
effect, he will find it interesting to study the illusion with a
camera. The 'physiological' functions referred to belong as well to
the dry-plate as to the retina, while the former exhibits, presumably,
neither contrast nor induction. The illusion-bands can be easily
photographed in a strong light, if white and black sectors are used in
place of colored ones. It is best to arrange the other variable
factors so as to make the transition-bands as narrow as possible (p.
174, No. 4). The writer has two negatives which show the bands very
well, although so delicately that it is not feasible to try to
reproduce them.


VIII. SOME CONVENIENT DEVICES FOR EXHIBITING THE ILLUSION.


The influence of the width of sector is prettily shown by a special
disc like that shown in Fig. 12 (Plate VII.), where the colors are
dark-red and light-green, the shaded being the darker sector. A narrow
rod passed before such a disc by hand at a moderate rate will give
over the outer ring equally wide green and red bands; but on the inner
rings the red bands grow narrower, the green broader.

The fact that the bands are not 'images of the rod' can be shown by
another disc (Fig. 13, Plate VII.). In all three rings the lighter
(green) sector is 60° wide, but disposed on the disc as shown. The
bands are broken into zigzags. The parts over the outer ring lag
behind those over the middle, and these behind those over the inner
ring--'behind,' that is, farther behind the rod.

Another effective variation is to use rods alike in color with one or
the other of the sectors. Here it is clear that when the rod hides the
oppositely-colored sector, the deduction of that color is replaced
(not by black, as happens if the rod is black) but by the very color
which is already characteristic of that band. But when the rod hides
the sector of its own color, the deduction is replaced by the very
same color. Thus, bands like colored with the rod gain in depth of
tone, while the other pure-color bands present simply the
fusion-color.


IX. A STROBOSCOPE WHICH DEPENDS ON THE SAME PRINCIPLE.


If one produce the illusion by using for rod, not the pendulum of a
metronome, but a black cardboard sector on a second color-mixer placed
in front of the first and rotating concentrically with it, that is,
with the color-disc, one will observe with the higher speeds of the
rod which are now obtainable several further phenomena, all of which
follow simply from the geometrical relations of disc and rod (now a
rotating sector), as discussed above. The color-mixer in front, which
bears the sector (let it still be called a 'rod'), should rotate by
hand and independently of the disc behind, whose two sectors are to
give the bands. The sectors of the disc should now be equal, and the
rod needs to be broader than before, say 50° or 60°, since it is to
revolve very rapidly.

First, let the rod and disc rotate in the same direction, the disc at
its former rate, while the rod begins slowly and moves faster and
faster. At first there is a confused appearance of vague, radial
shadows shuffling to and fro. This is because the rod is broad and
moves slowly (cf. p. 196, paragraph II).

As the velocity of the rod increases, a moment will come when the
confusing shadows will resolve themselves into four (sometimes five)
radial bands of one color with four of the other color and the
appropriate transition-bands between them. The bands of either color
are symmetrically disposed over the disc, that is, they lie at right
angles to one another (if there are five bands they lie at angles of
72°, etc.). But this entire system of bands, instead of lying
motionless over the disc as did the systems hitherto described, itself
rotates rapidly in the opposite direction from disc to rod. As the rod
rotates forward yet faster, no change is seen except that the system
of bands moves backward more and more slowly. Thus, if one rotate the
rod with one's own hand, one has the feeling that the backward
movement of the bands is an inverse function of the increase in
velocity of the rod. And, indeed, as this velocity still increases,
the bands gradually come to rest, although both the disc and the rod
are rotating rapidly.

But the system of bands is at rest for only a particular rate of the
rod. As the latter rotates yet faster, the system of bands now
commences to rotate slowly forward (with the disc and rod), then more
and more rapidly (the velocity of the rod still increasing), until it
finally disintegrates and the bands vanish into the confused flicker
of shadows with which the phenomenon commenced.

[Illustration: PSYCHOLOGICAL REVIEW. MONOGRAPH SUPPLEMENT, 17. PLATE VII.
                        Fig. 11.
               Fig. 12.         Fig. 13.]

This cycle now plays itself off in the reverse order if the speed of
the rod is allowed gradually to decrease. The bands appear first
moving forward, then more slowly till they come to rest, then moving
backward until finally they relapse into confusion.

But let the rate of the rod be not decreased but always steadily
increased. The bands will reappear, this time three of each color with
six transition-bands. As before, the system at first rotates backward,
then lies still, and then moves forward until it is dissolved. As the
rod moves still faster, another system appears, two bands of each
color forming a diameter and the two diameters lying at right angles.
This system goes through the same cycle of movements. When the
increased velocity of the rod destroys this system, another appears
having one band of each color, the two lying on opposite sides of the
center. The system goes through the same phases and is likewise
dissolved. Now, at this point the rod will be found to be rotating at
the same speed as the disc itself.

The explanation of the phenomenon is simple. The bands are not
produced by a single interruption of the vision of a sector by a rod,
but each band is made up of successive superpositions on the retina of
many such single-interruption bands. The overlapping of bands has been
already described (cf. Fig. 10 and pp. 196-198); superposition depends
of course on the same principle.

At the moment when a system of four bands of either color is seen at
rest, the rod is moving just one fifth as rapidly as the disc; so
that, while the rod goes once around, either sector, say the green
one, will have passed behind it exactly four times, and at points
which lie 90° apart. Thus, four red bands are produced which lie at
right angles to one another. But the disc is revolving at least 24
times in a second, the rod therefore at least 4.8 times, so that
within the interval of time during which successive stimuli still
contribute to the characteristic effect the rod will have revolved
several times, and with each revolution four red bands at right angles
to one another will have been formed. And if the rod is moving
_exactly_ one fifth as fast as the disc, each new band will be
generated at exactly that position on the disc where was the
corresponding band of the preceding four. The system of bands thus
appear motionless on the disc.

The movement of the system arises when the rate of the rod is slightly
less or more than one fifth that of the disc. If slightly less, the
bands formed at each rotation of the rod do not lie precisely over
those of the previous rotation, but a little to the rear of them. The
new set still lies mostly superposed on the previous sets, and so
fuses into a regular appearance of bands, but, since each new
increment lags a bit behind, the entire system appears to rotate
backward. The apparatus is actually a cinematograph, but one which
gives so many pictures in the second that they entirely fuse and the
strobic movement has no trace of discontinuity.

If the rod moves a trifle more than one fifth as fast as the disc, it
is clear that the system of bands will rotate forward, since each new
set of bands will lie slightly ahead of the old ones with which it
fuses. The farther the ratio between the rates of rod and disc departs
from exactly 1:5, whether less or greater, the more rapid will the
strobic movement, backward or forward, be; until finally the
divergence is too great, the newly forming bands lie too far ahead or
behind those already formed to fuse with them and so be apperceived as
one system, and so the bands are lost in confusion. Thus the cycle of
movement as observed on the disc is explained. As the rate of the rod
comes up to and passes one fifth that of the disc, the system of four
bands of each color forms in rapid backward rotation. Its movement
grows slower and slower, it comes to rest, then begins to whirl
forward, faster and faster, till it breaks up again.

The same thing happens as the rate of the rod reaches and exceeds just
one fourth that of the disc. The system contains three bands of each
color. The system of two bands of each color corresponds to the ratio
1:3 between the rates, while one band of each color (the two lying
opposite) corresponds to the ratio 1:2.

If the rod and the disc rotate in opposite directions, the phenomena
are changed only in so far as the changed geometrical relations
require. For the ratio 1:3 between the two rates, the strobic system
has four bands of each color; for 1:2, three bands of each color;
while when the two rates are equal, there are two bands of each color,
forming a diameter. As would be expected from the geometrical
conditions, a system of one band of each color cannot be generated
when rod and disc have opposite motions. For of course the rod cannot
now hide two or more times in succession a sector at any given point,
without hiding the same sector just as often at the opposite point,
180° away. Here, too, the cycle of strobic movements is different. It
is reversed. Let the disc be said to rotate forward, then if the rate
of the rod is slightly less than one fourth, etc., that of the disc,
the system will rotate forward; if greater, it will rotate backward.
So that as the rate of the rod increases, any system on its appearance
will move forward, then stand still, and lastly rotate backward. The
reason for this will be seen from an instant's consideration of where
the rod will hide a given sector.

It is clear that if, instead of using as 'rod' a single radial sector,
one were to rotate two or more such sectors disposed at equal angular
intervals about the axis, one would have the same strobic phenomena,
although they would be more complicated. Indeed, a large number of
rather narrow sectors can be used or, what is the same thing, a second
disc with a row of holes at equal intervals about the circumference.
The disc used by the writer had a radius of 11 inches, and a
concentric ring of 64 holes, each 3/8 of an inch in diameter, lying 10
inches from the center. The observer looks through these holes at the
color-disc behind. The two discs need not be placed concentrically.

When produced in this way, the strobic illusion is exceedingly pretty.
Instead of straight, radial bands, one sees a number of brightly
colored balls lying within a curving band of the other color and
whirling backward or forward, or sometimes standing still. Then these
break up and another set forms, perhaps with the two colors changed
about, and this then oscillates one way or the other. A rainbow disc
substituted for the disc of two sectors gives an indescribably
complicated and brilliant effect; but the front disc must rotate more
slowly. This disc should in any case be geared for high speeds and
should be turned by hand for the sake of variations in rate, and
consequently in the strobic movement.

It has been seen that this stroboscope is not different in principle
from the illusion of the resolution-bands which this paper has aimed
to explain. The resolution-bands depend wholly on the purely
geometrical relations between the rod and the disc, whereby as both
move the rod hides one sector after the other. The only physiological
principles involved are the familiar processes by which stimulations
produce after-images, and by which the after-images of rapidly
succeeding stimulations are summed, a certain number at a time, into a
characteristic effect.






              STUDIES IN MEMORY.









RECALL OF WORDS, OBJECTS AND MOVEMENTS.

BY HARVEY A. PETERSON.


Kirkpatrick,[1] in experimenting with 379 school children and college
students, found that 3-1/3 times as many objects were recalled as
visual words after an interval of three days. The experiment consisted
in showing successively 10 written names of common objects in the one
case and 10 objects in the other at the rate of one every two seconds.
Three days later the persons were asked to recall as many of each
series as possible, putting all of one series together. The averages
thus obtained were 1.89 words, 6.29 objects. The children were not
more dependent on the objects than the college students.

   [1] Kirkpatrick, E.A.: PSYCHOLOGICAL, REVIEW, 1894, Vol. I., p.
   602.

Since the experiment just described was performed without laboratory
facilities, Calkins[2] repeated it with 50 college women, substituting
lantern pictures for objects. She obtained in recall, after two days,
the averages 4.82 words, 7.45 pictures. The figures, however, are the
number of objects or words remembered out of ten, not necessarily
correctly placed. Kirkpatrick's corresponding figures for college
women were 3.22 words, 5.44 objects. The two experiments substantially
agree, Calkins' higher averages being probably due to the shortening
of the interval to two days.

   [2] Calkins, M.W.: PSYCHOLOGICAL, REVIEW, 1898, Vol. V., p.
   451.

Assuming, thus, that objects are better remembered than names in
deferred recall, the question arises whether this holds true when the
objects and names are coupled with strange and arbitrary symbols--a
question which is clearly of great practical interest from the
educational point of view, as it is involved in the pedagogical
problem whether a person seeking to acquire the vocabulary of a
foreign language ought to connect the foreign words with the familiar
words or with the objects themselves. And the further question arises:
what are the facts in the case of movements instead of objects, and
correspondingly in that of verbs instead of nouns. Both questions are
the problems of the following investigation.

As foreign symbols, either the two-figure numbers were used or
nonsense-words of regularly varying length. As familiar material,
nouns, objects, verbs and movements were used. The words were always
concrete, not abstract, by which it is meant that their meaning was
capable of demonstration to the senses. With the exception of a few
later specified series they were monosyllabic words. The nouns might
denote objects of any size perceptible to the eye; the objects,
however, were all of such a size that they could be shown through a
14×12 cm. aperture and still leave a margin. Their size was therefore
limited.

Concerning the verbs and movements it is evident that, while still
being concrete, they might be simple or complicated activities
consuming little or much time, and further, might be movements of
parts of the body merely, or movements employing other objects as
well. In this experiment complicated activities were avoided even in
the verb series. Simple activities which could be easily and quickly
imaged or made were better for the purpose in view.


THE _A_ SET.

The _A_ set contained sixteen series, _A_^{1}, _A_^{2}, _A_^{3}, etc.,
to _A_^{16}. They were divided as follows:

   Numbers and nouns: _A_^{1}, _A_^{5}, _A_^{9}, _A_^{13}.
   Numbers and objects: _A_^{2}, _A_^{6}, _A_^{10}, _A_^{14}.
   Numbers and verbs: _A_^{3}, _A_^{7}, _A_^{11}, _A_^{15}.
   Numbers and movements: _A_^{4}, _A_^{8}, _A_^{12}, _A_^{16}.

The first week _A_^{1-4} were given, the second week _A_^{5-8}, etc.,
so that each week one series of each of the four types was given the
subject.

In place of foreign symbols the numbers from 1 to 99 were used, except
in _A_^{13-15}, in which three-figure numbers were used.

Each series contained seven couplets, except _A_^{13-16}, which, on
account of the greater difficulty of three-figure numbers, contained
five. Each couplet was composed of a number and a noun, object, verb,
or movement.

Certain rules were observed in the composition of the series. Since
the test was for permanence, to avoid confusion no number was used in
more than one couplet. No two numbers of a given series were chosen
from the same decade or contained identical final figures. No word was
used in more than one couplet. Their vowels, and initial and final
consonants were so varied within a single series as to eliminate
phonetic aids, viz., alliteration, rhyme, and assonance. The kind of
assonance avoided was identity of final sounded consonants in
successive words, _e.g._, lane, vine.

The series were composed in the following manner: After the
twenty-eight numbers for four series had been chosen, the words which
entered a given series were selected one from each of a number of
lists of words. These lists were words of like-sounded vowels. After
one word had been chosen from each list, another was taken from the
first list, etc. As a consequence of observing the rules by which
alliteration, rhyme, and assonance were eliminated, the words of a
series usually represented unlike categories of thought, but where two
words naturally tended to suggest each other one of them was rejected
and the next eligible word in the same column was chosen. The
following is a typical series from the _A_ set.

   _A_^{1}. Numbers and Nouns.

    19     42     87     74     11     63     38
   desk   girl   pond   muff   lane   hoop   vine

The apparatus used in the _A_ set and also in all the later sets may
be described as follows: Across the length of a table ran a large,
black cardboard screen in the center of which was an oblong aperture
14 cm. high and 12 cm. wide. The center of the aperture was on a level
with the eyes of the subject, who sat at the table. The aperture was
opened and closed by a pneumatic shutter fastened to the back of the
screen. This shutter consisted of two doors of black cardboard sliding
to either side. By means of a large bulb the length of exposure could
be regulated by the operator, who stood behind the table.

The series--consisting of cards 4×2½ cm., each containing a printed
couplet--was carried on a car which moved on a track behind and
slightly below the aperture. The car was a horizontal board 150 cm.
long and 15 cm. wide, fixed on two four-wheeled trucks. It was divided
by vertical partitions of black cardboard into ten compartments, each
slightly wider than the aperture to correspond with the visual angle.
A curtain fastened to the back of the car afforded a black background
to the compartments. The couplets were supported by being inserted
into a groove running the length of the car, 3 cm. from the front. A
shutter 2 cm. high also running the length of the car in front of the
groove, fastened by hinges whose free arms were extensible, concealed
either the upper or the lower halves of the cards at the will of the
operator; _i.e._, either the foreign symbols or the words,
respectively. A screen 15 cm. high and the same length as the car,
sliding in vertical grooves just behind the cards and in front of the
vertical partitions, shut off the objects when desired, leaving only
the cards in view. Thus the apparatus could be used for all four types
of series.

The method of presentation and the time conditions of the _A_ set were
as follows:--A metronome beating seconds was used. It was kept in a
sound-proof box and its loudness was therefore under control. It was
just clearly audible to both operator and subject. In learning, each
couplet was exposed 3 secs., during about 2 secs. of which the shutter
was fully open and motionless. During this time the subject read the
couplet inaudibly as often as he wished, but usually in time with the
metronome. His object was to associate the terms of the couplet. There
was an interval of 2 secs. after the exposure of each couplet, and
this was required to be filled with repetition of only the
_immediately preceding couplet_. After the series had been presented
once there was an interval of 2 secs. additional, then a second
presentation of it commenced and after that a third. At the completion
of the third presentation there was an interval of 6 secs. additional
instead of the 2, at the expiration of which the test commenced.

_A_^{13-16} had five presentations instead of three. The test
consisted in showing the subject either the numbers or the words in
altered order and requiring him to write as many of the absent terms
as he could. In the object and movement series the objects were also
shown and the movements repeated by the subject if words were the
given terms. The time conditions in the test were,

   Exposure of a term                        3 secs.
   Post-term interval in A^{1-12}            4 secs.
   Post-term interval in A^{13-16}           6 secs.

This allowed the subject 7 secs. for recalling and writing each term
in A^{1-12} and 9 sec. in A^{13-16}. If a word was recalled after that
time it was inserted, but no further insertions were made after the
test of a series had been completed. An interval of 3 min. elapsed
between the end of the test of one series and the beginning of the
next series, during which the subject recorded the English word of any
couplet in which an indirect association had occurred, and also his
success in obtaining visual images if the series was a noun or a verb
series.

As already indicated, four series--a noun, an object, a verb, and a
movement series--given within a half hour, constituted a day's work
throughout the year. Thus variations due to changes in the
physiological condition of the subject had to affect all four types of
series.

Two days later these series were tested for permanence, and in the
same way as the tests for immediate recall, with this exception:

   Post-term interval in A^{13-16}            8 secs.

Thus 11 secs. were allowed for the deferred recall of each term in
A^{13-16}.

In the movement series of this set, to avoid hesitation and confusion,
the operator demonstrated to the subject immediately before the series
began, once for each word, how the movements were to be made.

The _A_ set was given to three subjects. The results of each subject
are arranged separately in the following table. In the tests the words
were required in A^{1-4}, in A^{5-16} the numbers. The figures show
the number of terms correctly recalled out of seven couplets in
A^{1-12} and out of five couplets in A^{13-16}, _exclusive_ of
indirect association couplets. The figures in brackets indicate the
number of correctly recalled couplets per series in which indirect
associations occurred. The total number correctly recalled in any
series is their sum. The figures in the per cent. row give the
percentage of correctly recalled couplets left after discarding both
from the number recalled and from the total number of couplets given
those in which indirect associations occurred. This simply diminished
the subject's number of chances. A discussion of the propriety of this
elimination will be found later. In _A_^{1-12} the absent terms had to
be recalled exactly in order, to be correct, but in _A_^{13-16}, on
account of the greater difficulty of the three-place numbers, any were
considered correct when two of the three figures were recalled, or
when all three figures were correct but two were reversed in position,
_e.g._, 532 instead of 523. _N_ means noun series, _O_ object, _V_
verb, and _M_ movement series. Series _A_^{1}, _A_^{5}, _A_^{9},
_A_^{13} are to be found in the first and third columns, _A_^{2},
_A_^{6}, _A_^{10}, _A_^{14} in the second and fourth, _A_^{3},
_A_^{7}, _A_^{11}, _A_^{15}, in the fifth and seventh, and _A_^{4},
_A_^{8}, _A_^{12}, _A_^{16} in the sixth and eighth columns.


TABLE I.

SHOWING IMMEDIATE RECALL AND RECALL AFTER TWO DAYS.

                              _M_.
   Series.       Im. Rec.   Two Days.     Im. Rec.      Two Days.
                 N.    O.   N.    O.     V.     M.    V.      M.
  A^{1-4}        6     7    3      1     6      7      2      1
  A^{5-8}        5(1)  6    3(1)   6     6(1)   7      5(1)   6
  A^{9-12}       7     7    4      6     7      6(1)   7      6(1)
  A^{13-16}      4     5    2      2     5      3      2      2
  Total.       22(1)  25   12(1)  15    24(1)  23(1)  16(1)  15(1)
  Per cent.    88     96   48     58    96     92     64     66

                              _S_.
   Series.      Im. Rec.   Two Days.     Im. Rec.      Two Days.
                 N.    O.   N.    O.     V.     M.    V.      M.
  A^{1-4}        6(1)  6    0      0     7      7      0      0
  A^{5-8}        6     7    1      3     6      7      0      3
  A^{9-12}       7     6    2      2     5      7      0      0
  A^{13-16}      5     5    0      0     5      5      3      0
  Total.        24(1) 24    3      5    23     26      3      3
  Per cent.     96    92   12     19    88    100     12     12

                              _Hu_.
   Series.      Im. Rec.   Two Days.     Im. Rec.      Two Days.
                 N.    O.   N.    O.     V.     M.    V.      M.
  A^{1-4}        6     7    0      1     5      6(1)   0      2
  A^{5-8}        5(2)  7    1(2)   1     7      7      1      0
  A^{9-12}       6(1)  7    2      2     6      7      0      5
  A^{13-16}      4(1)  4(1) 0      2     5      5      0      1
  Total.        21(4) 25(1) 3(2)   6    23     25(1)   1      8
  Per cent.     95   100   14     24    88    100      4     32


These results will be included in the discussion of the results of the
_B_ set.


THE _B_ SET.


A new material was needed for foreign symbols. After considerable
experimentation nonsense words were found to be the best adapted for
our purpose. The reasons for this are their regularly varying length
and their comparative freedom from indirect associations. An objection
to using nonsense syllables in any work dealing with the permanence of
memory is their sameness. On this account they are not remembered
long. To secure a longer retention of the material, nonsense words
were devised in substantially the same manner as that in which Müller
and Schumann made nonsense syllables, except that these varied
regularly in length from four to six letters. Thus the number of
letters, not the number of syllables was the criterion of variation,
though of course irregular variation in the number of syllables was a
necessary consequence.

When the nonsense words were used it was found that far fewer indirect
associations occurred than with nonsense syllables. By indirect
association I mean the association of a foreign symbol and its word by
means of a third term suggested to the subject by either of the others
and connected at least in _his_ experience with both. Usually this
third term is a word phonetically similar to the foreign symbol and
ideationally suggestive of the word to be associated. It is a very
common form of mnemonic in language material. The following are
examples:

   cax, stone (Caxton);
   teg, bib (get bib);
   laj, girl (large girl);
   xug, pond (noise heard from a pond);
   gan, mud (gander mud).

For both of these reasons nonsense words were the material used as
foreign symbols in the _B_ set.

The nonsense words were composed in the following manner. From a box
containing four of each of the vowels and two of each of the
consonants the letters were chosen by chance for a four-letter, a
five-letter, and a six-letter word in turn. The letters were then
returned to the box, mixed, and three more words were composed. At the
completion of a set of twelve any which were not readily pronounceable
or were words or noticeably suggested words were rejected and others
composed in their places.

The series of the _B_ set were four couplets long. Each series
contained one three-letter, one four-letter, one five-letter, and one
six-letter nonsense word. The position in the series occupied by each
kind was constantly varied. In all other respects the same principles
were followed in constructing the _B_ set as were observed in the _A_
set with the following substitutions:

No two foreign symbols of a series and no two terms of a couplet
contained the same sounded vowel in accented syllables.

The rule for the avoidance of alliteration, rhyme, and assonance was
extended to the foreign symbols, and to the two terms of a couplet.

The English pronounciation was used in the nonsense words. The
subjects were not informed what the nonsense words were. They were
called foreign words.

Free body movements were used in the movement series as in the _A_
set. Rarely an object was involved, _e.g._, the table on which the
subject wrote. The movements were demonstrated to the subject in
advance of learning, as in the _A_ set.

The following are typical _B_ series:

  B2.   Nonsense words and objects.

        quaro       rudv           xem            lihkez
        lid         cent           starch         thorn

  B3.   Nonsense words and verbs.

        dalbva      fomso          bloi           kyvi
        poke        limp           hug            eat

  B4.   Nonsense words and movements.

        ohv         wecolu         uxpa           haymj
        gnash       cross          frown          twist

The time conditions for presenting a series remained practically the
same. In learning, the series was shown three times as before. The
interval between learning and testing was shortened to 4 seconds, and
in the test the post-term interval of _A^{13-16}_ retained (6 secs.).
This allowed the subject 9 secs. for recalling and writing each term.
The only important change was an extension of the number of tests from
two to four. The third test was one week after the second, and the
fourth one week after the third. In these tests the familiar word was
always the term required, as in _A^{1-4}_, on account of the
difficulty of dealing statistically with the nonsense words. The
intervals for testing permanence in the _B_ set may be most easily
understood by giving the time record of one subject.


TIME RECORD OF _Hu_.

  Series.       Im. Rec.     Two Days.     Nine Days.     Sixteen Days.
  B^{1-4}       Feb. 12      Feb. 14       Feb. 21        Feb. 28
  B^{5-8}       Feb. 19      Feb. 21       Feb. 28        Mch. 7
  B^{9-12}      Feb. 26      Feb. 28       Mch. 7         Mch. 14
  B^{13-16}     Mch. 5       Mch. 7        Mch. 14        Mch. 21


The two half-hours in a week during which all the work of one subject
was done fell on approximately the same part of the day. When a number
of groups of 4 series each were to be tested on a given day they were
taken in the order of their recency of learning. Thus on March 7 the
order for _Hu_ was B^{13-16}, B^{9-12}, B^{5-8}.

Henceforth there was also rotation within a given four series. As
there were always sixteen series in a set, the effects of practice and
fatigue within a given half-hour were thus eliminated.

In the following table the results of the _B_ set are given. Its
arrangement is the same as in Table 1., except that the figures
indicate the number of absent terms correctly recalled out of four
couplets instead of seven or five. Where blanks occur, the series was
discontinued on account of lack of recall. As in Table 1., the tables
in the first, third and fifth columns show successive stages of the
same series. Immediate recall is omitted because with rare exceptions
it was perfect, the test being given merely as an aid in learning.


TABLE II.

  SHOWING RECALL AFTER TWO, NINE, AND SIXTEEN DAYS.

      Days.     Two.       Nine.   Sixteen.    Two.        Nine.   Sixteen.
             N.    O.   N.    O.   N.   O.   V.    M.    V.    M.   V.   M.
   Series.                         _M._
  B^{1-4}    2(1)  4    1(1)  2    1(1) 2    4     4     4     2    4    2
  B^{5-8}    3     1    2     1    1    1    2     2     2     1    1    1
  B^{9-12}   2     3    0     3    0    2    3     2     2     0    2    2
  B^{13-16}  2(1)  3    2(1)  0    2(1) 0    1     2     1     0    1    0
  Total      9(2) 11    5(2)  6    4(2) 5   10    10     9     3    8    5
  Per cent. 64    69   36    38   29   31   63    63    56    19   50   31

                                   _S._
  B^{1-4}¹   0     2    0     0              0     1     0     1
  B^{5-8}    0     0                         0     0
  B^{9-12}¹  0     1    0     0              0     1     0     0
  B^{13-16}² 0(2)  1    0(2)  1    0(2) 1    0     0(1)  0     0(1) 0    0(1)
  Total      0(2)  4    0(2)  1    0(2) 1    0     2(1)  0     1(1) 0    0(1)
  Per cent.  0    25    0     6    0    6    0    13     0     7    0    0

                                   _Hu._
  B^{1-4}    1(1)  4    0(1)  1    0(1) 2    1     3     0     2    0    0
  B^{5-8}    0     1(1) 0     0(1) 0    0(1) 0     1     0     1    0    1
  B^{9-12}   0     1    0     0    0    1    0     0     0     1    0    0
  B^{13-16}  0(1)  0    0(1)  0    0(1) 0    0     4     0     0    0    0
  Total      1(2)  6(1) 0(2)  1(1) 0(2) 3(1) 1     8     0     4    0    1
  Per cent.  7    40    0     7    0   20    6    50     0    25    0    6

                                   _B._
  B^{1-4}    1     1(1) 0     0              0     0(1)  0     0
  B^{6-8}    1     2    1     2    1    1    1     0     1     0    1    0
  B^{9-12}   0     2(1) 0     0(1) 0    0(1) 0(1)  2     0     2    0    1
  B^{13-16}  1     3    1     1    1    1    1     2     0     1    0    1
  Total      3     8(2) 2     3(1) 2    2(1) 2(1)  4(1)  1     3    1    2
  Per cent. 19    57   13    21   13   13   13    27     7    20    7   13

                                   _Ho._
  B^{1-4}¹   3     2(1) 2     2(1) 1    0(1) 1(2)  1(2)  1(2)  0(2) 0(2) 0(2)
  B^{6-8}    1     1(1) 1     0(1) 1    0    0     1(1)  1     1    0    1
  B^{9-12}   0(1)  1    0(1)  1    0(1) 0    1     1     1     1    0    0
  B^{13-16}³ 0     0    0     0    0    0    0(1)  4     0(1)  2    0(1) 0
  Total      4(1)  4(2) 3(1)  3(2) 2(1) 0(1) 2(3)  7(3)  3(3)  4(2) 0(3) 1(2)
  Percent.  33    30   25    23   17    0   17    58    25    33    0    8

                                   _Mo._
  B^{1-4}    3     3    3     1    4    1    0     2     0     2    0    2
  B^{5-8}    1     4    1     1    1    2    1     2(2)  1     1(2) 1    1(2)
  B^{9-12}   2     4    2     4    1    4    0(1)  3(1)  1(1)  3(1) 1(1) 2
  B^{13-16}  2(2)  4    2(2)  4    2(2) 2    1     4     1     4    1    4
  Total      8(2) 15    8(2) 10    8(2) 9    2(1) 11(3)  3(1) 10(3) 3(1) 9(2)
  Percent.  57    94   57    63   57   56   13    85    20    79   20   69

   ¹Four presentations in learning.
   ²Five presentations in learning.
   ³Five days' interval instead of two.


In the following summary the recall after two days is combined from
Tables I. and II. for the three subjects _M_, _S_ and _Hu_, there
being no important difference in the conditions of experimentation.
For the three other subjects this summary is merely a résumé of Table
II. The recall after nine and sixteen days in Table II. is omitted,
and will be taken up later. The figures are in all cases based on the
remainders left after those couplets in which indirect associations
occurred were eliminated both from the total number of couplets
learned and from the total number correctly recalled. _E.g._, in the
case of nouns, _M_ learned, in all, 42 couplets in the _A_ and _B_
sets, but since in 3 of them indirect associations occurred, only 39
couplets are left, of which 21 were correctly recalled. This gives 54
per cent.


SUMMARY OF RECALL AFTER TWO DAYS.--FROM TABLES I. AND II.

            N.            O.             V.             M.
  M.   54 per cent.   62 per cent.   63 per cent.   61 per cent.
  S.    8    "        21    "         7    "        12    "
  Hu.  11    "        30    "         5    "        59    "
  B.   19    "        57    "        13    "        27    "
  Ho.  33    "        30    "        17    "        58    "
  Mo.  57    "        94    "        13    "        85    "
  Av.  30 per cent.   49 per cent.   20 per cent.   50 per cent.

  Av. gain in object couplets, 19 per cent.
  "     "  "  movement couplets, 30 per cent.


The first question which occurs in examining the foregoing tables is
concerning the method of treating the indirect associations, _i.e._,
obtaining the per cents. The number of couplets correctly recalled may
be divided into two classes: those in which indirect associations did
not occur, and those in which they did occur. Those in which they did
not occur furnish us exactly what we want, for they are results which
are entirely free from indirect associations. In them, therefore, a
comparison can be made between series using objects and activities and
others using images. On the other hand, those correctly recalled
couplets in which indirect associations _did_ occur are not for our
purposes pure material, for they contain not only the object-image
factor but the indirect association factor also. The solution is to
eliminate these latter couplets, _i.e._, subtract them both from the
number correctly recalled and from the total number of couplets in the
set for a given subject. By so doing and by dividing the first
remainder by the second the per cents, in the tables were obtained.
There is one exception to this treatment. The few couplets in which
indirect associations occurred but which were nevertheless
_incorrectly_ recalled are subtracted only from the total number of
couplets in the set.

The method by which the occurrence of indirect associations was
recorded has been already described. It is considered entirely
trustworthy. There is usually little doubt in the mind of a subject
who comprehends what is meant by an indirect association whether or
not such were present in the particular series which has just been
learned. If none occurred in it the subjects always recorded the fact.
That an indirect association should occasionally be present on one day
and absent on a subsequent one is not strange. That a second term
should effect a union between a first and third and thereafter
disappear from consciousness is not an uncommon phenomenon of
association. There were thirteen such cases out of sixty-eight
indirect associations in the _A_, _B_ and _C_ sets. In the tables they
are given as present because their effects are present. When the
reverse was the case, namely, when an indirect association occurred on
the second, ninth or sixteenth day for the first time, it aided in
later recall and was counted thereafter. There were eight such cases
among the sixty-eight indirect associations.

Is it possible that the occurrence of indirect associations in,
_e.g._, two of the four couplets of a series renders the retention of
the other two easier? This could only be so when the intervals between
two couplets in learning were used for review, but such was never the
case. The subjects were required to fill such intervals with
repetitions of the preceding couplet only.

The elimination of the indirect association couplets and the
acceptance of the remainders as fair portrayals of the influence of
objects and movements on recall is therefore a much nearer approach to
truth than would be the retention of the indirectly associated
couplets.

The following conclusions deal with recall after two days only. The
recall after longer intervals will be discussed after Table III.

The summary from Tables I. and II. shows that when objects and nouns
are coupled each with a foreign symbol, four of the six subjects
recall real objects better than images of objects, while two, _M_ and
_Ho_, show little or no preference. The summary also shows that when
body movements and verbs are coupled each with a foreign symbol, five
of the six subjects recall actual movements better than images of
movements, while one subject, _M_, shows no preference. The same
subject also showed no preference for objects. With the subjects _S_
and _B_ the preference for actual movements is not marked, and has
importance only in the light of later experiments to be reported.

The great difference in the retentive power of different subjects is,
as we should expect, very evident. Roughly, they may be divided into
two groups. _M_ and _Mo_ recall much more than the other four. The
small percentage of recall in the case of these four suggested the
next change in the conditions of experimentation, namely, to shorten
with them the intervals between the tests for permanence. This was
accordingly done in the _C_ set. But before giving an account of the
next set we may supplement these results by results obtained from
other subjects.

It was impossible to repeat this set with the same subjects, and
inconvenient, on account of the scarcity of suitable words, to devise
another set just like it. Accordingly, the _B_ set was repeated with
six new subjects. We may interpolate the results here, and then resume
our experiments with the other subjects. The conditions remained the
same as for the other subjects in all respects except the following.
The tests after nine and sixteen days were omitted, and the remaining
test for deferred recall was given after one day instead of after two.
In learning the series, each series was shown four times instead of
three. The results are summarized in the following table. The figures
in the left half show the number of words out of sixteen which were
correctly recalled. The figures in parentheses separate, as before,
the correctly recalled indirect-association couplets. In the right
half of the table the same results, omitting indirect-association
couplets, are given in per cents, to facilitate comparison with the
summary from Tables I. and II.


TABLE III.

  SHOWING RECALL AFTER ONE DAY.

           N.     O.     V.     M.        N.     O.     V.     M.
  Bur.    6     10(1)   7(1)   5(4)       38     67     44     31
  W.      5(3)  12(1)   6      9          31     75     38     56
  Du.     1     11(1)   8      9           6     69     50     56
  H.      9(1)  14      8     12          56     88     50     75
  Da.     1(3)   7(4)   3(1)   9(3)        7     44     20     56
  R.      7(2)   3(3)   5      5(1)       44     19     31     31
  Total, 29(9)  57(10) 37(2)  49(8)  Av., 30     60     39     51

  Av. gain in object couplets, 30 per cent.
   "    "   " movement couplets, 12 per cent.


The table shows that five subjects recall objects better than images
of objects, while one subject recalls images of objects better.
Similarly, three subjects recall actual movements of the body better
than images of the same, while with three neither type has any
advantage.


THE _C_ SET.


In the _C_ set certain conditions were different from the conditions
of the _A_ and _B_ sets. These changes will be described under three
heads: changes in the material; changes in the time conditions; and
changes in the method of presentation.

For lack of monosyllabic English words the verbs and movements were
dissyllabic words. The nouns and objects were monosyllabic, as before.
All were still concrete, and the movements, whether made or imaged,
were still simple. But the movements employed objects, instead of
being merely movements of the body.

For two of the subjects, _M_ and _Mo_, the time intervals between the
tests remained as in the _A_ and the _B_ sets, namely, two days, nine
days, and sixteen days. With the four other subjects, _S, Hu, B,_ and
_Ho_, the number of tests was reduced to three and the intervals were
as follows:

The I. test, which as before was a part of the learning process, was
not counted. The II. test followed from 4½ to 6½ hours, or an average
of 5-3/8 hours, after the I. test. The III. test was approximately 16
hours after the II. test for all four subjects.

The series were learned between 10 a.m. and 1:30 p.m., the II. test
was the same day between 4:30 and 5:10 p.m., and the III. test was the
following morning between 8:30 and 9:10 a.m. Each subject of course
came at the same hour each week.

Each series was shown three times, as in the _B_ set.

A change had to be made in the length of exposure of each couplet in
the movement series. For, as a rule, movements employing objects
required a longer time to execute than mere movements of the body.
Five seconds was found to be a suitable length of exposure. To keep
the three other types of series comparable with the movement series,
if possible, their exposure was also increased from 3 to 5 secs. The
interval of 2 secs, at the end of a presentation was omitted, and the
interval between learning and testing reduced from 4 secs, in the _B_
set to 2 secs.

In the movement series of the _A_ and _B_ sets, movements of parts of
the body were chosen. But the number of such movements which a person
can conveniently make while reading words shown through an aperture is
limited, and as stated above no single word was ever used in two
couplets. These were now exhausted. In the _C_ set, therefore,
movements employing objects were substituted. The objects lay on the
table in a row in front of the subject, occupying a space about 50 cm.
from left to right, and were covered by a black cambric cloth. They
were thus all exposed at the same moment by the subject who, at a
signal, laid back the cloth immediately before the series began, and
in the same manner covered them at the end of the third presentation.
Thus the objects were or might be all in view at once, and as a result
the subject usually formed a single mental image of the four objects.

With this kind of material it was no longer necessary for the operator
to show the subject in advance of the series what the movements were
in order to avoid hesitation and confusion, for the objects were of
such a nature as obviously to suggest in connection with the words the
proper movements.


TABLE IV.

  SHOWING RECALL AFTER TWO, NINE AND SIXTEEN DAYS FOR TWO SUBJECTS, AND
  AFTER FIVE HOURS AND TWENTY-ONE HOURS FOR FOUR OTHER SUBJECTS.

  Days.      Two.     Nine.   Sixteen     Two.      Nine.    Sixteen
             N.  O.    N.  O.    N.  O.   V.    M.   V.   M.   V.   M.
  Series                             _M._
  C^{1-4}    4   4     4   4     3   2     3     2    2    2    1    1
  C^{5-8}    2   2     2   2     2   1     1     1    1    2    1    0
  C^{9-12}   3   2     3   1     3   0     2     4    3    2    2    1
  C^{13-16}  4   3(1)  4   2(1)  4   2(1)  3     4    2    3    2    3
  Total     13   1(1) 13   9(1) 12   5(1)  9    11    8    9    6    5
  Per cent. 81  73    81  60    75  33    56    69   50   56   38   31

                                     _Mo_
  C^{1-4}    2   4     1   1     1   1     1     4    1    2    1    2
  C^{5-8}    3   2     4   1     3   1     4     3(1) 4    3(1) 2    2(1)
  C^{9-12}   0   1     0   1     0   1     0     3    0    1    0    2
  C^{13-16}  0   0(1)  0   0(1)  0   0(1)  1(1)  4    1(1) 2    0(1) 0
  Total      5   7(1)  5   3(1)  4   3(1)  6(1) 14(1) 6(1) 8(1) 3(1) 6(1)
  Per cent. 31  46    31  20    25  20    40    93   40   53   20   40

  Hours.       Five.          Twenty-one.    Five.          Twenty-one
               N.    O.       N.    O.       V.    M.       V.    M.
  Series                             _S._
  C^{1-4}      1     3        1     1        0     1        0     1
  C^{5-8}      0(1)  3        0     2        0     1        0     1
  C^{9-12}     0(1)  3        0(1)  4        3     4        3     4
  C^{13-16}    1     3        1     3        2     3(1)     3     3(1)
  Total        2(2) 12        2(1) 10        5     9(1)     6     9(1)
  Per cent.   14    75       14    63       33    60       40    60

                                     _Hn._
  C^{1-4}      1     4        1     4        0     4        1     4
  C^{5-8}      0(2)  1        0(2)  1        0(1)  2        1(1)  2(2)
  C^{9-12}     3     4        3     4        2     4        2     4
  C^{13-16}    1     3        3     3        0     3(1)     0     2(1)
  Total        5(2) 12        7(2) 12        2(1) 13(3)     4(1) 12(3)
  Per cent.   36    75       50    75       14   100       29    92

                                     _B._
  C^{1-4}      3     4        3     4        3     4        3     4
  C^{5-8}      3     2        3     3        2     2        2     4
  C^{9-12}     2     4        2     3        2     1        2     2
  C^{13-16}    3     4        3     4        2     4        2     4
  Total       11    14       11    14        9    11        9    14
  Per cent.   69    88       69    88       56    69       56    88

                                     _Ho._
  C^{1-4}      3(1)  2(2)     3(1)  2(2)     0     3(1)     0     1(1)
  C^{5-8}      3(1)  4        3(1)  4        3     3(1)     3     3(1)
  C^{9-12}     1(2)  4        1(2)  4        2(1)  3(1)     2(1)  3(1)
  C^{13-16}    0     2        0     2        2     4        2     4
  Total        7(4) 12(2)     7(4) 12(2)     7(1) 13(3)     7(1) 11(3)
  Per cent.   58    92       58    92       50   100       50    85


The object series were also changed to conform to the movement series.
Formerly the objects had been shown successively through the aperture
and synchronously with their corresponding words; now they were on the
table in front of the subject and all uncovered and covered at once as
in the movement series. The subjects therefore had a single mental
image of these four objects also.

In both the object and the movement series the objects as before were
small and fairly uniform in size and so selected as not to betray to
the subject their presence beneath the cloth in the I. test. In the
II., III. and IV. tests there were no objects on the table.

The previous table shows the results of the _C_ set. The figures give
the number of couplets correct out of four; the figures in brackets
give the number of indirect associations; the total number recalled in
any series is their sum.

In the following summary the recall of _M_ and _Mo_ after two days and
of _S, Hu, B_ and _Ho_ after twenty-one hours are combined.


SUMMARY FROM TABLE IV.

                N.           O.            V.            M.
  _M._        81 per cent.  73 per cent.  56 per cent.  69 per cent.
  _Mo._       31 "          46 "          40 "          93 "
  _S._        14 "          63 "          40 "          60 "
  _Hu._       50 "          75 "          29 "          92 "
  _B._        69 "          88 "          56 "          88 "
  _Ho._       58 "          92 "          50 "          85 "

  Av.         51 per cent.  73 per cent.  45 per cent.  81 per cent.

  Av. gain in object couplets, 22 per cent.
  "     "  "  movement couplets, 36 per cent.


Before asking whether the results of the _C_ set confirm the
conclusions already reached, we must compare the conditions of the
three sets to see whether the changes in the conditions in the _C_ set
have rendered it incomparable with the other two. The first change was
the substitution of dissyllabic words in the verb and the movement
series in the place of monosyllabic words. Since the change was made
in both the verb and the movement series their comparability with each
other is not interfered with, and this is the point at issue.
Preliminary tests, however, made it highly probable that simple
concrete dissyllabic words are not more difficult than monosyllabic in
5 secs. exposure. This change is therefore disregarded.

The first important change introduced in the _C_ set was the reduction
of the intervals between the tests for four subjects. The second was
the lengthening of the exposure from 3 to 5 secs. These changes also
do not lessen the comparability of the noun, object, verb and movement
series with one another, since they affected all series of the _C_
set.

The third change in the conditions was the substitution in the
movement series of movements employing objects for movements of the
body alone, and the consequent placing of objects on the table in the
movement and in the object series of which the subject obtained a
single mental image. All of the subjects were of the opinion that this
single mental image was an aid in recall. Each of the objects
contributing to form it was individualized by its spatial order among
the objects on the table. The objects shown through the aperture were
connected merely by temporal contiguity. On this account the object
and the movement series of the _C_ set are not altogether comparable
with those of the _A_ and the _B_ sets. We should expect _a priori_
that the object and the movement series in the _C_ set would be much
better recalled than those of the _A_ and the _B_ sets.

The fourth change was from imaged or made movements of the body alone
to imaged or made movements employing objects. If, as the _A_ and the
_B_ sets have already demonstrated, the presence of objects at all is
an aid to recall, the movement series of the _C_ set should show a
greater gain over their corresponding verb series than the simple
movements of the body in the _A_ and the _B_ sets showed over their
corresponding verb series. For, employing objects in movements is
adding the aid of objects to whatever aid there is in making the
movements.

Turning to the results, we consider the _C_ set by itself with
reference to the effect of the use of objects vs. images in general.
The summary from Table IV. shows that under the conditions given,
after intervals of from slightly less than one day to two days, five
of the six subjects recall object couplets better than noun couplets.
One subject, _M_ recalls noun couplets better. It also shows that
under the conditions and after the intervals mentioned all six
subjects recall movement couplets better than verb couplets. In view
of the small difference here and of his whole record, however, _M_ is
probably to be classed as indifferent in both substantive and action
series.


RECALL AFTER NINE AND SIXTEEN DAYS.


Thus far recall after these longer intervals has not been discussed.
The experiment was originally devised to test recall after two days
only, but it was found that with two of the subjects, _M_ and _Mo_,
recall for greater intervals could be obtained with slight additional
trouble. This was accordingly done in the _B_ and _C_ sets. The
results of the four other subjects in the _B_ set are not so
satisfactory on this point, because not enough was recalled.

The most interesting fact which developed was an apparently slower
rate of forgetting, in many cases, of the nouns and verbs than of the
objects and movements. In the noun-object group of the _B_ set it is
noticeable in three out of the four possible subjects, viz., _B, Ho_,
and _Mo_. _M_ alone does not show it. The two other subjects, _S_ and
_B_, did not recall enough for a comparison. In the verb-movement
group of the _B_ set it is also marked in three out of the four
possible subjects, viz., _M_, _Ho_, and _Mo. B_ alone does not show
it. It is also seen in the _C_ set in the results of _M_ and _Mo_, in
both the noun-object and the verb-movement groups. With the four other
subjects in the _C_ set it could not be noticed, since the series ran
their course in a day. In _M_ (verb-movement group, _C_ set) and _Mo_
(noun-object group, _C_ set) the originally higher object or movement
curves actually fall below their corresponding noun or verb curves.

The results of the tests for recall after nine and sixteen days are
summarized in the following tables. They should be compared with the
recall of these same series after two days given in Tables II. and
IV., nor should it be forgotten that all four types started with
perfect immediate recall. The figures give per cents, correct after
eliminating indirect-association couplets.


TABLE V.

  SHOWING RECALL AFTER NINE AND SIXTEEN DAYS.--SUMMARY FROM _B_ SET.

  Days.        Nine.       Sixteen        Nine.       Sixteen.
               N.  O.      N.  O.         V.  M.      V.  M.
  _M._         36  38      29  31         56  19      50  31
  _S._          0   6       0   6          0   7       0   0
  _Hu._         0   7       0  20          0  25       0   6
  _B._         13  21      13  13          7  20       7  13
  _Ho._        25  23      17   0         25  33       0   8
  _Mo._        57  63      57  56         20  79      20  69
  Av.          22  26      19  21         18  31      13  21


TABLE VI.

  SAME FOR _M_ AND _Mo_.--SUMMARY FROM _C_ SET.

  Days.       Nine.   Sixteen.     Nine.   Sixteen.
              N.  O.   N.  O.      V.  M.   V.  M.
  _M_.        81  60   75  33      50  56   38  31
  _Mo_.       31  20   25  20      40  53   20  40


THE _D_ SET.


A few series of nouns, objects, verbs, and movements dissociated from
foreign symbols were obtained. The material was of the same kind as
the words used in the couplet series, being mostly monosyllabic and
seldom dissyllabic words. They had not been previously used with these
subjects. Each series contained ten words or ten objects. The same
kind of precautions were taken as in the couplet sets to avoid
phonetic aids and the juxtaposition of words which suggest each other.
The apparatus employed in the couplet sets was used. The objects in
the object series were shown through the aperture. Visual images were
required in the noun and in the verb series. The noun and the object
series were exposed at the rate of one word every 2 secs. (or 20 secs.
for the series) for _M_, _S_, and _Hu_, and one every 3 secs. (or 30
secs. for the series) for _B_, _Ho_, and _Mo_. Only one exposure of
the series was given. At its completion the subject at once wrote as
many of the words or objects as he could recall. Two days later at the
same hour he was asked to write without further stimulus as many words
of each series as he could recall, classifying them according to their
type of series.

The verbs were similar to the verbs of the couplet series. There was a
tendency in the verb series among most of the subjects to make a more
or less connected story of the verbs and thus some subjects could
retain all ten words for two days. This was an element not present in
the couplet verb series, according to the subjects, nor in any other
series, and the subjects were, therefore, directed to eliminate it by
imaging each action in a different place and connected with different
persons. The effort was nearly successful, some of the subjects
connecting two or three verbs, and others none. The movements employed
ten objects which were uncovered and covered by the subject as in the
_C_ set. The exposure for the verbs and movements was 5 secs. for each
word, or 50 secs. for the series. The tests were the same as in the
series of ten nouns and ten objects, but in a number of cases (to be
specified in the table) it seemed best to shorten the interval for
deferred recall to one day.

The series were always given in pairs--a noun and an object series, or
a verb and a movement series forming a pair. Only one pair was given
per day and no other series of any kind were given on that day.
Usually several days intervened between the II. test of one pair and
the learning of the next, but in a little less than half of the cases
a new pair was learned on the same day shortly after the II. test of
the preceding pair.

The noun-object pairs and the verb-movement pairs were not given in
any definite order with reference to each other.

The figures in the following table indicate the number of words out of
ten which the subject correctly recalled and placed in their proper
columns. Immediate recall is also given.


TABLE VII.


  Series.     Im. Rec.     Two Days.     Im. Rec.     Two Days.
             N.   O.      N.   O.       V.   M.      V.   M.

                              _M._
  D^{1-4}      8    9       7    7        7   10       4    5
  D^{5-8}      9    7       6    6        8    8       6    6
  D^{9-12}     7    7       5    6        8   10       7    7
  Av.         24   23      18   19       23   28      17   17

                             _Mo_.
  D^{1-4}      6    6       2    1        8   10       0¹   7¹
  D^{5-8}      6    5       0¹   3¹       8    9       2    4
  D^{9-12}     5    7       1¹   6¹      10   10       2    7
  Av.         17   18       3   10       26   29       4   18

                             _S_.
  D^{1-4}      8    9       2    3        9   10       6¹   9¹
  D^{5-8}      8   10       2    4        9   10       4¹   9¹
  D^{9-12}     8   10       2    5        8   10       3¹   7¹
  Av.         24   29       6   12       26   30      13   25

                             _Hu._
  D^{1-4}      6    8       3    7        9   10       4    9
  D^{5-8}      7    9       0    2        9   10       2    7
  D^{9-12}     7    9       4    6        8   10       1    8
  Av.         20   26       7   15       26   30       7   24

                             _Ho._
  D^{1-4}      9    9       3    3       10    9       5    7
  D^{5-8}      9    8       1    6        9    9       6¹   8¹
  D^{9-12}     8    8       5    5       10   10       6¹   7¹
  Av.         26   25       9   14       29   28      17   22

   ¹ One day.


The results of the _D_ set strongly confirm the results of the _A_,
_B_, and _C_ sets. Table VII. shows that after from one to two days'
interval four subjects recall objects better than nouns and movements
better than verbs. One subject, _M._, shows no preference.


CONCLUSIONS.


We are now in a position to answer specifically the problem of this
investigation. The results show: (1) that those five subjects who
recall objects better than nouns (involving images) _when each occurs
alone_, also recall objects better than nouns when each is recalled by
means of an unfamiliar verbal symbol with which it has been coupled;
(2) that the same is true of verbs and movements; (3) that these facts
also receive confirmation on the negative side, viz.: the one subject
who does not recall objects and movements better than nouns and verbs
(involving images) _when they are used alone_, also does not recall
them better _when they are recalled by means of foreign symbols_ with
which they have been coupled.


MINOR QUESTIONS.


The problem proposed at the outset of the investigation having been
answered, two minor questions remain: (1) as to images, (2) indirect
associations.


1. All the subjects were good visualizers. The images became clear
usually during the first of the three presentations, _i.e._, in 1-3
secs., and persisted until the next couplet appeared. In the second
and third presentations the same images recurred, rarely a new one
appeared.

An interesting side light is thrown on M.'s memory by his work in
another experiment in which he was a subject. This experiment required
that the subject look at an object for 10 secs. and then after the
disappearance of its after-image manipulate the memory image. M.
showed unusually persistent after-images. The memory images which
followed were unusually clear in details and also persistent. They
were moreover retained for weeks, as was shown by his surprising
ability to recall the details of an image long past, and separated
from the present one by many subsequent images. His memory was
capacious rather than selective. His eyesight was tested and found to
be normal for the range of the apparatus. Possibly his age (55 yrs.)
is significant, although one of the two subjects who showed the
greatest preference for objects and movements, Mo., was only six yrs.
younger. The ages of the other subjects were S. 36 yrs., Hu. 23 yrs.,
B. 25 yrs., Ho. 27 yrs.

That some if not all of the subjects did not have objective images in
many of the noun and verb couplets if they were left to their own
initiative to obtain them is evident from the image records in the _A_
set, in which the presence of the objective images was optional but
the record obligatory. The same subject might have in one noun or verb
series no visual images and in another he might have one for every
couplet of the series. After the completion of the _A_ set, the effect
of the presence of the objective images in series of 10 nouns alone,
or 10 objects alone after two days' interval, was tested. This was
merely a repetition of similar work by Kirkpatrick after three days'
interval, and yielded similar results. As a matter of fact some of the
subjects were unable wholly to exclude the objective images, but were
compelled to admit and then suppress them as far as possible, so that
it is really a question of degree of prominence and duration of the
images.

The presence of the objective images having been shown to be an aid in
the case of series of nouns, the subjects were henceforth requested to
obtain them in the noun and verb series of the _B_ and _C_ sets, and
the image records show that they were entirely successful in doing so.


2. The total number of couplets in any one or in several sets may be
divided into two classes: (1) Those in which indirect associations did
not occur in the learning, and (2) those in which they did occur. For
reasons already named we may call the first pure material and the
second mixed. We can then ascertain in each the proportion of
correctly recalled couplets after one, two, nine and sixteen days'
interval, and thus see the importance of indirect associations as a
factor in recall. This is what has been done in the following table.

The figures give the number of couplets correctly or incorrectly
recalled out of 64. In the case of the interval of one day the figures
are a tabulation of the III. test (twenty-one hours) of the _C_ set,
which contained 16 series of 4 couplets each. The figures for the
intervals of two, nine and sixteen days are a tabulation of the _B_
set, which also contained 16 series of 4 couplets each. _C_ denotes
correct, _I_ incorrect.


TABLE VIII.

SHOWING GREATER PERMANENCE OF COUPLETS IN WHICH INDIRECT ASSOCIATIONS
OCCURRED.

                  Pure Material.                     Mixed Material.
  Days.     One.     Two.   Nine. Sixteen.   One.   Two.   Nine. Sixteen.
           C   I    C   I   C   I   C   I   C   I   C   I   C   I   C   I
  _M._    40  22   23  39  22  40           2   0   2   0   3   0
  _Mo._   36  22   31  27  29  29           6   0   6   0   5   1
  _S._    27  34    6  55   2  59   1  60   2   1   3   0   3   0   3   0
  _Hu._   35  22   16  45   5  56   4  57   6   1   3   0   3   0   3   0
  _B._    48  16   17  43   9  51   7  53   0   0   4   0   1   3   1   3
  _Ho._   37  15   17  30  13  36   3  46  10   2   9   6   8   7   7   8

  Total: 147  87  132 217  83 268  66 285  18   4  27   6  23  10  21  12
  P'c't.: 63  37   38  62  24  76  19  81  82  18  82  18  70  30  64  36


We see from the table that the likelihood of recalling couplets in
which indirect associations did not occur in learning is 63 per cent.
after one day, and that there is a diminution of 44 per cent. in the
next fifteen days. The fall is greatest during the second day. On the
other hand, the likelihood of recalling couplets in which indirect
associations did occur is 82 per cent. after one day, and there is a
diminution of only 18 per cent. during the next fifteen days. The
fading is also much more gradual.

It is evident, then, that in all investigations dealing with language
material the factor of indirect associations--a largely accidental
factor affecting varying amounts of the total material (in these six
subjects from 3 per cent. to 23 per cent.) is by far the most
influential of all the factors, and any investigations which have
heretofore failed to isolate it are not conclusive as to other
factors.

The practical value of the foregoing investigation will be found in
its bearing upon the acquisition of language. While it is by no means
confined to the acquisition of the vocabulary of a _foreign_ language,
but is also applicable to the acquisition of the vocabulary of the
native language, it is the former bearing which is perhaps more
obvious. If it is important that one become able as speedily as
possible to grasp the meaning of foreign words, the results of the
foregoing investigation indicate the method one should adopt.






MUTUAL INHIBITION OF MEMORY IMAGES.

BY FREDERICK MEAKIN.


The results here presented are the record of a preliminary inquiry
rather than a definitive statement of principles.

The effort to construct a satisfactory theory of inhibition has given
rise, in recent years, to a good deal of discussion. Ever since it was
discovered that the reflexes of the spinal cord are normally modified
or restrained by the activity of the brain and Setschenow (1863)
attempted to prove the existence of localized inhibition centers, the
need of such a theory has been felt. The discussion, however, has been
mainly physiological, and we cannot undertake to follow it here. The
psychologist may not be indifferent, of course, to any comprehensive
theory of nervous action. He works, indeed, under a general
presumption which takes for granted a constant and definite relation
between psychical and cerebral processes. But pending the settlement
of the physiological question he may still continue with the study of
facts to which general expression may be given under some theory of
psychical inhibition not inconsistent with the findings of the
physiologist.

A question of definition, however, confronts us here. Can we, it may
be asked, speak of psychical inhibition at all? Does one conscious
state exercise pressure on another, either to induce it, or to expel
it from the field? 'Force' and 'pressure,' however pertinent to
physical inquiries, are surely out of place in an investigation of the
relations between the phenomena of mind. Plainly a distinction has to
be made if we are to carry over the concept of inhibition from the
domain of nervous activity to the conscious domain. Inhibition cannot,
it should seem, have the same sense in both. We find, accordingly,
that Baldwin, who defines nervous inhibition as 'interference with the
normal result of a nervous excitement by an opposing force,' says of
mental inhibition that it 'exists in so far as the occurrence of a
mental process prevents the simultaneous occurrence of other mental
processes which might otherwise take place.'[1]

   [1] Baldwin, J.M.: 'Dictionary of Philosophy and Psychology,'
   New York and London, 1901, Vol. I., article on 'Inhibition.'

Even here, it may be said, there is in the term 'prevents' an
implication of the direct exercise of force. But if we abstract from
any such implication, and conceive of such force as the term
inhibition seems to connote, as restricted to the associated neural or
physiological processes, no unwarranted assumptions need be imported
by the term into the facts, and the definition may, perhaps, suffice.

Some careful work has been done in the general field of psychical
inhibition. In fact, the question of inhibition could hardly be
avoided in any inquiry concerning attention or volition. A. Binet[2]
reports certain experiments in regard to the rivalry of conscious
states. But the states considered were more properly those of
attention and volition than of mere ideation. And the same author
reports later[3] examples of antagonism between images and sensations,
showing how the latter may be affected, and in some respects
inhibited, by the former. But this is inhibition of sensations rather
than of ideas. Again, Binet, in collaboration with Victor Henri,[4]
reports certain inhibitory effects produced in the phenomena of
speech. But here again the material studied was volitional. More
recently, G. Heymans[5] has made elaborate investigation of a certain
phase of 'psychische Hemmung,' and showed how the threshold of
perception may be raised, for the various special senses, by the
interaction of rival sensations, justly contending that this shifting
of the threshold measures the degree in which the original sensation
is inhibited by its rival. But the field of inquiry was in that case
strictly sensational. We find also a discussion by Robert Saxinger,[6]
'Ueber den Einfluss der Gefühle auf die Vorstellungsbewegung.' But the
treatment there, aside from the fact that it deals with the emotions,
is theoretical rather than experimental.

   [2] Binet, A.: _Revue Philosophique_, 1890, XXIX., p. 138.

   [3] Binet, A.: _Revue Philosophique_, 1890, XXX., p. 136.

   [4] Binet, A., et Henri, V.: _Revue Philosophique_, 1894,
   XXXVII., p. 608.

   [5] Heymans, G.: _Zeitschrift f. Psych. u. Physiol. d.
   Sinnesorgane_, 1899, Bd. XXI., S. 321; _Ibid._, 1901, Bd.
   XXVI., S. 305.

   [6] Saxinger, R.: _Zeitschrift f. Psych. u. Physiol. d.
   Sinnesorgane_, 1901, Bd. XXVI., S. 18.

In short, it appears that though much has been said and done upon the
general subject of psychical inhibition, experimental inquiry into the
inhibitory effect of one idea upon another--abstraction made, as far
as possible, of all volitional influence--virtually introduces us to a
new phase of the subject.

The term 'idea,' it should be noted, is here used in its broadest
sense, and includes the memory image. In fact, the memory image and
its behavior in relation to another memory image formed the material
of the first part of the research, which alone is reported here.
Apparatus and method were both very simple.

The ideas to be compared were suggested by geometrical figures cut out
of pasteboard and hung, 25 cm. apart, upon a small black stand placed
on a table in front of the observer, who sat at a distance of four
feet from the stand. The diagrams and descriptions which follow will
show the character of these figures.

Before the figures were placed in position, the subject was asked to
close his eyes. The figures being placed, a few seconds' warning was
given, and at the word 'look' the subject opened his eyes and looked
at the objects, closing his eyes again at the word 'close.' The time
of exposure was five seconds. This time was divided as equally as
possible between the two figures, which were simultaneously exposed,
the observer glancing freely from one to the other as in the common
observation on which our ideas of objects are founded. At the end of
the exposure the subject sat with closed eyes and reported the several
appearances and disappearances of the ideas or mental images of the
objects just presented. The conditions required of him were that he
should await passively the entry of the rival claimants on his
attention, favoring neither and inhibiting neither; that is to say, he
was to remit all volitional activity, save so far as was necessary to
restrict his attention to the general field upon which the ideated
objects might appear, and to note what occurred on the field. The
period of introspection, which followed immediately the disappearance
of such retinal images as remained, after the closing of the eyes to
the external objects, lasted sixty seconds. The reports, like the
signals, were given in a just audible tone. They were in such terms as
'right--left,' 'small--large,' 'circle--star,' terms the simplest that
could be found, or such as seemed, in any given case, most naturally
or automatically associated with the object, and therefore least
likely to disturb the course of the observation. And each report was
noted down by the experimenter at the instant it was given, with the
time of each phase, in seconds, as indicated by a stop-watch under the
experimenter's eye.

It will be remarked that the attitude required of the observer was one
which is not commonly taken. And it may be objected that the results
of an attitude so unusual towards objects so ghostly and attenuated
must be too delicate, or too complex, or influenced by too many alien
suggestions, to be plumply set down in arabic numerals. The subjects,
in fact, did at first find the attitude not easy to assume. A visual
object may hold the attention by controlling the reflexes of the eye.
But an ideational object has ordinarily no sure command of the
conscious field save under the influence of a volitional idea or some
strongly toned affectional state. But with a little practice the
difficulty seemed to disappear. The subject became surer of his
material, and the mental object gradually acquired the same sort of
individuality as the visual object, though the impression it made
might be less intense.

After a few preliminary experiments, figures were devised for the
purpose of testing the effect of mere difference in the complexity of
outline. That is to say, the members of every pair of objects were of
the same uniform color-tone (Bradley's neutral gray No. 2), presented
the same extent of surface (approximately 42 sq. cm.), were exposed
simultaneously for the same length of time (5 seconds), and were in
contour usually of like general character save that the bounding line
in the one was more interrupted and complex than in the other.

In another series the variant was the extent of surface exposed, the
color-tone (neutral gray), outline, and other conditions being the
same for both members of each pair. The smaller figures were of the
same area as those of the preceding series; in the larger figures this
area was doubled. Only one member of each pair is represented in the
diagrams of this and the next series.

In a third series brightness was the variant, one member of each pair
being white and the other gray (Bradley's cool gray No. 2). All other
conditions were for both figures the same.

In still another series strips of granite-gray cardboard half a
centimeter wide were cut out and pasted on black cards, some in
straight and some in broken lines, but all of the same total length
(10 cm.). These were exposed under the same general conditions as
those which have already been described, and were intended to show the
relative effects of the two sorts of lines.


TABLE I.

           1        2        3        4        5      Totals.  Averages.
         L   R    L   R    L   R    L   R    L   R    L    R    L     R
     I. 45  45   25  29   27  27   31  24   36  20   164  145  32.8  29
    II. 20  25   28  28   28  19   31  31   28  14   135  117  27    23.5
   III. 11  12   17  28    0   7    0  15   27  23    55   85  11    17
    IV.  7   6   47  22   17  21   17  45   31  30   119  124  23.8  24.8
     V. 27  33   46  36   40  31   44  31   26  35   183  165  36.6  33.2
    VI. 11  14   32  29   34  21   14  35    0  46    91  145  18.2  29
   VII. 36  33   30  30   50  50   22  22   52  52   190  187  38    37.4
  VIII. 41  44   33  33   45  45   34  44   37  28   190  194  38    38.8
    IX. 45  45   39  46   42  47   47  47   44  44   217  229  43.4  45.8
     X. 40  39   24  25   19  21   21  23   18  25   122  133  24.4  26.6
    XI. 51  53   52  50   42  42   42  42   42  42   229  229  45.8  45.8

       334 349  373 356  344 331  303 359  341 359  1695 1754  30.8 31.9

    The Arabic numerals at the head of the columns refer, in every
    table, to the corresponding numerals designating the objects
    in the diagram accompanying the table.

    _L_: left-hand object.
    _R_: right-hand object.

    The Roman numerals (_I_ to _XI_) indicate the different
    subjects. The same subjects appear in all the experiments, and
    under the same designation. Two of the subjects, _IV_ and
    _VIII_, are women.

    The numbers under _L_ and _R_ denote the number of seconds
    during which the left-hand image and the right-hand image,
    respectively, were present in the period of introspection (60
    seconds).

    General average: _L_, 30.8 sec.; _R_, 31.9 sec.


[Illustration: FIG. 1.]


_Series No. 1._--For the purpose of obtaining something that might
serve as a standard of comparison, a series of observations was made
in which the members of every pair were exact duplicates of each
other, and were presented under exactly the same conditions, spatial
position of course excepted. The records of these observations are for
convenience placed first as Table I.

In treating the facts recorded in the accompanying tables as phenomena
of inhibition no assumption is implied, it may be well to repeat, that
the ideational images are forces struggling with each other for
mastery. Nor is it implied, on the other hand, that they are wholly
unconditioned facts, unrelated to any phenomena in which we are
accustomed to see the expression of energy. Inhibition is meaningless
save as an implication of power lodged somewhere. The implication is
that these changes are conditioned and systematic, and that among the
conditions of our ideas, if not among the ideas themselves, power is
exerted and an inferior yields to a superior force. Such force, in
accordance with our general presupposition, must be neural or
cerebral. Even mental inhibition, therefore, must ultimately refer to
the physical conditions of the psychical fact. But the reference, to
have any scientific value, must be made as definite as the case will
allow. We must at least show what are the conditions under which a
state of consciousness which might otherwise occur does not occur.
When such conditions are pointed out, and then only, we have a case of
what has been called psychical inhibition; and we are justified in
calling it inhibition because these are precisely the conditions under
which physiological inhibition may properly be inferred. And, we may
add, in order that the conditions may be intelligibly stated and
compared they must be referable to some objective, cognizable fact.
Here the accessible facts, the experiential data, to which the
psychical changes observed and the cerebral changes assumed may both
be referred, are visual objects, namely, the figures already
described.

What may occur when these objects are precisely alike, and are seen
under conditions in all respects alike except as to spatial position,
is indicated in Table I. The general average shows that the image
referred to the left-hand object was seen some 30 seconds per minute;
that referred to the right-hand image, some 31 seconds. Sometimes
neither image was present, sometimes both were reported present
together, and the time when both were reported present is included in
the account. In this series it appears, on the whole, that each image
has about the same chance in the ideational rivalry, with a slight
preponderance in favor of the right. Individual variations, which may
be seen at a glance by inspection of the averages, show an occasional
preponderance in favor of the left. But the tendency is, in most
cases, towards what we may call right-handed ideation.

_Series No. II._--In the second series (Table II.) we find that, other
things being equal, _an increase in the relative complexity of the
outline favors the return of the image to consciousness_. Including
the time when both images were reported present at once, the simpler
appears but 27 seconds per minute as against 34 seconds for the more
complex. No attempt was made to arrange the figures on any regularly
increasing scale of complexity so as to reach quantitative results.
The experiment was tentative merely.


TABLE II.

              1            2             3             4
          S     C       S     C       S     C       S      C
     I.  21.5  23.5    14.5  35      22.5  21.5    15     27
    II.  35.5  21.5    32.5  48      32    33.5    32.5  21.5
   III.  27.5  39      20.5  47.5    24.5  46.5     8    22.5
    IV.  31.5  26.5    38    23.5    34.5  22      24    29.5
     V.  48    50      48    39.5    41.5  51.5    51    47.5
    VI.  11.5  35      26.5  28.5    21    33      29    17
   VII.  29.5  35      47    47      10.5  52      29.5  33.5
  VIII.  12.5  41      32    28.5    13    26.5    17    41.5
    IX.  10.5  25.5    27.5  34.5    14.5  44      33    44.5
     X.  24    25.5    20    23      16.5  28      23    21
    XI.  46    46.5    31.5  53.5    18    53.5    27    50.5

        298   369     338   408.5   248.5  412    289   356

                5              6             7               Averages.
          S     C       S     C       S      C              S      C
     I.  20.5  21      14.5  27      7.5    37.5          16.57  27.50
    II.  31.5  32      50    45.5    49.5   39.5          37.64  34.50
   III.  19.5  32.5    13    31      29     18            20.28  33.85
    IV.  40.5  46.5    27    30.5    26     32            31.64  30.07
     V.  47.5  47.5    50.5  48.5    38     38            46.35  46.07
    VI.  14.5  29      14    33      21     28.5          19.64  29.14
   VII.  25.5  43      42.5  30      28     41.5          30.35  40.28
  VIII.   8    34      24    27      33     14.5          19.92  30.42
    IX.  41.5  27      29.5  27.5    29.5   28            26.57  33.00
     X.  10.5  36.5    17    27      18     25            18.42  26.57
    XI.  21.5  53.5    40.5  43.5    30     45            30.64  49.42

        281   402.5   322.5 370.5   309.5  347.5          27.10  34.62

    _S:_ Outline simple.

    _C:_ Outline complex.

    In this and the following tables the numbers in the body of
    the columns represent, in each case, the combined result of
    two observations, in one of which the simpler figure was to
    the left, in the other the more complex. The figures were
    transposed in order to eliminate any possible space error.

    General average: _S_, 27.10 sec.; _C_, 34.62 sec.


Can anything be said, based on the reports, by way of explanation of
the advantage which complexity gives? In the first place, the attitude
of the subject towards his image seems to have been much the same as
his attitude towards an external object: to his observation the image
became, in fact, an object. "When the image was gone," says one, "my
eyes seemed to be in search of something." And occasionally the one
ideated object was felt to exert an influence over the other. "The
complex seemed to affect the form of the simpler figure." "It seemed
that the complex actually had the effect of diminishing the size of
the simpler figure." From time to time the images varied, too, in
distinctness, just as the objects of perception vary, and the superior
distinctness of the more complex was frequently noted by the subjects.
Now the importance of the boundary line in perception is well
understood. It seems to have a corresponding importance here. "What I
notice more in the simple figure," says one observer, "is the mass; in
the complex, the outline." "The simple seemed to lose its form," says
another, "the complex did not; the jagged edge was very distinct." And
it is not improbable, in view of the reports, that irregularities
involving change of direction and increase in extent of outline
contributed mainly to the greater persistence of the more complicated
image, the 'mass' being in both figures approximately the same. Nor
did the advantage of the broken line escape the notice of the subject.
"I found myself," is the comment of one, "following the contour of the
star--exploring. The circle I could go around in a twinkle." Again,
"the points entered the field before the rest of the figure." And
again, "the angle is the last to fade away."

[Illustration: FIG. 2.]

Now this mental exploration involves, of course, changes in the
direction of the attention corresponding in some way to changes in the
direction of the lines. Does this shifting of the attention involve
ideated movements? There can be little doubt that it does. "I felt an
impulse," says one, "to turn in the direction of the image seen." And
the unconscious actual movements, particularly those of the eyes,
which are associated with ideated movements, took place so often that
it is hard to believe they were ever wholly excluded. Such movements,
being slight and automatically executed, were not at first noticed.
The subjects were directed, in fact, to attend in all cases primarily
to the appearance and disappearance of the images, and it was only
after repeated observations and questions were put, that they became
aware of associated movements, and were able, at the close of an
observation, to describe them. After that, it became a common report
that the eyes followed the attention. And as we must assume some
central influence as the cause of this movement, which while the eyes
were closed could have no reflex relation to the stimulus of light, we
must impute it to the character of the ideas, or to their physical
substrates.

The idea, or, as we may call it, in view of the attitude of the
subject, the internal sensory impression, thus seems to bear a double
aspect. It is, in the cases noted, at once sensory and motor, or at
any rate involves motor elements. And the effect of the activity of
such motor elements is both to increase the distinctness of the image
and to prolong the duration of the process by which it is apprehended.
The sensory process thus stands in intimate dependence on the motor.
Nor would failure to move the eyes or any other organ with the
movement of attention, if established, be conclusive as against the
presence of motor elements. A motor impulse or idea does not always
result in apparent peripheral movement. In the suppressed speech,
which is the common language of thought, the possibility of incipient
or incomplete motor innervations is well recognized. But where the
peripheral movement actually occurs it must be accounted for. And as
the cause here must be central, it seems reasonable to impute it to
certain motor innervations which condition the shifting of the mental
attitude and may be incipient merely, but which, if completed, result
in the shifting of the eyes and the changes of bodily attitude which
accompany the scrutiny of an external object. And the sensory process
is, to some extent at least, conditioned by the motor, if, indeed, the
two are anything more than different aspects of one and the same
process.[7]

   [7] Cf. Münsterberg, H.: 'Grundzüge d. Psychologie,' Bd. I.,
   Leipzig, 1900, S. 532.

But where, now, the subject is occupied in mentally tracing the
boundaries of one of his two images he must inhibit all motor
innervations incompatible with the innervations which condition such
tracing: the rival process must cease, and the rival image will fade.
He may, it is true, include both images in the same mental sweep. The
boundary line is not the only possible line of movement. In fact, we
may regard this more comprehensive glance as equivalent to an
enlargement of the boundaries so as to include different mental
objects, instead of different parts of but one. Or, since the
delimitation of our 'objects' varies with our attitude or aim, we may
call it an enlargement of the object. But in any case the mental
tracing of a particular boundary or particular spatial dimensions
seems to condition the sense of the corresponding content, and through
inhibition of inconsistent movements to inhibit the sense of a
different content. No measure of the span of consciousness can, of
course, be found in these reports. The movements of the attention are
subtle and swift, and there was nothing in the form of the experiments
to determine at any precise instant its actual scope. All we need
assume, therefore, when the images are said to be seen together, is
that neither has, for the time being, any advantage over the other in
drawing attention to itself. If in the complete observation, however,
any such advantage appears, we may treat it as a case of inhibition.
By definition, an idea which assumes a place in consciousness which
but for itself, as experiment indicates, another might occupy,
inhibits the other.

[Illustration: FIG. 3.]


TABLE III.

            1           2           3           4           5           6
         S     L     S     L     S     L     S     L     S     L     S    L
     I. 22    24    19.5  23    20    26    21.5  21    21    26    18   31
    II. 31    39    31.5  36    15    32.5  11    22.5  13.5  24.5   7.5 23
   III. 10.5  43.5  12    21.5  13    14.5  19    10.5  18.5  30.5   7   18.5
    IV. 34.5  29.5  29.5  24    40.5  33    30.5  32.5  15    30    26   30
     V. 31.5  30    42    45    39    51    47    49.5  41    37    46   45
    VI. 22    20    20.5  22    23.5  22    25    16    24    20    22   25.5
   VII. 53.5  53.5  23.5  23.5  47.5  47.5  51    52    52.5  53    51   52
  VIII. 34    40.5  23    29    21    22    22    37.5  34.5  35    27.5 28
    IX. 19.5  45    19.5  46    22    23.5  23.5  48    26    45.5  19   44.5
     X. 16    30.5  12    35    21    24.5   8.5  41    15.5  33    19   28
    XI. 38.5  36.5  21    48.5  30    54.5  31    55.5  32    54    12   50

       313   392   254   353.5 292.5 381.5 290   386   293.5 388.5 255  375.5

            7           8           9          10             Averages
         S     L     S     L     S     L     S     L          S      L
     I. 20.5  31.5  21.5  28.5  22.5  28    22.5  26        20.90  26.50
    II. 14.5  17.5  19    20    11     4.5   7    30.5      16.10  25.00
   III. 10    22     8.5  26    17    16     8    16        12.35  21.90
    IV. 27.5  28.5  35    30.5  23.5  46    27.5  49.5      28.95  33.35
     V. 40.5  35    24.5  22.5  21    31    21.5  21.5      35.40  36.75
    VI. 22.5  18.5  11.5  21    20    27    22.5  24        21.35  21.60
   VII. 44.5  46.5  52    51    33.5  49    39.5  50.5      44.85  47.85
  VIII. 19.5  20    21    27    19.5  27.5  18.5  22.5      24.05  29.60
    IX. 18.5  46    13    42    20    42    18.5  43        19.95  44.90
     X. 18.5  24    20.5  21    20.5  22    18.5  28.5      17.00  28.75
    XI. 21    49    32    53.5  38    53.5  34.5  46.5      29.00  50.15

       257.5 338.5 258.5 343   246.5 346.5 238.5 358.5      24.54  33.30

    _L_: large.     _S_: small.

    General average, _S_, 24.54 sec.; _L_, 33.30 sec.


_Series No. III._--In the third series, where the variant is the
extent of (gray) surface exposed, the preponderance is in favor of the
image corresponding to the larger object. This shows an appearance of
some 33 seconds per minute as against 24 for the smaller (Table III.).
Here the most obvious thing in the reports, aside from the relative
durations, is the greater vividness of the favored image. Something,
no doubt, is due to the greater length of boundary line and other
spatial dimensions involved in the greater size. And it is this
superiority, and the ampler movements which it implies, which were
probably felt by the subject who reports 'a feeling of expansion in
the eye which corresponds to the larger image and of contraction in
the other.' But the more general comment is as to the greater
vividness of the larger image. "The larger images seem brighter
whichever side they are on." "The larger is a little more distinct, as
if it were nearer to me." "Large much more vivid than small." Such are
the reports which run through the series. And they point, undoubtedly,
to a cumulative effect, corresponding to a well-known effect in
sensation, in virtue of which greater extension may become the
equivalent of greater intensity. In other words, the larger image made
the stronger impression. Now in external perception the stronger
impression tends to hold the attention more securely; that is, it is
more effective in producing those adjustments of the sensory organs
which perceptive attention implies. So here what was noticed as the
superior brightness and distinctness of the larger image may be
supposed to imply some advantage in the latter in securing those
adjustments of the mental attitude which were favorable to the
apprehension of that image. Advantage means here, again, in part at
least, if the considerations we have urged are sound, inhibition of
those motor processes which would tend to turn attention to a rival.
And here, again, the adjustment may reach no external organ. An
incipient innervation, which is all that we need assume as the
condition of a change of mental attitude, would suffice to block, or
at least to hamper, inconsistent innervations no more complete than
itself.

[Illustration: Fig. 4.]


TABLE IV.

              1            2            3            4
           G     W      G     W      G     W      G     W
     I.   15.5  28.5   21.5  32.5   20    33     21    28.5
    II.   39.5  23     22.5  22.5   19    20.5   35.5  17.5
   III.   13.5  12.5   32     4.5    8.5  10     11.5  11.5
    IV.   30    33.5   38    36.5   36    39.5   37.5  13.5
     V.   33.5  32.5   34.5  32     33    35     45    36.5
    VI.   15    22     21    21     18.5  22     12    22
   VII.   53.5  50     43    46     54.5  55     56    56
  VIII.   15.5  24.5   24    25     20    13     16.5  21
    IX.   17.5  44      9.5  46     18.5  43.5   16    42
     X.   25.5  19     29.5  19     21    20.5   23.5  18
    XI.   35    42.5   13    29.5   18.5  46     16    38
         294   332    288.5 314.5  267.5 338    290.5 304.5

              5             6          7             8
           G     W      G     W      G     W      G     W
     I.   24    26.5   23.5  25     19.5  30.5   21    29
    II.   21    29.5   20    18.5   29    16.5   28.5  14
   III.   20.5   8.5   11    11.5   10    14     23    16.5
    IV.   39.5  28.5   34.5  22.5   23    30.5   33.5  18
     V.   45    53     48    51     45    29     32.5  34.5
    VI.   21.5  28     18    32     20.5  19     21.5  18
   VII.   54.5  56     54.5  54.5   45    46     49    49
  VIII.   24    26.5   23.5  22.5   24    17.5   31    31.5
    IX.   16    44     14    43.5    9    43.5   13    44.5
     X.   24.5  18     24    21.5   25.5  24     22    22.5
    XI.   20.5   8.5   15    36.5   33    23     34    29
         311   327    286   339    283.5 293.5  309   306.5

              9            10           11            12        Averages.
           G     W       G     W      G     W     G     W        G      W
     I.   25    25.5   22.5  21     25    26.5   27    21.5   22.95    27.33
    II.   20    25     15    20     29    32     13.5  20     24.37    21.58
   III.   12    20     12.5  17.5   10.5  21      3    23     14.00    14.25
    IV.   33    19.5   35.5  28     21.5  34.5   25.5  26.5   32.29    27.58
     V.   51    50     35    30.5   40.5  54.5   45.5  52.5   40.70    40.91
    VI.   13    29.5   25    33.5   28.5  23     23.5  27.5   19.83    24.79
   VII.   46.5  39.5   38.5  44.5   43.5  47.5   42.5  34.5   48.41    48.20
  VIII.   17.5  25.5   22    15.5   21    29     22.5  21.5   21.79    22.75
    IX.   13    43.5   12.5  41.5   15    42     11    40     13.75    43.16
     X.   24    24     27    19     25    21.5   23.5  23.5   24.58    20.87
    XI.   13.5  49      2.5  43     14    34     23    22     19.83    33.41
         268.5 351    248   314    273.5 365.5  260.5 312.5   25.61    29.53

   _G:_ Gray.            _W:_ White.

   General average: _G_, 25.61 sec.; _W_, 29.53 sec.


_Series No. IV._--This and the next following series do not suggest
much that differs in principle from what has been stated already. It
should be noted, however, that in the white-gray series (Table IV.)
the persistence of the gray in ideation surprised the subjects
themselves, who confessed to an expectation that the white would
assert itself as affectively in ideation as in perception. But it is
not improbable that affective or æsthetic elements contributed to the
result, which shows as high a figure as 25 seconds for the gray as
against 29 for the white. One subject indeed (IV.) found the gray
restful, and gives accordingly an individual average of 32 for the
gray as against 27 for the white. More than one subject, in fact,
records a slight advantage in favor of the gray. And if we must admit
the possibility of a subjective interest, it seems not unlikely that a
bald blank space, constituting one extreme of the white-black series,
should be poorer in suggestion and perhaps more fatiguing than
intermediate members lying nearer to the general tone of the ordinary
visual field. Probably the true function of the brightness quality in
favoring ideation would be better shown by a comparison of different
grays. The general average shows, it is true, a decided preponderance
in favor of the white, but the individual variations prove it would be
unsafe to conclude directly, without experimental test, from the laws
of perception to the laws of ideation.


_Series No. V._--The fifth series, which was suggested by the second,
presents the problem of the lines in greater simplicity than the
second; and, unlike the earlier series, it shows in all the individual
averages the same sort of preponderance as is shown in the general
average (straight line, 31; broken line, 38). The footings of the
columns, moreover, show an aggregate in favor of the broken line in
the case of every pair of lines that were exposed together. The
results in this case may therefore be regarded as cleaner and more
satisfactory than those reached before, and come nearer, one may say,
to the expression of a general law. The theoretical interpretation,
however, would be in both cases the same.

[Illustration: FIG. 5.]


TABLE V.

             1         2          3          4          5           6
          L    A     L    A     L    A     L    A     L     A     L    A
     I.  28   26.5  24.5 29.5  25   28    26   28.5  26    29.5  25.5 29.5
    II.  35   41.5  42   34.5  31.5 47.5  53   50.5  52    52    48   48
   III.  16.5 19.5  24   29    41   29.5  35.5 29    21    40    39   40
    IV.  40   41.5  37   45    32.5 45.5  36.5 43.5  33.5  38    36.5 43.5
     V.  49   53    45   47    45.5 36.5  32.5 51    37    46    40   51
    VI.  18   31.5  16   45    22.5 30.5  25   25    24.5  37    25   22
   VII.  43   39.5  52   54.5  52.5 53.5  51   54.5  40.5  55    48   48.5
  VIII.  23   23    27   29.5  38   40    34.5 32    23    37    42   38.5
    IX.  23   48    48   47.5  35   46.5  48   35    28.5  48    46.5 34.5
     X.  18   33    19.5 31.5  20.5 30    22   29.5  16.5  35.5  19.5 33
    XI.  22.5 33.5  18   41    26   23    19   35.5   5    38     7   50.5

        316  390.5 353  434   370  410.5 383  414   307.5 456   377   439

            Averages.
          L         A
     I. 25.83     28.58
    II. 43.58     45.66
   III. 29.50     31.16
    IV. 36.00     42.83
     V. 41.50     47.41
    VI. 21.83     31.83
   VII. 47.83     50.91
  VIII. 31.25     33.33
    IX. 38.16     43.25
     X. 19.33     32.08
    XI. 16.25     36.91

        31.91     38.54

    _L_: Line (straight line).     _A_: Angle (broken line).

    General average: _L_, 31.91 sec.; _A_, 38.54 sec.


TABLE VI.

            1           2           3           4           5          6
         P     M     P     M     P     M     P     M     P     M    P     M
     I. 22    32.5  23.5  32    23.5  32    22.5  32.5  23.5  31.5 21    39
    II. 24.5  32.5  31.5  49.5  32    39    36    36    33.5  42   28.5  35
   III.  8.5  23.5   0    36     0    31.5  11.5   5.5   8.5  14    3.5   8.5
    IV. 30    49.5  30.5  42    24    48    27.5  44    28    40.5  43.5 34.5
     V. 55.5  55.5  54.5  54.5  46.5  53    34    36    41.5  47    31   35.5
    VI. 19.5  22.5  19.5  28    19.5  28.5  26.5  27.5  24.5  29.5  18.5 36
   VII. 45    56.5  47.5  55.5  40.5  40    48    54    33.5  50    41   42.5
  VIII. 19.5  24     0    40    27.5  20.5  13.5  23    16    25    23   34.5
    IX. 28    49.5  26.5  48.5  27.5  45    18    45    21.5  48.5  42.5 44.5
     X.  8    43.5  22    29     8.5  43.5   9.5  42.5  16    35    12.5 40.5
    XI.  5.5  42.5   7.5  35.5  16.5  35.5   7.5  41    10    41.5   8   32.5

       24.18 39.27 23.91 40.95 24.18 37.86 23.14 35.18 23.32 36.77 24.82 34.82

     Indiv. Aver.
           P       M
     I. 22.666  33.250
    II. 31.000  39.000
   III.  5.333  19.833
    IV. 30.583  43.083
     V. 43.833  46.916
    VI. 21.333  28.666
   VII. 42.583  49.750
  VIII. 16.583  27.833
    IX. 27.333  46.833
     X. 12.750  39.000
    XI.  9.166  38.083

        23.92   37.48

   _P_: Plain.            _M_: Marked.

   General average: Plain, 23.92 sec.; Marked, 37.48 sec.


Series No. VI._--Both the figures in each pair of this series were of
the same material (granite-gray cardboard) and of the same area and
outline, but the content of one of the two was varied with dark lines
for the most part concentric with the periphery.

The advantage on the side of the figures with a varied content is
marked, the general averages showing a greater difference than is
shown in any of the tables so far considered. And the advantage
appears on the same side both in the individual averages and in the
averages for the different pairs as shown at the foot of the columns.
There can be little doubt, accordingly, that we have here the
expression of a general law.

For the meaning of this law we may consult the notes of the subjects:
'The plain figure became a mere amorphous mass;' 'the inner lines
reinforce the shape, for while previously the number of points in this
star has increased (in ideation), here the number is fixed, and fixed
correctly;' 'my attention traversed the lines of the content, and
seemed to be held by them;' 'the variety of the marked objects was
felt as more interesting;' 'the attention was more active when
considering the marked figures, passing from point to point of the
figure;' 'the surface of the plain figure was attended to as a whole
or mass, without conscious activity;' 'in the plain figure I thought
of the gray, in the marked figure I thought of the lines;' 'part of
the plain figure tended to have lines.'

The part played by the motor elements previously referred to in
sustaining attention and prolonging (internal) sensation is here
unmistakable. We have further evidence, too, of the value of the line
in defining and strengthening the mental attitude. In a mass of
homogeneous elements such as is presented by a uniform gray surface,
the attention is equally engaged by all and definitely held by none.
Monotony therefore means dullness. And the inhibition of incompatible
attitudes being as weak and uncertain as the attitudes actually but
loosely assumed, the latter are readily displaced, and the sensation
to which they correspond as readily disappears. Hence the greater
interest excited by the lined figures. The lines give definiteness and
direction to the attention, and as definitely inhibit incompatible
attitudes. And the shutting out of the latter by the spontaneous
activity of the mind means that it is absorbed or interested in its
present occupation.


TABLE VII.

             1           2           3           4           5           6
          5    10     5    10     5    10     5    10     5    10     5    10
     I. 29.5  23    24.5  21.5  27    18.5  28    26    27    20    25    29.5
    II. 25.5  21    32.5  42.5  19.5  33    27    33.5  26    32    20    28.5
   III.  4.5  18.5  12.5   5.5   0     3.5   7.5  11    10.5  18.5   0     7
    IV. 33    31.5  28    32    42    44    25    45    38.5  43    41    36.5
     V. 35    40.5  35    52.5  28    49.5  43    31    42.5  29    47.5  50.5
    VI. 10.5  34.5  10.5  34.5  23    15    26    26.5  22    27    19.5  34.5
   VII. 27    42    28.5  19    31.5  49    39    45.5  28.5  50.5  49.5  51.5
  VIII. 13.5  21.5  19    15    21.5  18    23    22.5  19.5  18    24.5  21.5
    IX. 33    43.5  36    37.5  35    40    26    45    31.5  44    21.5  43.5
     X. 20.5  23    22.5  23    23    23.5  22    27.5  21.5  29    21    34.5
    XI. 13.5  29    32    16.5   9.5  36.5  40.5   8.5  39.5   8.5  17.5  30.5

        22.32 31.50 25.55 27.23 23.64 30.05 27.91 29.27 27.91 29.05 26.09 33.45

             7           8           9          10          11          12
          5    10     5    10     5    10     5    10     5    10     5    10
     I. 22.5  29    27.5  25.5  26    22    22.5  27.5  25.5  25    22    28
    II. 29    37.5  32.5  28    34    32    26    23    30.5  28    25.5  23
   III. 20.5   8.5  12    16.5  21     9    32     3    21.5  15     8    22
    IV. 31    26    39.5  41.5  37    29.5  28.5  37    36.5  30.5  33    31.5
     V. 38    34    39    46.5  54    40    32.5  46    43.5  46    36.5  50.5
    VI. 30    17    13    25    34.5  26.5  20.5  27    27    35    27.5  33
   VII. 55.5  50    42.5  28    50.5  15.5  49    17.5  43.5  29.5  44    26.5
  VIII. 16.5  21.5  18    17    17.5  21.5  21    22.5  21.5  23.5  23    27.5
    IX. 41    46    45.5  43.5  46.5  33    39    37.5  32    35    33.5  40
     X. 24.5  28.5  26.5  24    28.5  25.5  25.5  25    22    30    24    23.5
    XI. 19.5  26.5  14    30    42.5   2.5  21.5  30    22.5  33    25.5  24

       29.82  29.50 28.18 29.59 35.64 23.36 28.91 26.91 29.64 30.05 27.50 29.96

          Indiv. Aver.
           5       10
     I. 25.58     24.62
    II. 27.33     30.16
   III. 12.50     11.50
    IV. 34.41     35.66
     V. 39.54     43.00
    VI. 22.00     27.95
   VII. 40.75     35.37
  VIII. 19.87     20.83
    IX. 35.04     40.70
     X. 23.45     26.41
    XI. 24.83     22.95

        27.75     29.15

    5: refers to object exposed 5 seconds.
   10: refers to object exposed 10 seconds.

   General average: (5), 27.75 sec.; (10), 29.15 sec.


_Series No. VII._--The object of this series was to determine the
effect in ideation of exposing for unequal lengths of time the two
objects compared. The figures compared were of the same area and
outline, and were distinguished only by their color, one being red and
the other green. These colors were employed, after a preliminary test,
as showing, on the whole, to nearly equal advantage in the individual
choice of colors. The shorter exposure was five seconds and the longer
exposure ten seconds. The color that was to be seen the longer time
was exposed first alone; after five seconds the other was exposed; and
then both were seen for five seconds together, so that neither might
have the advantage of the more recent impression. The two colors were
regularly alternated, and in one half of the series the longer
exposure was to the right, in the other half to the left. The extra
five seconds were thus in each case at the beginning of the
experiment.

The general averages show only a slight advantage in favor of the
color which was exposed the longer time, namely, 29.15 seconds, as
against 27.75 seconds. It is not easy to believe that the advantage of
sole occupancy of the visual field for five seconds, without any
offsetting disadvantage in the next five seconds, should have so
slight an effect on the course of ideation. And it is not improbable
that there was an offsetting disadvantage. In the presence of color
the subject can scarcely remain in the attitude of quiet curiosity
which it is easy to maintain in the observation of colorless objects.
A positive interest is excited. And the appearance of a new color in
the field when there is another color there already seems to be
capable of exciting, by a sort of successive contrast different from
that ordinarily described, an interest which is the stronger from the
fact that the subject has already been interested in a different
color. That is to say, the transition from color to color (only red
and green were employed) seems to be more impressive than the
transition from black to color. And, under the conditions of the
experiment, the advantage of this more impressive transition lay
always with the color which was exposed the shorter time.

Judging from the introspective notes, the outline seems to suffer, in
competition with a colored content, some loss of power to carry the
attention and maintain its place in the ideation. "The colors tend to
diffuse themselves, ignoring the boundary," says one. "The images fade
from the periphery toward the center," says another. On the other
hand, one of the subjects finds that when both images are present the
color tends to fade out. This may perhaps be explained by the remark
of another subject to the effect that there is an alternate shifting
of the attention when both images are present. An attitude of
continued and definite change, we may suppose, is one in which the
color interest must yield to the interest in boundaries and definite
spatial relations.

Other interesting facts come out in the notes. One subject finds the
ideated plane farther away than the objective plane; another conceives
the two as coinciding. The movement of the eyes is by this time
distinctly perceived by the subject. The reports run as follows:
'Eye-movements seem to follow the changes in ideation;' 'I find my
eyes already directed, when an image is ideated, to the corresponding
side, and am sometimes conscious of the movement, but the movement is
not intended or willed;' 'in ideating any particular color I find my
attention almost always directed to the side on which the
corresponding object was seen.' This last observation seems to be true
for the experience of every subject, and, generally speaking, the
images occupy the same relative positions as the objects: the image of
the right object is seen to the right, that of the left object to the
left, and the space between the two remains tolerably constant,
especially for the full-faced figures.

This fact suggested a means of eliminating the disturbing influence of
color, and its contrasts and surprises, by the substitution of gray
figures identical in form and size and distinguished only by their
spatial position. The result appears in the table which follows
(VIII.).

_Series No. VIII._--The object of this experiment was the same as that
of No. VII. Granite-gray figures, however, were substituted, for the
reasons already assigned, in place of the red and green figures. And
here the effect of additional time in the exposure is distinctly
marked, the general averages showing 32.12 seconds for the image of
the object which was exposed 10 seconds, as against 25.42 seconds for
the other.


TABLE VIII.

         1           2           3           4           5       Indiv. Aver.
       5     10    5     10    5     10    5     10    5     10    5     10
   I. 26.5  27    24.5  30.5  26.5  28    27.5  27.5  26.5  29    26.3  28.4
  II. 32.5  38.5  27    36    29    28    17    14.5  37.5  27    28.6  28.8
  III. 4.5  13.5  11     1.5  10    11     7.5  14.5  12.5   8.5   9.1   9.8
  IV. 23.5  40.5  27.5  34    35.5  38    35    28    17    39    27.7  35.9
   V. 41    46    50    51.5  43    42.5  46    35.5  31.5  44    42.3  43.9
  VI.  7.5  27    18    25    21.5  25.5   7    44.5  33.5  19    17.5  28.2
VIII. 24.5  27    34.5  32    36.5  36    34.5  38.5  28    28.5  31.6  32.4
  IX. 17    46    25.5  47.5  44    47    40.5  47.5  48    48    35.0  47.2
   X. 20    29    21    26.5  25.5  24.5  27.5  22    19.5  23.5  22.7  25.1
  XI. 11    41.5   9.5  50     5.5  43.5  15.5  40.5  25.5  32    13.4  41.5
      20.80 33.60 24.85 33.45 27.70 32.40 25.80 31.30 27.95 29.85 25.42 32.12

    VII.--Absent.

     5: refers to object exposed 5 seconds.
    10: refers to object exposed 10 seconds.

    General average: (5), 25.42 sec.; (10), 32.12 sec.


The interpretation of this difference may be made in accordance with
the principles already laid down. The ideated and actual movements
which favor the recurrence and persistence of an idea are, on grounds
generally recognized in psychology, much more likely to occur and
repeat themselves when the corresponding movements, or the same
movements in completer form, have frequently been repeated in
observation of the corresponding object.


TABLE IX.

      1           2           3           4           5          Indiv. Aver.
      1st   2d    1st   2d    1st   2d    1st   2d    1st   2d    1st   2d
   I. 22.5  32.5  27    28    26.5  28    26.5  27.5  26    29    25.7  29.0
  II.  4.5  43     9    29     3.5  38     0    43    17    44.5   6.8  39.5
 III.  0    22     0    20.5   9.5  16.5   0    23.5   3.5   9.5   2.6  18.4
  IV.  0    31     1    35.5   4.5  39    16.5  32.5  16    20.5   7.6  31.7
   V. 24    52.5  41.5  40    12    53.5  22    55    22    50.5  24.3  50.3
 VII.  1.5  52     0    48     0    54.5   0    50.5   0    46.5   0.3  50.3
VIII. 12    26    10    27.5  11.5  23.5  13.5  28.5  15.5  20    12.5  25.1
  IX. 24    43.5  20    42    25    42.5  20.5  44.5  28    42.5  23.5  43.0
   X.  9    45.5  19.5  30    11    33    12    38    14.5  30    13.2  35.3
  XI. 12.5  35    23.5  29.5   1    49     2    44    10.5  52     9.9  41.9
      11.00 38.30 15.15 33.00 10.45 37.75 11.30 38.70 15.30 34.50 12.64 36.45

    VI.--Absent.

    From this point on the place of Miss H. (IV.) is taken by Mr.
    R. The members in each pair of objects in this group were not
    exposed simultaneously.

    1st: refers to object first exposed.
    2d: refers to object last exposed.

    General average: 1st, 12.64 sec.: 2d, 36.45 sec.


What is here called ideated movement--by which is understood the idea
of a change in spatial relations which accompanies a shifting of the
attention or a change in the mental attitude, as distinguished from
the sense of movements actually executed--was recognized as such by
one of the subjects, who says: "When the two objects are before me I
am conscious of what seem to be images of movement, or ideated
movements, not actual movements." The same subject also finds the
image of the object which had the longer exposure not only more vivid
in the quality of the content, but more distinct in outline.


_Series No. IX._--In this experiment the objects, which were of
granite-gray cardboard, were exactly alike, but were exposed at
different times and places. After the first had been exposed five
seconds alone, it was covered by means of a sliding screen, and the
second was then exposed for the same length of time, the interval
between the two exposures being also five seconds. Two observations
were made with each pair, the first exposure being in one case to the
left and in the other case to the right. The object here was, of
course, to determine what, if any, advantage the more recent of the
two locally different impressions would have in the course of
ideation. The table shows that the image of the object last seen had
so far the advantage in the ideational rivalry that it remained in
consciousness, on the average, almost three times as long as the
other, the average being, for the first, 12.64 seconds; for the
second, 36.45 seconds. And both the individual averages and the
averages for the several pairs show, without exception, the same
general tendency.

The notes show, further, that the image of the figure first seen was
not only less persistent but relatively less vivid than the other,
though the latter was not invariably the case. One subject had 'an
impression that the images were farther apart' than in the series
where the exposure of the two objects was simultaneous, though the
distance between the objects was in all cases the same, the time
difference being, apparently, translated into spatial terms and added
to the spatial difference. The sort of antagonism which temporal
distinctions tend, under certain conditions, to set up between ideas
is illustrated by the remark of another subject, who reports that 'the
attention was fairly dragged by the respective images.' And the fact
of such antagonism, or incompatibility, is confirmed by the extremely
low figure which represents the average time when both images were
reported present at the same time. The two images, separated by
processes which the time interval implies, seem to be more entirely
incompatible and mutually inhibitory than the images of objects
simultaneously perceived. For not only does the advantage of a few
seconds give the fresher image a considerable preponderance in its
claim on the attention, but even the earlier image, after it has once
caught the attention, usually succeeds in shutting out the other from
a simultaneous view.


TABLE X.

          1           2           3           4           5      Indiv. Aver.
       V     H     V     H     V     H     V     H     V     H     V     H
   I. 27.5  27    26.5  28    30.5  24.5  27.5  28.5  26    25    27.60 26.60
  II. 45    43.5  37    40    35.5  28.5  19    15.5  30.5  30.5  33.40 31.60
 III. 19    21     0    10.5  19.5  19     9    15     4.5  16    10.40 16.30
  IV. 47.5  39    36    22.5  44.5  41.5  47.5  46    37    36    42.50 37.00
   V. 56.5  46.5  42.5  42.5  48    45.5  48.5  48.5  53    52    49.70 47.00
  VI. 31.5  28.5  30.5  30.5  22    34.5  34.5  28.5  25    26.5  28.70 29.70
 VII. 55    55    55    45.5  38    20    55.5  53.5  56    56    51.90 45.80
VIII. 39.5  47    23.5  23.5  19    18.5  26.5  26.5  26    20.5  26.90 27.20
  IX. 26.5  46    38    42.5  41    44    40.5  46.5  35.5  39    36.30 43.60
   X. 24.5  25    26    25    25.5  23    23.5  28.5  32.5  20.5  26.40 24.40
  XI. 52    52    56.5  54.5  48    49.5  45    47.5  51.5  47.5  50.60 50.20

      38.60 39.14 33.77 33.09 33.77 31.68 34.27 34.95 34.31 33.60 34.94 34.49

   _V_: Vertical.           _H_: Horizontal.

   General average: Vertical, 34.94 sec.; Horizontal, 34.49 sec.


_Series No. X._--The objects used in this experiment were straight
lines, two strips of granite-gray cardboard, each ten centimeters long
and half a centimeter wide, the one being vertical and the other
horizontal. These were pasted on black cards and exposed in alternate
positions, each appearing once to the right and once to the left. The
figures in the columns represent in each case the combined result of
two such observations.

The experiments with these lines were continued at intervals through
a number of weeks, each individual average representing the result of
ten observations, or of five pairs of exposures with alternating
objects.

The striking feature in the observations is the uniformity of the
results as they appear in the general averages and in the averages for
each pair as shown at the foot of the columns. There is some variation
in the individual tendencies, as shown by the individual averages. But
the general average for this group of subjects shows a difference of
less than half a second per minute, and that difference is in favor of
the vertical line.

This series will serve a double purpose. It shows, in the first place,
that on the whole the vertical and the horizontal lines have a nearly
equal chance of recurrence in image or idea. It will serve, in the
second place, as a standard of comparison when we come to consider the
effect of variations in the position and direction of lines.


TABLE XI.

          1           2           3           4           5       Indiv. Av.
       F     O     F     O     F     O     F     O     F     O     F     O
   I. 24    31    26.5  28.5  27    29    22    33.5  27.5  28    25.4  30.0
  II. 53.5  50    52.5  52.5  56.5  55.5  43.5  43.5  56    51.5  52.4  50.6
 III.  3    21.5   4    20    11    17     3.5  27     0    20.5   4.3  21.2
  IV. 26.5  30    11    48.5  12.5  53    12    51    23    51    17.0  46.7
   V. 40.5  56.5  48    56    55.5  55.5  53    55.5  53.5  55.5  50.1  55.58
  VI. 27.5  40.5  23    31.5  24.5  32.5  31    29    27    33.5  26.6  33.4
 VII. 50.5  54    53.5  56.5  53.5  53.5  40.5  52    55    55    50.6  54.2
VIII.  1    33.5  11    27     5    32     7.5  39     4.5  36.5   5.8  33.6
  IX. 35.5  41.5  45.5  47    41.5  41.5  39    44.5  41    41.5  40.5  43.2
   X. 19    30.5  21.5  30.5  21    29.5  16    37.5  22.5  30.5  20.0  31.7
  XI. 11.5  52.5  18    51.5  14.5  50.5  23    50.5  15    52.5  16.4  51.5
      26.59 40.14 28.59 40.86 29.32 40.86 26.45 42.09 29.55 41.45 28.10 41.08

    _F_: Full-faced.         _O_: Outlined.

    General average: full-faced, 28.10 sec.; outlined, 41.08 sec.


_Series No. XI._--In this series full-faced figures were compared with
outline figures of the same dimensions and form. Material,
granite-gray cardboard. The area of the full-faced figures was the
same as that of the figures of similar character employed in the
various series, approximately 42 sq. cm.; the breadth of the lines in
the outline figures was half a centimeter. The objects in each pair
were exposed simultaneously, with the usual instructions to the
subject, namely, to regard each object directly, and to give to each
the same share of attention as to the other.

The form of the experiment was suggested by the results of earlier
experiments with lines. It will be remembered that the express
testimony of the subjects, confirmed by fair inference from the
tabulated record, was to the effect that lines show, in ideation as in
perception, both greater energy and clearer definition than surfaces.
By lines are meant, of course, not mathematical lines, but narrow
surfaces whose longer boundaries are closely parallel. To bring the
superior suggestiveness of the line to a direct test was the object of
this series. And the table fully substantiates the former conclusion.
For the outline figure we have a general average of 41.08 seconds per
minute, as against 28.10 seconds for the full-faced figure.

The notes here may be quoted as corroborative of previous statements.
"I notice," says one, "a tendency of the color in the full-faced
figure to spread over the background"--a remark which bears out what
has been said of the relative vagueness of the subjective processes
excited by a broad homogeneous surface. To this may be added: "The
full-faced figures became finally less distinct than the linear, and
faded from the outside in;" "the areal (full-faced) figure gradually
faded away, while the linear remained." Another comment runs: "I feel
the left (full-faced) striving to come into consciousness, but failing
to arrive. Don't see it; feel it; and yet the feeling is connected
with the eyes." This comment, made, of course, after the close of an
observation, may serve as evidence of processes subsidiary to
ideation, and may be compared, in respect of the motor factors which
the 'striving' implies, with the preparatory stage which Binet found
to be an inseparable and essential part of any given (vocal) motor
reaction.[8]

   [8] Binet, A. et Henri, V.: _op. citat._


_Series No. XII._--Both the figures of each pair in this series were
linear, and presented the same extent of surface (granite-gray) with
the same length of line. In other words, both figures were constituted
of the same elements, and in both the corresponding lines ran in the
same direction; but the lines in the one were connected so as to form
a figure with a continuous boundary, while the lines of the other were
disconnected, _i.e._, did not inclose a space. The total length of
line in each object was twenty centimeters, the breadth of the lines
five millimeters. Both figures were arranged symmetrically with
respect to a perpendicular axis.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.]


TABLE XII.

          1           2           3           4           5       Indiv. Av.
       L     F     L     F     L     F     L     F     L     F     L     F
   I. 31.5  24    30    24.5  23.5  32    25.5  30.5  27    29.5  27.5  28.1
  II. 55    55    56    56    56    56    56.5  56.5  54    54    55.5  55.5
 III. 22     6    26.5   9.5  31.5   1.5  23     5.5  28.5   0    26.3   4.5
  IV. 31    15    46.5  20.5  52     9.5  49     6    55    18    46.7  13.8
   V. 56    54    56    56    56    56    56.5  56.5  55.5  55.5  56.0  55.6
  VI. 33    30    34    39.5  31.5  29.5  26.5  32    26    31.5  30.2  32.5
 VII. 55.5  49.5  56.5  38    54.5  35    57.5  32.5  38    27    52.4  36.4
VIII. 26.5  15.5  21.5  13.5  25    17    25.5  21    15    13.5  22.7  16.1
  IX. 45.5  32.5  44.5  39    42.5  35.5  41.5  37.5  43    40.5  43.4  37.0
   X. 29.5  23    36.5  16    23    28.5  35.5  16.5  29    23    30.7  21.4
  XI. 52     8    49.5  19    45.5  25    43.5  21.5  15    31.5  41.1  21.0
      39.77 28.41 41.77 30.18 40.10 29.60 40.05 28.73 35.10 29.50 39.32 29.26

   L: Interrupted lines.
   F: Figure with continuous boundary. (Figure in outline.)

   General average: Lines, 39.32 sec.; figure, 29.26 sec.


The experiment was devised in further exploration of the effect of the
line in ideation. The result fully bears out, when read in the light
of the introspective notes, what has been said of the importance of
the motor element in ideation. It might have been supposed, in view of
the importance usually attached to unity or wholeness of impression in
arresting and holding the attention in external perception, that the
completed figure would have the more persistent image. The general
averages, however, stand as follows: Interrupted lines, 39.32 seconds
per minute; completed figure, 29.26 seconds per minute. The individual
averages show slight variations from the tendency expressed in these
figures, but the averages for the several pairs are all in harmony
with the general averages.

The notes furnish the key to the situation: "I felt that I was doing
more, and had more to do, when thinking of the broken lines." "The
broken figure seemed more difficult to get, but to attract attention;
continuous figure easy to grasp." "Felt more active when
contemplating the image of the broken figure." "In the broken figure I
had a feeling of jumping from line to line, and each line seemed to be
a separate figure; eye-movement very perceptible." The dominance of
the interrupted lines in ideation is evidently connected with the more
varied and energetic activity which they excited in the contemplating
mind. Apparently the attention cannot be held unless (paradoxical as
it may sound) it is kept moving about its object. Hence, a certain
degree of complexity in an object is necessary to sustain our interest
in it, if we exclude, as we must of course in these experiments,
extraneous grounds of interest. Doubtless there are limits to the
degree of complexity which we find interesting and which compels
attention. A mere confused or disorderly complex, wanting altogether
in unity, could hardly be expected to secure attention, if there is
any truth in the principle, already recognized, that the definite has
in ideation a distinct advantage over the vague. Here again the notes
suggest the method of interpretation. "The broken lines," says one,
"tended to come together, and to take the form of the continuous
figure." Another remarks: "The broken figure suggests a whole
connected figure; the continuous is complete, the broken wants to be."
In virtue of their power to excite and direct the activity of the
attention the interrupted lines seem to have been able to suggest the
unity which is wanting in them as they stand. "The broken lines," says
another, "seemed to run out and unite, and then to separate again"--a
remark which shows a state of brisk and highly suggestive activity in
the processes implied in attention to these lines. And a glance at the
diagram will show how readily the union of the broken lines may be
made. These were arranged symmetrically because the lines of the
completed figures were so arranged, in order to equalize as far as
possible whatever æsthetic advantage a symmetrical arrangement might
be supposed to secure.

It thus appears that, whatever the effect in ideation of unity in the
impression, the effect is much greater when we have complexity in
unity. The advantage of unity is undoubtedly the advantage which goes
with definiteness of impression, which implies definite excitations
and inhibitions, and that concentration of energy and intensity of
effect in which undirected activity is wanting. But a bare unity, it
appears, is less effective than a diversified unity. To what extent
this diversity may be carried we make no attempt to determine; but,
within the limits of our experiment, its value in the ideational
rivalry seems to be indisputable. And the results of the experiment
afford fresh proof of the importance of the motor element in internal
perception.


TABLE XIII.

          1           2           3           4           5       Indiv. Av.
       F     V     F     V     F     V     F     V     F     V     F     V
   I. 25    29    26    29    29.5  26.5  25.5  30    24.5  31    26.1  29.1
  II. 56    56    55    55    54    54.5  47.5  47.5  45    50    51.5  52.6
 III.  2.5   5.5   2.5   8.5   6.5   5    16.5   9.5  17    15     9.0   8.7
  IV. 48    48    31.5  31.5  31    46    51.5  51.5  35    52    39.4  45.8
   V. 54    54    56.5  52    56    56    56    56    54    56    55.3  54.8
  VI. 39    29    30    33.5  35.5  22.5  32.5  34    33.5  24.5  34.1  28.7
 VII. 46    55    54.5  46.5  46.5  50    49.5  54    47    46    48.7  50.3
VIII.  9    14.5  23    20.5  23.5  22    18    14.5  16    17    17.9  17.7
  IX. 43    43    46.5  46.5  45.5  45.5  43.5  43.5  46    47.5  44.9  45.2
   X. 28    26.5  21    29.5  26.5  26.5  21.5  31.5  25    29    24.4  28.6
  XI. 23.5  46    19.5  35.5  20    46    24    47.5  28.5  19.5  23.1  38.9
      34.00 36.95 33.27 35.27 34.05 36.41 35.09 38.14 33.77 35.23 34.03 36.40

   F: Figure (in outline).      V: Vertical lines.

   General average: Figure, 34.03 sec.; vertical lines, 36.40 sec.


_Series No. XIII._--In this series, also, both the figures of each
pair were constituted of the same elements; that is to say, both were
linear, and presented the same extent of surface (granite-gray), with
the same length of line, the total length of the lines in each figure
being twenty centimeters and the breadth of the lines being three
millimeters. But while the lines of one figure were connected so as to
form a continuous boundary, the lines of the other figure were all
vertical, with equal interspaces. And, as in the last preceding
series, the two figures were formed by a different but symmetrical
arrangement of the same lines.

As before, the advantage is on the side of the disconnected lines. In
this case, however, it is very slight, the general averages showing
34.03 seconds for the completed figure, as against 36.40 seconds for
the lines. This reduction in the difference of the averages is
probably to be explained by the reduced complexity in the arrangement
of the lines. So far as they are all parallel they would not be likely
to give rise to great diversity of movement, though one subject does,
indeed, speak of traversing them in all directions. In fact, the
completed figures show greater diversity of direction than the lines,
and in this respect might be supposed to have the advantage of the
lines. The notes suggest a reason why the lines should still prove the
more persistent in ideation. "The lines appealed to me as a group; I
tended always to throw a boundary around the lines," is the comment of
one of the subjects. From this point of view the lines would form a
figure with a content, and we have learned (see Series No. VI.) that a
space with a varied content is more effective in ideation than a
homogeneous space of the same extent and general character. And this
unity of the lines as a group was felt even where no complete boundary
line was distinctly suggested. "I did not throw a boundary around the
lines," says another subject, "but they had a kind of unity." It is
possible also that from the character of their arrangement the lines
reinforced each other by a kind of visual rhythm, a view which is
supported by the comments: 'The lines were a little plainer than the
figure;' 'figure shadowy, lives vivid;' 'the figure grew dimmer
towards the end, the lines retained their vividness.'

On the whole, however, the chances are very nearly equal in the two
cases for the recurrence of the image, and a comparison of this series
with Series No. XII. cannot leave much doubt that the greater
effectiveness of the lines in the latter is due to their greater
complexity. In view, therefore, of the fact that in both series the
objects are all linear, and that the two series differ in no material
respect but in the arrangement of the disconnected lines, the
circumstance that a reduction in the complexity of this arrangement is
attended by a very considerable reduction in the power of the lines to
recur in the image or idea is a striking confirmation of the soundness
of our previous interpretation.


_Series No. XIV._--In this series full-faced figures (granite-gray)
similar in character to those made use of in former experiments, were
employed. The objects were suspended by black silk threads, but while
one of them remained stationary during the exposure the other was
lowered through a distance of six and one half centimeters and was
then drawn up again. The object moved was first that on the right
hand, then that on the left. As the two objects in each case were
exactly alike, the comparative effect of motion and rest in the object
upon the persistence in consciousness of the corresponding image was
obtained. The result shows a distinct preponderance in favor of the
moved object, which has an average of 37.39 seconds per minute as
against 28.88 seconds for the stationary object. The averages for the
pairs, as seen at the foot of the columns, all run the same way, and
only one exception to the general tendency appears among the
individual averages.


TABLE XIV.

          1           2           3           4           5      Indiv. Av.
       S     M     S     M     S     M     S     M     S     M    S      M
   I. 22.5  28.5  25    30.5  24.5  28    28    27.5  25.5  31   25.1   29.6
  II. 47.5  55    53    42    48.5  53.5  34.5  39.5  49    52   46.5   48.4
 III.  3    18     7.5   8.5   0     7.5   0     3.5   0     4    2.1    8.3
  IV. 45    45    33.5  51.5  11    50.5  11    50     8    52.5  21.7  49.9
   V. 54.5  51    53.5  54.5  49    51    30.5  38.5  56    55    48.7  50.0
  VI. 21    32.5  26    33    29.5  37.5  30    35    30    36    27.3  34.8
 VII. 48    55    56.5  49    41.5  54.5  44.5  53    35.5  54    45.2  53.1
VIII. 10.5  20.5  20.5  25     6    33    12.5  29.5  19    18    13.7  25.2
  IX. 37.5  43.5  34.5  45    36    47.5  30    47.5  29    48.5  33.4  46.4
   X. 13    39.5  18    34    19    33.5  19    33    10.5  44    15.9  36.8
  XI. 17.5  43.5  47.5  32    27.5  36    46    16.5  52    16    38.1  28.8

      29.09 39.27 34.14 36.82 26.59 39.55 26.00 33.95 28.59 37.36 28.88 37.39

   S: Refers to figure left stationary.
   M: Refers to figure that was moved during exposure.

   General average: S, 28.88 sec.; M, 37.39 sec.


The effectiveness of a bright light or of a moving object in arresting
attention in external perception is well understood. And the general
testimony of the subjects in this experiment shows that it required
some effort, during the exposure, to give an equal share of attention
to the moving and the resting object. Table IV., however, which
contains the record of the observations in the white-gray series,
shows that we cannot carry over, unmodified, into the field of
ideation all the laws that obtain in the field of perception. The
result of the experiment, accordingly, could not be predicted with
certainty. But the course of ideation, in this case, seems to follow
the same general tendency as the course of perception: the resting
object labors under a great disadvantage. And if there is any force in
the claim that diversity and complexity in an object, with the
relatively greater subjective activity which they imply, tend to hold
the attention to the ideated object about which this activity is
employed, the result could hardly be other than it is. There can be no
question of the presence of a strong motor element where the object
attended to moves, and where the movement is imaged no less than the
qualities of the object. In fact, the object and its movement were
sometimes sharply distinguished. According to one subject, 'the image
was rather the image of the motion than of the object moving.' Again:
'The introspection was disturbed by the idea of motion; I did not get
a clear image of the moving object; imaged the motion rather than the
object.' And a subject, who on one occasion vainly searched the
ideational field for sixty seconds to find an object, reports: 'I had
a feeling of something going up and down, but no object.' Clearly an
important addition was made to the active processes implied in the
ideation of a resting object, and it would be singular if this added
activity carried with it no corresponding advantage in the ideational
rivalry. In one case the ideas of rest and of movement were curiously
associated in the same introspective act. "The figure which moved,"
says the subject, "was imaged as stationary, and yet the idea of
movement was distinctly present."

The reports as to the vividness of the rival images are somewhat
conflicting. Sometimes it is the moving object which was imaged with
the more vivid content, and sometimes the resting object. One report
runs: "The moving object had less color, but was more distinct in
outline than the stationary." Sometimes one of the positions of the
moving object was alone represented in the image, either the initial
position (on a level with the resting object) or a position lower
down. On the other hand, we read: "The image of the moved object
seemed at times a general image that reached clear down, sometimes
like a series of figures, and not very distinct; but sometimes the
series had very distinct outlines." In one case (the circle) the
image of the figure in its upper position remained, while the serial
repetitions referred to extended below. This, as might be supposed, is
the report of an exceptionally strong visualizer. In other cases the
object and its movements were not dissociated: "The moved object was
imaged as moving, and color and outline were retained." And again:
"Twice through the series I could see the image of the moving object
as it moved." "Image of moved object moved all the time."


TABLE XV.

          1           2           3           4           5     Indiv.  Av.
      Gray  Red  Gray  Yellow Gray Green  Gray  Blue Gray Violet Gray Colored.

   I. 26    29    27.5  28.5  26.5  29    21.5  27.5  27.5  26.5  25.8  28.1
  II. 35.5  36.5  45.5  53.5  53.5  53.5  53.5  53.5  55    55    48.6  50.4
 III.  0    11     2.5  19    10.5  16    17.5   8.5   0     9     6.1  12.7
  IV. 45    23.5   8    53.5  48    39    48    52    55.5  35    40.9  40.6
   V. 55.5  55.5  42    53    50    56    52.5  50    44.5  56.5  49.1  54.2
  VI. 22    33.5  29    36.5  28    43.5  26    37.5  39.5  29    28.9  36.0
 VII. 38.5  39    56    56    49.5  54.5  47    47    45.5  50    47.3  49.3
VIII. 15    10.5  15    19.5  23    21    19.5  24    20.5  25    18.6  20.0
  IX. 31.5  49    19    42.5  50    50    35.5  46    48    39    36.8  45.3
   X. 19    33    14.5  37    29.5  23    17    37.5  23    31    20.6  32.3
  XI. 11    49.5   8    51.5   9    43.5  35    43.5  24    47    17.4  47.0
      27.18 33.64 24.27 40.95 34.32 39.00 33.91 38.82 34.82 36.64 30.90 37.81

   General average: Gray, 30.90 sec.; colored, 37.81 sec.


_Series No. XV._--The figures in each pair of this series were
full-faced, and of the same shape and size, but one was gray and the
other colored, the gray being seen first to the left, and then to the
right. The colors used were of Prang's series (Gray, R., Y., G., B.,
V.). In No. 1 the figures were in the form of a six-pointed star, and
gray was compared with red. In No. 2 the figures were elliptical, and
gray was compared with yellow. In No. 3 a broad circular band of gray
was compared with the same figure in green. In No. 4 the figures were
kite-shaped, and gray was compared with blue. In No. 5 a circular
surface of gray was compared with a circular surface of violet. The
objects compared were exposed at the same time, under the usual
conditions.

As might perhaps be expected, the colored surfaces proved to be the
more persistent in ideation, showing a general average of 37.81
seconds per minute as against 30.90 seconds for the gray.

The distinctness of the process of color apprehension is reflected in
the notes: "In the colored images I find the color rather than the
form occupying my attention; the image seems like an area of color, as
though I were close to a wall and could not see the boundary;" and
then we have the significant addition, "yet I feel myself going about
in the colored area." Again: "In the gray the outline was more
distinct than in the colors; the color seems to come up as a shade,
and the outline does not come with it." Or again: "The gray has a more
sharply defined outline than the color." This superior definiteness in
outline of the gray figures is subject to exceptions, and one subject
reports 'the green outline more distinct than the gray.' And even so
brilliant a color as yellow did not always obscure the boundary: "The
yellow seems to burn into my head," says one of the subjects, "but the
outline was distinct." The reports in regard to this color (yellow)
are in fact rather striking, and are sometimes given in terms of
energy, as though the subject were distinctly conscious of an active
process (objectified) set up in the apprehension of this color. The
reports run: "The yellow has an expansive power; there seemed to be no
definite outline." "The yellow seemed to exert a power over the gray
to suppress it; its power was very strong; it seemed to be
aggressive."


TABLE XVI.

              1            2          3           4           5
           a      b     a     b     a     b     a     b     a     b
     I.    0      0     0     0     0     0     0     0     0     0
    II.   43     41    33    51    19    31    32    41    20    18
   III.    0      6     0     0     3    11    13    16     0     0
    IV.   56     28    23    35     0    11    48    56    35    25
     V.   56     55    44    44    57    30    39    32    34    30
    VI.   14      8    12    12    11     5    35    12     9     6
   VII.   52     54    56    56    51    47    56    57    47    26
  VIII.   15      0    18    21    24    39    26    10    23    21
    IX.   28     25    39    31    23    28    26    36    25    17
     X.    0      0     0     0     0     0     0     0     0     0
    XI.   52     45    41    48     7    39    50    36    48    22
          35.11  29.11 29.55 33.11 21.66 26.78 29.55 26.91 21.91 15.00


_Series No. XVI._--The course of experimentation having shown the
superior energy of lines, in comparison with surfaces, in stimulating,
directing, and holding the attention, a series of figures was devised
to test the question whether the direction of the lines would have any
effect upon the length of time during which _both_ images of a pair of
linear figures would be presented together. The materials used were
granite-gray strips half a centimeter wide. The letters (_a_) and
(_b_) at the heads of the columns refer to the same letters in the
diagram, and distinguish the different arrangements of the same pair
of objects. The figures in the body of the columns show only the
length of time during which both images were reported present in
consciousness together. At the foot of the columns are shown the
averages for each pair. No general averages are shown, as the problem
presented by each pair is peculiar to itself.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.]

The maximum is reached in No. 1_a_, where the angle has the arrowhead
form and each angle points to the other. It should be remarked that
the diagram is somewhat misleading in respect to the distance of the
figures, which in this as in the other experiments was 25 cm. The
figures therefore were far enough away from each other to be perceived
and imaged in individual distinctness. But the 'energy' of the lines,
especially where the lines united to form an acute angle, was often
sufficient to overcome the effect of this separation, and either to
bring the figures nearer together or to unite them into a single
object. The notes are very decisive in this regard. A few of them may
be cited: "The angles tended to join points." "The figures showed a
tendency to move in the direction of the apex." "The angles (2_a_)
united to form a cross." "When both figures (4_b_) were in mind I felt
disagreeable strains in the eyeballs; one figure led me to the right
and the other to the left." The effect of the last-named figures
(4_a_) seemed to be different from that of 1_a_ and 2_a_, though the
apex of each angle was turned to that of the other in each of the
three cases. "The two angles," says another subject, speaking of 4_a_,
"appeared antagonistic to each other." It will be observed that they
are less acute than the other angles referred to, and the confluent
lines of each figure are far less distinctly directed towards the
corresponding lines of the opposing figure, so that the attention, so
far as it is determined in direction by the lines, would be less
likely to be carried over from the one image to the other.

On the other hand, when the angles were turned away from each other
the legs of the angles in the two figures compared were brought into
closer relation, so that in 2_b_, for instance, the average is even
higher than in 2_a_. Similarly the average in 3_b_, an obtuse angle,
is higher than in 3_a_. The notes show that in such cases the
contrasted angles tended to close up and coalesce into a single
figure with a continuous boundary. "The ends (2_b_) came together and
formed a diamond." "When the angles were turned away from each other
the lines had an occasional tendency to close up." "There was a
tendency to unite the two images (4_a_) into a triangle." "The two
figures seemed to tug each other, and the images were in fact a little
closer than the objects (4_a_)." "The images (4_a_) formed a
triangle." So with regard to the figures in 5_a_. "When both were in
the field there seemed to be a pulling of the left over to the right,
though no apparent displacement." "The two figures formed a square."

The lowest average--and it is much lower than any other average in the
table--is that of 5_b_, in which the contrasted objects have neither
angles nor incomplete lines directed to any common point between the
objects. In view of the notes, the tabulated record of these two
figures (5_b_) is very significant, and strikingly confirms, by its
negative testimony, what 1_a_ and 2_b_ have to teach us by their
positive testimony. The averages are, in the three cases just cited:
1_a_, 35.11 seconds; 2_b_,33.11 seconds; 5_b_, 15 seconds per minute.

On the whole, then, the power of the line to arrest, direct, and keep
the attention, through the greater energy and definiteness of the
processes which it excites, and thereby to increase the chances of the
recurrence and persistence of its idea in consciousness, is confirmed
by the results of this series. The greatest directive force seems to
lie in the sharply acute angle. Two such angles, pointing one towards
the other, tend very strongly to carry the attention across the gap
which separates them. (And it should be borne in mind that the
distance between the objects exposed was 25 cm.) But the power of two
incomplete lines, similarly situated, is not greatly inferior.

It thus appears that the attention process is in part, at least, a
motor process, which in this case follows the direction of the lines,
acquiring thereby a momentum which is not at once arrested by a break
in the line, but is readily diverted by a change in the direction of
the line. If the lines are so situated that the attention process
excited by the one set is carried away from the other set, the one set
inhibits the other. If, on the other hand, the lines in the one set
are so situated that they can readily take up the overrunning or
unarrested processes excited by the other set, the two figures support
each other by becoming in fact one figure. The great importance of the
motor elements of the attention process in ideation, and thus in the
persistence of the idea, is evident in either phase of the experiment.


RECAPITULATION.

                                          Seconds            Seconds.
  1 Figures alike:          Left          30.8     Right        31.9
  2   "     unlike:         Simple        27.10    Complex      34.62
  3   "       "             Small         24.54    Large        33.30
  4   "       "             Gray          25.61    White        29.53
  5   "       "             Line          31.91    Angle        38.54
  6   "       "             Plain         23.92    Marked       37.48
  7   "       "   (colored) 5 seconds     27.75    10 seconds   29.15
  8   "       "   (gray)    5 seconds     25.42    10    "      32.12
  9   "       "             1st exposure  12.64    2d exposure  36.45
  10  "       "             Vertical line 34.94    Hor. line    34.49
  11  "       "             Full-faced    28.10    Outline      41.08
  12  "       "             Figure        29.26    Int. lines   39.32
  13  "       "             Figure        34.03    Vert. lines  36.40
  14  "       "             Stationary    28.88    Moved        37.39
  15  "       "             Gray          30.90    Colored      37.81
  16 (See Table XVI.)


If we put these results into the form of propositions, we find:

1. That when the objects are similar surfaces, seen under similar
conditions, the chances of the recurrence and persistence of their
images are, on the whole, practically equal.

2. That surfaces bounded by complicated outlines have an advantage in
ideation, other things equal, over surfaces bounded by simple
outlines.

3. That as between two objects of unequal area--color, form, and other
conditions being the same--the larger object has the advantage in the
ideational rivalry.

4. That the image of a white object has a like advantage over the
image of a gray object.

5. That broken or complex lines have in ideation an advantage over
straight or simple lines.

6. That an object with varied content, other conditions remaining the
same, has an advantage over an object with homogeneous surface.

7 and 8. That an increase of the time during which the attention is
given to an object increases the chances for the recurrence of its
image or idea.

9. That of two objects to which attention is directed in succession,
the object last seen has a distinct advantage in the course of
ideation following close on the perception of the objects.

10. That lines of similar appearance and equal length, one of which is
vertical and the other horizontal, have, like surfaces of similar
appearance and form and equal dimensions, practically equal chances of
recurrence and survival in ideation, the slight difference in their
chances being in favor of the vertical line.

11. That as between two figures of similar form and equal dimensions,
one of which has a filled homogeneous content and the other is a mere
outline figure, the latter has a marked advantage in the course of
ideation.

12. That of two linear and symmetrical figures, of which one is an
outline figure with continuous boundary, and the other consists of the
same linear elements, similarly disposed, as the first, but has its
lines disconnected so that it has no continuous boundary, the latter
figure has the advantage in ideation.

13. That if, with material similar to that described in paragraph 12,
the disconnected lines are arranged so as to be vertical and
equidistant, the advantage in ideation still remains with the
disconnected lines, but is much reduced.

14. That if one of two figures, of similar appearance and form and of
equal dimensions, is kept in motion while it is exposed to view, and
the other is left at rest, the image of the moving object is the more
persistent.

15. That, under like conditions, colored objects are more persistent
in ideation than gray objects.

16. That lines and sharp angles, as compared with broad surfaces, have
a strong directive force in the determination of the attention to
their images or ideas; that this directive force is strongest in the
case of very acute angles, the attention being carried forward in the
direction indicated by the apex of the angle; but that uncompleted
lines, especially when two such lines are directed towards each
other, have a similar and not much inferior force in the control of
the course of ideation.

If we should seek now to generalize these experimental results, they
would take some such form as the following:

Abstraction made of all volitional aims and all æsthetic or affective
bias, the tendency of an object to recur and persist in idea depends
(within the limits imposed by the conditions of these experiments)
upon the extent of its surface, the complexity of its form, the
diversity of its contents, the length and recency of the time during
which it occupies the attention, the definiteness of the direction
which it imparts to the attention (as in the case of angles and
lines), its state of motion or of rest, and, finally, its brightness
and its color.

These conditions, however, are for the most part but conditions which
determine the energy, diversity, complexity and definiteness of the
active processes involved in the bestowal of attention upon its
object, and the experiments show that such active processes are as
essential in ideation as in perception. The stability of an image, or
internal sensation, thus depends on the activity of its motor
accompaniments or conditions. And as the presence of an image to the
exclusion of a rival, which but for the effect of these motor
advantages would have as strong a claim as itself to the occupation of
consciousness (cf. Series I., X.), may be treated as a case of
inhibition, the greater the relative persistence of an image or idea
the greater we may say is the 'force' with which it inhibits its
rival. Exclusive possession of the field involves, to the extent to
which such possession is made good, actual exclusion of the rival; and
exclusion is inhibition. Our generalization, accordingly, may take the
following form:--

The inhibitory effect of an idea, apart from volitional or emotional
bias, depends upon the energy, diversity, complexity and definiteness
of the motor conditions of the idea.






CONTROL OF THE MEMORY IMAGE.

BY CHARLES S. MOORE.


Since Gallon's classic investigation in the field of mental imagery
several similar investigations have been pursued in the same
direction, chiefly, however, for the purpose of discovering and
classifying types of imagination.

Little has been done in the line of developing and studying the
problems of the memory image proper, and still less, in fact almost
nothing, is to be found bearing on the control of the visual memory
image. The general fact of this control has been presented, with
greater or less detail, based upon returns from questionaries. Gallon
himself, for example, having referred to instances in which the
control was lacking, goes on to say[1]: "Others have complete mastery
over their mental images. They can call up the figure of a friend and
make it sit on a chair or stand up at will; they can make it turn
round and attitudinize in any way, as by mounting it on a bicycle or
compelling it to perform gymnastic feats on a trapeze. They are able
to build up elaborate structures bit by bit in their mind's eye and
add, substract or alter at will and at leisure."

   [1] Gallon, Francis: 'Inquiries into Human Faculty and its
   Development,' London, 1883, p. 109.

More recent writers classify the students, or other persons examined,
according to these persons' own statements with regard to the nature
and degree of control over the mental images which they consider
themselves to possess. An article by Bentley[2] is the only study of a
specific problem of the memory image. After a glance at the literature
with reference to methods pursued in the investigation of problems of
memory in general, Bentley outlines 'a static and genetic account' of
the memory image in particular, and presents details of experiments
'carried on for the special investigation of the visual memory image
and its fidelity to an original presentation.'

   [2] Bentley, I.M.: 'The Memory Image and its Qualitative
   Fidelity,' _Am. Journ. of Psychol._, 1899, XI., pp. 1-48.

Of the many memory problems as yet unattacked, that of the control of
the mental image is one of the most interesting. The visual image
obviously offers itself as the most accessible and the experiments
described in this report were undertaken with the purpose of finding
out something about the processes by which control of this image is
secured and maintained. The report naturally has two aspects, one
numerical and the other subjective, presenting the statements of the
subjects as to their inner experiences.

The term 'suppression' is used as a convenient one to cover the
enforced disappearance of the designated image, whether it be directly
forced out of consciousness (a true suppression) or indirectly caused
to disappear through neglect, or limitation of the attention to the
other image which is to be retained.

As this was an investigation of the control of memory images, the
presence of these images under conditions most favorable to their
vividness and distinctness was desirable. An immediate mental recall
at the end of five seconds of visual stimulation, under favorable
though not unusual conditions of light, position and distance, seemed
most likely to secure this desideratum. Experimentation showed that
five minutes was, on the whole, a suitable period in which to secure
the information needed without developing a fatigue in the subject
which would vitiate the results.

The experiments made in the visual field were restricted to visual
memory images which were called up by the subject during the five
minutes succeeding a five seconds' presentation of one or two objects.
The subject sat, with his eyes closed, about four feet from a wall or
screen, before which the object was placed. At a signal the eyes were
opened, and at a second signal five seconds later they were closed. If
an after-image appeared the subject reported its disappearance, and
then called up the image of the object just presented, and reported as
to its clearness, vividness, persistency and whatever phenomena arose;
and when directed he sought to modify the image in various ways to be
described later.

There were six subjects in experiments conducted during the winter of
1900-1901, and six (five being new ones) in experiments of the fall
of 1901. They were all good visualizers, though they differed in the
readiness with which they visualized respectively form or color.

The experiments of the first few weeks were designed to establish the
fact of control by the subjects over a single visual memory image as
to its position, size, outline, color, movement and presence. In
general it was established that a considerable degree of control in
these particulars existed in these subjects.

Later, two objects were presented at a time, and were such small
articles as a glass ball, a book, a silk purse, an eye-glass case, an
iron hook, and so forth. Still later, colored squares, triangles, or
discs were used exclusively.

The investigation followed these lines: I. Movements of a single
image; II. Changes of color of a single image; III. Movements of two
images in the same and in different directions; IV. Suppression of one
of two images; V. Movements of a single image, the object having been
moved during the exposure.


I. MOVEMENTS OF A SINGLE IMAGE.


The first table gives the time in seconds taken to move voluntarily a
single image (of a colored square or disc) to the right, left, up or
down, and in each case to restore it to its original position. There
were thirty movements of each kind for each of the six subjects,
making one hundred and eighty for each direction and also for each
return, the total of all movements being fourteen hundred and forty.
The distance to which the subjects moved the images was not fixed, but
was in most cases about twelve inches. The time was taken with a
stop-watch, and includes the time between the word of command,
'right,' etc., of the director and the verbal report 'now' of the
subject. It includes, therefore, for each movement two reaction times.
The subject reported 'now' the instant the color reached, or appeared
at, the designated place, not waiting for the completion of the shape
which usually followed. Two of the subjects (H. and K.) took much
longer than the other four, their combined average time being almost
exactly four times the combined average time of the other four.


TABLE I.

  MOVEMENTS OF A SINGLE IMAGE.

  30 Movements of Each Kind for Each Subject Average Time in Seconds.

            To           To
  Subjects  Right Return Left Return Up   Return Down Return Averages
  B.        1.30         1.07        1.06        1.11        1.13
                  0.58        0.73        0.46        0.45        0.55

  G.        1.44         1.15        0.99        0.82        1.10
                  0.92        0.89        0.76        0.57        0.78

  H.        7.12         6.42        5.96        5.85        6.34
                  4.51        4.41        4.36        4.40        4.42

  I.        1.28         1.34        1.62        1.47        1.43
                  0.67        0.62        0.86        0.72        0.72

  J.        1.71         1.42        1.40        1.14        1.50
                  1.34        1.53        0.77        0.74        1.09

  K.        4.81         4.64        3.29        3.28        4.01
                  2.40        2.71        1.91        1.56        2.14

  Averages  2.95         2.67        2.39        2.23        2.59
                  1.72        1.82        1.52        1.41        1.62


NUMERICAL.

The general averages for the different movements show that movement to
the right was hardest, to the left next; while movement downward was
the easiest. A marked exception is seen in I., for whom the upward
movement was the hardest and movement to the right was the easiest. J.
found movement to the left hardest. For the return movements, the
general averages show that the return from the left is the hardest,
from the right next; while from below is the easiest. Here again I.
found the return from above the hardest and from below the next
hardest; while from the left was the easiest.

Arranging the subjects in the order of the average time, taken for all
the movements, including the returns to the original position, we have

  H.  5.35 average time out and back.
  K.  3.07     "     "   "   "    "
  J.  1.29     "     "   "   "    "
  I.  1.07     "     "   "   "    "
  G.   .94     "     "   "   "    "
  B.   .84     "     "   "   "    "


SUBJECTIVE.

All the six subjects whose time records appear in Table I. and also
four others whose time was not recorded reported eye movements, or a
tendency to eye movement. A. and K. reported that when the image was
dim there was accommodation as for long vision and when the image was
vivid there was accommodation as for near vision. B. ideated the new
position and the eye movement occurred automatically. G. reported a
contraction of the scalp muscles and a tendency to cast the eyes up
and locate the image at the back of the head inside; this was an
inveterate habit. He reported also accommodation for the different
distances of the image and an after-feeling of strain in the head. H.
reported a strong tendency in the eyes to return to the center,
_i.e._, the original position, and to carry the image back there. All
the subjects frequently reported a sense of relief in the eye muscles
when the command to return the image to the center was given--also, a
tension in the forehead in the upward movement which was accentuated
(with H.) when there was headache. J. reported, 'always eye strain,'
and noticed that the eyes usually turned as far as the new position,
but sometimes stopped short of it. K. reported first an eye movement,
then an ideation of the image in the new position. E. and H. turned
the head to right and left for movements of the image in those
directions. A., B., E. and F. believed that they could inhibit the eye
movement. Subjects were at times unconscious of eye movements. H.
articulated the names of the colors of the image and found that it
aided the movement of the image to say to himself, for example: "Don't
you see that blue square there?"

All but J. reported a loss in vividness and also, though to a less
degree, in distinctness whenever the image was moved away from the
center. J. found no difference. H. reported that details of the object
which were reproduced in the image when at the center were not
discernible in the image in other positions, also that at the left the
image was more vivid than at the right. B.'s memory image of a watch,
three minutes after it was called up, was still so clear that he read
from it the time. E., who was an experienced photographer, had no
difficulty in recalling outline, light and shade, but had difficulty
in reproducing color. I. frequently lost the form in making the
required improvements.

Under manipulation the memory image usually retained its distinctness
and vividness with no loss or with but slight loss when in its
original position, to the end of the five minutes of the experiment.
The image, also, seldom disappeared except for the momentary
disappearances in passing from one position to another, which are
referred to later. Under passive observation of the memory image
disappearances, though of short duration, were frequent and there was
a noticeable fading away of color and loss of outline.

The memory image almost without exception, when first recalled, was
located in the direction and at the distance of the object presented.

In moving from the center to right and left the image remained in the
same plane with a few exceptions; in moving up and down it moved on an
arc whose center was at the eye. This was especially true of the
downward motion, which was almost always to a greater distance than
any of the other motions.

C., D., F. and H. felt the need of a support for the image in any
except the central position. This was true especially of the position
above the center, but was entirely overcome by practice by C., F. and
H., and partially by D. In movements where time was to be recorded,
the distance was from six to eighteen inches, but the image could be
carried by all the eleven subjects to any part of the room or beyond
the room. Usually the method followed was to fix the attention on the
suggested position and then the image appeared there, sometimes
complete at the outset, but usually in part at first, then developing
instantly to completion. When the subject was requested to trace the
image _in transitu_, this could usually be accomplished, but the time
was much longer. Frequently, in such a case, the image was lost during
the last third or fifth of its journey. J. "felt conscious of a
something that went in the suggested direction but did not develop
details out of this material; had to await development of the image at
the new locality." "At times _forced_ this development out of the
vague something that seemed to go over." G. had 'no feeling of
transition in space.' K. did not perceive the image _in transitu_. I.
perceived the image _in transitu_ when the movement was away from the
center but when the image was to return to the center its passage was
too quick to be followed; 'it came out at the center.'

J. noticed that in moving from the center the image took a curved path
towards himself, and that the position _to_ which the image moved
always seemed further away than the position _from_ which it came, but
the new position seemed to be readjusted when the next movement
occurred.

The return to the center seemed easier to all the subjects except G.,
who was conscious of no difference between the movements with respect
to ease. Several described the return to the center as like the return
of a small ball snapped back by a stretched elastic cord.

With D. a suggestion of weight in the perception of the object was a
hindrance to moving its memory image. Also the image of a short piece
of brass tubing persisted in rolling off the table and along the floor
and could not be held stationary. Other objects rotated rapidly, and
much effort was needed to 'slow down' the rotation and to bring the
objects to rest and keep them at rest.


II. CHANGES OF COLOR OF A SINGLE IMAGE.


Tables II. and III. show the results of experiments in changing the
color of a single image. This was usually a square, sometimes a disc.
The time of optical perception was five seconds. After the
disappearance of after-images, if there were any, eighteen to
twenty-four changes were made in the color of the memory image,
occupying from four and a half to six minutes.

The colors were saturated blue, green, yellow and red, and each one
was changed into each of the other colors and then restored. The order
of change was varied to avoid uniformity of succession. The four
colors were shown to the subjects each day before the experiments
began, to establish a standard. The time was taken with a stop-watch,
and includes the time between the director's word of command, 'green,'
etc., and the subject's report, 'now,' or 'green,' etc. It includes,
therefore, two reaction times. The subject reported 'now' the instant
he secured the desired color, not waiting for the completion of the
shape that usually followed.


TABLE II.

  CHANGES OF COLOR. SINGLE IMAGE. 72 CHANGES OF EACH COLOR.

  [Label 1: Subject.]
  [Label 2: To Green.]
  [Label 3: Return to Blue.]
  [Label 4: To Yellow.]
  [Label 5: Return to Blue.]
  [Label 6: To Red.]
  [Label 7: Return to Blue.]
  [Label 8: To Blue.]
  [Label 9: Return to Green.]
  [Label 10: To Yellow.]
  [Label 11: Return to Green.]
  [Label 12: To Red]
  [Label 13: Return to Green.]

             From Blue.                         From Green.
  [1] [2]  [3]  [4]  [5]  [6]  [7]     [8]  [9]  [10] [11] [12] [13]

  B.  1.72 0.50 1.66 0.38 1.81 0.50    1.23 0.56 1.10 0.65 1.33 0.56
  G.  1.15 0.60 1.10 0.79 0.89 0.65    1.75 0.87 1.04 0.75 1.35 0.71
  H.  4.67 4.25 4.87 4.06 4.81 3.83    5.27 4.50 5.81 4.89 5.37 4.94
  I.  2.27 1.25 1.77 1.19 1.83 1.25    2.15 0.93 1.71 1.04 1.92 1.15
  J.  1.38 0.81 1.29 0.94 1.29 0.95    1.65 1.08 1.15 0.77 1.60 0.81
  K.  2.35 1.71 1.96 1.66 2.10 1.19    2.25 1.25 2.17 1.73 2.44 1.27

  Av. 2.26 1.52 2.11 1.50 2.15 1.39    2.41 1.53 2.15 1.65 2.34 1.57

  [Label 1: Subject.]
  [Label 2: To Blue.]
  [Label 3: Return to Yellow.]
  [Label 4: To Green.]
  [Label 5: Return to Yellow.]
  [Label 6: To Red.]
  [Label 7: Return to Yellow.]
  [Label 8: To Blue.]
  [Label 9: Return to Red.]
  [Label 10: To Green.]
  [Label 11: Return to Red.]
  [Label 12: To Yellow.]
  [Label 13: Return to Red.]

            From Yellow.                         From Red.
  [1] [2]  [3]  [4]  [5]  [6]  [7]     [8]  [9]  [10] [11] [12] [13]

  B.  1.79 1.06 1.35 0.87 1.89 1.10    1.54 0.58 1.71 0.62 1.31 0.71
  G.  1.50 1.10 1.48 0.87 1.31 0.88    1.33 0.92 1.35 0.91 0.77 0.58
  H.  5.02 4.54 5.73 3.91 6.15 4.17    6.35 3.91 5.89 4.69 5.54 4.37
  I.  2.29 1.31 2.54 1.19 2.29 1.27    2.85 1.10 2.50 1.21 1.65 1.31
  J.  1.35 0.98 1.35 0.65 1.27 0.88    1.42 1.04 1.31 1.02 1.25 0.85
  K.  3.02 1.52 3.21 2.04 2.23 1.79    2.54 1.56 2.66 1.60 2.88 1.81

  Av. 2.49 1.76 2.61 1.59 2.52 1.68    2.67 1.51 2.57 1.68 2.23 1.62


TABLE III.

  CHANGES TO THE FOUR COLORS.

  Average time in seconds. 72 changes from and 72 changes to each color.

  [Label 1: To Blue.]
  [Label 2: Return from Blue.]
  [Label 3: To Green.]
  [Label 4: Return from Green.]
  [Label 5: To Yellow.]
  [Label 6: Return from Yellow.]
  [Label 7: To Red.]
  [Label 8: Return from Red.]

               [1]  [2]  [3]  [4]  [5]  [6]  [7]  [8]
  From blue,             2.26 1.52 2.11 1.50 2.12 1.39
    "  green,  2.38 1.53           2.16 1.64 2.33 1.57
    "  yellow, 2.49 1.75 2.61 1.59           2.52 1.68
    "  red,    2.67 1.52 2.58 1.68 2.27 1.62

  Average,     2.52 1.60 2.48 1.59 2.17 1.58 2.33 1.55


  _Changes from_ a presented color.        _Returns to_ a presented color.
            216 movements.                          216 movements.

  _From_ presented      yellow,   2.52    _To_ presented      yellow, 1.67
       "          "     red,      2.49        "         "     red,    1.61
       "          "     green,    2.29        "         "     green,  1.58
       "          "     blue,     2.16        "         "     blue,   1.47

  Average,                        2.37    Average,                    1.58


  _Changes to_ a color _from_    _Returns from_ a color _to_
      a presented color.             a presented color.
      216 movements.                   216 movements.

  _To_ blue,   2.52             _From_ blue,    1.60
     " green,  2.48                  " green,   1.59
     " red,    2.33                  " yellow,  1.58
     " yellow, 2.17                  " red,     1.55

     Average,  2.37                  Average,   1.58


The six subjects fall into two groups--three, H., I., and K., taking
longer than the other three. As in the previous experiment H. was
markedly longer than any of the others.

There were seventeen hundred and twenty-eight changes in all,
including returns to the original color. There were two hundred and
sixteen changes from each of the four colors as presented, to each of
the other three and, of course, the same number of returns to the
presented color.

The change to blue from the other presented colors was the most
difficult and the change to yellow was the easiest.

The averages (216 exp. each) are,

              Sec.
   To blue,   2.55
    " green,  2.48
    " red,    2.33
    " yellow, 2.17

The returns to the presented colors did not differ greatly from each
other, the averages (216 exp. each) being:

                Sec.
   From blue,   1.603
    "   green,  1.597
    "   yellow, 1.589
    "   red,    1.549

From red appears to be the easiest change, and from blue the hardest.

The getting away from a presented blue was the easiest and from a
presented yellow the most difficult, as seen by these averages (216
exp. each):

                Sec.
   From yellow, 2.54
    "   red,    2.49
    "   green,  2.29
    "   blue,   2.16

The returns to the presented colors show that it was hardest to get
back to the presented yellow, easiest to get back to the presented
blue, the averages (216 exp. each), being:

                Sec.
   To yellow,   1.67
    " red,      1.61
    " green,    1.58
    " blue,     1.47

The facts as to blue and yellow shown by these four tables of averages
may be expressed also in this way:

If a blue square was shown, it was easier to change the blue memory
image into the other colors, and also easier to get back the blue
memory image after such changes, than if any other of the three colors
was presented.

If another color than blue was shown it was harder to change the
memory image of that color to blue than to any of the other colors,
and also harder to get back to the memory image of that color from
blue than from any of the other three colors.

If a yellow square was shown, it was harder to change the yellow
memory image into the other colors, and also harder to get back the
yellow memory image after such changes than if any other of the three
colors was presented.

If another color than yellow was shown, it was easier to change the
memory image of that color to yellow than to any of the three other
colors, and also easier to get back to the memory image of that color
from the yellow than from any of the other three colors except red.

If we combine _all_ the changes into a color (both changes from
another presented color and returns to this color previously
presented) we find that changes to green are hardest, to yellow
easiest. The averages (for 432 exp. each) are,

                 Sec.
   To green,     2.03
    " blue,      1.99
    " red,       1.97
    " yellow,    1.92

The changes away from a color (both from this color previously
presented and from this color to the other previously presented
colors) show that it was hardest to get away from yellow, easiest to
get away from blue, the averages (for 432 exp. each) being:

                  Sec.
   From yellow,   2.06
     "  red,      2.02
     "  green,    1.94
     "  blue,     1.88

As for the subjects, all six found yellow the easiest to change into,
one finding red equally easy.


SUBJECTIVE.

For seven of the subjects, mental repetition of the name of the color
(usually accompanied by articulatory movements) tended to bring up the
color, and one other subject occasionally used this method of bringing
about a change that was difficult. With D. the color did not come at
repetition of the name. G. was assisted by auditory recall of the
name. Nine subjects reported a feeling of strain, usually in the eyes
as of focusing, occurring especially when there seemed a difficulty in
producing the desired change. The tension attended almost exclusively
changes of the presented color, not restorations of that color. For D.
this strain was considerable, for G. there was also an after-feeling
of strain in the head. For G. the image was clearest when the feeling
of strain was least, and J. secured the promptest and clearest results
when he could most nearly rid himself of anxiety as to the result. K.
in one instance (a change from green to yellow) became conscious of
the setting of his jaws and motions of feet and body in aid of his
attempt. H. frequently had the feeling of physical fatigue.

In most cases the restoration of the presented color was as a complete
square, triangle, etc. In changes from the presented color the new
color appeared at a corner, or edge, or as a patch at the center. With
E. the "color flashed over the whole field and then had to be
restricted to the figure." B. "held the outline, emptied of the old
color, while it was filled in with the new." D. "had a clear outline,
and the new color came in small blotches inside, and effort spread
them out to cover the whole figure." For I. the "new color came
sliding in from the right side over the old, which, however,
disappeared as if it were moving out of focus." With A. the new color
usually came from either the lower left-hand or the upper right-hand
corner. F. kept a clear outline and the new color came in from the
right.

When E. found it difficult to create at the center the desired color,
he thought of some object (garment, grass, sky, etc.) of that color
and then transferred it to fill in the outline preserved at the
center. B. moved the colored figure aside and in its place put one of
the desired color, moved the new figure up to the old and there
superposed it. With G. the new colors seemed of new material and there
was felt to be an accumulation about the center, of old
color-material. Then he located the square outside of this imaginary
debris and began again. H. found that the colors of his own
experiments, in which he used color squares framed in black, came to
his mind at the names of the desired colors, and the association soon
gave him the figure also. I. located the new colors around the
presented one, first all at the right; then green at the left, red at
the right, yellow above, when presented blue was at the center; then
yellow and green were at the upper left-hand corner, while red came
from behind. The new color 'slid in over the old.' It was found easier
to secure the desired color when its position was known beforehand. J.
also used a similar device. He 'turned towards the places and brought
out the required color and filled the central outline with it.' He
tried to break up this scheme and got red without going after it but
found himself 'at a loss to find the colors.' Later he succeeded so
that the required color simply appeared in the outline of the old
color at the center. K. turned his eyes to corners of the central
outline, then to the center, and found that this aided in developing
the desired color from the corners inward. When difficulty arose, he
experienced muscular tension in body and legs and jaws.

Five of the subjects considered the change from a presented color to
blue the hardest and one found the change to red hardest. Green was
placed second in difficulty by one, and blue second by the one who
found red the hardest. Three reported the change to yellow the easiest
and two the change to red.

The change from red to yellow caused 'an unpleasant sensation' in C.
and the new figure 'had a maroon halo.'

A. in returning from green or blue to yellow passed through a gray;
so, once, in changing from yellow to green, and once, green to red.
With A. blue retinal clouds, which often came, aided changes to blue
and hindered at times changes to other colors. B. had a fusion of
yellow and red in changing from yellow to red. G. had a tendency to
leave uncolored the lower left-hand corner and it 'was wood-colored';
G. had a gray image as the result of fusion of retinal clouds with red
memory image. With H. blue always came in as robin's-egg blue, which
then had to be changed to the standard blue. In one instant the green
memory image seemed to shift into a purple and change to a positive
retinal image which interfered with changes to other colors. J. found
whistling and humming an aid in relaxing an unnatural state of tension
which would hinder the best results. To increase the vividness of the
image he would recall the black background on which the colored
squares had hung. In one experiment K. became 'desperately tired of
yellow,' which was the presented color, so that his 'mind was ready to
jump to any color rather than yellow.' The returns to yellow were, in
this experiment, slower than the changes from yellow.

The images sometimes changed sizes, being at times smaller, but
usually larger than the object. In one experiment of C. the image was
four times the size of the object, which was a green square with sides
of one inch.


III. MOVEMENTS OF TWO IMAGES IN THE SAME AND IN DIFFERENT DIRECTIONS.


Table IV. gives the results of experiments in the movements of two
images, the objects presented being colored squares or discs. Time of
perception was five seconds. After the disappearance of after-images,
if there were any, eighteen to twenty-four movements with returns to
original positions were made, occupying five or six minutes. The
colors were saturated blue, green, yellow and red. Four of the
movements were such as separated the two images, and in four the two
moved uniformly. The first four movements were right and left, left
and right, up and down, down and up; the left-hand object followed the
first direction indicated. The right-and-left movements involved the
crossing of the images. The last four were _both_ to right, to left,
up, down. The time was taken with a stop-watch and includes the time
between the director's word of command and the subject's report,
'now.' It includes, therefore, two reaction times. The subject
reported the instant the colors reached, or appeared at, the suggested
positions.

It is to be noticed that H. was very much slower than any of the
others in making the movements, both out and back; and that K., while
also slower (though much less so than H.) in making the movements
outward, was no slower in making the return movements.


TABLE IV.

  MOVEMENTS OF TWO IMAGES.

  Twenty movements of each kind for each subject. Averages in seconds.

                           In Opposite Directions.

  Subj.   L.-R.   Ret.   R.-L.   Ret.   U.-D.   Ret.   D.-U.   Ret.

     B.    1.82           2.90           2.10           2.27
                  0.86           0.87           0.73           0.86

     G.    3.02           2.86           2.68           2.63
                  1.98           2.25           1.63           2.01

     H.    9.18          10.30           7.50           7.15
                  5.16           6.90           5.36           5.21

     I.    4.17           3.52           3.40           3.37
                  1.26           1.47           1.23           1.31

     J.    2.17           2.90           2.87           2.27
                  1.05           1.63           1.02           1.13

     K.    5.51           6.43           5.16           4.81
                  1.43           1.48           1.20           1.23

   Ave.    4.32           4.82           3.82           3.75
                  1.96           2.43           1.87           1.96

  Average of all movements involving separation (480), 4.18. Returns, 2.06.


                             In Same Direction.

  Subj.     R.    Ret.     L.    Ret.     U.    Ret.     D.    Ret.

     B.    1.31           1.22           1.30           1.11
                  0.72           0.67           0.72           0.85

     G.    2.66           2.35           3.01           2.53
                  2.00           1.86           2.22           1.86

     H.    8.45           7.91           5.66           7.66
                  6.53           5.95           5.96           6.11

     I.    2.57           2.27           2.13           2.05
                  0.97           1.26           1.00           1.13

     J.    1.11           1.16           1.08           11.5
                  0.68           0.90           0.73           0.71

     K.    3.97           3.91           3.60           4.07
                  1.35           1.50           1.75           1.71

   Ave.    3.33           3.14           2.79           3.10
                  2.04           2.02           2.04           2.06

  Average of all movements together (480), 3.09. Returns, 2.04.


NUMERICAL.

There were nineteen hundred and twenty movements in all, including the
returns to the original positions.

In the order of difficulty as shown by the time taken, the movements
stand as follows, the numbers being the averages in seconds for one
hundred and twenty movements of each kind:

   1. Right and left (_i.e._, crossing), 4.82 sec.
   2. Left and right,                    4.32  "
   3. Up and down,                       3.82  "
   4. Down and up,                       3.75  "
   5. Both right,                        3.33  "
   6. Both left,                         3.14  "
   7. Both down,                         3.10  "
   8. Both up,                           3.04  "


SUBJECTIVE.

In the experiments in which the time was recorded, there was no
disappearance of either image except where movements were made
successively. In these cases frequently the image which was awaiting
its turn vanished until the first image was placed, a time varying
from a quarter of a second to three or four seconds. Occasionally the
image already placed would vanish, while the other was _en route_; the
subject's attention in both these cases being centered exclusively on
the image he desired to move. This was especially the case when the
distances to which the images were moved were great, as to the ends of
the room or to ceiling and floor. In other experiments, where, after
the movements took place, the images were held for a short time, there
were disappearances of one image or the other ranging from one quarter
of a second to fifteen seconds, most of the absences, however, being
under five seconds. The absences were more numerous in the latter half
of the five minutes covered by the experiment. Occasionally a noise in
the adjoining room or in the street made the images disappear.

The greater ease of vertical as compared with horizontal movements
recalls an observation of Ladd,[3] in which the idioretinal light was
willed into the shape of a cross. Ladd says: "The vertical bar of the
cross seems much easier to produce and to hold steadily in the field."
This present observation is also in accord with that described above
in the case of movements of a single image.

   [3] Ladd, G.T.: 'Direct Control of the Retinal Field,' PSYCH.
   REV., 1894, L, pp. 351-355.

On several occasions G. reported that the crossing movement was the
easiest, and that the return to the original places was not easier
than the other movements. In one experiment he reported the field at
the center cloudy, so that it was a relief to get away from it. G.'s
time records on these occasions did not support his feeling with
regard to the return to the original places, but they show that the
crossing movements were, in two or three instances, quicker than the
'left-and-right' movement, and the impression of promptness thus made
persisted to the end of the experiment. The four movements in which
both images moved uniformly were easier than the four in which
movements in different directions were involved.

All the subjects were frequently conscious of eye movements, and more
frequently conscious of a tendency to eye movement, which was,
however, inhibited. That the strain in the eyes was practically
constant during all the movements away from the original places, seems
evident from the unanimous reports of a sense of relaxing and relief
in the eyes, attending the movement of returning to the original
places. The distance to which the images were moved was a powerful
factor in producing this sense of strain. When the two images were
moved and held but a few inches apart there was no sense of strain and
no conscious alternation of attention. Practice increased greatly the
distance at which the images could be held apart without conscious
alternation of attention, but the strain of holding them apart and of
inhibiting eye movement increased with the distance.

In the movements for which the time was recorded the distances varied,
according to the subject, from six to eighteen inches, and varied at
times with each subject. In the experiments without time record, A.,
B., C., E., F. and H. reported that they were able to move the images
apart to ceiling and to floor, or to the opposite ends of the room,
and to hold them there both in consciousness at the same time without
either alternation of attention or eye movement, a tendency to which
was felt but was inhibited. I. held them two feet apart without
fluctuation of attention. A. reported: "I tend to turn my body to left
or to right when I move the images in either of these directions." C.,
H. and I. said: "The eyes diverge when one image moves slowly to the
right and one to the left." D. found a slight movement of the eyes
which could be detected by the fingers placed lightly on the lids,
when the attention was alternating between the images. K. had
convergence and divergence of the eyes for crossing and separation
respectively and he was accustomed to run his eye over the outline of
the image. Strain in the scalp muscles was reported by A., B., E., F.
and G. The up-and-down movements were universally characterized by a
feeling as if one eye tended to move up and the other down. C.
unconsciously inclined his head to the left in such movements as if to
make the line of the two eyes parallel with the direction of the
movement.

E., when holding the images two feet apart, had a strong feeling of
difference of accommodation when alternating in observation and so
judged the two to be in different planes.

When the movement seemed difficult the strain was greater, and when an
image became dim the effort to restore its brightness or its
distinctness of outline was accompanied by a feeling of bringing it
nearer by accommodation and near focusing. J. found that the two
images approached each other when he attempted to secure greater
vividness. An analogous instance is that of A.G.C., a subject quoted
in 'Mental Imagery of Students,' by French.[4] In calling up the image
of a die this subject held up his hand as if it held the die. When
there was no sense of strain the hand was fourteen inches from his
face, but when effort was made to image all the sides of the die at
once he unconsciously moved his hand to within four inches of his
eyes. French says in this connection: "Situation depends on the
attention involved and the inference is near that this phenomenon may
be connected with feelings of convergence and accommodation which so
often accompany concentrated visual attention."

   [4] French, F.C.: PSYCH. REVIEW, 1902, IX., p. 40.

The movements were assisted by mentally saying, 'this image is here,
that image is there,' in the case of D., G., H., I. and K.; or, at
times, by articulating the names of the image, or of the color when
the image was of a colored object. I. found it easy to hold outlines,
but in order to retain colors in the movements of separation, he had
to speak the names continually. H. also repeated the names
continually, as, for example, 'violet here, orange there.'

A. represented the line of vision as going to each of the two images,
which seemed connected by a line, thus making a triangle, and then
pictured himself as standing off and seeing himself looking at the
images. When the two objects were solid and the images were to be
crossed, B. carried one image above or below the other, but when the
objects were colored surfaces he conceived them as pure colors so that
there was no sense of impenetrability to interfere with their crossing
and they glided by each other. In the up-and-down movements he moved
one at a time. C. and D. had to construct some support for the images.
In most of the experiments H. first moved the images to a greater
distance away, somewhat higher up and a little farther apart. In this
new position the images appeared smaller and the suggested movements
were made more easily. Sometimes in crossing two colored images he
observed a partial mixture of the colors. J. found that a sharp
movement of the head in the required direction aided materially in
moving the images, and when the objects were colored surfaces fastened
to the same card he found it necessary either to conceive the card as
of rubber or to picture it as cut in two before he could make the
movements of the images.

With A., B., C. and D. there were instances of unwilled movements of
the images, in the experiments where the movements were not timed.
These were much more frequent with D. than with the others, and to
check them required prolonged effort. The more common movements of
this sort were rotation of the image, change of its position,
separation of its parts (if detachable in the object) and change of
shape. E. had a return of the two images of a preceding experiment
which persisted in staying a few seconds and which were as vivid as
the two legitimate occupants of the mental field.

The images were duplicated five times on different days with A., and
once each with C., F. and K.

A.'s cases were these. The 'wraith' of a small box whose image was out
at the right, appeared above the other image off at the left and it
was turned with a corner to the front. Again, at the central position
each image was duplicated, the true pair being of full size, bright
and distinct, the false pair small, dim and on a more distant plane,
_i.e._, behind the others. One of the extra images persisted against
all effort to banish it, for fifty-five seconds. Again, when twelve
inches apart each image was similarly duplicated. In the fourth
instance the images were at the center of the field. In the fifth, the
right image, eight inches from the center, was duplicated, the extra
image being still farther away and above. This second image was very
dark, dim and vague in outline, and came and went slowly. The right
image of C., when seven feet from the center, had a dim double above
it. F. had moved the right-hand image (a violet disc) close to the
left when a blue disc also appeared above it. Though repeating the
word 'violet' he had imaged the violet disc as blue. K. was holding
the two images a foot and a half apart when an extra pair appeared at
the center. Both pairs persisted for sixty seconds and then the outer
pair vanished, and the inner, the false pair, grew brighter.

As was said in the case of a single image, so with double images, the
motion could be traced and often was traced when the movements were
away from the original positions, but on the return to the original
positions the images were not usually seen _in transitu_. For ten of
the subjects, the image moved downward uniformly on an arc whose
center was at the eye; and often the right and left movements were
likewise on an arc. With E. the ends of the arc for motion right and
left were higher also. H., I. and J. reported that all the movements
were in the same plane. The upward movement was always to a less
distance and the downward movement to a greater distance than the
horizontal movements.

In most cases the images were the size of the percepts, in a number of
cases smaller, and in a few cases larger. This was determined by
comparison between the image and the percept immediately on opening
the eyes and seeing the object at the end of the five minutes occupied
by the experiment. A similar mode of comparison showed that, in about
half of the experiments, the images were at the end of five minutes
approximately equal to the percept in clearness and distinctness of
outline. A comparison of these results with those obtained in a series
of experiments involving passive observation of the image seems to
indicate that active manipulation of the image tends to maintain the
qualitative fidelity of the image when at its original position.
During the progress of the experiments the reports were almost
unanimous and constant that at its original position the image was
vivid and distinct, but lost in both respects when away from that
position, the loss being greater the greater the distance to which it
was moved. Frequently there was fluctuation,--a loss of vividness and
then a restoration,--which A. frequently found to be rhythmical, while
in general it was evident that an increase of effort or of attention
was successful in restoring lost vividness and distinctness.

D., after three minutes, read the time in the image of a watch. In
superposing green on yellow, in two instances, the yellow shone
through, making a mixed color, and again, in moving a green disc and a
yellow disc, the green became suffused with yellow, so that the two
discs were one yellow and the other greenish-yellow. For C.,
similarity in the two objects presented tended to make both images
less vivid and distinct and to render more difficult their retention
and manipulation. When one of the two objects partially overlapped the
other it was difficult to separate the two images, and the area of
contact was very vague in the image of the under one, and when the
scrutiny reached that portion the other image returned to its original
overlapping position.


IV. SUPPRESSION OF ONE OF TWO IMAGES.


The next tables (V. and VI.) give the results of experiments in
suppressing one of two images, the objects presented being saturated
color squares, discs, triangles, etc., placed side by side, one above
the other, or a smaller one superposed on a larger. The time of
perception was five seconds. After the disappearance of after-images,
if there were any, the subject was directed to suppress one of the two
memory images, the one to be suppressed being indicated by the
director. The subject reported as soon as the indicated image
disappeared, and reported any return of the suppressed image and its
later disappearance in consequence of his efforts. Also he reported
any disappearance and reappearance of the retained image. Five minutes
was the limit of the time for the experiments with a few exceptions.
The times were recorded, and those given for the first suppression
include the time between the director's command and the subject's
report 'now' or 'gone,' and include, therefore, two reaction times.
The later suppressions include but one reaction time.


TABLE V.

  SUMMARY OF ALL SUPPRESSIONS. AVERAGE TIME IN SECONDS.

  [Label 1: Image Suppressed]
  [Label 2: No of Exper.]
  [Label 3: Time of First Supp.]
  [Label 4: Time of Ab. of Supp. Im.]
  [Label 5: No. of Later Supp.]
  [Label 6: Time of Later Supp.]
  [Label 7: No. of Ab. of Supp. Im.]
  [Label 8: Time of Ab. of Supp. Im.]
  [Label 9: Time of All Supp.]
  [Label 10: Time of All Absence of Supp. Im.]

  [1]       [2]  [3]    [4]  [5]  [6]  [7]  [8]   [9]   [10]
  Right.    46  11.59  82.39 221  8.43 216 35.74  8.94  43.93
  Left.     43  11.89  79.34 175  7.79 173 44.86  8.60  51.26
  Upper.    22  11.67  49.77 150  6.26 147 29.75  6.95  32.35
  Lower.    17  14.23  64     71  7.88  70 46.68  9.11  50.04
  Central.  42  18.24  96.93 357  3.90 352 18.13  5.41  26.54
  Marginal. 20  14.25 181.57  24  8.93  24 78.08 11.35 125.12
  Sundry.    7   8.71 127.21  19 13.34  19 47.27 12.09  68.78
  Averages.     13.48  91.25      6.46     32.14  7.60  41.86


TABLE VI

  SUPPRESSIONS GROUPED BY SUBJECTS. AVERAGE TIME IN SECONDS.

  [Label 1: Subject]
  [Label 2: No. of Exp.]
  [Label 3: Time of First Supp.]
  [Label 4: Time of Ab. of Supp. Im.]
  [Label 5: No. of Later Supp.]
  [Label 6: Time of Later Supp.]
  [Label 7: No. of Ab. of Supp. Im.]
  [Label 8: Time of Ab. of Supp. Im.]
  [Label 9: Time of All Supp.]
  [Label 10: Time of All Ab. of Supp. Im.]

  [1]       [2] [3]   [4]    [5] [6]   [7] [8]    [9]   [10]
  A.        11  28.32  11.29 117 14.90 114  10.35 16.05  10.44
  B.        29   5.79 270.44   5  0.25   5 138.80  4.98 251.08
  C.        18   7.88  43.08  64  3.94  63  67.49  4.81  62.07
  D.        14  23.28 190.07   6 31.66   5 204.60 25.80 193.89
  F.        10  12.67  86.07 230  1.95 230  67.92  2.40  10.09
  G.        21  21.88  20.39 190  9.97 184  19.37 11.15  19.47
  H.        21  15.27  73.27  47 10.30  47  84.48 11.84  81.02
  I.        26   9.77  53.83  96  5.06  94  61.34  6.06  59.72
  J.        26   3.59  32.18 209  1.40 208  31.69  1.64  31.75
  K.        21  21.63  71.90  53 14.75  51  70.04 16.70  31.83
  Averages.     13.48  91.25      6.46      32.14  7.60  41.86

There were ten subjects in most of the experiments, and the marked
differences in the individual records which were evident in the
previous experiments did not exist here except in the case of A., for
whom alone the time required to obtain the suppression exceeded the
time of absence of the suppressed image.

In several experiments the subjects were unable to suppress the
indicated image, which in five cases was the image at the center of a
disc and in two cases the outer portion of the disc. Further, five
failures were by one subject, D., and one each by A. and F. The
statistical report here given includes only the results of the
successful experiments. Forty-four of the one hundred and ninety-seven
were completely successful, as the suppressed image did not return
throughout the entire period. The following table shows the grouping
of the experiments according to the recurrence of the suppressed
image:

   Returned 0  times,          44
      "     1    "             26
      "     2    "             18
      "     3    "             25
      "     4    "             16
      "     5    "             16
      "  6 to 10 "             28
      "  more than 10 times,   24
   Total,                     197

Seventy-three and three fifths per cent. of all the experiments have
five or fewer returns of the suppressed images.

The subjects suppressed the image as soon as possible after each
return, the average time taken to accomplish these later suppressions
being 6.46 sec., while the average time of absence of the suppressed
image was 32.14 sec.

Including the first efforts and the first absences of the suppressed
image, the average time required to suppress the image was 7.60 sec.,
and the average time of absence of the suppressed image was 41.86 sec.

Arranging the subjects according to the average time they required to
accomplish a suppression, we have the following order. J. and F. had
more recurrences of the suppressed image than any of the other
subjects.

    J.    1.64 sec.
    F.    2.40  "
    C.    4.80  "
    B.    4.98  "
    I.    6.06  "
    G.   11.15  "
    H.   11.84  "
    A.   16.05  "
    K.   16.70  "
    D.   25.80  "

Arranging them by the average absence of the suppressed image we have
this order:

    B.  251.08 sec
    D.  193.89  "
    H.   81.02  "
    C.   62.07  "
    I.   59.72  "
    K.   31.83  "
    J.   31.75  "
    G.   19.47  "
    A.   10.44  "
    F.   10.09  "

It is to be remarked, however, that the ability to keep the suppressed
image out of the field increased with practice and that A. and F. had
less than half the number of experiments that the rest had. D., who
had but two thirds as many as most of the other subjects and therefore
had less practice in suppressing the image, stands yet second in
respect to this ability.

If we compare the subjects with regard to _first_ efforts and _first_
absences only, we obtain the following orders:

  According to Ave. Time req.            According to Ave. Absence
   for first Suppression.             of Image after first Suppression.
     J.        3.59 sec.                    B.       270.44 sec.
     B.        5.79  "                      D.       190.07  "
     C.        7.88  "                      F.        86.07  "
     I.        9.77  "                      H.        73.27  "
     F.       12.67  "                      K.        71.90  "
     H.       15.27  "                      I.        53.83  "
     K.       21.63  "                      C.        43.08  "
     G.       21.88  "                      J.        32.18  "
     D.       23.28  "                      G.        20.39  "
     A.       28.32  "                      A.        11.29  "

Arranging the groups of images suppressed according to the average
times of all suppressions and absences we have these orders:

             Suppression.                      Absences.
   Central Images,  5.41       Marginal Images,  125.12
   Upper     "      6.95       Sundry     "       68.78
   Left      "      8.60       Left       "       51.26
   Right     "      8.94       Lower      "       50.04
   Lower     "      9.11       Right      "       43.93
   Marginal  "     11.35       Upper      "       32.35
   Sundry    "     12.09       Central    "       26.54


SUBJECTIVE.

Most of the subjects imaginatively placed the image to be suppressed
behind the screen, in a drawer, in their closed hands, pushed it
forward into the remote distance, sliced up, burned up, or pulverized
and so destroyed it. B. and D. 'thought it away' directly, without
mechanism or device, or got rid of it 'by a pure act of will.'
Superposition was tried, frequently with success, but at times the
under image shone through. When the objects were colored discs one
superposed on the other, the subject spread over the whole surface the
color of the image to be retained, but at times this resulted in there
being two shades of the upper color, and a yellow above a red changed
to an orange. When red was above yellow, the red appeared more highly
illuminated. Associations with objects of the color of the retained
image were found helpful but tended to modify the original color. Such
associations also, at times, by secondary associations brought back
the suppressed image. For example, when thinking of buttercups to
enforce a yellow image, the picture of grass surrounding the flowers
brought back the suppressed green image. Concentration of the
attention on the image to be retained and an ignoring of the other
was, on the whole, the method usually and successfully followed. This
concentration was helped by imagining the image marked off into minute
squares which were carefully counted. Numerous other devices of a
similar character were used. Objects having many details and those
lending themselves readily to suggestions of action (as a china
animal) were the most helpful in enabling the subject to concentrate
his attention on their image to the exclusion of another. Some
subjects conceived themselves as tracing with a pencil the outline and
details of the retained image. Frequently, when the two images were
originally near each other and one alone was being held by close
scrutiny of its parts, when this scrutiny reached the part of the
image which was nearest the position of the suppressed image, the
suppressed image returned. The original association between the two
images was often broken up by change of the position or shape of the
one to be suppressed. But devices soon became 'worn out' and new ones
had to be resorted to.

Motor impulses played a large part in the process of suppression, such
as head and eye movement away from the image to be suppressed,
contraction of the muscles of the forehead and scalp, occasional
'setting' of the teeth, pressure together of the hands when they were
supposed to be holding the image and of the knees under like
circumstances. The eye traced outline and details and the more
actively it could be so employed the more successful was the
suppression. The sensations of accommodation and of focusing
previously referred to were repeated in this series. Enunciation also
was very common.

Frequent comparison of the image with the percept was made at the
close of experiments and showed the utmost diversity in size,
vividness and distinctness. During an experiment when the suppressed
image came back, it was rarely more than a mere blur of color; in two
or three instances the form came without color. Green was found to be
a difficult color to hold. C. had an orange after-image from a
retained yellow image, a red image having been suppressed. Between the
images of a gray disc and an orange disc, three inches apart, he had
a blue disc. J., while suppressing an orange disc and retaining a
green disc, noticed that 'when off the fovea the whole green disc
became bright orange.' There was always a sense of readiness on the
part of the suppressed image to slip back. As C. expressed this, "The
thing suppressed exists in the fringe of consciousness." The recurring
image usually came back at its original position even when the
retained image was being held in a different part of the field. In
such cases the retained image at once resumed its original place.

G. and J. were successful in proportion as they freed themselves from
the nervous strain of anxiety as to the result.


V. MOVEMENTS OF A SINGLE IMAGE, THE OBJECT HAVING BEEN MOVED DURING
THE EXPOSURE.


In an additional series of experiments with five of the same subjects
(B., G., H., I. and K.), the object was moved during the five seconds
of exposure either right, left, up or down, a distance of about six to
eight inches, and back again. In this way the subject was supplied
with further material of a pure memory type and it was believed that
some addition to our knowledge of the nature of the control of the
image might thus be made by securing data contrasting the construction
and the more purely reminiscent work of the imagination.

The question proposed is as follows: Does the fact that a certain
movement of an object was presented to the optical perception give an
advantage in time, or ease, to the mental recall of that object as so
moving, over its recall as moving in other directions? The subjective
experiences during such recalls may be expected to throw light upon
the matter.

The subject, with closed eyes, was requested to move the mental image
of the object in the four directions indicated above, returning it
after each movement to its original position, and the time of each
movement was recorded and, as well, the report of the subject with
regard to his subjective experiences. There were sixteen hundred
movements in all, eight hundred away from the original position of the
image (two hundred in each of the four directions mentioned above) and
eight hundred in returning to the original position.

Besides these experiments, other movements of the object during
exposure were made, such as inversion, rotation, change from the
vertical to the horizontal position and vice versa, rolling, oblique
movements and the subjective phenomena were recorded when the subject
had repeated with the image the designated movements. In all the
experiments the objects were moved by the hand of the conductor of the
experiment.

Table VII. gives the time record in seconds of these experiments for
each subject under each of the four variations: Movement of the object
to right, left, up, down.


TABLE VII.

  MOVEMENTS OF A SINGLE IMAGE, THE OBJECT HAVING BEEN MOVED DURING THE
  TIME OF OPTICAL STIMULATION. AVERAGE TIME IN SECONDS. TEN MOVEMENTS IN
  EACH DIRECTION FOR EACH SUBJECT.

                      _a_.   Object moved to right.

  Subject  R.  Return  L.  Return  Up  Return  Down  Return  Aver.
    B.    0.57        0.75        0.62         0.60          0.64
                0.35        0.42        0.37          0.62   0.44
    G.    0.55        0.60        0.55         0.57          0.57
                0.27        0.25        0.27          0.25   0.26
    H.    6.95        6.90        6.47         6.40          6.65
                5.40        5.55        4.50          5.00   5.11
    I.    2.05        2.10        2.05         2.22          2.10
                1.15        1.35        1.32          1.57   1.35
    K.    2.35        2.97        2.42         2.62          2.59
                1.17        1.20        1.17          1.55   1.28
  Ave.    2.49        2.66        2.02         2.48          2.52
                1.67        1.75        1.53          1.80   1.69

  Ave. to right, 2.49
  Ave. of other movements, 2.52
  Grand average, 2.10

                       _b_. Object moved to left.
    B.    0.72        0.60        0.62         0.60          0.64
                0.52        0.40        0.52          0.42   0.47
    G.    0.67        0.45        0.55         0.67          0.59
                0.42        0.35        0.35          0.37   0.37
    H.    8.22        5.95        6.52         6.42          6.78
                5.82        4.10        4.37          5.55   4.96
    I.    2.40        1.30        2.25         2.72          2.17
                1.97        1.22        0.95          1.47   1.40
    K.    2.45        2.57        2.25         2.00          2.30
                1.70        1.60        1.32          1.35   1.49
  Ave.    2.89        2.17        2.44         2.48          2.50
                2.09        1.53        1.50          1.83   1.74

  Ave. to left, 2.17
  Ave. of other movements, 2.60
  Grand average, 2.12

                      _c_. Object moved up.
    B.    0.75        0.62        0.42         0.57          0.59
                0.32        0.50        0.42          0.37   0.40
    G.    0.65        0.57        0.45         0.47          0.54
                0.35        0.27        0.25          0.27   0.29
    H.    6.77        6.25        6.85         6.15          6.57
                5.27        5.55        5.30          5.30   5.35
    I.    2.47        2.27        1.85         2.65          2.31
                1.25        1.00        0.87          1.10   1.05
    K.    3.40        2.72        1.42         2.20          2.44
                1.50        1.37        1.27          1.17   1.33
  Ave.    2.81        2.49        2.20         2.41          2.48
                1.74        1.74        1.62          1.70   1.69

  Ave. up, 2.20
  Ave. of other movements, 2.57
  Grand average, 2.08

                    _d_. Object moved down.
    B.    0.80        0.72        0.70         0.57          0.70
                0.42        0.42        0.50          0.42   0.44
    G.    0.60        0.60        0.55         0.47          0.55
                0.25        0.25        0.27          0.27   0.26
    H.    6.77        6.80        6.80         8.77          7.29
                5.90        6.35        4.55          5.55   5.59
    I.    2.30        2.20        2.22         1.80          2.13
                1.30        1.20        1.15          1.42   1.27
    K.    3.15        2.75        2.95         2.30          2.79
                1.62        1.57        1.12          1.25   1.39
  Ave.    2.72        2.61        2.64         2.78          2.69
                1.90        1.92        1.52          1.78   1.79

  Ave. down, 2.78
  Ave. of other movements, 2.66
  Grand average, 2.24


NUMERICAL.

As each movement may be compared with three other movements, and as
there were five subjects and four variations in the conditions, there
are sixty opportunities of comparing the time required to move the
image in the direction in which the object was moved with the time
taken to move it in the other directions. In 45 instances the time was
less, in 3 the same, and in 12 greater.

These twelve instances occurred with two subjects, three (to left)
occurring with K. and nine (three each right, up, down) occurring with
H. The cause was the same in all twelve instances, both H. and K.
reporting that (in these cases) they had great difficulty in obtaining
a reasonably vivid and distinct image when directed to move the image
in the direction in which the object had been moved. The attempt to
move the image resulted in a vague image spread continuously over the
entire area that had been covered by the moving object, and the effort
to obtain the image at the desired position only was serious and took
an appreciably longer time than usual. It is to be noted, also, that
the time usually taken by H. is uniformly very much greater than the
time taken by the other subjects. Yet, even with these instances
included, the average time of all movements of the image in the
direction in which the object had been moved is less than the average
time of the other movements, the former being 2.41 seconds, the
latter, 2.59 seconds.


TABLE VIII.

  MOVEMENTS OF A SINGLE IMAGE.

  I., OBJECT PREVIOUSLY MOVED; II., OBJECT NOT MOVED.

  Average Time Given in Seconds.

  Subjects:         B.                    G.                H.
                 I         II        I         II        I      II
  To right,  0.57      1.30      0.55      1.46      6.95      7.15
  Return,         0.35      0.58      0.27      0.92      5.40      4.51
  To left,   0.60      1.06      0.45      1.15      5.95      6.42
  Return,         0.40      0.73      0.35      0.89      4.10      4.41
  Up,        0.42      1.05      0.45      0.99      6.85      5.96
  Return,         0.42      0.46      0.25      0.76      5.30      4.36
  Down,      0.57      1.10      0.47      0.82      8.77      5.85
  Return,         0.42      0.45      0.27      0.06      5.55      4.40
  General    0.54      1.13      0.48      1.10      7.13      6.34
  Averages,       0.40      0.55      0.28      0.66      5.09      4.42


  Subjects:         I.                    K.
                 I         II        I         II
  To right,  2.05      1.28      2.35      4.80
  Return,         1.15      0.67      1.17      2.40
  To left,   1.30      1.34      2.57      4.63
  Retur,          1.22      0.62      1.60      2.73
  Up,        1.85      1.62      1.42      3.29
  Return,         0.87      0.86      1.27      1.90
  Down,      1.80      1.36      2.30      3.27
  Return,         1.42      0.72      1.25      1.56
  General    1.75      1.40      2.16      4.00
  Averages,       1.16       0.72     1.32      2.15


If the record of H. is omitted from Table VII., _a, c, _and _d_, and
that of K. from VII., _b_ (as these are the records of the twelve
exceptions), the former average becomes 1.44 seconds, the latter 1.86
seconds.

The following table affords the means of comparing the time taken in
moving the image in the direction in which the object had been moved
with the time taken in moving the image in the same direction when
there had been no movement of the object. The averages are obtained
from the records of Tables VII. and I.

We have here twenty comparisons each of movements away from the
original positions and movements back to the original positions:

    In the first case, 15 took less time under I., 5 took more
    time under I.

    The 5 cases of more time occurred with two subjects (H., 3 and
    I., 2).

    In the second case, 12 took less time under I., 8 took more
    time under I.

    The 8 cases of more time occurred with three subjects (G., 1;
    H., 3; I., 4).

If we omit H.'s record and take the general averages for each subject,
we find the following advantages in time in form of movements where
the object had been moved;

   B.,       0.59 seconds.
   G.,       0.52    "
   K.,       1.84    "

But I., 0.35 seconds in favor of movements when the object had not
been moved.

Combining these results, we have 0.74 sec. as the average gain in time
for these four subjects.


SUBJECTIVE.

With one exception (G.), the subjects found Movements I., movements in
the direction in which the object had been moved, easier than
Movements II. In Movements II. the eye seemed to construct and compel
the motion, which was not the case with Movements I., in which the eye
followed the motion. The distance to which the image went in Movements
I. seemed predetermined, and these movements seemed exact copies of
the original movement of the object, being purely reminiscent and
reproducing its irregularities when there were any. Also, the image
was usually seen _in transitu_ both out and back, which was never the
case with Movements II. Eye movement and enunciation were much less
frequent and the image was more vivid and distinct in Movements I.






        STUDIES IN ÆSTHETIC PROCESSES.