HOW I WENT TO SEA AND WAS SHIPWRECKED

I was born at York, in England, on the first of March, 1632. From the
time that I was quite a young child I had felt a great wish to spend
my life at sea, and as I grew, so did this taste grow more and more
strong; till at last on September first, 1651, I ran away from my
school and home, and found my way on foot to Hull, where I soon got a
place on board a ship.

Never did any young adventurer's misfortunes begin sooner or continue
longer than mine, for when we were far out at sea, some Turks in a
small ship came on our track in full chase. After a long pursuit our
vessel was captured, and all on board were taken as slaves.

The chief of the Turks took me as his prize to a port which was held
by the Moors. There I remained in slavery for several years, and
bitterly did I repent my rash act in leaving my good parents in
England.

At length I found an opportunity to escape to a vessel that was
passing by, and was kindly received by the captain, who proved to be
an English sailor bound on a voyage of trade.

I had not been aboard more than twelve days when a high wind took us
off, we knew not where. All at once there was a cry of "Land!" and the
ship struck on a bank of sand, in which she sank so deep that we could
not get her off. At last we found that we must make up our minds to
leave her and get to shore as well as we could. There had been a boat
at her stern, but we found it had been torn off by the force of the
waves. One small boat was still left on the ship's side, so we got
into it.

There we were, all of us, on the wild sea. The heart of s each now
grew faint, our cheeks were pale, and our eyes were dim, for there was
but one hope, and that was to find some bay, and so get in the lee of
the land.

The sea grew more and more rough, and its white foam would curl and
boil till at last the waves in their wild sport burst on the boat's
side, and we were all thrown out.

I could swim well, but the force of the waves made me lose my breath
too much to do so. At length one large wave took me to the shore and
left me high and dry, though half dead with fear. I got on my feet and
made the best of my way for the land; but just then the curve of a
huge wave rose up as high as a hill, and this I had no strength to
keep from, so it took me back to the sea. I did my best to float on
the top, and held my breath to do so. The next wave was quite as high,
and shut me up in its bulk. I held my hands down tight to my sides,
and then my head shot out at the top of the waves. This gave me
breath, and soon my feet felt the ground.

I stood quite still for a short time, to let the sea run back from me,
and then I set off with all my might to the shore, but yet the waves
caught me, and twice more did they take me back, and twice more land
me on the shore. I thought the last wave would have been the death
of me, for it drove me on a piece of rock, and with such force as to
leave me in a kind of swoon. I soon regained my senses and got up to
the cliffs close to the shore, where I found some grass out of the
reach of the sea. There I sat down, safe on land at last.

I felt so wrapped in joy that all I could do was to walk up and down
the coast, now lift up my hands, now fold them on my breast and thank
God for all that he had done for me, when the rest of the men were
lost. I now cast my eyes round me, to find out what kind of place it
was that I had been thus thrown in, like a bird in a storm. Then all
the glee I felt at first left me; for I was wet and cold, and had no
dry clothes to put on, no food to eat, and not a friend to help me.

I feared that there might be wild beasts here, and I had no gun to
shoot them with, or to keep me from their jaws. I had but a knife and
a pipe.

It now grew dark; and where was I to go for the night? I thought the
top of some high tree would be a good place to keep me out of harm's
way; and that there I might sit and think of death, for, as yet, I had
no hope of life.

Well, I went to my tree and made a kind of nest to sleep in. Then I
cut a stick to keep off beasts of prey, in case any should come, and
-fell asleep just as if the branch I lay on had been a bed of down.

When I woke up, it was broad day; the sky too was clear and the sea
calm. But I saw from the top of the tree that in the night the ship
had left the bank of sand, and lay but a mile from me. I soon threw
off my clothes, took to the sea, and swam up to the wreck. But how was
I to get on deck? I had gone twice around the ship, when a piece of
rope caught my eye, which hung down from her side so low that at first
the waves hid it. By the help of this rope I got on board.


HOW I MADE AND USED A RAFT

I found that there was a bulge in the ship, and that she had sprung
a leak. You may be sure that my first thought was to look around for
some food, and I soon made my way to the bin where the bread was kept,
and ate some of it as I went to and fro, for there was no time to
lose. What I stood most in need of was a boat to take the goods to
shore. But it was vain to wish for that which could not be had; and as
there were some spare yards in the ship, two or three large planks,
and a mast or two; I fell to work with these to make a raft.

I put four spars side by side, and laid short bits of plank on them,
crossways, to make my raft strong. Though these planks would bear my
own weight, they were too slight to bear much of my freight. So I took
a saw, which was on board, and cut a mast in three lengths, and these
gave great strength to the raft. I found some bread and rice, a Dutch
cheese, and some dry goat's flesh.

My next task was to screen my goods from the spray of the sea; and
this did not take long, for there were three large chests on board
which held all, and these I put on the raft.

"See, here is a prize!" said I, out loud (though there was none to
hear me); "now I shall not starve." For I found four large guns. But
how was my raft to be got to land? I had no sail, no oars; and a gust
of wind would make all my store slide off. Yet there were three things
which I was glad of a calm sea, a tide which set in to the shore, and
a slight breeze to blow me there.

I had the good luck to find some oars in a part of the ship in which I
had made no search till now. With these I put to sea, and for half a
mile my raft went well; but soon I found it driven to one side. At
length I saw a creek, up which, with some toil, I took my raft.

I saw that there were birds on the isle, and I shot one of them. Mine
must have been the first gun that had been heard there since the world
was made; for, at the sound of it, whole flocks of birds flew up, with
loud cries, from all parts of the wood. The shape of the beak of the
one I shot was like that of a hawk, but the claws were not so large.

I now went back to my raft to land my stores, and this took up the
rest of the day: What to do at night I knew not, nor where to find a
safe place to land my stores on. I did not like to lie down on the
ground, for fear of beasts of prey, as well as snakes; but there was
no cause for these fears, as I have since found. I put the chests and
boards round me as well as I could, and made a kind of hut for the
night.

As there was still a great store of things left in the ship which
would be of use to me, I thought that I ought to bring them to land at
once; for I knew that the first storm would break up the ship. So I
went on board, and took good care this time not to load my raft too
much.

The first thing sought for was the tool chest; and in it were some
bags of nails, spikes, saws, knives, and such things; but best of all,
I found a stone to grind my tools on. There were two or three flasks,
some large bags of shot, and a roll of lead; but this last I had not
the strength to hoist up to the ship's side, so as to get it on my
raft. There were some spare sails too, which I brought to shore.

Now that I had two freights of goods on hand, I made a tent with the
ship's sails, to stow them in, and cut the poles for it from the wood.
I now took all the things out of the casks and chests and put the
casks in piles round the tent to give it strength; and when this was
done, I shut up the door with the boards, spread on the ground one of
the beds which I had brought from the ship, laid two guns close to my
head and went to bed for the first time. I slept all night, for I was
much in need of rest.

The next day I was sad and sick at heart, for I felt how dull it was
to be thus cut off from all the rest of the world! I had no great wish
for work; but there was too much to be done for me to dwell long on my
sad lot. Each day, as it came, I went off to the wreck to fetch more
things; and I brought back as much as the raft would hold.

The last time I went to the wreck the wind blew so hard that I made
up my mind to go on board next time at low tide. I found some tea and
some gold coin; but as to the gold, it made me laugh to look at it.
"O drug!" said I, "thou art of no use to me! I care not to save thee.
Stay where thou art till the ship goes down; then go thou with it!"
Still, I thought I might just as well take it; so I put it in a piece
of the sail and threw it on deck, that I might place it on the raft.
By-and-by the wind blew from the shore, so I had to hurry back with
all speed; for I knew that at the turn of the tide I should find it
hard work to get to land at all. But in spite of the high wind I came
to my home all safe. At dawn I put my head out and cast my eyes on the
sea, when lo! no ship was there!. This great change in the face of
things, and the loss of such a friend, quite struck me down. Yet I was
glad to think that I had brought to shore all that could be of use to
me. I had now to look out for some spot where I could make my home.
Halfway up the hill there was a small plain, four or five score feet
long and twice as broad; and as it had a full view of the sea, I
thought that it would be a good place for my house.


HOW I MADE MYSELF A HOME ON THE ISLAND

I first dug a trench round a space which took in twelve yards; and in
this I drove two rows of stakes, till they stood firm like piles, five
and a half feet from the ground. I made the stakes close and tight
with bits of rope and put small sticks on the top of them in the shape
of spikes. This made so strong a fence that no man or beast could get
in. The door of my house was on top, and I had to climb up to it by
steps, which I took in with me, so that no one else might come up by
the same way. Close to the back of the house stood a sand rock, in
which I made a cave, and laid all the earth that I had dug out of it
round my house, to the height of a foot and a half. I had to go out
once a day in search of food. The first time, I saw some, goats, but
they were too shy to let me get near them. At first I thought that for
the lack of pen and ink I should lose all note of time; so I made a
large post, in the shape of a cross, on which I cut these words: "I
came on shore here on the thirtieth of September, 1659." On the side
of this post I made a notch each day, and this I kept up till the
last. I have not yet said a word of my four pets, which were two cats,
a dog, and a parrot. You may guess how fond I was of them, for they
were all the friends left to me. I brought the dog and two cats from
the ship. The dog would fetch things for me at all times, and by his
bark, his whine, his growl, and his tricks, he would all but talk to
me; yet he could not give me thought for thought. If I could but have
had someone near me to find fault with, or to find fault with me, what
a treat it would have been!

I was a long way out of the course of ships; and oh! how dull it was
to be cast on this lone spot with no one to love, no one to make me
laugh, no one to make me weep, no one to make me think.. It was dull
to roam day by day from the wood to the shore, and from the shore back
to the wood, and feed on my own thoughts all the while.

So much for the sad view of my case; but like most things, it had a
bright side as well as a dark one. For here was I safe on land, while
all the rest of the ship's crew were lost. True, I was cast on a rough
and rude part of the globe, but there were no beasts of prey on it to
kill or hurt me. God had sent the ship so near to me that I had got
from it all things to meet my wants for the rest of my days. Let life
be what it might, there was surely much to thank God for. And I soon
gave up all dull thoughts, and did not so much as look out for a sail.

My goods from the wreck remained in the cave for more than ten months;
I decided then that it was time to put them right, as they took up all
the space and left me no room to turn in; so I made my small cave a
large one, and dug it out a long way back in the sand rock.

Then I brought the mouth of the cave up to my fence, and so made a
back way to my house. This done, I put shelves on each side to hold my
goods, which made the cave look like a shop full of stores. To make
these shelves was a very difficult task and took a long time; for to
make a board I was forced to cut down a whole tree, chop away with my
ax till one side was flat, and then cut at the other side till the
board was thin enough, when I smoothed it with my adz. But, in this
way, out of each tree I would get only one plank. I made for myself
also a table and a chair, and finally got my castle, as I called it,
in good order.

I usually rose early and worked till noon, when I ate my meal; then I
went out with my gun, after which I worked once more till the sun had
set; and then to bed. It took me more than a week to change the shape
and size of my cave. Unfortunately, I made it far too large, for,
later on, the earth fell in from the roof; and had I been in it when
this took place, I should have lost my life. I had now to set up posts
in my cave, with planks on the top of them, so as to make a roof of
wood.



HOW I SUPPLIED MY NEEDS


I had to go to bed at dusk, till I made a lamp of goat's fat, which I
put in a clay dish; and this, with a piece of hemp for a wick, made
a good light. As I had found a, use for the bag which had held the
fowls' food on board ship, I shook out from it the husks of grain.
This was just at the time when the great rains fell, and in the course
of a month, blades of rice and barley sprang up. As time went by, and
the grain was ripe, I kept it, and took care to sow it each year; but
I could not boast of a crop of grain for three years.

I knew that tools would be my first want and that I should have to
grind mine on the stone, as they were blunt and worn with use. But as
it took both hands to hold the tool, I could not turn the stone; so I
made a wheel by which I could move it with my foot. This was no small
task, but I took great pains with it, and at length it was done.

I had now been in the isle twelve months, and I thought it was time to
go all round it in search of its woods, springs, and creeks. So I set
off, and brought back with me limes and grapes in their prime, large
and ripe. I had hung the grapes in the sun to dry, and in a few days'
time went to fetch them, that I might lay up a store. The vale on the
banks of which they grew was fresh and green, and a clear, bright
stream ran through it, which gave so great a charm to the spot as to
make me wish to live there.

But there was no view of the sea from this vale, while from my house
no ships could come on my side of the isle and not be seen by me; yet
the cool, soft banks were so sweet and new to me that much of my time
was spent there.

In the first of the three years in which I had grown barley, I had
sown it too late; in the next it was spoiled by the drought; but the
third year's crop had sprung up well.

Few of us think of the cost at which a loaf of bread is made. Of
course, there was no plow here to turn up the earth, and no spade to
dig it with, so I made one with wood; but this was soon worn out, and
for want of a rake I made use of the bough of a tree. When I had got
the grain home, I had to thresh it, part the grain from the chaff, and
store it up. Then came the want of sieves to clean it, of a mill to
grind it, and of yeast to make bread of it.

If I could have found a large stone, slightly hollow on top, I might,
by pounding the grain on it with another round stone, have made very
good meal. But all the stones I could find were too soft; and in the
end I had to make a sort of mill of hard wood, in which I burned a
hollow place, and in that pounded the grain into' meal with a heavy
stick.

Baking I did by building a big fire, raking away the ashes, and
putting the dough on the hot place, covered with a kind of basin made
of clay, over which 'I had heaped the red ashes.

Thus my bread was made, though I had no tools; and no one could say
that I did not earn it by the sweat of my brow. When the rain kept me
indoors, it was good fun to teach my pet bird Poll to talk; but so
mute were all things round me that the sound of my own voice made me
start.

My chief wants now were jars, pots, cups, and plates, but I knew not
how I could make them. At last I went in search of clay, and found a
bank of it a mile from my house; but it was quite a joke to see the
queer shapes and forms that I made out of it. For some of my pots and
jars were too weak to bear their own weight; and they would fall out
here, and in there, in all sorts of ways; while some, when they were
put in the sun to bake, would crack with the heat of its rays. You may
guess what my joy was when at last a pot was made which would stand
the fire, so that I could boil the meat for broth!

The next thing to turn my thoughts to was the ship's boat, which lay
on the high ridge of sand, where it had been thrust by the storm which
had cast me on these shores. But it lay with the keel to the sky, so
I had to dig the sand from it and turn it up with the help of a pole.
When I had done this, I found it was all in vain, for I had not the
strength to launch it. So all I could do now was to make a boat of
less size out of a tree; and I found one that was just fit for it,
which grew not far from the shore, but I could no more stir this than
I could the ship's boat.

"Well," thought I, "I must give up the boat, and with it all my hopes
of leaving the isle. But I have this to think of: I am lord of the
whole isle; in fact, a king. I have wood with which I might build a
fleet, and grapes, if not grain, to freight it with, though all my
wealth is but a few gold coins." For these I had no sort of use, and
could have found it in my heart to give them all for a peck of peas
and some ink, which last I stood much in need of. But it was best to
dwell more on what I had than on what I had not.

I now must needs try once more to build a boat, but this time it was
to have a mast, for which the ship's sails would be of great use. I
made a deck at each end to keep out the spray of the sea, a bin for my
food, and a rest for my gun, with a flap to screen it from the wet.
More than all, the boat was one of such a size that I could launch it.

My first cruise was up and down the creek, but soon I got bold, and
made the whole round of my isle. I took with me bread, cakes, a pot of
rice, half a goat, and two greatcoats, one of which was to lie on, and
one to put on at night. I set sail in the sixth year of my reign. On
the east side of the isle there was a large ridge of rocks which lay
two miles from the shore, and a shoal of sand lay for half a mile from
the rocks to the beach. To get round this point I had to sail a great
way out to sea; and here I all but lost my life.

But I got back to my home at last. On my way there, quite worn out
with the toils of the boat, I lay down in the shade to rest my limbs,
and slept. But judge, if you can what a start I gave when a voice woke
me out of my sleep, and spoke my name three times! A voice in this
wild place!, To call me by name, too! Then the voice said, "Robin!
Robin Crusoe! Where are you? Where have you been? How came you here?"
But now I saw it all; for at the top of the hedge sat Poll, who did
but say the words she had been taught by me.

I now went in search of some goats, and laid snares for them, with
rice for a bait. I had set the traps in the night, and found they had
stood, though the bait was all gone. So I thought of a new way to take
them, which was to make a pit and lay sticks and grass on it so as to
hide it; and in this way I caught an old goat and some kids. But the
old goat was much too fierce for me, soy I let him go.

I brought all the young ones home, and let them fast a long time, till
at last they fed from my hand and were quite tame. I kept them in a
kind of park, in which there were trees to screen them from the sun.
At first my park was half a mile round; but it struck me that, in so
great a space, the kids would soon get as wild as if they had the
range of the whole vale, and that it would be as well to give them
less room; so I had to make a hedge, which took me three months to
plant. My park held a flock of twelve goats, and in two years time
there were more than two score.

My dog sat at meals with me, and one cat on each side of me, on
stools, and we had Poll to talk to us. Now for a word or two as to the
dress in which I made a tour round the isle. I could but think how
droll it would look in the streets of the town in which I was born.

I usually wore a high cap of goatskin, with a long flap that hung down
to keep the sun and rain from my neck, a coat made from the skin of a
goat, too, the skirts of which came down to my hips, and the same on
my legs, with no shoes, but flaps of the fur round my shins. I had a
broad belt of the same around my waist, which drew on with two thongs;
and from it, on my right side; hung a saw and an ax; and on my left
side a pouch for the shot. My beard had not been cut since I came
here. But no more need be said of my looks, for there were few to see
me.


HOW I DISCOVERED A FOOTPRINT AND SAVED FRIDAY

A strange sight was now in store for me, which was to change the whole
course of my life in the isle.

One day at noon, while on a stroll down to a part of the shore that
was new to me, what should I see on the sand but the print of a man's
foot! I felt as if I were bound by a spell, and could not stir from
the spot.

By-and-by I stole a look around me, but no one was in sight. What
could this mean? I went three or four times to look at it. There it
was-the print of a man's foot: toes, heel, and all the parts of a
foot. How could it have come there?

My head swam with fear; and as I left the spot, I made two or three
steps, and then took a look around me; then two steps more, and did
the same thing. I took fright at the stump of an old tree, and ran to
my house, as if for my life. How could aught in the shape of a man
come to that shore, and I not know it? Where was the ship that brought
him? Then a vague dread took hold of my mind, that some man, or set of
men, had found me out; and it might be that they meant to kill me, or
rob me of all I had.

Fear kept me indoors for three days, till the want of food drove me
out. At last I was so bold as to go down to the coast to look once
more at the print of the foot, to see if it was the same shape as my
own. I found it was not so large by a great deal; so it was clear that
it was not one of my own footprints and that there were men in the
isle.

One day as I went from the hill to the coast, a scene lay in front of
me which made me sick at heart. The spot was spread with the bones of
men. There was a round place dug in the earth, where a fire had been
made, and here some men had come to feast. Now that I had seen this
sight, I knew not how to act; I kept close to my home, and would
scarce stir from it save to milk my flock of goats.

A few days later I was struck by the sight of some smoke, which came
from a fire no more than two miles off. From this time I lost all my
peace of mind. Day and night a dread would haunt me that the men who
had made this fire would find me out. I went home and drew up my
steps, but first I made all things round me look wild and rude. To
load my gun was the next thing to do; and I thought it would be best
to stay at home and hide.

But this was not to be borne long. I had no spy to send out, and all I
could do was to get to the top of the hill and keep a good lookout.
At last, through my glass, I could see a group of wild men join in a
dance round their fire. As soon as they stopped, I took two guns and
slung a sword on my side; then with all speed I set off to the top of
the hill, once more to have a good view.

This time I made up my mind to go up to the men, but not with a view
to kill them, for I felt that it would be wrong to do so. With a heavy
load of arms it took me two hours to reach the spot where the fire
was; and by the time I got there the men had all gone; but I saw them
in four boats out at sea.

Down on the shore there was a proof of what the work of these men had
been. The signs of their feast made me sick at heart, and I shut my
eyes. I durst not fire my gun when I went out for food on that side of
the isle, lest there should be some of the men left, who might hear
it, and so find me out.

From this time all went well with me for two years; but it was not to
last. One day, as I stood on the hill, I saw six boats on the shore.
What could this mean? Where were the men who had brought them? And
what had they come for? I saw through my glass that there were a score
and a half at least on the east side of the isle. They had meat on the
fire, round which I could see them dance. They then took a man from
one of the boats, who was bound hand and foot; but when they loosed
his bonds, he set off as fast as his feet would take him, and in a
straight line to my house.

To tell the truth, when I saw all the rest of the men run to catch
him, my hair stood on end with fright. In the creek he swam like a
fish, and the plunge which he took brought him through it in a few
strokes. All the men now gave up the chase but two, and they swam
through the creek, but by no means so fast as the slave had done.

Now, I thought, was the time to help the poor man, and my heart told
me it would be right to do so. I ran down my steps with my two guns,
and went with all speed up the hill, and then down by a short cut to
meet them.

I gave a sign to the poor slave to come to me, and at the same time
went up to meet the two men who were in chase of him. I made a rush at
the first of these, to knock him down with the stock of my gun, and he
fell. I saw the one who was left aim at me with his bow; so, to save
my life, I aimed carefully and shot him dead.

The smoke and noise from my gun gave the poor slave who had been bound
such a shock that he stood still on the spot, as if he had been in a
trance. I gave a loud shout for him to come to me, and I took care to
show him that I was a friend, and made all the signs I could think
of to coax him up to me. At length he came, knelt down to kiss the
ground, and then took hold of my foot and set it on his head. All this
meant that he was my slave; and I bade him rise and made much of him.

I did not like to take my slave to my house, or to my cave; so I threw
down some straw from the rice plant for him to sleep on, and gave him
some bread and a bunch of dry grapes to eat. He was a fine man, with
straight, strong limbs, tall and young. His hair was thick, like wool,
and black. His head was large and high, and he had bright black eyes.
He was of a dark-brown hue; his face was round and his nose small, but
not flat; he had a good mouth with thin lips, with which he could give
a soft smile; and his teeth were as white as snow.

Toward evening I had been out to milk my goats, and when he saw me, he
ran to me and lay down-on the ground to show me his thanks. He then
put his head on the ground and set my foot on his head, as he had done
at first. He took all the means he could think of to let me know
that he would serve me all his life; and I gave a sign to make him
understand that I thought well of him.

The next thing was to think of some name to call him by. I chose that
of the sixth day of the week, Friday, as he came to me on that day. I
took care not to lose sight of him all that night. When the sun rose,
we event up to the top of the hill to look out for the men; but as we
could not see them or their boats, it was clear that they had left the
isle.

I now set to work to make my man a cap of hare's skin, and gave him a
goat's skin to wear round his waist. It was a great source of pride to
him to find that his clothes were as good as my own.

At night I kept my guns, swords, and bow close to my side; but there
was no need for this, as my slave was, in sooth, most true to me. He
did all that he was set to do, with his whole heart in the work; and I
knew that he would lay down his life to save mine. What could a man do
more than that? And oh, the joy to have him here to cheer me in this
lone isle!



HOW FRIDAY LEARNED MY WAYS


I did my best to teach him, so like a child he was, to do and feel all
that was right. I found him apt and full of fun; and he took great
pains to understand and learn all that I could tell him.

One day I sent him to beat out and sift some grain. I let him see me
make the bread, and he soon did all the work. I felt quite a love for
his true, warm heart, and he soon learned to talk to me. One day I
said, "Do the men of your tribe win in fight?" He told me, with a
smile, that they did. "Well, then," said I, "how came they to let
their foes take you?"

"They run one, two, three, and make go in the boat that time."

"Well, and what do the men do with those they take?"

"Eat them all up."

This was not good news for me, but I went on, and said, "Where do they
take them?"

"Go to next place where they think."

"Do they come here?"

"Yes, yes, they come here, come else place, too."

"Have you been here with them twice?"

"Yes, come there."

He meant the northwest side of the isle, so to this spot I took him
the next day. He knew the place, and told me he was there once, and
with him twelve men. To let me know this, he placed twelve stones all
in a row, and made me count them.

"Are not the boats lost on your shore now and then?"

He said that there was no fear, and that no boats were lost. He told
me that up a great way by the moon--that is, where the moon then came
up--there dwelt a tribe of white men like me, with beards. I felt sure
that they must have come from Spain, to work the gold mines. I put
this to him: "Could I go from this isle and join those men?"

"Yes, yes, you may go in two boats."

It was hard to see how one man could go in two boats, but what he
meant was a boat twice as large as my own.

To please my poor slave, I gave him a sketch of my whole life; I told
him where I was born and where I spent my days when a child. He was
glad to hear tales of the land of my birth, and of the trade which we
kept up, in ships, with all parts of the known world. I gave him a
knife and a belt, which made him dance with joy.

One day as we stood on the top of the hill at the east side of the
isle, I saw him fix his eyes on the mainland, and stand for a long
time gazing at it; then jump and sing, and call out to me.

"What do you see?" said I.

"O joy!" said he, with a fierce glee in his eyes, "O glad! There see
my land!"

Why did he strain his eyes to stare at this land as if he had a wish
to be there? It put fears in my mind which made me feel far less at my
ease with him. Thought I, if he should go back to his home, he will
think no more of what I have taught him and done for him. He will be
sure to tell the rest of his tribe all my ways, and come back with, it
may be, scores of them, and kill me, and then dance round me, as they
did round the men, the last time they came on my isle.

But these were all false fears, though they found a place in my mind
for a long while; and I was not so kind to him now as I had been. From
this time I made it a rule, day by day, to find out if there were
grounds for my fears or not. I said, "Do you wish to be once more in
your own land?"

"Yes! I be much O glad to be at my own land."

"What would you do there? Would you turn wild, and be as you were?"

"No, no, I would tell them to be good, tell them eat bread, grain,
milk, no eat man more!"

"Why, they would kill you!"

"No, no, they no kill; they love learn."

He then told me that some white men who had come on their shores in a
boat had taught them a great deal.

"Then will you go back to your land with me?"

He said he could not swim so far, so I told him he should help me to
build a boat to go in. Then he said, "If you go, I go."

"I go? Why, they would eat me!"

"No, me make them much love you."

Then he told me, as well as he could, how kind they had been to some
white men. I brought out the large boat to hear what he thought of it,
but he said it was too small. We then went to look at the old ship's
boat, which, as it had been in the sun for years, was not at all in a
sound state. The poor man made sure that it would do. But how were we
to know this? I told him we should build a boat as large as that, and
that he should go home in it. He spoke not a word, but was grave and
sad.

"What ails you?" said I.

"Why you grieve mad with your man?"

"What do you mean? I am not cross with you."

"No cross? No cross with me? Why send your man home to his own land,
then?"

"Did you not tell me you would like to go back?"

"Yes, yes, we both there; no wish self there, if you not there!"

"And what should I do there?"

"You do great deal much good! You teach wild men be good men."

We soon set to work to make a boat that would take us both. The first
thing was to look out for some large tree that grew near the shore, so
that we could launch our boat when it was made. My slave's plan was to
burn the wood to make it the right shape; but as mine was to hew it, I
set him to work with my tools, and in two months' time we had made a
good, strong boat; but it took a long while to get her down to the
shore and float her.

Friday had the whole charge of her; and, large as she was, he made her
move with ease, and said, "Me think she go there well, though great
blow wind!" He did not know that I meant to make a mast and sail. I
cut down a young fir tree for the mast, and then I set to work at the
sail. It made me laugh to see my man stand and stare, when he came to
watch me sail the boat. But he soon gave a jump, a laugh, and a clap
of the hands when for the first time he saw the sail jib and fall, now
on this side, now on that.

The next thing to do was to stow our boat up in the creek, where we
dug a small dock; and when the tide was low, we made a dam to keep out
the sea. The time of year had now come for us to set sail, so we got
out all our stores to put them into the boat.


THE ENGLISH SHIP AND HOW I SAILED FOR HOME

I was fast asleep in my hutch one morning, when my man Friday came
running in to me and called aloud, "Master, master, they are come,
they are come!" I jumped up and went out, as soon as I could get my
clothes on, through my little grove, which, by the way, was by this
time grown to be a very thick wood. I went without my arms, which was
not my custom; but I was surprised when, turning my eyes to the sea, I
saw a boat at about a league and a half distance, standing in for the
shore, with a shoulder-of-mutton sail, as they call it, and the wind
blowing pretty fair to bring them in; also I saw that they did not
come from that side which the shore lay on, but from the south end of
the island.

Upon this I hastily called Friday in, and bade him lie close, for we
did not know yet whether they were friends or enemies. In the next
place, I went in to fetch my glass, to see what I could make of them;
and, having climbed up to the top of the hill, I saw a ship lying at
anchor, at about two leagues from me, but not above a league and a
half from the shore. It seemed to be an English ship, and the boat
looked like an English longboat.

They ran their boat on shore upon the beach, at about half a mile from
me; which was very happy for me, else they would have landed just at
my door, as I may say, and would soon have beaten me out of my caste,
and perhaps have plundered me of all I had. When they were on shore,
I saw they were Englishmen; there were, in all, eleven men, whereof
three of them I found were unarmed, and, as I thought, bound; and when
the first four or five of them had jumped on shore, they took those
three out of the boat as prisoners; one of the three I could see using
the gestures of entreaty and despair; the other two, I could see,
lifted up their hands and appeared concerned, but not to such a degree
as the first.

I was shocked and terrified at the sight of all this and knew not what
the meaning of it could be. Friday called out to me in English, as
well as he could, "O master! you see English mans eat prisoner as well
as savage mans." "Why, Friday," said I, "do you think they are going
to eat them, then?" "Yes," said Friday, "they will eat them." "No,
no," said I, "Friday, I am afraid they will murder them indeed; but
you may be sure they will not eat them."

I expected every minute to see the three prisoners killed, so I fitted
myself up for a battle, though with much caution, knowing that I had
to do with another kind of enemy than if I were fighting savages.
I ordered Friday also to load himself with arms. I took myself two
fowling pieces, and I gave him two muskets. My figure was very fierce;
I had my goatskin coat on, with the great cap, a naked sword, two
pistols in my belt, and a gun upon each shoulder.

It was my design not to make any attempt till it was dark; but about
two o'clock, being the heat of the day, I found, in short, they had
all gone straggling into the woods, and, as I thought, had all lain
down to sleep. The three poor, distressed men, too anxious for their
condition to get any sleep, had, however, sat down under the shelter
of a great tree.

I resolved to discover myself to them, and learn something of their
condition; immediately I marched toward them, my man Friday at a good
distance behind me, as formidable for his arms as I, but not making
quite so staring a specter-like figure as I did. I came as near them
undiscovered as I could, and then, before any of them saw me, I called
aloud to them in Spanish, "Who are ye, sirs?"

They gave a start at my voice and at my strange dress, and made a move
as if they would flee from me. I said, ``Do not fear me, for it may be
that you have a friend at hand, though you do not think it." "He must
be sent from the sky, then," said one of them with a grave look; and
he took off his hat to me at the same time. "All help is from thence,
sir," I said. "But what can I do to aid you? You look as if you had
some load of grief on your breast. A moment ago I saw one of the men
lift his sword as if to kill you."

The tears ran down the poor man's face as he said, "Is this a god, or
is it but a man?" "Have no doubt on that score, sir," said I, "for a
god would not have come with a dress like this. No, do not fear-nor
raise your hopes too high; for you see but a man, yet one who will do
all he can to help you. Your speech shows me that you come from the
same land as I do. I will do all I can to serve you. Tell me your
case."

"Our case, sir, is too long to tell you while they who would kill us
are so near. My name is Paul. To be short, sir, my crew have thrust me
out of my ship, which you see out there, and have left me here to die.
It was as much as I could do to make them sheathe their swords, which
you saw were drawn to slay me. They have set me down in this isle with
these two men, my friend here, and the ship's mate."

"Where have they gone?" said I.

"There, in the wood close by. I fear they may have seen and heard us.
If they have, they will be sure to kill us all."

"Have they firearms?"

"They have four guns, one of which is in the boat."

"Well, then, leave all to me!"

"There are two of the men," said he, "who are worse than the rest. All
but these I feel sure would go back to work the ship."

I thought it was best to speak out to Paul at once, and

I said, "Now if I save your life, there are two things which you must
do."

But he read my thoughts, and said, "If you save my life, you shall do
as you like with me and my ship, and take her where you please."

I saw that the two men, in whose charge the boat had been left, had
come on shore; so the first thing I did was to send Friday to fetch
from it the oars, the sail, and the gun. And now the ship might be
said to be in our hands. When the time came for the men to go back to
the ship, they were in a great rage; for, as the boat had now no sail
or oars, they knew not how to get out to their ship.

We heard them say that it was a strange sort of isle, for sprites had
come to the boat, to take off the sails and oars. W e could see them
run to and fro, with great rage; then go and sit in the boat to rest,
and then come on shore once more. When they drew near to us, Paul and
Friday would fain have had me fall on them at once. But my wish was to
spare them, and kill as few as possible. I told two of my men to creep
on their hands and knees close to the ground so that they might not be
seen, and when they got 'up to the men, not to fire till I gave the
word.

They had not stood thus long when three of the crew came up to us.
Till now we had but heard their voices, but when they came so near as
to be seen, Paul and Friday shot at them. Two of the men fell dead,
and they were the worst of the crew, and the third ran off. At the
sound of the guns I came up, but it was so dark that the men could not
tell if there were three of us or three score.

It fell out just as I wished, for I heard the men ask: "To whom must
we yield, and where are they?" Friday told them that Paul was there
with the king of the isle, who had brought with him a crowd of men!
At this, one of the crew said: "If Paul will spare our lives, we will
yield." "Then," said Friday, "you shall know the king's will." Then
Paul said to them: "You know my voice; if you lay down your arms, the
king will spare your lives."

They fell on their knees to beg the same of me. I took good care that
they did not see me, but I gave them my word that they should all
live, that I should take four of them to work the ship, and that the
rest would be bound hand and foot for the good faith of the four. This
was to show them what a stern king I was.

Of course I soon set them free, and I put them in a way to take my
place on the isle. I told them of all my ways, taught them how to mind
the goats, how to work the farm, and how to make the bread. I gave
them a house to live in, firearms, tools and my two tame cats-in fact,
all that I owned but Poll and my gold.

As I sat on the top of the hill, Paul came up to me. He held out his
hand to point to the ship, and with much warmth took me to his arms
and said: "My dear friend, there is your ship! For this vessel is all
yours, and all that is in her, and so are all of us."

I made ready to go on board the ship, but told the captain I would
stay that night to get my things in shape, and asked him to go on
board in the meantime and keep things right on the ship.

I cast my eyes to the ship, which rode half a mile off the shore, at
the mouth of the creek, and near the place where I had brought my raft
to the land. Yes, there she stood, the ship that was to set me free
and to take hie where I might choose to go. She set her sails to the
wind, and her flags threw out their gay stripes in the breeze. Such a
sight was too much for me, and I fell down faint with joy.

Friday and Paul then went on board the ship, and Paul took charge of
her once more. We did not start that night, but at noon the next day I
left the isle-that lone isle, where I had spent so great a part of my
life.

When I took leave of this island, I carried on board a great goatskin
cap I had made, and my parrot; also the money which had lain by me so
long useless that it was grown rusty or tarnished, and could hardly
pass for gold till it had been a little rubbed and handled. And thus I
left the island, the nineteenth of December, as I found by the ship's
account, in the year 1686, after I had been upon it seven-and-twenty
years, two months, and nineteen days. In this vessel, after a long
voyage, I arrived in England the eleventh of June, in the year 1687.



NOTES AND QUESTIONS

Biography. Daniel Defoe (1659-1731), an English author, was born in
London. He was well educated and devoted himself chiefly to writing.
He was active in political life, and many of his early pamphlets were
attacks upon the government. Robinson Crusoe, his greatest story, is
a world classic. It is founded mainly on the adventures of Alexander
Selkirk, who told Defoe about his own experiences as a castaway on
an island. Defoe tells his story in simple, direct language, with
frequent use of details and illustrations.

Discussion. 1. Why was an ocean voyage so difficult and dangerous at
the time when Robinson Crusoe was written? 2. Find the lines that
describe what you think was the most difficult work undertaken by
Robinson Crusoe. 3. What under king required the most perseverance?
Find lines that show this. 4. At what time did Crusoe show the
greatest courage? Find lines that seem to yore to prove your answer is
correct. 5. What was the greatest disappointment that he had to bear
while on the island? 6. What do you think was the greatest happiness
he had? 7. Find lines that tell how Robinson Crusoe studied to make
something which was very necessary to him. 8. Mention something he
made that you have tried to make. 9. How did your result compare with
his? What reason can you give for this? 10. This story shows how
dependent we are upon the tools, the inventions, and the means of
protection that men have devised for making life happy. Crusoe had to
make for himself under great difficulties things that we think nothing
of. Show from the story how dependent we are upon the cooperation and
assistance of others. Imagine the cooperation that has been necessary
to give you milk, oranges or bananas, sugar for your dessert, meat for
your dinner. What has been done to give you the stove on which your
dinner is cooked, the fuel that it burns, the light that you use at
night, the telephone that you use? Crusoe had to get along without
such assistance. Do you owe anything, any return service, for what
you receive and use? If Crusoe's hut had taken fire, what would have
happened? What would happen if your home should catch fire? Who would
pay for the help given you? If Crusoe had been attacked by robbers,
what would have happened? What keeps you safe at night? If Crusoe had
wished to go on a long journey, what would have been necessary? Who
would help you if you had to take such a journey? 12. Tell a story
about your debt to someone for an invention or discovery that makes
your life pleasanter or safer. Tell a story about your debt for the
sugar you use for your desert. Tell a story to illustrate what the
government does for you. 13. Class readings: Select passages to be
read aloud in class. 14. Outline for testing silent reading. Tell the
story briefly in your own words, using the topic headings given in
the book. 15. You will enjoy seeing the pictures in the edition of
Robinson Crusoe that is illustrated by N. C. Wyeth. 16. Find in the
Glossary the meaning of: stern; bulge; spikes; adz; limes; mute;
league; thong; fowling; piece. 17. Pronounce: pursuit; swoon;
spars; drought;; sieve; launch; cruise; shoal; tour; jib; gesture;
formidable; sheathe; sprites.

Phrases for Study lee of the land, in sooth, spare yards, I found him
apt, O drug, standing in for the shore, give me thought for thought,
appeared concerned, whole round of my isle, discover myself to them,
bound by a spell, specter-like figure.



STORIES OF ADVENTURE

A BACKWARD LOOK

Now that you have read all of these tales of adventure, perhaps some
evening you will curl up in that big chair in a cozy place and will
close your eyes and dream a dream. And in that dream you will see-who
knows? Ali Baba and Aladdin in their queer dress, and Sindbad, the
rich old sailor, and Captain Lemuel Gulliver, and Robin Hood in his
Lincoln green, and Robinson Crusoe with his man Friday. All of them
will sit down near you, between you and the fire perhaps, and they
will talk to each other about the meaning of all the perils and
successes that life brought them. And you will doubtless get the
idea from them all that every man, rich or poor, ought to feel some
responsibility to others. Ali Baba and Aladdin and Sindbad will tell
the company, there in the firelight before your very eyes, how they
felt that they owed something to' others because of the wealth they
had, gained. Aladdin became a serious and public-spirited man, though
as a boy he had been of little worth. Ali Baba and Sindbad helped
others and did many good deeds.

Then Robin Hood will join in the conversation. He lived in a time, as
you can see from his story, when the poor not only had no chance but
were oppressed. Robin tried to do away with some of this injustice.
He was an outlaw; he did many things that it would not be right to
do today; but he did these things in order to help people who were
wretched and who had no chance.

And next, Robinson Crusoe has a word to say. His experience, he tells
us, showed him how much we depend on each other. If a man is suddenly
cut off from his fellows, has to get his own food or starve, build his
own house with his own rude tools or freeze, he finds out how much he
owes to the cooperation of thousands of other people.

And finally, Captain Gulliver, who has been listening quietly for a
long time, knocks the ashes from his pipe as he gets up to go, and
says: "You know, it all comes down to this: can a man or a nation
stand being rich and strong? You know those Lilliputians, when they
conquered the people of Blefuscu, wanted right away to annex the lands
of their enemies. They had no right to the lands; they had enough of
their own; if I had let them do what they planned, they would have
made many people very miserable, But the moment they saw a chance to
grab something, they wanted to go right after it.. And it makes me
wonder about this America that is so much discussed just now. In my
day we scarcely knew there was such a country, but you know how strong
and prosperous the Americans are, and what a war they can fight, and
how many rich men they have. They seem to me to have found that lamp
and ring that friend Aladdin once had; everything they touch seems to
turn to gold, and they can build a city over night. I just wonder what
they will do with all this power?"

And they all shake their heads, as if to say that they wonder, too.
And the fire has grown lower and lower, so that you can hardly see the
strange forms.--And then father calls to you to wake up and get your
lesson or go to bed, and they all vanish at the sound of that voice.

How would you answer Captain Gulliver's question about America? What
did America do with its power in the World War? What good American
citizens that you know of have used their wealth to found libraries,
hospitals, parks, and other public benefits? Show that boys and girls
join together in teamwork for the good of all by organizing clubs,
Boy Scouts, Camp Fire Girls, Junior Red Cross, etc. Mention kinds of
service these organizations give for the good of all. Show that each
of the six stories in Part II has the two values mentioned in the
first paragraph on page 146. Which story did you enjoy most? Which
gave you the most worth-while ideas? What gains have you made in your
ability to read silently with speed and understanding?





PART III


GREAT AMERICAN AUTHORS

A man lives in the last half of life on the memory of things read in
the first half of life.

SAMUEL JOHNSON.



GREAT AMERICAN AUTHORS

A FORWARD LOOK

When Mother used to tell you a story about when she was a little girl,
you were interested only in the story and in the pictures her words
called up in your mind. Suppose some older person had been listening
while she told one of these tales, and had been interested not alone
in the adventure that she was telling about, as you were, but in the
way in which she told it. This person, your uncle, let's say, would
notice how Mother planned her story so as to keep the very most
exciting thing to the last, and how you grew more and more excited
about it, and how your eyes shone, and her eyes too, and how without
knowing it she was letting him see what kind of people they were
in her story, and what kind of little girl she was-very brave,
you know-and when at the end you drew a long breath and had that
delightful little thrill that you always have at the end of a
perfectly wonderful story-after all this, suppose your uncle should
look at Mother in a funny kind of way and should say, "Bless me, Sis,
I had no idea you were an author."

What would you say? Mother an author? Why, an author is a person who
writes big books in words that no one can understand, but Mother,
she-why, she is Mother!

Yet your uncle is right. Mother is an author when she thinks back over
her life and picks out something that is interesting, and then tells
it in her very most interesting way to please you. If she would only
write out that story, and a printer would print it in a book, and in
the front of the book you should read "When I Was a Little Girl." By
Mother"-that would be a Book, and Mother would be a real author.

Now long, long ago, there weren't any books. When Mother told you a
story, if you had lived then, you would remember it and would tell
it to other people, and after you grew up you would tell it to your
children, and when they had grown up, they would tell it to your
grandchildren, and so on and on. Who wrote Cinderella, or Sleeping
Beauty, or the Three Bears? You don't know. Nobody knows. They just
happened. They were told by mothers to their children and so on and
so on, and after centuries, perhaps, when printing had been invented,
some printer man thought, like your uncle, that here was a story that
ought to be printed and so he made a book of it. But he didn't claim
to be the author of it, for he was not.

So, some of the stories you have read in this book do not have any
author's name attached to them. And even if they did, you were not
thinking, while you were reading, about the man who wrote them. You
just thought of the story and whether you liked it or not. Yet no
small part of the advantage that you enjoy because you live now,
instead of in the days when there were no books, lies in the fact that
you can become acquainted with the men and women who have written the
stories and poems that you read.

Let's put it this way. In those old days that we have been speaking
about, you would have had to depend upon your Mother, or some other
mother, or some village weaver of tales, for your stories. But they
were busy, and you couldn't get enough stories to satisfy your
appetite. Then one-time, let's say, a strange, wandering fellow came
to your village. And he had yards and yards of the most wonderful
stories to tell. And he went home with you, let's say, and stayed
there, and did nothing but tell you stories whenever you wanted them,
first thing in the morning, and after school, and bedtime, and all.
And he was never too busy. And you learned to know him, what an
interesting man he was, and what fine eyes he had, and what a smile
that made you smile back before he said a word, and how he loved Truth
and hated lies, and loved Honor and hated shameful things. He was your
author, your book, your book of books. And he was as dear to you, in
himself, as his stories were.

Now you can have just such a friend, no, you can have a whole company
of just such friends, for yourself. How? In books, of course. Only
they won't be merely books; they will be friends. Washington Irving,
teller of wonderful stories, and Robert Louis Stevenson are there,
in those books, and you can learn them as well as their stories. And
Henry W. Longfellow, writer of stories in verse; and John G. Whittier,
writer of poems about barefoot boys and corn huskings; and Benjamin
Franklin, a kindly philosopher-there, that word is too hard for you,
but it just slipped out, and so you will have to be told that a
philosopher is a person who thinks about life and its meaning.

That's what all authors are, in a way. That's what makes them authors.
They don't just eat and sleep and do their work, whatever it is-they
think about life. And what they see and think they set down for you.
To know them is to know delightful friends who will tell you what
everything means and will answer all your questions.

There they are, on your bookshelf. They won't speak to you unless you
speak first. If you want to do something else and don't wish to be
bothered, they won't bother you. But when you want to talk with them,
they are ready. Call upon them often, and you will learn one of the
blessedest things about life, the companionship of boobs.

Some of them, men of our own America, are to be introduced to you in
the following pages. From now on you are to do three things. First,
you are to listen and enjoy when they tell you what they have to say.
Next, you are to begin to do just what your uncle was doing when he
listened to Mother telling you that story-you are to see that there is
a way to tell something that is good, and that if one has learned this
way, like Mother, he is an author. And last, you are to find that
these authors are real persons whom you can learn to know. Then you
will love them, just as you love Mother, not alone for what they say,
but for what they are.



BENJAMIN FRANKLIN

Benjamin Franklin (1706-1790) was born in Boston in the early colonial
days. While still a boy, he learned the printer's trade, but,
having difficulty with his brother, for whom he worked, he went
to Philadelphia,-where later he became owner and editor of the
Philadelphia Gazette, the city's leading newspaper. Later he
established another periodical, called Poor Richard's Almanac.

Franklin was greatly interested in the study of science. He "snatched
lightning from the skies" by the use of a key and a kite with a silk
string. This experiment led to his invention of the lightning rod,
which was soon placed on public and private buildings not only in
America but also in England and France. He invented the "Franklin
Stove," which is still in use in some places. This is an open stove
made in such a way as to economize heat and save fuel. Franklin
invented a street lamp which was used for lighting the streets of
Philadelphia.

Franklin was big-hearted and wished to be of real service to his
fellow-citizens. He organized a debating club, a night watch, a
volunteer fire company, a street-cleaning department, and a public
library-the first of its kind in America.

His-services to the new government that the Americans were just
setting up were equally noteworthy. He went to England to represent
the colonies and did all that he could to patch up the quarrel between
the colonies and the mother country. When all these attempts failed,
he gave himself heart and soul to the business of making a new
government. He was one of the signers of the Declaration of
Independence. Later, as a special minister to France he delighted
Frenchmen by his humor and his common sense, and he even succeeded
in securing the promise of the French government to acknowledge the
independence of the colonies and to send ships and men to their
assistance.

In a letter to a friend in 1779, Franklin tells the story, "The
Whistle." "An Ax to Grind" is from his autobiography.



THE WHISTLE

When I was a child seven years old, my friends on a holiday filled my
pocket with coppers. I went directly to a shop where they sold toys
for children, and, being charmed with the sound of a whistle that I
met by the way in the hands of another boy, I voluntarily offered and
gave all my money for one. I then ran home and went whistling all
over the house, much pleased with my whistle, but disturbing all the
family.

My brothers and sisters and cousins, understanding the bargain I had
made, told me I had given four times as much for it as it was worth;
put me in mind what good things I might have bought with the rest of
the money; and laughed at me so much for my folly that I cried with
vexation; and the reflection gave me more chagrin than the whistle
gave me pleasure.

This, however, was afterwards of use to me, the impression continuing
on my mind; so that often when I was tempted to buy some unnecessary
thing, I said to myself, "Don't give too much for the whistle";' and I
saved my money.

As I grew up, came into the world, and observed the actions of men, I
thought I met with many, very many, who gave too much for the whistle.

When I saw one too ambitious of court favor, sacrificing his time in
attendance on levees-his repose, his liberty, his virtue, and perhaps
his friends, to attain it-I have said to myself, "This man gives too
much for his whistle."

When I saw another fond of popularity, constantly employing himself
in political bustles, neglecting his own affairs, and ruining them by
that neglect, "He pays indeed," said I, "too much for his whistle."

If I knew a miser who gave up every kind of comfortable living, all
the pleasure of doing good to others, all the esteem of his fellow
citizens, and the joys of benevolent friendship, for the sake of
accumulating wealth, "Poor man," said I, "you pay too much for your
whistle."

When I met with a man of pleasure, sacrificing every laudable
improvement of the mind or of his fortune to mere corporeal
sensations, and ruining his health in their pursuit, "Mistaken man,"
said I, "you are providing pain for yourself instead of pleasure; you
give too much for your whistle."

If I see one fond of appearance, or fine clothes, fine houses, fine
furniture, fine equipages, all above his fortune, for which he
contracts debts and ends his career in a prison, "Alas!" say I, "he
has paid dear, very dear, for his whistle."

In short, I conceive that a great part of the miseries of mankind are
brought upon them by the false estimates they have made of the value
of things, and by their giving too much for their whistles.


NOTES AND QUESTIONS

Discussion. 1. Why did Franklin say that lie paid too much for his
whistle' 2. How was this incident of use to him afterwards? 3. How
does it apply to a man too fond of popularity? To the miser? To the
man of pleasure? To the one who cares too much for appearance? 4. Can
you think of other incidents that illustrate what Franklin had in
mind? 5. Extravagance has been called the great fault of Americans.
During the World war what efforts were made by our people to. Correct
this fault? Why were the efforts successful? 6. Why is it necessary
to continue these efforts now? If all Americans would practice what
Franklin advises, what would be the effect on the cost of living, and
why? 7. In what ways can you save some of the pennies you might spend
foolishly? S. What do you know about Postal Savings deposits? 9. Write
a letter to your teacher, proposing that the children in your class
save as many pennies as possible for savings accounts, pointing out
some ways in which children may save their pennies; bring in a part of
Franklin's story in the most interesting way that you can. 10. Tell
what you can about the author. 11. Find in the Glossary the meaning
of: coppers; voluntarily; vexation; ambitious; esteem; contracts.
12. Pronounce: directly: chagrin; sacrificing; levee; accumulating;
laudable; equipage.

Phrases for Study

impression continuing, corporeal sensations, political bustles, above
his fortune.



AN AX TO GRIND

When I was a little boy, I remember, one cold winter morning, I was
accosted by a smiling man with an ax on his shoulder. "My pretty boy,"
said he, "has your father a grindstone?"

"Yes, sir," said I.

"You are a fine little fellow!" said he. "Will you, let me grind my ax
on it?"

Pleased with the compliment of "fine little fellow," "Oh, yes, sir," I
answered. "It is down in the shop."

"And will you, my man," said he, patting me on the head, "get me a
little hot water?"

How could I refuse? I ran, and soon brought a kettleful.

"How old are you-and what's your name?" continued he, without waiting
for a reply. "I'm sure you are one of the finest lads that I have ever
seen. Will you just turn a few minutes for me?"

Tickled with the flattery, like a little fool, I went to work, and
bitterly did I rue the day. It was a new ax, and I toiled and tugged
till I was almost tired to death. The school bell rang, and I could
not get away. My hands were blistered, and the ax was not half ground.

At length, however, it was sharpened, and the man turned to me with,
"Now, you little rascal, you've played truant! Scud to school, or
you'll rue it!"

"Alas!" thought I, "it was hard enough to turn a grindstone this cold
day, but now to be called a little rascal is too much." It sank deep
into my mind, and often have I thought of it since.


NOTES AND QUESTIONS

Discussion. 1. In this story Franklin advises you to be on your guard
against flatterers who wish to make use of you in order to gain their
o"-n ends. What made Franklin do as the man wanted him to? What do you
think of the man? 2. How would you have sought the boy's help? 3. In
what way was this incident of use to Franklin afterwards? 4. What is
meant when we say of a person that he has "an ax to grind"? 5. How do
you think Franklin valued sincerity? 6. How do you value it? 7. Tell
the story as the man would have told it to a friend. 8. Pronounce:
accosted.



WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT

William Cullen Bryant (1794-1878) was born in the rugged hill country
of western Massachusetts. From infancy he showed remarkable powers of
mind. He could read by the time he was two years old, wrote verses
at nine, and when scarcely eighteen wrote his most noted poem,
"Thanatopsis," now one of the world's classics. He had a wonderful
memory, and it is said he could repeat "by heart" every poem he had
written.

Bryant removed to New York, where in 1825 he became editor of the
Evening Post. Through the remainder of--his long life he devoted his
energy and great gifts to building up one of the most forceful of
American newspapers, but he found time also to study Nature and to
write so many poems that we now think of him as a poet, not as an
editor. He was also a student, and we are indebted to him for some
excellent translations from old authors. And, finally, he was a
public-spirited American, interested in all matters that have to do
with the honor of our country. Imagine yourself in New York City
during the latter part of the last century. If you were walking up
Broadway almost any morning, your attention would be attracted to a
venerable looking man, with heavy, flowing, snow-white hair and beard,
whom you would be quite likely to meet swinging along at a vigorous
pace. You would not need to be told that this man is our first
American poet, with whose verses you are already familiar; and you
would probably know, too, that he is also the editor of the Evening
Post and that, although now past eighty, he is on his way to his
office, walking from his home some two miles away, as he has done,
rain or shine, for over half a century.

This great man was not too busy with affairs, or too learned, to look
for the joy that comes from companionship with Nature. Like Irving he
chose American subjects taken from his own surroundings: the scenes
of his boyhood, the flowers, birds, and hills of his old New England
home. He found pleasure in the simplest things, and he wrote about
this pleasure in the simplest way. In this simplicity and the variety
of his interests his wealth consisted; a treasure that made rich not
only the poet who possessed it but all Americans, to whom he left his
life and works for an inheritance.



THE YELLOW VIOLET

    When beechen buds begin to swell,
    And woods the bluebird's warble know,
    The yellow violet's modest bell
    Peeps from the last year's leaves below.

    Ere russet fields their green resume,
    Sweet flower, I love, in forest bare,
    To meet thee, when thy faint perfume;
    Alone is in the virgin air.

    Of all her train, the hands of Spring
    First plant thee in the watery mold;
    And I have seen thee blossoming
    Beside the snow-bank's edges cold.

    Thy parent sun, who bade thee view
    dale-skies, and chilling moisture sip,
    Has bathed thee in his own bright hue,
    And streaked with jet thy glowing lip.

    Yet slight thy form, and low thy seat,
    And earthward bent thy gentle eye,
    Unapt the passing view to meet,
    When loftier flowers are flaunting nigh.

    Oft, in the sunless April day,
    Thy early smile has stayed my walk,
    But 'midst the gorgeous blooms of May
    I passed thee on thy humble stalk.

So they who climb to wealth forget The friends in darker fortunes
tried. I copied them--but I regret That I should ape the ways of
pride.

And when again the genial hour Awakes the painted tribes of light,
I'll not o'erlook the modest flower That made the weds of April
bright.


NOTES AND QUESTIONS

Discussion. 1. When does the poet say the violet makes its appearance?
2. Why is the violet called a "modest" flower? 3. Why does the violet
make glad the heart of the poet? When the woods and fields are full of
flowers, does he notice the violet? 4. What does "alone" add to the
meaning of line 8, page 298? 5. What is meant by "her train," line 9,
page 298? 6. What are "the hands of Spring"? 7. In what sense is the
sun the "parent" of the violet? 8. Why does Bryant say the violet's
seat is low? 9. What does the poet say the violet's "early smile" has
often done for him? 10. Point out the stanzas in which the poet tells
you where he finds the violet; the stanzas in which he tells you about
the appearance and character of the flower; the stanzas in which he
rebukes himself for passing it by, and makes a promise. 11. Why does
Bryant stop to view the violet in April and pass it by in May? 12.
With what does the poet compare this treatment of the violet? 13. What
does the poet say he regrets? 14. What other flowers come very early
in the spring? How do you feel when you see them? 15. Which stanza of
the poem do you like best? 16. What other poem on the violet have you
read? 17. Tell what you can about the author. 18. Find in the Glossary
the meaning of: beechen; russet; train; jet; unapt. 19. Pronounce:
ere; parent; gorgeous; humble; genial.

Phrases for Study

modest bell, stayed my walk, their green resume, in darker fortunes
tried, virgin air, ape the ways of pride, pale skies, genial hour,
flaunting nigh, painted tribes of light.



THE GLADNESS OF NATURE

    Is this a time to be cloudy and sad,
    When our Mother Nature laughs around,
    When even the deep blue heavens look glad,
    And gladness breathes from the blossoming ground?

    There are notes of joy from the hangbird and wren,
    And the gossip of swallows through all the sky;
    The ground squirrel gayly chirps by his den,
    And the wilding bee hums merrily by.

    The clouds are at play in the azure space,
    And their shadows at play on the bright green vale,
    And here they stretch to the frolic chase,
    And there they roll on the easy gale.

    There's a dance of leaves in that aspen bower;
    There's a titter of winds in that beechen tree;
    There's a smile on the fruit, and a smile on the flower,
    And a laugh from the brook that runs to the sea.

    And look at the broad-faced sun, how he smiles
    On the dewy earth that smiles in his ray,
    On the leaping waters and gay young isles,
    Ay, look, and he'll smile thy gloom away.


NOTES AND QUESTIONS

Discussion. 1. What season is described here? 2. What are the signs
that Nature is glad? How do all these things affect the poet? How do
you sometimes feel on a cold, rainy day? 3. What signs of gladness are
mentioned in the first two stanzas? 4. Which of these have you seen
in springtime? 5. Have you ever seen clouds that seemed to chase one
another? 6. What is meant by "a laugh from the brook"? 7. What does
the poet say the sun will do for us? 8. Do you think spring is "a time
to be cloudy and sad"? Why? 9. Why do city boys and girls like to
visit the country? 10. Read again "A Forward Look," pages 19-20, and
then point out fancies that Bryant uses in this poem to help us see
the beauty and wonder of Nature. 11. Commit to memory the stanza that
you like best. 12. Pronounce: wilding; azure; isles; ay.


Phrases for Study

gladness breathes, frolic chase, blossoming ground, aspen bower,
gossip of swallows, titter of winds, azure space, broad-faced sun.


JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER

John Greenleaf Whittier (1807-1892) was born near the town of
Haverhill, Massachusetts, not far from Hawthorne's birthplace. He had
very little opportunity for education beyond what the district school
afforded, for his parents were too poor to send him away to school.
His two years' attendance at Haverhill Academy was paid for by his own
work at making ladies' slippers for twenty-five cents a pair. He began
writing verses almost as soon as he learned to write at all, but his
father discouraged this ambition as frivolous, saying it would never
give him bread. His family were Quakers, sturdy of stature as of
character. He is called "The Quaker Poet."

Whittier led the life of a New England farm boy, used to hard work
and few pleasures. His library consisted of practically one book, the
family Bible. Later, a copy of Burns's poems was loaned to him by
the district schoolmaster. Like Burns he had great sympathy with the
humble and the poor. In his poems. Whittier described the scenes and
told the legends of his own locality. Home Ballads and Songs of Labor,
in which "The Huskers" and "The Corn-Song" appear, are among his most
widely read books. They picture country life and the scenes of the
simple occupations common in his part of the country. Whittier was
intensely patriotic and religious by nature. His happiness lay in his
association with his friends, with children, animals, and the outdoor
world.

In these respects he was like Bryant, a man who found pleasure in
simple things. Like Bryant, also, he was interested in public affairs.
Any injustice to the poor he opposed passionately. He wrote many poems
in protest against slavery. He wrote, also, ballads of early New
England history, and some of our most beautiful religious poetry comes
from his pen. His life was less filled with business cares than that
of Bryant, but it was equally full of interests that made him happy
and source of help and joy to others.



THE HUSKERS

It was late in mild October, and the long autumnal rain Had left the
summer harvest-fields all green with grass again; The first sharp
frosts had fallen, leaving all the woodlands gay With the hues of
summer's rainbow or the meadow flowers of May.

Through a thin, dry mist, that morning, the sun rose broad and red; At
first a rayless disk of fire, he brightened as he sped; Yet even his
noontide glory fell chastened and subdued On the cornfields and the
orchards and softly pictured wood.

And all that quiet afternoon, slow sloping to the night, He wove with
golden shuttle the haze with yellow light; Slanting through the tented
beeches, he glorified the hill; And, beneath it, pond and meadow lay
brighter, greener still.

And shouting boys in woodland haunts caught glimpses of that sky,
Flecked by the many-tinted leaves, and laughed, they knew not why; And
schoolgirls, gay with aster-flowers, beside the meadow brooks, Mingled
the glow of autumn with the sunshine of sweet looks.

From spire and barn looked westerly the patient weathercocks; But even
the birches on the hill stood motionless as rocks. No sound was in the
woodlands save the squirrel's dropping shell, And the yellow leaves
among the boughs, low rustling as they fell.

The summer grains were harvested; the stubble-fields lay dry, Where
June winds rolled, in light and shade, the pale green waves of rye;
But still, on gentle hill-slopes, in valleys fringed with wood,
ungathered, bleaching in the sun, the heavy corn crop stood.

Bent low by autumn's wind and rain, through husks that, dry and sear,
Unfolded from their ripened charge, shone out the yellow ear; Beneath,
the turnip lay concealed in many a verdant fold, And glistened in the
slanting light the pumpkin's sphere of gold.

There wrought the busy harvester, and many a creaking wain Bore slowly
to the long barn-floor its load of husk and grain; Till broad and red,
as when he rose, the sun sank down at last, And like a merry guest's
farewell the day in brightness passed.

And lo! as through the western pines, on meadow, stream, and pond,
Flamed the red radiance of a sky set all afire beyond, Slowly o'er
the eastern sea-bluffs a milder glory shone, And the sunset and the
moonrise were mingled into one!

As thus into the quiet night the twilight lapsed away, And deeper in
the brightening moon the tranquil shadows lay, From many a brown old
farmhouse and hamlet without name, Their milking and their home-tasks
done, the merry huskers came.

Swung o'er the heaped-up harvest, from pitchforks in the mow, Shone
dimly down the lanterns on the pleasant scene below, The glowing pile
of husks behind, the golden ears before, And laughing eyes and busy
hands and brown cheeks glimmering o'er.

Half hidden in a quiet nook, serene of look and heart, Talking their
old times over, the old men sat apart; While up and down the unhusked
pile, or nestling in its shade, At hide-and-seek, with laugh and
shout, the happy children played.

Urged by the good host's daughter, a maiden young and fair, Lifting to
light her sweet blue eyes and pride of soft brown hair, The master of
the village school, sleek of hair and smooth of tongue, To the quaint
tune of some old psalm, a husking-ballad sung.


NOTES AND QUESTIONS

Discussion. 1. What is the difference between the sunshine of October
and that of May? 2. Why does it seem to the poet as if the sun wove
with golden shuttle the yellow haze? 3. What had the frost done that
made the woodlands gay? 4. What words in the second stanza make you
feel that the wood was some distance away? 5. To whom does "he" in the
third stanza refer? 6. What words in the second stanza explain
the word "haze" in the third stanza? 7. What gave the beeches the
appearance of being painted? 8. What are the colors of the woods
and sky in this poem? What colors are they in the poem "The Yellow
Violet"? Find the words and phrases that tell you. How many times, in
this poem, does the poet use the words golden and yellow, or speak of
things that suggest these colors? 9. What do you think was the reason
the boys laughed when they looked up to the sky? 10. What "summer
grain" is mentioned in line 11, page 304? 11. What crop was still
ungathered? 12. Where were the harvesters at work? 13. What was it
that set the sky "all afire beyond"? 14. Where did the husking take
place? What tells you this? 15.. How did the old men spend the
evening? 16. What things that we eat depend on the work of the
huskers? 17. Tell what you can about the author. 18. Find in the
Glossary the meaning of: shuttle; spire; sear; verdant; wain; lapsed.
19. Pronounce: autumnal; chastened; beneath; sphere; wrought;
radiance; tranquil; mow; serene; psalm.

Phrases for Study

hues of summer's rainbow, patient weathercocks, rayless disk of fire,
ripened charge, brightened as he sped; sphere of gold, glory fell
chastened, milder glory shone, softly pictured wood, mingled into one,
slow sloping to the night, hamlet without name, glorified the hill,
golden ears before, sunshine of sweet looks, glimmering o'er, looked
westerly, serene of look and heart.



THE CORN-SONG

    Heap high the farmer's wintry hoard!
    Heap high the golden corn!
    No richer gift has Autumn poured
    From out her lavish horn!

    Let other lands, exulting, glean
    The apple from the pine,
    The orange from its glossy green,
    The cluster from the vine;

    We better love the hardy gift
    Our rugged vales bestow,
    To cheer us when the storm shall drift
    Our harvest-fields with snow.

    Through vales of grass and meads of flowers
    Our plows their furrows made,
    While on the hills the sun and showers
    Of changeful April played.

    We dropped the seed o'er hill and plain,
    Beneath the sun of May,
    And frightened from our sprouting grain
    The robber crows away.

    All through the long, bright days of June
    Its leaves grew green and
    fair, And waved in hot midsummer's noon
    Its soft and yellow hair.

    And now, with Autumn's moonlit eves,
    Its harvest-time has come; We
    pluck away the frosted leaves,
    And bear the treasure home.

    Then shame on all the proud and vain
    Whose folly laughs to scorn
    The blessing of our hardy grain,
    Our wealth of golden corn!

    Let earth withhold her goodly root,
    Let mildew blight the rye,
    Give to the worm the orchard's fruit,
    The wheat-field to the fly;

    But let the good old crop adorn
    The hills our fathers trod;
    Still let us, for his golden corn,
    Send up our thanks to God!


NOTES AND QUESTIONS

Discussion. 1. In "A Forward Look," you read that poets help you to
see beauty in things that might otherwise seem common. The yellow
violet is less showy than the chrysanthemum, but the poet writes
of the violet. The pineapple, the orange, the grape, seem more
interesting than the yellow corn of the fields, but here is a poem
about one of the commonest of farm crops. To whom is the poet speaking
in the first two stanzas? Point out some of the poet's fancies in this
poem. 2. Is all corn "golden"? What other kinds have you seen? 3. Name
other gifts autumn brings us. 4. Why is the corn a "hardy gift"? What
other words or phrases in the poem suggest the same idea? 5. What do
we call the "apple from the pine"? 6. What clusters are picked from
vines? 7. In what "other lands" do these fruits grow? 8. Where was
Whittier's home? 9. What do you know of the soil and climate of New
England? 10. Find the line that tells when we plant the corn. 11. Find
the lines that tell when we harvest the corn. 12. What is the "yellow
hair" the corn waves in summer? 13. What does the poet mean by
"frosted leaves"? 14. What does he think of those who scorn the
blessing of the corn? 15. What wish does the poet express in the last
stanza? 16. What service did our farmers and boys and girls on the
farms perform during the World War? 17. On page 291 you were asked to
notice the way in which these American authors have expressed their
thoughts; does Whittier's use of rime add to the beauty of his "song"
about corn? Point out some of the lines that rime. 18. Find in the
Glossary the meaning of: glean; hardy; meads; furrows; frosted;
mildew; adorn.

Pronounce: hoard; lavish; glossy; root.

Phrases for Study

wintry hoard, rugged vales bestow, lavish horn, changeful April,
exulting, glean, folly laughs to scorn, hardy gift, goodly root.




WASHINGTON IRVING


Washington Irving (1783-1859) was a native of New York. He led a happy
life, rambling in his boyhood about every nook and corner of the city
and the adjacent woods, which at that time were not very far to seek.
New York, called New Amsterdam in early colonial times, was then the
capital of the country, and here the boy grew up happy, seeing many
sides of American life, both in the city and country.

Manhattan Island and the region about it, with its commanding position
at the entrance to a great inland waterway, was from the first a
prize for which the nations from across the sea had contended. Such
a mingling of different people must give rise to interesting
experiences, and when someone appears who can put the story of those
events into a pleasing sketch, then we begin to have real literature:
Irving had not only the experience and observation, but the ability
'to express what he had seen and felt. Therefore, when he grew to
manhood and gave his sketches of this region to the world, we had our
first real American literature.

Irving is best known as a humorist and a charming storyteller, but he
has also written serious and tender works. His life of Washington is a
tribute of loving reverence to the great American for whom he was named.
As a boy, Irving was of a rather mischievous turn, a trait which perhaps
helped to make him the "first American humorist." Indeed, it has been
said that "before Irving there was no laughter in the land." He is called
the "Father of American Literature," and also the "gentle humorist."
"Capturing the Wild Horse" is taken from A Tour of the Prairies, and
"The Adventure of the Mason" from The Alhambra.


CAPTURING THE WILD HORSE

We left the buffalo camp about eight o'clock and had a toilsome march
of two hours over ridges of hills covered with a ragged forest of
scrub-oaks and broken by deep gullies. Among the oaks I observed many
of the most diminutive size, some not above a foot high, yet bearing
abundance of small acorns.

About ten o'clock in the morning we came to where this line of rugged
hills swept down into a valley, through which flowed the north fork of
the Red River. A beautiful meadow about half a mile wide, colored with
yellow autumnal flowers, stretched for two or three miles along the
foot of the hills, bordered on the opposite side by the river, whose
bank was fringed with cottonwood trees.

The meadow was finely diversified by groves and clumps of trees, so
happily arranged that they seemed as if set out by the hand of art. As
we cast our eyes over this fresh and delightful valley, we saw a troop
of wild horses quietly grazing on a green lawn about a mile distant
to our right, while to our left, at nearly the same distance, were
several buffaloes--some feeding, others reposing and ruminating among
the high, rich herbage under the shade of a clump of cottonwood trees.
The whole had the appearance of a broad, beautiful tract of pasture
land on the estate of some gentleman farmer, with his cattle grazing
about the lawns and meadows. A council of war was now held, and it was
determined to profit by the present favorable opportunity and try our
hand at the grand hunting-maneuver which is called "ringing the wild
horse." This requires a large party of horsemen, well mounted.

They extend themselves in each direction, singly, at certain
distances apart, and gradually form a ring of two or three miles in
circumference, so as to surround the game. This has to be done
with extreme care, for the wild horse is the most readily alarmed
inhabitant of the prairie, and can scent a hunter at a great distance,
if to windward.

The ring being formed, two or three ride toward the horses, which
start off in an opposite direction. Whenever they approach the bounds
of the ring, however, a huntsman presents himself and turns them from
their course. In this way they are checked and driven back at every
point, and kept galloping round and round this magic circle, until,
being completely tired down, it is easy for the hunters to ride up
beside them and throw the lariat over their heads. The prime horses of
most speed and courage, however, are apt to break through and escape,
so that in general it is the second-rate horses that are taken.

Preparations were now made for a hunt of this kind. The packhorses
were taken into the woods and firmly tied to trees, lest in a rush of
the wild horses they should break away with them. Twenty-five men were
then sent, under the command of a lieutenant, to steal along the edge
of the valley within the strip of wood that skirted the hills. They
were to station themselves about fifty yards apart, within the edge of
the woods, and not advance or show themselves until the horses dashed
in that direction.

Twenty-five men were sent across the valley to steal in like manner
along the river bank that bordered the opposite side, and to station
themselves among the trees. A third party of about the same number was
to form a line stretching across the lower part of the valley, so as
to connect the two wings. Beatte and our other half-breed; Antoine,
together with the ever-officious Tonish, were to make a circuit
through the woods, so as to get to the upper part of the valley in the
rear of the horses, and to drive them forward into the kind of sack
that we had formed, while the two wings should join behind them and
make a complete circle.

The flanking parties were quietly extending themselves, out of sight,
on each side of the valley, and the rest were stretching themselves
like the links of a chain across it, when the wild horses gave signs
that they scented an enemy--snuffing the air, snorting, and looking
about.

At length they pranced off slowly toward the river and disappeared
behind a green bank. Here, had the rules of the chase been observed,
they would have been quietly checked and turned back by the advance of
a hunter from among the trees; unluckily, however, we had our wildfire
Jack-o'-lantern little Frenchman to deal with.

Instead of keeping quietly up the right side of the valley to get
above the horses, the moment he saw them move toward the river he
broke out of the thicket of woods and dashed furiously across the
plain in pursuit of them, being, mounted on one of the led horses
belonging to the Count. This put an end to all system. The half-breeds
and half a score of rangers joined in the chase.

Away they all went over the green bank; in a moment or two the wild
horses reappeared and came thundering down the valley, with Frenchman,
half-breeds, and rangers galloping and yelling like mad behind them.
It was in vain that the line drawn across the valley attempted to
check and turn back the fugitives. They were too hotly pressed by
their pursuers; in their panic they dashed through the line and
clattered down the plain.

The whole troop joined in the headlong chase-some of the rangers
without hats or caps, their hair flying about their ears; others with
handkerchiefs tied round their heads. The buffaloes, which had been
calmly ruminating among the herbage, heaved up their huge forms, gazed
for a moment with astonishment at the tempest that came scouring down
the meadow, then turned and took to heavy-rolling flight. They were
soon overtaken; the mixed throng were pressed together by the sides of
the valley, and away they went, pell-mell, hurry-scurry, wild buffalo,
wild horse, wild huntsman, with clang and clatter, and whoop and
halloo, that made the forests ring.

At length the buffaloes turned into a green brake on the river bank,
while the horses dashed up a narrow defile of the hills, with their
pursuers close at their heels. Beatte passed several of them, having
fixed his eye upon a fine Pawnee horse that had his ears slit, and
saddle marks upon his back. He pressed him gallantly, but lost him in
the woods.

Among the wild horses was a fine black mare. In scrambling up the
defile she tripped and fell. A young ranger sprang from his horse and
seized her by the mane and muzzle. Another ranger dismounted and came
to his assistance. The mare struggled fiercely, kicking and biting,
and striking with her forefeet; but a noose was slipped over her head,
and her struggles were in vain. It was some time, however, before she
gave over rearing and plunging, and lashing out with her feet on
every side. The two rangers then led her along the valley by two long
lariats, which enabled them to keep at a sufficient distance on each
side to be out of the reach of her hoofs; and whenever she struck out
in one direction, she was jerked in the other. In this way her spirit
was gradually subdued.

As to little Tonish, who had marred the whole scene by his rashness,
he had been more successful than he deserved, having managed to catch
a beautiful cream-colored colt about seven months old, which had not
strength to keep up with its companions. The little Frenchman was
beside himself with joy. It was amusing to see him with his prize. The
colt would rear and kick and struggle to get free, when Tonish would
take him about the neck, wrestle with him, jump on his back, and cut
as many antics as a monkey with a kitten.

Nothing surprised me more, however, than to see how soon these poor
animals, thus taken from the unbounded freedom of the prairie, yielded
to the control of man. In the course of two or three days the mare and
colt went with the led horses and became quite docile.



NOTES AND QUESTIONS

Historical Note. In 1832 Irving made "a tour of the prairies"--that
is, of what was then the Far West, beyond the Mississippi, where, he
says, "there is neither to be seen the log house of the white man, nor
the wigwam of the Indian." Discussion. 1. What picture do the first
three paragraphs give you? 2. Tell how "ringing the wild horse" is
accomplished. 3. What preparations did Irving's party make for the
hunt? 4. Who broke the rules of the chase? 5. What was the effect of
this? 6. Tell all you can learn about Tonish, the little Frenchman. 7.
What does Irving say about the ease with which the wild horses were
tamed? 8. List the words that give ideas of thrilling action in the
paragraph beginning, "The whole troop joined in the headlong chase."
What words tell the difference between the buffaloes and the horses
in flight? 9. Tell what you can about the author. 10. Class readings:
Select the passages you like best. 11. Outline for testing silent
reading. Tell the story in your own words, using the following
topics: (a) the scene of action; (b) the method of approach; (c) the
preparations; (d) the mistake of Tonish; (e) the excitement of the
chase; (f) the two captures. 12. Find in the Glossary the meaning
of: toilsome; gullies; diversified; circumference; prime; skirted;
fugitives; brake; defile. 13. Pronounce: diminutive; ruminating;
herbage; maneuver; kept; lariat; circuit; reappeared; rangers;
handkerchiefs; rearing; marred.

Phrases for Study

swept down into a valley, wildfire Jack-o'-lantern, fringed with
trees, thundering down the valley, happily arranged,

hand of art, hotly pressed, council of war, scouring down the meadow,
well mounted, heavy-rolling flight, if to windward, spirit was
gradually subdued, approach the bounds,

ever-officious Tonish, marred the whole scene, flanking parties,
beside himself with joy, extending themselves, unbounded freedom,




THE ADVENTURE OF THE MASON


There was once upon a time a poor mason, or bricklayer, in Granada,
who kept all the saints' days and holidays, and Saint Monday into the
bargain, and yet with all his devotion he grew poorer and poorer and
could scarcely earn bread for his numerous family. One night he was
roused from his first sleep by a knocking at his door. He opened it
and beheld before him a tall stranger.

"Hark ye, honest friend!" said the stranger; "I have observed that you
are a good Christian and one to be trusted. Will you undertake a job
this very night?"

"With all my heart, Senor, on condition that I am paid accordingly."

"That you shall be; but you must suffer yourself to be blindfolded."

To this the mason made no objection. So, being hoodwinked, he was led
by the stranger through various rough lanes and winding passages until
they stopped before the portal of a house. The stranger then applied a
key, turned a creaking lock, and opened what sounded like a ponderous
door. They entered; the door was closed and bolted, and the mason
was conducted through an echoing corridor and a spacious hall to an
interior part of the building. Here the bandage was removed from his
eyes, and he found himself in a court dimly lighted by a single lamp.
In the center was the dry basin of an old fountain, under which the
stranger requested him to form a small vault, bricks and mortar being
at hand for the purpose. He worked all night, but without finishing
the job. Just before daybreak the stranger put a piece of gold into
his hand, and having again blindfolded him, conducted him back to his
dwelling.

"Are you willing," said he, "to return and complete your work?"

"Gladly, Senor, provided I am so well paid."

"Well then, tomorrow at midnight I will call again."

He did so, and the vault was completed.

"Now," said the stranger, "you must help me to bring forth the bodies
that are to be buried in this vault."

The poor mason's hair rose on his head at these words; he followed the
stranger with trembling steps into a retired chamber of the mansion,
expecting to behold some ghastly spectacle of death, but was relieved
on seeing three or four jars standing in one corner. They were full of
money, and it was with great labor that he and the stranger carried
them forth and consigned them to their tomb.

The vault was then closed, the pavement replaced, and all traces of
the work were obliterated. The mason was again hoodwinked and led
forth by a route different from that by which he had come. After they
had wandered for a long time through a maze of lanes and alleys, they
halted.

The stranger then put two pieces of gold into his hand. "Wait here,"
said he, "until you hear the cathedral bell toll. If you uncover your
eyes before that time, evil will befall you." So saying, he departed.
The mason waited faithfully, amusing himself by weighing the gold
pieces in his hand and clinking them against each other. The moment
the cathedral bell rang its peals he uncovered his eyes and found
himself on the banks of the Xenil; whence he made the best of his way
home and reveled with his family for a whole fortnight on the profits
of his two nights' work; after which he was as poor as ever.

He continued to work a little and pray a good deal and keep saints'
days and holidays from year to year, while his family grew up gaunt
and ragged as a crew of gypsies. As he was seated one evening at the
door of his hovel, he was accosted by a rich old curmudgeon who was
noted for owning many houses and being a griping landlord. The man of
money eyed him for a moment from beneath a pair of anxious, shaggy
eyes.

"I am told, friend, that you are very poor."

"There is no denying the fact, Senor--it speaks for itself."

"I presume then that you will be glad of a job and will work cheap?"

"As cheap, my master, as any mason in Granada."

"That's what I want. I have an old house fallen into decay, which
costs me more money than it is worth to keep in repair, for nobody
will live in it. So I must patch it up and keep it together at as
small expense as possible."

The mason was accordingly conducted to a large deserted house that
seemed going to ruin. Passing through several empty halls and
chambers, he entered an inner court, where his eye was caught by an
old fountain. He paused for a moment, for a dreamy recollection of
the place came over him. "Pray," said he, "who occupied this house
formerly?"

"A pest upon him!" cried the landlord; "it was an old miserly fellow
who cared for nobody but himself. He was said to be immensely rich.
He died suddenly, and nothing could they find but a few ducats in a
leathern purse. The worst luck has fallen on me, for since his death
the old fellow continues to occupy my house without paying rent. The
people pretend to hear the clinking of gold all night in the chamber
where the old fellow slept, as if he were counting over his money,
and sometimes a groaning and moaning about the court. Whether true or
false, these stories have brought a bad name on my house, and not a
tenant will remain in it."

"Enough," said the mason sturdily; "let me live in your house
rent-free until some better tenant appears, and I will put it in
repair and quiet the troubled spirit that disturbs it. I am a good
Christian and a poor man and am not to be daunted by the Devil
himself, even though he should come in the shape of a big bag of
money!"

The offer of the mason was gladly accepted. He moved with his family
into the house, and fulfilled all of his engagements. By little and
little he restored it to its former state; the clinking of gold was no
more heard at night in the chamber of the defunct tenant, but began
to be heard by day in the pocket of the living mason. In a word, he
increased rapidly in wealth, to the admiration of all his neighbors,
and became one of the richest men in Granada. He gave large sums to
the Church--by way, no doubt, of satisfying his conscience--and never
revealed the secret of the vault until on his deathbed to his son and
heir.



NOTES AND QUESTIONS

Discussion. 1. What condition led the mason to undertake the
stranger's task? 2. Why was the mason blindfolded? 3. How long did it
take him to complete the vault? 4. What was buried in it? 5. How did
the mason find his way home? 6. Was the mason's poverty relieved by
the pay he received from the stranger? 7. What work did the grasping
landlord propose to the mason? 8. What stories had brought a bad name
upon the landlord's house? 9. What was the "dreamy recollection"? 10.
How did the mason show his quick wit? 11. Why did he say that he was
not afraid of the Devil in the shape of a bag of money? 12. What
differences do you notice between this story of how the mason came
upon great wealth and the stories of Aladdin and Ali Baba? 13. Read
again pages 289-291 and tell what makes Irving a real author. Can you
tell why you enjoyed this story? 14. Class reading: The second part
of the story, page 318, line 20, to the end. 15. Outline for testing
silent reading. Tell the story in your own words, using the following
topics: (a) how the mason built the vault in the mysterious house;
(b) how he unexpectedly came into possession of this vault many years
later. 16. Find in the Glossary the meaning of: hoodwinked; vault;
maze; cathedral; pest; ducat. 17. Pronounce: Granada; Senor;
ponderous; ghastly; obliterated; route; gaunt; hovel; curmudgeon;
daunted.

Phrases for Study

retired chamber, troubled spirit, ghastly spectacle, former state,
crew of gypsies, defunct tenant, griping landlord, by way of
satisfying.




HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW


Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (1807-1882) was a native of Maine and
a graduate of Bowdoin College, in the same class with Nathaniel
Hawthorne. Longfellow came of early New England ancestry, his mother
being a daughter of General Wadsworth of the Revolutionary War.

After his graduation from college he spent several years abroad and
upon his return to America held professorships first in Bowdoin and
later in Harvard College. When he moved to Cambridge and began his
active work at Harvard, he took up his residence in the historic
Craigie House, overlooking the Charles River-a house in which
Washington had been quartered for some months when in 1775 he took
command of the Continental army.

Longfellow is the poet who has spoken most sincerely and
sympathetically to the hearts of the common people and to children.
His style is notable for its simplicity and grace. His Hiawatha is a
national poem that records the picturesque traditions of the American
Indian. Its charm and melody are the delight of all children, and
in years to come, when the race which it describes has utterly
disappeared, we shall value at even higher state; the clinking of gold
was no more heard at night in the chamber of the defunct tenant, but
began to be heard by day in the pocket of the living mason. In a
word, he increased rapidly in wealth, to the admiration of all his
neighbors, and became one of the richest men in Granada. He gave
large sums to the Church--by way, no doubt, of satisfying his
conscience--and never revealed the secret of the vault until on his
deathbed to his son and heir.


NOTES AND QUESTIONS

Discussion. 1. What condition led the mason to undertake the
stranger's task? 2. Why was the mason blindfolded? 3. How long did it
take him to complete the vault? 4. What was buried in it? 5. How did
the mason find his way home? 6. Was the mason's poverty relieved by
the pay he received from the stranger? 7. What work did the grasping
landlord propose to the mason? 8. What stories had brought a bad name
upon the landlord's house? 9. What was the "dreamy recollection"? 10.
How did the mason show his quick wit? 11. Why did he say that he was
not afraid of the Devil in the shape of a bag of money? 12. What
differences do you notice between this story of how the mason came
upon great wealth and the stories of Aladdin and Ali Baba? 13. Read
again pages 289-291 and tell what makes Irving a real author. Can you
tell why you enjoyed this story? 14. Class reading: The second part
of the story, page 318, line 20, to the end. 15. Outline for testing
silent reading. Tell the story in your own words, using the following
topics: (a) how the mason built the vault in the mysterious house;
(b) how he unexpectedly came into possession of this vault many years
later. 16. Find in the Glossary the meaning of: hoodwinked; vault;
maze; cathedral; pest; ducat. 17. Pronounce: Granada; Senor;
ponderous; ghastly; obliterated; route; gaunt; hovel; curmudgeon;
daunted.

Phrases for Study

retired chamber, troubled spirit, ghastly spectacle, former state,
crew of gypsies, defunct tenant, griping landlord, by way of
satisfying.




HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW


Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (1807-1882) was a native of Maine and
a graduate of Bowdoin College, in the same class with Nathaniel
Hawthorne. Longfellow came of early New England ancestry, his mother
being a daughter of General Wadsworth of the Revolutionary War.

After his graduation from college he spent several years abroad and
upon his return to America held professorships first in Bowdoin and
later in Harvard College. When he moved to Cambridge and began his
active work at Harvard, he took up his residence in the historic
Craigie House, overlooking the Charles River-a house in which
Washington had been quartered for some months when in 1775 he took
command of the Continental army.

Longfellow is the poet who has spoken most sincerely and
sympathetically to the hearts of the common people and to children.
His style is notable for its simplicity and grace. His Hiawatha is a
national poem that records the picturesque traditions of the American
Indian. Its charm and melody are the delight of all children, and
in years to come, when the race which it describes has utterly
disappeared, we shall value at even higher worth these stories of the
romantic past of America and of the brave people who inhabited these
mountains and plains before the white man came.

Besides Indian stories, Longfellow wrote many narratives in verse
dealing with old legends of America. "The Skeleton in Armor" is an
example of the legends about European explorers who came here before
the days of Columbus. Evangehne and The Courtship of Miles Standish
are longer poems which find their subjects in early colonial history.
He wrote also of legends of Europe, and was well acquainted with
stories and romances of older civilizations than ours. Equally
well-known poems, of a different type, are those in which household
joys and sorrows give the theme. Longfellow is the poet of the
home-life, of simple hopes, of true religious faith. His spirit was
the Spirit of a child, affectionate, loyal, eager for romance and
knightly adventure. He is the "Children's Poet," as the poem "The
Children's Hour" helps to show. There were sorrows as well as joys
in his life, and this is why we go to him in trouble and why so many
people know his poems by heart. Sorrow never took away his faith or
made him bitter. He is genial and kindly, the friend--of all Americans
everywhere.

THE ARROW AND THE SONG

    I shot an arrow into the air;
    It Fell to earth, I knew not where;
    For, so swiftly it flew, the sight
    Could not follow it in its flight.

    I breathed a Song into the air;
    It fell to earth, I knew not where;
    For who has sight so keen and strong
    That it can follow the flight of Song?

    Long, long afterwards, in an oak
    I found the arrow, still unbroke;
    And the song, from beginning to end,
    I found again in the heart of a friend.


NOTES AND QUESTIONS

Discussion: 1. What became of the arrow? Of the song? 2. Where was the
arrow found? When? 3. Where was the Song found? 4. Point out lines
that rime. 5. What is Longfellow's purpose in this poem? 6. Why is the
poet's song compared to the flight of an arrow? 7. A poet once said,
"Let me make the Songs of a nation, and I care not who makes the
laws." What did he mean? 8. What was the Song doing "in the heart of a
friend"?

Phrases for Study

breathed a song, flight of Song.


THE CHILDREN'S HOUR

    Between the dark and the daylight,
    When the night is beginning to lower,
    Comes a pause in the day's occupations,
    That is known as the Children's Hour.

    I hear in the chamber above me
    The patter of little feet,
    The Sound of a door that is opened,
    And voices soft and sweet.

    From my study I See in the lamplight,
    Descending the broad hall stair,
    Grave Alice, and laughing Allegra.
    And Edith with golden hair.

    A whisper, and then a silence;
    Yet I know by their merry eyes
    They are plotting and planning together
    To take me by surprise.

    A sudden rush from the stairway,
    A sudden raid from the hall!
    By three doors left unguarded
    They enter my castle wall!

    They climb up into my turret
    O'er the arms and back of my chair;
    If I try to escape, they surround me;
    They seem to be everywhere.

    They almost devour me with kisses;
    Their arms about me entwine;
    Till I think of the Bishop of Bingen
    In his Mouse-Tower on the Rhine!

    Do you think, O blue-eyed banditti,
    Because you have scaled the wall,
    Such an old mustache as I am
    Is not a match for you all?

    I have you fast in my fortress,
    And will not let you depart,
    gut put you down into the dungeon
    in the round-tower of my heart.

    And there will I keep you forever,
    Yes, forever and a day,
    Till the walls shall crumble to ruin,
    And molder in dust away!


NOTES AND QUESTIONS

Discussion. 1. What is the time "Between the dark and the daylight"
usually called? 2. What do you suppose Longfellow had been doing in
his study before the children came down to him? 3. What reasons can
you give for the "pause in the day's occupations"? 4. Who were the
children whom the poet saw "Descending the broad hall stair" to enter
his "castle wall"? 5. What were these children whispering about? 6.
What does Longfellow mean by his "turret"? 7. To what does he compare
the rush made by the children? 8. What wall did they scale in order to
reach him? 9. Where does Longfellow say he will put the children now
that he has captured them? 10. Which stanza of this poem do you like
best? 11. Tell what you know about the life of Longfellow. 12. Find
in the Glossary the meaning of: raid; match. 13. Pronounce: lower;
banditti; dungeon.

Phrases for Study

Bishop of Bingen, round-tower of my heart, scaled the wall, forever
and a day, such an old mustache, molder in dust away, fast in my
fortress.


THE SONG OF HIAWATHA

INTRODUCTION

    Should you ask me, whence these stories,
    Whence these legends and traditions,
    With the odors of the forest,
    With the dew and damp of meadows,
    With the curling smoke of wigwams,
    With the rushing of great rivers,
    With their frequent repetitions,
    And their wild reverberations,
    As of thunder in the mountains.

    I should answer, I should tell you:
    "From the forests and the prairies,
    From the great lakes of the Northland,
    From the land of the Ojibways,
    From the land of the Dacotahs,
    From the mountains, moors, and fenlands,
    Where the heron, the Shuh-shuh-gah,
    Feeds among the reeds and rushes.
    I repeat them as I heard them
    From the lips Of Nawadaha
    The musician, the sweet singer."

    Should you ask where Nawadaha
    Found these songs, so wild and wayward,
    Found these legends and traditions,

    I should answer, I should tell you:
    "In the birds'-nests of the forests,
    In the lodges of the beaver,
    In the hoof-prints of the bison,
    In the aerie of the eagle!"
    If still further you should ask me,
    Saying, "Who was Nawadaha?
    Tell us of this Nawadaha,"
    I should answer your inquiries
    Straightway in such words as follow:

    "In the Vale of Tawasentha,
    In the green and silent valley,
    By the pleasant water-courses.
    Dwelt the singer Nawadaha.
    Round about the Indian village
    Spread the meadows and the cornfields,
    And beyond them stood the forest,
    Stood the groves of singing pine-trees,
    Green in summer, white in winter,
    Ever sighing, ever singing.

    "There he sang of Hiawatha,
    Sang the Song of Hiawatha,
    Sang his wondrous birth and being,
    How he prayed and how he fasted,
    How he lived, and toiled, and suffered,
    That the tribes of men might prosper,
    That he might advance his people!"

    Ye who love the haunts of Nature,
    Love the sunshine of the meadow,
    Love the shadow of the forest,
    Love the wind among the branches,
    And the rain-shower and the snowstorm,
    And the rushing of great rivers
    Through their palisades of pine-trees,
    And the thunder in the mountains,
    Listen to this Indian Legend,
    To this Song of Hiawatha!
    Ye whose hearts are fresh and simple,
    Who have faith in God and Nature,

    Listen to this simple story,
    To this Song of Hiawatha!


NOTES AND QUESTIONS

You have now begun to read parts of a long poem about Indian life and
tradition. The Indians, like all other races of men, have such songs.
Longfellow studied the Indian legends and put them into English verse
so that all of us may enjoy them. Such a poem, which is really a
collection of ballads or songs about heroes and about the beliefs and
superstitions of a race, is often called an epic. Notice that the poet
tells you that these stories in verse have the odors of the forest,
the curling smoke of wigwams; the rushing of great rivers, and the
roar of mountain thunder. This means that such stories are very
closely connected with the simple life of a simple people--there is
much of their thought about Nature, much of their love of the land
where they live. Next, notice that he got his knowledge of these songs
from a "sweet singer," a minstrel. All simple tribes have had such
singers, who went about from place to place telling in verse what
the people wanted to hear. There were no books, both boys and girls
learned their stories from older people, or from wandering singers.
Next, you observe that the theme of the stories is the life of
Hiawatha, their great hero. So the Greeks had stories about their hero
Ulysses, the early English about Beowulf and King Arthur, the French
about Roland. Every great race honors the memory of a hero who lived
when the race was young. Many stories cluster about the name of this
hero, and poets and minstrels love to sing, and the people to hear,
about these great characters. Finally, notice at the end of the
poet's Introduction, two things: First, Hiawatha lived and toiled and
suffered that the tribes might prosper, that he might advance his
people-thus an epic poem deals with the founding of a people or race.
Second, you notice that there is much about God and Nature in the
poem-the simple religious faith of the people. The hero, his deeds
that helped his people, the religion of the tribes-these are the
subjects. Find illustrations of these things as you read.

Discussion. 1. Where did these stories come from? Read lines which
tell. 2. Name the Great Lakes. 3. Who was Nawadaha? 4. What word tells
the sound of the pine-trees? 5. Read five lines that tell what the
singer sang of Hiawatha. 6. Find in the Glossary the meaning of:
reverberations. 7. Pronounce: legends; wigwams; aerie.

Phrases for Study

singing pine-trees, advance his people, wondrous birth and being,
haunts of Nature, tribes of men might prosper, palisades of
pine-trees.


HIAWATHA'S CHILDHOOD

    By the shores of Gitche Gumee,
    By the shining Big-Sea-Water,
    Stood the wigwam of Nokomis,
    Daughter of the Moon, Nokomis.
    Dark behind it rose the forest,
    Rose the black and gloomy pine-trees,
    Rose the firs with cones upon them;
    Bright before it beat the water,
    Beat the clear and sunny water,
    Beat the shining Big-Sea-Water.

    There the wrinkled, old Nokomis
    Nursed the little Hiawatha;
    Rocked him in his linden cradle,
    Bedded soft in moss and rushes,
    Safely bound with reindeer sinews;
    Stilled his fretful wail by saying,
    "Hush!  The Naked Bear will get thee!"
    Lulled him into slumber, singing,
    "Ewa-yea! my little owlet!
    Who is this that lights the wigwam,
    With his great eyes lights the wigwam?
    Ewa-yea! my little owlet!"

    Many things Nokomis taught him
    Of the stars that shine in heaven;
    Showed the broad, white road in heaven,
    Pathway of the ghosts, the shadows,
    Running straight across the heavens,
    Crowded with the ghosts, the shadows.

    At the door on summer evenings
    Sat the little Hiawatha;
    Heard the whispering of the pine-trees,
    Heard the lapping of the water,
    Sounds of music, words of wonder;
    "Minne-wawa!" said the pine-trees,
    "Mudway-aushka! said the water.

    Saw the firefly, Wah-wah-taysee,
    Flitting through the dusk of evening,
    With the twinkle of its candle
    Lighting up the brakes and bushes;
    And he sang the song of children,
    Sang the song Nokomis taught him:

    "Wah-wah-taysee, little firefly,
    Little, flitting, white-fire insect,
    Little, dancing, white-fire creature,
    Light me with your little candle,
    Ere upon my bed I lay me,
    Ere in sleep I close my eyelids!"

    Saw the moon rise from the water
    Rippling, rounding from the water;
    Saw the flecks and shadows on it;
    Whispered, "What is that, Nokomis?"
    And the good Nokomis answered
    "Once a warrior, very angry,
    Seized his grandmother, and threw her
    Up into the sky at midnight;
    Right against the moon he threw her;
    Tis her body that you see there."

    Saw the rainbow in the heaven,
    In the eastern sky, the rainbow;
    Whispered, "What is that, Nokomis?"
    And the good Nokomis answered:
    "'Tis the heaven of flowers you see there.
    All the wild-flowers of the forest,
    All the lilies of the prairie,
    When on earth they fade and perish,
    Blossom in that heaven above us."

    When he heard the owls at midnight,
    Hooting, laughing in the forest,
    "What is that?" he cried in terror;
    "What is that," he said, "Nokomis?"
    And the good Nokomis answered:
    "That is but the owl and owlet,
    Talking in their native language,
    Talking, scolding at each other."

    Then the little Hiawatha
    Learned of every bird its language,
    Learned their names and all their secrets--
    How they built their nests in summer,
    Where they hid themselves in winter--
    Talked with them whene'er he met them,
    Called them "Hiawatha's Chickens."

    Of all beasts he learned the language,
    Learned their names and all their secrets--
    How the beavers built their lodges,
    Where the squirrels hid their acorns,
    How the reindeer ran so swiftly,
    Why the rabbit was so timid;
    Talked with them whene'er he met then,
    Called them "Hiawatha's Brothers."

    Then Iagoo, the great boaster,
    He the marvelous story-teller,
    He the traveler and the talker,
    He the friend of old Nokomis,
    Made a bow for Hiawatha;
    From a branch of ash he made it,
    From an oak-bough made the arrows.
    Tipped with flint, and winged with feathers,
    And the cord he made of deerskin.

    Then he said to Hiawatha:
    "Go, my son, into the forest,
    Where the red deer herd together;
    Kill for us a famous roebuck,
    Kill for us a deer with antlers!"

    Forth into the forest straightway
    All alone walked Hiawatha
    Proudly, with his bow and arrows;
    And the birds sang round him, o'er him,
    "Do not shoot us, Hiawatha!",
    Sang the robin, the Opechee,
    Sang the bluebird, the Owaissa,
    "Do not shoot us, Hiawatha!"

    Up the oak-tree, close beside him,
    Sprang the squirrel, Adjidaumo,
    In and out among the branches,
    Coughed and chattered from the oak-tree,
    Laughed, and said between his laughing;
    "Do not shoot-me, Hiawatha!"

    And the rabbit from his pathway
    Leaped aside, and at a distance
    Sat erect upon his haunches,
    Half in fear and half in frolic,
    Saying to the little hunter,
    "Do not shoot me, Hiawatha!"

    But he heeded not, nor heard them,
    For his thoughts were with the red deer;
    On their tracks his eyes were fastened,
    Leading downward to the river,
    To the ford across the river;
    And as one in slumber walked he.

    Hidden in the alder-bushes,
    There he waited till the deer came,
    Till he saw two antlers lifted,
    Saw two eyes look from the thicket,
    Saw two nostrils point to windward,
    And a deer came down the pathway,
    Flecked with leafy light and shadow.
    His heart within him fluttered,
    Trembled like the leaves above him,
    Like the birch-leaf palpitated,
    As the deer came down the pathway.

    Then, upon one knee uprising,
    Hiawatha aimed an arrow;
    Scarce a twig moved with his motion,
    Scarce a leaf was stirred or rustled,
    But the wary roebuck started,
    Stamped with all his hoofs together,
    Listened with one foot uplifted,
    Leaped as if to meet the arrow,
    Ah! the singing, fatal arrow;
    Like a wasp it buzzed and stung him!

    Dead he lay there in the forest,
    By the ford across the river;
    Beat his timid heart no longer.
    But the heart of Hiawatha
    Throbbed and shouted and exulted,
    As he bore the red deer homeward;
    And WOO and Nokomis coming with applauses.

    From the red deer's hide Nokomis
    Made a cloak for Hiawatha;
    From the red deer's flesh Nokomis
    Made a banquet in his honor.
    All the village came and feasted;
    All the guests praised Hiawatha,
    Called him Strong-Heart, Soan-ge-taha!
    Called him Loon-Heart, Mahn-go-taysee!


NOTES AND QUESTIONS

Discussion. 1. What body of water is called Gitche Gumee? 2. Where did
the wigwam of Nokomis stand? 3. What is meant by the "beat" of the
water? 4. Why does Longfellow call the pine trees "black and gloomy"?
5. Who was Nokomis? 6. Why did she call Hiawatha "my little owlet"? 7.
What do we call the "broad, white road in heaven"? 8. What word tells
the so sound of the water? 9. Read lines that tell what Hiawatha
learned of the birds and the beasts. 10. Of what was Hiawatha's bow
made? His arrows? The cord? 11. Why was a tip of flint used on the
arrows? 12. What is meant by "the ford across the river"? 13. Read
lines which tell that Hiawatha was excited when hunting. 14. Find in
the Glossary the meaning of linden; frolic; postrils. 15. Pronounce:
moss; sinews; warrior; haunches; alder; palpitated; exulted.

Phrases for Study

twinkle of its candle, famous roebuck, native language, point to
windward, tipped with flint, flecked with leafy light, winged with
feathers, hailed his coming.


HIAWATHA'S FRIENDS

    Two good friends had Hiawatha,
    Singled out from all the others,
    Bound to him in closest union,
    And to whom he gave the right hand
    Of his heart, in joy and sorrow:
    Chibiabos, the musician,
    And the very strong man, Kwasind.

    Most beloved by Hiawatha
    Was the gentle Chibiabos,
    We the best of all musicians,
    He the sweetest of all singers.
    Beautiful and childlike was he,
    Brave as man is, soft as woman,
    Pliant as a wand of willow,
    Stately as a deer with antlers.

    When he sang, the village listened;
    All the warriors gathered round him,
    All the women came to hear him;
    Now he stirred their souls to passion,
    Now he melted them to pity.

    From the hollow reeds he fashioned
    Flutes so musical and mellow
    That the brook, the Sebowisha,
    Ceased to murmur in the woodland,
    That the wood-birds ceased from singing,
    And the squirrel, Adjidaumo,
    Ceased his chatter in the oak-tree,
    Ceased his chatter in the oak-tree,
    And the rabbit, the Wabasso,
    Sat upright to look and listen.

    Yes, the brook, the Sebowisha,
    Pausing, said, "O Chibiabos,
    Teach my waves to flow in music,
    Softly as your words in singing!"

    Yes, the bluebird, the Owaissa,
    Envious, said, "O Chibiabos,
    Teach me tones as wild and wayward,
    Teach me songs as full of frenzy!"

    Yes, the robin, the Opechee,
    Joyous, said, "O Chibiabos,
    Teach me tunes as sweet and tender,
    Teach me songs as full of gladness!"

    And the whippoorwill, Wawonaissa,
    Sobbing, said, "O Chibiabos,
    Teach me tones as melancholy,
    Teach me songs as full of sadness!"

    All the many sounds of nature
    Borrowed sweetness from his singing;
    All the hearts of men were softened
    By the pathos of his music;
    For he sang of peace and freedom,
    Sang of beauty, love, and longing;
    Sang of death, and life undying
    In the Islands of the Blessed,
    In the kingdom of Pond,
    In the land of the Hereafter.

    Very dear to Hiawatha
    Was the gentle Chibiabos.
    He the best of all musicians,
    He the sweetest of all singers;
    For his gentleness he loved him,
    And the magic of his singing.

    Dear, too, unto Hiawatha
    Was the very strong man, Kwasind,
    He the strongest of all mortals,
    He the mightiest among many;
    For his very strength he loved him,
    For his strength allied to goodness.

    Idle in his youth was Kwasind,
    Very listless, dull, and dreamy,
    Never played with other children,
    Never fished and never hunted;
    Not like other children was he.

    "Lazy Kwasind!" said his mother,
    "In my work you never help me!
    In the summer you are roaming
    Idly in the fields and forests;
    In the winter you are cowering
    O'er the firebrands in the wigwam!
    In the coldest days of winter
    I must break the ice for fishing;
    With my nets you never help me!
    At the door--my nets are hanging,
    Dripping, freezing with the water;
    Go and wring them, Yenadizze!
    Go and dry them in the sunshine!"

    Slowly, from the ashes, Kwasind
    Rose, but made no angry answer;
    From the lodge went forth in silence,
    Took the nets, that hung together,
    Dripping, freezing at the doorway;
    Like a wisp of straw he wrung them,
    Like a wisp of straw he broke them,
    Could not wring them without breaking,
    Such the strength was in his fingers.

    "Lazy Kwasind!" said his father,
    "In the hunt you never help me;
    Every bow you touch is broken,
    Snapped asunder every arrow;
    Yet come with me to the forest,
    You shall bring the hunting homeward."

    Down a narrow pass they wandered,
    Where a brooklet led them onward,
    Where the trail of deer and bison
    Marked the soft mud on the margin,
    Till they found all further passage
    Shut against them, barred securely
    By the trunks of trees uprooted,
    Lying lengthwise, lying crosswise,
    And forbidding further passage.

    "We must go back," said the old man;
    "O'er these logs we cannot clamber;
    Not a woodchuck could get through them,
    Not a squirrel clamber o'er them!"
    And straightway his pipe he lighted,
    And sat down to smoke and ponder.
    But before his pipe was finished,
    Lo! the path was cleared before him;
    All the trunks had Kwasind lifted;
    To the right hand, to the left hand,
    Shot the pine-trees swift as arrows;
    Hurled the cedars light as lances.

    "Lazy Kwasind!" said the young men,
    As they sported in the meadow;
    "Why stand idly looking at us,
    Leaning on the rock behind you?
    Come and wrestle with the others;
    Let us pitch the quoit together!"

    Lazy Kwasind made no answer,
    To their challenge made no answer,
    Only rose, and, slowly turning,
    Seized the huge rock in his fingers,
    Tore it from its deep foundation,
    Poised it in the air a moment,
    Pitched it sheer into the river,
    Sheer into the swift Pauwating,
    Where it still is seen in summer.

    Once as down that foaming river,
    Down the rapids of Pauwating,
    Kwasind sailed with his companions,
    In the stream he saw a beaver,
    Saw Ahmeek, the King of Beavers,
    Struggling with the rushing currents,
    Rising, sinking in the water.

    Without speaking, without pausing,
    Kwasind leaped into the river,
    Plunged beneath the bubbling surface,
    Through the whirlpools chased the beaver,
    Followed him among the islands,
    Stayed so long beneath the water
    That his terrified companions
    Cried, "Alas! good-by to Kwasind!
    We shall never more see Kwasind!"
    But he reappeared triumphant,
    And upon his shining shoulders
    Brought the beaver, dead and dripping,
    Brought the King of all the Beavers.

    And these two, as I have told you,
    Were the friends of Hiawatha,
    Chibiabos, the musician,
    And the very strong man, Kwasind;
    Long they lived in peace together,
    Spake with naked hearts together,
    Pondering much and much contriving
    How the tribes of men might prosper.


NOTES AND QUESTIONS

Discussion. 1. What two friends had Hiawatha "Singled out from all the
others"? 2. What were they "contriving"? 3. Read lines that tell of
Chibiabos. 4. With what is he compared? Read lines that tell. 5. From
what did he make his flutes? 6. Read lines that tell how musical they
were. 7. What did the brook say to Chibiabos? The bluebird? The robin?
8. Of what did Chibiabos sing? 9. Why did Hiawatha love him more than
all others? 10. For what did Hiawatha love Kwasind? 11. What did
Kwasind's mother say to him? His father? 12. What is meant by the
line, "Every bow you touch is broken"? 13. Read lines that tell of
Kwasind and the beaver. 14. Which of Hiawatha's two friends do you
like the better? Why? 15. Find in the Glossary the meaning of: reeds;
frenzy; listless; cowering; clamber; ponder; sported. 16. Pronounce:
pliant; wand; pathos; allied; asunder; quoit; triumphant.

Phrases for Study

singled out, strength allied to goodness, bound to him, bring the
hunting homeward, pliant as a wand, stirred their souls to passion,
forbidding further passage, poised it in the air, melted them to pity,
sheer into the river, fashioned flutes, shining shoulders, flow in
music, spake with naked hearts, Islands of the Blessed, pondering
much, magic of his singing, much contriving.


HIAWATHA'S SAILING

    "Give me of your bark, O Birch-Tree!
    Of your yellow bark, O Birch Tree!
    Growing by the rushing river,
    Tall and stately in the valley!
    I a light canoe will build me,
    Build a swift Cheemaun for sailing,
    That shall float upon the river,
    Like a yellow leaf in autumn,
    Like a yellow water-lily!

    "Lay aside your cloak, O Birch-Tree!
    Lay aside your white-skin wrapper,
    For the summer-time is coming,
    And the sun is warm in heaven,
    And you need no white-skin wrapper!"
    Thus aloud cried Hiawatha.

    And the tree with all its branches
    Rustled in the breeze of morning,
    Saying, with a sigh of patience,
    "Take my cloak, O Hiawatha!"

    With his knife the tree he girdled,
    Just beneath its lowest branches;
    Just above the roots he cut it,
    Till the sap came oozing outward;
    Down the trunk, from top to bottom,
    Sheer he cleft the bark asunder;
    With a wooden wedge he raised it,
    Stripped it from the trunk unbroken.

    "Give me of your boughs, O Cedar!
    Of your strong and pliant branches,
    My canoe to make more steady,
    Make more strong and firm beneath me!"
    Through the summit of the Cedar
    Went a sound, a cry of horror,
    Went a murmur of resistance;
    But it whispered, bending downward,
    "Take my boughs, O Hiawatha!"

    Down he hewed the boughs of cedar,
    Shaped them straightway to a framework;
    Like two bows he formed and shaped them,
    Like two bended bows together.

    "Give me of your roots, O Tamarack!
    Of your fibrous roots, O Larch-Tree!
    My canoe to bind together,
    So to bind the ends together
    That the water may not enter,
    That the river may not wet me!"

    And the Larch, with all its fibers,
    Shivered in the air of morning,
    Touched his forehead with its tassels,
    Said, with one long sigh of sorrow,
    "Take them all, O Hiawatha!"

    From the earth he tore the fibers,
    Tore the tough roots of the Larch-Tree,
    Closely sewed the bark together,
    Bound it closely to the framework.

    "Give me of your balm, O Fir-Tree!
    Of your balsam and your resin,
    So to close the seams together
    That the water may not enter,
    That the river may not wet me!"

    And the Fir-Tree, tall and somber,
    Sobbed through all its robes of darkness,
    Rattled like a shore with pebbles,
    Answered wailing, answered weeping,
    "Take my balm, 0 Hiawatha!"

    And he took the tears of balsam,
    Took the resin of the Fir-Tree,
    Smeared therewith each seam and fissure,
    Made each crevice safe from water.

    "Give me of your quills, O Hedgehog!
    All your quills, O Kagh, the Hedgehog!
    I will make a necklace of them,
    Make a girdle for my beauty,
    And two stars to deck her bosom!"

    From a hollow tree the hedgehog,
    With his sleepy eyes looked at him,
    Shot his shining quills, like arrows
    Saying, with a drowsy murmur,
    Through the tangle of his whiskers,
    "Take my quills, O Hiawatha!"

    From the ground the quills he gathered,
    All the little shining arrows;
    Stained them red and blue and yellow,
    With the juice of roots and berries;
    Into his canoe he wrought them,
    Round its waist a shining girdle,
    Round its bows a gleaming necklace,
    On its breast two stars resplendent.

    Thus the Birch-Canoe was builded
    In the valley, by the river,
    In the bosom of the forest;
    And the forest's life was in it--
    All its mystery and its magic,
    All the lightness of the birch-tree,
    All the toughness of the cedar,
    All the larch's supple sinews;
    And it floated on the river
    Like a yellow leaf in autumn,
    Like a yellow water-lily.

    Paddles none had Hiawatha;
    Paddles none he had or needed,
    For his thoughts as paddles served him,
    And his wishes served to guide him;
    Swift or slow at will he glided,
    Veered to right or left at pleasure.

    Then he called aloud to Kwasind,
    To his friend, the strong man, Kwasind,
    Saying, "Help me clear this river
    Of its sunken logs and sandbars."

    Straight into the river Kwasind
    Plunged as if he were an otter,
    Dived as if he were a beaver,
    Stood up to his waist in water,
    To his armpits in the river,
    Swam and shouted in the river,
    Tugged at sunken logs and branches;
    With his hands he scooped the sandbars,
    With his feet the ooze and tangle.

    And thus sailed my Hiawatha
    Down the rushing Taquamenaw,
    Sailed through all its bends and windings,
    Sailed through all its deeps and shallows,
    While his friend, the strong man, Kwasind,
    Swam the deeps, the shallows waded.

    Up and down the river went they,
    In and out among its islands,
    Cleared its bed of root and sandbar,
    Dragged the dead trees from its channel,
    Made its passage safe and certain,
    Made a pathway for the people,
    From its springs among the mountains
    To the waters of Pauwating,
    To the bay of Taquamenaw.



NOTES AND QUESTIONS

Discussion. 1. Of what did Hiawatha make his canoe? 2. Why does
Hiawatha call the bark of the birch-tree a cloak? 3. What other name
does he give the bark of the birch-tree? 4. What word tells the sound
made by the leaves of the birch-tree? 5. What word tells that Hiawatha
cut all around the birch-tree? 6. Why did Hiawatha ask the cedar tree
for its boughs? 7. Read lines that tell why he asked the larch-tree
for its roots. S. What other name does he give the larch tree? 9. Why
does Hiawatha call the drops of balsam "tears"? 10. Can the hedgehog
really shoot his quills "like arrows"? 11. What is meant by "my
beauty"? 12. Read lines that tell how Hiawatha decorated his canoe.
13. What did he use for paddles for the canoe? 14. What did Kwasind do
to aid the canoeing? 15. Why is the fir-tree spoken of as "somber"?
16. Find in the Glossary the meaning of: stately; larch; channel. 17.
Pronounce: horror; hewed; tamarack; fibrous; forehead; balm; balsam;
resin; fissure; crevice; bosom; resplendent; supple; veered; swam.

Phrases for Study

white-skin wrapper, robes of darkness, oozing outward, deck her bosom,
cleft the bark asunder, shot his shining quills, summit of the Cedar,
wrought them, shaped them to a framework, forest's life was in it,
ooze and tangle, close the seams together.


HIAWATHA'S WOOING

    "As unto the bow the cord is,
    So unto the man is woman
    Though she bends him, she obeys him,
    Though she draws him, yet she follows--
    Useless each without the other!"

    Thus the youthful Hiawatha
    Said within himself and pondered
    Much perplexed by various feelings--
    Listless, longing, hoping, fearing,
    Dreaming still of Minnehaha,
    Of the lovely Laughing Water,
    In the Land of the Dacotahs.

    "Wed a maiden of your people,"
    Warning said the old Nokomis;
    "Go not eastward, go not westward,
    For a stranger, whom we know not!
    Like a fire upon the hearthstone
    Is a neighbor's homely daughter;
    Like the starlight or the moonlight
    Is the handsomest of strangers!"

    Thus dissuading spake Nokomis,
    And my Hiawatha answered
    Only this: "Dear old Nokomis,
    Very pleasant is the firelight,
    But I like the starlight better,
    Better do I like the moonlight!"

    Gravely then said old Nokomis:
    "Bring not here an idle maiden,
    Bring not here a useless woman,
    Hands unskillful, feet unwilling;
    Bring a wife with nimble fingers,

    Heart and hand that move together,
    Feet that run on willing errands!"

    Smiling answered Hiawatha:
    "In the Land of the Dacotahs
    Lives the Arrow-maker's daughter,
    Minnehaha, Laughing Water,
    Handsomest of all the women.
    I will bring her to your wigwam;
    She shall run upon your errands,
    Be your starlight, moonlight, firelight,
    Be the sunlight of my people!"

    Still dissuading, said Nokomis:
    "Bring not to my lodge a stranger
    From the Land of the Dacotahs!
    Very fierce are the Dacotahs.
    Often is there war between us;
    There are feuds yet unforgotten,
    Wounds that ache and still may open!"

    Laughing answered Hiawatha:
    "For that reason, if no other,
    Would I wed the fair Dacotah,
    That our tribes might be united,
    That old feuds might be forgotten,
    And old wounds be healed forever!"

    Thus departed Hiawatha
    To the land of the Dacotahs,
    To the land of handsome women,
    Striding over moor and meadow,
    Through interminable forests,
    Through uninterrupted silence.

    With his moccasins of magic,
    At each stride a mile he measured;
    Yet the way seemed long before him,
    And his heart outran his footsteps;
    And he journeyed without resting,
    Till he heard the cataract's laughter,
    Heard the Falls of Minnehaha
    Calling to him through the silence.

    "Pleasant is the sound!" he murmured,
    "Pleasant is the voice that calls me!"
    On the outskirts of the forest,
    'Twixt the shadow and the sunshine,
    Herds of fallow deer were feeding,
    But they saw not Hiawatha;
    To his bow he whispered, "Fail not!"
    To his arrow whispered, "Swerve not!"
    Sent it singing on its errand,
    To the red heart of the roebuck;
    Threw the deer across his shoulder
    And sped forward without pausing.

    At the doorway of his wigwam
    Sat the ancient Arrow-maker,
    In the land of the Dacotahs,
    Making arrow-heads of jasper,
    Arrow-heads of chalcedony.
    At his side, in all her beauty,
    Sat the lovely Minnehaha,
    Sat his daughter, Laughing Water,
    Plaiting mats of flags and rushes;
    Of the past the old man's thoughts were,
    And the maiden's of the future.

    He was thinking, as he sat there,
    Of the days when with such arrows
    He had struck the deer and bison,
    On the Muskoday, the meadow;
    Shot the wild goose, flying southward,
    On the wing, the clamorous Wawa;
    Thinking of the great war-parties,
    How they came to buy his arrows,
    Could not fight without his arrows.

    She was thinking of a hunter,
    From another tribe and country,
    Young and tall and very handsome,
    Who one morning, in the springtime,
    Came to buy her father's arrows,
    Sat and rested in the wigwam,
    Lingered long about the doorway,
    Looking back as he departed.
    She had heard her father praise him,
    Praise his courage and his wisdom;
    Would he come again for arrows
    To the Falls of Minnehaha?
    On the mat her hands lay idle,
    And her eyes were very dreamy.

    Through their thoughts they heard a footstep,
    Heard a rustling in the branches,
    And with glowing cheek and forehead,
    With the deer upon his shoulders,
    Suddenly from out the woodlands
    Hiawatha stood before them.

    Straight the ancient Arrow-maker
    Looked up gravely from his labor,
    Laid aside the unfinished arrow,
    Bade him enter at the doorway,
    Saying, as he rose to meet him,
    "Hiawatha, you are welcome!"

    At the feet of Laughing Water
    Hiawatha laid his burden,
    Threw the red deer from his shoulders;
    And the maiden looked up at him,
    Looked up from her mat of rushes,
    Said with gentle look and accent,
    "You are welcome, Hiawatha!"
    Very spacious was the wigwam,
    Made of deerskin dressed and whitened,
    With the gods of the Dacotahs
    Drawn and painted on its curtains;
    And so tall the doorway, hardly
    Hiawatha stooped to enter,
    Hardly touched his eagle-feathers
    As he entered at the doorway.

    Then up rose the Laughing Water;
    From the ground fair Minnehaha
    Laid aside her mat unfinished,
    Brought forth food and set before them,
    Water brought them from the brooklet,
    Gave them food in earthen vessels,
    Gave them drink in bowls of basswood,
    Listened while the guest was speaking,
    Listened while her father answered.
    But not once her lips she opened,
    Not a single word she uttered.

    Yes, as in a dream she listened
    To the words of Hiawatha,
    As he talked of old Nokomis,
    Who had nursed him in his childhood,
    As he told of his companions, Chibiabos,
    the musician, And the very strong man,
    Kwasind, And of happiness and plenty In
    the land of the Ojibways,

    In the pleasant land and peaceful.
    "After many years of warfare,
    Many years of strife and bloodshed,
    There is peace between the Ojibways
    And the tribe of the Dacotahs."
    Thus continued Hiawatha,
    And then added, speaking slowly,
    "That this peace may last forever,
    And our hands be clasped more closely,
    And our hearts be more united,
    Give me as my wife this maiden,
    Minnehaha, Laughing Water,
    Loveliest of Dacotah women!"

    And the ancient Arrow-maker
    Paused a moment ere he answered,
    Smoked a little while in silence,
    Looked at Hiawatha proudly,
    Fondly looked at Laughing Water,
    And made answer very gravely:
    "Yes, if Minnehaha wishes;
    Let your heart speak, Minnehaha!"

    And the lovely Laughing Water
    Seemed more lovely, as she stood there,
    Neither willing nor reluctant,
    As she went to Hiawatha,
    Softly took the seat beside him,
    While she said, and blushed to say it,
    "I will follow you, my husband!"

    This was Hiawatha's wooing!
    Thus it was he won the daughter
    Of the ancient Arrow-maker,
    In the land of the Dacotahs!

    From the wigwam he departed,
    Leading with him Laughing Water;
    Hand in hand they went together,
    Through the woodland and the meadow,
    Left the old man standing lonely
    At the doorway of his wigwam,
    Heard the Falls of Minnehaha
    Calling to them from the distance,
    Crying to them from afar off,
    "Fare thee well, O Minnehaha!"
    And the ancient Arrow-maker
    Turned again unto his labor,
    Sat down by his sunny doorway,
    Murmuring to himself, and saying:
    "Thus it is our daughters leave us,
    Those we love, and those who love us!
    Just when they have learned to help us,
    When we are old and lean upon them,
    Comes a youth with flaunting feathers,
    With his flute of reeds, a stranger,
    Wanders piping through the village,
    Beckons to the fairest maiden,
    And she follows where he leads her,
    Leaving all things for the stranger!"

    Pleasant was the journey homeward,
    Through interminable forests,
    Over meadow, over mountain,
    Over river, hill, and hollow.
    Short it seemed to Hiawatha,
    Though they journeyed very slowly,
    Though his pace he checked and slackened
    To the steps of Laughing Water.
    Over wide and rushing rivers
    In his arms he bore the maiden;

    Light he thought her as a feather,
    As the plume upon his head-gear;
    Cleared the tangled pathway for her,
    Bent aside the swaying branches,
    Made at night a lodge of branches,
    And a bed with boughs of hemlock,
    And a fire before the doorway
    With the dry cones of the pine-tree.

    All the traveling winds went with them,
    O'er the meadow, through the forest;
    All the stars of night looked at them,
    Watched with sleepless eyes their slumber;
    From his ambush in the oak-tree
    Peeped the squirrel, Adjidaumo,
    Watched with eager eyes the lovers;
    And the rabbit, the Wabasso,
    Scampered from the path before them,
    Peering, peeping from his burrow,
    Sat erect upon his haunches,
    Watched with curious eyes the lovers.

    Pleasant was the journey homeward!
    All the birds sang loud and sweetly
    Songs of happiness and heart's-ease;
    Sang the bluebird, the Owaissa,
    "Happy are you, Hiawatha,
    Having such a wife to love you!"
    Sang the robin, the Opechee,
    "Happy are you; Laughing Water,
    Having such a noble husband!"

    From the sky the sun benignant
    Looked upon them through the branches,
    Saying to them, "O my children,
    Love is sunshine, hate is shadow;
    Life is checkered shade and sunshine;
    Rule by love, O Hiawatha!"
    From the sky the moon looked at them,
    Filled the lodge with mystic splendors,
    Whispered to them, "O my children,
    Day is restless, night is quiet,
    Man imperious, woman feeble;
    Half is mine, although I follow;
    Rule by patience, Laughing Water!"
    Thus it was they journeyed homeward;
    Thus it was that Hiawatha
    To the lodge of old Nokomis
    Brought the moonlight, starlight, firelight,
    Brought the sunshine of his people,
    Minnehaha, Laughing Water,
    Handsomest of all the women
    In the land of the Dacotahs,
    In the land of handsome women.


NOTES AND QUESTIONS

Discussion. 1. Why did Nokomis wish Hiawatha to wed a maiden of his
own people? 2. Whom did Hiawatha say he would wed? 3. Find the Falls
of Minnehaha on your map. 4. Read lines that tell of Hiawatha's
journey "To the land of the Dacotahs." 5. Of what was the Arrow-maker
thinking when Hiawatha appeared? 6. Read lines that tell of what the
maiden was thinking. 7. Read the words of Hiawatha when he asked the
father for his daughter. 8. In what words did the Arrow-maker give his
consent? 9. What was Minnehaha's answer? 10. Read lines that tell of
the journey homeward. 11. Why did Hiawatha "check" his pace on this
journey? 12. What greeting did the bluebird give them? 13. What was
the greeting of the robin? The sun? The moon? 14. Read the lines that
you like best. 15. Find in the Glossary the meaning of: cord; nimble;
moor; fallow; swerve; jasper; flags; rushes; basswood; flaunting. 16.
Pronounce: dissuading; feuds; wounds; chalcedony; plaiting; bade;
spacious; benignant; mystic; imperious.

Phrases for Study

feet unwilling, neither willing nor reluctant, yet unforgotten,
interminable forests, wanders piping through the village, moccasins of
magic, heart outran his footsteps, heart's-ease, cataract's laughter,
sun benignant, deerskin dressed and whitened, hate is shadow, mystic
splendors.



THE WHITE-MAN'S FOOT

    From his wanderings far to eastward,
    From the regions of the morning,
    From the shining land of Wabun,
    Homeward now returned Iagoo,
    The great traveler, the great boaster,
    Full of new and strange adventures,
    Marvels many and many wonders.

    And the people of the village
    Listened to him as he told them
    Of his marvelous adventures;
    Laughing answered him in this wise:
    "Ugh, it is indeed Iagoo!
    No one else beholds such wonders!"

    He had seen, he said, a water
    Bigger than the Big-Sea-Water,
    Broader than the Gitche Gumee,
    Bitter so that none could drink it!
    At each other looked the warriors,
    Looked the women at each other,
    Smiled, and said, "it cannot be so!
    Kaw!" they said, "it cannot be so!"
    O'er it, said he, o'er this water

    Came a great canoe with pinions,
    A canoe with wings came flying,
    Bigger than a grove of pine-trees,
    Taller than the tallest tree-tops!
    And the old men and the women
    Looked and tittered at each other;
    "Kaw!" they said, "we don't believe it!"

    From its mouth, he said, to greet him,
    Came Waywassimo, the lightning,
    Came the thunder, Annemeekee!
    And the warriors and the women
    Laughed aloud at poor Iagoo;
    "Kaw!" they said, "what tales you tell us!"

    In it, said he, came a people,
    In the great canoe with pinions
    Came, he said, a hundred warriors;
    Painted white were all their faces,
    And with hair their chins were covered!
    And the warriors and the women
    Laughed and shouted in derision,
    Like the ravens on the tree-tops,
    Like the crows upon the hemlocks.
    "Kaw!" they said, "what lies you tell us.
    Do not think that we believe them!"

    Only Hiawatha laughed not,
    But he gravely spake and answered
    To their jeering and their jesting:
    "True is all Iagoo tells us;
    I have seen it in a vision,

    Seen the great canoe with pinions,
    Seen the people with white faces,
    Seen the coming of this bearded
    People of the wooden vessel
    From the regions of the morning,
    From the shining land of Wabun.

    Gitche Manito, the Mighty,
    The Great  Spirit, the Creator,
    Sends them hither on his errand,
    Sends them to us with his message.
    Wheresoe'er they tread, beneath them
    Swarms the stinging fly, the Ahmo,
    Swarms the bee, the honey-maker;.
    Wheresoe'er they tread, beneath them
    Springs a flower unknown among us,
    Springs the White-man's foot in blossom.

    "Let us welcome, then, the strangers,
    Hail them as our friends and brothers,
    And the heart's right hand of friendship
    Give them when they come to see us.
    Gitche Manito, the Mighty,
    Said this to me in my vision.

    "I beheld, too, in that vision,
    All the secrets of the future,
    Of the distant days that shall be.
    I beheld the westward marches
    Of the unknown, crowded nations.
    All the land was full of people,
    Restless, struggling, toiling, striving,
    Speaking many tongues, yet feeling
    But one heart-beat in their bosoms.
    In the woodlands rang their axes,
    Smoked their towns in all the valleys,
    Over all the lakes and rivers
    Rushed their great canoes of thunder.

    "Then a darker, drearier vision
    Passed before me, vague and cloud-like.
    I beheld our nations scattered,
    All forgetful of my counsels,
    Weakened, warring with each other;
    Saw the remnants of our people
    Sweeping westward, wild and woeful,
    Like the cloud-rack of a tempest,
    Like the withered leaves of autumn!"


NOTES AND QUESTIONS

Discussion. 1. Read lines that tell Iagoo's story of adventures. 2.
Where do you think he had seen these things? 3. What was the "bitter"
water Iagoo told about? 4. What were the "lightning" and the "thunder"
that came from the "canoe with pinions"? 5. Why was his story laughed
at as false by the Indians? 6. How did Hiawatha know it was all true?
7. How did Hiawatha say they should receive the White Man when he
came? 8. What secrets came to Hiawatha in the vision? 9. What "darker
vision" did he see? 10. Has Hiawatha's vision come true? 11. What do
you think of Hiawatha's character? 12. Which of all the stories in
this poem do you like best? 13. Give the reason for your answer. 14.
You no doubt enjoyed reading this poem; can you tell why? 15. Read "A
Forward Look," and tell why you think Longfellow was a real author.
16. You will enjoy reading Eastman's Indian Legends Retold. 17. Find
in the Glossary the meaning of: tittered; hither; counsels. 18.
Pronounce: pinions; derision; vision; regions; vague; warring.

Phrases for Study

regions of the morning, distant days that shall be, shining land of
Wabun, unknown, crowded nations, canoe with pinions, feeling but one
heart-beat, painted white, sweeping westward, heart's right hand of
friendship, cloud-rack of a tempest.




NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE


Nathaniel Hawthorne (1804-1864), a native of Salem, Massachusetts, had
the distinction of being born on the Fourth of July. He was graduated
from Bowdoin College in the class with Henry Wadsworth Longfellow.

When a mere boy, Nathaniel was crippled by an accident in playing
ball. This led him to a life of quiet and to the companionship of
books. His vivid imagination made him fond of inventing stories for
the entertainment of his friends. When he began to think of a career
it was quite natural that he should turn to literature, and that in
looking about him for material he should-choose his subjects-as Irving
did-from those stirring scenes of which he had an intimate, almost
personal, knowledge many of them of his native town, Salem.

Hawthorne pictured New England as Irving did New Amsterdam. He
popularized New England history in the form of stories for children,
one of which, Grandfather's Chair, contains "The Boston Tea Party." He
wrote a book, The House of the Seven Gables, about the house in which
he lived for many years. Soon after he wrote this tale, he wrote The
Wonder-Book, a volume of stories about Greek gods and heroes, from
which "The Paradise of Children" and "The Golden Touch" are taken.
Perhaps the best known of all Hawthorne's works is the volume called
Twice-Told Tales. In this book he collected a large number of legends
about colonial life in New England and retold them in such a way as to
give us one of the best pictures of early American life that we have.
Some of them deal with actual events; others are based on legendary
matter. But all of them do for early New England life what
Longfellow's Hiawatha does for the Indian legends: they preserve the
stories and also the spirit of early times. Like Longfellow, Hawthorne
was a lover of romance and of the early history of our country. He w
wrote in prose, not verse, but is prose is as careful and artistic as
Longfellow's verse.




THE PARADISE OF CHILDREN

PANDORA AND THE GREAT BOX


Long, long ago, when this old world was in its tender infancy, there
was a child named Epimetheus who never had either father or mother;
and that he might not be lonely, another child, fatherless and
motherless like himself, was sent from a far country to live with him
and be his playfellow and helpmate. Her name was Pandora.

The first thing that Pandora saw when she entered the cottage where
Epimetheus dwelt was a great box. And almost the first question which
she put to him, after crossing the threshold, was this:

"Epimetheus, what have you in that box?"

"My dear little Pandora," answered Epimetheus, "that is a secret, and
you must be kind enough not to ask any questions about it. The box
was left here to be kept safely, and I do not myself know what it
contains."

"But who gave it to you?" asked Pandora. "And where did it come from?"
"That is a secret, too," replied Epimetheus.

"How provoking!" exclaimed Pandora, pouting her lip. "I wish the great
ugly box were out of the way!"

"O come, don't think of it any more," cried Epimetheus. "Let us run
out of doors, and have some nice play with the other children."

It is thousands of years since Epimetheus and Pandora were alive; and
the world nowadays is a very different sort of thing from what it was
in their time. Then, everybody was a child. They needed no fathers and
mothers to take care of the children; because there was no danger or
trouble of any kind, and there were no clothes to be mended, and there
was always plenty to eat and drink.

Whenever a child wanted his dinner, he found it growing on a tree; and
if he looked at the tree in the morning, he could see the blossom
of that night's supper; or at eventide he saw the tender bud of
tomorrow's breakfast. It was a very pleasant life indeed. No labor to
be done, no tasks to s be studied; nothing but sports and dances and
sweet voices of children talking, or caroling like birds, or gushing
out in merry laughter, throughout the livelong day.

What was most wonderful of all, the children never quarreled among
themselves; neither had they any crying fits; nor since time first
began had a single one of these little mortals ever gone apart into
a corner and sulked. O what a good time was that to be alive in! The
truth is, those ugly little winged monsters called Troubles, which are
now almost as numerous as mosquitoes, had never yet been seen on the
earth. It is probable that the very greatest disquietude which a child
had ever felt was Pandora's vexation at not being able to discover the
secret of the mysterious box.

This was at first only the faint shadow of a Trouble; but every day
it grew more and-more real, until before a great while the cottage
of Epimetheus and Pandora was less sunshiny than those of the other
children.

"Whence can the box have come?" Pandora continually kept saying to
herself and to Epimetheus. "And can be inside of it?"

"Always talking about this box!" said Epimetheus at last; for he had
grown extremely tired of the subject. "I wish, dear Pandora, you would
try to talk of something else. Come, let us go and gather some ripe
figs, and eat them under the trees for our supper. And I know a vine
that has the sweetest and juiciest grapes you ever tasted." "Always
talking about grapes and figs!" cried Pandora, pettishly.

"Well, then," said Epimetheus, who was a very good-tempered child,
like many children in those days, "let us run out and have a merry
time with our playmates."

"I am tired of merry times, and don't care if I never have any more!"
answered our pettish little Pandora. "And, besides, I never do have
any. This ugly box! I am so taken up with thinking about it all the
time. I insist upon your telling me what is inside of it."

"As I have already said fifty times over, I do not know!" replied
Epimetheus, getting a little vexed. "How, then, can I tell you what is
inside?"

"You might open it," said Pandora, looking sideways at Epimetheus,
"and then we could see for ourselves!"

"Pandora, what are you thinking of?" exclaimed Epimetheus.

And his face expressed so much horror at the idea of looking into a
box which had been given to him on the condition of his never opening
it, that Pandora thought it best not to suggest it any more. Still,
however, she could not help thinking and talking about the box.

"At least," said she, "you can tell me how it came here."

"It was left at the door," replied Epimetheus, "just before you came,
by a person who looked very smiling and intelligent, and who could
hardly forbear laughing as he put it down. He was dressed in an odd
kind of cloak, and had on a cap that seemed to be made partly of
feathers, so that it looked almost as if it had wings."

"What sort of staff had he?" asked Pandora.

"Oh, the most curious staff you ever saw!" cried Epimetheus. "It was
like two serpents twisting around a stick, and was carved so naturally
that I at first thought the serpents were alive."

"I know him," said Pandora thoughtfully. "Nobody else has such a
staff. It was Quicksilver; and he brought me hither, as well as the
box. No doubt he intended it for me; and most probably it contains
pretty dresses for me to wear, or toys for you and me to play with, or
something very 5 nice for us both to eat!"

"Perhaps so," answered Epimetheus, turning away. "But, until
Quicksilver comes back and tells us so, we have neither of us any
right to lift the lid of the box."

"What a dull boy he is!" muttered Pandora, as Epimetheus left the
cottage. "I do wish he had a little more enterprise!"


THE KNOT OF GOLDEN CORD

For the first time since her arrival Epimetheus had gone out without
asking Pandora to accompany him. He went to gather figs and grapes for
himself, or to seek whatever amusement he could find in other society
than his little playfellow's. He was tired to death of hearing about
the box, and heartily wished that Quicksilver, or whatever was the
messenger's name, had left it at some other child's door where Pandora
would never have set eyes on it.

So perseveringly as she did babble about this one thing! The box, the
box, and nothing but the box! It seemed as if the box were bewitched,
and as if the cottage were not big enough to hold it without Pandora's
continually stumbling over it and making Epimetheus stumble over it
likewise, and bruising all four of their shins.

Well, it was really hard that poor Epimetheus should have a box in his
ears from morning till night; especially as the little people of the
earth were so unaccustomed to vexations in those happy days that they
knew not how to deal with them. Thus a small vexation made as much
disturbance then as a far bigger one would in our own times.

After Epimetheus was gone, Pandora stood gazing at the box. She had
called it ugly above a hundred times; but in spite of all that she
had said against it, it was positively a very handsome article of
furniture, and would have been quite an ornament to any room in which
it should be placed. It was made of a beautiful kind of wood with
dark and rich veins spreading over its surface, which was so highly
polished that little Pandora could see her face in it. As the child
had no other looking-glass, it is odd that she did not value the box
merely on this account.

The edges and corners of the box were carved with most wonderful
skill. Around the margin there were figures of graceful men and women,
and the prettiest children ever seen, reclining or sporting amid a
profusion of flowers and foliage; and these various objects were so
finely represented, and were wrought together in such harmony, that
flowers, foliage, and human beings seemed to combine into a wreath
of mingled beauty. But here and there, peeping forth from behind the
carved foliage, Pandora once or twice fancied she saw a face not so
lovely, or something or other that was disagreeable, and which stole
the beauty out of all, the rest. Nevertheless, on looking more closely
and touching the spot with her finger, she could discover nothing of
the kind. Some face that was really beautiful had been made to look
ugly by her catching a sideways glimpse at it.

The most beautiful face of all was done in what is called high relief,
in the center of the lid. There was nothing else save the dark, smooth
richness of the polished wood, and this one face in the center, with a
garland of flowers about its brow. Pandora had looked at this face a
great many times, and imagined that the mouth could smile if it liked,
or be grave when it chose, the same as any living mouth. The features,
indeed, all wore a very lively and rather mischievous expression,
which looked almost as if it needs must burst out of the carved lips
and utter itself in words.

Had the mouth spoken, it would probably have been something like this:

"Do not be afraid, Pandora! What harm can there be in opening the box?
Never mind that poor, simple Epimetheus! You are wiser than he, and
have ten times as much spirit. Open the box, and see if you do not
find something very pretty!" The box, I had almost forgotten to say,
was fastened, not by a lock or by any other such contrivance, but by a
very fine knot of gold cord. There appeared to be no end to this knot,
and no beginning. Never was a knot so cunningly twisted, nor with so
many ins and outs, which roguishly defied the skillfulest fingers to
disentangle them. And yet, by the very difficulty that there was in
it, Pandora was the more tempted to examine the knot, and just see how
it was made. Two or three times already she had stooped over the box,
and taken the knot between her thumb and forefinger, but without
positively trying to undo it.

"I really believe," said she to herself, that I begin to see how it
was done. Nay, perhaps I could tie it up again after undoing it. There
could be no harm in that, surely. Even Epimetheus would not blame me
for that. I need not open the box, and should not, of course, without
the foolish boy's consent, even if the knot were untied." It might
have been better for Pandora if she had had a little work to do,
or anything to employ her mind upon, so as not to be so constantly
thinking of this one subject. But children led so easy a life before
any Troubles came into the world that they find really a great deal
too much leisure. They could not be forever playing at hide-and-seek
among the flower-shrubs, or at blind-man's buff with garlands over
their eyes, or at whatever other games has been found out while Mother
Earth was in her babyhood.

When life is all sport, toil is the real play. There was absolutely
nothing to do. A little sweeping and dusting about the cottage, I
suppose, and the gathering of fresh flowers (which were only too
abundant everywhere), and arranging them in vases--and poor little
Pandora's day's work was over. And then, for the rest of the day,
there was the box!

After all, I am not quite sure that the box was not a blessing to her
in its way. It supplied her with so many ideas to think of, and to
talk about, whenever she had anybody to listen! When she was in good
humor, she could admire the bright polish of its sides and the rich
border of beautiful faces and foliage that ran all around it. Or, if
she chanced to be ill-tempered, she could give it a push, or kick it
with her naughty little foot. And many a kick did the box (but it was
a mischievous box, as we shall see, and deserved all it got) many a
kick did it receive. But certain it is, if it had not been for the
box, our active-minded little Pandora would not have known half so
well how to spend her time as she now did.

GUESSING WHAT WAS IN THE BOX

For it was really an endless employment to guess what was inside. What
could it be, indeed? Just imagine, my little hearers, how busy your
wits would be if there were a great box in the house, which, as you
might have reason to suppose, contained something new and pretty for
your Christmas or New Year's gifts. Do you think that you should be
less curious than Pandora? If you were left alone with the box, might
you not feel a little tempted to lift the lid? But you would not do
it. Oh, fie! No, no! Only, if you thought there were toys in it, it
would be so very hard to let slip an opportunity of taking just one
peep!

I know not whether Pandora expected any toys; for none had yet begun
to be made, probably, in those days, when the world itself was one
great plaything for the children that dwelt upon it. But Pandora was
convinced that there was something very beautiful and valuable in the
box; and therefore she felt just as anxious to take a peep as any of
these little girls here around me would have felt. And, possibly,
a little more so; but of that I am not quite so certain. On this
particular day, however, which we have so long been talking about, her
curiosity grew so much greater than it usually was that at last she
approached the box. She was more than half determined to open, it, if
she could. Ah, naughty Pandora! First, however, she tried to lift it.
It was heavy; much too heavy for the slender strength of a child like
Pandora. She raised one end of the box a few inches from the floor,
and let it fall again with a pretty loud thump. A moment afterwards
she almost fancied that she heard something stir inside the box. She
applied her ear as closely as possible and listened. Positively, there
did seem to be a kind of stifled murmur within. Or was it merely the
singing in Pandora's ear's. Or could it be the beating of her heart?
The child could not quite satisfy herself whether she had heard
anything or no. But, at all events, her curiosity was stronger than
ever, As she drew back her head, her eyes fell upon the knot of gold
cord.

"It must have been a very ingenious person who tied this knot," said
Pandora to herself. "But I think 1 could untie it, nevertheless. I am
resolved, at least, to find the two ends of the cord."

So she took the golden knot in her fingers and pried into it as
sharply as she could. Almost without intending it, or quite knowing
what she was about, she was soon busily engaged in attempting to undo
it. Meanwhile, the bright sunshine came through the open window; as
did likewise the merry voices of the children, playing at a distance,
and perhaps the voice of Epimetheus among them.

Pandora stopped to listen. What a beautiful day it was! Would it not
be wise if she were to let the trouble some knot alone and think no
more about the box, but run and join her little playfellows and be
happy?

All this time, however, her fingers were busy with the knot; and
happening to glance at the face on the lid of the enchanted box, she
seemed to see it slyly grinning at her.

"That face looks very mischievous," thought Pandora. "I wonder whether
it smiles because I am doing wrong! I have the greatest mind in the
world to run away!"

But just then, by the merest accident, she gave the knot a kind of
twist, which produced a wonderful result. The gold cord united itself,
as if by magic, arid left the box without a fastening.

"This is the strangest thing I ever knew!" said Pandora. "What will
Epimetheus say? And how can I possibly tie it up again?" She made one
or two attempts to restore the knot, but soon found it quite beyond
her skill. It had untied itself so suddenly that she could not in the
least remember how the strings had been doubled onto one another; and
when she tried to recollect the shape and appearance of the knot, it
seemed to have gone entirely out of her mind. Nothing was to be done
therefore, but to let the box remain as it was until Epimetheus should
come in.

"But," said Pandora, "when he finds the knot untied, he will know that
I have done it. How shall I make him believe that I have not looked
into the box?"

And then the thought came into her naughty little heart, that, since
she would be suspected of having looked into the box, she might just
as well do so at once. O very naughty and very foolish Pandora! You
should have thought only of doing what was right and of leaving undone
what was wrong, and not of what your playfellow Epimetheus would have
said or believed. And so perhaps she might if the enchanted face on
the lid of the box had not looked so bewitchingly persuasive at her,
and if she had not seemed to hear, more distinctly than before, the
murmur of small voices within. She could not tell whether it was fancy
or no; but there was quite a little tumult of whispers in her
ear--or else it was her curiosity that whispered: "Let us out, dear
Pandora--pray let us out! We will be such nice, pretty playfellows for
you! Only let us out!"

"What can it be?" thought Pandora, "Is there something alive in the
box? Well!--yes!--I am resolved to take just one peep! Only one peep;
and then lid shall be shut down as safely as ever. There cannot
possibly be any harm in just one little peep!"



HOW TROUBLES CAME INTO THE WORLD

But it is now time for us to see what Epimetheus was doing.

This was the first time since his little Playmate had come to dwell
with him that he had attempted to enjoy any pleasure in which she did
not partake. But nothing went right; nor was he nearly so happy as
on other days. He could not find a sweat grape or a ripe fig (if
Epimetheus had a fault, it was a little too much fondness for figs);
or, if ripe at all, they were overripe, and so sweet as to be
distasteful. There was no mirth in his heart, such as usually made
his voice gush out, of Its own accord, and swell the merriment of his
companions. In short, he grew so uneasy and discontented that other
children could not imagine what was the matter with Epimetheus.
Neither did he himself know what ailed him, any better then they did.

For you must recollect that, at the time we are speaking of, it was
everybody's nature and common habit to be happy. The world had not
yet learned to be otherwise. Not a single soul or body, since these
children were first sent to enjoy it themselves on the beautiful
earth, had ever been sick or out-of-sorts.

At length, discovering that, somehow or other, he put a stop to all
the play, Epimetheus judged it best to go back to Pandora, who was
in a humor better suited to his own. But, with a hope of giving her
pleasure, he gathered flowers and made them into a wreath, which he
meant to put upon her head. The flowers were very lovely--roses and
lilies and orange-blossoms, and a great many more, which left a trail
of fragrance behind, as Epimetheus carried them along, and wreath was
put together with as much skill as could be expected of a boy. The
fingers of little girls, it has always appeared to me, are the fittest
to twine flower-wreaths; but boys could de it in those days rather
better than they can now.

And here I must mention that a great black cloud had been gathering
in the sky for some time past, although it had not yet overspread the
sun. But, just as Epimetheus reached the cottage-door, this cloud
began to cut off the sunshine, and thus to make a sudden and sad
darkness.

He entered softly; for he meant, if possible, to steal behind Pandora
and fling a wreath of flowers over her head before she should be
aware of his approach. But, as it happened, there was no need of his
treading so very lightly. He might have trod as heavily as he pleased,
as heavily as a grown man--as heavily, I was going to say, as an
elephant--without much probability of Pandora's hearing his footsteps.
She was too intent upon her purpose. At the moment of this entering
the cottage the naughty box, I had almost forgotten to say, was
fastened, not by a lock or by any other such contrivance, but by a
very fine knot of gold cord. There appeared to be no end to this knot,
and no beginning. Never was a knot so cunningly twisted, nor with so
many ins and outs, which roguishly defied the skillfulest fingers to
disentangle them. And yet, by the very difficulty that there was in
it, Pandora was the more tempted to examine the knot, and just see how
it was made. Two or three times already she had stooped over the box,
and taken the knot between her thumb and forefinger, but without
positively trying to undo it.

"I really believe," said she to herself, that I begin to see how it
was done. Nay, perhaps I could tie it up again after undoing it. There
could be no harm in that, surely. Even Epimetheus would not blame me
for that. I need not open the box, and should not, of course, without
the foolish boy's consent, even if the knot were untied."

It might have been better for Pandora if she had had a little work to
do, or anything to employ her mind upon, so as not to be so constantly
thinking of this one subject. But children led so easy a life before
any Troubles came into the world that they find really a great deal
too much leisure. They could not be forever playing at hide-and-seek
among the flower-shrubs, or at blind-man's buff with garlands over
their eyes, or at whatever other games has been found out while Mother
Earth was in her babyhood.

When life is all sport, toil is the real play. There was absolutely
nothing to do. A little sweeping and dusting about the cottage, I
suppose, and the gathering of fresh flowers (which were only too
abundant everywhere), and arranging them in vases--and poor little
Pandora's day's work was over. And then, for the rest of the day,
there was the box!

After all. I am not quite sure that the box was not a blessing to her
in its way. It supplied her with so many ideas to think of, and to
talk about, whenever she had anybody to listen! When she was in good
humor, she could admire the bright polish of its sides and the rich
border of beautiful faces and foliage that ran all around it. Or, if
she chanced to be ill-tempered, she could give it a push, or kick it
with her naughty little foot. And many a kick did the box (but it was
a mischievous box, as we shall see, and deserved all it got) many a
kick did it receive. But certain it is, if it had not been for the
box, our active-minded little Pandora would not have known half so
well how to spend her time as she now did.


GUESSING WHAT WAS IN THE BOX

For it was really an endless employment to guess what was inside. What
could it be, indeed? Just imagine, my little hearers, how busy your
wits would be if there were a great box in the house, which, as you
might have reason to suppose, contained something new and pretty for
your Christmas or New Year's gifts. Do you think that you should be
less curious than Pandora? If you were left alone with the box, might
you not feel a little tempted to lift the lid? But you would not do
it. Oh, fie! No, no! Only, if you thought there were toys in it, it
would be so very hard to let slip an opportunity of taking just one
peep!

I know not whether Pandora expected any toys; for none had yet begun
to be made, probably, in those days, when the world itself was one
great plaything for the children that dwelt upon it. But Pandora was
convinced that there was something very beautiful and valuable in the
box; and therefore she felt just as anxious to take a peep as any
of these little girls here around me would have felt. For it was
impossible, as you will easily guess, that the two children should
keep the ugly swarm in their own little cottage. On the contrary, the
first thing that they did was to fling open the doors and windows in
hope of getting rid of them; and, sure enough, away flew the winged
Troubles all abroad, and so pestered and tormented the small people,
everywhere about, that none of them so much as smiled for many days
afterwards.

And, what was very singular, all the flowers and dewy blossoms on
earth, not one of which had hitherto faded, now began to droop and
shed their leaves, after a day or two. The children, moreover, who
before seemed immortal in their childhood, now grew older, day by day,
and came soon to be youths and maidens, and men and women by-and-by,
and aged people, before they dreamed of such a thing.


WHAT HOPE DOES FOR US

Meanwhile, the naughty Pandora and hardly less naughty Epimetheus
remained in their cottage. Both of them had been grievously stung,
and were in a good deal of pain, which, seemed the more adorable
intolerable to them, because it was the very first pain that had
ever been felt since the world began. Of course they were entirely
unaccustomed to it, and could have no idea what it meant. Besides all
this, they were in exceedingly bad humor, both with themselves and
with one another. In order to indulge it to the utmost, Epimetheus sat
down sullenly in a corner with his back toward Pandora; while Pandora
flung herself upon the floor and rested her head on the fatal box. She
was crying bitterly, and sobbing as if her heart would break.

Suddenly there was gentle little tap on the inside of the lid.

"What can that be?" cried Pandora, lifting her head.

But either Epimetheus had not heard the tap, or was too much out of
humor to notice it. At any rate, he made no answer.

"You are very unkind," said Pandora, sobbing anew, "not to speak to
me!"

Again the tap! It sounded like the tiny knuckles of a fairy's hand,
knocking lightly and playfully on the inside of the box.

"Who are you?" asked Pandora, with a little of her former curiosity.
"Who are you, inside of this naughty box?"

A sweet little voice spoke from within: "Only lift the lid, and you
shall see."

"No, no," answered Pandora, again beginning to sob, "I have had enough
of lifting the lid! You are inside of the box, naughty creature, and
there you shall stay! There are plenty of your ugly brothers and
sisters already flying about the world. You need never think that I
shall be so foolish as to let you out!"

She looked toward Epimetheus as she spoke, perhaps expecting that he
would commend her for her wisdom. But the sullen boy only muttered
that she was wise a little too late.

"Ah," said the sweet little voice again. "You had much better let me
out. I am not like those naughty creatures that have stings in their
tails. They are no brothers and sisters of mine, as you would see at
once, if you were only to get a glimpse of me. Come, come, my pretty
Pandora! I am sure you will let me out!"

And, indeed, there was a kind of cheerful witchery in the tone that
made it almost impossible to refuse anything which this little voice
asked. Pandora's heart had grown lighter at every word that came from
within the box. Epimetheus, too, though still in the corner, had
turned half round, and seemed to be in rather better spirits than
before.

"My dear Epimetheus," cried Pandora, "have you heard this little
voice?"

"Yes, to be sure I have," answered he, but in no very good humor as
yes. "And what of it?"

"Shall I lift the lid again?" asked Pandora.

"Just as you please," said Epimetheus. "You have done so much mischief
already that perhaps you may as well do a little more. One other
Trouble, in such a swarm as you have set adrift about the world, can
make no very great difference."

"You might speak a little more kindly!" murmured Pandora, wiping her
eyes.

"Ah, naughty boy!" cried the little voice within the box, in an arch
and laughing tone. "He knows he is longing to see me. Come, my dear
Pandora, lift up the lid. I am in a great hurry to comfort you. Only
let me have some fresh air, and you shall soon see that matters are
not quite so dismal as you think them!"

"Epimetheus," exclaimed Pandora, "come what may, I am resolved to open
the box!"

"And, as the lid seems very heavy," cried Epimetheus, running across
the room, "I will help you!"

So, with one consent, the children again lifted the lid. Out flew
a sunny and smiling little personage, and hovered about the room,
throwing a light wherever she went. Have you never made the sunshine
dance into dark corners by reflecting it from a bit of looking-glass?
Well, so looked the winged cheerfulness of this fairy-like stranger
amid the gloom of the cottage. She flew to Epimetheus and laid the
least touch of her finger on the inflamed spot where the Trouble had
stung him, and immediately the anguish of it was gone. Then she kissed
Pandora on the forehead, and her hurt was cured likewise.

After performing these good offices, the bright stranger fluttered
sportively over the children's heads, and looked so sweetly at them
that they both began to think it not so very much amiss to have opened
the box, since, otherwise, their cheery guest must have been kept a
prisoner among those naughty imps with stings in their tails.

"Pray, who are you, beautiful creature?" inquired Pandora.

"I am to be called Hope!" answered the sunshiny figure. "And because
I am such a cheery little body, I was packed into the box, to make
amends to the human race for that swarm of ugly Troubles, which was
destined to be let loose among them. Never fear! We shall do pretty
well in spite of them all."

"Your wings are colored like the rainbow!" exclaimed Pandora. "How
very beautiful!"

"Yes, they are like the rainbow," said Hope, "because, glad as my
nature is, I am partly made of tears as well as smiles."

"And will you stay with us," asked Epimetheus, "for ever and ever?"

"As long as you need me," said Hope, with her pleasant smile, "and
that will be as long as you live in the world. I promise never to
leave you. There may be times and seasons, now and then, when you will
think that I have utterly vanished. But again, and again, and again,
when perhaps you least dream of it, you shall see the glimmer of my
wings on the ceiling of your cottage. Yes, my dear children, and
I know something very good and beautiful that is to be Given you
hereafter!"

"Oh, tell us," they exclaimed; "tell us what it is!"

"Do not ask me," replied Hope, patting her finger on her rosy mouth.
"But do not despair, even if it should never happen while you live on
this earth. Trust in my promise, for it is true."

"We do trust you!" cried Epimetheus and Pandora, both in one breath.

And so they did; and not only they, but so has everybody trusted Hope,
that has since been alive. And, to tell You the truth, I cannot help
being glad (though to be sure It was an uncommonly naughty thing for
her to do) but I Cannot help being glad that our foolish Pandora
peeped into the box. No doubt--no doubt--the Troubles are still flying
about the world, and have increased in numbers, rather than lessened,
and are a very ugly set of imps, and carry most venomous stings in
their tails. I have felt them already, and expect to feel them more
as I grow older. But then that lovely and lightsome little figure of
Hope! What in the world could we do without her? Hope spiritualizes
the earth; Hope makes it always new; and, even in the earths best and
brightest aspect, Hope shows it to be only the shadow of an infinite
bliss hereafter!


NOTES AND QUESTIONS

Discussion. 1. How long ago did Pandora and Epimetheus live? 2. Find
the lines that tell how different the world was then from what it is
now. 3. Where did the box come from? 4. On what conditions was it
given to Epimetheus? 5. Find lines that describe the box. 6. Why was
Pandora interested in it? 7. In what way was it a blessing to Pandora?
8. What led her to open the box? 9. Do you thing Epimetheus was at
fault? Why? 10. What happened when Pandora raised the lid of the box?
11. How did this affect the Paradise of Children? The flowers? The
children? 12. What happened when Pandora opened the box a second time?
13. Why was Hope put into the box with the Troubles? 14. Why are the
wings of Hope like the rainbows? 15. What does Hope do for us? 16.
What qualities in Epimetheus do you like? 17. What did Hope mean by
saying she was partly made of tears? 18. How does Hope "spiritualize"
the earth, i.e., make it purer? 19. Tell what you can about the
author. 20. On page 291 you were asked to notice the way in which
these authors tell their stories; you have no doubt noticed that
Hawthorne uses humor and fancy to add interest. 21. Point out examples
of his humor. 22. What quaint fancy has he about the way food was
provided when the world was young? 23. By what fancy does he increase
our interest in the mystery of the box? 24. Class readings: Select
passages to be read aloud in class. 25. Outline for testing silent
reading. Tell the story briefly in your own words, using the topic
headings given in the story. 26. You will enjoy seeing the pictures in
the edition of The Wonder-Book that is illustrated by the well known
artist, Maxfield Parrish. 27. Find in the Glossary the meaning of:
caroling; mysterious; whence; pettishly; intelligent; babble; combine;
pried; restore; constant; intent; pestered; witchery; personage;
glimmer; lightsome. 28 Pronounce: Epimetheus; either; Pandora;
threshold; livelong; disquietude; merry; forbear; accompany;
perseveringly; vexations; profusion; mischievous; contrivance;
ingenious; merest; lamentable; gigantic; molested; calamity;
grievously; intolerable; hovered; destined; venomous; spiritualizes;
aspect; infinite.

Phrases for Study

greatest disquietude, afflicted the souls, faint shadow of a Trouble,
obtained a foothold, more enterprise, immortal in their childhood,
unaccustomed to vexations, wrought together in such harmony, indulge
in to the utmost, with one consent, high relief, performing these good
offices, utter itself in words, roguishly defied, much amiss, toil is
the real play, make amends, bewitchingly persuasive, brightest aspect,
humor better suited, shadow of an infinite bliss. THE GOLDEN TOUCH

KING MIDAS AND HIS LOVE FOR GOLD

Once upon a time there lived a very rich man, and a King besides,
whose name was Midas; and he had a little daughter, whom nobody but
myself ever heard of, and whose name I either never knew, or have
entirely forgotten. So, because I love odd name for little girls, I
choose to call her Marygold.

This King Midas was fonder of gold than of anything else in the world.
He valued his royal crown chiefly because it was composed of that
precious metal. If he loved anything better, or half so well, it
was the one little maiden who played so merrily around her father's
footstool. But the more Midas loved his daughter, the more did he
desire and seek for wealth. He thought, foolish man, that the best
thing he could possibly do for his dear child would be to give her the
immensest pile of yellow, glistening coin that had ever been heaped
together since the world was make. Thus, he gave all his thoughts and
all his time to this one Purpose. If ever he happened to gaze for an
instant at the gold-tinted clouds of sunset, he wished that they were
real gold and that they could be squeezed safely into his strong box.
When little Marygold ran to meet him, with a bunch of buttercups and
dandelions, he used to say, "Pooh, pooh, child! If these flowers were
a golden as they look, they would be worth the plucking!"

And yet, in his earlier days, before he was so entirely possessed of
this insane desire for riches, King Midas had shown a great taste
for flowers. He had planted a garden, in which grew the biggest and
beautifulest and sweetest roses that any mortal ever saw or smelled.
These roses were still growing in the garden, as large, as lovely, and
as fragrant as when Midas used to pass whole hours in gazing at the
and inhaling their perfume. But now, if he looked at them at all, it
was only to calculate how much the garden would be worth if each of
the many rose-petals were a thin plate of gold.

At length (as people always grow more and more foolish, unless they
take care to grow wiser and wiser) Midas had got to be so exceedingly
unreasonable that he could scarcely bear to see or touch any object
that was not gold. He made it his custom, therefore, to pass a large
portion of every day in a dark and dreary apartment, underground, at
the basement of the palace. It was here that he kept his wealth. To
this dismal hole "for it was little better than a dungeon" Midas betook
himself whenever he wanted to be particularly happy. Here, after
carefully locking the door, he would take a bag of gold coin, or
a gold cup as big as a washbowl, or a heavy golden bar, or a
peck-measure of gold-dust, and bring them from the obscure corners of
the room into the one bright and narrow sunbeam that fell from the
dungeon-like window. He valued the sunbeam for no other reason but
that his treasure would not shine without its help. And then would he
reckon over the coins in the bag; toss up the bar, and catch it as it
came down; sift the gold-dust through his fingers; look at the funny
image of his own face, as reflected in the polished surface of the
cup; and whisper to himself, "O Midas, rich King Midas, what a happy
man art thou!"

Midas was enjoying himself in his treasure-room one Day as usual, when
he saw a shadow fall over the heaps of Gold; and, looking suddenly up,
what should he behold but The figure of a strange, standing in the
bright and narrow Sunbeam! It was a young man with a cheerful and
ruddy face. Whether it was that the imagination of King Midas threw a
yellow tinge over everything, or whatever the cause might be, he could
not help fancying that the smile with which the stranger regarded him
had a kind of golden radiance in it.

As Midas knew that he had carefully turned the key in The lock, and
that no mortal strength could possibly break Into his treasure-room,
he of course concluded that his Visitor must be something more than
mortal. It is no matter about telling you who he was. In those days,
when the earth was comparatively a new affair, it was supposed to be
often the resort of beings who had extraordinary powers, and who used
to interest themselves in the joys and sorrows of men, women, and
children, half playfully and half seriously, Midas had met such
beings before now, and was not sorry to meet one of them again. The
stranger's manner, indeed, was so good-humored and kindly that it
would have been unreasonable to suspect him of intending any mischief.
It was far more probable that he came to do Midas a favor. And what
could that favor be, unless to multiply his heaps of treasure?

The stranger gazed about the room; and when his bright smile had
glistened upon all the golden objects that were there, he turned again
to Midas.

"You are a wealthy man, friend Midas!" he observed. "I doubt whether
any other four walls on earth contain so much gold as you have piled
up in this room."

"I have done pretty well pretty well," answered Midas, in a
discontented tone. "But, after all, it is but a trifle, when you
consider that it has taken me my whole life to get it together. If one
could live a thousand years, he might have time to grow rich!"

"What!" exclaimed the stranger. "Then you are not satisfied?" Midas
shook his head.

"And pray what would satisfy you?" asked the stranger. "Merely for the
curiosity of the thing I should be glad to know."

Midas paused and meditated. He had a feeling that his stranger, with
such a golden luster in his good-humored smile, had come hither with
both the power and the purpose of gratifying his utmost wishes. Now,
therefore, was the fortunate moment when he had but to speak and
obtain whatever possible, or seemingly impossible, thing it might
come into his head to ask. So he thought and thought and thought,
and heaped up one golden mountain upon another in this imagination,
without being able to imagine them big enough. At last, a bright idea
occurred to King Midas. It seemed really as bright as the glistening
metal which he loved so much.

Raising his head, he looked the lustrous stranger in the face.

"Well, Midas," observed his visitor. "I see that you have at length
hit upon something that will satisfy you. Tell me your wish."

"It is only this," Replied Midas. "I am weary of collecting my
treasures with so much trouble, and beholding the heap so small after
I have done my best. I wish everything that I touch to be changed to
gold!"

The stranger's smile grew so very broad that it seemed to fill the
room like an outburst of the sun gleaming into a shadowy dell where
the yellow autumnal leaves--for so looked the lumps and particles of
gold--lie strewn in the glow of light.

"The Golden Touch!" exclaimed he. "You certainly deserve credit,
friend Midas, for striking out so brilliant an idea. But are you quite
sure that this will satisfy you?"

"How could it fail?" said Midas.

"And will you never regret the possession of it?"

"What could induce me?" asked Midas. "I ask nothing else to render me
perfectly happy."

"Be it as you wish, then," replied the stranger, waving his hand in
token of farewell. "Tomorrow, at sunrise, you will find yourself
gifted with the Golden touch."

The figure of the stranger then became exceedingly bright, and Midas
was forced to close his eyes. On opening them again he beheld only one
yellow sunbeam in the room, and, all around him, the glistening of the
precious metal which he had spent his life in hoarding up.

Whether Midas slept as usual that night, the story does not say.
Asleep or awake, however, his mind was probably in the state of a
child's to whom a beautiful new plaything has been promised in the
morning. At any rate, day had hardly peeped over the hills when King
Midas was broad awake, and stretching his arms out of bed, began to
touch the objects that were within reach. He was anxious to prove
whether the Golden Touch had really come, according to the stranger's
promise. So he laid his finger on a chair by the bedside, and on
various other things, but was grievously disappointed to perceive that
they remained of exactly the same substance as before.


THE GIFT OF THE GOLDEN TOUCH

All this while, it was only the gray of the morning, with but a streak
of brightness along the edge of the sky, where Midas could not see it.
He lay in a very unhappy mood, regretting the downfall of his hopes,
and kept growing sadder and sadder, until the earliest sunbeam shone
through the window and gilded the ceiling over his head. It seemed
to Midas that this bright yellow sunbeam was reflected in rather a
singular way on the white covering of the bed. Looking more closely,
what was his astonishment and delight, when he found that this linen
fabric wad been changed to what seemed a woven texture of the purest
and brightest gold! The Golden Touch had come to him with the first
sunbeam!

Midas started up, in a kind of joyful frenzy, and ran about the room
grasping at everything that happened to be in his way. He seized one
of the bed-posts, and it became immediately a fluted golden pillar. He
pulled aside a window-curtain in order to admit a clear spectacle of
the wonders which he was performing; and the tassel grew heavy in his
hand--a mass of gold. He took up a book from the table. At this first
touch, it assumed the appearance of such a splendidly-bound and
gilt-edged volume as one often meets with nowadays; but, on running
his fingers through the leaves, behold! It was a bundle of thin golden
plates, in which all the wisdom of the book had grown in distinct.
He hurriedly put on his clothes, and was delighted to ace himself in
magnificent suit of gold cloth, which retained its flexibility and
softness, although it burdened him a little with its weight.

Wise King Midas was so excited by his good fortune that the palace
seemed not sufficiently spacious to contain him. He therefore went
downstairs and smiled on observing that the balustrade of the
staircase became a bar of burnished gold as his hand passed over it in
the descent. He lifted the door latch (it was brass only a moment ago,
but golden when his fingers quitted it) and went into the garden.
Here, as it happened, he found a great number of beautiful roses in
full bloom, and others in all the stages of lovely bud and blossom.
Very delicious was their fragrance in the morning breeze. Their
delicate blush was one of the fairest sights in the world--so gentle,
so modest, and so full of erect composure did these roses seem to be.

But Midas knew a way to make them far more precious, according to his
way of thinking, than roses had ever been before. So he took great
pains in going from bush to bush, and exercised his magic touch most
freely; until every individual flower and bud, and even the worms at
the heart of some of them, were changed to gold. By the time this good
work was completed, King Midas was called to breakfast; and, as the
morning air had given him an excellent appetite, he made haste back to
the palace.

What was usually a king's breakfast, in the days of Midas, I really do
not know, and cannot stop now to find out. To the best of my belief,
however, on this particular morning, the breakfast consisted of hot
cakes, some nice little brook-trout, roasted potatoes, fresh boiled
eggs, and coffee, for King Midas himself, and a bowl of bread and milk
for his daughter Marygold. At all events, this is a breakfast fit to
be set before a king; and, whether he had it or not, King Midas could
not have had a better.

Little Marygold had not yet made her appearance. Her father ordered
her to be called, and, seating himself at table, awaited the child's
coming, in order to begin his own breakfast. To do Midas justice, he
really loved his daughter, and loved her so much the more this morning
on account of the good fortune which had befallen him. It was not
a great while before he heard her coming along the passage crying
bitterly. This circumstance surprised him, because Marygold was one of
the cheerfulest little people whom you would see in a summer day, and
hardly shed a thimbleful of tears in a twelvemonth. When Midas heard
her sobs, he determined to put little Marygold into better spirits by
an agreeable surprise; so, leaning across the table, he touched his
daughter's bowl (which was a china one, with pretty figures all around
it) and turned it to gleaming gold.

Meanwhile, Marygold slowly and sadly opened the door, and showed
herself with her apron at her eyes, still sobbing as if her heart
would break.

"How now, my little lady!" cried Midas. "Pray what is the matter with
you this bright morning?"

Marygold, without taking the apron from her eyes, held out her hand,
in which was one of the roses which Midas had so recently changed.

"Beautiful!" exclaimed her father. "And what is there in this
magnificent golden rose to make you cry?"

"Ah, dear father!" answered the child, as well as her sobs would let
her, "it is not beautiful, but the ugliest flower that ever grew! As
soon as I was dressed, I ran into the garden to gather some roses
for you, because I know you like them, and like them the better when
gathered by your little daughter. But, O dear, dear me! What do you
think has happened? Such a misfortune! All the beautiful roses, that
smelled so sweet and had so many lovely blushes, are blighted and
spoiled! They are grown quite yellow, as you see this one, and have no
longer any fragrance! What can have been the matter?"

"Pooh, my dear little girl, pray don't cry about it!" said Midas, who
was ashamed to confess that he himself had wrought the change which so
greatly afflicted her. "Sit down and eat your bread and milk! You will
find it easy enough to exchange a golden rose like that (which will
last hundreds of years) for an ordinary one, which would wither in a
day."

"I don't care for such roses as this!" cried Marygold. "It has no
smell, and hard petals prick my nose!"


THE KING'S BREAKFAST OF GOLD

The child now sat down to table, but was so occupied with her grief
for the blighted roses that she did not even notice the wonderful
change of her china bowl. Perhaps this was all the better; for
Marygold was accustomed to take pleasure in looking at the queer
figures and strange trees and houses that were painted on the outside
of the bowl; and those ornaments were now entirely lost in the yellow
hue of the metal.

Midas, meanwhile, had poured out a cup of coffee; and, as a matter of
course, the coffee-pot, whatever metal it may have been when he took
it up, was gold when he set it down. He thought to himself that it
was rather an extravagant style of splendor, in a king of his simple
habits, to breakfast off a service of gold, and began to be puzzled
with the difficulty of keeping his treasures safe. The cupboard and
the kitchen would no longer be a safe place of deposit for articles so
valuable as golden bowls and coffee-pots.

Amid these thoughts, he lifted a spoonful of coffee to his lips, and
sipping it, was astonished to perceive that, the instant his lips
touched the liquid, it became molten gold, and, the next moment,
hardened into a lump!

"Ha!" exclaimed Midas, rather aghast.

"What is the matter, father?" asked little Marygold, gazing at him,
with tears still standing in her eyes.

"Nothing, child, nothing!" said Midas. "Eat your bread and milk before
it gets quite cold."

He took one of the nice little trout on his plate, and, by way of
experiment, touched its tail with his finger. To his horror, it was
immediately changed from an admirably-fried brook-trout into a gold
fish, though not one of those goldfish which people often keep in
glass globes, as ornaments for the parlor. No; but it was really a
metallic fish, and looked as if it had been very cunningly made by the
nicest goldsmith in the world. Its little bones were now golden wires;
its fins and tail were thin plates of gold; and there were the marks
of the fork in it, and all the delicate, frothy appearance of a nicely
fried fish, exactly imitated in metal. A very pretty piece of work, as
you may suppose; only King Midas just at the that moment would much
rather have had a real trout in his dish than his elaborate and
valuable imitation of one.

"I don't quite see," thought he to himself, "how I am to get any
breakfast!"

He took one of the smoking hot cakes, and had scarcely broken it,
when, to his cruel mortification, though a moment before it had been
of the whitest wheat, it assumed the yellow hue of Indian meal. To say
the truth, if it had really been a hot Indian cake, Midas would have
prized it a good deal more than he now did, when its solidity and
increased weight made him know too well that it was old. Almost
in despair, he helped himself to a boiled egg, which immediately
underwent a change similar to that of the trout and the cake. The egg,
indeed, might have been mistaken for one of those which the famous
goose, in the story-book, was in the habit of laying; but King Midas
was the only goose that had had anything to do with the matter.

"Well, this is a puzzle!" thought he, leaning back in his chair, and
looking quite enviously at little Marygold, who was now eating her
bread and milk with great satisfaction. "Such a costly breakfast, and
nothing that can be eaten!"

Hoping that, by dint of great quickness, he might avoid what he now
felt to be a considerable inconvenience, King Midas next snatched a
hot potato, and attempted to cram It into his mouth and swallow it in
hurry. But the Golden Touch was too nimble for him. He found his mouth
full, not of mealy potato, but of solid metal, which so burned his tongue
that he roared aloud, and, jumping up from the table, began to dance
and stamp about the room, both with pain and affright.

"Father, dear father!" cried little Marygold, who was a very
affectionate child, "pray, what is the matter? Have you burned your
mouth?"

"Ah, dear child," groaned Midas, dolefully, "I don't know what is to
become of your poor father!"

And, truly, my dear little folks, did you ever hear of such a pitiable
case in all your lives? Here was literally the richest breakfast that
could be set before a king, and its very richness made it absolutely
good for nothing. The poorest laborer, sitting down to his crust of
bread and cup of water, was far better off than King Midas, whose
delicate food was really worth its weight in gold. And what was to be
done? Already, at breakfast, Midas was very hungry. Would he be less
so by dinner-time? And how ravenous would be his appetite for supper,
which must undoubtedly consist of the same sort of indigestible dishes
as those now before him! How many days, think you, would he survive
the fate of this rich fare?

These thoughts so troubled wise King Midas that he began to doubt
whether, after all, riches are the one desirable thing in the world;
or even the most desirable. But this was only a passing thought. So
pleased was Midas with the glitter of the yellow metal that he
would still have refused to give up the Golden Touch for so small a
consideration as a breakfast. Just imagine what a price for one meal's
victuals! It would have been the same as paying millions and millions
of money (and as many millions more as would take forever to reckon
up) for some fried trout, an egg, a potato, a hot cake, and a cup of
coffee!

"It would be quite too dear," thought Midas.

Nevertheless, so great was his hunger and perplexity of this
situation, that he again groaned aloud, and very grievously too. Our
pretty Marygold could endure it no longer. She sat a moment gazing at
her father, and trying, with all the might of her little wits, to find
out what was the matter with him. Then, with a sweet and sorrowful
impulse to comfort him, she started from the chair, and running to
Midas, threw her arms affectionately about his knees. He bent down
and kissed her. He felt that his little daughter's love was worth a
thousand times more than he had gained by the Golden Touch.

"My precious, precious Marygold!" cried he.

But Marygold made no answer.

Alas, what had he done? How fatal was the gift which the stranger
gave! The moment the lips of Midas touched Marygold's forehead, a
change had taken place. Her sweet, rosy face, so full of affection as
it had been, assumed a glittering yellow color, with yellow tear-drops
hardening on her cheeks. Her beautiful brown ringlets took the same
tint. Her soft and tender little form grew hard and stiff within her
father's encircling arms. O terrible misfortune! The victim of his
great desire for wealth, little Marygold was human child no longer,
but a golden statue!

Yes, there she was, with the questioning look of love, grief, and
pity, hardened into her face. It was the prettiest and most woeful
sight that ever mortal saw. All the features and tokens of Marygold
were there; even the beloved little dimple remained in her golden
chin. But, the more perfect was the resemblance, the greater was the
father's agony at beholding this golden image, which was all that
was left him of a daughter. It had been a favorite phrase of Midas,
whenever he felt particularly fond of the child, to say that she was
worth her weight in gold. And how the phrase had become literally true.
And now, at last, when it was too late, he felt how infinitely a warm
and tender heart that loved him exceeded in value all the wealth that
could be piled up betwixt the earth and sky!

It would be too sad a story if I were to tell you how Midas, in the
fullness of all his gratified desires, began to Wring his hands and
bemoan himself; and how he could neither bear to look at Marygold, nor
yet to look away from her.


WHAT KING MIDAS LEARNED

While he was in this despair, he suddenly beheld a stranger, standing
near the door. Midas bent down his head, without speaking; for he
recognized the same figure which had appeared to him the day before in
the treasure-room, and had bestowed on him this unlucky power of the
Golden Touch. The stranger's countenance still wore a smile, which
Seemed to shed a yellow luster all about the room, and Gleamed on
little Marygold's image, and on the other Objects that had been
changed by the touch of Midas.

"Well, friend Midas," said the stranger, "pray how do you succeed with
the Golden Touch?"

Midas shook his head.

"I am very miserable," said he.

"Very miserable, indeed!" exclaimed the stranger. "And how happens
that? Have I not faithfully kept my promise with you? Have you not
everything that your heart desired?"

"Gold is not everything," answered Midas. "And I have lost all that my
heart really cared for."

"Ah! So you have made a discovery since yesterday?" observed the
stranger. "Let us see, then. Which of these two things do you think
is really worth the more--the gift of the Golden Touch, or one cup of
clear cold water?"

"O blessed water!" exclaimed Midas. "It will never moisten my parched
throat again!"

"The Golden Touch," continued the stranger, "or a crust of bread?"

"A piece of bread," answered Midas, "is worth all the gold on earth!"

"The Golden Touch," asked the stranger, "or your own little Marygold,
warm, soft, and loving, as she was an hour ago?"

"Oh, my child, my dear child, my dear child!" cried poor Midas,
wringing his hands. "I would not have given that one small dimple in
her chin for the power of changing his whole big earth into a solid
lump of gold!"

"You are wiser than you were, King Midas!" said the stranger, looking
seriously at him. "Your own heart, I perceive, has not been entirely
changed from flesh to gold. Were it so, your ease would indeed be
desperate. But you appear to be still capable of understanding that
the commonest things, such as lie within everybody's grasp, are more
valuable than the riches which so many mortals sigh and struggle
after. Tell me, now, do you sincerely desire to rid yourself of this
Golden Touch?"

"It is hateful to me!" replied Midas.

A fly settled on his nose, but immediately fell to the Floor; for it,
to had become gold. Midas shuddered.

"Go, then," said the stranger, "and plunge into the river that glides
past the bottom of the your garden. Take likewise a vase of the same
water, and sprinkle it over any object that you may desire to change
back again from gold into its former substance. If you do this in
earnestness and sincerity, it may possibly repair the mischief which
your avarice has occasioned."

King Midas bowed low; and when he lifted his head, The lustrous
stranger had vanished.

You will easily believe that Midas lost no time in snatching up a
great earthen pitcher (but, alas! It was no longer earthen after he
touched it) and hastening to the riverside. As he scampered along, and
forced his way through the shrubbery, it was positively marvelous to
see how the foliage turned yellow behind him, as if the autumn had
been there, and nowhere else. On reaching the river's brink, he
plunged headlong in, without waiting so much as to pull off his shoes.

"Poof! Poof! Poof!" snorted King Midas, as his head emerged out of the
water. "Well, this is really a refreshing bath, and I think it must
have quite washed away the Golden Touch. And now for filling my
pitcher!"

As he dipped the pitcher into the water, it gladdened his very heart
to see it change from gold into the same good, honest earthen vessel
which it had been before he touched it. He was conscious, also, of a
change within himself. A cold, hard, and heavy weight seemed to have
gone out of his bosom. No doubt his heart had been gradually losing
its human substance, and changing itself into dull metal, but had now
softened back again into flesh. Seeing a violet that grew on the bank
of the river, Midas touched it with his finger, and was overjoyed to
find that the delicate flower retained its purple hue, instead of
undergoing a yellow blight. The curse of the Golden Touch had,
therefore, really been removed from him.

King Midas hastened back to the palace; and, I suppose, the servants
knew not what to make of it when they saw their royal master so
carefully bringing home an earthen pitcher of water. But that water,
which was to undo all the mischief that his folly had wrought, was
more precious to Midas than an ocean of molten gold could have been.
The first thing he did, as you nee hardly be told, was to sprinkle it
by handfuls over the golden figure of little Marygold.

No sooner did it fall on her than you would have laughed to see how
the rosy color came back to the dear child's cheek!--and how she began
to sneeze and splutter!--and how astonished she was to find herself
dripping wet, and her father still throwing more water over her!

"Pray, do not, dear father!" cried she. "See how you have wet my nice
frock, which I put on only this morning!"

For Marygold did not know that she had been a little golden statue;
nor could she remember anything that had happened since the moment
when she ran, with outstretched arms, to comfort poor King Midas.

Her father did not think it necessary to tell his beloved child how
very foolish he had been, but contented himself with showing how much
wiser he had now grown. For this purpose he led little Marygold into
the garden, where he sprinkled all the remainder of the water over
the rosebushes recovered their beautiful bloom. There were two
circumstances, however, which, as long as he lived, used to put King
Midas in mind of the Golden Touch. One was that the sands of the river
sparkled like gold; the other that little Marygold's hair had now a
golden tinge, which he had never observed in it before she had been
changed by the effect of his kiss. This change of hue was really an
improvement, and made Marygold's hair richer than in her babyhood.

When King Midas had grown quite an old man, and used to trot
Marygold's children on his knee, he was fond of telling them this
marvelous story, pretty much as I have now told it to your. And then
would he stroke their glossy ringlets, and tell them that their hair,
likewise, had a rich shade of gold, which they had inherited from
their mother.

"And to tell you the truth, my precious little folks," quoth King
Midas, diligently trotting the children all the while, "ever since
that morning I have hated the very sight of all other gold save
this!"


NOTES AND QUESTIONS

Discussion. 1. How did Midas think he could best show his love for
this daughter? 2. What was his chief pleasure? 3. Describe the visitor
who appeared to Midas in his treasure-room. 4. What did the stranger
ask him? 5. Find the sentence that tells what Midas wished. 6. When
did he receive his new power? 7. What use did he make of it? 8. What
did Marygold think of the gold roses? 9. Why was not Midas's breakfast
a success? 10. When did Midas first doubt whether riches are the most
desirable thing in the world? 11. How did he drive this thought away?
12. What make him realize that his little daughter was dearer to him
than gold? 13. Find lines that tell what he realized when it was too
late. 14. What did the stranger ask when he came again? 15. What was
the discovery that Midas mad made since the stranger's first visit?
16. How was Midas cured of the Golden Touch? 17. What was he told to
do in order to restore Marygold to life? 18. What was the only gold
he cared about after he was saved from the Golden Touch? 19. Find
examples of human; of fanciful expressions, Such as "day had hardly
peeped over the hills," of descriptions that you like. 20. Close
readings: Select passages to be read aloud in class. 21. Outline for
testing silent reading. Tell the story briefly in your own words,
using the topic headings given in the story. 22. Find in the Glossary
the meaning of: purpose; mortal; inhaling; induce; flexibility;
balustrade; burnished; afflicted; affright; consideration; perplexity;
fatal; agony; infinitely; desperate; earthen; conscious; molten.
23. Pronounce: Midas; calculate; particularly; obscure; tinge;
extraordinary; mediate; composure; blighted; bath; cup; snarl; molten;
aghast; admirably; metallic; frothy; pitiable; ravenous; indigestible;
victuals; phrase; recognized; purebred; avarice.

Phrases for Study

comparatively a new affair, fairest goldsmith, woven texture, cruel
mortification, wisdom of the book, by dint of great quickness,
cunningly made, features and tokens.


GREAT AMERICAN AUTHORS

A Backward Look

A wonderful power lies in the Crystal Glass of Reading--the power to
increase your circle of friends and to know intimately people who have
lived in distant times and places. Through its power the great
heroes of all ages--Joseph, Beowulf, Sigurd, Robin Hood, and our own
Washington, Lincoln, and Roosevelt--become your companions.

Someone has said that the pen is mightier than the sword, which is
another way of saying that great books have had more to do in shaping
the lives and fortunes of men than bloody battles. The group of
authors whose stories and poems you have just been reading is a
company of friends whose thoughts about Nature, or about life and its
meaning, have been a power in making America what it is today.

Acquaintance with these friends has been made easy for you; you have
had placed before you their pictures and interesting facts about their
lives, and best of all, you have been able to hear them tell their own
thoughts. What authors are in this group? Which of them did you learn
to know in Book IV and which were new to you in this book? Close
your eyes and see whether your "inward eye" can picture the faces of
Franklin, Bryant, Whittier, Irving, Longfellow, Hawthorne. Make one
interesting statement concerning each author and his works. Quote
lines from poems by Bryant, Whittier, and Longfellow. Make from memory
a list of title of stories or poems you have read from each of these
six American authors.

Benjamin Franklin founded the first public library in America; the
picture on page 18 shows you what a library must have been like in
the old Greek days, and page 288 pictures a view of the Congressional
Library at Washington, the home of the complete works of all our
American authors. The building is considered one of the most beautiful
in the world; report to the class some interesting facts about this
library that you have learned from someone who has seen it.

In the last paragraph of the Forward Look, you are asked to notice the
way in which authors tell what they have to say. When Franklin was a
young boy he was not at all satisfied with his way of writing, so
he sat himself the task of noticing carefully how a certain English
writer, whom he admired very much, expressed himself, and tried to
pattern after him. Notice how Franklin made the story "An Ax to Grind"
seem very real by using direct quotations; where else has he used
direct quotations with the same result?

Notice the way Hawthorne added interest to his stories: (a) by touches
of fancy; (b) by delicate humor; (c) by apt descriptions. Point out
examples of each of these qualities in "The Paradise of Children."
Make a similar showing for "The Golden Touch." Compare the two stories
in regard to each of These qualities.

Turn to the pictures on pages 282, 297, 302, 321, and 309, and see
whether you are able to tell what selection each panel-picture
illustrates. You have read many stories in this book that show how
fine a thing it is to serve, and so it seems fitting to have on the
cover at your reader a picture of Hiawatha, who

"Lived and toiled, so I suffered, That the tribes of men might
prosper, That he might advance his people!"

Make a list of the stories you have read in this book that tell about
service. Read the lines in "The White-man's foot" that describe "the
great canoe with pinions," which you see in the picture on the outside
cover of this book. Since you began to use this book what progress
have you hade in gaining ability to read silently with speed and
understanding?










GLOSSARY

abashed (a-bashed'), ashamed

abbey (ab'i), the home of monks

abbot (ab'ut), head of an abbey

above his fortune (for'toon), more than he can afford

absolutely (ab'so-loot-ly), positively

absurd inventions (ab-surd' in-ven'shuns), made-up stories not
believable

abyes (a-bis'), a space so deep as not to be easily measured

accompany (ac-com'pa-ny), go with

accosted (ac-cost'ed), spoken to

accoutered (ac-cout'ered), dressed

accumulating (ac-cu'mu-lat-ing), piling up

acquainted (ac-quaint'ed), friendly with each other

adage (ad'age), a saying

Adjidaumo (Ad-ji-dau'mo)

admirably (ad'mi-ra-bly), well

ado (a-do'), fuss

adorn (a-dorn'), decorate

advance (ad-vance') his people, help his tribe of Indians to be better

advisers (ad-viz'ers), men with whom he talked

adz (adz'), tool for trimming wood

aerie (i'ry), high nest

Aesop (Ae'sop), a Greek slave who wrote many little stories

afflicted (af-flict'ed), distressed

afflicted (af-flict'ed) the souls, made people do wrong

affliction (af-flic'shun), trouble

affright (af-fright'), alarm

aftermath (aft'er-math), second crop

against all comers, with anyone he meets

age of doubt, time when people are not ready to believe

aghast (a-ghast'), startled

agility (a-gil'i-ty), quickness

agony (ag'o-ny), grief

Ahmeek (Ah-meek')

Ahno (Ah'no)

Aladdin (A-lad'din)

alder (al'der), a kind of tree

alert (a-lert'), watchful

Ali Baba (A'li Bah'bah)

allied (al-lied'), joined

all in their best, dressed in their best clothes

all its endearments (en-dear'mentz), everything that makes it dear

allotted (al-lot'ted) time, time granted for doing anything

almanacs (al'ma-naks), small books containing a yearly calendar with
little stories

aloes (al'oes), a precious wood

alternate (al-ter'nate), first one, then the other

ambitious (am-bi'shus), eager for

ambush in the oak-tree, hiding-place in the oak

amethyst (am'e-thyst), a clear purple or bluish violet; a precious
stone

ancient, old; of old time

anecdote (an'ek-dote), a story

anemones (a-nim'o-nez), wild flowers of pale, dainty colors

anew (a-nu'), again

animal spirits, loud, rough play

Annemeekee (An-ne-mee'kee)

Antoine (An-twan')

anxious (ang'shus), troubled

ape the ways of pride, try to copy the

actions of proud people

apothecary (a-poth'uh-ca-ry), druggist

appeared concerned (ap-peared' con-surned'), seemed anxious

apple from the pine, pineapple

appointed (ap-point'ed), chosen beforehand for the feast

approached (ap-proacht'), went near to

approach (ap-proach') the bounds, come near the edge

Arabic (Ar'a-bik), language of Arabs

arch and laughing tone, merry, teasing voice

archery, shooting with bow and arrow

arching, curving

arching blue, sky

arch of the sunlit bow, curve of the rainbow

archway of rock, meeting place overhead of two rock walls

array (ar-ray',) order

artificar (ar-tif'i-sur), skilled worker

ash-cakes, unsweetened cakes baked on a hot shovel laid on the ashes

aspect, outlook; state

aspen (as'pen) bower, thicket of trees the leaves of which are easily
moved by the wind

aspiring (as-pir'ing) genius, clever person who is trying to rise

assembled (as-sem'bld), collected

assumed (as-soomd') the ap-pear'ance of, looked like

asters (as'ters) in the brook, reflection of the asters in the water

astir (a-stur'), moving around

astonished (as-ton'isht), surprised

astride (a-stride') the traces, having one leg over one of the straps
which fastened the plow to the horses

asunder (a-sun'der), apart

attendance (at-ten'dans) on levees (lev- ees'), going to receptions

attend his pleasure (plezh'ur), do his bidding

at their glittering (glit'ter-ing) best, shining as bright as possible

audible (au'di-b'l), that can be heard

aught but tender, any way except kind

autumnal (au-tum'nal), of autumn

avarice (av'a-ris), greed

averted (a-vurt'ed), turned aside

awakening (a-wak'n-ing) of the woods, the budding of the forest trees

awry (a-ri'), crooked

ay (I), yes

azure (azh'ur), sky-blue; the air

azure space, blue air above


babble (bab'bl), chatter

bade, told; told to

balas (bal'as), a kind of ruby

balked, (bal'kt) stopped

balm (balm), sticky dried juice

balsam (bal'sam), same as balm

balustrade (bal'us-trad'), railing

bandages (ban'daj-ez), strips of cloth

banditti (ban-dit'ti), robbers

barter (bar'ter) it all, trade all that I have gained

basswood (bas'wood), wood of the linden tree

battlements (bat'tl-ments), irregular top of the high walls of a castle

bayou (bi'oo), inlet

bazaars (ba-zars'), shops; marketplace

beam, ray of light

beaming, shining

bear me ill-will, dislike me

bear no malice (mal'is), have no ill-will

beast of prey, flesh-eating animal

Beatte (Be'ti)

beat us holler, do things we cannot do

beauteous (bu'te-us) summer glow, lovely

brightness of summer time becalmed (be-kalmd'), prevented from sailing
because of lack of wind

beechen (bech'en), of the beech tree

befall (be-fol'), happen to

beguile (be-gil'), charm

beguiled (be-gild'), tricked

beheld it aforetime (a-for'tim), see it before it arrived

belated (be-lat'ed) thriftless vagrant (va'grant), tardy, lazy wanderer

belfry (bel'fri), tower for a bell

bemoan (be-mon') himself, groan softly

beneath (be-neth') benevolent (be-nev'o-lent) friendship, kind and
generous acts of a friend

benignant (be-nig'nant), kindly

beseems (be-semz') his quality (kwol'i'ti), fits his rank

beside himself with joy, so happy he did not know what to do

besmeared (be-smerd'), covered

best of cheer, things that make one most happy

betrayed (be-trayd'; be_tra'ed), given me to my enemy by a trick

bewinderment (be-wil'der-ment), perplexity

bewitchingly persuasive (be-wich'ing-li per-swa'siv), charmingly
coaxing

Big-Sea-Water, Lake Superior

billowed like a russet ocean (bil'od; rus'et), reddish grass blew like
waves

Bishop of Bingen (bish'up; bing'en), Hatto, who starved the poor and
was shut up in a tower, where mice devoured him

bison (bi'sun), American buffalo

blanc-mange (bla-mänzh'), a dessert of starchy substances and milk

blare (blar), blow harshly

blest (blast), hard wind; loud, long sound

blazing in the sky, showing bright against the sky

Blefuscu (ble-fus'ku)

blended ranks (blend'ed), mixed lines

blighted (blit'ed), withered

blithe (blith), happy; joyous

blossoming ground, earth covered with flowers

blue day, day when the sky is clear

blur in the eye, tear

boar (bor), wild hog

bonny (bon'ì), gay

booming (boom'ing), hollow-sounding

boon (boon), favor

borne their part (born), done their share

born to rule the storm, naturally able to do anything

bosom (booz'um), front part

boundary (boun'da-ri), marking a division; separating

bound boy, boy hired out to work by the year for his board and a small
wage

bound by a spell, charmed so that I could not move

bound'less space, the endless extent of the regions of the air

bound to him, made them love him

bounties (boun'tiz), generous gifts

bountiful traveler (boun'ti-foõl trav'el-er) generous traveler

Bowdoin (bo'd'n)

bowers (bou'erz), lovely rooms

bowl'ders (bol'derz), large stones

brake (brayk), valley enclosed by hills

braves, Indian men ready to fight

brawny (bra'ni), strong

breakers (brayk'erz), big waves striking the shore

break my fast, eat my meal

breathed a song, sang a song softly

breeches (brich'ez), short trousers

bridled (bri'd'ld), put the headpiece on

brig (brig), sailing ship with two masts

brightened as he sped (brit'nd), grew brighter as he mounted up into
the sky

brightest aspect (as'pekt), look that is most attractive

brin'dled (brin'd'ld), having dark streaks or spots on a gray or
yellowish brown ground; streaked

bring the hunting homeward, carry home what I shoot

broadfaced sun, round, cheerful sun

brocades (bro-kadz'), heavy silk woven with a raised figure or flower

brooding (brood'ing), thinking sadly

broom, a shrub with yellow flowers

brought to bale (bal), made trouble for

buffet (buf'et), slap

bulge (bulj), place bent in

bullies (bool'iz), teases

bulwark (bool'wark), protection; defense

bunting (bun'ting), cloth for flags

buoy (boi) float

burial (ber'i-al), act of placing in a grave

burnished (bur'nisht), shining

Bussorah (bus'o-ra)

by dint of great quickness (dint), by acting very fast

by way of satisfying (sat'is-fi'ing), in order to quiet the prickings
of


calamity (ka-lam'i-ti), misfortune

calculate (kal'ku-lat), figure up

Caliph (ka'lif), an Eastern title

calked (kalkt), stopped up

calls but the warders (wor'derz), only calls the watchmen

calm (käm), a period of quiet

came into the knowledge of, was told

came into the world, took part in the business, political, social; etc.,
activities of the world

canoe with pinions (ka-noo'; pin'yunz), sailboat

capital crime (kap'i-tal), a sin so bad that it is punished by death

care is sowing, worry and work are making grow

carnage (kar'naj), killing

caroling (kar'ul-ing), singing

carriages (kar'ij-ez), carts

Casabianca (ka'za-byan'ka)

cast yourself free, unroll

cataract's laughter (kat'a-rakts laf'ter), laughing sound made by
water falling from a height

catches the gleam, reflects the light

cathedral (ka-the'dral), large church

caution (kau'shun); carefulness

ceased their calling (sest), stopped singing because they have migrated

ceremony (ser'e-mo-nì), formal act

chafe (chaf) rub, trying to get through

chagrin (sha-grin'), annoyance

chalcedony (ka1-sed'o-ni), a beautiful, very hard stone

changeful April (chanj'fool), April has sudden changes of weather

channel (chan'el), bed of the stream

charger (char'jer), fine horse

charm, something with magic power

chastened (chas'nd), with a softer light

Cheemaun (che-mon')

cheering power of spring, how spring makes one glad

cherished (cher'isht), lovingly cared for

cherished possessions (cher'isht po-zesh'unz), dearest things he had

Chibiabos (chib-i-a'bos)

chieftain (chef'tin), one, who gave orders

chimney (chim'ni)

chore (chor), light task

christening (kris'n-ing), naming

ciphering (si'fér-ing), working examples

curcuit (sur'kit), round-about trip

circumference (ser-kum'fer-ens), distance around the edge of a circle

clamber (klam'bér), climb

clapboard (klap'bord), narrow board

clatter, rattling noise

clearings, ground where the trees have been cut

cleft the bark asunder (a-sun'der), split the bark

clogging (klog'ing), hindering

close couching (kouch'ing), crouching so as to be hidden

close the seams together, make the cracks tight

cloud-rack of a tempest, flying, broken clouds after a storm

coffers (kof'ers), treasure chests

Cogia Houssam (ko'gya hoo'sam)

collected (ko-lekt'ed), thoughtful

collected her thoughts (ko-lekt'ed), thought quickly

combine (kom-bin'), form themselves

come what may, no matter what happens

Commander of the Faithful (ko-man'der; fath'foõl), leader of those
true to the Mohammedan religion.  The title is given to the Caliphs

commanding lookout (ko-mand'ing look'out'), place from which the
surrounding neighborhood can be seen

commission (ko-mish'un), thing to be done

comparatively a new affair (kom-par'a-tiv-li; a-far'), a world that
had been made only a short time

composure (kom-po'zhur), calmness

comrades (kom'radz), mates

concealed (kon-seld'), hidden

confident mood (kon'fi-dent mood), feeling sure I could do it

confounded with astonishment (kon-found'ed; as-ton'ish-ment), so
surprised that they could not think

confused (kon-fuzd'), bothered

conjoined of them all (kon-joind'), made of all together

connected with himself (ko-nekt'ed), have reference to him

conscious (kon'shus), aware

consequence (kon'se-kwens), result

consideration (kon-sid'er-a'shun), reason constant (kon'stant), regular

constellation (kon'ste-la'shun), a group of stars

constituting (kon'sti-tut'ing), making up

consul (kon'sul), one who lives in a foreign country to look after the
business interests of his own country there

contemptible (kon-temp'ti-b'1), mean

contracts (kon-trakts'), makes

contrivance (kon-triv'ans), device

contrived (kon-trivd'), made

contrive to bury (kon-triv'; ber'i), manage to bury

conveyed (kon-vad'), given over

coppers (kop'erz), pennies

cord, string of the bow

cornice (kor'nis), high molding around the walls

corporeal sensations (kor-po're-al sen-sa'shunz), coarse pleasures

corpse (korps), dead body

corselet (kors'1et), armor for the body

council of war (koun'sil), meeting to make plans

counsels (koun'selz), advice

count all your boasts, even though you present your many charms

count like misers (mi'zerz), count as lovingly as do misers their money

county town, town where the business of the county (holding court,
paying taxes, etc.), is carried on

coursers (kor'serz), swift horses; here reindeer

courteous (kur'te-us), polite

court favor (kort fa'ver), good will of the ruler or other high
personage

courtiers (kort'yerz), those in attendance at the court of a ruler

cover (kuv'er), underbrush large enough to hide behind

cowering (kou'er-ing), hovering

creation (kre-a'shun), the world

crestfallen (krest'fol'n), cast down

cresting the billows (krest'ing; bi1'oz), adorning the top of the waves

crevice (krev'is), crack

crew of gypsies, band of ragamuffins

cross-brace, the piece of wood between the plow handles

crown of his desire, thing he wanted most

cruel mortification (kroo'el mor'ti-fi-ka'shun), very great annoyance

cruise (krooz), trip in a boat

cunning (kun'ing), tricky

cunningly made, skillfully made

cupboard (kub'erd), a closet for dishes

curmudgeon (kur-muj'un), miser

curtsy (kurt'si), bow

cymbals (sim'balz), pair of brass half globes clashed together to
produce a ringing sound


Dacotahs (da-ko'taz), Sioux (Soo)

Daedalus of yore (ded'a-lus) Daedalus of olden time.  The story is
that he escaped from prison by flying with wings he had made

dames, married women

Darius (da-ri'us)

daunted (dant'ed), frightened

dawn, daybreak

daybeds, resting places in daytime

deathless fame (deth'les), lasting glory

deck her bosom (booz'um), trim the front of the canoe

deems (demz), thinks

deer-skin dressed and whitened, skins of deer, which had been cleaned,
smoothed, and bleached

defile (de-fi1'), narrow pass

defunct tenant (de-funkt' ten'ant), man who formerly lived there but
is dead

dejected (de-jekt'ed), downhearted

delicate crafts employ (del'i-kat), use your skill in cooking

dell, small valley

deposited (de-poz'it-ed), put away

derision (de-rizh'un), mockery

desert (dez'ert), uninhabited by man

design (de-zin'), plan

desolation (des'o-la'shun), ruin

despair (de-spair'), hopelessness

desperate (des'per-at), hopeless

dessert (de-zurt'), fruit, pastry, etc., served at the close of a meal

destined to be let loose (des'tind), fated to be free

diamond (di'a-mund), precious stone

diminished (di-min'isht); made less

diminutive (di-min'u-tiv), tiny

directly (di-rekt'li), at once

disaster (diz-as'ter), great trouble

discloses (dis-kloz'ez), lets be seen

discover (dis-kuv'er), find out

dismounted (dis-moun'ted), threw down off its mountings

disputed (dis-put'id), argued; talked each against the others

disquietude (dis-kwi'e-tud), uneasiness

dissuading (di-swad'ing), advising away from

distant days that shall be, time to come but still far-off

diversified (di-vur'si-fid), made to have a look of variety

docile (dos'il), gentle

down of a thistle (this'l), lightest thing you can think of

down timber (tim'ber), fallen trees

dowry (dou'ri), gift of a man to his bride

draft (draft), one drink

dread silence reposes (dred si'lens re-poz'ez), sleeps quietly, so we
fear it

dreamy recollection (rek'o'lek'shun), faint memory

drink your health, wish you good health when beginning to drink,
usually at a meal

driven (driv'en), blown before the wind

droll (drol), laughable

drooping (droop'ing), with hanging heads

droop o'er the sod, hang over a grave

drought (drout), lack of rain

drowned (dround)

dry and dumb (dum), dried up and still because there is no water to
ripple

ducat (duk'at), old gold coin ($2.28)

dungeon (dun'jun), underground prison

Duquesne (doo-kan')

dusk'y pods (dus'ki), dark-colored seed vessels

duty holds him fast (du'ti), he knows he ought to stay


each in its turn the sway, one after the other ruled

eager hand (e'ger), hand that could hardly wait

earth-bound ties, roots which hold it in the ground

ear'th'en (ur'th'n), earthenware

earth was young, world had not long existed

Eastern lands, Asia and Africa

eaves (evz), edges of the roof which overhang the walls slightly

echo (ßk'õ), say over again

echoing corridor (ek'o-ing kor'i-dor), long, empty hall in which they
could hear their own footsteps

ell (el), forty-five inches

enchantment (en-chant'ment), magic

en-circled (en-sur'kl'd), wound around

en-counter (en-koun'ter), meeting

engines (en'jinz), implements

enterprise (en'ter-priz), undertaking; willingness to try different
things

epidemic (ep'i-dem'ik), a disease which one person takes from another

Epimetheus (ep'i-me'thus)

equipage (ek'wi-paj), horses and carriage

ere (ar), before

esteem (Ls-tém'), good opinion

evaporated (e-vap'o-rat-ed), passed away from me

ever-officious Tonish (o-fish'us ton'ish), Tonish, who was always
doing too much

every part has a voice (ev'er-i), each stripe and star means something

evident intention (ev'i-dent in-ten'shun), plain purpose

Ewayea (e-wa-ya'), a lullaby

exaggerations (eg-zaj'er-a'shunz), overstatements

excess (ek-ses'), too much

exile (ek'sil), one away from home

explore (eks-plor'), examine thoroughly

expound (eks-pound'), explain

express consent (eks-pres' kon-sent'),

especial permission being given

extending themselves (eks-tend'ing), spreading out so as to be at a
distance from each other

extinguish (eks-ting'gwish), put out

extraordinary (eks-tror'di-na-ri), surprising; unusual

exulted (eg-zult'ed), was glad

exulting, glean (eg-zult'ing glen), rejoicing, harvest

eyeglass of dew (i'glas'; du), a dew-drop


fading, losing the original color

fail of the fruits, have not the fruits

faint shadow of a trouble, only a hint of unhappiness

fair voyage (voi'aj), trip without severe storms or accidents

fallow (fa1'o), pale yellow

Falls of Minnehaha (min'e-ha'ha), a waterfall near Minneapolis

false estimates (fols es'ti-mats), wrong judgment

faltering (fol'ter-ing), stopping

fame, being known everywhere

fame so becoming to you (be-kum'ing), glory that suits you so well

famous roebuck (ro'buk), fine, big deer

fantastic forms (fan-tas'tik), strange shapes

fashioned (fash'und), shaped; made

fashioned flutes (fash'und), made pipes from which he blew music

fast in my fortress (for'tres), held firmly by my love.

fatal (fa'tal), destructive

fatigue (fa-teg'), weariness

favorable gale (fa'ver-a-b'l gal), wind blowing in the direction he
wished to sail

feasting his eyes, enjoying looking at

features and tokens (fe'turz; to'k'nz), parts of the face, and
expression

feeling but one heart-beat, all having the same feelings and wishes

feet unwilling, moving slowly without interest

fenlands (fen'landz'), swamps

fervently (fur'vent-li), warmly

feuds (few-dz), quarrels

fevered mart (fev'erd mart), market place full of excitement

fib'rous (fi'brus), made of fibers; strong

filled the night, made it all light

fissure (fish'ur), narrow crack

fitfully blows (fit'fool-li), blows and then stops

fit to be made a tool of, suitable to be deceived by flattery to do
the work of others

flags, long, narrow leaves of a plant

flanking parties, riders who were going to stand at the sides

flaunt (flant), make a great showing of

flaunting (flant'ing), waving

flaunting nigh (falnt'ing al), making a great show near them

flecked with leafy light, spotted with sunlight shining through the
trees

fleck its lonely spread (flek), show as a dark spot against the great
stretch of grass

flesh creeps, shudder with horror

flexibility (flek'si-bil'i-ti), ability to be bent

flight of song, where a song goes

flitting (flit'ing), flying about

flow in music, glide along so as to make pleasant sounds

flow'ry dells, little valleys with flowers in them

flutter (flut'er), are in motion

foliage (fo'li-aj), leafy plants

folly laughs to scorn (fol'i lafs to skorn), one who is foolish makes
fun of

fond, loving

forbear (for-bear'), keep from

forbear thy stroke (for-bear'), do not chop it down

forbidding further passage (for-bid'ing fur'ther pas'aj), keeping them
from going on

forbore (for-bor'), held back

ford, a shallow place where the soldier could cross without a bridge

forefather (for'fath'er), ancestor

forehead (for'ed), upper part of the face

forest-fighters (for-est-fit'erz), men used to fighting among trees

forest's life was in it, it was made from the trees and seemed alive
like them

forever and a day, for all time

for-lore' (for-lorn'), poor and lonely

former state, condition it had been in

formidable (for'mi-da-b'l), dreadful

fortnight (fort'nit), two weeks

foul footsteps pollution (po-1u'shun), dishonor of the country, caused
by an enemy being in it

fowling piece, gun for shooting birds

fragments (frag'ments), scraps

fragrant (fra'grant), sweet-smelling frame of mind, feeling this way

franchise of this good people (fran'chiz), vote of the men of this
colony

freight'ing (fra'ting), burden

freight it with (frat), load the boat with

frenzy (fren'zi), joyous madness

frequented (fre-kwent'ed), visited

fretted, tired; teased

frigate (frig'at), light, sailing warship fringed with trees, with a
thin line of trees along it

frol'ic (frol'ik), play

frolic chase, game of running after each other

frosted (frost'ed), frostbitten, and, as a result, loosened

frothy (froth'i), having bubbles

frowning pine forest (froun'ing pin for'est), dark evergreen forest

fugitives (fu'ji-tivz), horses which were trying to escape

full glory reflected (re-flekt'ed), with all its colors showing

full of invention (in-ven'shun), good at thinking up plans

furrows (fur'oz), shallow trenches made by the plow

furze (furz), an evergreen shrub with yellow flowers


gainsaid (gan'sed'), changed

gallantly (gal'ant-li), bravely

gallantly streaming (gal'ant-li strem'ing), bravely flying

gaunt (glint), thin from, hunger

gauze (goz), thin, transparent stuff

gave me a good character (kar'ak- said I was a reliable man

gave myself up for lost, stopped having any hope of being saved

genial (je'ni-al), favorable to growth

genial hour (je'ni-al), pleasant spring time

genius (jen'yus), a person who can do more or better than ordinary
people

Genius (jen'yus), a powerful spirit

gentian (jen'shan), a beautiful flowering plant, usually blue

gesture (jes'tur), motion

ghastly spectacle (gast'li spec'ta- horrible sight

gigantic (ji-gan'tik), very large

gilt, gold-plated metal

gimlet (gim'let), tool which bores small holes as it is turned

Gitche Gum'ee (gi'che OW), Lake Superior

gitche Manito (gi'che man'i-to), Great Spirit

give back the cry, answer

give me thought for thought, tell me his ideas and listen to mine

glade (glad), an open, grassy space in a wood

gladness breathes, joy seems to come

gleaming (glem'ing), light

glean, gather

glens, little valleys

dimmer (glim'er), gleam

glimmering o'er (glim'er-ing), shining brightly over corn and people

glittering (glit'er-ing), shining

glorified the hill (glo'ri-fid), sent beautiful rays of light upon the
hill

glory fell chastened (chas'nd), his light at the height of its
brightness cast but a soft light

glossy (glos'i), shining

gold'en ears before (gol'd'n), yellow ears of corn taken from their
husks and piled in front of the huskers

goodly root (good'li root), the much prized potato

gophers (go'ferz), ground-squirrels

gorgeous (gor'jus), magnificent; beautiful

gossip of swallows, bird-notes that sound like chatter

go the entire round, make the furrow around the field

Governer (guv'er-ner), the chief man of the colony

gracious-ly (gra'shus-li), with kind courtesy

Granada (gra-na'da)

granaried harvest (gran'a-rid), grain and vegetables stored for the
winter

gratifying his utmost wishes (grat'i-fy-ing), giving him anything he
might wish for

grave (grav), serious-looking

gray of the morning, faint light before the sun is up

greatest disquietude (dis-kwe'e-tood), worst trouble

Great Spirit, God

grievously (grev'us-li), painfully

grim, stern; unyielding

grimace (gri-mas'), made-up face

griping landlord (grip'ing), stingy man who rents houses for high rent

grope (grop), feel without seeing

grow into tangles (tang'g'lz), grow wild as in the woods or fields

guard thy repose (gard; re-poz'), protect you while you sleep

guidance (gid'ans) showing him the right course to take

guided of my counsel (gid'ed; koun'-sul), take my advice

guiding lines (gid'ing), reins by which horses are driven

guileless (gil'les), pure in heart

guinea (gin'i), English coin ($5.11)

gullies (gul'iz), small valleys dug out by water

gushing (gush'ing), freely flowing


habitable (hab'it-a-b'l), fit to live in

had occasion to go out (o-ka'zhun), needed to go somewhere in the town

hailed his coming, called out gladly when they saw him

half-faced camp, shack with three walls and one open side

half-section of unfenced sod, 320 acres of unbroken ground with no
fence

hallooed (ha-lood'), shouted halloo

hallow us there (ha1'o), give us a feeling at home as of sacred things

hamlet without name (ham'let), few houses near together, but not
called a town

hampers (ham'perz), woven baskets

handiwork (han'di-wurk'), what I make

handkerchiefs (hang'ker-chifs)

hand of art, tasteful plan

happily arranged, growing in pretty clumps

hardy gift (har'di), fruit of the sturdy plant which is given by the
earth

harrowing additions (har'o-ing a-dish'unz), things added that are
painful to hear

hart (hart), male red deer Harunal-Rashid' (ha-roon'-ar-ra-shed'),
Caliph of Bagdad

harvest (har'vest), dry seeds

has an ax to grind, wants someone to do some hard work without pay

hate is shadow, feelings of dislike darken everything

haughty (ho'ti), proud

haunches (hanch'ez), hind legs

haunt (hint), come back again and again

haunts (hants), places where one loves to go often

haunts of Nature (na'tur), out-of-doors

havoc of war (hav'ok), ruin caused by fighting

hawk-eyed eagerness (hok-id e'ger-nes), watching impatiently and with
the sharpness of a hawk

hearken (har'ken), listen

hearthrug (harth'rug), rug in front of the fireplace

heart outran his footsteps, wanted to be there before he was

hearts-ease, comfort in trouble

hearts right hand of friendship, a greeting that shows we feel friendly

heartstrings, love

heath (heth), land covered with heather, which has a purple blossom

heav'n-rescued land (hev'n-res'kud), country saved by God

heavy-rolling flight, running with a rocking movement from side to side

heir (ar), one who takes the property of another after he is through
with it

helm (helm), helmet, a protection for the head; the machinery that
steers the ship

he must be cold, he lacks feeling

herb'age (ur'baj), grass and other plants eaten by grazing animals

here, on earth

heroic blood (he-ro'ik), descended from brave men

hewed (hud), chopped

Hiawatha (hi-a-wath'a)

hidden silk has spun (hid'n), threads of down in the pod that resemble
those which the silkworm spins

hideous (hid'e-us), horrible-looking

hie (hi), go; take

high relief (re-lef') carved so that the features stood up from the box

hireling (hir'ling), paid soldier

his proper sphere (prop'er sfer), his own place

his reverence (rev'er-ens), the minister

hither (hith'er), here

hoard (hord), supply of provisions

hoary (hor'i), old and gray

hold (hold), lower part of a ship, where cargo is stored

hollows that rustle between' (hol'oz; rus'l be-twen'), low, quiet
places between large, noisily-roiling waves

home-brew served for wine, home-made drinks were used instead of wine

homely old adage (hom'li; ad'aj), common saying

hoodwinked, blindfolded

horror (hor'er), great fear

horror of my situation (hor'er; sit'u-a'shun), great danger of the
place I was in

horseplay, rude play or jokes

host (host), great number

hotly pressed, closely followed

hovel (hov'r1), small, poor house

hovered (hub'erd), fluttered

huddled (hud'ld), crowded

hue (hu), color

hues of summer's rainbow (huz), colors in the rainbow in summer

human (hu'man), exactly like man

Humber (hum'ber), a river in northeastern England

humble (hum'b'l), lowly; not proud

humor (hu'mer), temper

humor better suited to his own (hu'-mer), more like his

hurrah (hoo-ra'), a word used as a shout of joy

hurricane (hur'i-kan), great storm

hush of woods, quiet of the forest


Iagoo (e-a'goo)

Icarus (ik'a-rus), the son of Daedalus--which *see*

ideas (i-de'az) thoughts

idle, golden freighting (fra'ting), burden of golden-colored autumn
leaves

if to windward, if the hunter is in the direction from which the wind
blows

imaginable (i-maj'i-na-b'l), I could think of; possible

immortal in their childhood (i-mor'-tal), so placed that they would
never grow any older

Imperial (im-pe'ri-al), royal

imperious (im-pe'ri-us), demanding much

implement (im'ple-ment), tool

imply a share of reason (im-pli'; re'-z'n), suggest some power to think

impression continuing (im-presh'-un kon-tin'u-ing), the effect
remaining

inability (in-a-bil'i-ti), that you cannot

incalculable (in-kal'ku-la-b'l), cannot be counted

incapable (in-ka'pa-b'l), not able

incline (in-klin'), slope

in darker fortunes tried (for'tunz), they had when they were poor

indifference (in-dif'er-ens), not caring

indigestible (in'di-jes'ti-b'l), impossible to digest

indignation (in'dig-na'shun), anger against what is wrong

induce (in-dus'), cause

indulge it to the utmost (in-dulj'; ut'most), be as cross as be could

infinite (in'fi-nit), everlasting

infinitely (in'fi-nit-li), much more

ingenious (in-jan'yús), clever

inhaling (in-hal'ing), smelling

inheritance (in-har'i-tans), a gift from our ancestors

initial mound (in-ish'al), first furrow around the field

inquíries (in-kwir'iz), questioning

in such wise, so fiercely

intelligent (in-tel'i-jent), clever

intent upon (in-tent'), interested in

interminable forests (in-tur'mi-na-b'l), woods that seemed endless

interrupt his lay (in'te-rupt'), stop his song

in the largest sense, in the broadest meaning

intimate association (in'ti-mat a-so'si-a'shun), close companionship

intolerable (in-tol'er-a-b'l), unbearable

intruder (in-troo'der), an uninvited guest

invention (in-ven'shun), schemes

Islands of the Blessed (i'landz; bles'-ed), in mythology, islands
where people lived happily, after death

isles (ilz), islands


jasper (jas'per), a dark, hard stone

jaunty (jan'ti), gay and easy

jet, black

jib (jib), swing around

joined to such folly (fol'i), a partner in such foolishness

joyance (joi'ans), happiness

judgment (juj'ment), idea; opinion

Justiciar (jus-tish'i-ar), chief judge

justs/jousts (justs), mock fights between knights on horseback


Kagh (kag), the hedgehog

keel (kel), bottom of a ship

keep, support

kept, made to go on

khan (kan), an unfurnished building for the use of traveling traders

King's Council (koun'sil), men who met with the King to advise him

kissed into green (kist), changed to green when touched by the sun's
rays

knight (nit), in Great Britain, a man with the title Sir

knights of old (nits), men of olden times who went about doing brave
deeds

knoll (nol), a little round hill

knows full well, knows very well

Kwansind (ksa'sind)


lady, the wife of a knight

lamentable (lam'ín-táa-b'l), distressed

lamentable tone, sad voice

languidly (lang'gwid-li), carelessly

lank (lank), thin

lapsed (lapst), slipped

larch (larch), tree which looks like an evergreen but sheds its needles

lariat (lar'i-at), long rope with running noose

laudable (lod'a-b'l), praiseworthy

laughing (laf'ing)

launch (lanch), get it afloat

lavish horn (lav'ish), overflowing horn; from the mythological story
of the horn that could become filled with whatever its possessor
desired

lea (le), ground covered with grass

league (lee-g), about three miles

learned (lur'ned), highly educated

learning (lurn'ing), knowledge

leave unmoved (un-moovd'), unharmed

lee of the land, shelter of the shore

legends (lef'endz), old stories only partly true

lei'sure (le'zhur), time to do what he wished

levee (lev-e'), reception given by a ruler or his representative

liege (lej), having the right to claim service

light and boon, bright and pleasant

lightsome (lit'sum), cheery

life a Turk, as people do in Turkey

Lilliput (lil'i-put)

Lilliputians (lil'i-pu'shanz)

limes (limz), fruit like lemons, but smaller and more sour

linden (lin'den), made from basswood

listless (list'les), caring about nothing

livelihood (liv'li-hood), living

livelong (liv'long'), whole

loam (lam), earth

lone (lon), lonely

lone post of death, place where he must die alone

looked westerly (wes'ter-li), turned toward the west, the direction in
which the wind was blowing before it stopped

loosed (loost), set free

lost their labor, got no good from the work they had done

lovely tokens (luv'li to'k'nz), beautiful signs

lower (lo-ur), darken

lowly thatched cottage, small one-story house with roof of straw

lozenge (loz'enj), a tablet of medicine

lust, strong wish

luster of midday (lus'ter; mid'da), light bright as at noon

lustrous (lus'trus), radiant

lusty rogue (lus'ti rog), lively little rascal


magic arts (maj'ik), power over spirits

magician (ma-jish'an), one who uses magic arts

magic his singing (maj'ik), charming way he sang

magnificence (mag'nif'i-sens), grandeur

Maharaja (ma-ha-ra'ja), title of the principal Hindu chief

Mahngotaysee (man-go'ta'se), brave

maintain (man-tan'), keep

make amends to the human race (a-mendz'), make up to people everywhere

make a stand, hold out against; fight

man-builded today, built by people now

maneuver (ma-noo'var), planned movement of a large number

man of might, strong, important man

man's dominion (do-min'yun), for the use of people

mansion (man'shun), large and handsome residence

many a happy return, many more

mariners (mar'i-nerz), sailors

marred (mard), spoiled

marred the whole scene (mard) spoiled the effect planned

marvel (mar'vel), wonderful thing

marveled (mar'veld), wondered

Massasoit (mas'a-soit') match, able to win against

matchless, having no equal

matrons (ma'trunz), married women

mayhap, maybe

maze (maz), confusing number of paths which cross

meads (medz), meadows

measures (mezh'urz), melodies

meditated (med'i-tat'ed), thought

meeting-house, church

melancholy (mel'an-kol-i), sad

melted them to pity, softened their feelings so they were filled with
gentle thoughts

merchandise (mur'chan-diz), goods

merchant-man (mur'chant-man), a trading vessel

merest (mer'est), simplest

merry (mer'i), joyous

metallic (me-tal'ik), of metal

metal true, really good iron

methinks (me-thinks'), it seems to me

Midas (mi'das)

milder glory shone (mil'der), a softer and paler glow cast its light

mildew (mil'du), mold; rust

mingled into one (ming'g'ld), so united that one could not be
distinguished from the other

miniature (min'i-a-tur), very small

Minnehaha (min'e-ha'ha)

Minnewawa (min'e-wa'wa)

mirthful to excess (murth'fool; ek-ses'), too gay

mischievious (mis'chi-vus), fun-loving

misdoings (mis-doo'ingz), wrong acts

mission (mish'un), errand

mists of the deep, fog over the water

moccasins of magic (mok'a-sinz), charmed shoes

moderation (mod'er-a'shun), fair way

modest bell, bell-shaped flower that hangs over

molder in dust away (mol'der), lose their form and become earth again

molested (mo-lest'ed), troubled

molten (mol't'n), melted

monarch (mon'ark), ruler

Monongahela (mo-non'ga-he'la), river in Pennsylvania

Monsieur (me-syur'), French for Mr.

moor sandy, wet ground

more enterprise (en'ter-priz), willingness to try to do things

Morgiana (mor'gi-a'na)

mortal (mor'tal), human

mortal enemy (mor'tal en'e-me), man who hates you so much he would
like to kill you

mortal fear, greatest fear

mortal-ly (mor'tal-i), so as to cause death

mosques (mosks), places of worship in Mohammedan countries

moss (mos), a tiny grasslike plant, very soft

moss-green trees, trees with trunks covered by green moss

mount to the sky, fly out of sight

mow (mo; here, mo for rime)

much amiss (a-mis'), very wrong

much contriving (con-triv'ing), making great plans

much frequented (fre-kwent'ed), often visited

much inclined (in-klind'), having a great liking for

Mudwayaushka (mud'way-oush'ka)

multiply his heaps, make his piles many times greater

mummies (mum'iz), dead bodies which have been preserved in a dried
state; here, persons whose minds are dry and not open to new ideas

Munchausen (mun-cho'zen), a teller of extravagant tales

Musketaquid (mus-ket'a-kwid)

Muskoday (musk'o-day)

mute (m-yut), voiceless; quiet

muttering, saying in a low tone

muzzle (muz'l), nose and,mouth

my design (de-zin'), my plan

mysterious (mis-te'ri-us), puzzling

mystic splendors (mis'tik splen'-derz), magic brightness


naked sword (nay'kd sord), sword without a sheath

narrow bound, thin wall keeping them out

national constellation (nash'un-al kon'ste-la'shun), group of stars
belonging to the nation

native language (na'tiv lang'gwaj), way that is natural to them

natural death (nat'u-ral), died without being killed

naught (not), nothing

navigate the azure (nav'i-gay-t; az'-ur), sail through the sky

Nawadaha (na'wa-da'ha)

near his cot, not far from his cottage

neither (ne'ther)

neither willing nor reluctant (ne'-ther re-luk'tant), not showing
whether she wanted to go or stay

nephew (nef'u), the son of a brother or sister

nicest goldsmith, most skillful worker in gold

niche (nich), small opening

nimble (nim'b'l), quick to do things

noble (no'b'l), coin worth about $1.60; man of high rank

Nokomis (no-ko'mis)

nostrils (nos'trilz), the openings in the nose for breathing

note if harm were near, to see if there were any danger round about


obliterated (ob-lit'er-at'ed), taken away

obscure (ob-skur'), dark

obscured their passage (ob-skurd'; pas'aj), hid their line of movement

observation (ob'zer-vay'shun), careful notice

obstacle (ob'sta-k'l), something in the way

obtained a foothold (ob-tand'), got a start

occupied with her grief (ok'u-pi-d), full of sorrow

o'cean's breast (o'shanz brest), calm surface of the sea

O drug, useless thing

o'er-shadowed Thanksgiving Day (or-shad'od), brought up sad thoughts
on the holiday

o'er the combers (or; kom'erz), over the long rolling waves

of all degrees, of all kinds, large and small

of a serious nature (se'ri-us na'tur), of a dangerous kind

officially recognized (o-fish'al-i rek'og-nizd), known and stated

ointment (oint'ment), precious salve

Ojibways (o-jib'waz), a tribe that lived just south of Lake Superior

ooze and tangle (ooz), mud and roots

oozing outward (ooz'ing), flowing from the tree

Opechee (o-pech'e)

open-handedness, generosity

operations of the enemy (op'er-shunz; en'e-mi), doings of those
fighting against us

oppression lifts its head (o-presh'-shun), people are treated unjustly

original (o-rij'i-nal), first

outlaw', one who breaks the laws and flees to escape punishment

overcame this handicap (han'di-kap), got over this disadvantage

Owaissa (o-was'a)


packet (pak'et), bundle

pack train, a number of animals carrying the supplies of the party

pagans (pa'ganz), not Christians

painted pulpit (pool'pit), green and purple over-arching leaf of the
jack-in-the-pulpit flower

painted tribes of light, gay, bright flowers of spring

painted white, white-skinned, like an Indian's face covered with paint

pale skies, gray skies of early spring

palfreys (pol'friz), saddle-horses

palisades pine-trees (pa1'i-say-dz'), tall pines, standing like a wall
on each bank

palpitated (pal'pi-tat'ed), shook

Pandora (pan-do'ra)

parched (parcht), dry

parent (par'ent), the giver of life

partake (par-tak') share

particularly (par-tik'u-lar'li), very

partners (part'nerz), companions

past will no longer be the past (past), things that happened long ago
will seem as real as though going on now

pathos (pa'thos), sad sweetness

patient weathercocks (pa' shent we'-ther-koks), patient, waiting for
the wind to blow

Pauwating (pa-wa'ting) St. Mary's river, joining Lakes Superior and
Huron

pay my court (kort), show my respect by visiting you

peace of mind, calm thoughts with nothing to disturb them

peasants (pez'ants), lowest class of people

peer (per) peep cautiously

pennon (pen'un), flag

performing these good offices (per-for'ing), doing these kind acts

perilous (per'i-lus), dangerous

periodical (pe'ri-od'i-kal), printed matter, in the form of a magazine,
published regularly (not daily)

perplexity (per-plek'si-ti), difficulty

persevered (pur'se-verd') persisted

perseveringly (pur'se-ver'ing-li), continually

personage (pur'sun-aj), creature

pest, disease which kills

pestered (pes'terd), annoyed

pettishly (pet'ish-li), crossly

pheasants (fez'antz), wild birds of delicious flavor

phoebe (fe'be), a kind of bird

phrase (fray-z), expression

physical and moral courage (fiz'i-kal; mor'al kur'aj), bravery of body
and mind

physique (íf-zék'), build and health

piece of cover (kuv'er), bit of underbrush large enough to hide behind

pierce like a shaft (pers; shaft), fly through like an arrow

pine-clad hills, hills covered with pine trees

pinion (pin'yun), wing

pitiable (pit'i-a-b'l), sad

place of deposit (de-poz'it), keeping place

plagued the realm (plagd; relm), made trouble in the country

plague the Abbot (plag), annoy the Abbot

plaiting (plat'ing), braiding

Plantagenets (plan-taj-e-nets), the English Kings from 1154 to 1485

plenty, enough of everything

pliant as a wand (pli'ant; wond), as easily moved as a willow twig is
bent

plow had violated (vi'o-lat-ed), had been turned up by the plow, and
thus spoiled for the small owners

plowshare' (plou'shar'), blade of the plow; part which turns up the
earth

plundered store (plun'derd), goods he had taken by force

Poet Laureate (lo're-at), poet chosen by the King to write on great
events of the nation

point to windward (wind'werd), turn in the direction from which the
wind came

poised it in the air (poizd), held it high

political bustles (po-lit'i-kal bus'-lz), activities of politics

pollution (po-lu'shun), soiling and making impure

pomp (pomp), show

ponder (pon'der), think

pondering much, thinking things over

ponderous (pon'der-us), heavy

Ponemah (po-ne'ma)

poniard (pon'yard), dagger

porcelain (por'se-lan), fine white ware

possessed authority (po-zest' o-thor'i-ti), knew how to control

power of prophecy (prof'e-si), ability to foretell events

practice decency (prak'tis de'sen-si), do the right thing every time

prattle (prat'l), child's talk

presence (prez'ens), being there

presently (prez'ent-li), soon

prevent (pre-vent'), keep from

Prideaux (pre-do')

pried into (prid), tried to pull apart

prig, one who thinks himself good

prime (pri-m), best

princely (prins'li), like a prince

proclaim (pro-klam'), show

profusion of flowers (pro-fu'zhun), great many flowers

projected (pro-jekt'ed), extended

proudly we hailed, looked at with pride and joy

province (prov'ins), one of the divisions of certain countries

prudence (proo'dens), wisdom; sense

psalm (salm), sacred song

publican (pub'li-kan), tax gatherer

pull fodder (fod'er), pull up cornstalks by the roots

pulp, wet mixture of which paper is made

pumpkin (pump'kin)

purpose (pur'pus), object; work

pursuit (pur-sut'), chase

put me in mind, suggested to me


quail (kway'-l), the bobwhite

quirk (kwurk), turn

quoit (kwoit), ring

quoth (kwoth), said


radiance (ra'di-ans), brilliance

radiant (ra'di-ant), beaming

raid (ray-d), attack made to get something

ramparts (ram'parts), protecting walls for defense

rangers (ran'jerz), men who live on the range or prairie

rapturous (rap'tur-us), very happy

rarities (rar'i-tiz), rare and precious things

ravenous (rav'n-us), very great

rayless disk of red, flat, burning circle, not seeming to throw off
any rays of light

reappeared (re'a-perd'), came in sight again

rear (rer), raise

rearing (rer'ing), standing on her hind legs

recalling (re-kol'ing), remembering

received in trust (re-sevd'), taken, to protect honorably

reckless (rek'les), careless

recognized (rek'og-nizd), saw

recoil (re-koil'), rebound

recovering himself (re-kuv'er-ing), coming back to his natural state
of mind

red-coats, British soldiers, so called because of their red uniforms

redeem them (re-dem'), buy them back

redoubled (re-dub'ld), repeated

reeds, large tall swamp grasses

reenforcing (re'en-fors'ing), covering again

reflected (re-flekt'ed), thought

regions of the morning (re'junz), place where the sun rises; the East

regular order (reg'-u-lar or'der), in straight lines, one behind the
other

related (re-lat'ed), told

relaxed (re-lakst'), loosened; let go

Reldresal (rel'dre-sal)

remnant (rem'nant), few that are left

remotest corner of Africa (re-mot'-est), part of Africa the farthest
away

render (ren'der), give back

renown (re-noun'), fame

repaired to her house (re-pard'), went to her house

repair the mischief (re-par'; mis'-chif), make up for the harm

repast (re-past'), feast

repelling (re-pel'ing), driving back

repentance (re-pen'tans), regret

resembles (re-zem'b'lz), is like

resin (rez'in), dried sap

resolutely (rez'o-lut-li), determinedly

resoled (re-zolvd'), with his mind firmly made up

resplendent (re-splend'ent), shining brightly

restore (re-stor'), put back

retired chamber (re-tird' cham'ber), room away from the main part of
the house

retreat (re-tret'), hiding place

revels (rev'els), wild enjoyment

reverberations (re-ver'ber-a'-shunz), echoes

reverence (rev'er-ens), great respect

richly decked (dekt), wearing beautiful and costly blankets and other
decorations

rich stuffs, costly cloth of different kinds

ridges, raised lines of ground

ridiculous (re-dik'u-lus), deserving to be laughed at

rills, little streams

ring of the same, sound of it

ripened charge (rip'end charj), precious object in its keeping, now
ready for husking

rippling (rip'ling), blowing in curves

rival for one hour (ri'val), equal at the time of greatest beauty

riveted (riv'et-ed), fastened by bending down the end

riveted his at-ten'tion (riv'et-ed; a-ten'shún), put all his thought

roam (rom), wander

robes of darkness, blue-black foliage clothing it

roc (rok), imaginary bird of great size

roguishly defied (ro'gish-li de-fid'), resisted in a joking way

Roha (ro'ha)

root (root), the potato

rosy morn (ro'zi morn), reddish tint of the sky at sunrise

round-tower of my heart, safest place for a prisoner

route (root), way

ruefully (roo'fool-i), sadly

rue the day (roo), regret what I had done that day

rugged (rug'ed), uneven

rugged vales be-stow' (rug'ed vay'lz be-sto'), rough valleys furnish

ruined (roo'ind), destroyed

ruminating (roo'mi-nat'ing), chewing their cuds

run over with joy, be wildly happy

rushes, coarse grasses

russet (rus'et), reddish brown or reddish gray


Sachem (sa'chem), Indian chief

sacrificing (sak'ri-fic'ing), giving up

sad sea wave, ocean seeming sad because you are sad

sage speeches (say'j), wise remarks

saluted the company (sa-lut'ed; kum'pa-ni), greeted those assembled

sandal-wood (san'dal-wood), a highly prized, fragrant Asiatic wood
from a tree of the same name

sank deep into my mind, made a lasting impression on me

sate (sat), old spelling of satin

satin burs (sat'in), prickly husks of chestnuts with their smooth,
soft lining

satisfy his mind (sat'is-fi), find out what he wanted to know

save, except

savory (sa'ver-i), pleasing to the smell

scaled the wall (skald), got over the wall, as soldiers climbed by
ladders over the walls of an old-time city

scars of all wars, marks left from injuries got in fighting

scope (skop), reach

scorched (skorcht), heated until burned

scoured the seas (skourd), hunted over the seas

scour for spoils (skour), hunt for dainty foods

scour'ing down the meadow (skour'ing; med'o), sweeping over the
grassland

sear (ser), withered

seaward glide (se'werd glid), flow toward the ocean

Sebowisha (seb'o-wish'a)

secure him against evil (se-kur'; a-genst' e'v'l), protect him from
harm

sedges (sej'ez), grasslike plants with tall heads of seeds

señor (se'nyor), Spanish for sir

sense of elation (e-la'shun), feeling of joy

sequin (se'kwin), a coin, no longer in use, worth about 82.25

serene of look and heart (se-ren'), with a calm face and mind

service liketh us, we like to serve

sesame (ses'a-me), a kind of grain grown in the East and used for food

severed (sev'erd), cut off

Severn (sev'ern), a river in southwestern England

shadow of an infinite bliss (in'fi-nit), hint of happiness that cannot
be measured

shanty, small, unfinished house

shaped them to a framework, bent and fastened them to form the
skeleton of the canoe

share, see plowshare

sheath (sheth), put into its case

sheaves (shevz), bundles of grain

sheer into the river, straight down into the water

shiftless (shift'les), poorly kept

shilling, coin worth $0.24

shining land of Wabun (wa'bun), bright light (Wabun is the East Wind)

shining shoulders, bare, wet shoulders glistening in the sun

shipping, passage on shipboard

shirk (shurk), one who tries to get out of work

shivering shock, force that breaks its timbers

shoal (shol), sandbar

shoot a main, have a match

shot his shining quills, cast off some of his smooth spines

shoulder your matchlocks, take your guns

shroud, rope of a ship

shuttle (shut'l), tool used in weaving

sieve (siv), a utensil for separating the coarse particles from the
fine

signify union (sig'ni-fi un'yun), mean joining

sincerity (sin-ser'ity), honesty

sinews (sin'uz), tough strips

singing pine trees, pines through which the wind blew with a pleasant
sound

singled out (sing'g'ld), chose

sire (sir), father

situation (sit'u-a'shun), state in which things were

skillet (skil'et), frying pan

skimming (skim'ing), flying so close as to brush the surface

skirted (skurt'ed), walked along the edge of; grew along the edge of

skyward cast (ski'werd), hung high

slab (slab), thick slice

slaughtered (slo'terd), killed for food

sledge (slej), a heavy hammer

sleep shall be broken, you will be awakened

sleight-of-mouth tricks (slit), mysterious disappearanoes

slow sloping to the night (slop'ing), sinking slowly in the West

sluices (sloos'ez), gates to hold back the water

smiling fields, patches of grain growing well

smirk (smurk), put-on smile

smite the ore (smit), hammer the iron into shape

smoldered (smol'derd), slowly burned

Soangetaha (son'ge-ta'ha)

soaring (sor'ing), floating in the air

sobered by his adventure (so'berd; ad-ven'tur), made wise by his
experience

softly pictured wood (soft'li pik'turd), beautifully colored foliage
showing up in soft tints

solace (soi'as), comfort

somber (som'ber), gloomy

soothe, comfort

sore of heart, weary and discouraged

sorry pass, sad state

sound of their shock, noise when they struck

sovereign (sov'er-in), ruler

spacious (spa'shus), large

spake with naked hearts, hid no secrets from each other

spare yards, extra poles used to support the sails

spars (sparz), masts

speaks sublimely (sub-lym'li), has a noble meaning

specter-like figure (spek'ter-lyk'), person looking like a ghost

spelled down, beat in spelling

sphere of gold (sfer), golden globe

spikes, large nails

spire, a slender rod, or tower, extend ins upward from the top of a
build ins; here, for the weathercock

spiritualizes (spir'it-u-al-iz-ez), purifies

spirit was gradually subdued (spir'it; grad'u-al-li sub-dud'), she was
tamed

splendor dazzles in vain (splen'der), bright show of glory does not
tempt

splendor wild (splen'der), light rising and falling

spoils of forest free, things that come from trees

sported, played

spray (spra), twig

sprites (sprits), fairies

square heaven of blue, blue part of the flag

stalwart (stol'wert), brave

stanch (stanch), faithful

stanched (stancht), checked the bleeding from

standing in for the shore, coming toward the land

stand you in yeoman's stead (yo' manz sted), be of help to you in your
adventures

star spangled, sprinkled with stars

state and person, country and the man himself

stately (stat'li), standing proudly

stature (stat'ur), height

stayed my walk, stopped me

stay surety (shoor'ti), be security

stern, the back part of a boat

steward (stu'erd), man in charge of the food

stick to your sphere (sfer), do the things you can do; don't try to do
those you can't

stiff, not to be bent or changed

stifled murmur (sti'f'ld mur'mur), a low sound not easily heard

stirred their souls to passion (pash'un), moved their deepest feelings

store, large amount

storm still brave, stand firm in a hard wind

stoutest, bravest

stout fellow, gay young man

Straits of Gibraltar (strats; ji-brol'tar), narrow waterway between
Spain and Africa

strength allied to goodness (a-lid'), bodily power added to virtues

strewn (stroon), covered

stricken (strik'en), frightened

strife comes with manhood, men have to fight

stroked in ripples (strokt; rip'lz), gently made into little folds

stubble (stub'l), short stalks left in the ground after grain has been
cut

studied the situation (stud'id; sit'u-a'shun), thought over the state
in which things were

sturdy (stur'di), strong; firm

sublimely (sub-lim'li), with great nobility and purity

succeeded to the gloom (suk-sed'ed; gloom), followed the cloudiness

such an old mustache (mus-tash'), so fierce a soldier

suitable to that character (sut'a-b'l; kar'ak-ter), such as dancers
wore

Sultan (sul'tan), title of the ruler in some Asiatic countries

summit of the Cedar (sum'it), top of the tree

summoned (sum'mund), called

sun benignant (be-nig'nant), kindly sun

sun is under the sea, sun has set

sunshine of sweet looks, brightness of expression

supple (sup'l), easily bent

supported the dog's chances (su-port'ed; chans'ez), said that the dog
would succeed

suppressed (su-prest'), kept down

surety (shoor'ti), security

surge's swell (surj'ez), waves of the rising sea

surpassed (sur-past'), did better than

swam (swim) sweeping westward, moving swiftly toward the west

sweetmeats, candied fruits

swell the merriment (mer'i-ment), make louder the sound of happy voices

swept down into a valley, sloped gradually to low land

swerve (swurv), go crooked

swoon (swoon), faint

symbol (sim'bol), sign

symbolizes (sim'bol-iz-ez), means


tamarack (tam'a-rak), tree that looks like an evergreen but sheds its
needles in winter

tang to the spirit (tang; spir'it), fancied taste

Taquamenaw (ta'kwa-me'no), river in Michigan

tarnished (tar'nisht), stained

taught wisdom from the past, having learned better things from what
had happened before

Tawasentha (ta'wa-sen'tha), name of a valley in New York

tawny (ta'ni), yellowish-brown

tax, a part of one's wealth given up by law to benefit the public

tedious (te'di-us), tiresome

terrace (ter'as), a raised level platform of earth

text, the subject of a talk

theater (the'a-ter), building in which plays are acted

their green resume (re-zum'), are again covered with grass

the night is behind us, night-time is almost here

therefore (thar'for), for that reason

thick zigzags (zig'zagz'), many paths running this way and that

thinned to a thread, grew so narrow she could barely be seen

thongs (thongz), narrow strips of leather

threshold (thresh'old), piece of timber under the door

thrilled (thrild), filled with joy

thunder halls (thun'der holz), far up, where the thunder dwells

thundering down the valley (thun'der-ing; val'i), running along level
ground with a noise like thunder

thus accoutered (a-koo'terd), dressed in this way

thus disposed (dis-pozd'), so arranged

thwarted the wily savage (thwort'ed; wi'li), fought against the tricks
of the Indians

tinge (tinj), color; tint

tinkered (tink'erd), worked without knowing just how

tiny (ti'ni), very small

tipped with flint, having points of flint, the hardest kind of stone

'tis meet, it is right

tittered (tit'erd), laughed mockingly

titter of winds, merry sound of the breeze

toil is the real play, work is more fun than playing

toil'some (toil'sum), hard

tolerable (tol'er-a-b'l), bearable

toll (tol), tax; money

took no toll (tol), did not rob them

took shipping, engaged passage on shipboard

took to his revels (rev'elz), went on with his wild play

tormentors (tor-men'toerz), flies which bit them

tortured by their lances (tor'turd), in great pain from the sharp bites

touchhole (tuch'hol'), the place where the powder was lighted

tour (toor), trip

tourneys (toor'niz), meetings where knights fought

toward (to'erd), in the direction of

towering steep (tou'er-ing), high slope

towers (tou'erz), high parts of the castle

tracker (trak'er), one who traces the path an animal has taken

trade winds, winds which always blow in the same direction

tradition (tra-dish'un), story handed down

traffic (traf'ik), business

train, those in a company

tranquil (tran'kwil), motionless because there was no wind

transparent (trans-par'ent), able to be seen through

transport (trans'port), great excitement

transport (trans-port'), to remove

traveling schoolmaster (trav'el-ing), teacher who went from one place
to another

treason (tre'z'n), attempt to injure the government

tribes of men might prosper, all nations might live in better ways

trickling (trik'ling), of water running in a small stream

trims, smooths neatly

triumph (tri'umf), victory

triumphant (tri-um'fant), glad of success

trophy (tro'fi), prize

troubled spirit (trub'ld spir'it), soul of the dead man which cannot
rest

tryst (tryst), meeting place

turban (tur'ban), headdress worn in Mohammedan countries, a cap with a
sash or scarf wound about it

turquoise (tur'koiz), a precious blue stone

turret (tur'et), a small tower

tusks (tusks), large, projecting teeth

twining (twyn'ing), creeping up and winding about

twinkle of its candle, little glow like that from a candle

twinkling, moment

tyrant would be lord (ti'rant), cruel master would rule everything


unaccustomed to vexations (un'a-kus'tumd; vek-sa'shunz), not used to
any sort of bothers

unanimously elected (u-nan'i-mus-li), given every vote

unapt (un-apt'), unlikely

unbounded freedom (un-bound'ed), state where they did as they liked

uncomfortable state of affairs (un-kom'fer-ta-b'l; a-farz'), hard way
of living

unconscious (un-kon'shus), feeling and knowing nothing

uneasiness (un-ez'i-nes), worry

unequal fight, ill-matched struggle

unfolded to your gaze, spread out before you

unhoused (un-houzd'), turned out of their homes

unknown, crowded nations, great masses of people of different races

unwittingly, by accident

upon their kind, against other men

useless (us'les), without having been made good use of

utmost (utmost), greatest

utter itself in words (ut'er), speak its meaning


vagrant (va'grant), idle wanderer

vague (vag), not clear

vague lisps (vag), talk that could not be understood

vales (valz), little valleys

valor (val'er), bravery

varied riches (va'rid), good foods of different kinds

vault (volt), walled-up space under- ground

vauntingly (vant'ing-li), boastingly

veered (verd), turned

venomous (ven'um-us), poisonous

verdant (vur'dant), green

vest that is bright, red breast

vexation (vek-sa'shun), anger

vexations (vek-sa'shunz), troubles

victuals (vit'lz), food

villain (vil'in), wicked man

virgin air (vur'jin), clear, fresh air of spring.

virtue of vested power (vur'tu), because of the office to which he had
been elected

vision (vizh'un), dream

visions of sugarplums (vizh'unz), dreams of candy

vizier (vi-zer'), a high state officer in Mohammedan countries

voluntarily (voi'un-ta-ri-li), willingly


Wabasso (wa-bas'o)

Wabun (wa'bun), East wind

Wahwahtaysee (wa'wa-ta'se)

wain (wan), wagon

waistcoat (wast'kot), vest

walks of life, things they try to do

wand (wand), slender stick

wanders piping through the village, walks around the town, playing
sweet music

wanted nothing, had everything he wanted

warring (wor'ing), fighting

warrior (wor'yer), fighting man

wary (wa'ri), easily frightened

was minded to try (min'ded), felt he would like to test

wastes (wasts), wide stretches of land unfit for cultivation

wayside blossom (wa'sid blos'um), flower growing by the roadside

wayside things (wa'sid'), flowers that grow along the roadside

Wawa (wa'wa)

Wawonaissa (wa'won-a'sa)

Waywassimo (wa-was'i-mo)

weasel (we'z'l), a small animal noted for its quickness

wedge (wej), a tool, thinner at one edge, used for splitting

ween, know

well mounted, riding on good horses

wend (wend), go

wheeling (hwel'ing), circling

whence, from where

where the last was bred, in the place in which the last sprang

whereupon (hwar'u-pon'), after which

wherever it listeth (hwar'ev'er; list'eth), wherever it wishes

white-skin wrapper, covering of white bark

Whitsunday (hwit's-n-day), the seventh Sunday after Easter

whole round of my isle, trip all the way around the island

whose joy is to slay, who like to kill

wield (weld), use

wigwams (wig'womz), huts of bark

wilderness (sil'der-nes), wild country

wildfire Jack-o'-lantern, gay little man dancing about

willing lands, ground ready for plowing

will not eat salt, in olden times eating salt with a man (that is,
being his guest) bound the guest to do his host no harm, then or
afterward

wily (wíi'i), tricky

winged (wing'ed), having wings

winged with feathers (wingd), having feathers at one end, to help them
fly

wintry hoard (win'tri hord), store of food for the winter

wisdom of the book, words which made up the sense

witchery (wich'er-i), fascination

within his scope (with-in'; skop), where he could reach it

with one accord (a-kord'), with the same idea

with one consent (kon-sent'), agreeing

without more ado (a-doo'), not making any objection

wonder (wun'der), surprising thing

wondrous (wun'drus), strange

wondrous birth and being (wun'drus; be'ing), story of the wonderful
way he came into the world and lived in it

words cannot paint, anything one might say could not describe

work the book out, do enough work to pay for the book

worship (wur'ship), devotion to God

wounded (woond'ed), hurt

wounds (woondz), old griefs

woven texture (wo'v-n; teks'tur), cloth

wrack (rak), ruin

wreath (reth), garland

wreathed (reth'ed), joyous

wreathing fires reth'ing), flames twisting around

wrought (rot), worked

wrought together in such harmony (rot; har'mo-ni), so combined in the
carving


Xenil (ze'nil)


yearling (yer'ling), an animal one year old

yellow hair, the silky threads growing out from the end of the corn ear

Yenadizze (yen'a-diz'e), an idler

yeoman (yo'man), free-born man

yester (yes'ter), of the day before

yet unforgotten, still remembered

yore (yor), olden time

young sun, early morning sun