YEISHO.

Of Yeishi's many pupils, Shokosai Yeisho stands out as the most
important. Nothing is known of him except that his work was done toward
the end of the eighteenth century.

[Illustration: YEISHO.]

Yeisho may be regarded as the veritable shadow of Yeishi. He wholly
adopted his master's style; but he was not able to impart to his figures
that reserved aristocratic poise which was Yeishi's distinguishing mark.
Instead, Yeisho's figures not infrequently have a certain very pleasing
and plausible elegance, fuller and rounder than his master's. His
curves sweep more assertively and less subtly; and his decorative
effects are often superb even though not particularly complex. He too
passed from the manner of Kiyonaga into that of Utamaro; but his middle
period is his most characteristic. In this he produced many fascinating
single sheets of seated or kneeling women, several admirable
pillar-prints, as in Plate 33, some large bust-portraits that are
perhaps his finest works, and a number of triptychs. These last, as a
rule, lack the element that is the real glory of the triptych--a broadly
grasped correlation of complex elements into one great harmonious
composition. Yeisho's triptychs are merely three sheets placed side by
side with only a rudimentary attempt at unification. But so completely
attractive are the separate figures and the great sweeping curves of his
best work that these triptychs are nevertheless delightful
productions--more striking than many a subtler composition. They have,
however, a stereotyped quality that makes one unwilling to take Yeisho
very seriously as an artist. His curves sweep splendidly, but they are
dominated by a formula.

Yeisho's works are not common; they are far rarer than Yeishi's. Yeisho
may serve to illustrate the difficulty of appraising these artists. I
had hardly written the foregoing estimate of Yeisho when I received as a
gift from a friend a large bust-portrait of a woman by Yeisho which is
so unexpectedly magnificent and so much finer than any work of Yeisho's
I had ever seen that my previous opinion had to be modified. In subtlety
of line and delicacy of colour this head is at least equal to Utamaro's
finest works in the same manner; it utterly contradicts my previous
impression of Yeisho's stereotyped quality. Now, what has happened to me
in the case of Yeisho is happening to students of Japanese prints every
day; and not until the last secreted treasure is brought to light and
made known can we be confident that we are even approximately right in
the ranks which we assign to the various designers.


OTHER PUPILS OF YEISHI.

Yeishi's vigour, barely sufficient to create his own exquisite works,
could not transmit itself to any very vital body of pupils. Though his
disciples were many, no one of them achieved independent renown; the
seeds of life were not in the teacher. Out of a large number, the
following pupils may be named as the most important:--

ICHIRAKUTEI YEISUI, of whom nothing is known, inherited from his master
an elegance of line that is often pleasing. He cannot, however, be
regarded as an important or original artist. His large bust-portraits,
with charming piquant faces, are his best-known works. His prints are
rare but not especially sought after.

GOKYO, an interesting artist who probably died young, worked in the same
manner as Yeishi. His prints, soft and pleasing in colour, are very rare
indeed; the few known examples of his work have a distinction worthy of
more attention than they have hitherto received. Had he lived he might
have given the school of Yeishi a fresh fame.

YEIRI, of whom not much is known, sometimes signed himself "Yeishi's
pupil Yeiri." He is to be distinguished from the almost contemporaneous
Rekisenti Yeiri. The latter worked more in the style of Utamaro; his
work is rare, and his finest prints are beautiful and valuable. It was
Yeishi's pupil Yeiri who created that rare and astonishing portrait of
Kitao Masanobu which must take a place beside the most brilliant
portraiture of any time or land.

YEISHIN is known only by half a dozen prints; these, though attractive,
are not as greatly prized as their scarcity might lead one to expect.

CHOTENSAI YEIJU is a slightly stiff and not very interesting disciple
whose work is rare.

YEICHO also is notable chiefly for his rarity.

YEIRU followed his master with little originality.

YEIKI and SORAKU are later unimportant pupils who followed Utamaro also.


UTAMARO.

_Portrait of a Woman._

      In robes like clouds of sunset rolled
    About the dying sun,
    In splendid vesture of purple and gold
    That a thousand toiling days have spun
    For thee, O imperial one!--

      With the cunning pomp of the later years,
    With their pride and glory and stress,
    Thou risest; and thy calm forehead bears
    These like a crown; but thy frail mouth wears
    All of their weariness.

      Thou art one of the great who mayest stand
    Where Cleopatra stood:
    Aspasia, Rhodope, at each hand;
    And even the proud tempestuous mood
    Of Sappho shall rule thy blood.

      Thy throat, in its slender whiteness bare,
    Seems powerless to sustain
    The gorgeous tower of thy gold-decked hair--
    Like a lily's stem which the autumn air
    Maketh to shrink and wane.

      More haunting music, more luring love
    Round thy sinuous form hold sway
    Than the daughters of earth have knowledge of
    For thou art the daughter of fading day,
    Touched with all hope's decay.

      And the subtle languor, the prismic glow
    Of a ripeness overpast
    Burns through the wonderful curving flow
    Of thy garments; and they who love thee know
    A loathing at the last.

      For they are the lovers of living things--
    Stars, sunlight, morning's breath;
    But thou, for all that thy beauty brings
    Such songs as the summer scattereth--
    Thou art of the House of Death.

    .     .     .     .     .     .

      But there was one in thy golden day
    Who saw thy poppied bloom,
    And loved not thee but the heart's decay
    That filled thee, and clasped it to be alway
    His chosen and sealed doom.

      He who this living portrait wrought,
    Outlasting time's control,
    A dark and bitter nectar sought
    Welling from poisoned streams that roll
    Through deserts of the soul.

      Ah, dreamer! come at last where dreams
    Can serve no more thy need,
    Who hast by such bright silver streams
    Walked with thy soul that now earth seems
    A waste where love must bleed--

      Thou whom such matchless beauty filled
    Of visions frail and lone,
    For thee all passion now is stilled;
    Thy heart, denied the life it willed,
    Desireth rather none.

      And thee allure no verdant blooms
    That with fresh joy suspire;
    But blossoms touched with coming glooms,
    And weariness, and spent desire,
    Draw to thy spirit nigher.

      Wherefore is nothing in thy sight
    Propitious save it be
    Brushed with the wings of hovering night,
    Worn with the shadow of delight,
    Sad with satiety.

      For thou hast enmity toward all
    The servants of life's breath;
    One mistress holdeth thee in thrall,
    And them thou lovest who her call
    Answer; and she is Death.

    .     .     .     .     .     .

      Now Death thy ruined city's streets
    Walketh, a grisly queen.
    And there her sacred horror greets
    Him who invades these waste retreats,
    Her sacrosanct demesne--

      In robes like clouds at sunset rolled
    About the dying sun,
    In splendid vestments of purple and gold
    That a thousand perished years have spun
    For her, the Imperial One.

Utamaro, the central and in some ways the most fascinating figure of
this period, has been from the first a great favourite in the esteem of
European collectors. His graceful, sinuous women are the images that
come most readily to the minds of many people at the mention of Japanese
prints. In his own time and land his popularity was equalled by that of
no other artist.

[Illustration: UTAMARO.]

It was by his portraits of women that Utamaro won his great fame.
Passing outside the influence of Kiyonaga, he developed in his designs
of the last decade of the nineteenth century his characteristic feminine
type. Her strange and languid beauty, the drooping lines of her robes,
her unnatural slenderness and willowiness, are the emanations of
Utamaro's feverish mind; as her creator he ranks as the most brilliant,
the most sophisticated, and the most poetical designer of his time. His
life was spent in alternation between his workshop and the haunts of the
Yoshiwara, whose beautiful inhabitants he immortalized in prints that
are the ultimate expression of the mortal body's longing for a more than
mortal perfection of happiness. Wearied of every common pleasure, he
created these visions in whose disembodied, morbid loveliness his
overwrought desires found consolation.

[Illustration: UTAMARO: OKITA OF NANIWAYA, A TEA-HOUSE WAITRESS.

Mica background. Size 121/2 x 9. Signed _Utamaro, hitsu_. Chandler
Collection.

_Plate 38._]

Utamaro was born in 1753 in the province of Musachi. Early in life he
went to Yedo and there studied under the noted Kano painter and
book-illustrator Toriyama Sekiyen, whom some authorities say was his
father. Almost from the beginning of his career he lived with the famous
publisher Tsutaya, who issued his prints; and this relation continued up
to the date of Tsutaya's death in 1797.

In Utamaro's early work, which began with an illustrated book in 1776,
the influence of Kiyonaga was strong. Shunsho's and Kitao Masanobu's
characteristics are sometimes also visible, but Kiyonaga's style is the
dominating one. Some of his early work is signed Toyoaki.

In 1780 the first important product of Utamaro's career saw the
light--his famous "Gifts of the Ebb-Tide"--a book of exquisitely
conceived and delicately printed representations of shells and rocks on
the seashore. The effort of a trained conchologist to produce accurate
descriptive drawings of these objects could hardly achieve a more
scrupulous fidelity than do these pages, which have in addition an
aesthetic charm of a high order. The same characteristic appears in his
celebrated "Insect Book" of 1788. These two works, dominated by a
scientific realism that was new to Ukioye, may serve as an indication of
the growth of that naturalistic spirit whose effect upon the stylistic
ideals of the art was later to be so destructive.

In the decade between 1780 and 1790 Utamaro produced many additional
books. Notable among them are the "Customs of New Year's Day" (1786),
"The Mad Full Moon," a series of lovely moonlight landscapes in
monochrome (1789), and "The Silver World," a series of delicate snow
scenes (1790). The single-sheet prints which he issued during this
decade are exceedingly beautiful works of a type that the inexperienced
eye would never recognize as Utamaro's. The figures are like those of
Kiyonaga's prime, but drawn with a slenderness of line and restlessness
of poise that strikes a different and shriller note. His work of this
period may be distinguished by the fact that the signature is written in
a squarer, more compact, and more formal manner than the sprawling,
cursive signature of his later days. The two long, tail-like lines of
the later signature, by which even the casual tourist learns to
recognize Utamaro's name, are wholly absent.

With 1790 begins the classic period of Utamaro's work. This was the year
of Kiyonaga's retirement and, according to some authorities, of
Shunsho's death. With the two giants of the older generation gone,
Utamaro was left to compete for leadership with Yeishi, Shuncho, Choki,
Toyokuni, and the lesser men. During the decade from 1790 to 1800
Utamaro was, except for the isolated figure of Sharaku, outstandingly
the most versatile and brilliant among them. All were profoundly
influenced by him, and he had not a few imitators who attempted to
profit by his popularity.

[Illustration: UTAMARO: TWO COURTESANS.

One of a Series "Beautiful Women compared with the Fifty-three Stations
of the Tokaido Road." Size 15 x 10. Signed _Utamaro, hitsu_.

_Plate 39._]

During this last decade of the nineteenth century Utamaro produced the
greatest of his works. Among these must be counted the remarkable series
of half-length figures on silver backgrounds, for which no admiration
can be too extreme. One of them appears in Plate 38. The type of face
which Utamaro drew in these prints differs from the Kiyonaga type; it
has something of the girlishness of Harunobu or Sukenobu--wholesome,
rounded, with eyes that are large and not narrowed to slits as in his
later years, and with coiffure of modest proportions. It resembles the
type characteristic of Choki at this time. These charming figures, drawn
with subtle precision, stand against their dull silver backgrounds in
colours whose few and soft tones produce an effect so harmonious as to
almost justify Von Seidlitz in calling Utamaro "the first colourist of
his nation." The prints of this class are as rare as they are beautiful.
The collector who is familiar with nothing but the later work of the
artist can have only an imperfect conception of the greatness of
Utamaro. They constitute the purest and most tranquil of his
productions, and perhaps the high point of his genius.

This 1790 decade, when Utamaro was at the zenith of his powers, saw many
triumphs besides the silver-portraits. He was incessantly busy with
experiments of every kind; pushed by the keen competition of Yeishi,
Choki, and the others, he laboured incessantly for new effects and
passed on to new manners. Plates 39 and 41 are examples. Discarding the
type of head that had appeared in the silver-portraits, he devised that
more restless, haunting type by which we best know him. The ethereal and
supple bodies, the slender necks, the slightly strained poses, all
indicate the nervous hyper-aesthetic tension of the hour. Toward the end
of the decade his peculiarities grew even more marked. The necks of his
figures became incredibly slender; the bodies took on unnatural length;
a snaky languor pervaded them. One print, his famous "Woman Seated on
the Edge of a Veranda," reproduced in Plate 40, may serve as
representative of them all. The drawing of the draperies and of the
figure beneath them is studied with extraordinary fidelity; in fact, so
human and real a figure is hardly to be found in the work of any
preceding artist. But on the other hand, Utamaro has used his keen
realistic power merely as a scaffolding, and has proceeded to build up
on it a work that goes over almost into the region of symbolism. In the
slender delicacy of this figure, the splendid black of her elaborate
coiffure, the drooping fragility of her body, the sensuous grace and
refinement, the languor and exhaustion--in all these speak the
super-sensible gropings and hungers of Utamaro himself. Out of a living
woman he created his disturbing symbol of the impossible desires that
are no less subtle or painful because they are born of the flesh. With
nerves keyed beyond the healthy pitch, he dreamed this melody whose
strange minor chords alone could stir the satiated spirit. He caught and
idealized the lines and colours of mortal weariness.

[Illustration: UTAMARO: WOMAN SEATED ON A VERANDA.

Size 13 x 8. Signed _Utamaro, hitsu_.

_Plate 40._]

"Woman," says Von Seidlitz, "had always played a prominent part in the
popular art of the country, but now Utamaro placed one type of the sex
in the absolute centre of all attention--the type, namely, of the
courtesan initiated into all the refinements of mental culture as
well as of bodily enchantment, and then playing in the life of Japan
such a part as she must have played in Hellas during the golden age of
Greek civilization. For expressing the inexpressible, the simple
rendering of nature did not suffice; the figures must needs be
lengthened to give the impression of supernatural beings; they must have
a pliancy enabling them to express vividly the tenderest as well as the
most intense emotions of the soul; lastly, they must be endowed with a
wholly peculiar and therefore affected language for uttering the wholly
peculiar sensations that filled them.... It is true that soon after he
yielded to the general tendency of his age ... and gradually insisted on
these attributes to exaggeration, even to impossibility, while his fame
of having been the first to give such morbid inclinations completely
satisfactory and therefore unsurpassable expression is a title of
somewhat doubtful value, even if in any case a high historical
significance cannot be denied it. Nevertheless, we must not forget that
within this domain of the hyper-aesthetic Utamaro was the creator of a
most original and individual style. Nay, if we could only admit the
morbid and exaggerated to be as fit subject-matter for art as the
healthy and sane, we must grant that this style is one of altogether
enchanting originality, and that, however dangerous might be its
immediate influence upon the spectator, and particularly upon possible
successors, it does none the less lift us beyond the cramping limits of
reality, and is therefore not wanting in idealism of a kind."

But weary as seems the spiritual content of these end-of-the-century
designs of Utamaro's, there is no lack of brilliant vigour in their
composition. The great triptychs--such as the "Night Festival on the
Banks of the Sumida River," or the "Firefly Catchers," or the "Persimmon
Pickers"--stand among the finest prints we know. In colour, rhythm of
line, and dramatic quality of composition they are triumphs. There is a
startling beauty in even those extraordinary bust-portraits in which the
enormous coiffure, minute neck, slips of eyes, and dot of a mouth, carry
exaggeration to a bizarre and delirious extreme.

Not long after 1800 the pressure of work brought upon him by his great
popularity, together with the effects of a none too well spent life in
the Yoshiwara, combined to strain his powers unduly. His work no longer
kept its earlier freshness; his exaggerations became coarser; his
invention grew less fertile. He began to rely on the assistance of his
pupils, as we know from his "Book of the Green Houses" (1804), in which
several collaborated with him. Doubtless many an Utamaro print of this
time is their work.

In the year 1804 came the final catastrophe. Consequent upon the
publication of the well-known triptych representing the ancient Shogun
Hideyoshi entertaining his five concubines in the eastern quarter of the
capital, the ruling Shogun Iyenari took umbrage at the salacious
disrespect to his ancestor and the delicately implied allusion to
himself, and Utamaro was thrown into prison for his offence. There he
remained, it is said, for a year; when he emerged, it was with impaired
health and a broken spirit.

[Illustration: UTAMARO: A YOUTHFUL PRINCE AND LADIES.

Left-hand sheet of a triptych. Size 15 x 10. Signed _Utamaro, hitsu_.

_Plate 41._]

His productions after this time were not comparable with his earlier
work. In the year 1806 he died, and with him died the great days of the
Japanese print.

In this rapid survey it has been impossible to do justice to the
many-sided powers of this great designer. His beautiful landscapes, his
fine animal pictures, the tender and whimsical mother-and-child and
domestic scenes he produced, have all had to be ignored in favour of his
central achievements--his unparalleled designs of the courtesan of the
Yoshiwara in her weary glory. Certainly no more varied and distinguished
talent than his illumines the roll of Ukioye artists. Beside his
perpetually fresh invention even the great Kiyonaga seems stereotyped
and academic.

To-day the poorer examples of Utamaro's work are still readily
procurable. His greatest works are rare. Certain of his triptychs, his
silver half-length portraits, and his large heads on mica backgrounds,
are very uncommon. But with patience and judgment the collector may
still obtain now and then a fine specimen of Utamaro's work.

But some care is necessary. Even during Utamaro's life his work was
forged by unscrupulous persons who hoped to reap the benefit of his
popularity; and his pupils, under his direction, produced an unknown
quantity of work signed with his name. After his death, from about 1808
to 1820, the Second Utamaro worked in the manner of his predecessor,
issuing work that cannot with certainty be distinguished from the late
work of the master. Besides these perils there is the fact that
Utamaro's prints have been well reproduced in recent years; and
reproductions are sometimes put forward as originals by ignorant or
dishonest dealers. Considerable familiarity with authentic examples of
Utamaro's best work, or expert advice, can alone protect the would-be
purchaser.


PUPILS AND FOLLOWERS OF UTAMARO.

Though Utamaro's influence upon his contemporaries was incalculably
great, he left behind him a body of pupils who were almost without
exception rather insignificant artists. With cruder colour and
composition, they carried still farther the vulgarities of Utamaro's
declining period. Among them may be mentioned the following men:--

UTAMARO II, whose original name was Koikawa Shuncho or Harumachi, was a
pupil of Sekiyen; he married Utamaro's widow, and from about 1808 to
1820 continued to produce prints in the debased Utamaro manner. Dr.
Kurth believes he must be distinguished from another Koikawa Shuncho
whose family name was Kurahashi, and who died in 1789. The whole matter
is by no means clear.

BANKI and SHIKIMARO were among the best of this group. Particularly the
former, before Utamaro's death, produced some fine work.

TAMAGAWA SHUCHO was a rare pupil of Utamaro who worked about 1790 to
1810.

KIKUMARO I (who also called himself KITAGAWA TSUKIMARO), KIKUMARO II,
TANIMOTO TSUKIMARO, TAKEMARO, TOYOMARO, YUKIMARO I, YUKIMARO II,
YOSHIMARO I (also called KITAO SHIGEMASA III), YOSHIMARO II, REKESENTI
SOGAKU, GOSHICHI, HIDEMARO, MITEMARO, MINEMARO, KITAMARO, MICHIMARO,
TOSHIMARO, HANAMARO, ISOMARO, ASHIMARO, KANAMARO, KUNIMARO, YOSHIMUNE,
YOSHITORA, YOSHITSUYA, YOSHIKI, YOSHIMORI, YOSHITOSHI, YOSHIKATA,
YENCHO, YUMIAKI, HOKOKUJIN FUYO, CHIKANOBU, SHINTOKU, SHUNKIOSAI,
HISANOBU, SORAKU, SENKA, RYUKOKU, SEKKYO, SEKICHO, SEKIHO, SEKIJO may
all be classed as late followers, fellow-pupils, or rivals of Utamaro.

BUNRO, some of whose work is fine, was a rare imitator of Utamaro. He
worked chiefly about 1800 to 1810.


SHARAKU.

_Dramatic Portrait._

      Whence art thou come,
    Tall figure clasping to thy tragic breast
    Thy orange robe, a flame amid the gloom--
    By what wild doom
    Art thou forever onward--onward pressed?

      A wreath is on thy brow,
    A crown of leafage from some lonely haunt
    Where might Medea's shade brood ministrant.
    Thy shoulders bow
    Beneath what fearful weight, what need, what vow?

      A leopard fierce--
    A ghost that wanders down the wandering wind--
    A fury tracking toward some shaken mind--
    Where shall I find
    The divination that thy veil shall pierce?

      How shall I wrest
    From thee the secret of thy lofty doom--
    From what wild gulf of midnight thou dost come
    Who, with clutched breast,
    Stalkest forever onward--onward pressed?

Few people approach Sharaku's work for the first time without regarding
him as a repulsive charlatan, the creator of perversely and senselessly
ugly portraits whose cross-eyes, impossible mouths, and snaky gestures
have not the slightest claim to be called art. At first these strange
pictures may even seem mirth-provoking to the spectator--a view of them
which he will remember in later years with almost incredulous wonder. To
overcome one's original feeling of repulsion may take a long time; but
to every serious student of Japanese prints there comes at last a day
when he sees these portraits with different eyes; and suddenly the
consciousness is born in him that Sharaku stands on the highest level of
genius, in a greatness unique, sublime, and appalling.

[Illustration: TOSHIUSAI SHARAKU.]

Toshiusai Sharaku is a figure more shadowy than most, even in this
region of shadows. The wilful neglect of a public that hated him has
folded him in a mystery deeper than the mere accidental obscurations of
time. Of his birth and death we know absolutely nothing, nor of the name
of his teacher, if he had one. The resemblance between his work and that
of Shunyei cannot be fully explained until we know more accurately their
relative dates. Kiyonaga's noble drawing certainly affected his
style. The influence of Shunsho upon his colour-schemes is fairly
obvious; but we do not know whether this was due to personal contact, or
only to familiarity with Shunsho's work. The one indisputable fact about
Sharaku is that he was originally a No-performer in the troupe of the
Daimyo of Awa. The Japanese authorities state that he worked at
print-designing only one or two years, somewhere between 1790 and 1795.
Dr. Kurth, in his stimulating but somewhat too imaginative volume,
"Sharaku," believes that the evidence justifies us in fixing Sharaku's
working period as a much longer time--1787 to 1795; but he cannot be
said to have wholly proved his case. Whether or not these dates are
accurate, we may at least say that Sharaku's years of activity lay
chiefly within the early part of the last decade of the eighteenth
century.

[Illustration: SHARAKU: THE ACTOR ARASHI RYUZO IN THE ROLE OF ONE OF THE
FORTY-SEVEN RONIN.

Silver background. Size 14 x 10. Signed _Toshiusai Shakaru ga_.
Spaulding Collection.

_Plate 42._]

Sharaku's work consisted entirely of startlingly powerful and ironic
portraits of actors, some in the form of large bust-portraits, some in
the form of full-length figures of _hoso-ye_ size, and a few large
sheets each containing two full-length figures. Their savage intensity
is arresting and unforgettable; it at once drives one to consider what
manner of man could have created them.

Sharaku was, as we have said, professionally a member of the No-troupe
of the Daimyo of Awa. This fact is of far-reaching significance.

The No was a highly developed and aristocratic form of lyrical drama,
based upon ancient and classical legends; it was full of a poetry and
allusiveness that made it incomprehensible to the populace, who,
indeed, had no opportunity to see it; it was as much the exclusive
concern of the cultured aristocracy as the private revival of a Greek
tragedy is with us to-day. In brocaded costumes, perhaps the treasured
reliques of centuries ago, the No-dancer appeared upon his empty stage
before a hushed audience of nobles--his face masked, as were the faces
of the Greek actors, his voice lifted to an unnatural pitch of vibrant
chaunting; and with stately motions, elaborately devised steps, and
stereotyped gestures, he intoned the rolling strophes of the drama's
long and hallowed strain. A complex formalism pervaded every word and
step; in no art-form with which I am familiar is an accepted convention,
a totally unrealistic medium, so rigidly adhered to as in these
No-plays.

The No-actors were a caste utterly apart from the actors of the common
stage. They were the proteges and associates of great nobles who would
not, save incognito, appear in the presence of the common actor. The gap
between the two classes of actors was as great as that between Sir
Johnston Forbes-Robertson and a juggler at a fair--one, the inheritor of
a distinguished literary tradition, the interpreter of our classic
dramatic heritage; the other, a crude beguiler of the populace, with
station no higher than the pedlar. Caste-feeling may very well have been
rather harsh between the haughty No-performers and their despised and
ostracized brothers of the gutter.

As we have noted, the No-dancer wore a mask; these masks are creations
of the greatest interest. They are carved out of wood, frequently with
a skill that makes them striking works of art. It is impossible to
convey in words the remarkable degree of characterization which they
express. The smooth guilelessness of the young girl, the deep wrinkles
of the old man, the leer of the rascal, the savagery of the villain, are
all in their turn summarized in these haunting representations whose
simplicity of outline is matched only by their intensity of effect.
Nature seems to speak in them--but a heightened nature, stripped of all
incidentals; the very essence of the character of the role is revealed
to our eyes the instant the actor, wearing his impressive and vivid
mask, steps upon the stage.

Bearing these things in mind, we may follow Dr. Kurth ("Sharaku,"
Muenchen, 1910) in his imaginative summary of the probable effects of the
calling of a No-dancer upon the mind and art of Sharaku:--

"Picture a richly endowed painter--at first only dimly conscious of his
powers--as in a mystery-play he treads the consecrated stage in the
sacred precincts of a temple of Tokushima or in the shadow of the
cryptomerias and firs of the Hachisuka castle--a fantastic mask covering
his features, other masked spectres before his eyes--surrounded by the
atmosphere of the occult tradition of ancient and lofty dramatic
art--while, in the depths of his soul's abysses, chained Titans would
storm up to the outer world, and confused pictures of his future
creations hover before his spirit, ... and we shall realize that this
man, as a painter, must become a dramaturgist.

"And if we summon to our vision the gorgeous stretches of Awa--its
chasmy mountains with the forests rustling around them--its picturesque
sea-lapped beaches--its sun-drenched groves of oak--its glowing scarlet
maples--the brilliant flowers of its Spring--the evergreens of its
Winter--then we shall realize that this man, as a painter, must become a
colour-dreamer.

"Brooding spirit that he was, he, an Edipus, approached venturously to
the Sphinx of passion that peers forth from the faces of men. Uncanny
powers lurked in the grotesque furrows and demoniac grimaces of his
No-masks, but nothing little or shallow--nay, in spite of all
grotesqueness, only the significant and symbolic. And then he looked
down from his buskined height upon the popular actors--bombastic
barn-stormers--greasy low-comedians--louts from nowhere, as the
illustrious Harunobu had called them--performers who brought before
their gaping audience not, as did he, august things in strangely
wonderful guise, but often things far too human in strutting stage-pomp.
He looked upon them, a guild not only despised but sometimes even
outlawed--a guild that stood on the same plane as the idiotic profession
of the wrestler,--a class whose vulgar faces could not hide their
swaggering gutter-vanity and their cringing lust for applause behind
even the red paint of the ferocious warrior-role or the corpse-coloured
rice-powder used when aping women. And if we see him thus, we shall
understand that this man, as a painter of actors, must eventually become
a pitiless satirist."

It was therefore with the colossal and tragic gestures of the No-dance
in his soul, the distorted and monumental intensity of the No-masks in
his eyes, and the contempt and irony of the No-performer for the common
actor in his heart, that Sharaku, coming to Yedo, took up his terrible
brush to depict the Yedo actors as he saw them. The resulting series of
portraits is surely one of the supreme examples of graphic
characterization and devastating contempt that the world has ever seen.

In the earlier portion of Sharaku's work, among which are his large
portraits on yellow backgrounds, the originality of the man is already
striking enough; but his acid qualities are hardly at their fullest
development. Certain of his _hoso-ye_ prints must belong to this first
period; in these, after the manner of Shunsho, he devoted his attention
chiefly to the attaining of a powerful dramatic rendering of the role he
was depicting. Strutting Daimyo, beguiling woman, ferocious warrior,
shrewd peasant--he made each part move with the vigour and force of the
seen stage. Shunsho was never more impressive; and here, in addition,
there is in every design a strange distortion of line, a disturbing
abnormality of pose, that makes one realize that no mere copyist of
Shunsho is at hand.

Then, beginning with an astounding series of twenty-four portraits with
mica backgrounds (Plates 42, 43, 44) representing actors in the play of
the Forty-seven Ronin, Sharaku's mood changes. He ceases to remind one
at all of Shunsho; it is rather the scrutinizing individual
characterization of Shunyei that he recalls. But Shunyei never reached
the point to which Sharaku is now coming. The dramatic force, the
histrionic illusion of his pictures abates no jot; but beyond it,
disturbing lights and movements are lurking. The mighty role towers like
a shadow before us in its full dramatic sweep; but from the depths of
the shadow peers with stealthy glance the indwelling personality of the
actor--like a jackal's eyes seen suddenly in a king's tomb. This
contradiction--this complex of two utterly antagonistic forces--is one
of the miracles of Sharaku's genius: it is an antinomy which he resolves
sufficiently to produce an equilibrium, but not enough to take from
these portraits the insoluble mystery of two spirits, the tangle of two
meanings, the explosive and inscrutable life that makes them
unforgettable.

Thus the sweeping rhetoric of the stately role and the sudden
naturalistic cry of the discovered actor's soul meet in a discord
unique, subtly calculated, magnificent, and harrowing. Sharaku pierced
deep into the hearts of his sitters to grasp the weak, the grotesque,
the pathetic, the tragic; he appraised the lust, the horror, the vacuity
that was there, and these qualities he dragged out to the light through
the avenues by which he had entered--through the eyes, the lips, the
hands--tearing these gates into terrible and distorted breaches eloquent
of the booty that had been forced through them. No portraits so blasting
as his have ever been created by another; no other hand has so
devastatingly shattered the conventional contours of faces to reshape
them into the awful images of their own hidden potentialities.

[Illustration: SHARAKU: THE ACTOR ISHIKAWA DANJURO (YEBIZO) AS THE
DAIMYO KO NO MORONAO IN THE DRAMA OF THE FORTY-SEVEN RONIN.

Size 14 x 10. Silver background. Signed _Toshiusai Sharaku ga_.

_Plate 43._]

To call Sharaku a realist is a silly, untruthful attempt to muffle in
words forces that one does not understand. He was hardly more a realist
than Kiyonaga. He saw in the spectacle before him certain elements of
beauty and terror; he selected and moulded them into his cunningly
devised designs; and the result was as much a creation of the visionary
mind--a true idealism--as the pictures of the fairy-tale-telling
Harunobu. It is no mere realism, but an insidious dissection and a
mordant reconstruction, that is so striking in these works. The most
savage efforts of modern caricature are child's play beside Sharaku's
disintegrating analysis and his satanic reassembling of features. He
does to the face and its concealed passions what Michael Angelo's
anatomical figure does to the nerves and muscles--revealing appallingly
the secrets of structure and the machinery of power.

Yet, in spite of all the distortions and exaggerations and
displacements, Sharaku's satyrical faces live. They have an unnatural
and monstrous life--like the life of Gothic gargoyles and fabulous
animals, whose parts are brought together into an incredible yet organic
creation. Looking upon them, one realizes that for Sharaku beauty meant
not sweetness or grace, but vitality--the clench and rending of the
earthquake forces of life. He sought no harmonies of sentiment like
those of Harunobu; he plunged wholly into a maelstrom of powers whose
magnificent surge and flow was to him the sole end and the sole
consolation.

He drew no courtesans, no scenes from the daily life of the people, no
festivals, no tea-house gardens by the river; but with a baleful
concentration he, the proud master of the esoteric No drama, kept his
eyes fixed unswervingly upon the pathetic mimes of the vulgar
stage--outcasts, common lumps strutting for an hour of glory in gorgeous
robes and heroic roles before a gaping populace. How one longs for one
more work from Sharaku's hands--a portrait of himself, seated in the
stalls, watching the play at its height! One can almost imagine the
peering eyes, the tight lips, the hidden hands....

So far I have spoken chiefly of the large heads of Sharaku. But it must
not be forgotten that he produced a number of designs in _hoso-ye_ form
that are the very flower of his work. Kurth places certain of these
early in Sharaku's career; he is, perhaps, wrong in this, for many of
those which he thus dates give evidence of an art so mature and
masterful that they must be at least contemporaneous with the Ronin
Series. Such are the print of Arashi Ryuzo as an aged noble in robe of
black with violet girdle, and the print of Segawa Kikusabro in robe of
olive and purple holding an open fan. In the finest of these _hoso-ye_
the dramatic force of the composition is so subtle that the element of
caricature takes a subordinate place. A lyric mood pervades them. It is
impossible to contemplate these figures without a sense, not merely of
the irony and contempt which they sometimes embody, but also of the
tragic heights on which they move. Lofty conflicts, desperate destinies,
immense strainings toward desired goals, immense despairs before
impassable barriers--these are some of the emotions that confront us
here. The echo of the tragedy of the Greeks is around them; their
gestures seem the shadows of titanic cataclysms. Kiyonaga gave us the
gods; Sharaku gives us those who fought against the gods. If it were my
fortune to choose, out of the tens of thousands of prints that I have
seen, one print which could alone be saved from some impending universal
destruction, I am not sure whether I would take Harunobu's flawless
"Flute Player," or Kiyonaga's serene "Terrace by the Sea," or that
terrible print of Sharaku's, illustrated in both Kurth and the catalogue
of the exhibition at the Musee des Arts Decoratifs, in which the
orange-robed figure of Nakayama Tomisabro stalks by with an intensity of
passion that makes one's flesh creep--a vibrancy of line, colour, and
emotion that seems the apogee of beauty and terror.

[Illustration: SHARAKU: THE ACTOR KOSAGAWA TSUNEYO AS A WOMAN IN THE
DRAMA OF THE FORTY-SEVEN RONIN.

Silver background. Size 14 x 10. Signed _Toshiusai Sharaku ga_.
Ainsworth Collection.

_Plate 44._]

The _hoso-ye_ prints have, upon the whole, more poise and serenity than
the busts; and they will perhaps be judged--in a hundred years, when the
excitement of the discovery of Sharaku is over--to be among his greatest
works. When they occur in triptychs, as probably all were originally
designed to do, they constitute more harmonious and dramatic units than
any of Shunsho's actor-triptychs. The finest, and latest in order of
production, are generally those without background; in these, isolated
and sublime against an empty universe of yellow tint, rise the supreme
evocations of Sharaku's genius.

Great distinction of composition marks all of Sharaku's work. Both the
_hoso-ye_ and the large bust-portraits are drawn with classic simplicity
of lines and masses. Nothing short of certain of the Primitives can
approach them. Every superfluous ornament is omitted; as in Plate 43,
each line is cut down to its meagrest possible limit. But the
expressiveness of the drawing is unsurpassable; and the aesthetic effect
of the direct composition grows with every repeated sight. These strange
heads against the dark glimmering backgrounds seem Titans rooted in the
void; they loom upon one's vision enormously; they are overwhelming with
the spiritual greatness of their creator. In spite of all the disturbing
unquietness of their conflicts, they are charged with a monumental
equilibrium of design, sealed with an exalted peace of conception,
poised as for eternity with the repose of measureless space and time
around them. At first sight, one would imagine these portraits to be
impossibly restless things to live with; but greater familiarity proves
them to be like the Sibyls of the Sistine Chapel--vast and enduring
figures, whose large passion does not obliterate the fundamental
tranquillity of their conception.

The colour which Sharaku employs is of a unique quality: sombre, with
lurid lights; heavy and opaque; nightmare colours, leashed into
miraculous and incredible harmony; things of infernal and dusky
splendour; "tragic colours," Kurth calls them. The dark mica
backgrounds, which Sharaku is said, without much proof, to have
invented, heighten to a remarkable degree his colour effects. Words and
reproductions are alike powerless to convey any sense of them; they hold
in store an impressive sensation for him who has not yet seen them.
With them Sharaku takes first rank as a colourist.

Toward the end of his brief career, his portraits became almost too
terrible in their savage and tragic irony. In the large double-portraits
Sharaku tears the mask of humanity aside and shows the very beast. Yet
to call even these most extreme of his productions caricatures is to
obscure a subtle spiritual essence by a crude word. They are exactly as
comic as the ravings of Lear, as mirth-provoking as the laments of
Shylock. They are not the light mocking of a scoffer or a comedian, but
the appalling and tortured sneer of a man whose vision of men is
coloured by his desire for the gods.

"Because he did not represent reality, but on the contrary painted
unnatural figures, the public became hostile toward him."... "His
figures were too realistic."... "He was a bungler in art."... From
these conflicting criticisms, found in various Japanese authorities, we
may gather with what comprehension the public of that day accepted the
final work of the great painter; and we may conjecture what neglect and
hatred forced him into a never-broken retirement.

Dr. Kurth is of the opinion that, after the year 1795, Sharaku still
continued to produce secretly a few prints under the assumed name of
Kabukido Yenkyo, and attempted under this disguise to win back the
popularity of his prime. This is an alluring but somewhat fantastic
theory, which neither the documentary nor the internal evidence of
Yenkyo's work adequately supports. Other authorities believe Yenkyo to
have been an independent artist who was a pupil of Sharaku. His work
strangely resembles that of Kunimasa I. At the present time it cannot be
said that the question is wholly settled; but it would be rash to accept
Kurth's theory at its face value.

In conclusion, let us grant that Sharaku is not for every one. One
cannot quarrel with a person who says, "I understand Sharaku; I see the
measureless depths of his tragic irony, the unique splendour of his
colour, the perfect mastery of his composition. But I do not like him. I
prefer Kiyonaga, just as I prefer the stately beauty of Keats to the
troubled profundity of Blake." Such a position is comprehensible and
impregnable. But he who finds Sharaku merely grotesque or absurd or
repellent should return to the portraits for further study; he has not
yet reached the immortal heart of Sharaku's work, and he is missing a
memorable experience.

Exact comparisons are profitless; but most students of Japanese prints
have at certain times turned from the work of Sharaku with the deep
conviction that this man was the greatest genius of them all.

Sharaku's output was not large, and his work is now of the utmost
rarity. The Parisian collectors long ago recognized Sharaku's greatness,
and at a time when Fenollosa was proclaiming Sharaku as an
"arch-purveyor of vulgarities," and Strange was grudgingly describing
him in seven lines as an artist "of great power but little grace," the
collectors of Paris had already acquired such Sharaku treasures as are
now a lavish and deserved reward for their foresight. Perhaps the only
collection of Sharaku prints that can rival those of Paris is the
notable Spaulding Collection of Boston, which takes high rank.


CHOKI.

_A Silver Print._

      The sky, a plate of darkened steel,
    Weighs on the far rim of the sea,
    Save where the lifted glooms reveal
    The last edge of the sun burned free.
    Blood-red, it drops departingly.

      And in the nightmare or the hour,
    Against the terrible sea and sky,
    A woman's figure--a strange flower--
    Lingers. Her wearied, curious eye
    Watches the burning world go by.

Though Choki is probably not to be counted as one of the few supremely
great artists of the Ukioye School, his fame has been steadily
increasing during the last twenty years; and whereas he once held an
insignificant place in the esteem of amateurs, he has of late been
regarded with an interest and admiration that at times seem almost more
than his deserts. Mr. Strange calls him the most graceful of all the
figure-designers of his time, and Kurth does not hesitate to deal with
him as "mit einem Riesengroszen." I note in Kurth a tendency to exalt an
artist because of his proficiency in technical processes, to an extent
that I cannot assent to; Choki was superb, but hardly Titanic. It would
be difficult to characterize him more justly than in the words of M.
Koechlin, "Le plus curieux des petits maitres." This description
certainly does not err on the side of over-enthusiasm; perhaps these are
rather lukewarm words to apply to a grace so exquisite, a precision so
sharp, and a spiritual appeal so strangely alluring as that of Choki.

[Illustration: CHOKI.]

Absolutely nothing is known of Yeishosai Choki's life; it is believed
that he was a pupil of Sekiyen, who also taught Utamaro. The Japanese
authorities are inexplicably silent about him. Internal evidence,
however, tells us that his work lies between the years 1785 and 1805.
His earliest designs are strongly after the manner of Kiyonaga, whose
feminine types he at first adopted almost literally. These he modified
somewhat a little later when he came under the influence of Yeishi,
whose slender and delicate figures led him away from the robust ones of
Kiyonaga. One of Choki's pillar-prints, illustrated in Plate 45, marks
an interesting transition stage. The face and figure seem at first sight
almost purely of the Kiyonaga variety, but on closer examination
differences appear; and most striking of all is the fact that the
colour-scheme is that peculiar combination of yellow, grey, violet,
blue, and black which was distinctive of some of Yeishi's finest work.
The influence of Sharaku on Choki was at some time very strong,
though the precise date is almost impossible to determine. So great was
Choki's admiration for this master that later, when he had arrived at
his own distinctive manner, he produced a pillar-print of a girl holding
a fan on which appears Sharaku's famous design of "The Man with the
Pipe." But Choki followed no one else as badly as he did Sharaku; though
he appears to have learned things that were of great value to him later,
his immediate imitations of the great ironist reduced the superb effects
of the latter to the level of caricatures and dissipated the effect of
concentrated force which marks his work. Utamaro proved a more congenial
influence; and in Choki's earlier prints there are many traces of the
grace, though not of the versatility, of that artist.

[Illustration: CHOKI: COURTESAN AND ATTENDANT.

Size 26 x 41/2. Signed _Choki ga_.

SHUNMAN: TWO LADIES UNDER A MAPLE-TREE.

Size 24 x 5. Signed _Kubo Shunman ga_.

_Plate 45._]

About 1790 there came out of this series of imitations a curious blended
type, which finally became Choki's distinctive own. This type is a
composite of Kiyonaga, Yeishi, and Sharaku, but ultimately unlike any of
them in its effect. The lower part of the face is prominent; the neck is
elongated and wonderfully delicate; about the eyes there is a narrowing
that is unusual. These figures of Choki's are distinguished by a
precision in drawing so sharp as to be almost an affectation, and by a
grace half of whose unique fascination is produced by some strangeness
of gesture, some keenness of characterization, or some unusual angle of
vision. Few examples of Choki's work in this manner survive; but they
are sufficient to lift his reputation from that of a copyist to that of
a notable creator of women's portraits. Woman was his great theme. "Er
hat ihrem Liebreiz das Hohelied der Japanischen Malerei ueberhaupt
gesungen," says Kurth, in a burst of enthusiasm for these subtle
designs. His most striking works in this manner, and perhaps the
greatest of all his works, are undoubtedly his half-length figures on
mica or silver backgrounds. Of the fascination of these rare prints it
is impossible to gain any idea from a reproduction. They rise into the
world of the miraculous; they are pure incantations. Such sheets as the
famous "Fireflies," or the two women smoking by the river, or the
falling-snow scene, or the sunset by the sea, have a beauty as unique as
it is haunting. The colours, dull in tone, produce against the metallic
sheen of the silver backgrounds unparalleled arrangements that are
positively disturbing in their super-refinement.

Choki's blue and silver and red tones seem to pass over into a region
where dwell things inexpressible by ordinary pigments. The most
sophisticated amateur shivers before some of these colour-harmonies.
Choki's characteristic prints are never restful, but always exciting and
vibrant; they are dominated by some hidden instability of equilibrium
that reacts on one's nerves like a drug. Their beauty has a certain
madness in it, or at least a note of strain and disquietude. Thus in the
end, for all his imitative efforts, Choki stands, as did Sharaku, in
solitary isolation and impenetrable mystery.

[Illustration: CHOKI: A COURTESAN AND HER LOVER.

Size 24 x 41/2. Signed _Shiko, hitsu_.

CHOKI: A GEISHA AND HER SERVANT CARRYING LUTE-BOX.

Size 24 x 5. Signed _Shiko, hitsu_.

_Plate 46._]

For reasons unknown to us, Choki late in his activity changed his
signature to Shiko and produced under this name a small number of prints
regarding the quality of which opinions differ. They are all in the
manner of Utamaro's later style, and so little resemble the work signed
"Choki" that one has to use a distinct effort to restrain one's
incredulity, in the face of pretty clear evidence that the two names
were used by a single artist. Easily first among these prints are a few
splendid pillar-prints; one of these, the two singers with the black
box, illustrated in Plate 46, seems to me almost the finest pillar-print
post-dating 1795 that I have ever seen. Of this form Choki was a
consummate master. But M. Koechlin regards these Shiko prints as mere
imitations of Utamaro's period of decadence, and rejoices in the fact
that they are so rare. Mr. Arthur Morrison, on the other hand, who
points out correctly that Shiko is Choki's late, not his early name (a
matter on which most writers have inexplicably gone astray) feels that
the Shiko sheets are, in the best instances, of more elegance and
distinction than anything produced under the Choki signature. I should
hardly like to agree with either view, but am content to put the Shiko
pillar-prints and the Choki silver-prints side by side, and regard them
as the supreme examples of the double talent of this puzzling genius.

[Illustration: SHIKO.]

All of Choki's work is of great rarity; that signed Shiko is possibly
even rarer than that signed Choki. Rarest and most highly treasured of
all are his silver-prints; the ordinary collector will probably never
have an opportunity to obtain one.

NAGAHIDE II and ICHIRAKUSAI NAGAMATSU (CHOSHO) may be mentioned as
followers of Choki. The fact that we do not know of more disciples of so
brilliant a designer is another one of the inexplicable things that
surround him.


TOYOKUNI.

_The Pupil of Toyokuni._

      I walk the crowded Yedo streets,
    And everywhere one question greets
    My passing, as the strollers say--
    "How goes the Master's work to-day?
    We saw him sketching hard last night
    At Ryogoku, where the bright
    Trails of the rockets lit the air.
    You should have seen the ladies there!
    All the most famous of the town
    In gorgeous robes walked up and down
    The long bridge-span, well-knowing he
    Was there to draw them gorgeously.
    I'm sure he'll give us something fine--
    Dark splendid figures, lights ashine,
    A great procession of our best
    And costliest Oiran, with the West
    Burning behind them. When it's done,
    Pray, of the copies, save me one."

      Yes, I am pupil to the great.
    How well he bears his famous state!
    With what superbness he fulfills
    The multitude's delighted wills,
    Giving them, at their eager call,
    Each play and feast and festival
    Drawn with a rich magnificence:
    And they come flocking with their pence
    To buy his sheets whose supple power
    Captures the plaudits of the hour--
    Till even Utamaro's eyes
    Turn, kindled with swift jealousies.

      Strange! that before this crowded shrine
    One voice is lacking, and that mine--
    I, learner in his lordly house--
    I, on whose cold, unwilling brows
    The lights of his strong glory burn,
    Blinding my heart that needs must yearn
    Far from the measure of his state--
    I, liegeman to another fate.
    Would that some blindness came on me
    That I might cease one hour to see,
    For all his high, ambitious will,
    His is a peasant's nature still....
    What utter madness that my thought
    Weighs him--I who am less than naught!
    Where he walks boldly, there I creep.
    Where his assured long brush-strokes sweep
    Unhesitant, there I falter, strain
    With agony--perhaps in vain--
    For some more subtly curving line,
    Some musical poising of design
    That shall at last, at last express
    My frailer glimpse of loveliness.
    And yet, for all his facile art,
    I hug my impotence to my heart.
    For there are things his marching mind
    In steady labours day by day
    With all its sight shall never find,
    With all its craft can never say.
    There are lights along the dusky street
    That his bold eyes have never caught;
    There are tones more luminous, more sweet
    Than any that his hopes have sought.
    There are torturing lines that curve and fall
    Like dying echoes musical,
    Or twine and lave and bend and roll,
    In labyrinths to lure my soul.
    His ladies sumptuous and rare
    Move princess-like in proud design
    Of glowing loveliness: but where
    His bannered pomps and pageants shine,
    I feel a stiller, rarer peace,
    A cadence breathless, slender, lone.
    And where his facile brush-strokes cease
    Begins the realm that is my own.

      I wander lonely by fields and streams.
    I lie in wait for lingering dreams
    That brood, a tender-lighted haze
    Down the wide space of ending days--
    A secret thrill that hovering flies
    Round some tall form, some wistful eyes,
    Some thin branch where the Spring is green--
    A whisper heard, a light half-seen
    By lonely wanderers abroad
    In crowded streets or solitude
    Of hills--to haunt with dim unrest
    The empty chambers of the breast.

      Perhaps some day a heart shall come,
    Like me half-blind, like me half-dumb,
    Like me contentless with the clear
    Sunlighted beauties men hold dear.
    Perhaps he will more greatly prize
    My faltered whispers from afar
    Than all the Master's pageantries
    And confident pomp and press and jar.
    Yet, well or ill, how shall I change
    The measure doled, the nature given?
    Mine is the thirst for far and strange
    Echoes of a forgotten heaven.
    I listen for the ghosts of sound;
    Remote, I watch life's eager stream;
    Through wastes afar, through gulfs profound,
    I, Toyohiro, seek my dream.

Utagawa Toyokuni was born in 1768, and early began his apprenticeship as
a pupil of Toyoharu. From this master he learned the rules of European
perspective--a device which he soon abandoned for the true Japanese
convention. He may have studied under Shunyei for a short time. Though
he was later to become a fertile producer of actor-prints, he
inaugurated his work with the figures of women. His first works imitate
the type of face and figure made famous by Shunsho's and Shigemasa's
book, "Mirror of the Beautiful Women of the Yoshiwara." Before 1790 he
gave up this type for one copied from Kiyonaga, who was at this time at
the height of his fame. But Toyokuni was no such draughtsman as
Kiyonaga, and his figures in this manner are generally poorly drawn and
awkward. At this time he frequently adopted colour-schemes from Shunman.
After Kiyonaga's retirement Toyokuni began to use the delicate type made
popular by the rising genius of Choki; but after a short interval he
went over to Utamaro, who was then coming into supreme mastery.

[Illustration: TOYOKUNI.]

Up to 1791, therefore (according to Friedrich Succo, "Toyokuni und Seine
Zeit," Muenchen, 1913), Toyokuni was exclusively a painter of women. But
when in the early nineties the colossal Sharaku brought out his
revolutionary actor-portraits, Toyokuni abandoned his old field and
adopted, to the extent that a smaller man could, the themes and
eventually the manner of this great genius. At first Sharaku appears to
have been an awakener rather than a guide to Toyokuni; for we find that
it was to Shunsho's style that Toyokuni first looked for a model. But
when Sharaku's great series of the Ronin bust-portraits appeared,
Toyokuni at once responded to them as the strongest influence of his
whole life and produced a number of similar portraits in a manner that
captures all the eccentricities but little of the strength or insight of
Sharaku. A more successful series, also definitely inspired by Sharaku's
Ronin busts, was a set of full-length Ronin figures which Toyokuni then
brought out. These tall monumental designs, with striking masses of
black and deep colour against grey or mica backgrounds, are perhaps the
finest actors in the whole long list of this artist's work. Though they
never surpass Shunsho's or Sharaku's supreme creations, they are
powerful conceptions, and constitute some basis for the claim of
Toyokuni's admirers that he was the third-greatest of the
actor-painters.

When, about 1794, Sharaku's career came to a sudden and tragic close,
Toyokuni turned back from actors to women. Once more he followed Utamaro
in the selection of his type, and with greater success than heretofore.
To this period belongs the really splendid triptych, "The Journey of
Narahira," representing a man on horseback and six attendants, admirably
spaced, at the foot of Fuji. In this period also must be placed the
series of pillar-prints of unusual width and shortness, very richly
printed, representing courtesans and actors together. The print of this
series which shows Ichikawa Komazo pushing back a reed blind to
surprise a half-clothed courtesan is a very fine work. These, and other
productions of this time, justify us in calling this decade the best
period of Toyokuni's activity.

[Illustration: TOYOKUNI: LADIES AND CHERRY BLOSSOMS IN THE WIND.

Right-hand sheet of a triptych. Size 15 x 10. Signed _Toyokuni ga_.
Metzgar Collection.

_Plate 47._]

But before 1800 Toyokuni had followed Utamaro in that artist's adoption
of the thin necks, enormous coiffures, and distorted bodies which not
even Utamaro was always able to handle beautifully. Toyokuni's success
was far inferior. The over-ripeness of the type required all Utamaro's
subtlety to make it attractive or significant; and Toyokuni was by no
means subtle. Therefore it was no loss when he returned to actor-prints
shortly thereafter. One print of this, his second actor-period--the
savage portrait of Matsumoto Koshiro, reproduced by Succo--is notable
and fine. But on the whole his second period shows Toyokuni as only
slightly more original than in the Sharaku period. In his portraits of
women at this time he sometimes leaned a little toward the Yeishi type,
with Yeishi's stiffness but without his distinction. Many books, from
these as well as from other years, bear witness to his industry; he was
a veritable geyser of prints of every sort.

In 1804 Toyokuni was obscurely involved in trouble with the authorities
over some of his historical prints. This was the time when Utamaro also
suffered at their hands. In 1806 Utamaro died; and Toyokuni, who had so
long leaned on the greater painter for his stimulus and inspiration,
went to pieces like a house of cards. Without a rival to emulate, he was
nothing; and we see him, a tragic figure--indisputably the most famous
master then living, who had survived the great days when he had competed
with Kiyonaga, Yeishi, and Utamaro for popular favour--now alone in a
glory which he could not sustain--a master bereft of those conditions
which had once enabled him to produce almost-masterpieces.

From this time on his work steadily deteriorated. The raw and
over-complicated colours of his designs of women made a melancholy
contrast to the "Narahira" triptych. He abandoned woman-portraiture
about 1810. His actors continued--a mere outworn formula--awkward,
angular creations, with senselessly crossed eyes, twisted necks, wry
mouths--the veriest parody on those devices which had once been employed
by Sharaku for a sublime end. Toyokuni died in 1825, a man who had
outlived himself.

Toyokuni's production had been enormous. The contemporaneous popularity
indicated by this is hard to understand unless we remember his frequent
shiftings of style and realize that at every moment he was ready to
throw off his old manner and adopt that of whatever artist most strongly
appealed to the taste of the hour. He was the most imitative of all
artists. What the mob wanted he gave them unreservedly, losing his own
integrity thereby.

Toyokuni seems to have been without real individuality or individual
view-point. He was devoid of either illusions or insight; and the true
artist must have the one or the other passionately. He drew his women
without enthusiasm and without tenderness. He conceived his actors
without the white-heat of real artistic creation. There is something
rasping about the greater part of his work; it seems full of sound and
fury, signifying nothing. It is rhetoric, not the profound and tragic
poetry of Sharaku, nor the subtle and decadent lyric strain of Utamaro.
Rarely did he make an authentic attempt to capture the beauty or wonder
or terror of life as he himself saw it. It is always the vision of other
men that he is reporting, not his own. He had no vision.

So long as he could attach himself to some productive master, catching
that master's feeling and style to a certain extent, he produced
creditable works. But when the support was withdrawn he seemed powerless
to take another step along that road. Kiyonaga's retirement, Sharaku's
downfall, Utamaro's death--each in turn cut short Toyokuni's prosperous
career in the footsteps of these masters. When left to himself he had
only one thing to revert to--the typical Toyokuni actor at its worst, a
thing of common ugliness.

No fame has tarnished more than his with the passing of time. As
Sharaku's has brightened, his has dimmed. Once he was esteemed the
greatest living print-designer; now I find that many students feel a
sense of surprise when occasionally, out of the thousands of Toyokuni's
prints, one appears that is really distinguished.

It must, however, be admitted that at certain times Toyokuni's native
brilliancy enabled him to create prints that are not surpassed by any of
his contemporaries. He did more poor work than any other artist of his
time; but such triptychs as the "Ryogoku Fireworks," in the Kiyonaga
manner, the "Bath House," in which shadows appear on the wall, the "Fan
Shop," and the "Ladies and Cherry-blossoms in the Wind," are beyond
criticism.

The best Toyokuni prints are very rare; the common ones are to be found
plentifully in every print-shop. His few finest triptychs, such as the
"Narahira," or the "Ladies and Cherry-blossoms in the Wind," of which
one sheet appears in Plate 47, are among the collector's important
treasures.

The beginner should be warned that there were, in all, at least five men
who at various times bore the name Toyokuni. No one of the successors of
the first Toyokuni ever produced work comparable with the finest work of
Toyokuni I; but it is a matter of great difficulty, not yet by any means
wholly clear, to distinguish between the late inferior work of Toyokuni
I and the work of several of the succeeding Toyokunis. One simple
indication may be of service to the inexperienced collector: If the
Toyokuni signature is in a red oval or cartouch, it is not by the first
master. This statement cannot, however, be reversed, for the later
Toyokunis often signed without the cartouch.


TOYOHIRO.

_A Group of Ladies._

      O careless passer--O look deep!
    These forms from near the sea of sleep
    Come hither; on each forehead gleams
    The phosphorescent spray of dreams.
    They have sailed in from lonely seas
    Cloaked in a haze of mysteries;
    And hither by a lord are led
    Who snared them, pale himself with dread,
    Upon the very shores of sleep.
    O careless passer-by, look deep!

Utagawa Toyohiro, sometimes also called Ichiriusai, was born in 1773; he
was a brother, fellow-student, and probably pupil of Toyokuni. It is
well known that about 1800 these two artists collaborated to some
extent. Toyohiro's own chief work--landscapes, book-illustrations not
unlike Hokusai's, and figures of women--was done between 1795 and 1820;
he died in the year 1828.

[Illustration: TOYOHIRO.]

Fate has been unkind to him in associating him with a man tremendously
more productive and incomparably more popular in his own day than
himself. Even to the present time, the reputation of Toyokuni still
overshadows that of his brother. But the close student of Toyohiro's
work will probably come to the conclusion that this present difference
in fame is due less to difference in merit than to the fact that
Toyokuni was enormously prolific, while Toyohiro's work was scanty. The
contemporaneous popularity may be ascribed to the ability of Toyokuni to
shift and veer with every change in the public taste, while Toyohiro was
unable or unwilling to move with these fluctuating winds. It is reported
that a serious breach occurred between the brothers because of
Toyohiro's refusal to produce actor-prints as the popular taste
demanded. His work is, however, coming to be recognized as of a quality
at least equal to his brother's, and in some respects finer and more
truly the expression of a rare sense of beauty.

We may conjecture that Toyohiro inherited two things from his first
teacher Toyoharu. One was a leaning toward landscape drawing. The other
was a certain distinction and shy aloofness that marked the older
master.

All Toyohiro's work has an aristocratic touch, a fine subtlety of curve
and colour, that contrast markedly with the frequently blaring
compositions of Toyokuni. He seldom drew actors or courtesans; most of
his figures are ladies of birth and breeding. The beautiful spots of
black which are important elements in the majority of his compositions
are handled with a keen sense of contrast that not even Kiyonaga's
surpassed. His brushwork is firm and delicate, but not so sparkling with
vitality as that of some of his predecessors. His colours are soft, his
figures wonderfully graceful; the impression he produces upon one is
that of a subtle and beauty-hungry spirit, detached from the mob by a
refinement beyond their comprehension, driven on by a consuming passion,
devoted to the quest of a perfection he was able to project but not to
realize.

In style, he draws considerably upon Toyokuni's early Utamaro manner;
but in spirit he is nearer to Yeishi and Utamaro himself, both of whom
must have influenced him somewhat. Not even the work of Yeishi is so
saturated with the wistfulness for beauty, the sense of vanishing
loveliness, the homesickness for regions of otherwhere. One of his
triptychs, the "Daimyo's Kite Party," reproduced in Plate 48, so
embodies these qualities that it is worthy of special attention.

[Illustration: TOYOHIRO: A DAIMYO'S KITE-PARTY.

Triptych. Each sheet size 15 x 10. Signed _Toyohiro ga_.

_Plate 48._]

In a landscape of green hills, where a circle of low slopes encloses a
space of level ground, stands, on the rising edge of that natural
amphitheatre, a group of noble ladies and children in the soft
brightness of festal attire--richly decorated pink, black, white,
translucent heliotrope. Below and behind them boys are manoeuvring a
kite, and older men direct briskly. The ladies for whom this simple and
charming pastime is arranged do not seem wholly intent upon it. Their
tall slender figures move as if in abstraction, an isolated group in the
foreground. One grey cherry-tree, with gnarled branches etched against a
clear sky, stands in their midst, bare except for the pink of earliest
blossoms; and the pale green of the more distant encircling hills is
here and there touched with the same luminous flowers.

Across this landscape the slender figures move in slow procession. Their
robes sway about them slowly. These sweeping draperies, which Harunobu
would have charged with peace and solemnity, are here touched with the
tension of more unquiet curves, restless, troubled with some element of
torture in their beauty. These are the lines of the branch and of the
wave, bent by the strain of hidden and conflicting forces. The clear
festive brightness of pink cherry-blossoms with the light of spring
shining through them serves but to accentuate the faint melancholy of
the trailing figures on whom lies a wistfulness that no spring can
satisfy. They linger, exquisitely aimless; beautiful, and weary for a
yet-unattained beauty; happy, but grave with the shadow of fleeting
happiness; sad, though reconciled by the knowledge that beauty is half
sadness. They have walked with expectant steps to the edge of the world;
and now they pace, delicately wondering, not far from the abyss where
there is nothing. Autumn will always be to them cold and unkindred; yet
in the flush of the spring their thoughts will turn toward death and
autumn. One cannot imagine them wholly joyous. They seem haunted by a
nostalgia for remote delights, unearthly music, secret and dimly
remembered gardens. Strange, late, exotic flowers are these, whom a
pensiveness not known to simpler and sturdier natures disturbs with
futile dreams.

A similar feeling is so often repeated in Toyohiro's work that I venture
to regard it as the keynote of his genius.

Toyohiro's landscapes are without notable beauty. He had a habit of
cutting across the middle of his picture with wide streaks of white
mist--an unpleasant device adopted to produce the effect of distance. He
is, however, an historical link of great importance between his master,
Toyoharu, and his pupil, Hiroshige, the greatest of all landscape
painters. As a conduit of landscape painting at a time when the Ukioye
School was little given to this as a separate study, Toyohiro's work in
this field may well engage our attention; but one suspects that it is
the fame of his great pupil's landscapes rather than the intrinsic merit
of his own that has given his their prominence.

Toyohiro produced a few pillar-prints of birds which have great
distinction; an almost classic feeling marks some of them.

Toyohiro's prints are not numerous; Toyokuni's outnumber his twenty to
one. His pillar-prints are very rare; his triptychs are generally
notable. It is necessary to add, however, that poor impressions of his
work, printed in poor colours, are more common than any other kind.




VII

THE FIFTH PERIOD:
THE DOWNFALL

FROM THE
DEATH OF UTAMARO
TO THE
DEATH OF HIROSHIGE
(1806-1858)




CHAPTER VII

THE FIFTH PERIOD: THE DOWNFALL

FROM THE DEATH OF UTAMARO TO THE DEATH OF HIROSHIGE (1806-1858)


When Utamaro died, in 1806, the great days of the figure-print were
ended. There were to be no more Harunobus or Kiyonagas or Sharakus--only
a horde of little men whose work retained few traces of the earlier
greatness. And our serious interest in the art as a whole must end here.
Were it not for the superb renaissance of landscape which this period
includes, side by side with the decay of figure-designing, it would be
my choice to mark this date as the end of our history.

The causes of the degradation of prints in this period appear to have
been of several natures. For one, the accidents that regulate the birth
of geniuses operated unkindly, and few artists of first-rate talent came
to take the places of the dead masters. Further, the colour-print had
gone somewhat out of fashion among its original public, and the people
who now bought were chiefly of a lower and more ignorant class than the
purchasers of Kiyonaga's day. To the less exacting but eager demands of
this class the publishers catered with coarser designs, cruder colours,
and more careless printing. Now, in literal truth, the print-designer
was the artisan; and amid the vast flood of commonplace productions of
the time it is difficult to search out those few works that have a claim
to beauty.

It is probable that a general loss in refinement of taste marked the
epoch and was reflected in the prints. The uncouth flaring designs of
the textiles, the gross overladen coiffures, the excess of decoration
that lay like a blight over all the instruments of life at this time,
naturally had their influence upon the standards of the artist.

Furthermore, the movement toward realism here reached its climax.
Dominated by Hokusai's earlier work, the artists abandoned the old
traditional devotion to stylistic restraint and went madly in chase of a
distorted kind of literal truth that had no relation to beauty. Men who
were too impotent to create visions nobly and too dull to observe
reality keenly attempted to conceal their double weakness by a double
evasion--spoiling what claim their work had to idealistic imagination by
touches of crude realism, and ruining it as realism by the most
grotesque aberrations of fancy. In the sphere of erotic prints this was
characteristically and repellently manifest. Certain examples of this
type, produced in the first quarter of the nineteenth century, surpass
in grossness even the most studied of European specimens. In landscape
alone has the period something of the highest charm to offer us.


THE SCHOOL OF TOYOKUNI.

As we have seen, Toyokuni's career ended anything but brilliantly.
Unfortunately his numerous followers appear to have been influenced more
by his final work than by the production of his better days. I do not
regard it as profitable to wade, as some writers have done, through this
wearying period of degenerate production and tabulate every fact
obtainable about every insignificant artist with the same care that one
would bestow upon Kiyonaga. I shall therefore be content to note down
only the most salient features of this epoch of disintegration.

Following Toyokuni, at least four men used the name made famous by him.
The first of these, Toyokuni II, was that same Toyokuni Gosotei of whom
we shall treat under the heading of Landscape. His use of the name
Toyokuni appears to have been between the years 1825 and 1835.

Toyokuni III was better known as Kunisada I; for though he was born in
1786 and lived until 1865, he did not adopt the name of Toyokuni until
about 1844. He added to our confusion by the fact that he signed himself
"Toyokuni" or "Toyokuni II," never recognizing the claims of the real
Toyokuni II to the name. Most frequently Kunisada's Toyokuni signature
is enclosed in a long red cartouch, a device never used by Toyokuni I.
This very undistinguished artist was one of the most prolific producers
of the school. All that meaningless complexity of design, coarseness of
colour, and carelessness of printing which we associate with the final
ruin of the art of colour-prints finds full expression in him. Every
tourist returning from Japan brings back dozens of crudely coloured
prints by him or by the members of his school, under the misapprehension
that these are the famous and valuable Japanese prints of which he has
vaguely heard. The only figure work of Kunisada's that I am able to
recall with any pleasure is his really notable Memorial Portrait of
Hiroshige, a dignified and impressive print. The few landscapes he
produced are of much greater beauty than his figures, and one is
inclined to wish that he had done more in this field and less in the
other.

[Illustration: KUNISADA.]

TOYOKUNI IV was also known as Kunisada II and as Kunimasa II. Born 1833,
he died 1880. His prints, largely executed in cheap analine colours, set
one's teeth on edge with some of the most shrieking discords that I have
ever encountered. There exists an unfortunate collector who proudly
brought back from Japan one hundred and nineteen triptychs by this
artist.

TOYOKUNI V was also called Kunisada III and Kunimasa III. His work was
worthless.

KUNIMASA I (1772-1810) was an exceedingly able pupil of Toyokuni, who
was influenced by Sharaku. Some of his work is very fine; he stands out
as one of the few notable designers of this group.

KUNINAGA, who died in 1804, was a rare pupil of Toyokuni. His work is
pleasant, though it has no great distinction; but it is far more
attractive than the work of most of these men, for the reason that he
had the good luck to die before the period of general disintegration
began. The Spaulding Collection contains a fine diptych by him, in black
and several shades of yellow, in the early style of Toyokuni.

KUNIMITSU was also an early pupil of Toyokuni. His work is agreeable but
not notable.

From the vast number of minor followers of the Toyokuni tradition, I
select the following as the most common: KUNIYASU I, KUNIYASU II,
TOYOKIYO, TOYOHIRO II, KUNIFUSA, KUNIHIRO, KUNITANE, KUNIKATSU,
KUNIHISA, KUNITERA, KUNITERU, KUNIKANE I, KUNIKANE II, KUNITAKA,
KUNIMUNE, KUNIHIKO, KUNITOKI, KUNIYUKI, KUNITSUMA, KUNIKIYO, KUNIHANA,
KUNITOHISA, KUNIMICHI I, KUNIMICHI II, KUNIAO I, KUNIAO II, KUNITORA,
KUNITAKI, KUNITSUGI I, KUNITSUGI II, KUNITADA, KUNINOBU II, KUNIAKI,
KIYOKUNI, KUNIMARU I, KUNIMARU II, KUNICHIKA, CHIKASHIGE, YOSHITAKI,
YOSHITSURU, YOSHIUME, YOSHITSUNA, YOSHISATO, YOSHIFUJI, YOSHIKAGE,
YOSHIKUNI, YOSHICHIKA, YOSHIKAZU, YOSHIHARU, SHUNBENI, YOSHITOMI,
YOSHIFUSA, SUGAKUDO, SENCHO, TOMINOBU.

CHIKAMARO is said to be identical with KIOSAI, whose work sometimes
resembles Hokusai's. Born in 1831, he died very late in the century. He
was a vigorous designer--perhaps the best of all the later men. His
crow pictures are famous.

[Illustration: KIKUGAWA YEIZAN.]

KIKUGAWA YEIZAN, a prolific and undistinguished designer of the first
quarter of the century, was a late rival and imitator of Utamaro. He
eventually sank even to imitating Kunisada. The flowing draperies of
some of his prints of women are at first sight attractive to eyes not
accustomed to the finest works in this field; but the complete banality
of Yeizan's powers becomes manifest on more prolonged acquaintance, and
any trace of charm disappears.


FOLLOWERS OF THE TORII SCHOOL.

Here may be mentioned those artists in whom the once-great Torii School
came to its inglorious end.

KIYOMINE, the fifth head of the school, sometimes signed himself
Kiyomitsu; his work is easily distinguishable from that of the first
Kiyomitsu. He studied under Kiyonaga, and later adopted a style somewhat
like that of Toyokuni. His work is graceful, but not distinguished.
Prints by him are rather rare. He died in 1868.

KIYOFUSA, who died as late as 1892, was the sixth Torii. He also called
himself Kiyomitsu III and Kiyosada II. Other late members of this
school were: KIYOMOTO II, KIYOYASU, KIYOTADA II, KIYOTADA III, KIYOSADA
I.


THE OSAKA SCHOOL.

In the first half of the nineteenth century there grew into importance
in the city of Osaka a group of designers who constituted an exception
to the statement made earlier in this book--that the art of
colour-printing was exclusively a Yedo art. Hokusai is known to have
visited Osaka in 1818; and possibly it was his influence that encouraged
the movement. At any rate, a large number of the Osaka group were pupils
of Hokusai or followers of his manner.

The school thus entered into real activity at a date when the art was
far gone in its decline; and its designs produced no arresting effect.
Most of the work of these men is crude. Yet when we look at the products
of the second quarter of the century in Yedo, we may very possibly feel
that the Osaka output was at least no worse. It included chiefly
theatrical portraits, all done with a peculiar hardness of line and cold
brilliance of colour, and printed as a rule very skilfully. These by no
means approach the works of Shunsho, Shunyei, and Sharaku, after which
they were obviously patterned, nor even the works of Toyokuni; but the
hard treatment so characteristic of them gives a certain dignity of
effect which Kunisada's flowing and formless earthquakes of draperies
generally lack.

The school does not call for elaborate treatment; the following men may
be mentioned as among the best known: HOKUSHU, HASEGAWA SADANOBU,
SADAKAGE, KAGETOSHI, SADAFUSA, SADATORA, SADAMASA, SADAMASU, SADAHIRO,
SADAYOSHI, ASHIKUNI, ASHIYUKI, HIROSADA, SHUNSHI, HORAI SHUNSHO II,
HOKUMIO, HANZAN, YOSHIIKU, and RANKO. Others will be mentioned later as
pupils of Hokusai or as landscape-painters.


THE RENAISSANCE OF LANDSCAPE.

Like a beautiful island in the midst of a sea of wrecks, the landscape
prints of the first half of the nineteenth century stand apart from the
general debasement of print-designing. The great days of the
figure-print were over; but now, into an art filled with the second-rate
followers of Utamaro and Toyokuni, came the fresh and brilliant
landscape genius of Hokusai and Hiroshige. Their work did not share in
the general decline; it must be regarded as a new shoot sent up by the
roots of a tree whose main trunk had already fallen into irreparable
decay.

Landscape-prints were not a new thing; Utamaro and Toyohiro had already
produced fine work of this nature, and interesting examples are to be
found as we look backward through the work of Toyoharu, Shigemasa,
Kiyonobu, and Masanobu--back, in fact, almost to the beginning of the
art. But these earlier landscapes were, upon the whole, of subordinate
importance; beside the figure-prints of the earlier masters, they seem
crude and rudimentary. Previous to Hokusai and Hiroshige, they were
chiefly of topographical, not of aesthetic, intention and interest. In
the nineteenth century their importance became paramount.

"Japanese colour-prints devoted to landscape," writes Mr. Strange, "form
a class apart in the art of the world. There is nothing else like them;
neither in the highly idealistic and often lovely abstractions of the
aristocratic painters of Japan, nor in the more imitative and, it must
be said, more meaningless transcripts from nature, of European artists.
The colour-print, as executed by the best men of the Japanese popular
school, occupies an intermediate place; perhaps thus furnishing a reason
why we Westerners so easily appreciate it. Its imagery and sentiment are
elementary in the eyes of the native critics of Japanese high art. Its
attempts at realism are in his eyes mere evidence of vulgarity. On the
other hand these very qualities endear it to us. We can understand the
first, without the long training in symbolism which is the essential of
refinement to an educated man of the extreme East. And the other
characteristic forms, in our eyes, a leading recommendation. In short,
the landscapes of artists such as Hiroshige approach more nearly to our
own standards, and are thus more easily acceptable to us than anything
else in the pictorial arts of China and Japan; while they have all the
fascination of a strange technique, a bold and undaunted convention, and
a superb excellence of composition not too remote in principle from our
own."


HOKUSAI.

      Because thou wast marvellous of eye, magic of fancy, lithe of hand,
    Because thou didst play o'er many a gulf where common mortals
        dizzy stand,
    Because no thing in earth or sky escaped the pryings of thine art,
    I call thee, who wast master of all, the master with the monkey's heart.

      Where in the street the drunkards roll--where in the ring
        the wrestlers sway,
    Where rustics pound the harvest rice, or fishers sail, or abbots pray,
    In rocky gorge, or lowland field, or winter heights of mountain air,
    Wherever man or beast or bird or flower finds place--yea, everywhere
    Thou standest, as I fancy, rapt in the live play of mass and line,
    Curiously noting every poise; and in that ugly head of thine
    Storing it with unsated fierce passion for life's minutest part,
    Some day to use infallibly--O master with the monkey's heart!

      Where Kanazawa's thundering shores behold the mounded waters rave,
    And Fuji looms above the plain, and the plain slopes to meet the wave,
    There didst thou from the trembling sands unleash thy soul in sudden flight
    To soar above the whirling waste with awe and wonder and delight.
    Thou sawest the giant tumult poured; each slope and chasm of cloven brine
    Called thee; and from the scattered rout one vision did thy sight divine,
    One heaven-affronting whelming wave in which all common waves have part--
    A billow from the wrath of God--O monkey with a master's heart!

      What mind shall span thee? Who shall praise or blame thy
        world-embracing sight
    Whose harvest was each rock and wraith, each form of loathing or of light?
    Though we should puzzle all our days, we could not know thee as thou art,
    Nor where the seer of vision ends, nor where begins the monkey's heart.

Until rather recently Hokusai was, for European spectators, as isolated
and commanding a figure in the domain of Japanese art as Fuji is in the
Japanese landscape. He was regarded as the one culminating and
all-inclusive genius among Japanese painters and print-designers. At
precisely the same time, he was esteemed by Japanese connoisseurs to be
a prolific but vulgar artisan, whose mere craftsman-dexterity could not
compensate for his lack of lofty feeling and poetic vision.

It is not necessary to quarrel with either of these views. Almost every
student of Hokusai passes through three stages. At first, he is
overwhelmed by Hokusai's technical skill and imaginative brilliance, and
regards him as unrivalled. Deeper experience brings him the conviction
that much of this magical dexterity is somewhat in the nature of a
juggler's antics in a vaudeville, and that his first burst of enthusiasm
was not wholly warranted. Then, finally, he comes to perceive that there
are qualities in Hokusai's work which, in spite of so much that is
vulgar, justly entitle this artist to his high fame.

[Illustration: HOKUSAI.]

One classes Hokusai as a landscape-artist; yet his work was by no means
confined to landscape. He pictured, as M. Theodore Duret wrote,
"everything to be seen by the eye or invented by the brain of a
Japanese." His "Mangwa," that vast twelve-volume collection of
drawings, includes sketches of a whole world of varied scenes and
objects and people. The bulk of his production was colossal--dozens of
designs a day throughout most of his eighty-nine years!

His figures are drawn with a swift and sure realism that is generally
tinged with humour and often with vulgarity. His vigorous power of
observing and recording faces and attitudes is almost unparalleled.
Fantasy, whimsical conceits, irony, grotesqueness animate them; always
they have superabundant life. The play of his brush is miraculous.

His landscapes are his greatest works. In the best of these he shakes
off his trifling mood, and, as in Plate 51, creates designs whose stark
brilliance and originality of composition is unsurpassed. And at least
once, in the noblest of his prints--the rare and monumental series of
"The Imagery of the Poets"--he achieves a high seriousness that will
always be impressive.

[Illustration: HOKUSAI: FUJI, SEEN ACROSS THE TAMA RIVER, PROVINCE OF
MUSASHI.

One of the Series "Thirty-six Views of Fuji." Size 101/2 x 15. Signed
_Hokusai I-itsu, hitsu_.

_Plate 49._]

Hokusai was born in 1760, the son of a mirror-maker. He lived to the age
of eighty-nine years--a long life, crowded with privation that wins our
sympathy, and with incessant devotion to his art. When in his seventies,
he said: "Ever since the age of six years I have felt the impulse to
draw the forms of objects. Up to the age of fifty years I made a great
number of drawings; but I am dissatisfied with everything that I created
prior to my seventieth year. At the age of seventy-three I, for the
first time, began to grasp the true forms and nature of birds, fishes,
and plants. It follows that at the age of eighty I shall have made
still greater progress; at ninety I shall be able to create all objects;
at a hundred I shall certainly have attained to still higher,
unimaginable power; and when I finally reach my one hundred and tenth
year, every line, every dot will live with an intense life. I invite
those who are going to live as long as I to convince themselves whether
I shall keep my word. Written at the age of seventy-five years by me,
formerly Hokusai, now called the Old Man Mad with Painting." His dying
words were: "If the gods had given me only ten years more--only five
years more--I could have become a really great painter!"

Hokusai's education began as an apprentice to a wood-engraver, a
valuable experience for his later career. At the age of eighteen he
entered the studio of Shunsho and adopted the name of Shunro. Under this
name he produced actors in the orthodox Shunsho manner and melodramatic
illustrations for the popular romances of the day. About 1786 a quarrel
with Shunsho, due to the pupil's insubordination, led to Hokusai's
expulsion, and he thereupon launched out for himself, to begin his long
life of poverty and madly enthusiastic labour.

His work may be divided roughly into three periods. In the first he
followed the traditions of Shunsho, Shunyei, Utamaro, and others of his
contemporaries, with great skill but no special originality. His
countless book-illustrations of this time were all conceived with lively
fancy and vigour; but perhaps the finest works of this, his conventional
period, are the very wide prints and surimono in which, against a
delicately suggested landscape, move extraordinarily graceful women's
figures not unlike those of Utamaro. Already he was a master of drawing;
but he kept incessantly at his studies under many teachers, learning,
among other things, European perspective from Shiba Kokan. His work was
done in this and the following periods under a dozen different names, of
which Sori, Kako, Shunro, and Taito are the most important.

In 1812 began his second or realistic period, with the publication of
the first book of his fifteen-volume series of drawings, the "Mangwa."
In this epoch he turned from the styles of his predecessors and launched
into a hitherto unknown journalistic realism. With a lively sense of the
comic and the burlesque, and an insatiable interest in the homeliest
details of life, he threw overboard all formal stylistic quality and set
sail on a riotous voyage of naturalistic discovery.

The "Mangwa," which may serve as a type of his whole production in this
realistic period, is praised sometimes as his greatest work. In it we
shall find not only his most striking _tours-de-force_ as a draughtsman
but also the key to his weakness. All existence thrilled him as it did
Walt Whitman; and each object on which he turned his eyes stirred him
with the desire to record it in his pages. Day after day he worked like
a madman, throwing off his sketches of man, beast, and phantom, of rock,
river, and sea, in endless profusion and with inexhaustible ingenuity.
And though we grant our admiration to the enthusiasm, sharp vision, and
clever draughtsmanship of these sheets, we may still find in this
undiscriminating passion a quality incompatible with the highest
reaches of artistic greatness. There is something vulgar, childish,
under-developed in the mental attitude revealed; it seems a coarse greed
for all experience, unlighted by the power to judge and reject, or by
any consciousness of the ranks and hierarchies of beauty. It is a vast
and dull enthusiasm; a celebration of the victory of the will to live
over the will to perfect; a triumph of meaningless sensation over the
just judgments of the discriminating mind. All shapes seem equally
interesting and beautiful to it--all smells equally sweet. As Pater
writes of Balzac--a man who was in many ways not unlike Hokusai--this
artist "had an excess of curiosity--curiosity not duly tempered with the
desire of beauty."

I can never look through the "Mangwa" without a sense of distressing
chaos and a longing for the purer beauties which more finely organized
artists have evoked from the heterogeneous welter of the seen world. But
just this welter is at this time Hokusai's theme. "A debauch of
sketches," Fenollosa calls it. In this work Hokusai stands beside
Harunobu exactly as Whitman stands beside Keats--a more interesting mind
but a far less perfect artist.

"Hokusai is incomparable," writes the commentator who furnished the
introduction to one of his books. "While all his predecessors were more
or less slaves to classical tradition and inherited rules, he alone
emancipated his brush from all such fetters, and drew according to the
dictates of his heart." True: and this was his curse. No man has ever
lived with heart profound and subtle enough for such emancipation. Nor
have the supreme artists ever attempted it. In Hokusai's case this
upstart-abandoning of all tradition was an error from which he was able
later to retrieve himself; but so great was the impression produced by
his vulgarities on the mob that even to this day popular Japanese art
has remained under the cloud of it.

Hokusai himself did recover. In his third period, the stylistic one, the
greatness that was in him transcended his petty interest in the trivial
idiosyncrasies of seen things, and he created those visions which
constitute his lasting glory. Between 1823 and 1830 he issued those
series, "The Thirty-six Views of Fuji," "The Bridges," "The Waterfalls,"
"The Loocho Islands," and "The Imagery of the Poets," in which we hail
him as master. No longer the dupe of realism, he brings us his dreams.

"The Thirty-six Views of Fuji" stands as one of his two greatest works.
Here, in the forty-six plates that constitute the main series and the
supplement, the same motive is treated recurrently, but with infinite
variety. He depicts Fuji, the sacred mountain, in storm and calm, in
mist and sunlight--sometimes dominating the colossally empty frame of
the design, sometimes receding to a mere speck in the distance; and
around the noble peak beat the waves of the sea and the foam of the
clouds and the restless stream of human life, in a great epic of
infinite diversity and profound unity.

[Illustration: HOKUSAI: FUJI, SEEN FROM THE PASS OF MISHIMA, PROVINCE OF
KAHI.

One of the Series "Thirty-six Views of Fuji." Size 101/2 x 15. Signed
_Saki no Hokusai I-itsu, hitsu_.

_Plate 50._]

In this series his trivial realism is forgotten, or employed only in
just subordination. Throwing aside his earlier vulgar absorption in the
minutiae of existence, he concentrated his vision on one conception, one
chosen impression, so sharply and personally seen that he evoked a new
style in landscape. Much it borrowed from tradition; but the flavour was
Hokusai's. These designs are, primarily, magnificent studies in linear
composition. The great sweep of Fuji's slope is related to the rhythm of
every other line in the picture. And the line-dominance is preserved by
the use of the simplest and most original of colour-schemes--green,
blue, and brown--broadly laid on in large masses. A highly decorative
quality and great boldness are the result.

The justly famous "Wave" belongs to this series. Here for the first time
in our survey of the prints do we find elemental fury depicted with
grandiose eloquence. In the majestic composition of the "Great Tree"
(Plate 50) the calm sublimity of nature and the infinitely minute,
vermin-like aspect of man is superbly expressed. In the "Tama River"
(Plate 49) Hokusai gives us a sweep of wave and shore, mist and
mountain, that his great predecessors, the landscape-painters of Sung
days in China, might have envied. In all these prints he relates man and
nature to each other with a vividness and dramatic power foreign to his
great rival Hiroshige.

The world which Hokusai pictures in this series is not the real world,
but Hokusai's highly personal translation of it into terms of superb
imagination. A thousand memory-stored impressions combine to make the
sharp composite of each design; and it is to use the term in its
technical Platonic sense, the Idea of the scene that he flashes before
us. Herein lies the abnormal vitality that emanates from these pictures.
"We feel," says Mr. Binyon, "that the world holds more wonders than we
dreamed of, sources of power and exhilaration which Hokusai has
revealed, and which we may go and discover for ourselves."

Hokusai's other great work was a series of ten upright prints of very
large size, "The Imagery of the Poets." It returns in feeling, though
not in technique, to the style of the classic masters; and remains,
because of its high seriousness of mood and its sweeping magnificence of
composition, at the very top of all Hokusai's work. Of all his thousands
of designs, the one that is supreme is probably the print of this set
which depicts the famous Chinese poet Li Peh beside the chasm and
cascade of Luh.

Even his latest years were crowded with continued efforts. In 1849, at
the age of eighty-nine years, he died.

Fine and well-preserved Hokusai prints are not common. His "Poets" and
really brilliant impressions of his "Thirty-six Fuji" are very rare,
particularly the former. Poor impressions of the latter are numerous.
Practically all of Hokusai's most famous prints have been reproduced,
and the collector must be on his guard against these worthless sheets.
One of the best-known judges in Europe was recently deceived by a
fraudulent set of the "Poets." Hokusai's fine bird-and-flower designs
and his large early surimono are rare; as also are good copies of his
famous books, the "Mangwa" and the "One Hundred Views of Fuji." Numerous
late blurred impressions of these are extant, and should be avoided. His
other books are not uncommon.

[Illustration: HOKUSAI: THE MONKEY BRIDGE--TWILIGHT AND RISING MOON.

Size 141/2 x 61/2. Signed _Hokusai ga_.

_Plate 51._]


PUPILS AND FOLLOWERS OF HOKUSAI.

Hokusai had many pupils; no one of them equalled the landscape work of
the master, though several of them produced designs of great interest.
As a body they were distinguished for their matchless work in the field
of surimono.

The surimono was a type of print not sold in the market; it was made
upon special order of private individuals for use as a festival-greeting,
an invitation, a congratulatory memorial, or an announcement. Its size
was generally small, about five or six inches square; printed on very
soft thick paper, it displayed the utmost complexity of the technique of
colour-printing. The number of blocks was lavishly multiplied; the most
subtle gradations of colour were contrived; and the effect was
heightened by every variety of gauffrage, gold, silver, and bronze
powders, and mother-of-pearl dust. Yet in spite of all this effort, the
surimono is, in the opinion of many collectors, not as a rule very
important as a work of art. In the ordinary surimono the medium employed
has outstripped the motive expressed, and what should have been the
means has become the sole end. Nevertheless they are unrivalled as
specimens of workmanship and printing, and the best of them are highly
treasured. Some of Hokusai's pupils excelled their master in this form.

[Illustration: GAKUTEI.]

GAKUTEI, who also signed himself Gogaku, produced perhaps the finest
surimono of any that we know. His work in this field was voluminous and
distinguished. He also issued a few exceedingly decorative landscapes.

HOKKEI stands beside Gakutei as a brilliant producer of surimono,
closely in the manner of Hokusai. Some of his landscapes, printed in
blue and green, have a curious charm and individuality.

HOKUJU produced landscapes in a strange semi-European style, with
angular mountains and unusual cloud effects.

[Illustration: HOKKEI.]

YANAGAWA SHIGENOBU, the son-in-law of Hokusai, copied his master
closely; some of his work has great charm. According to some authorities
he is the same person to whom Hokusai gave his discarded name,
KATSUSHIKA TAITO. Certain prints signed Taito are still somewhat in
doubt, notably the well-known leaping fish and the moon-and-bridge
scene, both from the "Harimaze Han"; Mr. Happer has brought forward
evidence that these are by Taito, but many authorities still hold to the
idea that they are the work of Hokusai under his early name. Among the
numberless Hokusai pupils may be named: HOKUBA, HOKUGA, NIHO, SHIGEYAMA,
GOKEI, SHINSAI, ISAI, HOKUUN, HOKUYEI, HOKUTEI, HOKUTAI, HOKUSUI,
TAIGAKU, RENSHI, JUZAN, YASUMICHI, BOKUSEN, KEIJU, RYUSAI, GANGAKUSAI,
KEIRI, HOKUYO.


HIROSHIGE.

      As merchantmen from Eastern Isles
    In caravels of purple came,
    With freight that alien heart beguiles,
    Incense and cloths of woven flame,

      So down the gulfs of elder time
    Thy glorious pinions bear to me
    Mad treasure from the unknown clime
    Of worlds beyond the Western Sea.

      Now in my bay the sails are furled.
    But I, who guess their native skies,
    Henceforth must roam that golden world,
    Where strange winds whisper and strange scents rise.--

          Immortal Fuji's snowy crown--
        Wide seas with sky of amethyst--
        A street where torrents thunder down--
        Branches that toss against the mist--
        Smooth hills and hill-girt plains where run
        Streams through the rice-fields steeped in heat--
        Pines gnarled above a sunken sun--
        Cold heights where cloud and mountain meet.

      Now visions enter to my breast
    That from thy passion won their birth,
    When like a bride in radiance dressed
    Before thee glowed the summers of earth.

      What magic gave thee to behold
    This fairness, secret from our sight,
    Where morning walks the world in gold,
    Or seas turn grey with coming night?

      For thee, as when the South Winds blow.
    Lands burst to bloom. On every shore
    Where beauty dwells thou didst bestow
    A perilous mortal beauty more.

          Twilight and morn on Biwa's breast--
        Harima's sands and lordly pines--
        White Hira-mountain's winter crest--
        The low red dusk round Yedo shrines--
        The moon beneath the Monkey Bridge--
        The Poisoned River's brooding gloom--
        Rose-dawn on some Tokaido ridge--
        Pale water-worlds of lotus bloom.

      Our toiling race is with the day
    Wearied, and restless with the night,--
    Unpausing, on its tombward way,
    For fear or wonder or delight,--

      Unwatchful, mid the sombre things
    That mesh us in a vain employ,
    For peace that half of heaven brings,
    For beauty that is wholly joy.

      Lover for whom the world was wide!
    Down lighted pathways thou didst move,
    Where hills and seas and cities hide
    So much for weary men to love.--

          The mist of cherry-trees in spring--
        Ships sleeping on some bright lagoon--
        A swallow's dusky sweeping wing--
        Steep Ishiyama's autumn moon--
        The changing marvels of faint rain--
        The foam that hides the torrent's stream--
        The eagle o'er the snowy plain--
        Sea-twilights haunted as a dream.

      Speaking, thou laidst thy brush aside--
    "On a long journey I repair--
    Regions beyond the Western Tide--
    To view the wonderful landscapes there."

      Yet, at Adzuma, loosed from all
    Thy mortal bonds, made free to roam,
    Methinks thou couldst not break the thral
    That held thee to thy human home.

      Surely no heaven could harbour thee,
    Nor other world of keener bliss,
    Who didst with such deep constancy
    Worship the loveliness of this.

          Moon-flooded throngs in Yedo streets--
        Dawn quickened travellers on their road--
        Lone ocean-fronting hill retreats--
        An Oiran's perilous-sweet abode--
        A mighty Buddha by the sea
        Where all the wondering pilgrims meet--
        Immortal Fuji, changelessly
        Watching the world around her feet.

[Illustration: HIROSHIGE: HOMING GEESE AT KATADA--TWILIGHT.

One of the Series "Eight Famous Views of Lake Biwa." Size 9 x 131/2.
Signed _Hiroshige ga_.

_Plate 52._]

[Illustration: HIROSHIGE.]

Hiroshige takes rank by unanimous consent as the foremost landscape
artist produced by the Ukioye School. His prints, known to every one,
have been more greatly admired in Western lands than the prints of any
other artist except Hokusai. Hokusai's main concern was with the
fundamental architecture of landscape; he outlined the structure of
mountains, rocks, rivers, waves, and bridges with a hard and brilliant
sharpness; but Hiroshige, less rigid in his treatment, seems chiefly
intent upon the more delicate and transitory appearances of cloud and
mist, rain and snow, sunrise and dusk, that give to a landscape at each
moment so much of its specific character. These atmospheric effects of
his are justly famous. Few landscape painters of any race have succeeded
in rendering so finely the mood of a scene. No one can be insensible to
the delicate peace and sweetness of a twilight like that of Plate 52, or
the vigorous life of wide sea spaces in Plate 53, or the heavy hush of
nightfall over the snow-covered village of Plate 54. Even more
impressive are the luminous and solemn dusk on the Sumida River (Plate
55) and the mystery of the print called "The Bow-Moon" which appears as
the frontispiece.

_The Bow-Moon._

      Where the torrent leaps and falls,
    And the hanging cliffs look down,
    Cloven grey and ruddy walls
    Each with ragged forest-crown,

      There across the chasmed deep
    Spans a gossamer bridge on high;
    And below, from gulfs of sleep,
    Mounts the Bow-Moon up the sky.

      Blue dusk, thickening whence she rose.
    Her abysses veils; above
    Moves she into twilight's close
    As faint strains of music move.

      On the eastern slope her feet,
    White, in tranced ecstasy,
    Climb, a ghost of heaven so sweet
    That the spent day cannot die.

      Walled by crags on either side
    Glimmers forth her figure wan,
    Straying like some lonely bride
    Through the halls of Kubla Khan.

      Pilgrim of the riven deep!
    Whereso'er thy lover lie,
    Sleep to him is troubled sleep
    While his Bow-Moon haunts the sky.

Hiroshige's great strength lay in his genius for strikingly effective
composition, and in the skill with which he adapted his designs to the
limitations of the colour-print technique. He reduced the pictured scene
to a few simple elements of a highly decorative character, and managed
to make them so symbolic and suggestive that we do not miss the
multitude of details which he purposely omits. A strongly dominant unity
of impression is the result. His finest designs convey a sense of
personal feeling that even the Barbizon artists at their best do not
surpass. With the limited resources of the wood block, he achieved
subtle renderings of distance, aerial perspective, atmosphere, and
light; and the poetic quality of his designs has endeared him to
generations of print-lovers in a way more personal than is the case with
any other artist. His work will stand beside the "Liber Studiorum" of
Turner; it remains perhaps the most complete and magnificent landscape
record that any land has ever had.

One curious characteristic of these prints at once strikes the Western
eye--the use of a band of dark colour along the top of the picture,
which is shaded gradually down into the clear white of the lower sky.
This convention serves several purposes. It provides a mass to balance
the colour at the bottom of the design, bringing the whole sheet into
the picture and not leaving the upper portion as a mere margin above the
landscape proper. It also creates depth and atmosphere, setting the
brightest part of the design, the middle, back into the frame created by
the upper and lower masses. And finally, it renders with peculiar
accuracy the effect of gradual vanishing which we actually experience as
we look at a landscape: in our visual field, the sky does not end in a
sharp line, but blurs and darkens at the upper edge of the space that
our eyes survey.

Hiroshige's bird and flower designs are works of extraordinary freshness
and loveliness; a unique and idyllic charm emanates from them, and as
compositions they take high rank (Plate 56).

      Alilt against the emerald sky,
    A tiny violet songster swings,
    Clutching a branch, in ecstasy
    Of light and height and skiey things.
    Singing, he swings; and swinging, I
    For once am showered with joy of wings.

      Keen and pure, of a magic power,
    Thy rapture stirs what was never stirred.
    Thou hast brought to earth a cloudland dower,
    The joy of the small sweet singing bird.
    All time is richer for thy hour
    Of delicate music, gravely heard.

      Does the iris droop beneath the heat?
    Its weariness finds voice in thee.
    Does the pheasant run with snow-clogged feet?
    Winter is theirs who thy vision see.
    Is summer's glow to the swallow sweet?
    Thou hast captured its summer eternally.

      Each thou hast wrought as a lyric note
    Pure with one mood of sky and trees
    And flowers, and tiny lives that float
    Or dart or poise in world of these.
    The painter's hand, the thrush's throat--
    Which masters best these melodies?

      Gusty rain through the tree-tops blown
    And a bird that scuds where the grey gusts hiss--
    Sapphire wings and a golden crown
    Flung skyward in unconscious bliss--
    No rare enchanted bird has known
    As thou hast known the savour of this!

      And winning it, thou hast cast aside
    Thy native bonds of mortal birth,
    Flinging the spirit-pinions wide
    Above this world of weary worth,
    To float and poise and skyward ride
    With those whose realm is not the earth--

      The peacock in his proud repose--
    Wild geese that rush across the moon--
    The little sleepy owl that knows
    The wind-among-the-tree-tops tune--
    The kingfisher that darts and glows
    Over the reeds of the lagoon--

      The flower-lured humming-bird that weaves
    Spirals more delicate than they--
    Sanderlings that on moonlit eves
    Over the wave-crest swoop and play--
    The crane that shores of sunset leaves
    For sunset skies of far away.

[Illustration: HIROSHIGE: THE SEVEN RI FERRY, KUWANA, AT THE MOUTH OF
THE KISO RIVER--SUNSET.

One of the Series "The Fifty-three Post Stations of the Tokaido Road."
Size 9 x 14. Signed _Hiroshige ga_.

_Plate 53._]

Hiroshige was born in 1796, just as the great period of figure-designing
was drawing to its close. As a youth he attempted to gain entrance to
the studio of Toyokuni; but the fortunate fact that there was no room
for him forced him to enter the studio of the less popular but more
subtly gifted Toyohiro. Here he studied landscape, a branch in which he
was destined far to outstrip his master. That delicate genius which was
Toyohiro's cannot but have produced its effect upon the pupil; and it
pleases one to fancy that it is some echo of Toyohiro's inarticulate
refinement of feeling that gains at last full expression in some of
Hiroshige's most beautiful landscapes.

In 1828 Toyohiro died; and Hiroshige became independent. His earliest
works probably antedate this time a little; they consist of a few
figures of women and actors, and two very fine horizontal landscape
series. These were the "Toto Meisho," or earliest series of Yedo views,
distinguished by curious long red clouds in each plate; and the "Honcho
Meisho," a group of views of the main island of Japan. Particularly the
first of these sets contains work of great beauty.

Shortly after 1830 Hiroshige found occasion to travel from Yedo, the
northern capital, to Kyoto, the southern capital, along the great
post-road which he has immortalized--the Tokaido. There resulted his
series of horizontal plates, "The Fifty-three Stations of the Tokaido,"
completed about 1834. This remains his best-known and unsurpassed work.
Plate 53 is from this series. Each picture records with unfailing
vividness and originality some famous scene along the crowded national
highway. For reasons unknown to us, Hiroshige prepared new designs for
some of the plates after the original publication of the series; and
these variation-plates are of great interest to collectors.

Of the many series that followed, only the most important can be named
here. All are of horizontal shape unless otherwise designated.

_Naniwa Meisho_, ten views of Osaka--chiefly crowded wharf and market
scenes.

_Kyoto Meisho_, ten views of Kyoto; a varied and delightful series
containing many fine prints.

[Illustration: HIROSHIGE: THE VILLAGE OF FUJI KAWA--EVENING SNOW.

One of the Vertical Tokaido Series. Size 131/2 x 9. Signed _Hiroshige ga_.

_Plate 54._]

_Omi Hakkei_, the Eight Famous Views of Lake Biwa; the most poetic and
possibly the greatest of his works (Plate 52).

_Kanazawa Hakkei_, the Eight Famous Views of the Inlet of Kanazawa;
distinguished by a fine simplicity of composition.

_Yedo Kinko Hakkei_, the Eight Famous Views of Yedo; a series of
masterpieces, of great rarity.

_Chiushingura_, sixteen scenes from the story of the Forty-seven Ronin;
fine dramatic compositions, with powerful blacks and greys
predominating.

_Toto Meisho_ and _Yedo Meisho_, names under which more than fifty
different series of Yedo views were issued by different publishers.
These sets include many masterpieces.

_Nihon Minato Tsukushi_, ten views of the Harbours of Japan.

_Toto Meisho_, a series of narrow upright panels of Yedo; several are
very distinguished.

_Mu Tamagawa_, views of the Six Tama Rivers.

_Series of Fishes._

_Kwa Cho_, upright panels of birds and flowers, some on full-sized
sheets, others very narrow; uneven in quality, some being masterpieces
(Plate 56).

_Fan Prints_, with landscapes or bird designs.

In the year 1842 began the so-called Prohibition Period of twelve years,
when the sale of actor and courtesan prints was forbidden. The effect of
this was to redouble the demand for landscape prints; and Hiroshige was
called upon to supply it. This he did by issuing, among others, the
following sets:--

_Tokaido Series_, published by Maruzei; next best to the "Great Tokaido
Series" of 1834.

_Tokaido Series_, published by Yesaki; slightly smaller than the "Great
Series"; when well-printed, which is rare, they take a very high place.

_Tokaido Series_, published by Sanoki, half-plate size; including many
charming designs.

_Kisokaido_, the Sixty-nine Stations of the Kisokaido Road between Yedo
and Kyoto; a series in which Keisai Yeisen collaborated, producing
twenty-three of the seventy plates. Many of the plates are
uninteresting; but a quarter of them are superb. The set was reprinted
at least twice in inferior editions.

In this, which we may call the Kisokaido Period of Hiroshige's work, he
abandoned to a certain extent the delicate drawing of his Great Tokaido
and Yedo Period and employed larger unbroken colour masses, aiming at
broader effects.

In the fifties, Hiroshige abandoned almost entirely the horizontal or
lateral prints of his earlier days and adopted the upright shape. In
this form he produced the following series, as well as others not
named:--

_Upright Tokaido_, published by Tsutaya, 1855; a fine series when well
printed, but the late editions were crude in colour (Plate 54).

_Views of the Sixty-nine Provinces_, 1856; the rare first edition, which
is much the finer, is distinguished by having five seals on the face of
each plate. It contains a great deal of uninteresting work, but also ten
or fifteen masterpieces.

[Illustration: HIROSHIGE: THE OMMAYA EMBANKMENT, ON THE SUMIDA RIVER AT
ASAKUSA--EVENING.

One of the Series "The Hundred Views of Yedo." Size 13 x 9. Signed
_Hiroshige ga_.

_Plate 55._]

_Three Triptychs._--The Rapids of Awa No Naruto, Moonlight View of
Kanazawa, and Snow Mountains on the Kiso Highway, all dated 1857, and
all magnificent.

_Two Kakemono-ye_, very large--the Monkey Bridge and the Snow Gorge of
the Fuji River, things of matchless impressiveness.

_The One Hundred Views of Yedo_, 1858; 119 plates, including, besides
much rubbish, 25 masterpieces (Plate 55).

_The Thirty-six Views of Fuji_, 1859; inferior, upon the whole, to his
earlier work. There are in existence very few well-printed copies.

In the last two or three of these series it is more than probable that
Hiroshige was assisted by his pupil Hiroshige II. The finest plates in
all these later series are equal to the master's most splendid earlier
designs; but certain of the plates are of so banal a character that it
is impossible to believe them to be from the great man's hand. Doubtless
the distinction between the work of the two artists cannot always be
drawn with certainty; but as a general rule we may regard the work as
that of Hiroshige II if we find the figures stiff and wooden, if the
composition is lacking in any central unity, or if some large ugly
object is thrust into the foreground with the hope of thus putting the
background into its proper relative place. At this period less care was
taken with the printing, and the majority of prints from these later
series are miserable impressions that libel Hiroshige's powers. When
well printed they can be very fine indeed; but the poor copies
outnumber the good a hundred to one.

In the year 1858, just after the publication of the "One Hundred Views
of Yedo," Hiroshige died. He did not live to see the plates for his
"Thirty-six Views of Fuji" completed. One of the collector's treasures
is a striking memorial portrait by Kunisada that was issued shortly
after Hiroshige's death. The old man is represented with a finely shaped
head, powerful, quiet features, and eyes as piercing as an eagle's.

The number of Hiroshige's different designs runs into at least three or
four thousand, not counting his illustrated books; and there must be in
existence a hundred thousand prints by him. His work is almost as
plentiful as that of all the other artists taken together. In spite of
this great abundance, the collector finds it difficult to-day to obtain
many really fine prints by him. The prints usually offered are either in
bad condition, or they are careless impressions produced without proper
attention to the difficult problem of printing. The rush occasioned by
Hiroshige's popularity naturally led to slighted work. Even in these
poor copies a certain fascination of design generally appears; but it is
only in the carefully printed copies, where the register is accurate and
the colours are delicately graded, luminous, and soft, that the full
beauty of Hiroshige's conception is made clear. Familiarity with the
finer impressions forever spoils the attentive observer's taste for the
crude ordinary copies. The task of the collector of Hiroshige's work
to-day resolves itself into a search for these rare and precious
early prints. The collector should lose no opportunity to compare
different copies of the same print; only thus can he educate his eyes
sufficiently to appreciate the vast difference between fine and inferior
examples. The difference, once grasped, is unforgettable.

[Illustration: HIROSHIGE: BIRD AND FLOWERS.

Size 15 x 7. Signed _Hiroshige, hitsu_.

_Plate 56._]

The reader who desires detailed information as to the long list of
Hiroshige's work is referred to the Sale Catalogue of the Collection of
John Stewart Happer (Sotheby, Wilkinson, and Hodge, London), which is
the present foundation for any real study of the subject. A valuable
article on seal-dates by Major J. J. O'Brien Sexton, in the
_International Studio_ for May, 1913, should also be consulted by the
student.


THE SECOND HIROSHIGE.

HIROSHIGE II, born 1826, was the adopted son of the great Hiroshige; as
we have seen, he probably assisted in some of the master's last work.
After Hiroshige's death the pupil assumed the master's name, previous to
that he had been known as Ichiusai Shigenobu. He is not to be confused
with Yanagawa Shigenobu, Hokusai's pupil.

It was once thought that Hiroshige II produced all the upright prints
signed Hiroshige. Mr. Happer has once for all discredited this idea, and
it is no longer held by any one.

Some of the work of Hiroshige II is very good; upon the accidental
destruction of one of the plates of the "One Hundred Yedo Series," he
produced a new design that is admirable. But he lacked originality, and
at his best merely trod in the footsteps of his master. Most of his
designs are flat and uninspired. About 1865 he fell into disgrace, and
moved to Yokohama, where he gave up his name, and is said to have worked
henceforth under the name of Hirochika II. He died in 1869.

There was also a Hiroshige III, who died in 1896--a wholly commonplace
and unimportant artist, who assumed the great name about 1865.


FOLLOWERS AND CONTEMPORARIES OF HIROSHIGE.

KEISAI YEISEN, who collaborated with Hiroshige in the "Kisokaido
Series," was born in 1791 and died in 1851. He produced many
figure-prints, following Yeizan, in the debased style of his
contemporaries. His landscapes, however, are his most interesting work.
Many of these follow Hiroshige tamely; but a few, in the older Kano
manner, are surprising and splendid designs. One of these, a rare sheet
depicting a bridge and mountains in moonlight, in _kakamono-ye_ form,
must be regarded as a masterpiece. His ordinary work is rather
undistinguished.

[Illustration: YEISEN.]

GOSOTEI TOYOKUNI produced, besides some unimportant actor-prints, a few
fine landscapes in a very hard, sharp style. Chief among these is a
"Tamagawa Series," each plate of which has a large purple panel at the
top. The artist's original name was Toyoshige. Born in 1777, he became
the adopted son of Toyokuni I; after Toyokuni's death in 1825, he
married Toyokuni's widow and called himself Toyokuni II, a title which
Kunisada also claimed.

UTAGAWA KUNIYOSHI, born in 1798, was the best pupil of Toyokuni I, and
an artist of more power than most of his contemporaries. His figures
sometimes have dramatic force of a rather fine kind; but the majority of
them are crude. His landscapes are his greatest claim to fame. Among
them are some of extraordinary quality. They have hardly been
sufficiently appreciated as yet by collectors. Kuniyoshi died in 1861.

[Illustration: KUNIYOSHI.]

KATSUKAWA SHUNSEN, a pupil of Shunyei, produced, besides ordinary
figure-prints, a few graceful landscapes, chiefly in tones of green and
rose.

HASEGAWA SADANOBU, who has been mentioned under the Osaka School, was an
arrant imitator of Hiroshige. The Hayashi Catalogue, page 236,
reproduces a print of his that is nothing more than a replica of one of
Hiroshige's "Sixty-nine Province Series"; and the Victoria and Albert
Museum Catalogue, Plate XLVI, shows a Lake Biwa print that copies
Hiroshige's half-plate "Omi Hakkei" almost line for line.

SADAHIDE and YOSHIYUKI, both Osaka artists, may be mentioned among the
unimportant landscape designers of the second half of the nineteenth
century.

To-day the old art of the colour-print is completely dead. But an
entirely new school has produced some pleasing though weak designs of
birds, flowers, and landscapes; and some attractive illustrated books
have also been issued. The larger part of such work bears the obvious
stamp of having been produced for the tourist and the foreign market,
and has not a trace of that vigour and integrity which marked the prints
of the great masters, whose inspiration sprang from and spoke to the
heart of the Japanese people. European influence has produced a bad
effect upon the style of these modern prints; and the weak colour used
tends toward prettiness rather than toward beauty. It is idle to hope
that real vitality will ever return to animate this lost art.




VIII

THE
COLLECTOR




CHAPTER VIII

THE COLLECTOR


The field of Japanese prints is so wide, and the cost of different
classes of prints is so various, that almost any taste and almost any
pocket-book can find appropriate material for collection. A print-lover
who is prepared to invest considerable sums of money, running perhaps
into many thousand pounds, will naturally seek only important examples
from the hands of the most renowned designers. A great collection must
in the first place contain representative specimens of the distinctive
manners of the notable men in each period; and in addition a great
collector will wish to acquire considerable numbers of the supreme
treasures--large-size Primitives, Harunobu pillar-prints, Kiyonaga
triptychs, Utamaro silver-prints, Sharaku portraits, matchless
impressions of Hiroshige landscapes, and the like. But even the modest
collector who is able to expend only a few pounds a year can, with
patience, secure beautiful and desirable pieces. It would be vain for
him to imagine that he can have things of the first importance and
rarity; but he may confidently expect to obtain delightful minor
examples of the work of even great artists, at prices that are within
any one's reach. A Yeishi triptych will cost from ten to eighty pounds,
but a charming small sheet by Yeishi can perhaps be bought for two. The
pleasure which the collector obtains from his collection is not
necessarily proportionate to the amount of his expenditure; and the
intelligent lover of beauty can derive lasting satisfaction from his
carefully selected but inexpensive little group of Hiroshige landscapes,
Shunsho actors, Harunobu book-illustrations, and similar works.

When, however, the owner of some such sheets finds his ambition is
growing with his interest, he needs to be somewhat cautious in his
effort to extend his collection. A few charming minor prints are a
highly desirable possession; a large collection of them is not. It is
easy for the lover of prints who has begun modestly to go on year after
year with increasing enthusiasm, piling up numbers of cheap mediocre
sheets; and in the end, after having spent enough money to purchase ten
great Kiyonagas, he finds himself the owner of a numerous but
undistinguished collection in which there is not a single print of the
first rank, nor a single one that will compel the admiration of the
connoisseur. It is interesting to have a few prints of each type and
period as examples, even though they are not notable works; but when the
collector has a moderate number he will be wise to cease his
miscellaneous buying and husband his resources for the occasional
purchase of a masterpiece. More pleasure is to be found in acquiring two
or three fine sheets a year than from the wholesale acquisition of
hundreds of insignificant works.

It is, however, well to define one's limits carefully. If one is not
able to expend from ten to a hundred pounds on a single print, one must
dismiss from one's mind the idea of owning an important Kiyonaga; for
that is the lowest sum at which one can hope to get it even with luck.
If an expenditure of thirty to eighty pounds is impossible, one must put
aside all idea of a Sharaku. But lesser treasures at lower prices are to
be had; let the collector only remember to take care that he gets the
best things he can afford even though his purchases be few, rather than
allow himself to be tempted into buying a great many of a cheaper kind.

Remarkable opportunities to acquire fine prints at low prices sometimes
occur, but they are rare. Certain prints may come up for sale only once
in a collector's lifetime. These exceptional examples must be seized
when they are offered; one of the characteristics of a great collector
is the ability to make these swift and often expensive decisions. He
must know the available supply of prints and the probability of having
another chance to get this particular sheet; if he estimates such a
recurrence as improbable, and if he esteems the print a masterpiece, he
must take it at any price he can afford to pay.

It is, after all is said, the masterpieces that bring the unwaning
satisfaction. Most collectors find that the few supreme treasures of
their collections give them more pleasure than all their other prints
put together. Therefore it is well for the inexperienced collector to
bear in mind that quality, not quantity, will prove his most profitable
aim. For it is one of the delightful characteristics of collecting that
the collector's perception is likely to grow continuously in fineness;
and the acquisitions of his earlier years may fail to satisfy his more
educated taste of later days. This will sometimes be true of even the
prints he once loved best; and much more is it likely to apply to those
which he bought merely because they were cheap or would increase the
bulk of his collection.

Discrimination is the life-blood of collecting. He who collects
everything collects nothing; he is the owner of a scrap-heap or a
second-hand shop, not of an ordered series of specimens that illustrate
historical or artistic ideas. The true collector would rather have ten
selected prints than the whole mass of prints now in existence, if in
the latter case he had to keep them all. Many a collection has been
improved both in monetary value and in power to give pleasure by merely
throwing out of it the second-rate things it contained.

The collector, as a rule, sets out in the beginning with little
knowledge and with no very definite notion of what he intends to
collect. If he is to profit by his efforts or is to end by having an
interesting group of possessions, he must before long define for himself
the idea of a collection and the conception which his own is to express.
He may decide to obtain at least one representative example of the work
of every important artist; or he may prefer to specialize, and assemble
all that he can of the works of a single man or a single period. A
certain well-known collector has selected Harunobu and Shunsho as his
special objects of interest, and has brought together a notable and
illuminating series of specimens of their work. Another has chosen
Hiroshige, and after many years of effort he can display to the student
a fine copy of almost every important print by that artist. A third has
especially sought the works of Kiyonaga; while a fourth has pursued the
less costly but very interesting aim of bringing together the sheets of
Kuniyoshi. Another is devoted to surimono; still another, to
pillar-prints. The possible list of specialities is inexhaustible.
Narrow and exclusive specialization is, however, uncommon among amateurs
of Japanese prints; and even the specialist tries to have in his
collection a few representative examples of all important types.

The inexperienced collector may find himself confused, amid so many
unfamiliar names, and fail to separate in his mind the notable artists
from those of secondary interest. A little study of the following list
will perhaps be of assistance. It contains thirty-two names, selected
from the three or four hundred mentioned in this book; each one in the
list is important, and a collection that contained even one fine example
by each of these designers would represent very fairly the whole scope
of the art. In fact, the beginner will not go far astray if at the
outset he confines his purchases to the work of the men here listed; he
will at least be saved from the danger of accumulating the productions
of unnoteworthy designers. The names preceded by two stars are the ten
outstanding figures whose historical and artistic importance makes it
imperative that they be adequately represented in any self-respecting
collection. Thirteen more names, preceded by one star, are of next
conspicuousness. A collection containing a really brilliant example by
each of these thirty-two men would cost from three hundred to three
thousand pounds to bring together, depending upon the quality and
importance of the prints selected.


_List of Principal Artists._

   * Buncho
   * Choki
  ** Harunobu
  ** Hiroshige I
  ** Hokusai
   * Kiyomasu
   * Kiyomitsu I
  ** Kiyonaga
   * Kiyonobu I
   * Kiyonobu II
  ** Koriusai
   * Kwaigetsudo
     Masanobu (Kitao)
  ** Masanobu (Okumura)
  ** Moronobu
  ** Sharaku
   * Shigemasa
   * Shigenaga
   * Shuncho
     Shunko (Katsukawa)
     Shunman
  ** Shunsho
     Shunyei
     Sukenobu
     Toshinobu
     Toyoharu
     Toyohiro
   * Toyokuni I
   * Toyonobu (Ishikawa)
  ** Utamaro I
   * Yeishi

Collecting is to a certain extent creative; for the picture of the art
of Japanese prints that a collection presents is almost as definitely an
expression of a personal interpretation as is a book on the subject.
What the collectors treasure will be preserved; what they reject will
doubtless perish as valueless.

One of the collector's joys is the sense that he is laying by
immeasurable riches for posterity. Much remains for us still to learn
from Japanese prints; and any sheet in a collection may prove to be the
key that will some day unlock doors leading to treasure-chambers. Both
historically and aesthetically, the field of Japanese prints still offers
many undiscovered regions to the explorer. By making available the
material for such investigations, the collector performs a valuable
service.

The collector's own satisfaction is not dependent upon the fact of
possession. To seek, to desire ardently, is not to covet; and the most
eager collectors are the very ones who most thoroughly enjoy a beautiful
print owned by another. Possession is an accident; but enjoyment is a
form of genius.

Collecting at its best is very far from mere acquisitiveness; it may
become one of the most humanistic of occupations, seeking to illustrate,
by the assembling of significant reliques, the march of the human spirit
in its quest of beauty, and the aspirations that were its guide. To
discover, preserve, relate, and criticize these memorials is the
rational aim of the collector. The joy of pursuit which he experiences
is a crude but delightful one; and discovery has the triumphant
sweetness of all successful effort. The act of restoring and preserving
is a pious service to the future, and a delicate handicraft. To arrange
examples in accurate relation to each other, and illustrate a conception
of complex history by means of concrete specimens, is a constructive
task that involves detailed knowledge and wide vision. And finally, the
attempt to appraise the spiritual values of the parts and the whole may
be an illuminating achievement, relating all this material to the
general stream of cultural development and to the history of the race.

The best way to study an art of the past is to collect examples of it.
The collector's historical sense is trained and his discriminative
powers are sharpened by his activities. As his education progresses, his
chief interest is in works of an ever higher quality. He attempts always
to acquire the best, and his knowledge of what is best is always
widening. His is the task of judging between degrees of perfection. It
differs not so very widely from that desperate search for an ideal
fulfilment which is the curse, the inspiration, and the one abiding joy
of the artist.

The artist's sense of triumph in an achievement must be only momentary;
if he continues long to regard his creation as admirable, he has reached
the stagnation of his powers and the end of his career; he must ever
hate to-day what he created yesterday, in order that he may be driven on
to produce a still finer thing to-morrow. The collector, also, must
eventually abandon his present position and move forward; and, tragic to
confess, perhaps his ultimate triumph comes on that day when the field
he long has loved ceases to suffice his growing sense of beauty, and he
sends his collection under the hammer, having mastered it and passed
beyond it. For every collector must in the end transcend his
collection, unless he is to perish in it as in some fatal Saragossa Sea.

A collection is a life-estate only, and the important question confronts
every collector as to what disposition shall be made of his possessions
after his death. My personal feeling is strongly against the bequest of
such a collection to a public institution. These prints are inherently
suited to private exhibition and not to public display. They must be
kept in portfolios, not hung up in galleries, or they fade. They must be
examined closely and at leisure; the spectator should be able, seated at
ease, to study them as he holds them in his hand. To walk through a
gallery of prints is only a slight pleasure; to sit in the library of
the collector and inspect and discuss the same prints one by one is a
great delight. Further, they require a degree of care that they would
not receive in the public institutions. The prints in most public
collections are repaired, mounted, and handled with a carelessness that
horrifies the collector. That painstaking skill in restoring,
preserving, and mounting to the best advantage, which means so much for
the ultimate effect of a print, is seldom, if ever, exercised except by
the private owner. It may be said that if these treasures are in private
hands, the public is deprived of them. This is untrue. The great body of
the public would pass them by in a gallery, for this is not a
spectacular or obtrusive art like sculpture. On the other hand, any
person who gives evidence of a reasonable degree of interest can not
only obtain free and willing access to all the private collections with
which I am familiar, but he may have at his disposal the services of the
owner of the collection to explain, interpret, and guide. There are at
present scores of highly trained men, of such cultivation as the museums
cannot afford to employ except in the highest positions, who are
spending weeks and months out of every year in this unpaid work of
serving the public; while in the great public collections the ordinary
inquirer is left adrift to find his way as best he can through the chaos
of an improperly arranged exhibit. In the public collections the prints
are of service or pleasure to almost nobody; while in the private
collections their service and pleasure to the owner and his friends is
great, and the same opportunities are easily opened to any one who is
qualified to profit by them. Therefore it seems better that, upon the
death of a collector, his prints should be sold; in order that, as
Edmond de Goncourt directed in the case of his collection, those
treasures which have been so great and so personal a delight to the
owner may pass on into the hands of such others as will find in them the
same satisfaction. "My wish is," he wrote in his will, "that my
drawings, my prints, my curios, my books--in a word those things of art
which have been the joy of my life--shall not be consigned to the cold
tomb of a museum, and subjected to the stupid glance of the careless
passer-by; but I require that they shall all be dispersed under the
hammer of the auctioneer, so that the pleasure which the acquiring of
each one of them has given me shall be given again, in each case, to
some inheritor of my own taste."


CONSIDERATIONS GOVERNING THE CHOICE OF PRINTS.

A variety of elements must be weighed in the mind of the collector
whenever he decides for or against the purchase of a particular specimen
to add to his collection.

THE ARTIST.--In the first place, the authorship of the print is an
important consideration. If the designer is a very great man like
Kiyonaga, or a very rare one like Kitao Masanobu, or both combined like
Shigemasa, these facts must be given weight. Other things being equal, a
print by an important leader such as Utamaro is more desirable than one
by a less original follower such as Banki. A Kiyonaga is a little
preferable to an equally beautiful Shuncho, because of Kiyonaga's prime
historical importance. The work of certain other men is prized by
collectors because of its scarcity; Chincho, for example, would be only
moderately valued were it not for the extraordinary rarity of his
designs. When rarity combines with greatness, as in the case of
Kwaigetsudo, Moronobu, Buncho, and Sharaku, the desirability of the
artist's work is naturally doubled in the eyes of the collector.

A print sometimes derives an unusual interest from the fact that it is
of a kind seldom produced by the particular artist who designed it.
Harunobu and Kiyonaga actor-prints are exceptional things, dating from
the early years of these men's careers. On the other hand, the
silver-prints of Utamaro, the triptychs of Kiyonaga, and the
yellow-background prints of Yeishi are desirable for the opposite
reason; they represent famous and characteristic aspects of the work of
their respective creators.

THE QUALITY OF THE DESIGN.--The impression produced upon the aesthetic
sense of the collector is the most vital of all the elements that
determine his choice. The composition, the drawing, the total beauty of
the design, will in each individual case have their importance; and upon
the collector's estimate of these qualities will depend his desire to
own the print. There are some dull and uninteresting designs by even the
most gifted men--work without charm or life. Shunsho was a great sinner
in this respect; so also were Utamaro and Toyokuni. On the other hand,
men of secondary importance produced occasional triumphs; a Yeisho or a
Yenshi is sometimes found in which the most brilliant qualities of
composition appear. Each print must be appraised on its own merits.

The collector generally passes by all designs in which clumsiness or
awkwardness is evident, and waits patiently for those in which the
force, or grace, or dignity of the composition proclaims the
masterpiece. Kiyonaga's "Terrace by the Sea," Sharaku's portrait of the
Daimyo Moronao, Hokusai's "Red Mountain," and Utamaro's "Firefly
Catchers" are examples of that unsurpassable quality which no
experienced collector willingly lets escape him.

THE QUALITY OF THE IMPRESSION.--Different copies of the same print
differ enormously in quality. The finest design is of little avail if
the work of the printer has not been judicious. Among early prints,
before Utamaro, really bad impressions are not very common, although
especially fine and brilliant ones are hard to obtain. Later,
particularly in the work of Hiroshige, the poor ones much outnumber the
good. In a good impression the lines are all sharp and clean: where the
hair meets the temples, every brush-stroke is clearly defined. The
blacks are rich and heavy, not sooty or streaked. The colours must be in
perfect register; that is, each must exactly fill its allotted space
without overlapping and without ragged edges. Prints in which these
defects occur are either careless impressions or late impressions from
worn blocks. Whichever be the explanation, they are not desirable; the
discriminating collector does not care to acquire any but perfectly
printed sheets. All the skill and devotion of the printer was needed to
make the resulting product a just interpretation of the conception of
the designer; in a bad impression the beauty of the design is ruined.

Prior to the nineteenth century it was the usual practice to give each
colour-block a uniform coat of pigment; thus each separate colour
impressed on the paper was completely flat and unshaded. In Hiroshige's
time, however, the pigment was often partially wiped from portions of
the block, so that in the resulting print the colour shades gradually
into the uncoloured white of the paper. Many of Hiroshige's prints
derive a considerable portion of their beauty from the subtlety of these
gradations.

There are no such things as signed artist's proofs among Japanese
prints; but there is a class of prints that corresponds to them. They
are not labelled; nothing distinguishes them from the ordinary copies
except the extreme beauty of the printing. These rare impressions were
probably early ones made under the eye of the artist. The sharpness of
the lines, the harmony of the colours, and the delicacy of gradation in
any shaded portions are of a perfection lacking in the ordinary copies.
It took much care and time, and was therefore expensive, to produce such
work; and probably the majority of purchasers were unwilling to pay the
additional price entailed by this degree of attention. The few existing
copies of this character are exceptionally prized by the collector
to-day.

The colour-schemes used in printing various copies of the same print
often differ widely, and there is considerable difference in
desirability on this ground alone. Some of Hiroshige's prints are found
in monochromes of blue or of grey--some of Hokusai's are in bluish
green. These rare and beautiful variations from the normal are highly
valued. On the other hand, the late prints of Hiroshige are generally
printed in raucous greens and reds and purples that are an offence to
the eye; and only rarely do we find copies of them in which a soft and
harmonious colour scheme reveals the intention of the artist. This
explains why certain prints from the "One Hundred Views of Yedo"
sometimes bring fifteen or twenty pounds apiece, though multitudes of
ordinary copies of the identical print can be purchased for a few
shillings each. Badly coloured examples of Hiroshige's work are
plentiful and of little value; harmonious and subtly modulated ones are
things of unsurpassable beauty, and almost as rare as Kiyonagas. The
collector of Hiroshige prints will scrutinize a specimen with the utmost
care to determine whether the colour scheme is harmonious, and whether
the pigments have been applied in the delicately graded luminous manner
that Hiroshige intended. If he finds that the various tones are harsh in
quality, or are printed in crude, unshaded masses, he will reject the
sheet. Considerable familiarity with really fine impressions is the only
safeguard in this matter. The beginner is only too ready to be led
astray by the charm of the design, not realizing how much this same
design is enhanced if given the expression of appropriate printing; and
he is very likely to find himself loaded down with worthless
impressions, the very sight of which is repugnant to him after he has
become familiar with fine copies of the same prints. Poor copies are
worth nothing; but choice ones are never really dear at any price.

In this matter more than in any other a fine collection differs from a
poor one, and it is in this that the discriminating collector has his
best chance to match his judgment against that of the dealer. Sometimes
one can for a few shillings select from a pile of worthless Hiroshiges a
notable impression that is worth twenty times the sum asked for it.

A generally accepted classification of prints from the point of view of
the quality of the impression would be convenient. There are to-day no
recognized terms by which to describe the various grades. I therefore
suggest a division into four groups with the following terminology:--

(_a_) _Artist's Impression._--Such a print as might have been produced
under the eye of the artist himself--every line clear and sharp, every
colour delicate and perfectly registered; the total effect exceptionally
luminous and harmonious; no possible subtlety of technique left to be
desired.

(_b_) _Fine Impression._--A clear, perfect impression such as a careful
printer would normally turn out at his best, but without that inspired
fineness in every detail which distinguishes Class (_a_).

(_c_) _Good Impression._--Such a print as would pass muster with the
ordinary buyer of that day--good, but not especially fine; clear, but
not notably sharp; pleasantly enough coloured, but not distinguished in
colour scheme. Very slight defects of register or of gradation will not
exclude a print from this class.

(_d_) _Late Impression._--One in which serious defects appear, such as
bad register, raw colour, blurred definition, or any other real error.

CONDITION.--The state of preservation is one of the most important
elements that the collector has to consider. Collectors of Japanese
prints do not as a rule pay much attention to questions of margin, but
they very properly insist that the effects of time and wear shall not be
such as to obliterate or diminish the original beauty of the work
itself. The print must not be cut down in size, and its face must be
unmarred. Stains, creases, tears, abrasions, discolorations and fading
are all defects of a serious nature. Only experience can enable one to
judge whether a certain print is of such rarity that one must waive
requirements as to condition and accept a defective copy. In the case of
the Primitives, flawless examples are so few that one must needs be
content with prints that show decidedly the effect of time. The same is
true of pillar-prints. On the other hand, there is no reason why one
should ever purchase a damaged Hiroshige, unless it be an exceptional
rarity like the "Monkey Bridge." On the whole, the experience of
collectors is that in every case of doubt the faulty print should be
rejected. For as one sees a print repeatedly one's consciousness of the
defect increases, and gradually the flaw becomes more obvious to one's
observation than anything else in the print.

In many cases prints that are in undamaged condition have nevertheless
acquired with age a peculiar deadness that may not be perceptible to the
careless eye. If such a print is placed beside a perfectly fresh one,
the difference is at once apparent. In the first case, though the
surface is unmarred, there is a slight yellowing of the fibres of the
paper that prevents their sending out that vibrating luminosity which is
a distinctive beauty in the immaculate copy. This absence of luminous
quality is so common that I mention it less to caution the collector
against it than to bid him be on his guard to seize the few luminous
prints that are offered him.

It is against the really brown prints that the novice should be warned.
The difference in market value between a chocolate coloured copy and a
brilliantly white copy is enormous, amounting in some cases to a
thousand per cent. Brilliant copies are excessively rare; and since they
are the only ones desired by the great collectors, they bring record
prices.

The whole question of condition is one of personal taste; collectors are
by no means agreed about it. European collectors have been, as a rule,
less insistent upon condition than have the Japanese and Americans.
There are collectors--though they grow fewer daily--who positively
prefer faded and "toned" prints, because of their softness. This view is
an ill-advised one.

I do not say that, if one can have none other, the damaged prints may
not give one pleasure and intimations of the original beauty that was
theirs; but I do affirm that such prints are but makeshifts, and that
their market value is, and always will be, very slight. When I began
collecting many years ago in Japan, I purchased a number of Hokusai
prints that were much blackened by exposure. I thought at the time that
any trace of the work of so famous a master was worth treasuring. But I
have found that my purchase was quite valueless, not only from the
commercial point of view, but also from the artistic, since they do not
represent the work of Hokusai with the slightest approach to adequacy.

Perfect condition conveys to us perfectly the artist's conception;
anything else obliterates or modifies his design. Though the beauty of
faded or damaged prints is often indisputable, and though some prints
are so saturated with beauty that a certain charm remains as long as any
trace of the printing is visible, yet these wrecks and fragments are not
the desirable specimens. The slight softening of the colours that almost
always comes with age is perhaps not detrimental; but when the
luminosity of the colours and the brilliant whiteness of the paper is
gone, an irreparable loss has been suffered. For the white spaces and
the reflective effect of the white fibres under the coloured spaces were
integral and vital elements in the artist's design; and one cannot say
that this is not injured when the paper has been turned to a dingy
brown.

Further, it is almost childish to prefer the time-changed colours to the
fresh ones. For surely, if these prints have any value at all, it is not
the kind of value that beautifully weather-marked pebbles have: their
significance lies in whatsoever spiritual values their designers put
into them. They are not curiosities of nature, but monuments erected by
the human spirit in its search for beauty. We go very far astray when we
admire what is in fact lamentable disintegration. To delight in the
faded tone of a print is like delighting in the cracks of the Sistine
Chapel.

The matter can be made clearer if we become specific. A certain blue of
Harunobu's changes, with exposure, to yellow; and the yellow sky or
river that results is anything but what the designer intended. A certain
white of Hiroshige's oxidizes into black; the effect is unfortunate as,
for instance in prints where we now see black snowflakes. The rich
orange beloved of Koriusai and Shunsho, and the delicate pink used by
Harunobu, Kiyonaga, and Shuncho, are transformed in the course of time
into rusty black; then in the place of the luminous rooms intended when
the artist planned his composition, we see dingy mottled caverns of mud.
The brilliant early purple turns brown; the still earlier rose colour
vanishes entirely. After all these changes, how is it possible to prefer
the faded print to the fresh one? The resulting accidental effects may
happen to be beautiful, but they have a destructive influence upon those
elements which alone make the prints worthy of our serious attention as
works of art. The only marvel is that they do not more completely ruin
the beauty of the artist's work.

The chemical disintegrations of which I speak are sometimes so great
that they are very misleading to the uninformed. A writer in the London
_Times_ of November 6, 1913, reviewing the exhibition at the Albert and
Victoria Museum, discovers an amazing mare's nest. "One colour alone
Harunobu neglects in common with all his predecessors and
contemporaries," he says. "It remained for the artists of the nineteenth
century to discover the possibilities of blue--a curious and hitherto
unnoted omission." Indeed, the omission had not been previously
noted--for the simple reason that it does not exist. Harunobu used blue
a great deal, almost always in depicting water or sky; Shunsho used it
repeatedly for sky, water, and draperies in the "Ise Monogatari," and as
a solid background in certain _hoso-ye_ actor-prints of which two, in
their startling pristine brilliancy, are in the Gookin Collection;
Koriusai used blue frequently in combination with his famous orange. But
the blue used by the early artists, particularly that of Harunobu and
Shunsho, was the most unstable of colours, and it is rare to find it
unaltered by time. Generally it has turned to a delicate grey or yellow
that is very beautiful, but very far from what the artist meant it to
be.

A systematic classification of the various conditions in which a print
may be found will perhaps put the matter clearly before the beginner:--

1. _Publisher's State._--Without the slightest evidence of any change
since the hour it was printed; colours unaltered; paper absolutely new
and sparkling.

2. _Collector's State._--As a print might be after a few years in the
possession of a careful purchaser; perfect, except for having been
mounted or washed, or except for slight chemical change in the colours
due to time only and not to damage; paper white and clear.

3. _Good State._--Marred only by minor defects that would be
unnoticeable to casual observation--small worm-holes, slight tears or
creases, moderate fading of colours, or slightly rubbed surface; paper
toned but not brown.

4. _Ordinary State._--Still retaining its chief beauty in spite of
noticeable injury by tears, small stains, worn or faded colours, or
other damage; paper somewhat browned by exposure.

5. _Defective State._--Such injuries or colour changes as deprive the
print of its significance as a thing of beauty; paper browned or
stained.

RARITY.--The rarity of a print may be a factor in determining whether or
not it should be purchased. Not only does rarity affect monetary value,
but it sometimes indicates to the collector that this is perhaps the
only opportunity he will ever have to acquire this particular design.
The rain scene from Hiroshige's "Yedo Kinko Hakkei" has a higher value
than the equally beautiful rain scene from the "One Hundred Yedo
Series," for the simple reason that copies of the former are very few,
and that many collectors desire it because of its beauty. There is,
however, a danger into which many collectors fall, of esteeming rarity
as a precious element _per se_. Rarity alone, detached from other
elements of value or interest, is perhaps the most ridiculous element
that the human race has ever chosen to esteem.

ASSOCIATIONS.--Certain prints have an historical value that makes them
particularly interesting to the collector. For example, there is the
well-known triptych by Utamaro which, because of its portrayal of one of
the Shoguns in scandalous surroundings, was the cause of the
imprisonment and death of the artist. Also there is the famous memorial
portrait of Hiroshige by Kunisada, which is an especially desirable
possession because of its associations and because the subject is the
great landscape painter. Dated prints are of interest by reason of the
light they may throw on uncertain points in Ukioye history. Prints that
have belonged to famous collectors, Hayashi, Wakai, Fenollosa, and
others, derive a double interest from that fact; the association is
interesting, and the previous possession by a discriminating collector
confirms the present owner's estimate of the high quality of the print.
It should not, however, be forgotten that enterprising Japanese dealers
recognize this fact. A small red stamp can be made in Japan for about
two shillings; and a considerable number of prints now bearing the Wakai
and Hayashi seals never formed a part of these collections.

PRICES.--The subject of prices is one so complex and indeterminate that
one writes of it only with hesitancy. That which seems excessive to one
collector will be willingly paid by another. No stable standard exists;
I have had equally good copies of certain Hiroshige prints offered me at
prices as various as 10s. and L10. In discussing the matter, one can
give nothing more than an individual impression of the normal and usual
figures at which prints change hands to-day. Experience is the only
means by which a collector can equip himself on this subject. He will
acquaint himself with the prices asked by dealers and the prices at
which other collectors have obtained their specimens; and from these,
together with a careful study of auction sale catalogues, he forms his
judgment. Auction prices are likely, however, to be misleading unless
one sees the prints sold; for the fact that a certain print brought only
L3 at Sotheby's is no indication that another copy of the same print may
not be worth the L30 asked for it. Variations in condition and quality
of impression make vast differences in value. An Artist's Impression of
Hiroshige's famous Tokaido print, "Rain on Shono Pass," might bring L20;
a Fine Impression would perhaps sell for half that; a Good Impression
would be worth about L4; while a Late Impression would bring less than
L2. Similarly a Kiyonaga might vary from L40 to L4 on this account. In
the matter of condition there would be parallel differences. A rare
Kiyonaga or Utamaro triptych might vary as follows: Publisher's State,
L200; Collector's State, L100; Good State, L60; Ordinary State, L30;
Defective State, L5. A great Sharaku might, in the same way, be priced
at L100, L70, L50, L20, and L3; and a Harunobu at L60, L50, L20, L8, and
L3. Pillar-prints in perfect preservation are rare; therefore the
differences would be even greater; in the case of an exceptional
Koriusai, perhaps L30, L15, L10, L3, L1.

The following very rough generalizations may suggest something to the
inexperienced collector. Small Primitive sheets in fair condition can
seldom be obtained for less than L5 to L15; the rare large sheets and
Pillar-prints generally bring L20 to L100. These are minimum prices; for
special treasures such as Kwaigetsudo, prices may rise to several
hundred pounds.

Harunobu's work in perfect condition brings from L20 to L100. Shunsho
actors are sometimes to be had very cheap, for a pound or two; but the
finest designs will bring from L10 to L20. Buncho is rare; one may
expect to pay at least L15 to L40 for a fine example. Shunyei and Shunko
are about the same in price as Shunsho. A good Shigemasa is worth L20
to L50.

Kiyonaga is expensive; an attractive small sheet by him will cost L5 to
L15; a fine large sheet, L15 to L40; a triptych brings scores or
hundreds. Shuncho and the other Kiyonaga followers are only a little
less costly. A notable Sharaku is rarely obtainable for less than L40 to
L80. Shunman brings almost as much, as also does Kitao Masanobu.

Small or unimportant sheets by Yeishi, Yeisho, Utamaro, Choki, Toyokuni,
and Toyohiro can be had for a pound or two. From this level, prices go
up to several hundred pounds, which has been paid for Utamaro's "Awabi
Shell-Divers." Triptychs, silver-prints, and large heads by these men
are especially expensive, rising from L20 to much larger sums.

Two to five pounds will buy a fair Hokusai; L20 or more may be asked for
an unusually fine one, and certain rare treasures bring much more than
that. Prices for Hiroshige prints vary so with the quality of the
impression that generalizations are impossible. It can only be said that
the purchaser who gets a Hiroshige of the highest quality for L5 is
fortunate. On the other hand, it must be stated that fine Hiroshige
prints are often obtainable for considerably lower prices than this.

All these prices apply to the best prints in good condition. Dealers
frequently ask unreasonably high sums for second-rate designs or
defective copies; in such cases the collector should refuse to be made a
victim.

Experience alone can dictate to a collector what prices he may
prudently pay. In the most uniformly fine private collection I know--a
collection comprising only one hundred and fifty prints, but each one a
treasure--there are few, if any, sheets that cost less than L5, and many
that cost L20 to L40. Their value ten years from now may very possibly
be ten times those prices, so admirable has been the taste of this
particular amateur in selecting beautifully preserved masterpieces.

These figures need not terrify the beginner whose means are limited.
Specimens of great beauty may still be brought together with a small
expenditure of money, if accompanied by a large expenditure of taste and
judgment. For example, the book-sheets of Harunobu called "Serio Bijin
Awase," the sheets of Shunsho's "Ise Monogatari," the later upright
prints of Hiroshige, the pillar-prints of Koriusai--all of them works of
admirable quality--may sometimes be obtained with only a small outlay.
Their intrinsic proportionate worth, and the certainty of their
advancing in value, are almost as great as in the case of those rarer
treasures of Masanobu, Kiyonaga, and Sharaku which have been largely
pre-empted by the great collections, and which are now almost
prohibitive in price.

Yet it would not be a kindness to hold out to the novice the hope that,
with the expenditure of a few shillings, he can form an important
collection. Such a hope is a mistaken one. Great discretion is necessary
to obtain at a moderate price prints worth having at all. The cheap
prints are generally either the late and crude ones, or the badly
damaged ones. Both of these classes lack the one _raison d'etre_ of
collecting--beauty. It is true that, as I have said, a really fine
Hiroshige may still sometimes be picked up for a song, but such
opportunities are rare; they must be waited for a long time, and must be
seized with instant determination when they come. The collector who is
not well informed is more than likely to find, after a short period of
triumph over his bargain, that his copy is a late and poor impression,
and that even the beauty of composition will not permanently satisfy him
in the absence of fine and appropriate printing. In this connection it
should be remembered that while the finest prints are generally more
valuable than their cost, the second-rate prints are generally worth
nothing whatsoever.

If one has adequate experience, one can well hunt for these
opportunities of which I speak. Or if one is unable to pay the normal
prices for fine works, one is obliged to lie in wait for them. The
average collector will, however, find that in the course of years he
gains more by paying normal prices to high-class dealers for the best
prints than by seeking in the byways for dubious bargains of speculative
quality.

It is true that the prices set upon the finest prints are at present
high. Recent years have seen an enormous advance in values. For example,
I have known L300 to be asked for a copy of the "Monkey Bridge"; L60 for
a superb copy of the Kiso Snow Mountains Triptych; and several other
prints by Hiroshige have changed hands at L60 apiece. These prices of
course applied only to remarkably, and perhaps uniquely, fine copies.
In the last edition of his volume, "Japan and its Arts," Mr. Marcus B.
Huish remarks that prints have "risen to extravagant prices--prices
sober-minded people consider altogether beyond their worth." This is a
matter of individual opinion. A good Hiroshige at L5, or a Kiyonaga at
L20 will seem to many people less extravagant than a "proof" mezzotint
by Smith from Reynold's "Mrs. Carnac" at seven hundred guineas, or
Rembrandt's etching of "Jan Six" at L3,000. In fairness to Mr. Huish,
however, we must continue the quotation. "But these prices," he says,
"have been paid by the Directors of Museums and other astute persons who
do not expend the limited means at their disposal unless they feel well
assured that they (the prints) will in the future be either unobtainable
or at enhanced prices." This is quite true. There is no indication that
the values of Japanese prints will ever be lower than they are to-day;
on the contrary, they have been rising swiftly and steadily for twenty
years, and great advances in value may be expected. To these advances
many forces are already contributing. Every year a certain number of
prints are accidentally destroyed, decreasing the total available
supply. No further supplies of large numbers can be expected from Japan,
which has been ransacked with all the thoroughness of skilled searchers
armed with the lure of high prices. In fact, prices in Japan to-day are
probably higher than prices in London; at least, higher prices are asked
for inferior prints. The finest prints bring about the same price
everywhere. Each year the great museums of the world acquire by
purchase or bequest prints which are thus forever removed from the
market. Each year the number of persons who appreciate prints is
growing; and there is a continual increase in the number of wealthy
collectors who can and will pay almost any price to obtain what they
desire. One may be prepared to look back, in twenty years, with mingled
amazement and regret as he contemplates what will then seem the absurdly
low prices asked for the greatest treasures to-day.

Therefore, without serious doubt, the prudent collector will not suffer
because of his present acquisitions. It should, however, always be borne
in mind that the very finest prints--those which seem most expensive
to-day--are the ones that will rise most rapidly in value as time
passes. Poor impressions, soiled copies, and second-rate compositions
will never be very rare; but the supremely fine sheets--scarce enough
now--will grow scarcer with every year.

Nevertheless, collecting as an investment is not advocated. If the
collector is not moved by the delight he gets from the aesthetic
qualities of the prints, he had far better leave them entirely alone.
Nothing but the passion of real enthusiasm and perception will enable
him to select the best works; and without this selection his prints are
not likely to be of much ultimate value. When, however, the collector
makes his acquisitions out of pure love for their beauty, it is right
and prudent that he should consider their value in later years. Such a
collector need have no fear; what was to him a delight and a
dissipation will probably in the end prove to his heirs an investment of
profit.


FORGERIES.

The collector must be constantly on his guard against reprints,
forgeries, and reproductions. These are not as common as some writers
believe; but they exist.

Reprints are impressions made at a time so long after the original
edition that they have not the original colouring. The register of such
prints is generally faulty, and the lines are not sharp. So long as the
blocks are in existence these reprints are possible. Early reprints are
merely late editions of the originals, and are not objectionable if the
blocks have not become worn; but late ones are undesirable. A print made
to-day from the original blocks of Harunobu, did they exist, would have
no value.

Forgeries are works produced in the style and over the signature of some
famous artist. Since they have no prototype among the artist's real
works, they present difficulties of their own; there is no genuine copy
of the same print with which to compare them. They are very rare; their
chief occurrence is in the cases of Harunobu and Utamaro.

Reproductions are prints made from new blocks cut in imitation of the
original ones. For unknown reasons a second edition of certain prints
sometimes was made very shortly after the first, from re-cut blocks.
These prints have no necessary difference in beauty or value from those
of the first edition. But such cases are few. Far commoner are the
reproductions proper--most of them copies made within the last
twenty-five years, sometimes with fraudulent intent, and sometimes
merely as honest commercial copies. In either case, they may be used
fraudulently by a present owner.

The ordinary modern reproduction is not difficult to detect. It is
generally on a harder, brittler paper than a genuine print. The feeling
of the paper between one's fingers is more like that of our
wrapping-paper than like that of the old soft papers used by the Ukioye
artists. Its surface is compact and glassy, not spongy and pliant. It
has a starchy stiffness, and lacks the soft, luminous tone of the
genuine. Generally the lines of the block are clumsily cut, lacking the
grace and strength of the original; and a careful and minute comparison
with an original impression of the same print will invariably show
difference in small details of the lines. Even the Japanese are not
skilful enough to cut a new block precisely like the old one.

The colours of a reproduction constitute perhaps the most definite
danger signal. They are, as a rule, flat and dead, lacking the soft
brilliancy of the old colours. Very seldom are they graded with care--a
repellent harshness marks them. Particularly does the blue lack the life
and depth of the genuine blue; and the red and yellow are likely to be
staring.

Freshness and perfect preservation are never, in the absence of other
signs, to be regarded as evidence of recent production. Conversely, it
is only the merest bungler who regards worm-holes or faded, browned,
and damaged condition as any evidence of age. The Japanese use
tea-leaves and various other devices to give this time-worn appearance
to the most flagrant reproductions. For all I know, they may have
trained worms to eat holes. These damaged, tea-soaked prints would be
almost worthless even if they were genuine. The stray tourist in Japan,
however, customarily accumulates a large number of these soiled tatters,
fearing to touch the fresh-looking copies. And the Japanese willingly
calm his fears by soaking and soiling their reprints.

There are, however, a few reproductions of so fine a quality that
detection is extremely difficult. These are the sheets over which
experts shake their heads and go away muttering, to return for councils
and deliberations and sometimes total disagreement. There exists in an
American collection a certain Kiyonaga print which half a dozen experts
believe to be a modern fraud, though another half-dozen are prepared to
defend its authenticity until Judgment Day. Work of this quality is
expensive to produce, and the price asked for it is therefore always
high.

Certain specific reproductions are to be guarded against. Many
fraudulent copies of Hiroshige's "Monkey Bridge" and "Kiso Snow Gorge"
are on the market; all those I have ever seen are so poor in colour and
so different in line-details that it seems incredible that anyone should
be deceived. Several of the Tokaido Set have been imitated, rather
poorly; and also some of the Birds and Flowers. Quite recently, there
has appeared a remarkable Lake Biwa set, produced with such beauty and
skill that several of the greatest authorities in the world were at
first deceived by it. Hokusai's "Imagery of the Poets," "Waterfalls,"
"Thirty-six Views of Fuji," and "Loocho Islands," have been reprinted;
the colours and the lines are a little imperfect; and no one who uses
care need be misled by them. They are, however, good enough to be
dangerous to the beginner. Utamaro's most famous works, particularly the
"Awabi Shell-Divers" triptych, have been reprinted fairly well. Perilous
imitations of several of the Primitives are extant; the stiff paper is
almost the only means of detection. Sharaku has been reprinted
dangerously well; one lately discovered fraudulent print of his sold for
a high price at Sotheby's some years ago, and subsequently passed
unquestioned through the hands of a dozen English and American experts,
until finally an accidental comparison of it with a genuine sheet
revealed points of difference. Another copy of this same reproduction
remains to this day as the treasured possession of a well-known English
collection.

Possibly the most dangerous of all forgeries and reprints are those of
Harunobu's small square prints, for they have sometimes been produced
with notable skill. Even the greatest experts have been deceived by
them. Fenollosa, at No. 131 of the Ketcham Catalogue, describes in the
most glowing terms, as "the central point of all Ukioye," a print which
its present owner has found to be a reproduction, not thirty years old,
and has discarded from his collection.

The reputable dealers, often men of much experience, never offer
reproductions for sale, though they, like any one else, may
occasionally be deceived by the finest of the fraudulent ones. They use
their best skill to protect their customers, and the protection is
generally efficient. If, however, a dealer is unwilling to give
assurance in writing that the print is genuine, or if his stock contains
more than the two or three reproductions accountable for on the ground
of bad judgment, he should be avoided as untrustworthy.

The experienced collector, who has seen and handled tens of thousands of
prints, becomes accustomed to the texture of the various papers, the
tones of the various colours, and the contours of line-cutting. His
familiarity produces in him a sixth sense which is his instinctive guide
in the detection of frauds. Later investigation may define his original
impression and prove it to have been correct; but in the first instance
he relies on intuition. The less experienced collector has no such
guide; and he should realize that he has not, and not try to evolve one
from his inner consciousness. Nothing is more ludicrous than to see such
a person in a print-shop in Japan. He turns over pile after pile of
prints, selecting those which his judgment tells him are "really old."
What he generally means is, "really dirty." Advice from bystanders is
not often welcomed by him, and the only peaceable thing one can do is to
leave him to his own curious devices. There is a certain malicious
pleasure to be obtained in going through the piles such a collector has
discarded, and selecting from them, as one sometimes can, a flawlessly
preserved copy of some fine print which he passed by as too
fresh-looking to be anything but fraudulent. But when he returns to his
hotel at night and exhibits triumphantly the treasures he has garnered
during the day, it would be a hard heart that could do anything but keep
silent and weep inwardly. The sixth sense can be relied on only if one
has had much experience. If one is inexperienced, the safe way is to ask
expert advice.

For the experienced collector I venture to suggest only one maxim. If
vaguely suspicious of a print, but unable to tell exactly why, discard
the print. Your whole accumulated experience is indefinably expressing
itself in your suspicion; and nine times out of ten it is right.


CARE OF A COLLECTION.

When a print is once properly prepared and mounted, it needs no further
care except protection from injury. Prolonged exposure to sunlight is
not desirable, since fading may result; dampness is to be guarded
against because of the danger of mildew, a terrible foe; care in
handling must be exercised, so that the print be not rubbed, creased, or
torn. But if these elementary precautions are employed, the print will
take care of itself.

It may be worth while for the benefit of the beginner to trace the steps
that are taken by a collector between the time when he becomes the owner
of a new print and the time when he puts it away in his portfolios as an
established part of his collection.

The first step is to examine the print with care and ascertain what, if
any, processes are necessary to prepare it for mounting. If the
condition of the sheet is flawless, nothing is required. If its
condition is in one way or another defective, it is the task of the
collector to determine whether any operation within his command can
remedy the defect, and to decide how he will accomplish his end.

This is perhaps a proper place to caution the inexperienced, and in some
cases even the experienced collector, against acts of vandalism. To cut
down, colour, or otherwise mutilate a print, is one of those
unforgivable offences which often demonstrate conclusively how easy it
is for a fool to destroy in five minutes the achievement of a genius's
lifetime. One well-known collector, now dead, boiled his Harunobus in
paraffin to give them lustre; another painted branches into the
pillar-prints of Koriusai; another cut down the size of his Hiroshiges,
leaving only those portions that particularly pleased him. If the
feelings of later collectors have any potency in heaven, these men are
now in hell. Not only is any attempt to improve upon the artist's work a
contemptible piece of presumption, but even the mere effort to repair
damages inflicted by time may be an unwise venture. Frequently such
injuries could be remedied by an expert were it not that some preceding
bungler, with the best intentions in the world, has, out of sheer
inexperience, made the injuries irreparable. For example, if a print
comes into the expert's hands untouched he can literally slice off a
microscopic layer of the paper and thus remove a bad surface-spot; but
if the paper has been tampered with by ignorant attempts to erase, he
is helpless. Tears, stains, abrasions, and chemical decomposition may
yield to skilful treatment; but unless one knows with the utmost
exactitude what he expects to accomplish and how he intends to proceed
at every step, he had best leave the matter strictly alone, or entrust
it to other hands.

If the collector will remember that, though he is the present owner of
his prints, he is not the final owner, he will be impelled to move with
caution in his handling of them. Long after he is dead and forgotten,
generations of lovers of beauty will treasure the sheets he once owned,
and he will deserve their reproaches or their thanks according to the
respect he has shown for these works. He is custodian for posterity, and
his trust is one worthy of careful thought. He cannot do better than
bear constantly in mind what should be the golden rule for collectors in
all fields: Make no repairs, institute no changes, that cannot be
altered; never do anything to a work of art that cannot be undone by its
next owner.

Trim no margins; it is easy to mat them. Do not try to make more decent
the objectionable rendering of a nude; sell the print to some one who
does not find this rendering objectionable. If the colour has faded out,
do not try to paint it in; possibly some one else may find the mere
black-and-white composition beautiful, and he may prefer to see even the
faded work of Kiyonaga rather than Kiyonaga plus the improvizations of a
doubtless less illustrious designer.

No one needs such cautions as little as do the few experts whose
experience renders them competent to attempt what are almost capital
operations. They are, of all collectors, the most reluctant to essay any
manipulation whatsoever. To witness the repeated examinations and
deliberations which the competent workman expends on so simple a
question as whether or not a certain black spot shall be restored to its
original orange hue is to learn a serious lesson.

The first of the steps to be taken in improving the condition of a print
will generally be washing. If a print is badly wrinkled or creased, or
if it appears to have dust and dirt on its surface, a bath is the best
possible thing for it. A perfectly fresh print should never be washed;
nothing is to be gained by it, and much may be lost. For in many cases a
little of the colour will come out in the course of the process, and the
brilliance of the print will suffer slightly. Certain prints should be
washed only if it is absolutely necessary. Harunobu prints with
transparent red in them, Shuncho's that have purple, and any print that
contains a delicate pigment known to collectors as "surimono blue,"
should be kept out of water if possible. These colours are not fast, and
they are likely to go down in tone, or even run over into the adjoining
parts of the print. The yellows and greens are as a rule unchanging, but
a large number of the other colours are subject to modification,
particularly in the work of the Kiyonaga and Utamaro Periods. The prints
of Hiroshige and Hokusai generally undergo no change.

Prints with silver backgrounds should not be washed, and pillar-prints
that consist of two joined sheets of paper should be kept in water only
long enough to become wet through; longer immersions will cause the
sheets to separate, and necessitate troublesome work in rejoining them.

The process of washing is simple. A large vessel--a prosaic bath-tub is
as good as anything--is filled with luke-warm water, and the print is
put in and allowed to soak for a few minutes. If another sheet of paper
has been pasted on the back of the print, this is carefully peeled off
after the paste has become thoroughly wet. Adhering daubs of paste may
be rubbed off with the fingers. Sometimes a very brown and dirty print
can be cleaned a little by spreading it out while wet on a sheet of
glass and applying a solution of some good washing-soap. Such a
proceeding should be resorted to only in case of extreme dirtiness; and
prolonged soaking in clear water should follow.

When the washing is finished, the print is lifted from the water and
allowed to drain for a few seconds, and is then carefully spread face
downwards on a fresh sheet of heavy unglazed cardboard of the kind known
as "blank." By means of a large damp brush or a delicately handled
cloth, the back of the print is smoothed out so that it lies perfectly
flat and even. Another sheet of cardboard is then placed on top of it,
and the two sheets, with the print between them, are put away under
heavy weights, such as two or three portfolios, and allowed to remain
untouched for twenty-four hours or more. A good deal of dirt, and
unfortunately a little colour, will generally soak out of the print and
into the cardboard. When dry, the print peels neatly away from the
cardboard, with its surface freshened and smoothed, sometimes almost
remade.

Thin, worn, or disintegrated prints are difficult to handle during these
processes; when wet, they tear like damp cigarette-paper. Sometimes
prints that have been damaged and skilfully mended will float away in
two or three pieces upon immersion. These and other possible troubles
make it advisable that the inexperienced collector venture not too
boldly in trying experiments. At least let him begin on prints of no
value.

After the print is dry, worm-holes or tears can be mended either by
patching or inlaying. Generally it is best to dampen the paper before
attempting this. The simplest form of repair is to paste back of the
hole a small piece of paper of the same colour as the print. A collector
will have on hand a number of worthless damaged prints of various
shades, out of which he cuts pieces for this purpose. Inlaying is more
difficult; it involves either inserting a piece of paper cut to match
the hole exactly, or inserting loose paper-pulp which is moulded to fill
the hole. Both processes require more skill than the average collector
can master, and are best left to the expert.

Stains and spots present difficult problems. Some are superficial, and
can be gradually sliced off with a very sharp thin knife--an operation
that will invariably result in the ruin of the print if tried by a
novice. Minute knowledge of the behaviour of the curious fibrous
Japanese paper is necessary for success; the expert generally works
under a glass, and prays continuously while he works. Stains that have
soaked deeply into the paper are almost hopeless. Mildew discoloration
is ineradicable. Grease-spots sometimes yield to ether, benzine, or
other common solvents. The use of these is, however, a desperate remedy;
they may spoil the print even if they remove the spot.

Certain chemical changes in the pigments can be reversed, and the
original colour restored. The blackening of _tan_, that orange pigment
used by Koriusai and many other artists, can be removed and the original
brilliance brought back. The same is true of a certain white that
blackens with time. The processes employed are, however, easily capable
of misuse; and the few persons who know the methods prefer not to make
them public.

If a portion of a print is missing, due to a tear or to the ravages of
moths, it is legitimate and desirable to tint the paper that is used to
fill in the hole so that it matches its surroundings. Water-colours and
a fine brush are employed. But on no account should the surface of the
print itself be painted; if the colour has worn off in spots, any
attempt to restore it will merely increase the damage still further.

A very thin print, or one that has been torn in several places, is best
treated by pasting on the back of it while damp a dampened sheet of
thin, tough Japanese paper. The operation, simple as it sounds, is
difficult and requires practice to produce a smooth result.

Some collectors paste down the four edges of their prints on thin
sheets of cardboard to preserve their flatness. The practice is an
undesirable one; it prevents any examination of the back of the print;
and does not achieve its end, since the print and the mount expand and
contract differently, and wrinkles are almost sure to appear eventually.
The better practice is to apply a mere touch of paste to the two upper
corners of the print, and affix these lightly to the mount. Over this is
then placed a mat, with a hole cut to fit the print exactly, covering
and holding down the print's edges, and protecting it from abrasions.
The size of the mount and mat is determined by individual taste; 3 or 4
inches margin would seem to be the minimum desirable. After many
experiments I have adopted 221/2 x 151/2 inches as the size for my own
collection. Mr. Gookin prefers 25 x 16; but he also finds 23 x 151/2
satisfactory if the economy of space is any object. As to thickness,
tastes also differ; the mount should be at least thick enough not to
bend much with ordinarily careful handling. Heavy Japanese Vellum makes
the best mats; it is expensive, but it greatly enhances the appearance
of the prints.

For triptychs and pillar-prints, a much larger and heavier mount is
required than in the case of ordinary sheets. If the collector has only
a few of the former, he may prefer to mount the three sheets separately,
for convenience in storing, and place the three mounts side by side only
when exhibiting them. If the two end sheets are mounted so that they
come very close to the right and to the left-hand edges of their
respective mounts, the effect of the three assembled is by no means bad;
and the ease of handling them is an advantage. Only the most perfectly
matched triptychs can in any case dispense with the necessity of narrow
strips left in the mat to cover the junction-edges of the sheets.

Some collectors have card-catalogues in which they keep all information
relating to each print. Others use the bottom of the mount under the mat
for that purpose. For a large collection the former is preferable; for a
small one, the latter.

The mounted prints are best kept in portfolios or Solander-boxes, laid
flat on shelves and protected from dust as much as possible. Within the
portfolio or box, the arrangement that is most useful is the
chronological one.

There have been in the past several collections, such as the Hayashi and
Wakai, whose owners felt it to be appropriate that they stamp their
private seals upon the face of each print held by them. It is useless to
comment upon the wisdom or unwisdom of their course; for the thing is
done, and many a fine print is now indelibly branded with these
insignia. But it may be pointed out that the present practice of
reputable collectors does not sanction such acts. Should any collector
who happens to read these lines contemplate thus immortalizing himself,
I suggest that he seriously consider whether even one small seal is not
a disturbing factor when injected into a design so subtly calculated as
the finest prints.

Further, if one collector may so stamp his prints, all others surely
have a similar privilege; and if the habit became universal, what would
be the appearance of a print which, in the next two hundred years,
should pass--as a print might easily pass--through the hands of twenty
collectors? And lastly, is there not a certain betrayal of petty conceit
when the mere temporary owner of a great work of art judges the fact of
his brief ownership to be of such importance that future generations
must be told of it; and so places his own emblem beside that of the
creator of the print--beside the name of the immortal Kiyonaga or
Sharaku?


CONCLUSION.

The day is coming--perhaps it is already here--when the Japanese Print
will become the spiritual possession of a wider circle than that limited
group of collectors who have been devoted to it in the past. Alien
though this art is, it has power to penetrate to regions of the mind
which Western art too often leaves unvisited.

Much is said unwisely about the elevating and educative power of art.
The man in the street has come to believe that the elevating force
resides in the theme which a work of art presents--that a picture of
Galahad riding for the Grail is a lofty thing, and that a picture of the
wings of the theatre during a ballet is a base one. Hence has arisen
that unspeakably childish modern school of middle-class painters whose
"pictures with a story"--generally a sentimental or edifying story--are
the terror of the art-lover. After them, no wonder that even the
Cubists came as a relief.

As every artist knows, the elevating power that resides in the mere
subject of a picture has at best no more force than a moral maxim; the
mind may assent to it, but the heart is unmoved. The same may be said in
the case of a poem. The glory of poetry is not that it furnishes
elevated sentiments in rhyme for public speakers to quote, but that it
embodies music and thought combined in so fitly proportioned and
expressive a structure that the reader carries away with him a certain
acquaintance with perfection and a lasting desire for ideal beauty in
everything.

Thus it is only through its power to cultivate the spectator's sense of
form that art may be called elevating. Close familiarity with the
productions of great artists gradually develops in the spectator an
understanding of proportion, harmony, and conscious design, evoking in
him the ability to perceive and even create order and freedom.

Because of the fact that the best Japanese prints are so superb an
expression of the sense of form, they may be rated high as cultural
agents. In them the eye finds little or no distraction occasioned by
mere subject. Here speak the pure elements of artistic creation,
liberated from combination with elements of accidental and personal
charm. They contain the quintessence of all those harmonious and
significant qualities which men desire of life. He who really takes them
into his consciousness will be repelled by disorder, dullness, and
indeterminateness all his days. And probably the world will be saved by
its hatred of these things. Therefore the Japanese print cannot be
regarded as primarily a pattern for future designers of wood-engraving;
it appears to have a far wider and deeper office to perform.




INDEX




INDEX


Actors, 134, 304, 306

Anchi, _see_ Kwaigetsudo

Ando, _see_ Kwaigetsudo

Anshin, _see_ Yasunobu

Ashikuni, 356

Ashimaro, 299

Ashiyuki, 356


Banki, 298

Banto, 173

Bokusen, 375

Buddhism, 55

BUNCHO, 185, 209, 426

Bunkaku, _see_ Okumura Masanobu

Bunro, 299


Chikamaro, _see_ Kiosai

Chikanobu, 299

Chikashige, 353

Chincho, 91

Chiryu, 173

CHOKI, 319, 427

Chosho, _see_ Nagamatsu

Condition, 418

Courtesan, _see_ Yoshiwara


Denroku, 108

Dohan, _see_ Kwaigetsudo

Doshin, _see_ Kwaigetsudo

Doshu, _see_ Kwaigetsudo


Forgeries, 432

Fujinobu, 108, 173

Furuyama, 75

Fusanobu, 108

Fuyo, 299


Gakutei, 374

Gangakusai, 375

Genpachi, _see_ Okumura Masanobu

Genroku Era, 65, 134

Genshichi, 80

Ginsetsu, _see_ Fusanobu

Gogaku, _see_ Gakutei

Gokei, 375

Gokyo, 278

Goshichi, 299

Gosotei, 351, 398

Gyokushi, 157


Hanamaro, 299

Hanzan, 356

Haruhiro, _see_ Koriusai

Haruji, 173

Harumachi, _see_ Utamaro II

Harumitsu, 234

Harunobu, 129, 136, 208, 422, 426

Harushige, 171

Harutoshi, 108

Harutsugu, 173

Hasegawa Toun, 75

Hidemaro, 299

Hirosada, 356

HIROSHIGE I, 357, 375, 415, 426

Hiroshige II, 397

Hiroshige III, 398

Hisanobu, 299

Hogetsudo, _see_ Okumura Masanobu

Hokkei, 374

Hokuba, 375

Hokuga, 375

Hokuju, 374

Hokumio, 356

HOKUSAI, 258, 379, 427

Hokushu, 356

Hokusui, 375

Hokutai, 375

Hokutei, 375

Hoku-un, 375

Hokuyei, 375

Hokuyo, 375

Horiu, 173


Isai, 375

Ise Monogatari, 56, 182

Isomaro, 299

Iyeyasu, 49


Juzan, 375


Kagetoshi, 356

Kako, _see_ Hokusai

Kammyo, _see_ Okumura Masanobu

Kanamaro, 299

Kano School, 50, 52, 54

Katsukawa School, 129

Katsumasa (Kichikawa), 95

Katsumasa (Yoshimura), 75

Katsunobu, 95

Keiju, 375

Keisai, _see_ Masayoshi

Keri, 375

Kichi, 75

Kikumaro I, 298

Kikumaro II, 298

Kiosai, 353

Kisen, 173

Kitamaro, 299

Kiyoaki, 92

Kiyofusa, 84, 123, 354

Kiyoharu (Torii), 124

Kiyoharu (Kondo Sukegoro), 92

Kiyohide (Torii), 124

Kiyohide II, 234

Kiyohiro, 123

Kiyohisa, 234

Kiyokatsu, 234

Kiyokuni, 353

Kiyomasa, 234

KIYOMASU, 84, 88

Kiyomine, 84, 123, 354

KIYOMITSU, 84, 116

Kiyomitsu II, _see_ Kiyomine

Kiyomitsu III, _see_ Kiyofusa

Kiyomoto (Torii), 124

Kiyomoto II, 355

KIYONAGA, 84, 217, 241, 259, 405, 426

KIYONOBU I, 83

KIYONOBU II, 87, 90

Kiyonobu (Kondo), 95

Kiyoro, 95

Kiyosada I, 355

Kiyosada II, 354

Kiyosato, 124

Kiyoshige, 91

Kiyosomo, 92

Kiyotada I, 91

Kiyotada II, 355

Kiyotada III, 355

Kiyotomo, 92

Kiyotei, 234

Kiyotoki, 234

Kiyotoshi, 124

Kiyotsugi, 234

Kiyotsune (Torii), 124

Kiyotsune II, 234

Kiyoyasu, 355

Kiyoyuki, 234

Kogan, 173

Kokan, _see_ Shiba Kokan

Komatsuken, 173

KORIUSAI, 157, 159

Kuniaki, 353

Kuniao I, 353

Kuniao II, 353

Kunichika, 353

Kunifusa, 353

Kunihana, 353

Kunihiko, 353

Kunikane I, 353

Kunikane II, 353

Kunihiro, 353

Kunihisa, 353

Kunikatsu, 353

Kunikiyo, 353

Kunimaro, 299

Kunimaru I, 353

Kunimaru II, 353

Kunimasa I, 318, 352

Kunimasa II, _see_ Kunisada II

Kunimasa III, _see_ Kunisada III

Kunimichi I, 353

Kunimichi II, 353

Kunimitsu, 353

Kunimune, 353

Kuninaga, 353

Kuninobu I, 173

Kuninobu II, 353

Kunisada I, 351

Kunisada II, 352

Kunisada III, 352

Kunitada, 353

Kunitaka, 353

Kunitohisa, 353

Kunitaki, 353

Kunitane, 353

Kunitera, 353

Kuniteru, 353

Kunitoki, 353

Kunitora, 353

Kunitsugi I, 353

Kunitsugi II, 353

Kunitsuma, 353

Kuniyasu I, 353

Kuniyasu II, 399

Kuniyoshi, 375

Kuniyuki, 353

Kuzayeimon, 108

KWAIGETSUDO, 79

Kyoden, _see_ Kitao Masanobu

Kyosen, 157

Kyuyeimon, 108


Landscape, 356


Magosaburo, _see_ Shigenaga

Mangetsudo, 105

Masafusa, 105

Masanobu (Hishikawa), 75

MASANOBU (Kitao), 248, 427

MASANOBU (Okumura), 95

Masanojo, 75

Masataka, 75

Masayoshi, 250

Masks, 304

Masunobu (Tanaka), 92, 173

Masunobu II, 92, 172

Matabei, 58, 73

Mazunobu, 95

Michimaro, 299

Minemaro, 299

Minko, 173

Mitemaro, 299

Mitsunobu, 95

Morikuni, 75

Morobei, 75

Morofusa, 75

Moromasa, 75

Moromori, 75

Moronaga, 75

MORONOBU, 69

Moroshige, 75

Morotada, 124

Morotane, 75

Morotsugi, 75

Motonobu, 105

Muranobu, 173


Nagahide I, 108

Nagahide II, 328

Nagamatsu, 328

Nagayoshi, _see_ Choki

Nichiren, 58

Niho, 375

Nishimura School, 105

No Drama, 303

Norihide, _see_ Kwaigetsudo

Norishige, _see_ Kwaigetsudo

Noritatsu, _see_ Kwaigetsudo

Nudes, 115, 123, 222


Oiran, _see_ Yoshiwara

Omume, 92

Osaka School, 355

Osawa, 75

Otsu-ye, 67


Pillar Prints, 100, 123, 151, 164, 233

Primitives, 63, 127, 207, 426

Polychrome, 140

Printing, 40, 414

Prices, 425


Ranko, 356

Renshi, 375

Rihei, 108

Riusen, 75

Riushu, 75

Rosen, 157

Ryokin, 58

Ryujo, 75

Ryukoku, 299

Ryusai, 375

Ryushi, 173


Sadafusa, 356

Sadaharu, 108

Sadahide, 400

Sadahiro, 356

Sadakage, 356

Sadamasa, 356

Sadamasu, 356

Sadanobu (Hasegawa), 356, 399

Sadanobu (Tamura), 92

Sadatora, 356

Sadatoshi, 95

Sadayoshi, 356

Sancho, 234

Seiko, 173

Sekicho, 299

Sekiga, 198

Sekiho, 299

Sekijo, 299

Sekiyen, 285, 320

Sekkyo, 299

Sencho, 353

Senga, 157

Senka, 299

Senkwado, _see_ Shigenaga

SHARAKU, 194, 260, 299, 323, 405, 426

Shiba Kokan, 156, 171

Shigefusa, 108

Shigeharu, 108

SHIGEMASA, 182, 199, 201, 426

Shigemasa III, _see_ Yoshimaro I

SHIGENAGA, 105

Shigenobu (Hirose), 108

Shigenobu (Ichiusai), _see_ Hiroshige II

Shigenobu (Kawashima), 75

Shigenobu (Nishimura), 105, 107

Shigenobu (Ryukwado Ichiichido), 108

Shigenobu (Tsunegawa), 107

Shigenobu (Yamamoto), 108

Shigenobu (Yanagawa), 297, 374

Shigeyama, 375

Shiko, _see_ Choki

Shoha, 173

Shoshin, _see_ Masayoshi

Shikimaro, 298

Shiro, _see_ Kiyonobu II

Shoyu, 198

Shimbei, 75

Shinsai, 375

Shintoku, 299

Shoshoken, _see_ Komatsuken

Shucho, 298

Shuha, _see_ Ishikawa Toyonobu

SHUNCHO (Katsukawa), 237, 427

Shuncho (Koikawa), _see_ Utamaro II

Shunbeni, 353

Shundo, 198

Shunkaku, 198

Shunken,198

Shunki, 198

Shunkio, 198

Shunkiosai, 299

Shunjo, _see_ Shunyei

Shunko (Harumitsu), _see_ Harumitsu

SHUNKO (Katsukawa), 197, 426

Shunko II, 198, 234

Shunko (Kichosai), 198

Shunkyoku, 198

Shunri, 198

Surimono, 373

Shunrin, 198

SHUNMAN, 246, 427

Shunro, _see_ Hokusai

Shunshi, 356

Shunsei, 198

Shuntei, 198

Shunsen, 399

SHUNSHO (Katsukawa), 134, 174, 186, 193, 199, 201, 208, 426

Shunsho II, 356

Shunsui, 177

Shuntoku, 198

SHUNYEI, 193, 300, 426

Shunyen, 198

Shunzan, 245

Shuseido, 105

Soan, 173

Sobai, 198

Sogaku, 299

Sogiku, 173

Soraku, 279, 299

Sori, _see_ Hokusai

Sugakudo, 353

Suiyo, 173

SUKENOBU, 75


Tadeharu, 95

Taigaku, 375

Taito, _see_ Hokusai and Yanagawa Shigenobu

Takahashi, _see_ Rosen

Takemaro, 298

Tanchosai, _see_ Okumura Masanobu

Tange, 75

Terunobu, 92

Terushige, 92

Theatre, 133, _also see_ Actors

Toban, _see_ Kwaigetsudo

Tojin, _see_ Kwaigetsudo

Tokugawa Dynasty, 49

Tominobu, 353

Tomofusa, 75

Torii School, 84

Tosa School, 53

Toshimaro, 299

Toshinobu, 104

Toshiyuki, 75

Toshu, _see_ Kwaigetsudo

TOYOHARU, 199, 200

Toun, 75

TOYOHIRO I, 320, 338, 427

Toyohiro II, 353

Toyohisa, 201

Toyokiyo, 353

TOYOKUNI I, 328, 339, 427

Toyokuni II, _see_ Gosotei

Toyokuni III, _see_ Kunisada I

Toyokuni IV, _see_ Kunisada II

Toyokuni V, _see_ Kunisada III

Toyokuma, 124

Toyomaro, 298

Toyomaru, 201

Toyomasu, 124

Toyonaga, 124

TOYONOBU (Ishikawa), 108, 200

Toyonobu (Utagawa), 200

Toyoshige, _see_ Gosotei

Triptych, 230

Tsukimaro (Kitagawa), _see_ Kikumaro I

Tsukimaro (Tanimoto), 298

Tsukioka Tange, 75


Ujimasa, 173

Ukioye School, 54, 65, 70

UTAMARO, 257, 260, 279, 426

Utamaro II, 298

Utagawa School, 200


Wagen, 92

Wowo, 75


Yamamoto School, 108

Yasumichi, 375

Yasunobu, 107

Yasutomo, _see_ Kwaigetsudo

Yeicho, 279

Yeiju, 279

Yeiki, 279

Yeiri (Rekisenti), 279

Yeiri (Yeishi's Pupil), 279

Yeiru, 279

Yeisen, 398

YEISHI, 262, 404, 427

Yeishin, 279

YEISHO, 274, 427

Yeisui, 278

Yeizan, 354

Yencho, 299

Yenkyo, 317

Yenshi, 199

Yoshichika, 353

Yoshifuji, 353

Yoshifusa, 353

Yoshikata, 299

Yoshiharu, 353

Yoshikage, 353

Yoshiku, 356

Yoshiki, 299

Yoshikazu, 353

Yoshikuni, 353

Yoshimaro I, 298

Yoshimaro II, 298

Yoshimori, 299

Yoshimune, 299

Yoshisato, 353

Yoshinobu (Fujikawa), 92

Yoshinobu (Komai), 172, 108

Yoshinobu (Tamura), 92

Yoshinobu (Yamomoto), 108, 172

Yoshitaki, 353

Yoshitomi, 353

Yoshitora, 299

Yoshitoshi, 299

Yoshitsuna, 353

Yoshitsuru, 353

Yoshitsuya, 299

Yoshiyuki, 400

Yoshiume, 353

Yoshiwara, 210, 259, 282, 290

Yumiaki, 299

Yukimaro I, 298

Yukimaro II, 298

Yumisho, 198




PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
BY UNWIN BROTHERS, LIMITED
PRINTERS, LONDON AND WOKING