WHY I BELIEVE IN POVERTY



                      The Riverside Uplift Series

               WHY I BELIEVE IN POVERTY. By EDWARD BOK,

                  THE AMATEUR SPIRIT, By BLISS PERRY.

           THE GLORY OF THE IMPERFECT, By GEORGE H, PALMER.

           SELF-CULTIVATION IN ENGLISH. By GEORGE H. PALMER.

             TRADES AND PROFESSIONS. By GEORGE H. PALMER.

               THE CULTIVATED MAN. By CHARLES W. ELIOT.

                          WHITHER? ANONYMOUS.

                  CALM YOURSELF. By GEORGE L. WALTON.

                         Each, 50 cents, net.
                       HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY
                          BOSTON AND NEW YORK






                       WHY I BELIEVE IN POVERTY

           AS THE RICHEST EXPERIENCE THAT CAN COME TO A BOY

                                  BY

                              EDWARD BOK

                          BOSTON AND HEW YORK

                       HOUGHTON MIFFLIN COMPANY

                               MDCCCCXV

             COPYRIGHT, 1915, BY CURTIS PUBLISHING COMPANY

                    COPYRIGHT, 1915, BY EDWARD BOK

                       ALL RIGHTS RESERVED 1915




                              A FOREWORD

THE article in this little book was published in _The Ladies' Home
Journal_ for April, 1915. Much to the surprise of the author, the call
for copies was so insistent as to exhaust the edition of the magazine
containing it. As the demand did not appear to be supplied, the article
is now reprinted in this form. It is sent out with the hope of the
author that it may still further fulfill its mission of giving the
stimulant of encouragement wherever it is needed.

E. B.

_October Nineteen hundred and fifteen_




                       WHY I BELIEVE IN POVERTY

           AS THE RICHEST EXPERIENCE THAT CAN COME TO A BOY

I MAKE my living trying to edit the "Ladies' Home Journal." And because
the public has been most generous in its acceptance of that periodical,
a share of that success has logically come to me. Hence a number of my
very good readers cherish an opinion that often I have been tempted to
correct, a temptation to which I now yield. My correspondents express
the conviction variously, but this extract from a letter is a fair
sample:--

It is all very easy for you to preach economy to us when you do not know
the necessity for it: to tell us how, as for example in my own case, we
must live within my husband's income of eight hundred dollars a year,
when you have never known what it is to live on less than thousands. Has
it ever occurred to you, born with the proverbial silver spoon in your
mouth, that theoretical writing is pretty cold and futile compared to
the actual hand-to-mouth struggle that so many of us live, day by day
and year in and year out--an experience that you know not of?



"An experience that you know not of"!

Now, how far do the facts square with this statement?

Whether or not I was born with the proverbial silver spoon in my mouth I
cannot say. It is true that I was born of well-to-do parents. But when I
was six years old my father lost all his means, and faced life at
forty-five, in a strange country, without even necessaries. There are
men and their wives who know what that means: for a man to try to "come
back" at forty-five, and in a strange country!

I had the handicap of not knowing one word of the English language. I
went to a public school and learned what I could. And sparse morsels
they were! The boys were cruel, as boys are. The teachers were
impatient, as tired teachers are.

My father could not find his place in the world. My mother, who had
always had servants at her beck and call, faced the problems of
housekeeping that she had never learned nor been taught. And there was
no money.

So, after school hours, my brother and I went home, but not to play.
After-school hours meant for us to help a mother who daily grew more
frail under the burdens that she could not carry. Not for days, but for
years, we two boys got up in the gray cold winter dawn when the bed
feels so snug and warm to growing boys, and we sifted the cold ashes of
the day-before fire for a stray lump or two of unburned coal, and with
what we had or could find we made the fire and warmed up the room. Then
we set the table for the scant breakfast, went to school, and directly
after school we washed the dishes, swept and scrubbed the floors. Living
in a three-family tenement, each third week meant that we scrubbed the
entire three flights of stairs from the third story to the first, as
well as the doorsteps and the side-walk outside. The latter work was the
hardest: for we did it on Saturdays with the boys of the neighborhood
looking on none too kindly, or we did it to the echo of the crack of the
ball and bat on the adjoining lot!

In the evening, when other could sit by the lamp or study their lessons,
we two boys went out with a basket and picked up wood and coal in the
neighboring lots, or went after the dozen or so pieces of coal left from
the ton of coal put in that afternoon by one of our neighbors, with the
spot hungrily fixed in mind by one of us during the day, hoping that the
man who carried in the coal might not be too careful in picking up the
stray lumps!

"An experience that you know not of"! Don't I?

At ten years of age I got my first job: washing the windows of a baker's
shop at fifty cents a week. In a week or two I was allowed to sell bread
and cakes behind the counter after school hours for a dollar a
week--handing out freshly baked cakes and warm, delicious smelling
bread, when scarcely a crumb had passed my mouth that day!

Then on Saturday mornings I served a route for a weekly paper, and sold
my remaining stock on the street. It meant from sixty to seventy cents
for that day's work.

I lived in Brooklyn, New York, and the chief means of transportation to
Coney Island at that time was the horse car. Near where we lived the
cars would stop to water the horses, the men would jump out and get a
drink of water, but the women had no means of quenching their thirst.
Seeing this lack I got a pail, filled it with water and a bit of ice,
and, with a glass, jumped on each car on Saturday afternoon and all day
Sunday, and sold my wares at a cent a glass. And when competition came,
as it did very quickly when other boys saw that a Sunday's work meant
two or three dollars, I squeezed a lemon or two in my pail, my liquid
became "lemonade" and my price two cents a glass, and Sundays meant five
dollars to me.

Then, in turn, I became a reporter during the evenings, an office boy
day-times, and learned stenography at midnight!

My correspondent says she supports her family of husband and child on
eight hundred dollars a year, and says I have never known what that
means. I supported a family of three on six dollars and twenty-five
cents a week--less than one half of her yearly income. When my brother
and I, combined, brought in eight hundred dollars a year we felt rich!

I have for the first time gone into these details in print so that my
readers may know, at first hand, that the

Editor of the "Ladies' Home Journal" is not a theorist when he writes or
prints articles that seek to preach economy or that reflect a
hand-to-hand struggle on a small or an invisible income. There is not a
single step, not an inch, on the road of direst poverty that I do not
know or have not experienced. And, having experienced every thought,
every feeling, and every hardship that come to those who travel that
road, I say to-day that I rejoice with every boy who is going through
the same experiences.

Nor am I discounting or forgetting one single pang of the keen hardships
that such a struggle means. I would not to-day exchange my years of the
keenest hardship that a boy can know or pass through for any single
experience that could have come to me. I know what it means, not to earn
a dollar, but to earn two cents. I know the value of money as I could
have learned it or known it in no other way. I could have been trained
for my life-work in no surer way. I could not have arrived at a truer
understanding of what it means to face a day without a penny in hand,
not a loaf of bread in the cupboard, not a piece of kindling wood for
the fire--with nothing to eat, and then be a boy with the hunger of nine
and ten, with a mother frail and discouraged!

"An experience that you know not of"! Don't I?

And yet I rejoice in the experience, and I repeat: I envy every boy who
is in that condition and going through it. But--and here is the pivot of
my strong belief in poverty as an undisguised blessing to a boy--I
believe in poverty as a condition to experience, to go through, and then
to get out of: not as a condition to stay in. "That's all very well,"
some will say; "easy enough to say, but how can you get out of it?" No
one can definitely tell another that. No one told me. No two persons can
find the same way out. Each must find his way for himself. That depends
on the boy. I was determined to get out of poverty because my mother was
not born in it, could not stand it, and did not belong in it. This gave
me the first essential: a purpose. Then I backed up the purpose with
effort and a willingness to work, and to work at anything that came my
way, no matter what it was, so long as it meant "the way out." I did not
pick and choose: I took what came, and did it in the best way I knew
how; and when I didn't like what I was doing I still did it well while I
was doing it, but I saw to it that I didn't do it any longer than I had
to do it. I used every rung in the ladder as a rung to the one above. It
meant effort, of course, untiring, ceaseless, and unsparing, and it
meant work, hard as nails. But out of the effort and the work came the
experience; the upbuilding; the development; the capacity to understand
and sympathize; the greatest heritage that can come to a boy. And
nothing in the world can give that to a boy, so that it will burn into
him, as will poverty.

That is why I believe so strongly in poverty, the greatest blessing in
the way of the deepest and fullest experience that can come to a boy.
But, as I repeat: always as a condition to work out of, not to stay in.

                          The Riverside Press

                       CAMBRIDGE. MASSACHUSETTS

                                U.S.A.