CHAPTER XIX

A CHAMBER OF HORROR

I backed against the wall, crouching low, revolver in hand, scarcely
venturing to breathe, listening intently for the slightest sound to
break the intense silence.  My heart beat like a trip-hammer, and there
were beads of cold perspiration on my face.  The change had occurred so
swiftly as to leave me quaking like a coward at the unknown terrors of
the dark.  Yet almost within the instant I gripped my nerves,
comprehending all that had occurred, and confident of my own safety.
There must be another opening into this underground den--one leading to
the outer air--judging from that sudden and powerful suction.  The very
atmosphere I breathed had a freshness to it, inconceivable in such a
place otherwise.  With the first return of intelligence my mind gripped
certain facts, and began to reason out the situation.  That sudden
sweep of air could only have originated in the opening of some other
barrier--a door no doubt leading directly to the outside.  I had seen
no occupant of the room; without question it was deserted at my
entrance.  Yet someone had been there, and not long before, as was
evidenced by the burning candle.  Nor, by that same token, did this
same mysterious party expect to be absent for any length of time.
Apparently I had intruded at the very moment of his departure.
Wherever that second passage might be, the former occupant of this
underground den had evidently entered it previous to my opening the
inner door.  Still unaware of my presence he had unfastened some other
barrier, and the resultant draught had extinguished the candle, and
blown shut the door at my back.  This seemed so clearly the truth that
I laughed grimly behind clinched teeth.  The solution was easy; I had
but to discover the extinguished candle, relight it, search out the
second passage, and waylay the fellow when he returned unsuspicious of
danger.

Confident as to the correctness of my theory, and eager for action to
relieve the tension on my nerves in that black silence, I began feeling
a way along the wall toward the right, in the direction where I
remembered the iron light bracket to be situated.  The rough stone
surface was unbroken, and I encountered no obstacles under foot, my
groping search being finally rewarded by touch of the iron brace.  I
could clearly trace the form of the bracket, and determine how it was
fastened into place, yet to my astonishment there was no remnant of
candle remaining in the empty socket.  Grease, still warm to the touch,
proved conclusively that I had attained the right spot in my search,
yet the candle itself had disappeared.  Beyond doubt the draught of air
had been sufficiently strong to dislodge it from the shallow socket,
and it had fallen to the floor.  I felt about on hands and knees, but
without result, and finally, in sheer desperation, struck my last
match.  The tiny flare was sufficient to reveal the entire floor space
as well as the wall, but there was no remnant of candle visible.  I
held the sliver of wood, until the flame scorched my fingers, staring
about in bewilderment.  Then the intense darkness shut me in.

I crouched back to the wall, revolver in hand, and it seemed as though
the blood in my veins had turned to ice.  What legerdemain was this!
The candle was there, and not half burned, when I entered.  I saw it
with my own eyes.  How then--in the name of God--could it have vanished
so completely?  There was no germ of superstition in my nature, and,
had there originally been, it could never have out lived the practical
experiences of the past few years.  There was but one way to account
for this occurrence--some human, aware of my presence, had removed the
candle, had stolen through the pitch darkness silently, and as swiftly
disappeared.  I was locked in, trapped, and not alone!

I confess for an instant I was panic-stricken, shrinking back from the
horror of the black unknown which enveloped me.  I could see and hear
nothing, yet I seemed to feel a ghastly presence skulking behind that
impenetrable veil.  My first inclination was to creep back to the door,
and escape into the outer passage.  Yet pride restrained me, pride
quickly supplemented by a return of courage.  It was a man surely, a
thing of flesh and blood, I was called upon to meet.  He was no better
armed than myself, and he possessed no advantage in that darkness,
except his knowledge of surroundings.  I straightened up, and advanced
slowly, testing the wall with my hand, every muscle stiffened for
action, listening for the slightest sound.  I encountered nothing,
heard nothing, until my groping fingers touched the rough plank of a
sleeping berth.  I explored this cautiously, lifting the edge of a
coarse blanket, and reaching up to make sure the one above was also
unoccupied.  Satisfied that both were empty I worked my way blindly
along to the second tier.  As I reached into the lower of the two bunks
my finger came in contact with some substance that left the impression
of a human body beneath the blanket.  I jerked away, startled,
expecting my light touch would arouse the occupant.  There was no
movement, however, nor could I distinguish any sound of breathing.

Convinced I had been mistaken, I reached in once more to assure myself
of the truth, and my hand touched cold, clammy flesh.  The shock of
discovery sent me reeling backward so suddenly that I slipped and fell.
It was a man--a dead man!  In imagination I could see the wide-open,
sightless eyes, staring toward me through the dark.  Trembling with the
unreasonable terror of unstrung nerves, I yet managed to regain my
feet.  It was not the dead body, so much as the black gloom, which
robbed me of manhood.  I could not see where to go, how to escape.  At
whatever cost I must procure light.  The very desperation yielded me
reckless courage.  Shaking as with palsy, yet with teeth clinched, I
reached forward, groping my way back to the side of the bunk.  I
touched the edge of the blanket, and thrust it away, feeling the body.
The man was fully dressed, lying upon his back, and I experienced no
difficulty in attaining the pockets of his coat.  In the third I found
what I sought--a box of matches.

Never before, or since, have I experienced such relief, as when my
fingers closed over this precious find.  I struck one, and as the
phosphorus head burst into flame, stared about the vacant room, and
then down into the dead face within the bunk.  The man had been killed
by the stroke of a hatchet, and was almost unrecognizable.  Not until
the blazing match had burned to my finger tips was I sure of his
identity--then, to my added horror, I recognized Coombs.  I struck a
second match, assuring myself beyond doubt, and drew the blanket up
over the disfigured face.  As the brief light flickered and died, I
grasped the full significance of the man's death, the probable reason
for his being stricken down.  Whoever had been hidden behind that
picture, crouching in the passage, had overheard his confession to me.
This was vengeance wreaked upon a traitor, the executed death sentence
of desperate men.  And it had just been carried out--within the hour!
The murderers might be even now lurking within the shadows watching my
every motion.

Again a slender match flared into tiny flame, casting about a dim
radius of light, partially reassuring me that I was alone.  Before it
flickered out into darkness my eyes made two discoveries--the opening
of a dark passage to the left of the bunks, and a ghastly hand
protruding from the upper berth.  I was scarcely sure this last was not
a vision of my half-mad brain, but a fourth match revealed it
all--above the murdered Coombs, hidden beneath blankets, was the body
of the strange man shot in the upper room.  My God! the place was a
charnel house! a spot accursed!  I crept back from that ghastly scene
of death as though invisible hands gripped my throat.  I fairly choked
with the unutterable horror which overcame me.  And yet I knew I must
act, must go on to the end.  Even as I crouched there, trembling and
unmanned, seeing visions in the darkness, hearing imaginary sounds, my
thought leaped back to the girl upstairs.  It was the one remembrance
which kept me sane.  It was not the dead, but the living, I had to
fear, and it was not in my nature to shrink back from any man.  I could
feel the courage returning, the leap of hot blood through my veins as I
straightened up.

I risked one more match to make certain of the opening through the
wall, dimly glimpsed beyond the berths.  My eyes were not deceived;
here was a second wood-supported passage, unblocked so far as I could
perceive, but black as pitch.  I held the flaming splinter aloft,
anxiously scanning the few feet thus revealed, but as it sputtered out,
the red ash dropping to the floor, I felt renewed confidence that I was
alone, unobserved.  Whoever those assassins might be, they had
departed, leaving only the helpless dead behind.  No doubt they would
come again to remove the bodies, to seek refuge in this hidden hole.
But for the moment I was there undiscovered, and must utilize each
precious instant for discoveries and escape.  Wild recklessness, a
desire to break away from those grewsome surroundings, overcame all
caution.  Swiftly as I dared in the dense blackness I crept forward,
feeling the smooth wall with eager fingers, my right hand still
nervously gripping the revolver butt.  Then I came to the door, similar
to the other, although no groping about would reveal the catch, or
enable me to force it open.

Again I struck a match, guarding the infant flame with both hands
against a slight draught which threatened its extinction.  There was no
sound, no warning of imminent danger.  All my coolness had returned,
and my every thought centered on quickly discovering the lock of the
door.  Yet, even in that instant, I caught glimpse of a shadow on the
wall, and made one swift, automatic effort to leap aside, dropping the
fatal match.  The movement was too late!  Something descended crashing
upon my head, and I pitched forward into unconsciousness.




CHAPTER XX

TAKEN PRISONER

It must be I lay there practically dead for some time.  I had no
knowledge of being approached, or handled, and yet every pocket was
rifled, the revolver jerked from my hand, and my coat ripped from my
body.  Like so much carrion the fellows had flung me back against the
wall, so as to make room for the swinging open of the door.  I lay
there huddled up in shapeless disfigurement, blood staining the stones,
one arm twisted above my head.  Consciousness returned so slowly, the
benumbed brain began to flicker into activity before a stiffened muscle
relaxed.  I was awake, able to perceive dimly, and to realize my
situation, before my body responded to action.  Returning life seemed
to sweep downward as the mind grasped the realities, bringing
consciousness of pain, throbbing head and aching muscles.  Little by
little, silently, comprehending now what had occurred, and warned by
the sound of voices not far away, I changed posture slightly,
straightening out cramped limbs, and so turning my head as to enable me
to see along the passage where a ray of light streamed.  There was a
mist before my eyes, but this lessened, and I began to view
intelligently the scene.

I lay twenty feet from the entrance to this habitation underground,
thrust into the black shadow behind the door which stood partially
ajar.  My position precluded any possibility of learning what was
beyond that wooden barrier, but I could plainly view the entire north
portion of the interior, although the only light radiated from a
flickering candle.  One edge of the table came within my vision, a man
sitting beside it, his back turned toward me.  I made out little of
this fellow's characteristics, as I saw only a pair of broad shoulders,
encased in a rough shooting coat, and a fringe of black whiskers.  He
was smoking a short-stemmed pipe, and contented himself with a
growling, indistinct utterance when addressed.  Opposite, however, was
a man of a different type, slender and active, his hair very dark and
inclined to curl, a rather long face, slightly olive-hued, with a small
mustache waxed at the ends.  His black, sparkling eyes attracted me
first, and then his long, shapely hands.  These grasped a sheet of
paper, and I noticed others, including several unopened envelopes,
lying before him on the table.  He laughed a bit unpleasantly, a row of
white teeth visible beneath the dark mustache.

"It's just as I thought, Herman," he said genially.  "The fellow is a
mere adventurer.  There will be no one to take his disappearance
seriously.  Look at this document."

He held out a half-printed, half-written sheet which I instantly
recognized as my discharge, but the big man only nodded, his hands in
his pockets.

"I not read English--you know dot," he said placidly.

"True, I had forgotten.  This is the fellow's army discharge; only
issued six or seven weeks ago at Manila.  He was serving in the ranks
over there.  Got back to this country broke, most likely, and fell into
the hands of those schemers up North, willing enough to do anything for
a bunch of coin.  The poor devil probably has n't got a friend on
earth."

"But someone know he come here."

"Only the two who sent him, and they 'll never dare tell, and the
woman.  She is safe enough.  Nigger Pete drove them out here, and we
can close his mouth easily enough.  It's been easy, Herman, and now
with these two settled it leaves me a clear field."

"Maybe so--yes.  But vat you think it all mean?  I would know how eet
vas dey come."

The younger man shuffled the papers restlessly, his eyes on the face of
the other.

"I confess there are some details missing, Herman," he said slowly,
"but in the main it is clear enough.  I take it this man Neale is a
damned rascal.  He went North to find the heir, discovered that he was
either dead, or had disappeared, ran into some scamp of the same kidney
as himself, and, between them, determined to cop the coin.  That's my
guess.  Then they picked up this penniless soldier, who, by the way,
resembles the missing son a bit, and sent him down here to play the
part.  Wrote him out full instructions," tapping the papers
suggestively, "and then sat down there to wait results."

"Vel, maybe so--but vat about the girl, hey?"

"Someone they picked off the streets.  He 's told to do it in this
letter.  They thought it best to prove their man married, and so had to
procure a woman.  We won't have any trouble with her."

"Vat you do to be sure?"

"Turn her loose in New Orleans with a few dollars," carelessly.  "All
she knows about the affair can't hurt us if she does squeal.  There are
plenty of ways to shut her mouth.  I 'll know better how to handle her
case right when I see her.  Broussard is a long time at his job."

"Perhaps she fight heem--hey?"

"The worse for her--that Creole is a wild-cat.  But I wish he would
hurry, so we can get through the Gut on the flood tide; that boat draws
more water than is comfortable in this lagoon."

"You need not worry," said the German, placidly looking at his watch.
"I take eet through safe.  She dam good sea boat, an' where I come in I
can go out.  Ach! 'tis the fellow come now."

The newcomer passed so close beside me I could feel his foot touch
mine.  As he hurried forward I realized the eyes of the two men would
be upon him, and that any movement of mine would be unobserved.  The
door remained ajar, and, if escape was possible, now was the time.
With head reeling dizzily, I crept through the opening, yet held the
latch, fascinated by the first spoken words within.

"Well, Broussard, what is it?"

"All seen to, sir."

"The bodies are planted then?"

"The men attended to that."

"And the woman?"

"On her way; there was no trouble.  Sallie had her doped, sir."

"I expected she would.  Then that finishes our job here, Herman, and
the quicker we are off the better."  The two men arose to their feet,
Herman grumbling something in German, but the younger man interrupted.

"We got the fellow after you left, Broussard; hit him a bit too hard it
seems, but no one will ever investigate, so it's just as well.
Adventurer named Craig, just discharged from the army."

"Where is he?"

"Lying there in the passage behind the door.  Have Peters and Sam bury
him along with the others, and then join us.  We 'll go aboard."

I shut the door, and started down the passage.  For a dozen steps it
was black as night; then there was a sharp swerve to the right, and a
gleam of daylight in the far distance.  Already they were at the
barrier, and I ran forward recklessly, eager to escape into the open.
The way was clear, the floor rising slightly, yet without obstructions.
I could hear voices, the pounding of feet behind, and I made desperate
effort to outdistance my pursuers.  That they were merciless I knew,
and my only hope lay in attaining some hiding place in the weeds before
they could emerge into the daylight.  I thought of nothing else.  But
as I burst, straining and breathless into the open, hands gripped me
from both sides.  An instant I struggled to break free, fighting with a
mad ferocity, which nearly accomplished the purpose.  I had one down, a
bearded ruffian, planting my fist full in his face, and sent the other
groaning backward with a kick in the stomach, when the three from
within burst forth and flung me face down into the earth, and pinned me
flat beneath their weight.  An instant later Broussard's belt was
strapped tightly, binding my hands helplessly to my sides, and I was
hurled over so that I stared up blindly into the face of the fellow in
command.  His black eyes were sneering, while the unpleasant smile
revealed a row of white teeth.

"Great God, man," he exclaimed, "you must have the skull of an
elephant.  Are you actually alive?"

"Very much so," I gasped, defiant still.

"Maybe I finish heem, Monsieur," questioned Broussard, with knee still
planted on my chest.  "Then he not talk, hey?"

The leader laughed, with a wave of the hand.  "You take the fellow far
too seriously.  Let him up.  I 'll find a way to close his mouth if it
ever be necessary.  Besides, he knows nothing to do any harm.  A bit
groggy, my man.  Hold him on his feet, you fellows."

I stood helpless, my arms bound, gripped tightly on either side, gazing
full into the villain's face; out of the depth of despair and defeat
there had come an animating ray of hope--they were going to take me
with them.  Even as a prisoner I should be near her.  Would yet be able
to dig out the truth.

"You take heem along, Monsieur?"  It was Broussard's voice.  "Zat vat
you mean?"

"Certainly--why not?  There's plenty of work for another hand on board.
Trust me to break him in.  Come, hustle the lad along, boys.  I 'll be
with you in a minute."

They drove me forward roughly enough, the German marching
phlegmatically ahead, still silently puffing at his pipe, and leading
the way along a narrow footpath through the weeds.  This wound about in
such crazy fashion that I lost all sense of both direction and
distance, yet finally we emerged into an open space, from which I saw
the chimneys of the old house far away to our left.  The path led
onward into another weed patch beyond, down a steep ravine, and then
before us stretched the lonely waters of the bayou.  Hidden under the
drooping foliage of the bank was a small boat, a negro peacefully
sleeping in the stern, with head pillowed on his arm.  Herman awoke him
with a German oath, and the way the fellow sprang up, his eyes popping
open, was evidence of the treatment he was accustomed to.  A hasty
application of an oar brought the boat's nose to the bank, and I was
thrust in unceremoniously, the three others following, each man
shipping an oar into the rowlocks.  Herman alone remained on shore,
scattering the embers of a small fire, and staring back toward the
house.  A few moments we waited in silence, then the slender figure of
the one who seemed the leading spirit, emerged from out the cane.  He
glanced at the motionless figures in the boat, spoke a few words to
Herman, and then the two joined us, the latter taking the tiller, the
former pushing off, and springing alertly into the bow.

Lying between the thwarts, face turned upward, all I could see
distinctly was the black oarsman, although occasionally, when he leaned
forward, I caught glimpses of the fellow I believed to be the captain
of the strange crew.  Our boat skirted the shore, keeping close within
the concealing shadows, as evidenced by overhanging trees.  The only
word spoken was a growling command by Herman at the rudder, and the
oars were noiseless as though muffled.  Yet the men rowed with a will,
and scarcely twenty minutes elapsed ere we were scraping along the side
of a vessel of some size, and then came to a stop at foot of a
boarding-ladder.




CHAPTER XXI

ON BOARD THE SEA GULL

The Captain--for so I must call him--went up first, after hailing the
deck in French, and receiving some answer.  Then, under Herman's
orders, I was hustled roughly to my feet, and bundled aboard.  My head
still reeled dizzily, and the two men gripping my arms, hurried me over
the rail so swiftly my first impressions were extremely vague.  I knew
the sides of the vessel were painted a dull gray, as nearly an
invisible color as could be conceived; I recall the sharp sheer of her
bow, the clearness of her lines, and the low sweep of her rail.  Less
than a 1,000 tons burden, I thought, and then, as my eyes swept aloft,
and along the decks, I knew her for either a private yacht, or tropic
fruit steamer.

"First stateroom, second cabin," said a new voice, sharply.  "Lively
now."

"Shall we unloose the ropes, sir?"

"Yes; fasten the door, and leave a guard.  Stow away the boat,
Broussard.  Everything ready, Captain."

I went down a broad stairway, shining brass rails on either side, which
led to a spacious after-cabin.  A table extended its full length,
already set for a meal, and a round-faced negro, in white serving
jacket, grinned at me, as the men pressed me between them into a narrow
passage leading forward.  A moment later I was unceremoniously thrust
into a small apartment on the right, the ropes about my wrists
loosened, and the door shut and locked behind me.  For perhaps five
minutes I lay where I had been so unceremoniously dropped, weakened by
loss of blood, and dazed by the rapidity of events.  I found it hard to
adjust my faculties to this new situation.  I knew what had occurred,
but into whose hands I had fallen, and what was the purpose of this
outrage, was beyond my comprehension.  One thing, however, was
sufficiently clear--these men were playing for big stakes, and would
hesitate at nothing to accomplish their purpose.  They had already
killed without remorse, and that I still survived was itself a mere
accident.  Yet the very fact that I lived yielded me fresh confidence,
a fatalistic belief that my life had thus been spared for a specific
purpose.  It might yet be my privilege to foil these villains, and
rescue Mrs. Henley.  It was my belief she was also on board this
vessel.  I had no reason to assume this, except the wording of
Broussard's report which I had overheard.  But she was a prisoner, and
this vessel would be the most likely place for her to be confined.  I
sat up, my flesh burning, and stared about.  The light shining through
the single closed port was dim, convincing me the sun had already set,
yet I could perceive the few furnishings of that interior.  These
consisted merely of a double berth, a blanket spread over the lower
mattress, and a four-legged stool.  Hooks, empty, decorated the walls,
and a small lamp dangled from the overhead beam.  As I got to my feet I
could feel a faint throb of the engine, and realized we were moving
slowly through the water.  The glass of the porthole was thick, but
clear.  I knelt on the berth, and looked out, dimly perceiving the
shore-line slipping past, with an ever-broadening stretch of water
intervening.  Then I sat down helplessly on the stool, and waited for
something to occur.  Escape was impossible; I could only hope for some
movement on the part of my captors.

I had little enough to think over, for the few words spoken in the
cellar had furnished no clew.  My purpose there was known, and these
men had considered it worth while to put me out of the way, and to pick
up my companion also, yet I could not directly connect this action with
Judge Henley's will.  We might have merely crossed their path,
interfered with their criminal plans.  If so, then it was more than
likely our release would not be long delayed.  Indeed, the man who
appeared to be the chief, had already said he would turn the girl free
in New Orleans, where she could do them no harm.  New Orleans then was,
doubtless, the port for which we sailed.  My knowledge of distance was
vague, yet that could not be a long voyage, nor one involving any great
danger.  It was clear they meant no personal harm to her, and they
would never have brought me on board alive, if they had deemed it
necessary to otherwise dispose of me.  These considerations were in the
main reassuring, and as I turned them over in my mind I drifted into
better humor.  Besides, my head had ceased to ache, and a little
exercise put my numbed limbs into fair condition.

It was fully an hour after the coming of darkness before I was
disturbed.  Then the door opened, and the entering gleam of a light
swinging in the passage revealed the grinning negro steward bearing a
well-filled tray.  This he deposited in the berth, while applying a
match to the lamp overhead.  I saw no shadow of any guard outside, but
the fellow made no effort to close the door, and I did not move,
confident he was not alone.  As he turned to go, however, curiosity
compelled me to question him, his good-natured face provocative of
courage.

"Say, George, what boat is this?"

"Mah name is Louis, sah."

"All right, Louis, then; what's the name of this vessel?"

"She am de _Sea Gull_, an' a mighty fin' boat, sah."

"So I judge; what is she, fruiter, or private yacht?"

"I reckon I don't just know," and he grinned.

"Perhaps then you will inform me where we are bound--I suppose you know
that?"

"No, sah; de captain he nebber done tol' me, sah, nothing 'bout his
personal plans.  All he done said wus fer me to hustle sum grub in
yere."

"But surely," I Insisted warmly, "you know what voyage you signed on
for?"

"Wal, boss, I did n't sign on fer no vige.  I 'se de steward, sah, an'
I just naturally goes 'long where ebber de ship does.  'T ain't rightly
none o' my business what de white folks 'cides to do.  Good Lor', dey
don't never ask dis nigger nuthin' 'bout dat.  All I got ter do is just
go 'long with 'em--dat's all."

The shadow of a man blocked the doorway.  He was one of those who had
been in the small boat, and I noticed a revolver at his waist.

"That's enough, boy.  Come, now, out with you," he commanded gruffly.
"Never you mind the door; I 'll attend to that."

He pulled the door to after the retreating form of the negro, and I
heard the sharp click of the latch, and then his voice, muffled by
intervening wood, ordering the steward aft.  There was no appearance of
any lock on the door; probably there was none, as otherwise it would
not have been necessary to post a guard.  However, this was clearly no
time to experiment and I was hungry enough to forget all else in the
appetizing fragrance of the meal waiting.  I fell to eagerly, convinced
there was a good cook on board, and enjoying every morsel.  This did
not look as though I was destined to suffer, and merely being confined
in these narrow quarters for a few hours was no great hardship.
Probably the girl was receiving very similar treatment, and, as soon as
the _Sea Gull_ made whatever port was aimed at, we would both be put
ashore, and left to proceed as we thought best.  Indeed, sitting there
alone, under the inspiration of choice food, well cooked, I became
quite cheerful, dismissing altogether from my mind any apprehension
that this attack upon us had any connection with the inheritance of
Philip Henley.  These people were lawless enough, without doubt--the
murders already committed were evidence of that--but all they desired
so far as we were personally concerned, was to get us safely out of the
way, where we could no longer interfere with their plans.  What those
plans might be I could merely conjecture, with little enough to guide
my guessing.  They might be filibusters, connected with some revolution
along the Central American coast, smugglers, or marauders of even less
respectability.  Their methods were desperate enough for any deeds of
crime.  Without doubt they utilized this comparatively forsaken lagoon
as a hidden rendezvous, and the deserted Henley plantation--from which
even the negroes had been frightened away--was an ideal spot for them
to meet in, plan their raids, or secrete their spoils.  These fellows
were doubtless the ghosts which haunted the place, and had given it so
uncanny a reputation throughout the neighborhood.  They would naturally
resent any interference, any change in ownership, or control.
Possibly, if they were thieves, as I more than half suspected, they had
loot buried nearby, and were anxious to get us out of the way long
enough to remove it unobserved.  This appealed to me as by far the most
probable explanation.

I had cleaned the dishes, and was sitting on the stool, leaning back
against the wall, already becoming sleepy, listening to the rhythmic
pulsation of the engines at low speed, when the door opened again, and
the guard stood revealed before me in the glare of light.

"The old man wants you," he explained brusquely, waving his hand aft as
though specifying the direction.  "Come on, now."

"What does he want?"

"How the hell do I know!  But let me tell you, his orders go on this
boat."

I preceded him along the narrow passage, utterly indifferent to the
threat in his manner, but still conscious that one hand gripped the
butt of his revolver.  Without doubt the fellow had orders to be
vigilant, and, perhaps, would even welcome some excuse for violence.  I
gave him none, however, hopeful that the approaching interview might
yield new information.  The cabin was unoccupied, the table swung up
against the beams of the upper deck, the heavy chairs moved back
leaving a wide open space.  The furnishings were rich, in excellent
taste, the carpet a soft, green Wilton; the hanging lamp quite ornate,
while a magnificent upright piano was firmly anchored against the butt
of the aftermast.  It was a yacht-like interior, even to the sheet
music on the rack, and a gray striped cat dozing on one of the softly
cushioned chairs.  Gazing about, I could scarcely realize this was an
abode of criminals, or that I was there a captive.  It was the sudden
grip of my guard which brought the truth relentlessly home.

"This is no movin' picture show," he muttered.  "Hustle along thar, in
back o' that music box.  See--the way I 'm pointin'."

There was but one door, evidence that a single cabin occupied the
entire space astern, and I stopped before it, my companion applying his
knuckles to the wood, but without removing his watchful eyes from me.
A muffled voice asked who was there, and at the response replied:

"Open the door and show him in, Peters, and remain where you are within
call."

I entered, conscious of a strange feeling of hesitancy, pausing
involuntarily as I heard the door close, and glancing hastily about.  I
had expected a scene of luxury, a counterpart of the outer cabin.
Instead, I stood upon a plain, uncarpeted deck, the white walls and
ceiling undecorated.  On one side was a double tier of berths, lockers
were between the ports, and heavy curtains draped the two windows aft.
Opposite the berths was an arm rack, containing a variety of weapons,
and the only floor covering was a small rug beneath a desk near the
center of the apartment.  This latter was littered with papers, among
them a map or two, on which courses had been pricked.  Beyond these all
the room contained was a small bookcase, crowded with volumes, and a
few chairs, only one upholstered.  The only person present occupied
this, and was seated at the desk, watching me, a cigarette smoking
between his fingers.  It was the olive-hued man of the cellar, the one
I had picked as leader, and his teeth gleamed white in an effort to
smile.  In spite of his skin and dark eyes, I could not guess at his
nationality, but felt an instinctive dislike to him, more deeply rooted
than before, now that I comprehended how completely I was in his power.

"Take a seat, Craig," he said, speaking with a faint accent barely
perceptible.  "The second chair will be found the more comfortable.
Now we can talk easily.  May I offer you a cigarette?"

I accepted it more to exhibit my own coolness than from any desire to
smoke, but without other response.  The man had sent for me for some
specific purpose, and I desired to learn what that might be before
unmasking my own batteries.

"A smoke generally leaves me in more genial humor," he continued,
ignoring my reticence.  "Mere habit, of course, but we are all more or
less in slavery to the weed.  I trust you have been fairly comfortable
since coming on board the _Sea Gull_."

"As much so as a prisoner could naturally expect to be," I replied
indifferently.  "This vessel then is the _Sea Gull_?"

He bowed, with an expressive gesticulation of the hand.

"At present--yes.  In days gone by it has been found convenient to call
her the _Esmeralda_, the _Seven Sisters_, and the _Becky N_.  The name
is immaterial, so long as it sounds well, and conforms to the manifest.
However, just now the register reads _Sea Gull_, Henley, master, 850
tons, schooner-rigged yacht."

"You are under steam?"

"Exactly; auxiliary steam power."

"In what trade?"

"Operated for pleasure exclusively," a slight tone of mockery in the
soft voice.  "A rather expensive luxury, of course, but available all
the year around in this latitude."

"I failed to catch the captain's name--yours, I presume?"

He laughed, pausing to light another cigarette.

"Still it is one you seem fairly familiar with--Henley, Philip Henley."




CHAPTER XXII

I CHANGE FRONT

This statement of his identity, spoken calmly, and smilingly, was such
a surprise that I could but stare at the man, half convinced I had
misunderstood his words.

"You see, Craig," he continued quietly, apparently comprehending my
state of mind, "your little game is up.  Not a bad plan
originally--something of a criminal genius that fellow Neale--but he
failed to count on the fact that I was very much alive, and fully
capable of attending to my own affairs.  By the way, what part did the
girl play in this little conspiracy?  Merely a friend of yours, who
came along for company?"

"Certainly not," I replied indignantly.  "Have you seen her?"

"Not yet; I preferred coming to an understanding with you first."

"A condition you may not find as easy as you anticipate," I retorted,
angered at his cool insolence.  "If you are Philip Henley, then the
lady you are holding prisoner is your wife."

He laughed, leaning back again in his chair.

"Well, hardly.  I rather surmised that was the idea from a sentence or
two, in these instructions," and he touched a bundle of papers on the
desk.  "Careless way to carry such evidence around--shows the amateur.
Thought it would add to the appeal to justice for Henley to have a
wife, I presume.  Why not a child also?  Permit me to state, my dear
sir, that I possess no such encumbrance."

"It happens," I contended coldly, "that I have seen the marriage
certificate."

He sat up stiffly, the sarcastic grin leaving his face, and replaced by
an expression of vindictiveness.

"Oh, you have!  As much a forgery as some of these other precious
documents.  You win certainly grant that I ought to know whether I am
married or not?"

"I made no assertion relative to that."

"What did you assert?"

"That Philip Henley was married, and that his wife--or widow, as the
case may be--is the lady who accompanied me to Carrollton."

He leaned forward, both arms on the desk, his black eyes narrowed into
mere slits.

"Oh, I see," finally.  "Driven out of one position, like a good
general, you have another in reserve.  You are more of an antagonist
than I had supposed, Craig.  So now it is the widow who claims the
ducats.  Am I also to understand that you are prepared to submit proof
of the death of Philip Henley?  By the saints; I am becoming
interested."

"Naturally, if you claim to be the man.  I have not said he was dead,
for I do not know.  I came down here believing him alive.  His wife is
almost convinced otherwise.  All I am actually certain about now is
that you are not the man."

"You are extremely free-spoken for a fellow in your condition.  You
will at least confess that I am master on board this ship; that my word
here is law, and you are in my power."

"Yes."

"Then why expose yourself, and that young woman, to unnecessary danger?
To be frank, Craig, I sent for you just now in a friendly spirit.  You
can be decidedly useful to me, and I can afford to pay well for
services rendered.  Now wait! don't break in until I am through.  I
know who you are, and how you originally became involved in this
affair.  You have no personal interest in the final outcome, so you
receive the amount promised.  You are a mere soldier of fortune, an
adventurer.  Good!  Then it is certainly to your interest to be on the
winning side.  What did Neale, and that other fellow--Vail--offer?"

I sat looking at him steadily for a moment.  That he was a shrewd,
scheming villain I had no doubt, but the one question which controlled
my answer was the thought of how I could best serve her.  If I followed
my inclination, told him frankly that I had already deserted my
allegiance to those men in the North, and only remained loyal to the
woman, the confession would possibly react upon us both.  We would be
held prisoners indefinitely.  If, on the other hand, I appeared to
hesitate, a way of service might be opened before me, and, with it, a
path to freedom, for us both.  The decision had to be made quickly.

"Never mind the sum," I said soberly.  "I am not altogether mercenary,
although I need money.  I 'll say this, however, and you can take it
for what it may be worth.  I originally came into this game believing I
was doing a kindness to a helpless man who was being defrauded of his
rights.  There is no necessity of my going into details, but Neale told
me an apparently straight story, and convinced me my part was a mere
form.  Later I learned different, and promptly quit.  I have n't sent
in a line of report to my employers."

"What convinced you of the fraud?"

"A conversation with Mrs. Henley."

"Oh, the woman, hey!" his tone again sarcastic.  "Always the woman;
more to be valued than great riches, aye! even than fine gold.  Good
Lord, Craig, don't be a wooden-headed fool.  I tell you plainly Philip
Henley was never married, and I know.  This girl is a mere adventuress
unworthy of any consideration."

"You claim still to be Henley?" I asked, stifling my indignation.

"Not only claim, but am.  My identity is already firmly established in
court.  Lawyers have the final papers ready to file."

"You do not in any way resemble the photograph shown me of the man."

"A fake picture; we have known something of Neale's plans from the
first."

The man was apparently so confident, that I began to doubt my own
conclusions, and yet I could not doubt her.  Whatever other falsehoods
might compass me about, she was to be implicitly trusted.

"Is the woman on board?" I questioned.

He hesitated just an instant.

"Yes."

"Will you have her brought here?"

He walked across the cabin twice, turning the proposition over in his
mind.  Apparently concluding that the ordeal might as well be over with
first as last, he opened the door, and gave an order to Peters.  Then
he returned to his seat at the desk.

"This is all silly enough, Craig, but I might as well convince you both
now, as later, that I hold the cards.  The lady may try a bluff, if she
is that kind, but it will be soon over."

We waited silently, and I endeavored swiftly to formulate a
satisfactory course of action.  In spite of all my faith in her--which
could never waver--it was clearly evident this fellow had us helpless
in his grasp.  If I was to become free to act it could only be by
yielding to his expressed desires, and apparently accepting his claims.
That this would separate me for the time from Mrs. Henley, alienate her
friendship, was a certainty.  Yet I must risk all this even to be of
real service.  The end would justify the means.  We were confronted by
no common scoundrel, and here was a case where fire could only be
fought with flame.  I did not for an instant believe he was Philip
Henley, yet he was apparently fortified with strong evidence to sustain
that claim.  The very fact that he so strenuously denied that Philip
was married, convinced me he was an impostor, that he had never even
heard of this secret wedding.  Probably the Judge had not mentioned it
while living, nor written any memoranda concerning it.  Yet Neale knew,
and there could be no question as to the truth of the matter.  In view
of all I decided openly to cast my fortunes with the man, and appear
angry at the deceit with which she had ensnared me.  I dreaded the
result, the expression my apparent desertion would bring to her face,
but this seemed the only was possible for me to unmask the fellow.  He
had clearly enough catalogued me in his own class, as one who would
serve any master for sufficient reward.  Very well, let him so continue
to think, until I could turn the tables, and pay him back in his own
coin.  And the quickest way in which to convince him that I was
altogether his man, was to denounce the girl in his presence, and
frankly avow myself on his side.  Difficult as this task would
prove--at least until I could make some explanation to her--it was the
sensible course to pursue.  I hardened myself to it, my eyes on the
outlines of the man's face, as he shuffled the papers on his desk.

"Do you mind telling me where this vessel is bound?" I asked, not only
curious to learn, but also anxious to break the silence.

"No objections whatever, Craig, if I knew myself," he answered
carelessly.  "The _Sea Gull_ being my property sails on my orders, and,
at present, those orders are merely to put out to sea."

"You spoke of leaving the lady ashore at New Orleans."

"Oh, back at the house?  You overheard that?  Well, I am not above
changing my mind in such matters.  From what you have just told me I
infer the young woman is more dangerous than I had supposed.  Perhaps
some foreign port would be the safer landing place.  I shall determine
that after our coming interview.  This will be the lady now."

We both arose to our feet as she entered, glancing about her curiously
at the rather strange surroundings, then stopping irresolutely,
apparently recognizing neither of us.  The light from the hanging lamp,
waving somewhat from the movement of the vessel, served to soften the
lines of her face, and reveal the delicate beauty.  About her were no
signs of fatigue or fear.  Suddenly the light of recognition leaped
into her eyes, and she took a quick step forward.

"Mr. Craig--you here?  Why, I can hardly understand.  Were you made
prisoner also?"

"I suppose that to be my status, although I hardly know," I answered,
yet unable to refrain from accepting the extended hand.  "I was
certainly brought aboard in chains, and much against my will.  I
presume you know this person?"

She swept my face with a swift, questioning glance, and then looked
beyond me at the man standing beside the desk.

"No, I do not," slowly.  "I have no remembrance of ever seeing him
before."

"Is that not rather strange," I asked, steeling myself to the task,
"after asserting that he was your husband?  He is the owner of this
vessel--Philip Henley."

She reached out gropingly, and grasped the back of a chair, staring at
his face, and then glancing into mine, as though bewildered, suspecting
some trick.  I could see her lips move, as if she endeavored to speak,
but could not articulate the words.  Henley---for I must call him
that--advanced a step toward us, his thin lips fashioning themselves
into an ironic smile.

"You receive this information about as I supposed you would, Madam," he
said coldly.  "I was doubtless the very last person you expected to
encounter.  Your accomplice here informs me that I am supposed to be
dead.  I am inclined to think you were both mistaken--but not more so
than in regard to my marriage."

She straightened up, her eyes shining.

"You are not Philip Henley," she said firmly.  "He is my husband."

The smile widened, revealing the cruel white teeth.

"I expected heroics.  It was hardly to be supposed that you would
confess your fraud at once, and--before your lover."

She shrank back, her hands still extended.

"My--my lover--"

"Now stop!" I broke in, every nerve tingling, as I stepped between
them.  "Another insinuation like that, and you will learn what I can
do.  You may be captain of this boat, but you are alone with us now,
and I can kill you before you could utter a cry.  So help me God, I
will, if you dare insult her again."

He reeled back against the desk, although I do not think I touched him,
and his hand sought an open drawer.  I knew him instantly for a coward,
and gripped his wrist, hurling him from me half across the room.

"I 'll stand here, and you over there.  I prefer dealing with your kind
with bare hands.  Now if you have any reply to make to this lady's
assertions put it in decent language."

He gasped a bit, rubbing his bruised wrist, his eyes shifting to the
closed door as though contemplating an alarm.  But I stood where I
could block any effort, and I doubt if he liked the expression on my
face.

[Illustration: He gasped a bit, rubbing his bruised wrist.]

"There is no use going off at half cock, Craig," he snarled.  "I did
n't mean any insult.  And I 'll get you for that some time.  You 'll
learn yet what the _Sea Gull_ is."

"No doubt," I coincided, tired of his threats, and awakened to the fact
that this quarrel was not likely to help our chances.  "But for a few
minutes it will be worth your while to listen to me.  I am not
defending this woman from anything but unnecessary insults.  If she has
deceived me I want to find it out.  If you are Philip Henley, as you
claim to be, you must have evidence to prove it.  Convince me that her
assertions are false, and you will not find me unreasonable."

"Gordon Craig, do you mean--"

I turned to her, steeling myself to look into her appealing eyes.

"I have been honest with you from the beginning," I Interrupted
abruptly.  "Now, if I discover that your statements are false, the
inducements are all the other way.  I am a soldier of fortune."




CHAPTER XXIII

THE SECRET OF THE VOYAGE

Henley laughed, the sound grating harshly on my nerves, yet I made no
movement of protest as he stepped silently back to his desk.  I was no
longer afraid of the fellow, even although he might have a weapon
concealed in one of the drawers, for I knew I had drawn his fangs.
This open avowal on my part was sufficient to convince one of his
stripe that I was concerned only with my own interests.  Whatever
suspicion he may have previously entertained regarding my relations
with the lady were now thoroughly evaporated.  Assured in his own mind
that Philip had never been married, he was now easily convinced that I
had merely associated myself with a girl from the streets, whom I was
only too glad to desert upon any plausible excuse.  His words confirmed
my judgment.

"Well said, my man.  Now we begin to understand each other.  Of course
I have the proofs.  I would be a fool to sit in such a game without a
winning hand.  Sit down, both of you, while we talk this over.  There
is no reason why the three of us should not be friends, providing you
are sensible."

She had never removed her gaze from me, standing white-faced and rigid,
as though unable to fully comprehend.  I doubt if she heard, to
distinguish, a syllable he spoke, her every thought centered on my
renunciation.

"But--but I am his wife," she panted indignantly.  "Philip Henley's
wife.  I--I showed you our certificate."

"A fake, a forgery," asserted the other roughly, before I could find
voice.  "You had it framed up all right, if you had never run across
me.  Show me the paper."

"I cannot, for it is not here.  I placed it in my valise back at that
house."  She stepped forward with hands held out toward me.  "But you
know--Gordon Craig, you know.  I could not have forged that; I had not
time; no information which would have led to such an act.  You tell him
so."

"I hardly think he will, Madam," returned the Captain shortly,
evidently feeling it better not to let me speak.  "And there is no use
going on with this any farther.  Answer me a question or two, that is
all.  Did n't Craig tell you why he was coming down here?"

"Yes," the single word scarcely audible.

"He explained to you in detail what was expected of him?"

"Yes."

"Some hours before you left, was n't it?"

"Yes."

"Then you had sufficient time, and knowledge to complete your plans.
When did you first tell Craig you were Philip Henley's wife?"

I clinched my hands at the bewildered embarrassment in her eyes, at the
sneer in the voice of the questioner, yet held myself silent.

"It was after we came here; when I was frightened, and felt that I must
confess the truth.  I--I had begun to trust him."

"Oh, indeed, and you failed to tell him at first because you did not
trust him."

"Partially that--yes.  Although I do not think the name Henley was even
mentioned during our first interview.  I am sure I did not realize it
was my husband's father who was dead until later."

"Exactly; you picked up a strange man on the street; agreed to go off
on a criminal mission with him, and now expect us to believe you
perfectly innocent of any wrong intent."

"That will be enough," I interrupted, unable to remain quiet any
longer.  "The motives of the woman, and how we chanced to meet, are no
concern of yours.  If you are Philip Henley, prove it, and let it go at
that.  I have told you plainly enough where I stand."

He gazed with black eyes narrowed into slits at the two of us, too
pleased with himself to doubt his success.  The sarcastic smile curling
his lips caused me to swear under my breath, but I had gone too far now
to retreat.

"Just as you say, Craig," affecting an easy good nature.  "That is
perfectly agreeable to me.  However, as it makes no difference what the
late Mrs. Henley thinks, we will dismiss her from the case, and settle
the affair quietly between ourselves.  I 've got a proposition which
will interest you."  He touched a button, and I heard the sharp tingle
of a bell outside.  Almost instantly the door in the cabin opened.
"That you, Peters?  Conduct the woman back to her stateroom, lock the
door, and bring me the key."

He bent forward, searching for something in a pigeonhole to his right,
and I caught her eyes, touching my lips with my fingers to signal
silence, while an inclination of the head told her to go without
resistance.  The swift change of expression on her face proved her
instant comprehension, as, without uttering a word of protest, she
turned, and disappeared.  Henley never glanced up from his work of
selecting papers from a bundle under his hands, nor did I move, until
after Peters returned with the key.  Henley dropped it into his pocket.

"That will be all," he said; "you can go."

"You mean I am off duty, sir?"

"Certainly; you understand English, don't you?  There will be no more
guard work tonight."

As the door closed again behind Peters the fellow rose to his feet, and
held out his hand.  "You are the kind I like, Craig," he said
cordially.  "At first I had my doubts about you, and no doubt have been
harsh.  To be perfectly honest I thought you would be all right under
ordinary circumstances, but was afraid the girl had a sentimental hold
on you which would make you difficult to handle.  Lord, she thought so
too.  Did you see her face when you first sided in with me?  She wilted
completely.  Well, that will make the rest easy.  Sit down again, and I
will explain what I want you for."

I accepted the chair indicated, but was not yet altogether ready to
hear his proposition.

"Just a moment," I said firmly.  "I may be the man you want, and all
that, but I have got to be convinced first that I am not making another
mistake.  I came down here originally believing myself an agent of
justice, only to discover I had been duped.  This time I insist on the
truth.  I may be a soldier of fortune, but I prefer choosing the side
on which I fight."

"You mean you wish to assure yourself I have the right of it," he asked
smilingly, "before you enlist?  There is nothing unreasonable to that.
Unfortunately, however," and he picked up the papers from the desk, "I
can only furnish you corroborative proofs now.  Still, I think these
will be convincing.  The legal papers, which absolutely establish my
identity as Philip Henley, are in the hands of lawyers, who represent
me at Carrollton.  The case will not come up for adjudication for
several weeks yet," speaking slowly, and with careful choice of words,
"but my contention as heir to the property is thoroughly established.
It had to be, for as you know the Judge's son had been away from this
neighborhood for years, practically ever since boyhood.  He was almost
unknown to the local inhabitants, even to the servants.  He was even
reported as being dead.  This state of affairs made identification the
most important thing to be considered.  Consequently all documents
bearing directly on that point are, at present, out of my reach.  You
understand?"

"Yes; only you must have retained something to substantiate your word."

"Precisely.  I was coming to that.  I have letters from my father which
should be sufficient.  You have seen Judge Henley's writing?" and he
handed me a half dozen missives.  They were without envelopes, each
beginning simply, "My Dear Son," relating principally to local
conditions on the plantation, and occasionally expressing a desire for
the wanderer to return, and assume the burden of management.  Instead
of names, initials were employed to designate individuals referred to,
and it was evident the recipient had been addressed at various places.
That they were in the crabbed and peculiar handwriting of the old Judge
was beyond all question, and the dates covered several years.  I read
them through carefully, puzzled by their contents.

"There are no envelopes?"

"No; I never keep them--why?"

"Only that no name is mentioned; they begin all alike, 'My Dear Son.'"

"I never thought of that," he, admitted, simulating surprise, "but can
supplement by showing you this picture, taken three years ago at
Mobile.  Of course you will recognize myself, but may never have seen a
photograph of Judge Henley."

"I never have."

"Well, that is his likeness, and there are those on board who will
identify it.  Does this satisfy you that I am what I claim to be?"

In truth it did not, for I would have believed nothing in opposition to
the positive statement of the woman that he was not Philip Henley.  Her
simple assertion weighed more with me than any proofs he might submit.
Yet his coolness of demeanor, and the tone of the letters, evidently
written in confidence from father to son, were unanswerable.  Under
other conditions--divorced from what I knew--they would be conclusive.
Now I could only wonder at them, groping blindly for some solution.
Were they really addressed to him, or had he stolen them?  If the
latter, then how had he succeeded in getting his picture on the same
plate with Judge Henley's?  And what were those other more important
documents on which he rested his claim?  These considerations flashed
through my mind, yet I was sufficiently aroused to answer quickly,
aware that even the slightest hesitancy might awaken suspicion.

"It would seem to be unanswerable," I replied, replacing letters and
photograph on the desk.  "What hurts my pride is to have been made such
a fool of."

"That's nothing, Craig; we have all had that experience.  You merely
fell into the clutches of some shrewd men, and a designing woman.
Fortunately you have discovered the truth before any great harm has
been done, and I stand ready to give you a chance now on the winning
side.  I would rather have you with me than opposed, and there will be
more money in it for us both.  What do you say?"

"I should prefer to know more about your proposition."

"It has nothing whatever to do with the Henley matter," he exclaimed,
leaning back in his chair, and surveying me shrewdly through his dark
eyes.  "That is practically settled already, so you will not be further
involved with the girl."

"You would oblige me by leaving her name out of the discussion then," I
interposed coldly.  "Even her presence on board is distasteful under
the circumstances."

He chuckled, well satisfied with his diplomacy.

"I understand that; however, we cannot obliterate her entirely.  Pretty
enough to be useful too, I imagine, if she can ever be brought to view
this affair from the right angle.  Could n't you be induced to attempt
a little, missionary work?  Love-making at sea is said to be especially
pleasant."

I shook my head, gazing directly into his eyes, barely able to keep
from throttling him.

"Drop it," I said sternly.  "The girl is to be left alone if I have any
part in your scheme.  Now I want to know what is expected of me; may I
ask questions?"

He lit another cigarette, calmly indifferent to all outward appearance.

"Certainly--fire away."

"Where are we bound?"

"Spanish Honduras," lazily, but spreading out a map, and tapping it
with his finger.  "Perto Cortez, if we can make that port safely; if
not then somewhere along the coast between there and Trupillo.  There
will be signals."

I leaned forward, startled out of my self-restraint.  "Honduras!  Good
Lord! what are you--a filibuster?"

"Hardly," with a short laugh.  "That is too dangerous a job, and not
money enough in it.  I prefer to do my revoluting through others, and
cop the swag.  That is the safe end of the game.  It happens to be
Honduras just now; I have been equally interested in other downtrodden
countries.  In truth, friend, I am a patriot for revenue only."

"You mean you furnish arms?"

"For a suitable consideration--yes.  In strict confidence I will state
that securely packed away in the hold of the _Sea Gull_--largely in
boxes labeled machinery--are twenty thousand rifles, six rapid-fire
guns, and a sufficiency of ammunition for a small army.  Once safely
landed the profits of the voyage will total one hundred and fifty
thousand dollars, gold.  A rather tidy sum, hey?"

I grasped the idea swiftly enough, and it cleared up some of the shadow
of mystery.  But the situation was rendered no more pleasant for us.

"Then you are not sailing for New Orleans?"

"Not until my hold is empty.  We cleared from there, light, three weeks
ago."

"You mean to retain the lady on board?"

"Unless she prefers to jump overboard."

"And what have I to do with all this?  You said you had use for
me--what use?"




CHAPTER XXIV

I JOIN THE SEA GULL

I can see the fellow still, as he sat there smiling, his teeth revealed
under his mustache, his eyes filled with cunning.

"You! why you chance to be the very sort of man I need.  The devil
could not have sent me a better," he said, with some enthusiasm.  "You
are an American soldier, the best-drilled men in the world for
irregular service.  You can understand that the longer I can keep those
fellows down there fighting, the more I will sell.  Good! that is part
of my business.  And the better they are drilled, the longer they will
keep it up.  That is what I want you for--to help make that mob of rags
into an army.  By God! you can do it, and I am willing to pay the
price."

I got up, and walked across the cabin, apparently struggling with
temptation, arguing the matter over with myself.  In very truth,
however, there was little choice.  Either I must coincide with his
desire, or be thrust helplessly back into my old quarters, under guard.
There was no mercy, no weakness, behind the smile with which he watched
me.  The man was a tiger who would kill me with as little remorse as he
would brush a mosquito from his cheek.  If I yielded, if I exhibited a
willingness to fit into his plans, well and good.  But if I decided
otherwise the jaws of the trap would close.  I did not care so much for
myself--it would be a pleasure to defy him--but the memory of the girl
was vivid.  What would happen to her, alone on this lawless ship,
surrounded by the gang of wolves with which it was manned?  The thought
sickened me.  Even already I had imagined a gleam of lust in the eyes
of the fellow when he glanced covertly at her, and distrusted him as I
would a snake.  And he was owner and captain, his word on board the
supreme law, even unto death.  There was nothing left me but to agree
to his proposition, and thus purchase freedom.  Yet I must not appear
too eager.

"I perceive your point," I said at last, facing him.  "But what is
there in it for me?"

"A good round sum," he replied.  "More than you ever made before, I
warrant, not excepting the promises made you in this Henley will case.
We 'll talk the details over later."

"Who is responsible for my pay?"

"See here, Craig, the case stands like this.  The revolutionists down
there asked me to find them a competent drill-master, and they will pay
royally.  They 've got the money, too, scads of it.  There will be no
trouble on that score.  Besides, I need a reliable man ashore to look
after shipments.  We have to land our goods in a hurry, you understand,
at night, without checking up.  I can afford to hand you something
pretty nice on the side to assure myself a square deal.  I had a fellow
picked out for the berth--a retired German officer---but he failed to
show up when we sailed.  Now I have run across you I am damned glad he
did.  You are more the style of man I want.  Come, now, I don't believe
you can afford to turn this offer down."

"It looks good," I confessed, but still hesitating.  "Only I shall have
to have it in writing, and more in detail."

"We'll talk that over in the morning; it's late now.  Take the third
stateroom starboard: it's all ready for you."

"Then I am no longer to consider myself a prisoner onboard?"

"Certainly not.  Practically you are one of us."

"And I have the freedom of the deck?"

He smiled grimly, gazing intently at me.

"That is safe enough, I reckon, even if I questioned your interest in
this adventure.  There must be ten miles of water already between us
and the coast.  There are no limits on your liberty, but I would n't
advise your going forward at present--not until the men understand the
situation--they 're a hard lot."

"Revolutionists?"

"Hell, no; plain New Orleans wharf rats, the scouring of the Seven
Seas."

"Who is first mate--the German?"

"Yes, Herman, a fine sailor; was with the Hamburg people until he had a
wreck.  The Creole Broussard is second, and the two of them together
could tame a cargo of wild-cats.  Is that all, Craig?"

"All at present."

"Good night then; think this over, and we 'll have another talk
tomorrow.  The third starboard stateroom is yours."

I took his hand, feeling the sinewy grip of his lean, brown fingers,
and turned to the door, cursing myself under my breath for a weakling,
and yet utterly unable to perceive how I could choose otherwise.  The
single lamp in the main cabin was turned low, only faintly illuminating
the interior.  In the quiet I could feel the movement of the vessel,
and realized there was some sea on, although the engines were being
operated only at half speed.  This seemed odd, if speed was desirable,
as I supposed it must be on a voyage of this nature.  However that was
none of my affair, and, heaven knows, I had enough to consider in my
own situation.  I was not in the least sleepy, and sank down in the
first chair to think, my eyes on the Captain's door.  But I was not
disturbed.  If this was my case exclusively I doubt if it would have
greatly worried me.  Indeed, I might have rejoiced over the outlook,
welcoming the excitement, and rough experience promised in a new land.
I possessed the adventurous spirit, and the position offered had its
appeal.  But the girl stood directly in the way.  What Henley meant to
do with her was problematical--I had not thought to ask--but he either
intended putting her ashore in Honduras, or else holding her prisoner
on board until the _Sea Gull_ returned North.  Either contingency was
bad enough, and the suspicion flashed suddenly across me that the final
decision would depend on how kindly she might receive the attentions of
the Captain.  Nor did I question the result.  I had not known the lady
long, but, in that brief time, our relations had been sufficiently
intimate to yield me a good insight into her womanly character.  There
would be no yielding, no compromise.  Neither threats nor promises
would change her attitude in the least.  Not only did she know the
fellow to be a lying knave, but he was not of the sort to ever
influence her in the slightest degree.  I could imagine how she would
look at him, with those searching eyes burning in indignation, and her
instant squelching of his first protestations.  There would be no need
of my help to repel the insults of such a beast.  But afterwards there
would, for I realized also what he would become after such a repulse--a
cold, sneering Nemesis, revengeful, ready to crush even a woman
remorselessly.  And he possessed the power, the means to make that
revenge complete.  I felt my teeth lock, my hands clinch in sudden
anger.  Perhaps I could accomplish little in her defense, but I
intended to be free to do that little.  Whatever fate might be in store
for us, that sneering, olive-hued devil should receive his deserts if
ever he attempted wrong to her.  That had become the one purpose of my
heart, for I realized here skulked the real danger, the deeper peril of
our situation.

I may have remained there for a quarter of an hour, motionless,
thinking over every incident, and reviewing carefully, and in detail,
the various happenings which had led to our present condition.  The
only result was to enlist me yet more strongly to her service.
Believing her statement I could see nothing in her conduct to
criticize, and she appealed to me in all womanhood.  I would be a
dastard to doubt, or desert, her cause now, and the warm blood throbbed
in my veins responsive to the memory of what had already been between
us.  No one disturbed me, the Captain was still in his stateroom,
where, once or twice, I imagined I heard him pacing the floor.  The
steward had apparently retired for the night, although it was not late,
as a glance at my watch proved.  My eyes traced the doors on either
side, ten altogether, each plainly numbered, and I opened the one
assigned to me, and glanced within.  Except that it was more
commodious, and contained a washstand at one corner, it did not differ
greatly from the other forward where I had been held prisoner.

I wondered which of these others might be hers, and passed silently
from door to door, vaguely hoping for some sign of guidance.  They were
all tightly closed, and I dare not try the locks, as I was certain one,
at least, of the under officers would be sleeping below.  My round had
brought me to the second door on the port side when, in the dim light,
I perceived something lying at my feet, and stooped down to better
determine its character.  It was the end of a very narrow light blue
ribbon, apparently caught beneath the door.  Assured that she was the
only one of her sex aboard, I drew the strip forth, fondled it,
imagined I had seen it before, struggling with a desire to make myself
known.  The door before which I hesitated was numbered "5."  Whether by
accident, or design, she had left the one clew I most needed.  Indeed,
at the moment, I believed the ribbon had been purposely dropped.  That
last meeting of our eyes had reassured her of my loyalty; with the
quick intuition of a woman she had comprehended the truth, and this
ribbon, apparently carelessly dropped, was for my guidance.  I thrust
it into my pocket, but the soft touch of the silk seemed to bring back
to me a sense of caution.  I knew the door was locked, and assured
myself there was no space beneath.  If I was to communicate with her,
other means must be employed.  What?  This was the second stateroom on
the port side.  Judging from my own, the width of each room would be
about six feet.  There ought to be no difficulty in locating her
porthole from the deck above, nor in attracting her attention.

The one thing I desired now was to reëstablish myself fully in her
confidence, assure her I was at liberty on board, able and willing to
be of service.  This necessity overshadowed all else.  If I could
discover means of communication we could plan hopefully, assured of
cooperation.  And this seemed possible, the way to its accomplishment
open.  Shadowed from observation by the thick butt of the after-mast, I
wrote a few lines hastily on the back of an envelope, thrust it into my
pocket, and ventured up the companion stairs.  Reaching the top, and
stealing to one side out of the dim range light, I took hasty survey of
the deck.  It was a dark night, although a few stars were visible, and
the _Sea Gull_ was steaming slowly through a fairly rough sea, pounding
against her port quarter.  Little twinkles of light were visible off
the port side, so numerous as to make me suspicion land, while a narrow
strip of moon, barely exposed beneath an edge of cloud, convinced me
our course was almost directly east.  This was strange if the boat's
destination was Spanish Honduras, and the Captain was, as he contended,
desirous of making a swift passage.  I recall this flash of thought,
yet my attention almost instantly reverted elsewhere.  The closer we
hugged the shore the greater the opportunity for escape, the more vital
the necessity of immediately establishing communication with the fair
prisoner below.

A glance sufficed to convince that I was alone, and unobserved.  The
deck was unobstructed aft, except for a small boat swung to davits
astern, and the cabin transoms.  These last were elevated some three
feet, but considerable space separated from the rail.  I slipped into
this opening on the port side, crouching in the dense shadow, until
again assured I was alone.  My position afforded as good a view forward
as the darkness would permit, and likewise enabled me to see into the
dimly lit cabin below.  The fact that Henley--for whatever his name
might be, this was the one to which he laid claim--had not left his
stateroom, or made any effort to observe my movements, was a decided
encouragement.  Beyond all question he believed me safely in his grasp,
and his promise of liberty on board was being substantiated.  I was not
to be watched, or spied upon.  For the first time I began to feel a
true sense of freedom.

The deck forward of the main mast was too dark for observation,
although I was certain of a group of men gathered in the waist to
leeward.  Occasionally the sound of a voice was blown back, and I could
perceive the dull, red glow of a pipe or two.  The main body of the
watch these would be, and even as I stared at the lumping shadow, a
command was roared from the bridge, and two shapeless figures detached
themselves from the mass, and ran forward.  The bridge itself was
partially outlined against the lighter sky, giving me a vague glimpse
of two figures, one standing motionless, as though gripping the rail,
and peering straight ahead into the smother, the other striding back
and forth.  The last appeared a huge shadow, his coat flapping in the
wind, and I knew he must be the German first mate, Herman.

Satisfied on these points, and with a glance below at the unoccupied
cabin, I stepped back and paced off the distance, until convinced that
I had safely located where the porthole of number "5" should be.  I
leaned over, seeking to trace its outline by some reflection of light
from within, but the receding side of the vessel baffled me.  Yet,
assured that I must be correct in my measurements, I marked the spot on
the rail, and began search for some means by which I could open
communication with the girl below.




CHAPTER XXV

THE FREEDOM OF THE DECK

The flag locker was astern, and standing on it I could feel inside the
boat swung to the davits.  It was a small, light boat, fashioned like a
cutter, a good sea-going craft for its size.  Two oars and a short mast
together with a roll of canvas were stowed on top the thwarts, and
secured by lashings.  I cut one of these, and drew forth about three
fathoms of line, sufficiently pliable for my purpose.  The severed end
of cord I thrust down out of sight, where it would escape any
superficial examination.  Anxious as I was to carry out my plans
rapidly I could not refrain from passing my hands over the boat,
impressed by its lightness and sea-going qualities, and inspired by the
thought it might eventually aid in our escape.  It hung ready for
launching, the falls easily unhooked, and two pair of hands would be
sufficient to lower it into the water.  There was a locker forward I
was unable to reach, but two water kegs, filled, were strapped under
the stern sheets, leading me to believe the craft was fully equipped
for immediate service.  My mind filled with a daring hope by this
discovery, I fastened the note to the end of the cord, weighted it with
a bunch of keys, and crept back to where I had marked the rail.  Inch
by inch I payed out the line, leaning well over.  At last my ears
detected the dangling of the metallic keys against glass, and, by
manipulating the rope, managed to make them sound with clear
insistence.  I repeated the effort several times before there was any
response.  Then the port seemed to be opened cautiously, although no
gleam of light shot forth.  She had evidently extinguished her lamp
before venturing to answer the signal, but I felt her grasp on the
cord.  Then it was left dangling against the closed port, leaving me to
infer that she was reading the hasty note.

I must have hung there gazing down into the black shadows for two or
three minutes, before my line was again hauled taut, but, as I
straightened up, prepared to haul up the returning message, I saw the
shadow of a man passing across the cabin below.  He was already at the
foot of the companion stairs; in another minute would be on deck.
There was no time to do otherwise, and I released my grasp of the rope,
letting it drop silently into the water.  I had barely turned my back
to the rail when Henley emerged within six feet of me.  For an instant
his gaze was forward, and then, as his eyes accustomed themselves to
the darkness, he turned slightly and perceived me, peering at me in
uncertainty.

"Who is this?  Oh, you, Craig," he questioned sharply.  "Not asleep
yet?"

"Not even drowsy," I said, pretending an ease I was far from feeling.
"The crack on my head yesterday pains considerable, and besides I
wanted to think over your proposition a bit."

"You must have the skull of an elephant, or a negro, to have any head
at all," he agreed, apparently satisfied.  "But I would advise sleep
nevertheless.  You think favorably of my plan, I hope."

"I see no reason to refuse, if the pay is all right."

"It will be; trust me for that.  A beautiful night this--the air as
soft as June.  I was about to turn in, but decided to take a whiff on
deck first."

"Rather a captain's duty, is it not?"

"I believe so, in regular service, but this is decidedly irregular.
The fact is, that while I am the owner of this vessel, and technically
in command, I am no navigator.  I merely give my general orders, and
trust the seamanship to Herman.  He is perfectly trustworthy and
capable, and I never interfere.  The last voyage I doubt if I was on
deck twice, although, of course," he added soberly, "my word goes if I
should care to exercise authority."

I remained silent, staring out across the water, endeavoring to
reconcile his statements, and wondering what message it was I had
dropped into the deep.

"What are those lights off yonder?" I asked, at length, pointing.

"Shore lights."

"Then we are steering east?"

"A bit south of east, yes; odd course for Honduras, you think?"

I nodded, willing enough to let him talk.

"We are playing the game safe, Craig; that's all," he explained, both
hands gripping the rail.  "You see we cleared for Santiago, and are not
anxious to be seen and reported by any west-bound ships.  We are
keeping well to the north of their course now, and tomorrow will be
hidden among the islands off the west Florida coast.  Then, as soon as
it is dark, we will shoot out under full steam, into the Gulf.  The
chances are we 'll cross the lane unobserved; if we should intercept a
liner, she won't identify us in the dark, as we burn no lights.  By
daylight we 'll be well beyond their look-outs, and can steer a
straight course."

Vague as my memory was regarding the Gulf and its surrounding coast
line, this explanation seemed reasonable enough, and I remained silent,
gazing off across the water.  He did not speak again, yet the very
proximity of the man irritated me, my dislike and distrust of him so
deep rooted that I could scarcely bear his near presence.  I wanted to
be alone, where I could think out some feasible scheme of escape.

"I have had enough for tonight," I said finally, "and am going to turn
in."

"Best thing you can do," he coincided, but without looking toward me.
"Will follow suit as soon as I smoke a cigarette.  See you tomorrow."

I went down the companion stairs directly to my stateroom, not even
glancing aside, feeling confident that he would be watching me from
above.  I had every reason to believe I had won his confidence, that he
counted me as already among those he controlled and commanded, yet he
was not a man who would ever rise above suspicion, and his trust would
always be limited.  Without lighting a lamp I lay down, still partially
dressed, on my bunk, my mind busily occupied with desperate plans, none
of them satisfactory.  We would not be far from land, according to his
statement, until late the following night.  The small boat hanging
astern was fully capable of transporting the two of us safely, and I
was sufficiently acquainted with such a craft to feel no doubt of my
ability to navigate it if once afloat.  But unless Mrs. Henley was also
given her freedom on board, I could perceive no means of reaching her.
With her stateroom key hidden in the Captain's pocket, any plan I might
formulate was useless.  Nor was it at all probable she would be
released until we were well at sea.  Baffled by these conditions I
tossed and turned for an hour, hearing Henley return to his cabin, and
marking a swifter pulsation of the engines.  Finally worn out mentally,
as well as physically, I fell asleep.

When I awoke the sun was shining through the glass of my porthole, and
glancing forth I caught the dazzle of the water.  The vessel was
motionless, apparently riding at anchor, the sea barely rippled by a
gentle breeze.  Refreshed by sleep and more eager than ever to be in
action, I dressed hurriedly, and stepped forth into the cabin.  The
breakfast table was set for one, and the black steward was lolling
lazily in a chair.  At sight of me he got to his feet.

"Ah suah thought you was n't nebber goin' ter wake up, sah," he said
genially, showing his teeth.  "Ah bin waitin' fer yer mor'n two hours,
Ah reckon."

"For me!  Have the others eaten then?"

"Mostly, sah, mostly.  De Captain he nebber eat no breakfast; he say et
ain't good fer his libber--yaw; yaw!--but de mates dey both bin down."

"What time is it?"

"Most ten, sah."

"I did sleep, that 's a fact, Louis.  However, I 'll try and do full
justice to anything you got," and I seated myself at the table.  "Has
Mrs. Henley breakfasted yet?"

"Who, sah?"

"The lady you have on board."

He scratched the wool on his head vigorously, glancing behind the mast
as though uncertain what he had best answer.

"Ah suah nebber know'd dat wus her name, sah; no sah, Ah nebber done
suspected it.  Yes, sah, she had her breakfast, but, Ah reckon she did
n't eat much."

"You served her here at the table?"

The negro, apparently anxious to escape from the topic, shook his head.

"No, sah; in her room, sah," his voice low.  "De Captain, he unlock de
doah, an' then lock it agin.  He say she done gone crazy, but Lor' she
don't look dat-a-way to me.  You like sugah in your coffee, sah?"

In spite of the seeming geniality of the steward, and his eagerness now
to question me, I realized that he was thoroughly dominated by personal
fear of the man aft.  The less I questioned him the better, probably,
as there was a strong possibility that he would be interviewed later
relative to our conversation.  Henley was only testing me, and would
use the darky, if he could, to learn more of my plans.  So, although, a
number of questions trembled on my lips, I left them unasked, and
finished my meal in silence.  Louis hovered around, dropping a sly hint
now and then, which only served to increase my suspicion that he might
have received instructions to draw me out.  If so, the experiment was a
failure, and, after a light meal, I lit a pipe, and, ignoring him
completely, strolled out on deck.  There was evidently no hope that the
woman would be released at present, and I could formulate no plan of
communicating with her, but I was no less anxious to view our
surroundings.

I found the after-deck entirely deserted, and there was no one visible
on the bridge.  Two or three sailors--the anchor watch--were forward,
engaged in some service about the capstan, and a fellow was swabbing
the deck amidship.  I heard Broussard's voice at a distance, but could
not locate him.  However, no one paid the slightest attention to me, as
I stood smoking, and gazing curiously around.  Everything appeared
peaceful enough.  We were lying in a small harbor, within a hundred
feet of the shore, completely concealed on the sea side, by a thick
forest growth lining the higher ridge, of what appeared a narrow
island.  The _Sea Gull's_ fires were banked, only a thin vapor arising
from the stack which instantly disappeared.  In the opposite direction
there was a wide expanse of water, quiet as a mill-pond in spite of a
fresh breeze, revealing in the distance the faint blue blur of a
far-off coast line.  Nothing broke the vista except the white sails of
two sloops, evidently fishing boats, far off on the horizon.  It was an
ideal spot in which to lie--to quietly hide in during the hours of
daylight, probably never approached but by stray fishermen.  Ashore
everything appeared primitive and uninhabited, except for one of the
_Sea Gull's_ small boats beached directly opposite, the crew hidden in
the brush.

I walked leisurely around the cabin transom, peering into the boat
swung astern, so as to better familiarize myself with its equipment,
meanwhile keeping a wary eye on the cabin below, where the negro was
clearing the table, and then, satisfied I had everything photographed
upon the mind, sauntered forward toward the bridge, aiming to exchange
greetings with the Creole mate.  Broussard was not a man to expect
favors from, and I had hated him with the first glimpse of his face,
yet he possessed his racial characteristic of impulsive speech, and was
thus far more approachable than the gruff German first officer.
Perhaps, if he believed me an accomplice, he might be led to talk, and
even be induced to let drop some hint which would later prove useful.
I met him just forward of the chart-house, and the manner in which he
eyed me was immediate proof that he remained uninformed as to my new
status on board.

"How you com' on ze deck, M'sieur?" he asked, his eyes threatening.
"By Gar, I thought you down below, locked in all tight," and he waved
an expressive hand aft.




CHAPTER XXVI

THE NEW PERIL

I laughed, but without paying him the compliment of looking at him.

"I 've changed allegiance, that's all, Broussard.  It's money which
makes the mare go with all of us, eh?  The Captain turned me loose last
night."

"You wif us?  You go volunter?"

"Well, something like that.  I 'm to be drill-master, or general, for
those tattered battalions down in the jungles.  What do you think of
the job?"

He shrugged his shoulders, and then grinned.

"What ze dif!" and he swept his hands about in expressive gesture.
"Sea--land, if only one gets the price, M'sieur.  But for me I like to
go, to move; not lie still an' rot."

"Of course," falling into his mood, "that's in your blood, I reckon,
but the Captain said we were only to hide here for a day."

"Maybe day, maybe week.  No one knows how long.  We wait till the sea
is clear.  Bah! the man 'fraid of shadow.  He give me sheep, an' I show
heem."

"You 'd take a chance?"

"Oui, M'sieur.  I wait till dark, no more, den I take ze chance.  But
ze Capitaine, he no sailor, M'sieur; I know heem long while."

"How long?"

"Oh, seek, eight year."

"Then you can tell me if he is really Judge Henley's son?"

"Oui, M'sieur; 'tis sure I can.  I hav' been with heem there," his
brown hand outstretched landward, "where we got you, hey, many the
time; besides, the Judge he been on zis sheep.  Of course he was son;
why you think not?"

I shook my head, unwilling to discuss the affair with the fellow, yet
impressed by his statement.

"I am beginning to believe I do not know very much about it,
Broussard," I explained briefly, moving aside to the rail.  "I came
down South with another story pumped into me, that's all."

"And ze young woman," he persisted, following me closely, "why she
come?"

"For the same reason I did."

He laughed, his eyes sparkling.

"More like 'cause she love you, hey!  Sacre, she was fine-lookin' girl,
but," shrugging his shoulders, "'t is the Capitaine, not ze mate, who
may admire."

I turned on the fellow, my blood boiling.

"What do you mean by that!  That Henley will dare intrude himself?"

"_Sacre_, an' why not, M'sieur!  He is ze Capitaine; nobody tell him
not on ze _Sea Gull_.  I know him seek, eight year, an' he devil with
women.  She not ze furst to be on board ze sheep.  Zar no use you be
mad, M'sieur; he laugh at you."

"Then for once he will laugh at the wrong man, Broussard," I said
soberly.  Regretting the threat even as I uttered it, I left him and
walked aft, aware as I turned of the sneer on his face.  Yet even then,
although burning with anger, I knew better than to remain.  I dare not
speak the bitter words on my tongue, feeling certain that whatever I
said would be repeated to Henley.  I despised Broussard, and would have
taken the rat by the throat, but for a wholesome fear of his master.  I
knew men well enough to understand the character of the _Sea Gull's_
Captain.  With unlimited power in his hands he was not an antagonist to
be despised.  He was a cruel, merciless coward, and, in spite of my
boast, I realized how helpless I was to oppose his will, here, in the
midst of men who would obey his slightest command.  Nor did I doubt his
purpose; now that he had seemingly won me over to his scheme, he would
turn his attention to her, feeling secure from interference.  I had
permitted him to believe that she was but a chance acquaintance, in
whom I felt little interest, and he would consequently anticipate no
serious protest from me.  Even if I did intervene he possessed the
power to render me helpless.  And he was Judge Henley's son, or, at
least, so these men believed who had been associated with him for
years.  The situation grew more and more complicated; it was no longer
merely her word against his, and yet I could not doubt the truth of any
statement she had made to me.  There was a mystery here unexplained,
involving the dead, and strangely complicating the lives of the living.

I paced the deck undisturbed, struggling vainly to evolve some
solution.  Broussard stared in my direction for a moment, but made no
effort to follow, and finally disappeared forward.  There was nothing
on sea or land to distract my attention, and I felt that I would be
nearer to her below in the cabin than on deck.  The skylight was
closed, although even then it gave me a partial view, and, as I gazed
through the clouded glass, I perceived a shadow pass.  The next instant
the negro steward emerged from the companion.  Some swift impulse led
me to crouch instantly out of sight, until the sound of his feet on the
deck convinced me the fellow was going forward.  I watched him
cautiously; he stopped twice to glance back, but, perceiving nothing,
finally vanished into the forecastle.  While I in no way connected his
actions with myself, yet the disquieting thought as instantly occurred
to me that the negro's going forward had left the Captain and Viola
Henley alone below.  If the steward was acting under orders his being
dispatched from the cabin at this hour was for a purpose.  Determined
to learn what this purpose might be, I crept to the door of the
companion, and then down the stairs.

The main cabin was vacant, but the door of number 5 stateroom stood
slightly ajar.  Assured I should find it empty, my heart already
beating furiously, I took a swift glance within.  It in no way differed
from the room which had been assigned me opposite, and everything was
in perfect order.  Evidently the girl had departed without a struggle,
and with full expectation of an early return.  Her small hand-bag lay
on the berth unlatched, and a handkerchief, together with a pair of
gloves, were upon the chair.  That she had not gone on deck was a
certainty, while the deserted cabin led me irresistibly to suspect the
Captain's quarters.  He had dismissed the steward on some excuse,
opened her door, and, using some pretense, or authority, had impelled
her to accompany him.  She had no means of resistance even if she had
suspected his purpose, and the probability was the fellow had been
plausible enough to achieve his point without violence.  This was all
clear enough to my mind, but what I could do to help her, to overcome
him, was not so evident.  I was alone, unarmed, surrounded by men under
his command.

Possibly, even now, I was under surveillance.  The negro had left the
cabin, I knew, but where was Herman?  Broussard was in charge of the
deck, and hence this would be the first mate's watch below.  Impressed
with this disconcerting thought, I emerged again into the main cabin.
The stateroom doors were all closed, and I had to guess which was the
German's.  I was sure, however, that Broussard occupied the first on
the port side; I had heard him open that door while talking to the
steward, and it was highly probable the first mate had the apartment
opposite.  Judging from the position of the doors these would be larger
than the other staterooms, and, if Herman was the real navigator of the
boat, he would require good quarters.  I listened at the door, but
heard nothing; then, rendered desperate by the delay, tried the knob
cautiously.  The door was unlocked, opening noiselessly.  A glance
convinced me the room was unoccupied, and I stepped inside, gazing
about in surprise.  It was nearly twice the size of my own apartment,
containing a wide single berth, several comfortable upholstered chairs,
and a large desk, on which stood a sextant, besides several charts, one
unrolled.  To my left, close against the side of the vessel was a
narrow door standing ajar, and through the opening I caught sight of a
porcelain bath tub.

Instantly my mind leaped to a conclusion--the first mate was not on
board; he was ashore with the boat party, and that beast Henley, was
entirely alone.  He had taken advantage of the opportunity.  But what
in God's name could I do!  If I broke down the door into his cabin, the
noise would be heard on deck, and besides, the fellow was armed.  The
only result of such an effort would be my own imprisonment, leaving her
in more helpless stress than before.  Without knowing why, I stepped
around the desk, and peered into the bathroom.  It was small, but
perfect in arrangement, and, to my surprise, revealed a second door.
In an instant I understood--this was not Herman's private bath, but was
also used by the Captain; that second door led to the after-cabin.  I
was there in two strides, my ear at the crack listening.  Nothing
reached me but the murmur of a voice, the words indistinguishable, yet
this was sufficient to convince me that I was on the right trail.  The
two were together, and here was an opportunity for me to reach them
unobserved.  Slowly, using every precaution to avoid noise, I turned
the knob, and opened the intervening door a scant inch.  I could hear
the voice now plainly, but my view was blocked by a heavy curtain.
Breathless, I drew a fold aside, and caught a glimpse of the interior.

Neither occupant was facing in my direction, and both were too deeply
interested to observe.  Besides, the possibility of intrusion was not
in their minds.  Henley stood beside his desk, the same sneering smile
I had learned to hate, curling his lips, his eyes on her face in a gaze
that was insult.  The girl, evidently retreating before him, alarmed by
some word he had uttered, or by his approach, had reached the door, and
grasped the knob.  The expression on her face told me she had
discovered it locked, herself a prisoner, and that she had turned in
desperation.  Her first, swift, unrestraining speech gave me full
understanding of her despair.

"You have trapped me here--you--you brute," she burst forth.  "What you
said out yonder was all a lie to--to get me to come with you!"

"Well, what of it?" insinuatingly.  "All is fair in love and war, I
have heard, and this is either the one or the other.  Why should n't it
be me, my dear, as well as the other?"

"What do you mean?  Do you connect me with Gordon Craig?"

"Of course," and he laughed.  "Why shouldn't I, please?  You came with
him from the North, did you not--traveling as his wife?  Picked the
fellow up on the street, did n't you?  My dear, this assumption of
outraged virtue is all thrown away on me--I happen to know your
history."

She took a deep breath, standing straight before him, her cheeks
burning.

"Perhaps you think you do," she said, now in full control of herself.
"But you are going to learn your mistake.  I am here under unpleasant
circumstances, yet, I am not subject to your insult.  I refuse to
answer you, or remain in your presence," she stepped aside, leaving
free passage.  "You will unlock that door."

"Hardly that," and I could see his fingers shut down on the top of the
desk.  "It takes more than a few words to change me.  Really, I like
you better than I did.  You are decidedly pretty now you are angry.
Besides, what have I to be afraid of?  There is no one but us in this
part of the ship; I fixed that up before I went after you; even your
friend Craig is mooning around somewhere on deck, dreaming about a
fortune.  If you cry out, no one will hear you, and if they did, God
pity the man who attempted to come in here.  I 'm Captain of the _Sea
Gull_, and there 's not a rapscallion on board who would risk his skull
to help you.  Even Craig would n't; Lord, he even told me himself you
were nothing to him."

"He--he told you that!"

"He certainly did, in this room.  Come, now, what is the use of being
such a cat?  I 'm not a bad fellow if I am treated half-way decent.  I
've got money to spend, and know how to spend it."  He took a step
forward, but she never moved.

"Don't touch me," she said in a tone that stopped him.  "I am a woman,
but I can defend myself."




CHAPTER XXVII

THE TABLES TURNED

There was that about her attitude, and the expression of her face, which
restrained the fellow.  No doubt he suspected for a moment that she might
be armed, for his quick glance swept her from head to foot.  Then his
eyes hardened.

"That is the worst thing you can do--threaten me," he said sharply.  "I
never take that from man or woman.  See here, do you realize where you
are? how completely you are in my power?  Do you?"

She did not quail, or look aside; nor did she answer, standing straight,
her eyes on his face, her bosom rising and falling from swift breathing.

"I doubt if you do," he went on, angered by her contempt.  "Well, think
it over.  This is my ship, and we 're at sea.  I 'm owner and captain,
and my word on board here is the law.  More than that, there is n't a
man-jack of the crew aft of the main mast.  They are forward on my
orders, and they 'll stay there until I send for them.  You could scream
your head off, my beauty, and no one would hear you, or dare interfere.
Now do you perceive why it is to your interest to be kind to me?"

"I do not."

He laughed, rendered ugly by her open defiance.

"Then I 'll teach you.  You are not the first of your kind I have tamed,
young lady.  The door is locked, and you have n't any weapon; don't try
to fool me!"

"I have told you once," she said earnestly, "not to touch me."

He glanced about sneeringly, yet impressed by her manner of speaking.

"Good Lord! do you mean Craig?  A lot that fellow will help you.  But we
've had enough of this.  Will you come over here to me?"

"No!"

"Then I'll take a chance; damn me, but you're worth it!"

Neither one saw me, yet I was across the room before he had taken the two
steps forward, and gripped her arm.  I saw her struggle to break free,
and then, out of the shadow I leaped at him, both hands seeking his
throat.  There was to be no alarm, no shooting, if it could be avoided.
While it might be true, as he had boasted, that the crew was forward, we
could afford to take no chance.  The very impetus of my rush sent him
staggering, and left her helpless on the deck; yet I got grip on his
collar, choking back the first cry, and struck him once, a half-arm jolt,
which would have sent him sprawling, but for the cabin wall.  Yet he
rallied so quickly as to overcome this advantage.  Judging him from his
size I had underrated his fighting ability, for he was all muscle, swift
in movement as a cat, squirming out of my grasp before I could close
firmly.  His contact with the wall helped him to keep his feet, yet,
quick as his recovery was, he failed to break my grip, and we struggled
fiercely for advantage.  He recognized me, and understood instantly.  He
was a wrestler, while I must rely upon sheer strength to overcome his
tricks.  Even as he adventured first I had him pinned tight, and we
strained back and forth across the cabin deck, neither able to throw the
other, in grim, relentless struggle.  My fingers were wrenched from his
throat, yet the fellow made no outcry, realizing doubtless he would not
be heard.  His eyes blazed with hate, merciless, vindictive, and he
struggled like a fiend to break free.  I saw the girl, still dazed from
her fall, struggling to her feet, with face uplifted, then my every
consideration was riveted on my antagonist.  This was to be no boy's
play, no easy victory; his muscles were like iron, his movements so quick
and unexpected as to put me on the defensive.  I could only hold tight,
braced for the strain, yet forced back in spite of every effort, inch by
inch across the floor, my feet tangled in the rug.  Neither could strike,
nor kick; I was weaponless, and I dare not release his arms for fear he
might possess a gun.  Once I bent him back until he seemed helpless, yet,
by some trick, he wiggled free, and thrust me against the desk, its
corner gouging into my side.  The pain gave me superhuman strength, and I
swung him sideways, the two of us tripping over the chair, and coming
down heavily on the deck.  By some luck I landed on top, and, before he
recovered from the shock, had wrenched one arm free, locking my fingers
in his throat.

He squirmed under me like an eel, but could not break the grip, his face
purpling, until he lost all power.  Fierce as the battle had been I
retained sufficient sense to loosen my death grip while the man still
breathed, lifting my head sufficiently to glance about.  My own breath
came in sobs, and the perspiration almost blinded me.

"Bring me something to tie him with," I said brokenly.  "Anything; yes,
that belt will do."

She tore it from the hook on the wall, and thrust it into my hands.  With
a single movement I had it buckled securely about his arms, and was free
to sit up, and stare about.  A cord from the portière curtain draping the
bathroom entrance completed his lashings.  With wicked eyes he stared up
at me, unable to move a muscle.

"By God, Craig!" he snarled, "you'll both wish you 'd killed me before ye
're done with this job."

I made no reply, using the corner of the desk to help me get to my feet.

"Do you hear!" he shouted.  "What chance have you got to get away?"

"That is for me to decide," I answered.  "But if you open your mouth
again I 'll gag you.  Now stop it; the first word you utter will mean a
handkerchief in your mouth."

I stooped down, and dragged him to one side.  As I straightened up again
she was facing me, her eyes frankly meeting mine.

"You--you know how I came here?" she asked, as though that was the most
important.

"Of course; I overheard most of the conversation."

"How did you find out? how did you get here?"

"Your door was left ajar, and I found my way through the connecting
bathroom yonder."

"Then--then, we can escape in the same manner."

"I hardly think that will be necessary.  I 'll go through our friend's
pockets for his keys."  I turned him over, and began the search.  "Ah, a
revolver; I thought probable--in protection against a woman, you cur.
Here are keys; now let's see what they fit."

The third one tried unlocked the door, but even as I tried them in the
lock, my mind swiftly reviewed the situation in which this affair left
us, and leaped forward toward a possible solution.  It must be open war
from now on.  No pretense on my part would ever again win me the
confidence of the man I had fought and conquered.  Henceforward, we could
expect no mercy on board.  Yet how was it possible to escape, or avoid
discovery?  To attempt leaving the _Sea Gull_ before dark would be
suicidal; no boat could be lowered unseen, and even if one reached the
surface of the water, we would surely be overtaken, and brought back.
Yet there was a chance that what had occurred in this cabin could be kept
concealed for a few hours, until darkness gave us better opportunity for
successful action.  The memory of what Henley had said to me the evening
before--that he was only technically in command; that for days at a time
he never appeared on deck in person, gave me the clew.  If he could be
kept absolutely secure in his cabin, unable to create any alarm, we would
be free to plan our escape.  There were but two points of danger to be
guarded against--Herman and the steward.  The former, when he returned
from shore, might seek him for final orders, and the latter, if he failed
to appear in the cabin for the regular meal, would endeavor to learn his
desires.  I would have to guard against these contingencies, and, with
the first in mind, I stepped across to the bathroom, and was gratified to
learn that the door leading into the mate's stateroom could be locked on
the inside.  With this private approach barred I felt confident of being
able to guard the single entrance remaining.  I met her waiting for me as
I stepped out from behind the curtain.

"Well, what can we do?"

"Keep the fellow tied, and wait for night," I answered soberly.  "That is
our only chance.  The mate is ashore--we are lying in the cove of a small
island off the Florida coast, waiting for darkness, and a chance to slip
through into southern waters."

"Do you know where this boat is bound?"

"Yes--Spanish Honduras; we are loaded with munitions of war," I laughed.
"I was to be a general down there."

"You!"

"Yes; swift promotion, was n't it!  Our friend yonder promised the job;
all I had to do was to desert you, and join his outfit."

"And you consented?"

"With a mental reservation.  It gained me a few hours' freedom at least,
and surely has done you no harm.  Did you doubt me?"

"Oh, I hardly know.  I was so miserable locked up alone, unable to even
learn where we were going, that I lost faith in everyone.  You acted so
strange."

"I had to play my part.  But you received my note?"

"Yes, and it helped me wonderfully, although even then I scarcely
comprehended why all this pretense was necessary.  Surely you do not
believe this man is Philip Henley? that--that I have told you a lie?"

"No, I do not," I answered earnestly.  "It is my absolute confidence in
you which has held me steadfast.  He has shown me evidence of his
identity which would have convinced me under other circumstances--letters
and pictures; I will show them to you, for I know where they are kept in
the desk--but in opposition I had your word, and I believed in that.  No
evidence would shake my faith in you, and I am certain now there is fraud
here--some devilish plot concocted to steal Judge Henley's fortune."

"What letters?  What pictures were they?"

"Letters from the Judge to his son--intimate, family letters, and a
photograph of the father and this man taken together."

"And were the letters addressed to Philip?"

"The envelopes had been destroyed, and no name was mentioned, but the
photograph was endorsed in the Judge's handwriting."

She sank down on a locker, and hid her face in her hands.  The pitiful
dejection in her attitude compelled me to bend over her in quick sympathy.

"Please do not take it like that," I urged.  "We shall find a way of
escape if we keep our courage, and work together."

"Oh, it is not that," and she looked up into my face.  "I am not afraid.
Only I cannot bear the thought that you doubt me ever so little.  I know
I have been indiscreet, that you might justly deem me an adventuress.
But I am not, Gordon Craig; I am a good woman left to fight alone, and I
must have your faith, or break down utterly."

"Why do you suppose you have not?" I asked, grasping her hands in
complete forgetfulness.  "We are together now in open fight against these
villains.  There is no longer any purpose in acting a lie."

"It was a lie?"

"A bare-faced one.  Never for an instant did I intend deserting you, or
becoming that man's tool."

"And you believe me--all I have told you; that I am really the wife of
Philip Henley?"

"Yes," I answered through clinched teeth, struggling to control myself.

For a moment she sat in silence, and, while I dare not look at her, I
knew her eyes were upon my face.

"Then I will do whatever you say, go wherever you tell me," she promised
gravely.  "I cannot decide for myself.  I am too confused to think
clearly, but I trust you as a friend."

"Is--is that all?" I stammered, unable to restrain the words.

"All!  What do you mean? is that not enough?" in surprise.

My eyes met hers, and I cursed myself for a fool.

"Yes--I--I meant nothing," I managed to explain lamely.  "That was a slip
of the tongue.  Please forget it, and keep faith in me."

I drew aside the curtain draping one of the after ports, and glanced out,
eager for anything to distract attention.  Through the clear glass I
could see the curve of shore-line forming the little cove.  Just within
the foam of the breakers a half dozen men were launching a small boat.  I
stared at them an instant, before realizing what it meant.  Then I
dropped the curtain.

"The mate is coming aboard," I said swiftly.  "You must go to your room;
here is the key; lock yourself in, and only open when you hear my voice."

"And you--?"

"I must take care of myself; don't worry about me."

She hesitated, yet the expression of my face decided her, and she held
out her hand.

"I--I said I would do whatever you told me to, and here I am questioning
the first thing.  Forgive me."

Without so much as a glance at our prisoner, she opened the door, and,
with a swift look about the outer cabin, disappeared.




CHAPTER XXVIII

THE CREOLE'S STORY

My time of preparation was brief, yet I already had a plan of operation
outlined.  In truth, there was small choice left me.  I must keep
Henley concealed and silent until darkness rendered our escape
possible.  In order to accomplish this it would be necessary to prevent
either the steward or the mate from entering the after cabin.  All
peril from the negro I dismissed quickly, confident that his knowledge
of my standing on board would impel him to accept any explanation I
might make.  But with Herman the situation was not so clear.  Whether,
or not, the Captain had informed him that I was a volunteer on their
lawless expedition, I did not know.  We had not met since coming
aboard, and, unless he had received direct orders regarding my status,
any interference on my part would be apt to arouse instant suspicion.
Nor was he the kind to brook any assumed authority.  I had him placed
as a gruff, hard-fisted sea-dog, who would strike first, and
investigate later--one in dealing with whom either diplomacy or force
might prove equal failures.  Yet I possessed this advantage--I could
deal with him alone.  With but two watch officers on board, only one at
a time could leave the deck, and Broussard, I felt assured, had no
privileges in the Captain's cabin.  From what I knew of Henley I
doubted if even the first officer felt privileged to invade the privacy
of his chief without some special reason.  There was discipline on
board, strict discipline; there had to be to control such a crew, and
it was my impression Henley was the very kind to insist on every
privilege of his station.  Herman was of value merely for his ability
as navigator; socially, the Captain and he had nothing in common.  It
was on this theory I decided to work.

As I lifted the helpless Captain into his berth, his eyes glaring at me
in impotent rage, my ears could distinguish the sound of oars as the
small boat rounded the stern of the _Sea Gull_.  Much as I despised the
fellow, I hated to gag him, yet our safety depended on his silence, and
I dare not neglect the precaution.  Even as the boat grated along the
side, I stepped forth into the main cabin, and sat down to wait.  To my
surprise and relief, it was Broussard who came down the companion
stairs, driving the steward before him.

"Vat for you loaf, hey!" he snapped fiercely.  "By Gar, I teach you.  I
work four--seek--hour an' nodding to eat.  You say ze Capitaine send
you; bah! eet vas not so--nevaire!  Vat you hav'--hey?"

The negro mumbled something through thick lips, and the irate mate
gripped him by the collar of his jacket, shaking the fellow as he might
a dog, and hurling him half across the deck.

"Sacre!  I keel you for five cent.  Queek now--jump!  Put all on right
way, by Gar, or I show you.  Here you--ze brandy furst."

The steward slunk into the passage leading to the pantry, and the
Creole, turning, saw me.

"Ah, M'sieur; I saw you not.  Pardon ze roughness, but consider, no
dinare, an' I been on deck seek hour; no sleep, no eat, only work.  I
lose ze tempair, M'sieur."

"That is not to be wondered at," I answered, affecting good humor.
"Has the first mate been ashore?"

"Oui, M'sieur; asleep in the sun, I bet you.  Bah! any man could watch
the sea from the cliff.  Dat job not need ze furst officer.  Sacre! but
't is a dog's life at sea."

I nodded my head, too busily engaged with my own thoughts to give much
consideration to his troubles.  Still, this situation, as revealed by
Broussard's complaints, would afford us a respite of at least four
hours.  If this was the Creole's watch below, then Herman would keep
the deck.  Even lying there at anchor those fellows would not leave the
crew alone.  There was too much at stake, and besides there must still
remain a look-out ashore.  However it was a relief to know that the
German had nothing of importance to communicate to Henley, no occasion
even to come below.  Broussard sank back into a chair, watching the
frightened negro hurry back and forth.  At last, satisfied that
everything available had been produced, the former strode across to the
table, jerked out a chair, and waved his hand toward me in invitation
to join him.

"The lazy dog!  'T is likely all you will get, M'sieur.  Maybe you eat
with me--hey?  Or would you wait for ze Capitaine?"

"I 'll take pot-lunch with you, Broussard," I agreed genially, speaking
loud enough so the negro would overhear.  "I 've got to get accustomed
to camp fare, and am hungry enough to begin.  Besides, Captain Henley
is laid up in his berth with a sick headache, and does n't wish to be
disturbed.  He told me to tell you, Louis."

"Yes, sah!  Shall Ah make you sum coffee, sah?  Massa Broussard he
don't nebber drink none."

"Yes, and, by the way, Louis, take a lunch in to the lady; fix up
something neat if you can, and let me know when it is ready.  All
right, Broussard, a nip of that brandy would help me."

He passed the bottle, and a clean glass across the table, watching me
pour out the liquor with a sarcastic smile.

"You know ze Capitaine before, maybe?" he asked.

"No," I answered, wondering what he could be aiming at, but willing to
give him a free rein.  "Only since he tapped me on the head back in the
cellar.  However, he has been square with me, and seems to be a pretty
good fellow."

"You think so--hey!  Maybe so while he get you with heem.  Den he ze
devil.  I know, M'sieur.  I see heem for long while on ze ocean; zat
whar' you fin' out."

I began eating slowly, exhibiting an indifference I was far from
feeling, yet swiftly determining that no matter how much antagonism
might exist between the two men, I would never trust the Creole.  Still
I might use him to advantage; induce him to talk freely under the spur.

"What has he done to you?" I asked carelessly.

"By Gar!--what!" firing up at the recollection.  "Get out o' here, yer
damn coon!" turning fiercely upon the steward, and then leaning across
the table, lowering his voice, which yet trembled with passion.
"Sacre, M'sieur, it was I do his dirty work five--seek--year.  He no
sailor, but I sail ze sheep for him--see?  Tree, four time I sail ze
sheep, an' he make ze money.  Vat he geef me?  Maybe one hundred ze
month--bah! eet was to laugh.  Zen he fin' zat Dutch hog, Herman, an'
make of heem ze furst officer.  He tell eet all me nice, fine, an' I
tink maybe eet all right.  You know he promise beeg profit--hey! an' I
get ze monies.  Oui, it sound good.  But Herman big brute; he gif me ze
ordaire, and I not like eet.  I tells ze Capitaine, an' by Gar! he keep
me tied up before ze port watch.  You stan' zat, M'sieur?"

I shook my head, uncertain just what stand to take.

"Nevar!" he went on, barely pausing for breath.  "I show ze damn
half-breed; you vait, I git heem."

"What do you mean by half-breed, Broussard?" I questioned, surprised.

He laughed, but not pleasantly.

"He vas ze mongrel--sure; you know not zat?  Sacre, I tell you zen.
What you zink him, white man?  Pah! you see hees mother--she mulatto.
Ze damn dog!"

"How do you know that?"

"How I know!  I tell you I sail with heem long while.  He nevar tell,
but I fin' eet out.  I listen, I hear ze talk, but I say noddings,
M'sieur.  Vat I care while he treat me right?  But now I show heem vat
I know.  He not lord eet over me ven ol' Sallie vas his mother--by Gar!
no!"

"Sallie!  You cannot mean that mulatto woman back on the plantation?"

"Sure, the ol' rip."

"Then his name is not Henley?"

"Why not, M'sieur?  The ol' Judge was his father."

The whole thing came to me in a flash, as I stared across at the mate,
who scarcely realized yet the revelation made.  He was brooding over
his wrongs, and how he was to be avenged.

"Good God!" I breathed, "so that 's the way of it!"

Broussard looked up, a cunning smile on his face.  "By Gar, I forget,"
he said softly.  "You vas after ze monies too, hey!  Bah! eet make no
difference vat you know.  He haf you here all right, var' you keep
still or--" and he drew the back of a knife across his throat.  "I
vonder he not keel you furst, M'sieur; maybe he use you, an' then, hav'
you shot in ze South.  Oui, zat be ze easy vay.  Why you ever cum down,
an' claim to be Philip Henley--hey?"

"That was all a mistake," I returned deliberately.  "I came merely to
look after his interest?"

"Interest!  Why a dead man hav' interest?"

"Do you mean Philip Henley is dead?"

"You pretend not know?  By Gar, eet queer.  Vell, I tell you, M'sieur.
Ze hole back ov ze picture; I lie there one night an' leesten, week,
ten days ago.  Ze Capitaine talk with Sallie.  He hav' letter from
North--one, two sheet paper--an' eet tell heem how eet all vas.
Someone write heem--I link maybe Pierre Vonique who went way long time.
No matter; vat he told was zat M'sieur Philip die--die queek frum
accident.  Nevah speak, an' when zey pick heem up, zar was noddin' in
hees pocket.  See, M'sieur!  He vas robbed.  Vonique he hear about eet,
an' fin' ze body.  No one know who ze man is, but Vonique know.  To
prove eet he send ze ring--ze signet ring--off ze finger.  Zen he
write, 'Look out, someone has ze papers.  Watch who comes.'  Zat vas
true, M'sieur."

I hung on his words, fascinated, never doubting, the very thought of
her freedom obscuring all else.  It was only as he stopped speaking,
and resumed his meal, that I gained control of my voice.  The affair
was clear enough now, except for some few corroborative details.

"And someone did come, Broussard?"

"Oui, damn queek--a fellow with a letter from Philip; eet was sign hees
name, hees handwrite, appoint heem overseer."

"And what became of him?"

The Creole shrugged his shoulders.

"'T is not my business, M'sieur.  He go way somewhere queek.  Maybe he
not like ze place."

The dead face of the bearded man in the rear room rose before me.  But
Broussard went on.

"Zen you came, M'sieur, 'long wiz ze girl.  Ze Capitaine he laugh, eet
was so easy.  Why ze girl, M'sieur?"

"Philip Henley was married."

"Non, non, impossible; eet cannot be shown.  'T is not of ze record.
Ze Capitaine not 'fraid any more; he just play wiz you like ze cat wiz
ze mouse.  He know Philip dead; he has ze proof, an' now he breaks ze
will, an' gets ze monies.  Ze damn dog rich now; zen he be more rich."

"Do you know an executor of the will named Neale--P. B. Neale?"

"Oui, M'sieur."

"Who is he?  What does he look like?"

"He vas a planter two mile west Carrollton.  I see heem maybe ten days
ago--leetle short man wif bald head."

He poured out another drink of brandy, and, downing it, pushed back his
chair.

"By Gar, I talk too mooch, maybe," he said, yawning.  "But eet make no
dif.  Ze Capitaine he cop ze monies just ze same, an' eet better you
know.  Now I turn in an' sleep."

He crossed the cabin to his stateroom, and closed the door.




CHAPTER XXIX

UNDER WAY

The negro brought the girl's lunch on a tray, and I took it in to her,
barely pausing long enough to speak a few encouraging words, for fear
of some interruption.  Then I sat down and watched while the remnants
of our meal were being removed.  Except for an occasional footstep on
the deck above, and the swift movements of the steward, nothing
interrupted my thoughts.  After Louis had carried the last dishes into
his pantry, and run the table up on its stanchions, he also
disappeared, and in the silence I could hear the heavy breathing of the
sleeping mate.  For the first time I comprehended clearly the entire
situation, and I could face it with understanding.  Broussard's anger
had served me well, and it never occurred to me to doubt this story,
told under the inspiration of liquor.  It dovetailed in with all I
previously knew.

The facts were clear.  Philip Henley was dead, killed while
intoxicated, either accidentally, or for purposes of robbery.  And he
had been robbed when picked up by the police, nothing to identify him
being found.  Beyond doubt this half-breed brother had dispatched a man
North to look him up--possibly to assassinate him if necessary.  The
fellow had either done the job, or been anticipated in his purpose.  In
either case he was present to identify the body, and had written at
once, enclosing the signet ring as proof.  That was the same ring we
had round in the arbor, and which Viola had instantly recognized.  And
those men who had made a tool of me were the robbers.  They had found
papers and letters which opened before them this scheme of fraud; then,
with his residence address, using his keys, they had learned everything
necessary for the completion of their plans.  A copy of the Judge's
will must have been in Henley's possession, and, no doubt, some
lawyer's letter, describing the situation, received since the departure
of his wife.  Apparently everything two clever crooks needed to know
was in their possession.  All they needed to do was pull the strings,
using a figurehead to represent Philip Henley.  That was the part for
which I was chosen.  They had to construct a lie in order to interest
me, yet that was comparatively easy, and there was a strong probability
of success but for peculiar conditions of which they could know
nothing.  The half-breed had never been mentioned; he was the monkey
wrench thrown unexpectedly into their well-oiled machine.  Yet, even
without him, the reappearance of Philip Henley's wife was sufficient to
cause disaster.

Philip Henley's wife!  The magic of the words halted me.  Then now, if
all I had learned was true, she was his widow.  What would that mean to
me!  The swift beating of my heart answered.  As I sat there alone, in
the silence I forgot everything save her, and my mind dwelt upon every
word and look which had passed between us.  These had been innocent
enough, and yet, to my imagination, stimulated by this discovery,
formed the basis of a dream of hope.  I knew this, that however
sincerely she might have once supposed she loved Henley, his neglect,
cruelty, dissipation, had long ago driven all sentiment from her.
Before we met, her girlhood affection had been utterly crushed and
destroyed.  Loyal, she was, and true to every tradition of her
womanhood.  No audacity, no boldness, could penetrate her reserve, or
lower her self-respect.  Before I knew who she was, when I had every
reason to doubt and to question, I was still restrained by an invisible
personality which kept me helpless.  It was to guard his interest, not
her own, that she had accompanied me on this expedition, risking her
good name in the belief that he was unable to care for his own.  What
would she do now? how would she feel toward me?  What change would it
make in the friendly relationship between us?  I longed to tell her,
and yet shrunk from the task.  She could not fail to know how much I
cared; careful as I had been in word and action, yet a dozen times had
my eyes revealed the secret.  I had seen her draw back from me, half
afraid, had her restrain me by a gesture, or a word.  This could be
done no longer--we were free now, I to speak, she to listen, but I
could only guess the result.  Back behind the rare depth of those eyes
her heart was hidden, and thus far I had probed for its secret in vain.

The sunlight streaming in through the upper transom told me the sun was
dipping into the west.  If we were to get away when night came there
were many things to consider first; especially was I obsessed now with
a desire to overhaul the Captain's papers, and secure those which would
be of benefit.  We must possess more proof than the garrulous talk of
the second mate, and surely that proof would be discovered in the after
cabin.  The noise of the steward's dish-washing had ceased, and
cautious investigation discovered him sound asleep, curled up like a
dog, on the deck.  Assured as to this, I ventured up the companion
stairs, and indulged in a glance forward.  Except for a group of
sailors doing some sail patching in the shade of the charthouse, no one
was visible.  The vessel rocked gently, and far forward there was a
sound of hammering.  The mate would be there, overseeing the job
whatever it might be.  There was a dark cloud overshadowing the eastern
horizon, with zigzag flashes of lightning showing along its edge, but
the sea was barely rippled.  There was no sign of any boat along the
beach of the cove, and the fishermen had disappeared, not a glimmer of
white sail showing above the waters.  Surely no better opportunity than
this could be given.

I stole back, silent and unobserved, listened an instant to Broussard's
steady breathing, then unlocked the Captain's door, and entered his
cabin.  His wicked eyes, blazing with hate, glared at me as I
approached, and, inspired by some sudden feeling of sympathy, I bent
over, and removed the gag from his mouth.  The result was an outburst
of profanity, bristling with threats, but these as instantly ceased as
I picked up the cloth again.

"It's just as you please," I said soberly.  "Either lie quiet, or have
this back--it's up to you."

"Do you mean to kill me?"

"Not unless I have to, but I hold some things more valuable than your
life.  Just at present I mean to look over your papers."

He must have realized I was beyond playing with, and impervious to
threats, for he lay quiet, but with glaring eyes following my every
movement, as I threw open the drawers of the desk, and began handling
their contents.  For some time I discovered nothing of special
interest, only an accumulation of business letters, manifests and old
sea charts, showing that the _Sea Gull_ had been concerned in a vast
variety of enterprises.  It was only after I had thus emptied the
unfastened drawers that I came upon one securely locked.  I tried key
after key before discovering the right one, realizing from Henley's
squirming that I must be drawing near the goal.  The first paper
touched was a copy of the will, and a little further rummaging put me
into possession of various documents which, I believed from a cursory
glance at their contents, were of utmost value.  These I hastily
transferred to my coat pocket, making sure I had the original letter
descriptive of Philip Henley's death, as well as the copy of a
memorandum which the half-breed had evidently drawn up for the
convenience of his lawyers.  I ran through this last swiftly, surprised
at its frankness, and convinced that the attorneys employed must be as
great rascals as the man who commanded their services.  Evidently they
had requested full particulars so as to be prepared for any emergency.

I presume this search, swift as I endeavored to conduct it, occupied
fully a half hour, every nerve strained by fear of interruption.
However, I could not desist until I had handled every scrap of paper,
and the result well repaid the risk.  Once I heard steps above on the
deck, but, so far as I knew, no one entered the outer cabin.

"I think I've got your number," I said finally, wheeling about to look
at him.

"You 've got to get away first," he sneered defiantly, "and you 'll not
find that so easy.  My turn will come yet, you spy, and then you 'll
learn how I bite."

I laughed, feeling no mercy.

"All in good time, friend; I think you have had your innings; now it's
mine.  So you are Charles Henley?"

He did not answer.

"The illegitimate son of Judge Henley and a negro mother.  That's a
clever forgery, that paper of legal adoption, I admit.  Must have had
legal advice for that.  What did you pay the lawyers?"

He stared at me with compressed lips.

"Not ready to confess yet?  Well, you will be.  By the way, who was
that Pierre who wrote telling you of Philip's death?  Not Vonique, was
it?"

"You damn white devil!" he burst forth, tortured beyond resistance.
"What do you know about him?  Who told you?"

"You 'll learn it all soon enough."

"You 're a sneaking detective!"

"Oh, no, Henley; I 'm merely a man who drifted into this adventure
blindly, but now I am going to fight it out for sake of the woman.
It's a pity for you that you did n't tap me on the head a bit harder
back in the cellar."

His teeth ground together savagely, and he burst into a string of oaths.

"That's enough," and I got to my feet.  "I see I 'll have to gag you
again."

"Where 's the steward?"

"Asleep in the pantry when I came in here."

"And Herman--has n't he got on board yet?"

"Oh, yes; two hours, or more, ago.  He has the deck watch, while the
Creole is below.  Anything else you desire explained?"

"You think you 're smart, but you 'll sing a different song before I 'm
through," he snarled.  "I 'm hungry, and I want to know why that
Dutchman did n't come down here and report."

"You 'll have to stand the hunger for awhile.  As to Herman, I suppose
he had nothing to tell.  Well, I 've wasted time enough."

I replaced the gag, and took a survey of the cabin to make sure all was
secure.  Uncomfortable as the man was, he was not in the slightest
danger, and I felt little tenderness.  He would not remain long
undiscovered after we got away, and our only possible safety required
harsh methods.  Nothing had occurred in the outer cabin during my
absence, but the growing shadows evidenced the approach of twilight.
In those waters night came quickly.  Locking the Captain's door, I
entered my own stateroom, and sat down on the lower berth to wait,
leaving my door slightly ajar.  The cabin grew constantly darker,
although outside, through the open port, I could still distinguish
gleams of light along the water surface, and the heights of the island.
Herman came down, and entered his stateroom, but without closing the
door.  He remained but a moment, or two, and then hurried back on deck.
Suddenly a gust of wind blew in through the port, and it began to rain
gently, but in huge drops.  Far away was the rumble of thunder, echoing
across the open sea.  The storm was evidently coming up slowly from the
east, as all the western sky was clear, and streaked with golden red.

Then a sailor--I thought he was Peters, but could not tell--came
shuffling down the companion stairs, his oilskins rustling, and pounded
on the second mate's door.

"All hands, Mr. Broussard!"

There was a muffled response, and the Creole, buttoning his jacket as
he passed, followed the other on deck.  A moment later I heard the slow
throb of the engines, and glanced out to note the shore-line slipping
past into the gloom.  The _Sea Gull_ was under way.




CHAPTER XXX

WE MAKE THE EFFORT

It would be some time yet--fifteen or twenty minutes at the
best--before I dared attempt to carry out my plan of escape.  In spite
of the overspreading cloud, and steady rainfall, daylight lingered in
the west, and a spectral glow hung above the ocean.  It was a peculiar,
almost ghastly light, yet of sufficient intensity to render objects
visible for a considerable distance.  However, there were preliminaries
to be attended to, and I was eager to be busy.

The steward had aroused from his nap, and I watched him lower the
table, and spread it with a white cloth.  Now the distant clatter of
dishes proved him to be in the pantry.  He could be dealt with there
even to better advantage than in the cabin, and, noncombatant as he
undoubtedly was, I felt it safer to place him beyond power to create
any alarm.  The task confronting me was far too serious to leave our
rear unguarded.  I slipped silently along the short passageway, and,
watching his back closely, investigated the lock on the pantry door.
It was of the spring variety, easily set to fasten, and could not be
operated from the inside.  As I pressed in the catch there was a
clicking sound, which caused the negro to turn around, the whites of
his eyes gleaming oddly.

"Oh, my Lordy!  I nebber heard you, Massa Craig.  By golly, sah, dis
yere niggah sure thought he was shot."

"Not yet, Louis," I replied quietly, standing in the opening, one hand
still on the latch.  "But it is just as well for you to be serious
about it--I 've got the weapon all right--see," and I pushed the
revolver butt forward into his range of vision.  "I don't mean to hurt
you so long as you keep still."

"What--what you a-goin' fer to do, sah?"

"Get away from this ship if I can, and you are going to help by
remaining right where you are, boy.  First, what's in that small boat,
hung to davits astern--provisions, I mean?"

His teeth chattered so he could hardly answer, but finally words came
through his lips.

"Thar 's a breaker of fresh water, an'--an' a package o' sea-biscuit,
sah.  Ah--Ah reckon that's all."

"Good; do you happen to know how far we are away from the main coast?"

"A a-bout thirty-five mile, sah."

"Florida?"

"Yes, sah."

"What is the nearest town?"

"Ah--Ah reckon it would likely be Carlos, sah, but it don't 'mount ter
much."

"Can you tell me the compass point?"

He scratched his head, his confidence that he was not going to be hurt
returning, as I questioned him.

"Wal', sah, I ain't no sailor man myself--no, sah; but de second mate
he done point it out dis mohnin' when Ah was on deck, an' he say it lay
nor'east by east, sah.  Ah members dat distinctly."

"That will be all, Louis.  Now listen to me.  I am going to shut this
door, and lock you in.  I 'll be on board here for an hour yet, and if
you utter so much as a whimper I 'll come down here, and fill you full
of lead.  Are you going to keep still?"

"Ah--Ah sure am, sah; my Lordy!  Ah don't want fer to be no dead
niggah."

"Well, you will be if I hear a peep out of you."

I closed the door, testing it before turning away, smiling grimly to
myself at recollection of those white eyeballs glaring at me through
the gloom.  Louis was evidently not the stuff of which martyrs are made.

There was a small tell-tale compass fastened to a beam over the table.
I unscrewed this without difficulty, and dropped it into my pocket.  It
would be a dark night with that cloud shutting out the sky, with
probably not a shore light visible.  Then I climbed the companion
stairs to take a survey of the deck.  As the cabin lights had none of
them been lit, I could stand in the shadow of the hood without fear of
being seen, and my eyes, accustomed to the slow approach of darkness,
could see fairly well.  No attempt had been made to spread sail,
although doubtless a closely reefed jib helped to steady the vessel,
which was advancing steadily under medium engine power.  Quietness, and
secrecy was clearly the aim sought, for the stacks discharged only a
faint haze of smoke, instantly disappearing into the cloud mass above,
while the sound of the revolving screws was scarcely discernible.
Nevertheless we were slipping through the water at fair rate of speed,
leaving a very perceptible wake astern.  Judging from our present
progress the _Sea Gull_ would prove herself a clipper once under full
steam.  The open decks glistened with water, although the rainfall was
light and intermittent; thunder rumbled to the northward, with
occasional flashes of lightning.  Even as I stood there, staring
forward, endeavoring to make out certain objects in the gloom, the
overhanging cloud seemed to close in across the western sky, instantly
plunging us into night.  Like a spectral ship we swept through the
slight smother, gently lifted by the long swell, without a light
burning fore or aft.  I heard no movement of men, no voice shouting
orders, yet before that last gleam faded, I had seen outlined several
figures on the bridge.  To better assure myself that no watch was upon
the after deck, I circled the cabin, and then, crouching in the shadow
of the rail, advanced even with the chart-house.  From this point I
could distinguish voices in conversation, but the forms of the men
could not be discerned.  Still, without accurately locating them, I had
ascertained all I required to know, and made my way back along the
slippery deck.  All hands were on duty forward, and would be held there
for a time, at least, while the _Sea Gull_ was slipping through the
danger zone.  But supper had not been served, and one of the watches
might be piped down at any moment.  This would bring one of the mates
aft to the cabin.

Driven by the thought, I rapped softly on her door, and she came forth
instantly, fully dressed.

"You are ready?"

"Yes."

"You 'll need a waterproof of some kind--it's raining outside.  Wait a
moment; there will be a coat in some of these staterooms."

I found one, a fisherman's slicker, and wrapped her in it.  It was a
world too big, but I tightened the belt, and turned up the skirts, so
she managed to walk.  It would serve to keep her dry, although worn
under indignant protest.

"Oh, I can't," she proclaimed.  "Why, I must be a perfect fright."

"Not to me; besides, it's dark as Erebus.  Here, let me take your hand;
I know every step of the way."

I led her forward slowly, so that the flapping of the oilskins against
the stair-rail would not be heard.  The steady patter of rain on the
deck planks drowned what little noise we made, and as we emerged into
the hood a gust of wind drove the moisture into our faces.  I could
feel my heart thump, yet it was more because of her proximity than any
excitement of adventure.  So far as I could perceive, peering out into
the storm with hand shading my eyes, the way was clear, and, bidding
her stoop low, we slipped back along the narrow deck passage into the
shadow cast by the boat.  Here, protected as we were by the bulge of
the cabin, there was slight probability of our being observed, and I
stood up, again examining the tackle to reassure myself of its proper
working.  I even tested the boat's weight in sudden fear lest I could
not hold it alone.  Then I whispered to the shapeless form crouched
beside me.

"Now," I said, "step on my knee, and I 'll help you over.  Don't
hurry--only be quiet."

"How can I with this ridiculous thing on?"

"You must try.  That's it; now just let me lift you--steady yourself
with the tackle."

She peered back at me over the side of the boat, her hair shining with
moisture.

"Now are you coming?"

"No; I shall have to remain here and lower the boat."

"But I don't know what to do."

"Listen, and I 'll tell you.  Turn about and face the stern.  Yes, that
is the way I mean; keep your hand on that rope so as not to make a
mistake.  Now take this knife; don't drop it.  The moment the boat
touches the water--an instant before, if possible--cut the rope you
have hold on.  Then hurry forward and cut the other.  You understand?"

"I--I think so; I am to cut this first and then the other."

"Yes; now don't fail.  You see we are launching this boat above the
screw.  There is bound to be suction.  If you cut as I say, you will
drift off bow on to the course of the vessel, and will float free;
otherwise the boat is likely to be swamped.  You see what I mean?"

She nodded.

"The quicker you can get to that second rope," I added seriously, "the
better your chances."

"Then I 'll get out of these oilskins," and she struggled out of them,
with every semblance of relief, tucking the bundle out of sight.  "I
don't care if I get wet.  But--but, what are you going to do?"

"Jump for it, as soon as you are fairly afloat.  I 'll be aboard before
you know it.  Are you ready?"

She was looking forward, and her hand gripped mine.  Her failure to
answer, and the sudden pressure of fingers, was a warning of danger.  I
glanced back across my shoulder.  In front of the cabin stood a man
staring aft.  His huge bulk, even in that darkness, told me it was
Herman.




CHAPTER XXXI

THE OPEN BOAT

Following the first impulse of this alarming discovery I pressed her
back into the boat, and crouched low myself behind the protection of
the flag locker.  The fellow might not have seen us.  How still it was;
only the swish of water astern, and the continuous patter of rain.  The
pounding of my heart was like that of a trip hammer, as I listened
intently for any movement.  For a long moment of suspense there was
none; then I heard his heavy step on the deck, as he came slowly
forward around the bulge of the cabin.  The very manner of his advance
told me his uncertainty; something had occurred to arouse suspicion--he
had heard a noise, or seen a shadow--and was investigating curiously.
He came up to the stern rail, standing still, a huge bulk in the gloom,
his gaze on the swinging boat.  Then, unsatisfied, he leaned forward,
and began to explore with one hand.  Apparently he touched something
strange; the edge of her skirt it must have been, for there was a bit
of cloth in the lifted fingers.  Noiselessly I arose to my feet,
planting myself firmly on the wet deck.  There was but one means of
escape now, and big as the fellow was, I must accept the chance.
Another minute would mean discovery, and his bull voice would roar the
length of the ship.  He neither saw, nor heard me, his whole attention
concentrated on the boat.  Without warning, putting every ounce of
strength into the blow, I struck, landing square on the chin.  There
was a smothered groan, and he collapsed, hurled back bodily, his arms
flung up.  I heard him thud against the rail, his great form bending to
the shock, and then he went over, whirling through the air.

The result was so sudden, so unexpected, as to be all accomplished
before I realized its possibility.  I saw him go down, blindly clawing
with his hands at the open air, and yet it was more a delirium than a
reality.  There was no splash, no cry, and I leaned over the rail,
rubbing my bruised knuckles, and staring down into the black void where
the fellow had disappeared, scarcely believing the truth of what I had
actually witnessed.

"What is it?" she asked, her voice barely audible.  "What has happened?"

Her voice seemed to recall me instantly, to restore my numbed faculties.

"Why, really I hardly know," I answered, yet stepping back to grip the
ropes.  "The fellow had hold of your dress, did n't he?"

"Yes, oh!  I was so frightened, and--and then he jerked me horribly."

"That was when I hit him.  I must have got the big brute just right.
He fell back as if he had been pole-axed, crashed into the rail, and
went overboard."

She looked down into the swirl beneath, clutching the edge of the boat
with her hands.

"Is--is he down there--in the water?  Do you--you suppose he is
drowned?"

"I don't see what else he could be.  I did n't mean to kill him; just
to knock him out, but I don't believe he had any swim left by the time
he hit the water."

"I--I cannot bear to think of it!"

"Now see here," I said, coming back to my senses.  "This is all
foolishness, and losing us time.  I 'm not sorry he is out of the way;
it was either his life or ours.  He was a big, lawless brute, a
murderer at heart, if he was n't in deed.  Now there is all the more
reason for us to hurry.  Have you got the knife?"

"Yes."

"Then get hold of that stern rope; I am going to lower away."

She obeyed me, but it was mechanical, her eyes still fixed upon the
water.

"Be quick now," I said sternly, and my hand pressed her shoulder.
"Your life depends on your promptness."

I loosened the ropes, permitting them to run slowly through the blocks.
There was no creaking, and I rejoiced at the ease with which I
sustained the weight, as the boat descended.  Slowly it sank below into
the darkness, until it was merely a black, shapeless shadow outlined
against the water.  I felt the strain on my arms as the swell gripped
its keel; then the stern swung free, and I knew she was scrambling
forward, knife in hand, for the other rope.  Almost before the boat
could swing about, the second stay dangled, and all my straining eyes
could perceive was a dark, indefinite shadow drifting out of sight
astern.  Without uttering a sound, or wasting a second, I dived from
the rail.  I came up to the surface, swishing the water from my eyes.
Five fathoms away was the shapeless outline of the boat, tossing
helplessly on the swell, the girl still in the bow, her very attitude
bespeaking terror.

"It's all right," I called, loud enough for her to hear.  "Throw out an
oar on the left, and hold her.  I 'll be there in a minute."

She heard me and understood, for with one sob of relief plainly audible
in the still night, she shipped the oar.  Weighted by sodden clothes
even that short distance tested me, yet her efforts, small as they
were, halted the boat's drift, and I made it, almost breathless, when I
finally gripped the gunwale, and hung on to regain a measure of
strength.

"Oh, thank God!" she exclaimed, staring at me, "I--I thought you were
lost."

"My clothes are like lead," I panted.  "They dragged me down twice.
That's over with now."

"But--but what could I have done if you had not come!"

"Don't think of it; the danger is all over.  You need n't pull on the
oar; just hold it straight out; that will keep the boat's head forward."

"Can you get over the side?"

"In a moment---yes; as soon as I get my breath back.  Did you notice
any alarm on board the _Sea Gull_?"

She shaded her eyes with one hand, holding the heavy oar against her
body, and looked ahead.

"No; I was not thinking about that--only of your danger, and my awful
position.  I was never so frightened before."

"Can you still see the vessel?"

"Just a shadow against the sky.  I--I think she is moving straight
ahead."

"Then we have not been missed, nor the mate.  Doubtless he was going
below for his supper.  Now lean well over to port--yes, the left--and
balance the boat; I am going to climb in."

With a struggle, I made it, rolling over the low gunwale, the water
draining from me into a pool at the bottom, the slight chill of the
night air making me shiver.  It was not raining now, although there was
a vapory mist in the atmosphere, almost a drizzle.  I sat up, and
touched her hand where it grasped the oar.

"You are a fine brave girl," I said sincerely, unable to restrain my
admiration.

She dropped her head, and began to sob.

"Oh, no, no!  I am not," she replied, tremblingly.  "I am such a
coward.  You cannot know the terror I have felt."

"That is the test of courage; you faced peril realizing all you risked.
Not one in a thousand would have done as well."

"You--you really think so?" and she glanced toward me, "or are you
merely seeking to encourage me?  But you are soaking wet, and must be
cold."

"A little damp--yes," and I laughed, stretching my limbs, "but there is
plenty to do now to keep me warm.  Where is the _Sea Gull_?  I hardly
know in which direction to look."

She pointed over the port bow, and, with an effort, I managed to make
out, through the misty gloom, a faint shadow against the sky.  Not a
light was visible, nor could I decipher any real outline of the vessel.
Even as I stared in uncertainty this dim spectral shade vanished,
swallowed up in the night.

"Why," she said, "it is gone now; I cannot see it at all any more."

"The best luck that could happen to us.  Now we will widen the stretch
of water as much as possible."  I leaned over, and clawed about until I
found the discarded oilskins, and wrapped them about her, despite
protests.

"No, not another word, young lady.  I shall have to work and cannot be
bothered with such things, while you must sit there and hold that oar
until we have some sail spread.  This mist is as bad as rain; your
jacket is soaked already.  Have n't you learned yet to obey your
captain's orders?"

"I was never very good at that."

"Obeying, you mean?  Well, you have no choice now.  Hold steady while I
step the mast."

Fortunately the spar was not a heavy one.  Except for the roll of the
boat I could have handled it alone, but fearful of capsizing, I lashed
the oar into position, and she helped me steady it down until it rested
solidly in the socket.  Our eyes met.

"You are not so frightened now."

"Not when I am busy; it--it was being left alone, and--and thought of
that drowned man."

"Of course, but my being here makes a difference?"

"Always," she confessed frankly.  "Somehow I can never be afraid with
you.  But--but what shall we do now?"

"I hardly know what to put you at--oh, yes, here is a tin, and you can
bail out this water sloshing about in the bottom.  That will be
valuable service."

"What will you do?"

"Rig up the sail the best I can in the dark; there is breeze enough to
give us some headway, and ship the rudder."

"Do you know which direction to steer?"

"Not now, but I have a compass in my pocket; a northeast course would
be sure to bring us to the coast, and towns are scattered along.  I
found that out from Broussard yesterday."

She made no response, bending over with the tin dipper, and I went at
my task, straightening out ropes so they would work easily through the
blocks.  In spite of the darkness I was not greatly hampered, as
everything had been stored away in shipshape manner, and came
conveniently to hand.  The wind freshened perceptibly while I was thus
engaged, veering into the southeast, so that all the cloth I dare
spread was the jib and a closely reefed mainsail.  The boat acted a bit
cranky, but, confident she would stand up under this canvas, I crawled
back to the tiller, eased off the sheet a trifle more, and waited
results.  We shipped a bucket full of water, and then settled into a
good pace, a cream of surge along our port gunwale, and a white wake
astern.  The woman kept on bailing steadily, until the planks were dry,
and then crept cautiously back to the thwart just in front of me,
leaning over slightly to keep clear of the occasional flap of the sail.

I hoped she would speak, and thus afford me some excuse for telling
what I had discovered on board the _Sea Gull_, but she sat there in
silence, staring straight ahead into the ceaseless drizzle, her
oilskins gathered tightly.  Holding the tiller under my arm I unscrewed
the face of the compass, and made a guess at our position.  However,
there was no star, or other mark of guidance, by which I could steer;
only the wind, which apparently shifted in gusts, and I could merely
hold the leaping craft in the course I deemed safest.  I doubt if the
eye penetrated twenty feet beyond the boat's rail, but we raced through
the smother in a way that gave me a certain thrill of exultation.  At
least we were clear of the _Sea Gull_, and safe enough, unless a storm
arose.  With the return of daylight a course could be set for the
coast, which would n't be far away.  So I stared into the darkness, and
waited, scarcely bold enough to break the silence.




CHAPTER XXXII

A TALK IN THE NIGHT

I wondered what awaited us ahead in that black mystery of waters; had
they discovered yet our absence on board the _Sea Gull_?  If so, what
would Henley do?  Knowing that I had rifled his desk, his one thought
upon release would naturally be the recovery of the papers.  Besides,
smarting from his bonds, and thirsting for revenge, he would never
permit the vessel to depart from these waters without an effort to
overtake us.  Private vengeance would outweigh all other
considerations.  God pity us if we ever fell into his clutches again.
And there would be no doubt as to the manner of our escape--the trail
left was a plain one.  I could imagine the scene on board when the
discovery of our escape was first made--the search for the missing
mate, the discovery of the loss of the boat, the dangling ropes proving
how it had been lowered.  Then would follow an excited investigation
below, revealing the steward locked into his pantry, and the raging
captain tied and gagged in his berth.  I could not forbear laughing to
myself at the picture, and yet never was insensible to the danger still
confronting us.

There was in my mind, now I had leisure to consider, no doubt as to
what those on board that vessel would do.  They would realize we were
somewhat astern, and, in the hope of sighting us at daylight, would
cruise back and forth in those immediate waters.  Any moment the _Sea
Gull's_ sharp prow might loom up out of the black wall.  As she carried
no lights there would be no warning.  It occurred to me that they would
be more apt to take a course well in toward shore, anticipating I would
endeavor to reach the protection of the coast under cover of darkness.
Someone would discover the loss of the tell-tale compass, which would
naturally confirm that suspicion.  Convinced of this I steered more to
the eastward, feeling of the face of the compass again to assure myself
of the direction.  I found even this small change an advantage in more
ways than one, as the boat moved steadier, and I was able to spread a
larger amount of canvas.  Lashing the tiller, I crept forward and shook
out an additional reef, hauling the ropes taut.  By this time the wind
had steadied into a brisk breeze, and the rain had ceased.  Crawling
back across the thwarts, I took the jumping tiller again into my hands,
and held her nose to it, seeking every advantage.  I had brought back
with me a tin of biscuit from the bow locker, more as an excuse for
opening conversation than from any feeling of hunger.

"It must be pretty close to midnight," I said finally.  "Are you
hungry?"

The shapeless form in the oilskins straightened slightly, and I knew
she had turned her face toward me.

"Hungry!  Oh, no; I had not thought of that."

"You have been crying?"

"Yes; it is so foolish, but I am so frightened out here in this little
boat.  The darkness, and that awful water has got upon my nerves.
You--you must n't scold me."

"Of course not--I feel the weight myself," I replied kindly.  "This
experience is almost as new to me as to yourself.  You must remember I
am no sailor."

"Yet you understand boats; you know the sea."

"Only a little about small boats; I picked that up in the Philippines;
but I have never had to rely entirely upon myself before."

"But you are not afraid?"

I laughed softly, hoping to reassure her.

"Not of those things which most affect you, at least.  I can handle the
boat all right in this sea and wind, while the darkness possesses no
special terror."

"Nor the memory of that dead man float--floating somewhere yonder?"

"I have hardly thought about him.  I have seen so many dead men in the
past three years I have become hardened possibly.  You must n't let
your mind dwell on that grewsome incident.  It was unavoidable, our
only means of escape.  His death was an accident."

"What is it then you are afraid of?"

I told her, dwelling upon our situation so far as I could understand
it, and describing the change in my plans.  She listened quietly,
asking a question now and then, sitting erect, the oilskins thrown
aside, and one hand grasping the boat's rail.

"What papers did you find in the desk?"

"Letters mostly, establishing the identity of the Captain."

"Who is he--really?"

"Charles Henley--Philip Henley's half brother by a negro mother.  Did
you ever hear of him?"

"No; I was never told there was such a man."

"I doubt if anyone, outside those immediately interested, ever knew the
circumstances.  Of course the family kept it a close secret.  This is
where the man had all the advantage.  As soon as the Judge died he
determined to represent himself as Philip, and claim the property.

"As Philip had been absent so long, no one could dispute successfully
his claim to be that individual.  He possessed ample evidence that he
was the son of Judge Henley."

"But surely he would anticipate that my hus--Philip--would hear of his
father's death?"

"He took the chance of getting the property into his hands first.  As I
understand the matter he possessed no knowledge that the Judge was in
communication with Philip.  He believed the latter had disappeared
utterly, and would only learn of his inheritance through accident.  To
prevent this he dispatched a man North to discover him, if possible,
and keep him under surveillance.  He thought he had every avenue
guarded."

"And--and you said his mother was a negress?"

"Yes--old Sallie."

"What!  That awful creature!"

"Probably she was not that in her younger days."

"I cannot imagine such a thing.  How did you learn this?"

"From Broussard first.  They have been together for years, but I
happened to discover the fellow when he was angry over a punishment.
He talked more freely than he intended to do, and later I verified all
he said by the letters found."

"Then, strange as it sounds, it is true?"

"Without doubt.  Moreover," and I lowered my voice in sudden
embarrassment, "within the last two weeks the Captain had received news
from his agent in the North, which gave him fresh confidence.  From his
standpoint he no longer had any cause for fear from the chief source."

"What--what do you mean?"

"You will believe me?  You will not think I manufacture this?"

"Certainly not:--but--but I do not understand."

"Well, the man reported that he had found trace of Philip Henley; he
told of the life the man was leading, and where he lived.  I think all
this must have been immediately after your separation, as he mentioned
no wife.  However, he described something even more important."

"You must tell me," she burst forth, as I hesitated.  "Don't be afraid
to trust me with all you know."

"I am not afraid," I returned stoutly enough, "not in the sense you
mean, at least, yet it is never easy to be the bearer of evil news."

"It is evil?"

"Misfortune, certainly.  The man reported the death of your husband."

"His death!  You are sure?"

I could hear her quick breathing, as she leaned forward, all attention
riveted on me.

"Yes."

"You saw the report?"

"I have it with me; as soon as it becomes daylight you can read it
yourself."

"Yes, but tell me now what he said; how it happened."

"The report was specific, and would seem to be true.  He says that
Philip Henley, while intoxicated, was struck and killed by an
automobile.  The date given was after you left him.  His body was found
by the police but his pockets had been rifled, and there were no marks
of identification on his clothes.  He was buried unknown, but the
informant claimed to have visited the morgue, viewed the body, and
states positively the dead man was Philip."

"And--and you think--tell me what you believe, Gordon Craig."

"There is but one conclusion to my mind.  I have no doubt as to the
entire truth of the story.  The silence and disappearance of your
husband is evidence that he is either dead, or, in some other way,
helpless.  The former explanation is the most probable, and, coupled
with this fellow's statement, seems unquestionable.  There would be no
apparent reason why he should lie."

"No; there is none.  I--I--really, I have thought this all the time;
but about those others?"

"Vail and Neale, you mean?  It seems to me they fit in exactly with the
story.  Everything had been removed from Philip's pockets, and all
ordinary means of identification destroyed.  There must have been a
purpose in this, and it must have been done by a second party, as there
is no suggestion of suicide.  My theory is this--the body was either
found by others before the police arrived, or else the automobile party
which killed him paused long enough to ascertain the extent of his
injuries.  In either case his pockets were searched, and all contents
removed.  Do you comprehend what that would mean?"

"I--I think so; but tell me yourself."

"He certainly had papers with him dealing with his inheritance.  To a
shrewd, criminal mind they would be suggestive.  He also, undoubtedly,
had keys to his apartments.  With these in their possession it would be
comparatively easy for unscrupulous persons to ascertain the entire
nature of the case, and secure all necessary documents.  Then there
would be nothing more needed except a man capable of passing himself
off as Philip Henley."

"And Vail was not a lawyer," she asked breathlessly, "nor Neale one of
the executors?"

"In my judgment the fellows merely took those names to impose upon me,
to help bolster up their story, and make it appear probable.  They were
simply two crooks, willing to take a chance for a pot of money.  I
happened to be the one selected to pull their chestnuts out of the
fire."

I saw her head sink into the support of her hands, and knew she was
sobbing silently.




CHAPTER XXXIII

WE UNDERSTAND EACH OTHER

"You think my conclusions must be correct?" I could not refrain from
asking.

"Yes; even without seeing the letter, but," and she glanced up quickly,
"the ring--Philip's ring--we found?"

"I forgot to mention that.  Its presence here alone is convincing.  It
was sent to Charles Henley by his agent, who claimed to have removed it
from the finger of the dead man."

"Then every doubt is removed; the one killed was my hus--husband."

There was a long, painful silence, during which I stared out into the
dark, mechanically guiding the boat, although every thought centered on
her motionless figure.  What should I say? how was I to approach her
now?  Before there had always been a frank spirit of comradeship
between us; no reserve, no hesitancy in the exchange of confidences.
But with this assurance of Philip Henley's death, everything was
changed.  I longed to go to her and pour out my sympathy, but some
instinct held me back, held me wordless.  I knew not what to say, or
how any effort on my part would be received.  Instantly there had been
a barrier erected between us which she alone could lower.  Those were
long minutes I sat there, speechless, gazing straight ahead, my brain
inert, my hand hard on the tiller.  Suddenly, with a swift thrill which
sent my blood leaping, I felt the soft touch of her fingers.

"Are you afraid to speak to me?" she asked, pleadingly.  "Surely I have
said nothing to anger you."

"No, it is not that," I returned in confusion, not knowing how to
express the cause of my hesitancy.  "I am sorry, and--and I sympathize
with you, but I hardly know how to explain."

She was looking at me through the darkness; I was able to distinguish
the white outline of her uplifted face.

"I am sorry--yes," very slowly, "but perhaps not as you suppose.  It is
hard to think of him as dead--killed so suddenly, without opportunity
to think, or make any preparation.  He--he was my husband under the
law.  That was all; he was no more.  I do not believe I ever loved
him--my marriage was but the adventure of a romantic girl; but if I
once did, his subsequent abuse of me, his life of dissipation,
obliterated long since every recollection of that love.  He is to me
scarcely more than a name, an unhappy memory.  I told you that frankly
when I believed him still alive.  We were friends then, you and I, and
I cannot conceive why his death should sever our friendship."

"Nor has it," I interposed instantly.  "It was not indifference which
silenced me.  Rather it was the very strength of my feeling toward you.
I was fearful of saying too much, of being too precipitate."

"You imagine I would fail to value your friendship at such a time?"

"Don't," I burst forth impetuously; "you talk of friendship when all my
hope centers about another term.  Surely you understand.  I am a man
sorely tempted, and dare not yield to temptation."

She drew her hand away from my clasp, yet the very movement seemed to
express regret.

"You speak strangely."

"No, I do not; the words have been wrung from me.  I am in no way
ashamed, although I realize this is neither the time nor the place.
Remember you have been under my protection ever since that night we met
first on the streets; you are alone here with me now, but still under
my protection.  I cannot take advantage of your helpless condition,
your utter loneliness.  If I did I should never again be worthy of the
name gentleman."

"I regret you should say this."

"No more than I do; the words have been wrung from me."

"And we are to be friends no longer?  Is that your meaning?"

"You must answer that question," I replied gravely, "for it is beyond
my power to decide."

Her head was again uplifted, and I knew she was endeavoring to see my
face through the gloom.  There was silence, the only sounds the slash
of the boat through the water, and the slight flapping of the canvas.

"I am a woman," she said at last, "and we like to pretend to
misunderstand, but I am not going to yield to that inclination.  I do
understand, and will answer frankly.  We can never be friends as we
were before."

My heart sank, and I felt a choke in my voice difficult to overcome.

"I was afraid it would be so."

"Yes," and both her hands were upon mine, "in our position we cannot
afford to play at cross purposes.  You have been loyal to me, even when
every inducement was offered elsewhere.  There was a moment when I
almost doubted, but it was only for a moment.  Then I seemed to sense
your plan, your purpose, and from that time on I have trusted you more
completely than ever before.  This is confessing a great deal, for it
is my nature to be reticent--I have always been hard to become
acquainted with."

"I have not found you so; I feel as though I had known you always."

"That comes from the peculiarity of our first meeting, the
unconventional manner in which we were brought together.  I was not my
natural self that night, nor have I ever been able since to feel toward
you as I have in my relations with other men.  Indeed I have been so
frank spoken, so careless of social forms, as to make you question in
your own mind my real womanhood."

"No; never that!" I protested.

"Oh, but you have," and she laughed softly, a faint trace of bitterness
in the sound.  "You need not deny, for I have read the truth in your
face, yet without resentment.  Why should you not, indeed?  No man
would wish his sister to take the chances I have with an absolute
stranger.  My only excuse is the seeming necessity, and the confidence
I felt in my own strength of character.  I permitted myself to come
South with you, knowing your purpose to be an illegal one; I placed
myself in a false position.  In doing this I was actuated by two
purposes; one was to save this property which had been willed to my
husband by his father.  Do you guess the other?"

"No," I said, impressed by the earnestness with which she was speaking.
"You will tell me?"

"I mean to; the time has come when I should.  It was that I might save
you from a crime.  You had been kind to me, sympathetic; I--I liked you
very much, and I knew you did not understand; that you were being
misled.  I could not determine then where the fraud was, but I knew
there was fraud, and that you would eventually become its victim."

"You cared that much for me?"

"Yes," she confessed frankly, "I did.  I would never have told you so
under ordinary conditions.  But I can now, here, where we are--alone
together in this boat."  She paused, as though endeavoring to choose
the proper words.  "We both realize the changed relations between us."

I drew a quick, startled breath.

"That--that I love you!" the exclamation left my lips before I was
aware.

"Yes," she said calmly.  "I could not help that.  At first I never
deemed such a result of our friendship possible.  I was Philip Henley's
wife, and I gave this possible danger scarcely a thought.  Indeed it
did not seem a danger.  While it is true he was husband in name only,
yet I was wife forever.  That is my religion.  Now the conditions are
all changed, instantly changed by his death."

"You believe then he is dead?"

"I am as sure of it as though I had seen his body.  I feel it to be
true."  There was an instant of hesitation, while I waited
breathlessly.  "Do you understand now why because of the fact we can no
longer remain friends?"

"Yes," I burst forth, "because you know how I have grown to feel toward
you; you--you resent--"

"Have I said so?"

"No, not in words; that was not necessary, but I understand."

"Do you, indeed?"

I stared toward her, puzzled, bewildered, yet conscious that the hot
blood was surging through my veins.

"You cannot mean the other?" I questioned, the swift words tripping
over themselves in sudden eagerness.  "That--that you love me?"

"And why not?  Am I so different from other women?"

I held the tiller still with one hand, but the other arm was free, and
I reached out, and drew her toward me.  There was no resistance, no
effort to break away.  I could see her face uplifted, the wide-open
eyes.

"Different!  Yes; so vastly different, that I misunderstood everything.
But now I know, and--and sweetheart, I love you, I love you."

It could not have been long, not to exceed a moment or two, when a
sudden leaping of the boat brought us back to a realization of our
position.  As soon as I had regained control of the craft, I reached
out again and touched her hand.

"This is all so strange, so unexpected, I can scarcely comprehend what
has occurred."

"Strange, yes, in the way it has happened," she coincided.  "But we
cannot afford to dwell upon that now.  We are in peril.  Do you really
know where we are? for what you are steering?"

"It is largely a guess; there is nothing to give me guidance, except as
I unscrew the face of this compass and feel the needle."

"Then we may still be within view from the deck of the _Sea Gull_ at
daybreak?"

"Yes; that will depend entirely upon luck."

She turned away, and sat quiet, staring forward intently into the black
void.

"What time is it now?"

"Nearly three."

"In two hours it will be dawn."

"Yes."

I thought I could see her clasp her hands together; then suddenly lean
forward.

"Why, look there!" she exclaimed quickly.  "See! to the right.
Merciful Heavens! it is a ship!"




CHAPTER XXXIV

THE REVENUE CUTTER

The vision, indistinct in the gloom, was blotted out from me by the
intervening sail.  It was only as I leaned well to one side that I
could distinguish the dim outlines.  By that time we were almost upon
it, and I could only sheer away to avoid collision.  It was hard to
determine the nature of the vessel, the sides looming so close above
us, but it was not the _Sea Gull_.  I was certain of that from the
height of the rail, and the outline of a square foresail showing dimly
against the sky.  From poop to bow there was not a light visible, and
the hull moved through the water like that of a spectral ship.
Apparently we were unnoticed, and as the stretch of water widened
slightly between us, I called out:

"Ahoy there!  Take us aboard!"

I shouted twice, before a head popped over the rail, and stared down in
apparent amazement.

"Hullo, the boat!  Who are you?  What do you want?"

"Small boat adrift; two passengers; throw us a rope."

"All right; standby!"

I could hear his voice up above, shouting orders; there was a rush of
feet, and a rope's end fell within reach.  The head bobbed over the
rail again, and, a moment later I had helped her up a swaying boarding
ladder, and felt the solid deck under my feet.  The intense darkness
puzzled me, not a gleam of light showing anywhere.  Suddenly a hand
touched my arm.

"This way, sir; help the lady aft--the deck is clear."

I could see nothing, barely the planks underfoot, yet there was nothing
to do but obey, with his fingers gripping me.

"What kind of a boat is this?" she whispered.

"I 'm sure I don't know; not big enough for a passenger liner."

"The officer is in uniform."

"Are you sure?"

We were at the head of the companion stairs, and descended carefully,
clinging to the rail.  The officer, groping in the darkness, opened a
door at the bottom, and hurried us into the lighted cabin.  Facing us,
one hand resting on the table, stood a short, sturdy man in uniform.
Before I could speak, or do more than glance about the Interior, my
eyes still blinded by the sudden blaze of light, he began questioning.

"Who are you? how did you come to be adrift in these waters?  Answer
up, sir--you 're no fisherman."

"We escaped from a vessel last evening, sir."

"Escaped!  By Gad! are we in a state of war?  What do you mean by
escaped--run away?"

"Yes, sir," and I stepped aside so he could see her more clearly.  "We
were being held as prisoners."

His eyes flashed to her face, rested an instant, and then his cap was
in his hand.

"I beg your pardon, young lady," he said gravely, "but this is all most
strange.  I could almost imagine this was a century or two earlier when
pirates roamed these seas.  You were prisoners you say, and escaped."

"Yes," I answered, before she could do so, "but you must pardon us
details until we know who it is that questions us."

"Oh, exactly; you are unaware of the nature of this vessel."

"Yes, sir."

"Well, this is the revenue cutter _Saline_, which I have the honor to
command."

I understood the situation in a flash, my heart leaping in fierce
anticipation.

"Mr. Smith, assist the lady to a chair, and have the steward bring a
glass of wine.  Now, sir, are you ready to answer."

"I am; we were prisoners on board the _Sea Gull_.  It is a long story,
envolving a will, in which the master of that vessel was interested.
We escaped in a small boat last evening, and have been floating about
since."

"The _Sea Gull_?  Do you remember the name, Mr. Smith?"

"No, sir; perhaps a description--"

"A schooner-rigged steam yacht," I explained briefly, "clearing from
New Orleans for Santiago."

The two exchanged glances.

"I begin to see light," said the Captain calmly.  "I think the _Sea
Gull_ must have originally sailed as the _Mary Somers_.  Do you happen
to know, sir, where she was really bound, and the nature of her cargo?"

"I do; Spanish Honduras, with munitions of war."

"Exactly, under command of a half-breed named Henley.  By Gad, Smith,
this sounds too good to be true."

He walked across the cabin twice, thinking, not even glancing up as he
passed us.  Suddenly he stopped, facing me.

"Where did he get you two?"

"In a bayou off the Alabama coast."

"And you got away last evening--how?"

"By imprisoning the Captain and steward below; I was obliged to knock
the first mate overboard, but we were unseen by any others.  Let me
tell you the whole story; it will scarcely require five minutes."

He nodded his head, walking back and forth as I reviewed the events
swiftly.  I hardly think he asked so much as a single question, his
eyes upon my face and then upon the face of the girl.

"A rather strange tale," he commented when I had concluded, "and,
perhaps, the whole is not told.  However that is none of my affair.
Now listen; this is a revenue cutter.  We were ordered out of Pensacola
four days ago to intercept this boat on which you two were prisoners.
We have n't even sighted the vessel, and if we did would be perfectly
helpless; as she can steam three knots to our one.  Only some streak of
wonderful good luck would ever enable us to capture her.  I half
believe you are the good luck, if you do what I suggest."

"What?" I asked.  "I will be willing.  Would you need Mrs. Henley also?"

"Yes," he turned to the officer who was still standing.

"How large was the boat, Mr. Smith?"

"Capable of transporting about fifteen, sir."

"Hardly enough; still I don't know; we could afford to take a chance.
What crew did the _Sea Gull_ carry?"

"I do not know how many were below, sir," I answered, beginning dimly
to conceive his purpose.  "I never saw to exceed a dozen on deck in a
watch."

"Any evidence they were armed?"

"I know they were not; the officers carried weapons, but would never
trust the crew."

"And only two officers remaining?"

"There may be an engineer, sir."

He pondered a moment, grave-faced, and silent.

"It is not a very complicated plan, but we will try It.  I don't think
Henley will leave these waters without an effort to recover his boat,
and prisoners.  He will want those papers, and revenge on Craig here.
He has no warning that we are after him.  I believe the fellow will
cruise about in the same neighborhood until daylight.  What do you say,
Smith?"

"I agree with you, sir."

"Good; then all we have got to do is lay a trap; the boat's the trap."

"You mean conceal a squad of men in the bottom, and send it adrift
again?"

"Exactly; lower the mast, as though Craig here had been unable to step
it; or, better still, heave it overboard; the loss of weight will give
room for another man.  Then cover the lads over with the canvas.  They
will never suspect the ruse on the _Sea Gull_, or study it out through
glasses.  They 'll simply recognize their boat, and steer for it."

"The fighting odds will be pretty heavy, sir," said Smith soberly.

The Captain's smile lit up his stern features.

"I would not so consider if it was my privilege to be along," he
replied.  "We must trust to surprise, and get the crew below fastened
down before an alarm is sounded on board.  A dozen armed men ought to
clear the decks.  How do you look at the affair, Craig?  Will the plan
work?"

"I am not sure I understand exactly what is proposed, sir?"

"My thought is, that this man Henley will be sufficiently anxious to
get hold of you two again, and regain those papers, so that he will
steam about slowly all night, hoping to get sight of the missing boat
at daylight.  He has no means of knowing that the revenue officers are
after him.  If he sights us at daybreak, he 'll make a run, and show us
a clean pair of heels.  He 'd be hull down in five hours, for this is a
slow old tub.  Now what I propose is this," and the Captain counted off
the points on his fingers.  "There is about an hour of darkness
left--sufficient to enable me to run this cutter in behind Cosmos
Island safely out of sight.  In the meanwhile we 'll dismantle that
small boat a bit, slip a dozen good men under the canvas, and turn her
adrift."

"And you wish me to go also?"

"Yes, if you will."

"And Mrs. Henley?"

"That would be the only way to allay suspicion on the _Sea Gull_."

I hesitated, half turning so as to look at her.  Our eyes met, and she
must have instantly read the question in mine, for she arose to her
feet, and rested one hand on my arm.

"You wish to say yes?" she asked quietly.  "You believe the plan will
succeed?"

"It sounds feasible.  I would gladly go myself, but I hesitate at
exposing you; there will be fighting."

"But my being there is one of the requisites of success?"

"I suppose so.  If you were not visible in the boat, they might
suspicion the truth."

She glanced toward the waiting Captain, and then back into my face.

"Then I will go, of course," she said smilingly.  "Let us not discuss
it any more."

The Captain stepped forward, bowing, bare-headed.

"Most bravely spoken," he said soberly.  "I owe you a debt, madam.  Mr.
Smith, have the boat prepared at once to carry out my idea."

"To leave the impression that an incompetent seaman had been in charge
of it through the night, sir?"

"Exactly; the mast overboard, and the canvas stowed badly."

"Yes, sir, a big sheet."

"Bunch it so as to leave all the space possible; leave the jib set; it
will help conceal the men.  Send Lieutenant Hutton here."

"He will have command of the party?"

"Yes; let him pick his own men, and then report to me; arm them with a
revolver apiece.  Be lively about it."

He turned to us as Smith left the cabin.

"I cannot offer you much at this hour," he said genially, "but the boy
has some hot coffee ready.  Bring on what you have, Joe."




CHAPTER XXXV

THE DECK OF THE SEA GULL

The dawn broke gray and desolate, the vista of restless waters growing
gradually wider, as the light spread out across the eastern sky.  The
clouds yet hung thick and low, yielding a ghastly aspect to the dawn,
somberness to the picture of breaking waves tipped by flying vapors of
mist.  I sat at the tiller, grasping one of her hands in mine, and
staring anxiously about the broadening circle.  The boat in which we
rode, while buoyant enough, still bore the outward appearance of a
wreck, the broken stump of a mast barely showing sufficiently high to
support the flapping jib, and the wet canvas of the mainsail completely
concealing everything forward.  The men were lying low, so completely
hidden as to be invisible even to us, but the Lieutenant sat upright,
with head above the mass of sail, and was scanning the sea with
glasses.  He was a resolute-looking fellow, with brown eyes, and a
reddish tinge of hair.  As he lowered the glasses a moment, I saw him
glance back at us curiously.

"Had n't seen you before," he explained cordially enough.  "Dark when
we came over the side, you know.  Bad morning."

"The fog is lifting.  What is that black mass out there?"

"Cosmos Island," and he turned his lenses the other way.  "The next ten
minutes will give us a clear view."

I looked at her, noting how tired her eyes appeared in the gray light,
although they smiled courageously.

"I wish you were not here," I whispered.

"Please do not say that.  I--I really I wished to come.  I do not think
I could have let you go without me."

"But you are so tired--"

"No more than you, I am sure.  Why, I have done nothing except to stay
awake.  You have had all the work and worry.  It will not be long now."

"No; we shall know in a few minutes if the _Sea Gull_ is standing by
hunting us.  If she shows up, you must do exactly as I say.  You
promise that?"

"Of course," and the clasp of her hand tightened.  "You have no reason
to doubt me."

The Lieutenant's eyes were on the widening sea line, and I bent down
and pressed my lips to her bare arm.  I glanced up again into flushed
cheeks.

"It has been a great night," I said sincerely.  "The one in all my life
best worth living through."

"I almost believe you mean that."

"Don't you?"

"Can you not read my answer in my eyes?"

"Craig," exclaimed the Lieutenant suddenly, "that must be the fellow
off there to port.  Here, try the glasses--just where the cloud is
lifting a bit."

I was some time gaining the proper focus, but when I once had the
distant vessel caught fairly in the lens, I recognized her instantly.

"That's the _Sea Gull_, and, by heavens, they are keeping a sharp
lookout on board.  See! she is swinging on her heel already; they've
sighted us."

He grasped the glass, and stared out through it in silence for several
minutes.  Then he thrust it into a pocket and settled back out of sight
behind the canvas screen.

"You have called the turn," he said quietly, "and the dance is about to
begin.  Unship your rudder and let it go.  Let them think you are
wrecked, helpless to escape, and they will be more careless.  You men
there, loosen your guns, and be ready to scale a ship's side in a
jiffy, but lie perfectly still until I give the word."  He turned his
head.

"You understand what you are to do, Craig, you and the lady?"

"I think so.  We are to obey Henley's orders, and go on board."

"Yes, but do something as soon as you reach the deck to attract
attention, and get them away from the rail.  Try and get the lady as
far astern as possible, for there is likely to be some fighting.  Are
you frightened, miss?"

"No," although her voice trembled from excitement.  "You need not worry
about me."

I caught the gleam of admiration in the Lieutenant's eyes as he looked
at her, but almost instantly his thought centered on his own work.

"All right, then; I shall not wait for any signal.  Now listen, men;
these are my last orders.  When I say go, get up any way you can, and
hit the first man you see.  Hit hard, but no shooting unless they use
firearms.  But fight like devils, and do it quick.  They outnumber us
three to one.  Marston, you and Simms take the stoke hold and the
forecastle.  Keep those fellows below down with your revolvers.  Shoot
if you need to.  The rest of you stick close to me.  All clear, lads?"

"Aye, aye, sir," returned the muffled voices from beneath the canvas.

I unshipped the rudder, letting it disappear noiselessly beneath the
waves, and the boat's head swung slowly around, and we drifted
helplessly, the jib flapping.  With our eyes on the approaching vessel
we remained motionless in the stern, our hands clasped.  The flush had
faded from out her cheeks, yet once she turned toward me and smiled.
Forward not so much as the twitch of a muscle revealed any other
presence in the boat, the only visible thing a jumble of ropes and
canvas, apparently dragged hastily from the water by inexperienced
hands.  The waves tossed us about so that any seaman would recognize
instantly our predicament.  The manner in which the jaunty _Sea Gull_
bore down upon us was proof that those on board had already grasped the
situation, and had no remaining suspicion of treachery.  She was under
steam, with no sail set, and the rapidly increasing light gave me a
fairly clear view.  In low monotone, without turning my head, I managed
to convey my observations to the motionless officer.

"She 's heading straight toward us under low pressure.  There are two
men on the bridge, and a lookout on the bow.  Now she 's swinging to
port to bring up close.  There 's a group at the rail near the
starboard gangway.  About ten, I should say.  Can you see, Viola?"

"Twelve," she answered quietly, "and three forward.  The third man at
the rail is the Captain, and he has a glass."

"By George! you are right.  I recognize the fellow now.  Broussard is
on the bridge.  They expect no trouble, Lieutenant, and only have the
regular watch on deck.  They are getting too close for me to talk any
more."

It was indeed a beautiful picture had we only been in a mind to enable
us to enjoy the scene.  The deserted ocean, rolling gray and dismal
under the cloudy sky, white caps showing in every direction as our boat
was flung helplessly aloft on the steady roll of the sea.  The coast
line was not visible from our elevation, and nothing broke the gray
round of horizon but clouds of floating vapor, slowly drifting away
before the sun, which was already yielding a faint crimson glow to the
east.  Behind us, probably two miles distant, arose the rough ridge of
Cosmos Island, while bearing down upon us from the north, with a
westward sheer sufficient to expose her beautiful lines, came the _Sea
Gull_.  Yet graceful, handsome as she appeared, my entire attention
centered on the group of men at her rail.  They were watching us
intently, Henley with a glass at his eyes.  Twice I saw him turn, and
wave his hand to Broussard on the bridge, slightly altering the
vessel's course, and once the sound of his voice echoed faintly across
the intervening water.

It was quite evident that as yet he perceived nothing to arouse
suspicion, for, with a swing like a hawk, the _Sea Gull_ bore down upon
us, the engines slowing, and then reversed.  We were staring up into
the faces that looked curiously down at us.  Henley gripped a stay and
swung himself to the rail; farther aft the negro steward hung over, his
mouth wide open, grinning at the spectacle.

"Hard down!" yelled the Captain, motioning with one arm.  "Plug her,
man.  Now you damned army hound," he called to me, "catch that rope,
and make fast."

One of the hands flung the coil so that it fell at my feet, and I did
as directed, as otherwise we would have been crushed under the vessel.
As it drew taut, the boat swung in gently against the side of the _Sea
Gull_.  Above us Henley hung, leaning far enough out so he could look
down.

"Now, you damn thief," he screamed, "it's my turn to play jailer.  Come
up, both of you."

"Just a moment, Captain Henley," I answered, rising to my feet.  "If
there is anyone to be punished I am the one; this woman had nothing to
do with it."

"That 's for me to decide," he snarled, and whipped out a revolver.  "I
know how to handle both of you.  Come, jump now, you dog, or you never
will move again.  Pass the girl up first, and be lively about it.  Give
them a hand there, Peters, and don't be too easy."

There was no excuse for delay; besides, those lads under the heavy
canvas must be nearly smothered.  With my arm about her I lifted her up
to where Peters could reach down, and grasp her hand, and then followed
as quickly as possible.  Henley had swung down to the deck, and stood
there, his men grouped about him, the revolver still in his hand.  One
glance at his face told me he was insane from rage, thinking only of
revenge.

"Take the woman below," he snapped, his cruel teeth gleaming.  "By God!
she 'll get her lesson.  Here, Louis, you damned nigger, don't you hear
me?  Lock her in, and bring me the key.  I 'll handle this sniveling
thief first.  So you could n't run a boat, hey!  Not so easy as it
looked, was it, you dog.  Thought we 'd be gone this morning, didn't
you?  You 'll find I 'm not quite as easy as all that.  Now, by God!
you 'll take your medicine!"

I still stood motionless, my back to the rail, letting him rave, but
watching every movement.  I knew the girl's eyes were on my face,
although I did not venture to glance toward her, not even when the
negro guided her aft through the ring of seamen.  Yet this was the one
thing I was waiting for, my heart beating fiercely, in fear lest the
Lieutenant might give signal for attack too soon.  I remember the faces
about me, fierce, scowling faces, of men wild to lay hold upon me at
the first word of command, yet it was Henley I looked at, measuring the
distance between us, and watching the revolver in his hand.  What did
he mean to do?  Kill me, or give me over into the hands of those
merciless devils?  All I could read in his eyes was hatred, exultation,
consciousness of power.  Suddenly he laughed, a sneering, cynical
laugh, as though he thought me cringing before him in terror.  The man
judged me by himself, and believed me helpless.

"Hard luck, Craig--hey!" he began tauntingly.  "Played with the wrong
man, did n't you.  Now I 've got the girl just as I want her, and as
for you--Lord! but I 'll keep you to play with all the way to Honduras.
It will be a pleasant voyage, my friend.  Here, Masters, you and Peters
stand by.  Now, you robber, give me those papers."

I handed them out, watching closely.  Peters stood at my right, one
hand on my arm; the other fellow must have been behind me.  Henley
grasped the envelope, opening the flap to be sure of its contents.  The
movement caused him to lower the revolver, and avert his gaze, for just
an instant.  With one motion I flung Peters aside, and jammed a
clinched fist into the Captain's face.




CHAPTER XXXVI

IN POSSESSION

Masters must have struck me at almost the same instant my fist landed
on Henley, for we went down together, his revolver discharging, the
flying bullet gouging my shoulder, burning the flesh like a red-hot
wire.  Yet I grappled him even as we crashed to the deck, but the
fellow lay stunned, motionless as a dead man.  Everything happened
quicker than I can tell it; with such rapidity, indeed, that not a hand
touched me.  I could barely struggle up on one knee, dazed still by the
stroke which had floored me, and glance about, when the blue-jackets
came tumbling over the rail, and leaped at the astounded crew of the
_Sea Gull_.  It was a swift, short fight, the assailants having every
advantage.  I saw the Lieutenant, bare-handed, dash into the group,
striking out left and right, his men at his heels.  There was a volley
of oaths, a thud of falling bodies, a sharp command, and the shrill
pipe of a boatswain's whistle.  Two men rushed forward, the first
disappearing behind the chart-house.  The second encountered Broussard
stepping off the bridge ladder, and hurled the fellow to the deck with
one blow of a sledge-hammer fist.  Scarcely pausing to see whether he
was alive or not, the assailant ran on toward the forecastle.

The whole affair was over in two minutes, the blue-jackets circling out
like a fan, and pressing their enemy into a helpless mass against the
rail.  For a moment the fight was furious, every man for himself, then
the Lieutenant drove like a wedge into the bunch, and it was all over.
I struggled to my feet, still viewing all through a mist, and swaying
back and forward as I endeavored to steady myself on the rolling deck.
There was no one at the wheel, and the bow of the _Sea Gull_ was
swinging slowly about.

"On to the bridge there, Coates, and hold up her head," sang out the
officer.  "Boatswain, take charge of these beauties, and run them into
the forecastle.  Leave two men on guard, and take a squint into the
engine room.  Report to me here."

He took off his coat, examined a long slit in its side where a vicious
knife had ripped it from shoulder to tail; then slipped it on again,
and watched his men drive their prisoners forward.

"I 'd like to know which one of them did that," he growled, glancing
toward me.  "Say, what 's the matter with you--shot?  You 're white as
a sheet of paper, man."

"I got one on the head with a belaying pin from the heft of it.  The
bullet touched me--here.  Lord, how it burns."

"Who did the shooting?"

"Henley here," and I touched the fellow with my foot.  "He fired just
as I hit him."

The Lieutenant stepped forward and looked down into the upturned face.

"So that's the man!" he exclaimed.  "We 've done a good day's work.  I
've heard stories of that half-breed ever since we 've been on this
coast.  He must be a natural devil, but he 's played hide and seek with
Uncle Sam for the last time.  This will be a feather in the 'old man's'
cap.  He 's waking up."

Henley stirred as he spoke, and opened his eyes, staring up into my
face, and then at the Lieutenant's uniform.  The sight of the latter
perplexed him.

"Who the hell are you?" he asked angrily, making an effort to rise.
"Where is Broussard?"

"Henley," I said, stepping in between them, "the game is up, and the
best thing you can do now is keep quiet.  This gentleman is Lieutenant
Hutton, of the Revenue Cutter _Saline_, and his men have the crew of
the _Sea Gull_ under hatches forward.  Give me back those papers."

[Illustration: "Give me back those papers."]

He had the envelope still clasped in his left hand, and he glanced at
it dully, and then beyond me toward Hutton.  Apparently his brain, yet
numbed by the blow, failed to entirely comprehend.  The Lieutenant,
however, was a man of action.  With grip on his collar he jerked the
poor wretch to his feet, and held him there.

"Hand over those papers to Craig," he ordered shortly, "and be lively
about it.  I have n't anything to do with that affair, and I don't
think you will have much more from now on.  You are my prisoner, and
you are good for a ten spot at least.  Stand up, you coward."  He
forced him back against the rail, and glanced about the deck.  The
boatswain was coming aft.

"Well, Sloan, how did you find things?"

"All serene, sir; the whole crew bottled up, and mighty little fight
left in them."

"The engine room?"

"The engineer was a bit ugly, sir, and had to be man-handled proper.
He 's lyin' in a coal bunker with a sore head, cussin' blue.  But the
assistant is a young fellar, an' kin run the engines.  I left him in
charge with a couple o' lads lookin' after him."

"Who has the wheel?"

"Somers, sir."

"All right; have steam kept up, and make the course south, southeast.
Send a couple of men here to get this boat on deck.  Put all the
fire-room fellows who won't work into the forecastle with the others.
Here, take this man along also.  He 's the Captain, but no better than
the rest."

Henley started back, with some crazy hope of resistance, but the great
fist of the boatswain gripped his collar.

"Come on, you," he said, jerking him savagely.  "Yer bloody pirate;
make another crack, an' I 'll land yer one.  Is he that Henley, sir?"
of the Lieutenant.

"Yes; ever hear of him?"

"Have I!  Aye, many the time.  He 's wanted in Galveston, sir, for
somethin' worse than runnin' arms--it was a knifin' job, sir."

"And not the last either, if what Craig says is true.  Take the fellow
forward.  Ah! there comes the _Saline_ now--just poking her nose out
from behind the ridge."

I looked as he pointed, clutching the recovered papers in my hands, and
forgetful of Henley.  The sun had discovered an opening in the cloud
bank, and a long shaft of golden light played across the water,
gleaming with white caps.  Into its radiance the revenue cutter was
gliding, outlined against the leafy shade of Cosmos Island, her flag
standing out like a board in the fresh breeze, her cutwater churning up
a mass of foam.  She made a beautiful picture, one that fascinated me
for the moment, and caused me to forget my own immediate incidents.  I
was brought back to a realization of the situation by Hutton's hand on
my shoulder.

"Nice-looking old girl, but, like all of her sex, a gay deceiver.
Slowest tub that ever floated a U. S. flag; any coal barge could get
away from her in a fair wind.  Take her half an hour now to get within
hailing distance, and the old man raging to learn the news.  How do you
feel? still groggy?"

"All right, except for a stiff headache."

"Then come into the cabin.  There is nothing more to do on deck, and I
want to get sight of the ship's papers.  Where was the fellow cleared
for?"

"Santiago."

"And his cargo?"

"Miscellaneous; mostly farm machinery--worth investigating."

"I 'll have some of the boxes broken open, but will take a squint at
the papers first.  What became of the girl?"

"The steward took her below, and locked her in before the fracas
started."

"I thought so; I heard a little of the talk, and hung back so as to
give you plenty of time."  He laughed, good-humoredly.  "Nice little
scrap, Craig; those fellows never even heard us, until I was over the
rail.  By the way, is the young lady married?  I never heard the whole
story."

"She is a widow," I replied, a bit stiffly, resenting his flippancy of
tone.  "She was the wife of this Henley's half brother, but I have
every reason to believe he is dead."

He looked into my face, a glint of amusement in his eyes.

"Let us hope the good news is true," he said soberly.  "Come, don't
flare up, man; I recognize the symptoms.  But don't you think she will
be crying her pretty eyes out down below?"

We went down the companion stairs together, into a deserted cabin.  No
steward was in evidence, and, finding the Captain's stateroom locked,
the Lieutenant kicked open the door, and entered.  I turned back,
explored the passage, and finally dragged Louis out from a dark corner
of the pantry.  That darky was plainly in a state of flunk, his legs
trembling, and the whites of his eyes much in evidence.

"Oh, Lor', Massa Craig," he whined.  "Ah ain't done nuthin', deed Ah
ain't, sah!"

"You locked up the girl."

"Ah just had to, sah.  Captain Henley he just nat'rally skin me alive,
sah, if Ah don't.  But Ah nebber hurt her none."

"Where is she?"

"In number five, sah; here--here am de key."

"All right, Louis," and I tossed him into one corner.  "Now listen; set
that table, and get some food on it quick.  Make coffee, but don't wait
for anything else."

"Yes, sah."

I crossed the cabin, and inserted the key.  As the door opened she
stood there waiting, her hands held out.




CHAPTER XXXVII

A HOMEWARD VOYAGE

"It--it is all over with?  You have been successful?"

"Yes, don't worry," and I held her hands fast, looking into her eyes.
"There can be no further trouble.  Captain Henley and his crew are
prisoners."

"And no one was hurt?  You were not?"

"Oh, there are a few sore heads, but nothing serious.  I got a crack
myself; bled a little--see."

She placed her fingers on the wound, stroking the hair gently, her eyes
full of anxiety.

"Is that all?  Please tell me; I--I heard a shot fired."

"Henley's revolver; no damage done.  Really you must accept my
assurance.  Come out into the cabin; Louis is getting breakfast ready."

"Where is the Lieutenant?" hesitating slightly.

"In Henley's cabin, going through the papers.  He wants to have a full
report ready when the _Saline_ comes up.  The three of us will
breakfast together."

"You must permit me to wash the wound on your head first," she
insisted.  "The hair is all matted with blood.  Please."

"Of course," and I laughed.  "Even then I will not be very presentable;
these clothes are frightful; the last week has been a strenuous one."

"What about me!" and she shot a look downward.  "I 've only had the one
dress."

"The marvel of it," I interrupted ardently.  "You look as though you
had just come from the dressing-table."

"You do not think so!"

"But I do; still, it may be a case where love is blind."

The fresh color swept into her cheeks.

"That is the only explanation possible, I am sure.  See how the skirt
is stained, and the lace ruffle is almost torn off."

"Oh, well, don't worry; the Lieutenant has lost his natty appearance
also.  Some villain slashed his coat its full length.  However, I
accept your offer."

She ministered to me with womanly gentleness, parting the matted hair,
and cleansing the wound with water.  While in no way serious it was an
ugly bruise, and required considerable attention.  Sitting there on a
stool while she worked, I could hear Louis bustling about in the cabin,
but my mind was busy with a thousand matters requiring settlement.  At
last I refused to be ministered to any longer, laughing at her desire
to bandage my head, and insisting that all I needed now was breakfast.
As we entered the cabin, the Lieutenant stood in Henley's door.

"I was looking for you, Craig," he said, coming forward, and bowing to
my companion.  "Here is a newspaper clipping which may be of interest.
I found it on the deck."

I read it hastily, and, in silence handed it to her, watching her face
as she read.  It was a local item describing the finding of a dead body
which could not be identified.  The details of the man's appearance as
well as the clothes worn were carefully depicted, evidently in hope
someone might thus recognize the party.  She remained with the bit of
paper in her hands for what seemed a long while, while we waited.  Then
her eyes were slowly lifted to our faces.

"That was Philip Henley," she said soberly.

"You are sure?"

"There is no possibility of mistake; the description is almost
photographic and the clothing I remember well."

"Your husband, madam?" asked the Lieutenant, as I remained silent.

"Yes; legally my husband, although he had driven me from him by
dissipation and neglect.  I--I cannot tell you the wretched story now."

"Nor do I ask it," he hastened to assure her.  "What is it, Mapes?"

A blue-jacket stood at the foot of the stairs, one hand lifted in
salute.

"The _Saline_, sir, is alongside, and hailing us.  The boatswain sent
me, sir."

We followed the two on deck, and, after one glance about, I led her
around the bulge of the cabin to the narrow deck space astern.  The
boat in which we had escaped had been hoisted into its davits, and we
halted in its shadow.  The sea was gently rolling in great crested
waves, with no land visible except Cosmos Island.  The most of our crew
must have been busy forward, as only three or four hung over the port
rail in idle curiosity.  The two vessels moved side by side, separated
by a narrow stretch of green water, a thin vapor of smoke visible.  I
could perceive the whiteness of the _Saline's_ deck, and the group of
officers on the bridge.  The Captain, facing us, hollowed his hands.

"What have you to report, Mr. Hutton?"

"The vessel is in our possession, sir, and the crew under guard below."

"Any injuries?"

"None serious, sir."

"And the Captain--the half-breed Henley; did you get him?"

"He 's with the others."

"Better put the fellow in irons, Hutton.  There are some serious
charges against him, you know.  Have you men enough?"

"I could use a half dozen more."

"Very well; I 'll send them over with Mr. Steele."

"What is to be our course, sir?"

"Pensacola.  Don't wait for us."

"Aye, aye, sir.  Shall I hold Craig and the lady?"

"Not on this case; we have all the evidence needed.  If you take their
addresses that will be all that is necessary.  Pleasant voyage!"

He waved his hand, and then, perceiving us as he turned away from the
rail, lifted his cap in salute.  A moment later a boat heavily manned
shot out from the cutter's black side, and headed toward us.  We stood
there alone in the shadow, watching its approach.

"It is all over now, dear," I whispered.

"Yes, but--but I do not feel as though I could ever touch that money."

"You will have no choice.  The courts will decide that."

She glanced aside at me shyly, and one hand rested on the rail of the
boat.

"I know what I would like to do with some of it."

"What?"

"Buy this--this boat."

"In memory?"

"Of course--you loved me then."

"And now, and always.  Do you know what is the first thing I shall do
when we make Pensacola?"

"No."

I clasped the straying hand and drew her to me, looking down into her
eyes.

"Telegraph my father I am coming home."

"Is that all?"

"And that I shall bring a wife with me.  Right here I end my career as
a soldier of fortune."

Under the protecting shadow of the boat our lips met.