CHAPTER VI.

LITERATURE IN THE CITIES.

1837-1861.

Literature as a profession has hardly existed in the United States
until very recently.  Even now the number of those who support
themselves by purely literary work is small, although the growth of the
reading public and the establishment of great magazines, such as
_Harper's_, the _Century_, and the _Atlantic_, have made a market for
intellectual wares which forty years ago would have seemed a godsend to
poorly paid Bohemians like Poe or obscure men of genius like Hawthorne.
About 1840, two Philadelphia magazines--_Godey's Lady's Book_ and
_Graham's Monthly_--began to pay their contributors twelve dollars a
page, a price then thought wildly munificent.  But the first magazine
of the modern type was _Harper's Monthly_, founded in 1850.  American
books have always suffered, and still continue to suffer, from the want
of an international copyright, which has flooded the country with cheap
reprints and translations of foreign works, with which the domestic
product has been unable to contend on such uneven terms.  With the
first ocean steamers there started up a class of large-paged weeklies
in New York and elsewhere, such as _Brother Jonathan_, the _New World_,
and the _Corsair_, which furnished their readers with the freshest
writings of Dickens and Bulwer and other British celebrities within a
fortnight after their appearance in London.  This still further
restricted the profits of native authors and nearly drove them from the
field of periodical literature.  By special arrangement the novels of
Thackeray and other English writers were printed in _Harper's_ in
installments simultaneously with their issue in English periodicals.
The _Atlantic_ was the first of our magazines which was founded
expressly for the encouragement of home talent, and which had a purely
Yankee flavor.  Journalism was the profession which naturally attracted
men of letters, as having most in common with their chosen work and as
giving them a medium, under their own control, through which they could
address the public.  A few favored scholars, like Prescott, were made
independent by the possession of private fortunes.  Others, like
Holmes, Longfellow, and Lowell, gave to literature such leisure as they
could get in the intervals of an active profession or of college work.
Still others, like Emerson and Thoreau, by living in the country and
making their modest competence--eked out in Emerson's case by lecturing
here and there--suffice for their simple needs, secured themselves
freedom from the restraints of any regular calling.  But, in default of
some such _pou sto_, our men of letters have usually sought the cities
and allied themselves with the press.  It will be remembered that
Lowell started a short-lived magazine on his own account, and that he
afterward edited the _Atlantic_ and the _North American_.  Also that
Ripley and Charles A. Dana betook themselves to journalism after the
break-up of the Brook Farm Community.

In the same way William Cullen Bryant (1794-1878), the earliest
American poet of importance, whose impulses drew him to the solitudes
of nature, was compelled to gain a livelihood, by conducting a daily
newspaper; or, as he himself puts it, was

      "Forced to drudge for the dregs of men,
  And scrawl strange words with the barbarous pen."

Bryant was born at Cummington, in Berkshire, the western-most county of
Massachusetts.  After two years in Williams College he studied law, and
practiced for nine years as a country lawyer in Plainfield and Great
Barrington.  Following the line of the Housatonic Valley, the social
and theological affiliations of Berkshire have always been closer with
Connecticut and New York than with Boston and eastern Massachusetts.
Accordingly, when in 1825 Bryant yielded to the attractions of a
literary career, he betook himself to New York city, where, after a
brief experiment in conducting a monthly magazine, the _New York Review
and Athenaeum_, he assumed the editorship of the _Evening Post_, a
Democratic and free-trade journal, with which he remained connected
till his death.  He already had a reputation as a poet when he entered
the ranks of metropolitan journalism.  In 1816 his _Thanatopsis_ had
been published in the _North American Review_, and had attracted
immediate and general admiration.  It had been finished, indeed, two
years before, when the poet was only in his nineteenth year, and was a
wonderful instance of precocity.  The thought in this stately hymn was
not that of a young man, but of a sage who has reflected long upon the
universality, the necessity, and the majesty of death.  Bryant's blank
verse when at its best, as in _Thanatopsis_ and the _Forest Hymn_, is
extremely noble.  In gravity and dignity it is surpassed by no English
blank verse of this century, though in rich and various modulation it
falls below Tennyson's _Ulysses_ and _Morte d'Arthur_.  It was
characteristic of Bryant's limitations that he came thus early into
possession of his faculty.  His range was always a narrow one, and
about his poetry, as a whole, there is a certain coldness, rigidity,
and solemnity.  His fixed position among American poets is described in
his own _Hymn to the North Star_:

  "And thou dost see them rise,
    Star of the pole! and thou dost see them set.
  Alone, in thy cold skies,
    Thou keep'st thy old, unmoving station yet,
  Nor join'st the dances of that glittering train,
  Nor dipp'st thy virgin orb in the blue western main."

In 1821 he read _The Ages_, a didactic poem, in thirty-five stanzas,
before the Phi Beta Kappa Society at Cambridge, and in the same year
brought out his first volume of poems.  A second collection appeared in
1832, which was printed in London under the auspices of Washington
Irving.  Bryant was the first American poet who had much of an audience
in England, and Wordsworth is said to have learned _Thanatopsis_ by
heart.  Bryant was, indeed, in a measure, a scholar of Wordsworth's
school, and his place among American poets corresponds roughly, though
not precisely, to Wordsworth's among English poets.  With no humor,
with somewhat restricted sympathies, with little flexibility or
openness to new impressions, but gifted with a high, austere
imagination, Bryant became the meditative poet of nature.  His best
poems are those in which he draws lessons from nature, or sings of its
calming, purifying, and bracing influences upon the human soul.  His
office, in other words, is the same which Matthew Arnold asserts to be
the peculiar office of modern poetry, "the moral interpretation of
nature."  Poems of this class are _Green River_, _To a Water-fowl_,
_June_, the _Death of the Flowers_, and the _Evening Wind_.  The song,
"O fairest of the rural maids," which has more fancy than is common in
Bryant, and which Poe pronounced his best poem, has an obvious
resemblance to Wordsworth's "Three years she grew in sun and shade,"
and both of these nameless pieces might fitly be entitled--as
Wordsworth's is in Mr. Palgrave's _Golden Treasury_--"The Education of
Nature."

Although Bryant's career is identified with New York his poetry is all
of New England.  His heart was always turning back fondly to the woods
and streams of the Berkshire hills.  There was nothing of that urban
strain in him which appears in Holmes and Willis.  He was, in especial,
the poet of autumn, of the American October and the New England Indian
Summer, that season of "dropping nuts" and "smoky light," to whose
subtle analogy with the decay of the young by the New England disease,
consumption, he gave such tender expression in the _Death of the
Flowers_, and amid whose "bright, late quiet" he wished himself to pass
away.  Bryant is our poet of "the melancholy days," as Lowell is of
June.  If, by chance, he touches upon June, it is not with the exultant
gladness of Lowell in meadows full of bobolinks, and in the summer day
that is

    "simply perfect from its own resource,
  As to the bee the new campanula's
  Illuminate seclusion swung in air."

Rather, the stir of new life in the clod suggests to Bryant by contrast
the thought of death; and there is nowhere in his poetry a passage of
deeper feeling than the closing stanzas of _June_, in which he speaks
of himself, by anticipation, as of one

  "Whose part in all the pomp that fills
  The circuit of the summer hills
  Is--that his grave is green."

Bryant is, _par excellence_, the poet of New England wild flowers, the
yellow violet, the fringed gentian--to each of which he dedicated an
entire poem--the orchis and the golden-rod, "the aster in the wood and
the yellow sunflower by the brook."  With these his name will be
associated as Wordsworth's with the daffodil and the lesser celandine,
and Emerson's with the rhodora.

Except when writing of nature he was apt to be commonplace, and there
are not many such energetic lines in his purely reflective verse as
these famous ones from _The Battle-Field_:

  "Truth crushed to earth shall rise again;
    The eternal years of God are hers;
  But Error, wounded, writhes in pain,
    And dies among his worshipers."

He added but slowly to the number of his poems, publishing a new
collection in 1840, another in 1844, and _Thirty Poems_ in 1864.  His
work at all ages was remarkably even.  _Thanatopsis_ was as mature as
any thing that he wrote afterward, and among his later pieces the
_Planting of the Apple Tree_ and the _Flood of Years_ were as fresh as
any thing that he had written in the first flush of youth.  Bryant's
poetic style was always pure and correct, without any tincture of
affectation or extravagance.  His prose writings are not important,
consisting mainly of papers of the _Salmagundi_ variety contributed to
the _Talisman_, an annual published in 1827-30; some rather sketchy
stories, _Tales of the Glauber Spa_, 1832; and impressions of Europe,
entitled _Letters of a Traveler_, issued in two series, in 1849 and
1858.  In 1869 and 1871 appeared his blank-verse translations of the
_Iliad_ and _Odyssey_, a remarkable achievement for a man of his age,
and not excelled, upon the whole, by any recent metrical version of
Homer in the English tongue.  Bryant's half-century of service as the
editor of a daily paper should not be overlooked.  The _Evening Post_,
under his management, was always honest, gentlemanly, and courageous,
and did much to raise the tone of journalism in New York.

Another Massachusetts poet, who was outside the Boston coterie, like
Bryant, and, like him, tried his hand at journalism, was John Greenleaf
Whittier (1807-  ).  He was born in a solitary farm-house near
Haverhill, in the valley of the Merrimack, and his life has been passed
mostly at his native place and at the neighboring town of Amesbury.
The local color, which is very pronounced in his poetry, is that of the
Merrimack from the vicinity of Haverhill to its mouth at Newburyport, a
region of hill-side farms, opening out below into wide marshes--"the
low, green prairies of the sea," and the beaches of Hampton and
Salisbury.  The scenery of the Merrimack is familiar to all readers of
Whittier: the cotton-spinning towns along its banks, with their
factories and dams, the sloping pastures and orchards of the back
country, the sands of Plum Island and the level reaches of water meadow
between which glide the broad-sailed "gundalows"--a local corruption of
gondola--laden with hay.  Whittier was a farmer lad, and had only such
education as the district school could supply, supplemented by two
years at the Haverhill Academy.  In his _School Days_ he gives a
picture of the little old country school-house as it used to be, the
only _alma mater_ of so many distinguished Americans, and to which many
others who have afterward trodden the pavements of great universities
look back so fondly as to their first wicket gate into the land of
knowledge.

  "Still sits the school-house by the road,
    A ragged beggar sunning;
  Around it still the sumachs grow
    And blackberry vines are running.

  "Within the master's desk is seen,
    Deep-scarred by raps official,
  The warping floor, the battered seats,
    The jack-knife's carved initial."

A copy of Burns awoke the slumbering instinct in the young poet, and he
began to contribute verses to Garrison's _Free Press_, published in
Newburyport, and to the _Haverhill Gazette_.  Then he went to Boston,
and became editor for a short time of the _Manufacturer_.  Next he
edited the _Essex Gazette_, at Haverhill, and in 1830 he took charge of
George D. Prentice's paper, the _New England Weekly Review_, at
Hartford, Conn.  Here he fell in with a young Connecticut poet of much
promise, J. G. C. Brainard, editor of the _Connecticut Mirror_, whose
"Remains" Whittier edited in 1832.  At Hartford, too, he published his
first book, a volume of prose and verse, entitled _Legends of New
England_, 1831, which is not otherwise remarkable than as showing his
early interest in Indian colonial traditions--especially those which
had a touch of the supernatural--a mine which he afterward worked to
good purpose in the _Bridal of Pennacook_, the _Witch's Daughter_, and
similar poems.  Some of the _Legends_ testify to Brainard's influence
and to the influence of Whittier's temporary residence at Hartford.
One of the prose pieces, for example, deals with the famous "Moodus
Noises" at Haddam, on the Connecticut River, and one of the poems is
the same in subject with Brainard's _Black Fox of Salmon River_.  After
a year and a half at Hartford Whittier returned to Haverhill and to
farming.

The antislavery agitation was now beginning, and into this he threw
himself with all the ardor of his nature.  He became the poet of the
reform as Garrison was its apostle, and Sumner and Phillips its
speakers.  In 1833 he published _Justice and Expediency_, a prose tract
against slavery, and in the same year he took part in the formation of
the American Antislavery Society at Philadelphia, sitting in the
convention as a delegate of the Boston abolitionists.  Whittier was a
Quaker, and that denomination, influenced by the preaching of John
Woolman and others, had long since quietly abolished slavery within its
own communion.  The Quakers of Philadelphia and elsewhere took an
earnest though peaceful part in the Garrisonian movement.  But it was a
strange irony of fate that had made the fiery-hearted Whittier a
friend.  His poems against slavery and disunion have the martial ring
of a Tyrtaeus or a Körner, added to the stern religious zeal of
Cromwell's Ironsides.  They are like the sound of the trumpet blown
before the walls of Jericho, or the psalms of David denouncing woe upon
the enemies of God's chosen people.  If there is any purely Puritan
strain in American poetry it is in the war-hymns of the Quaker "Hermit
of Amesbury."  Of these patriotic poems there were three principal
collections: _Voices of Freedom_, 1849; _The Panorama, and Other
Poems_, 1856; and _In War Time_, 1863.  Whittier's work as the poet of
freedom was done when, on hearing the bells ring for the passage of the
constitutional amendment abolishing slavery, he wrote his splendid
_Laus Deo_, thrilling with the ancient Hebrew spirit:

          "Loud and long
  Lift the old exulting song,
  Sing with Miriam by the sea--
  He has cast the mighty down,
    Horse and rider sink and drown,
  He hath triumphed gloriously."

Of his poems distinctly relating to the events of the civil war, the
best, or at all events the most popular, is _Barbara Frietchie_.
_Ichabod_, expressing the indignation of the Free Soilers at Daniel
Webster's seventh of March speech in defense of the Fugitive Slave Law,
is one of Whittier's best political poems, and not altogether unworthy
of comparison with Browning's _Lost Leader_.  The language of
Whittier's warlike lyrics is biblical, and many of his purely
devotional pieces are religious poetry of a high order and have been
included in numerous collections of hymns.  Of his songs of faith and
doubt, the best are perhaps _Our Master_, _Chapel of the Hermits_, and
_Eternal Goodness_; one stanza from the last of which is familiar;

  "I know not where his islands lift
    Their fronded palms in air,
  I only know I cannot drift,
    Beyond his love and care."

But from politics and war Whittier turned gladly to sing the homely
life of the New England country-side.  His rural ballads and idyls are
as genuinely American as any thing that our poets have written, and
have been recommended, as such, to English working-men by Whittier's
co-religionist, John Bright.  The most popular of these is probably
_Maud Muller_, whose closing couplet has passed into proverb.  _Skipper
Ireson's Ride_ is also very current.  Better than either of them, as
poetry, is _Telling the Bees_.  But Whittier's masterpiece in work of a
descriptive and reminiscent kind is _Snow-Bound_, 1866, a New England
fireside idyl which in its truthfulness recalls the _Winter Evening_ of
Cowper's _Task_ and Burns's _Cotter's Saturday Night_, but in sweetness
and animation is superior to either of them.  Although in some things a
Puritan of the Puritans, Whittier has never forgotten that he is also a
Friend, and several of his ballads and songs have been upon the subject
of the early Quaker persecutions in Massachusetts.  The most impressive
of these is _Cassandra Southwick_.  The latest of them, the _King's
Missive_, originally contributed to the _Memorial History of Boston_ in
1880, and reprinted the next year in a volume with other poems, has
been the occasion of a rather lively controversy.  The _Bridal of
Pennacook_, 1848, and the _Tent on the Beach_, 1867, which contain some
of his best work, were series of ballads told by different narrators,
after the fashion of Longfellow's _Tales of a Wayside Inn_.  As an
artist in verse, Whittier is strong and fervid, rather than delicate or
rich.  He uses only a few metrical forms--by preference the
eight-syllabled rhyming couplet--

  "Maud Muller on a summer's day
  Raked the meadow sweet with hay," etc.

and the emphatic tramp of this measure becomes very monotonous, as do
some of Whittier's mannerisms, which proceed, however, never from
affectation, but from a lack of study and variety, and so, no doubt, in
part from the want of that academic culture and thorough technical
equipment which Lowell and Longfellow enjoyed.  Though his poems are
not in dialect, like Lowell's _Biglow Papers_, he knows how to make an
artistic use of homely provincial words, such as "chore," which give
his idyls of the hearth and the barnyard a genuine Doric cast.
Whittier's prose is inferior to his verse.  The fluency which was a
besetting sin of his poetry, when released from the fetters of rhyme
and meter, ran into wordiness.  His prose writings were partly
contributions to the slavery controversy, partly biographical sketches
of English and American reformers, and partly studies of the scenery
and folk-lore of the Merrimack Valley.  Those of most literary interest
were the _Supernaturalism of New England_, 1847, and some of the papers
in _Literary Recreations and Miscellanies_, 1854.

While Massachusetts was creating an American literature other sections
of the Union were by no means idle.  The West, indeed, was as yet too
raw to add any thing of importance to the artistic product of the
country.  The South was hampered by circumstances which will presently
be described.  But in and about the sea-board cities of New York,
Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Richmond many pens were busy filling the
columns of literary weeklies and monthlies; and there was a
considerable output, such as it was, of books of poetry, fiction,
travel, and miscellaneous light literature.  Time has already relegated
most of these to the dusty top shelves.  To rehearse the names of the
numerous contributors to the old _Knickerbocker Magazine_, to
_Godey's_, and _Graham's_, and the _New Mirror_, and the _Southern
Literary Messenger_, or to run over the list of authorlings and
poetasters in Poe's papers on the _Literati of New York_, would be very
much like reading the inscriptions on the head-stones of an old
grave-yard.  In the columns of these prehistoric magazines and in the
book notices and reviews away back in the thirties and forties, one
encounters the handiwork and the names of Emerson, Holmes, Longfellow,
Hawthorne, and Lowell embodied in this mass of forgotten literature.
It would have required a good deal of critical acumen, at the time, to
predict that these and a few others would soon be thrown out into bold
relief, as the significant and permanent names in the literature of
their generation, while Paulding, Hirst, Fay, Dawes, Mrs. Osgood, and
scores of others who figured beside them in the fashionable
periodicals, and filled quite as large a space in the public eye, would
sink into oblivion in less than thirty years.  Some of these latter
were clever enough people; they entertained their contemporary public
sufficiently, but their work had no vitality or "power of continuance."
The great majority of the writings of any period are necessarily
ephemeral, and time by a slow process of natural selection is
constantly sifting out the few representative books which shall carry
on the memory of the period to posterity.  Now and then it may be
predicted of some undoubted work of genius, even at the moment that it
sees the light, that it is destined to endure.  But tastes and fashions
change, and few things are better calculated to inspire the literary
critic with humility than to read the prophecies in old reviews and see
how the future, now become the present, has quietly given them the lie.

From among the professional _littérateurs_ of his day emerges, with
ever sharper distinctness as time goes on, the name of Edgar Allan Poe
(1809-49).  By the irony of fate Poe was born at Boston, and his first
volume, _Tamerlane, and Other Poems_, 1827, was printed in that city
and bore upon its title-page the words, "By a Bostonian."  But his
parentage, so far as it was any thing, was Southern.  His father was a
Marylander who had gone upon the stage and married an actress, herself
the daughter of an actress and a native of England.  Left an orphan by
the early death of both parents, Poe was adopted by a Mr. Allan, a
wealthy merchant of Richmond, Va.  He was educated partly at an English
school, was student for a time in the University of Virginia, and
afterward a cadet in the Military Academy at West Point.  His youth was
wild and irregular; he gambled and drank, was proud, bitter, and
perverse, finally quarreled with his guardian and adopted father--by
whom he was disowned--and then betook himself to the life of a literary
hack.  His brilliant but underpaid work for various periodicals soon
brought him into notice, and he was given the editorship of the
_Southern Literary Messenger_, published at Richmond, and subsequently
of the _Gentlemen's_--afterward _Graham's_--_Magazine_ in Philadelphia.
These and all other positions Poe forfeited through his dissipated
habits and wayward temper, and finally, in 1844, he drifted to New
York, where he found employment on the _Evening Mirror_ and then on the
_Broadway Journal_.  He died of delirium tremens at the Marine Hospital
in Baltimore.  His life was one of the most wretched in literary
history.  He was an extreme instance of what used to be called the
"eccentricity of genius."  He had the irritable vanity which is
popularly supposed to accompany the poetic temperament, and was so
insanely egotistic as to imagine that Longfellow and others were
constantly plagiarizing from him.  The best side of Poe's character
came out in his domestic relations, in which he displayed great
tenderness, patience, and fidelity.  His instincts were gentlemanly,
and his manner and conversation were often winning.  In the place of
moral feeling he had the artistic conscience.  In his critical papers,
except where warped by passion or prejudice, he showed neither fear nor
favor, denouncing bad work by the most illustrious hands and commending
obscure merit.  The "impudent literary cliques" who puffed each other's
books; the feeble chirrupings of the bardlings who manufactured verses
for the "Annuals;" and the twaddle of the "genial" incapables who
praised them in flabby reviews--all these Poe exposed with ferocious
honesty.  Nor, though his writings are unmoral, can they be called in
any sense immoral.  His poetry is as pure in its unearthliness as
Bryant's in its austerity.

By 1831 Poe had published three thin books of verse, none of which had
attracted notice, although the latest contained the drafts of a few of
his most perfect poems, such as _Israfel_, the _Valley of Unrest_, the
_City in the Sea_, and one of the two pieces inscribed _To Helen_.  It
was his habit to touch and retouch his work until it grew under his
more practiced hand into a shape that satisfied his fastidious taste.
Hence the same poem frequently re-appears in different stages of
development in successive editions.  Poe was a subtle artist in the
realm of the weird and the fantastic.  In his intellectual nature there
was a strange conjunction; an imagination as spiritual as Shelley's,
though, unlike Shelley's, haunted perpetually with shapes of fear and
the imagery of ruin; with this, an analytic power, a scientific
exactness, and a mechanical ingenuity more usual in a chemist or a
mathematician than in a poet.  He studied carefully the mechanism of
his verse and experimented endlessly with verbal and musical effects,
such as repetition and monotone and the selection of words in which the
consonants alliterated and the vowels varied.  In his _Philosophy of
Composition_ he described how his best-known poem, the _Raven_, was
systematically built up on a preconceived plan in which the number of
lines was first determined and the word "nevermore" selected as a
starting-point.  No one who knows the mood in which poetry is composed
will believe that this ingenious piece of dissection really describes
the way in which the _Raven_ was conceived and written, or that any
such deliberate and self-conscious process could _originate_ the
associations from which a true poem springs.  But it flattered Poe's
pride of intellect to assert that his cooler reason had control not
only over the execution of his poetry, but over the very well-head of
thought and emotion.  Some of his most successful stories, like the
_Gold Bug_, the _Mystery of Marie Roget_, the _Purloined Letter_, and
the _Murders in the Rue Morgue_, were applications of this analytic
faculty to the solution of puzzles, such as the finding of buried
treasure or of a lost document, or the ferreting out of a mysterious
crime.  After the publication of the _Gold Bug_ he received from all
parts of the country specimens of cipher-writing, which he delighted to
work out.  Others of his tales were clever pieces of mystification,
like _Hans Pfaall_, the story of a journey to the moon, or experiments
at giving verisimilitude to wild improbabilities by the skillful
introduction of scientific details, as in the _Facts in the Case of M.
Valdemar_ and _Von Kempelen's Discovery_.  In his narratives of this
kind Poe anticipated the detective novels of Gaboriau and Wilkie
Collins, the scientific hoaxes of Jules Verne, and, though in a less
degree, the artfully worked up likeness to fact in Edward Everett
Hale's _Man Without a Country_, and similar fictions.  While Dickens's
_Barnaby Rudge_ was publishing in parts Poe showed his skill as a
plot-hunter by publishing a paper in _Graham's Magazine_ in which the
very tangled intrigue of the novel was correctly raveled and the finale
predicted in advance.

In his union of imagination and analytic power Poe resembled Coleridge,
who, if any one, was his teacher in poetry and criticism.  Poe's verse
often reminds one of _Christabel_ and the _Ancient Mariner_, still
oftener of _Kubla Khan_.  Like Coleridge, too, he indulged at times in
the opium habit.  But in Poe the artist predominated over every thing
else.  He began not with sentiment or thought, but with technique, with
melody and color, tricks of language, and effects of verse.  It is
curious to study the growth of his style in his successive volumes of
poetry.  At first these are metrical experiments and vague images,
original, and with a fascinating suggestiveness, but with so little
meaning that some of his earlier pieces are hardly removed from
nonsense.  Gradually, like distant music drawing nearer and nearer, his
poetry becomes fuller of imagination and of an inward significance,
without ever losing, however, its mysterious aloofness from the real
world of the senses.  It was a part of Poe's literary creed--formed
upon his own practice and his own limitations, but set forth with a
great display of _a priori_ reasoning in his essay on the _Poetic
Principle_ and elsewhere--that pleasure and not instruction or moral
exhortation was the end of poetry; that beauty and not truth or
goodness was its means; and, furthermore, that the pleasure which it
gave should be indefinite.  About his own poetry there was always this
indefiniteness.  His imagination dwelt in a strange country of dream--a
"ghoul-haunted region of Weir," "out of space, out of time"--filled
with unsubstantial landscapes and peopled by spectral shapes.  And yet
there is a wonderful, hidden significance in this uncanny scenery.  The
reader feels that the wild, fantasmal imagery is in itself a kind of
language, and that it in some way expresses a brooding thought or
passion, the terror and despair of a lost soul.  Sometimes there is an
obvious allegory, as in the _Haunted Palace_, which is the parable of a
ruined mind, or in the _Raven_, the most popular of all Poe's poems,
originally published in the _American Whig Review_ for February, 1845.
Sometimes the meaning is more obscure, as in _Ulalume_, which, to most
people, is quite incomprehensible, and yet to all readers of poetic
feeling is among the most characteristic, and, therefore, the most
fascinating, of its author's creations.

Now and then, as in the beautiful ballad _Annabel Lee_, and _To One in
Paradise_, the poet emerges into the light of common human feeling and
speaks a more intelligible language.  But in general his poetry is not
the poetry of the heart, and its passion is not the passion of flesh
and blood.  In Poe the thought of death is always near, and of the
shadowy borderland between death and life.

  "The play is the tragedy 'Man,'
    And its hero the Conqueror Worm."

The prose tale, _Ligeia_, in which these verses are inserted, is one of
the most powerful of all Poe's writings, and its theme is the power of
the will to overcome death.  In that singularly impressive poem, _The
Sleeper_, the morbid horror which invests the tomb springs from the
same source, the materiality of Poe's imagination, which refuses to let
the soul go free from the body.

This quality explains why Poe's _Tales of the Grotesque and Arabesque_,
1840, are on a lower plane than Hawthorne's romances, to which a few of
them, like _William Wilson_, and _The Man of the Crowd_, have some
resemblance.  The former of these, in particular, is in Hawthorne's
peculiar province, the allegory of the conscience.  But in general the
tragedy in Hawthorne is a spiritual one, while Poe calls in the aid of
material forces.  The passion of physical fear or of superstitious
horror is that which his writings most frequently excite.  These tales
represent various grades of the frightful and the ghastly, from the
mere bugaboo story like the _Black Cat_, which makes children afraid to
go in the dark, up to the breathless terror of the _Cask of
Amontillado_, or the _Red Death_.  Poe's masterpiece in this kind is
the fateful tale of the _Fall of the House of Usher_, with its solemn
and magnificent close.  His prose, at its best, often recalls, in its
richly imaginative cast, the manner of De Quincey in such passages as
his _Dream Fugue_, or _Our Ladies of Sorrow_.  In descriptive pieces
like the _Domain of Arnheim_, and stories of adventure like the
_Descent into the Maelstrom_, and his long sea-tale, _The Narrative of
Arthur Gordon Pym_, 1838, he displayed, a realistic inventiveness
almost equal to Swift's or De Foe's.  He was not without a mocking
irony, but he had no constructive humor, and his attempts at the
facetious were mostly failures.

Poe's magical creations were rootless flowers.  He took no hold upon
the life about him, and cared nothing for the public concerns of his
country.  His poems and tales might have been written _in vacuo_ for
any thing American in them.  Perhaps for this reason, in part, his fame
has been so cosmopolitan.  In France especially his writings have been
favorites.  Charles Baudelaire, the author of the _Fleurs du Mal_,
translated them into French, and his own impressive but unhealthy
poetry shows evidence of Poe's influence.  The defect in Poe was in
character--a defect which will make itself felt in art as in life.  If
he had had the sweet home feeling of Longfellow or the moral fervor of
Whittier he might have been a greater poet than either.

  "If I could dwell
    Where Israfel
  Hath dwelt, and he where I,
    He might not sing so wildly well
  A mortal melody,
    While a bolder note than this might swell
  From my lyre within the sky!"

Though Poe was a Southerner, if not by birth, at least by race and
breeding, there was nothing distinctly Southern about his peculiar
genius, and in his wandering life he was associated as much with
Philadelphia and New York as with Baltimore and Richmond.  The
conditions which had made the Southern colonies unfruitful in literary
and educational works before the Revolution continued to act down to
the time of the civil war.  Eli Whitney's invention of the cotton-gin
in the closing years of the last century gave extension to slavery,
making it profitable to cultivate the now staple by enormous gangs of
field-hands working under the whip of the overseer in large
plantations.  Slavery became henceforth a business speculation in the
States furthest south, and not, as in Old Virginia and Kentucky, a
comparatively mild domestic system.  The necessity of defending its
peculiar institution against the attacks of a growing faction in the
North compelled the South to throw all its intellectual strength into
politics, which, for that matter, is the natural occupation and
excitement of a social aristocracy.  Meanwhile immigration sought the
free States, and there was no middle class at the South.  The "poor
whites" were ignorant and degraded.  There were people of education in
the cities and on some of the plantations, but there was no great
educated class from which a literature could proceed.  And the culture
of the South, such as it was, was becoming old-fashioned and local, as
the section was isolated more and more from the rest of the Union and
from the enlightened public opinion of Europe by its reactionary
prejudices and its sensitiveness on the subject of slavery.  Nothing
can be imagined more ridiculously provincial than the sophomorical
editorials in the Southern press just before the outbreak of the war,
or than the backward and ill-informed articles which passed for reviews
in the poorly supported periodicals of the South.

In the general dearth of work of high and permanent value, one or two
Southern authors may be mentioned whose writings have at least done
something to illustrate the life and scenery of their section.  When in
1833 the Baltimore _Saturday Visitor_ offered a prize of a hundred
dollars for the best prose tale, one of the committee who awarded the
prize to Poe's first story, the _MS. Found in a Bottle_, was John P.
Kennedy, a Whig gentleman of Baltimore, who afterward became secretary
of the navy in Fillmore's administration.  The year before he had
published _Swallow Barn_, a series of agreeable sketches of country
life in Virginia.  In 1835 and 1838 he published his two novels,
_Horse-Shoe Robinson_ and _Rob of the Bowl_, the former a story of the
Revolutionary War in South Carolina, the latter an historical tale of
colonial Maryland.  These had sufficient success to warrant reprinting
as late as 1852.  But the most popular and voluminous of all Southern
writers of fiction was William Gilmore Simms, a South Carolinian, who
died in 1870.  He wrote over thirty novels, mostly romances of
Revolutionary history, Southern life, and wild adventure, among the
best of which were the _Partisan_, 1835, and the _Yemassee_.  Simms was
an inferior Cooper, with a difference.  His novels are good boys'
books, but are crude and hasty in composition.  He was strongly
Southern in his sympathies, though his newspaper, the _Charleston City
Gazette_, took part against the Nullifiers.  His miscellaneous writings
include several histories and biographies, political tracts, addresses,
and critical papers contributed to Southern magazines.  He also wrote
numerous poems, the most ambitious of which was _Atlantis, a Story of
the Sea_, 1832.  His poems have little value except as here and there
illustrating local scenery and manners, as in _Southern Passages and
Pictures_, 1839.  Mr. John Esten Cooke's pleasant but not very strong
_Virginia Comedians_ was, perhaps, in literary quality the best
Southern novel produced before the civil war.

When Poe came to New York the most conspicuous literary figure of the
metropolis, with the possible exception of Bryant and Halleck, was N.
P. Willis, one of the editors of the _Evening Mirror_, upon which
journal Poe was for a time engaged.  Willis had made a literary
reputation, when a student at Yale, by his _Scripture Poems_, written
in smooth blank verse.  Afterward he had edited the _American Monthly_
in his native city of Boston, and more recently he had published
_Pencillings by the Way_, 1835, a pleasant record of European
saunterings; _Inklings of Adventure_, 1836, a collection of dashing
stories and sketches of American and foreign life; and _Letters from
Under a Bridge_, 1839, a series of charming rural letters from his
country place at Owego, on the Susquehanna.   Willis's work, always
graceful and sparkling, sometimes even brilliant, though light in
substance and jaunty in style, had quickly raised him to the summit of
popularity.  During the years from 1835 to 1850 he was the most
successful American magazinist, and even down to the day of his death,
in 1867, he retained his hold upon the attention of the fashionable
public by his easy paragraphing and correspondence in the _Mirror_ and
its successor, the _Home Journal_, which catered to the literary wants
of the _beau monde_.  Much of Willis's work was ephemeral, though
clever of its kind, but a few of his best tales and sketches, such as
_F. Smith_, _The Ghost Ball at Congress Hall_, _Edith Linsey_, and the
_Lunatic's Skate_, together with some of the _Letters from Under a
Bridge_, are worthy of preservation, not only as readable stories, but
as society studies of life at American watering-places like Nahant and
Saratoga and Ballston Spa half a century ago.  A number of his simpler
poems, like _Unseen Spirits_, _Spring_, _To M---- from Abroad_, and
_Lines on Leaving Europe_, still retain a deserved place in collections
and anthologies.

The senior editor of the _Mirror_, George P. Morris, was once a very
popular song-writer, and his _Woodman, Spare that Tree_, still
survives.  Other residents of New York city who have written single
famous pieces were Clement C. Moore, a professor in the General
Theological Seminary, whose _Visit from St. Nicholas_--"'Twas the Night
Before Christmas," etc.--is a favorite ballad in every nursery in the
land; Charles Fenno Hoffman, a novelist of reputation in his time, but
now remembered only as the author of the song _Sparkling and Bright_,
and the patriotic ballad of _Monterey_; Robert H. Messinger, a native
of Boston, but long resident in New York, where he was a familiar
figure in fashionable society, who wrote _Give Me the Old_, a fine ode
with a choice Horatian flavor; and William Allen Butler, a lawyer and
occasional writer, whose capital satire of _Nothing to Wear_ was
published anonymously and had a great run.  Of younger poets, like
Stoddard and Aldrich, who formerly wrote for the _Mirror_ and who are
still living and working in the maturity of their powers, it is not
within the limits and design of this sketch to speak.  But one of their
contemporaries, Bayard Taylor, who died American minister at Berlin, in
1878, though a Pennsylvanian by birth and rearing, may be reckoned
among the "literati of New York."  A farmer lad from Chester County,
who had learned the printer's trade and printed a little volume of his
juvenile verses in 1844, he came to New York shortly after with
credentials from Dr. Griswold, the editor of _Graham's_, and obtaining
encouragement and aid from Willis, Horace Greeley, and others, he set
out to make the tour of Europe, walking from town to town in Germany
and getting employment now and then at his trade to help pay the
expenses of the trip.  The story of these _Wanderjahre_ he told in his
_Views Afoot_, 1846.  This was the first of eleven books of travel
written during the course of his life.  He was an inveterate nomad, and
his journeyings carried him to the remotest regions--to California,
India, China, Japan, and the isles of the sea, to Central Africa and
the Soudan, Palestine, Egypt, Iceland, and the "by-ways of Europe." His
head-quarters at home were in New York, where he did literary work for
the _Tribune_.  He was a rapid and incessant worker, throwing off many
volumes of verse and prose, fiction, essays, sketches, translations,
and criticisms, mainly contributed in the first instance to the
magazines.  His versatility was very marked, and his poetry ranged from
_Rhymes of Travel_, 1848, and _Poems of the Orient_, 1854, to idyls and
home ballads of Pennsylvania life, like the _Quaker Widow_ and the _Old
Pennsylvania Farmer_; and on the other side, to ambitious and somewhat
mystical poems, like the _Masque of the Gods_, 1872--written in four
days--and dramatic experiments like the _Prophet_, 1874, and _Prince
Deukalion_, 1878.  He was a man of buoyant and eager nature, with a
great appetite for new experience, a remarkable memory, a talent for
learning languages, and a too great readiness to take the hue of his
favorite books.  From his facility, his openness to external
impressions of scenery and costume and his habit of turning these at
once into the service of his pen, it results that there is something
"newspapery" and superficial about most of his prose.  It is reporter's
work, though reporting of a high order.  His poetry too, though full of
glow and picturesqueness, is largely imitative, suggesting Tennyson not
unfrequently, but more often Shelley.  His spirited _Bedouin Song_, for
example, has an echo of Shelley's _Lines to an Indian Air_:

  "From the desert I come to thee
    On a stallion shod with fire;
  And the winds are left behind
    In the speed of my desire.
  Under thy window I stand,
    And the midnight hears my cry;
  I love thee, I love but thee,
    With a love that shall not die."

The dangerous quickness with which he caught the manner of other poets
made him an admirable parodist and translator.  His _Echo Club_, 1876,
contains some of the best travesties in the tongue, and his great
translation of Goethe's _Faust_, 1870-71--with its wonderfully close
reproduction of the original meters--is one of the glories of American
literature.  All in all, Taylor may unhesitatingly be put first among
our poets of the second generation--the generation succeeding that of
Longfellow and Lowell--although the lack in him of original genius
self-determined to a peculiar sphere, or the want of an inward fixity
and concentration to resist the rich tumult of outward impressions, has
made him less significant in the history of our literary thought than
some other writers less generously endowed.

Taylor's novels had the qualities of his verse.  They were profuse,
eloquent, and faulty.  _John Godfrey's Fortune_, 1864, gave a picture
of bohemian life in New York.  _Hannah Thurston_, 1863, and the _Story
of Kennett_; 1866, introduced many incidents and persons from the old
Quaker life of rural Pennsylvania, as Taylor remembered it in his
boyhood.  The former was like Hawthorne's _Blithedale Romance_, a
satire on fanatics and reformers, and its heroine is a nobly conceived
character, though drawn with some exaggeration.  The _Story of
Kennett_, which is largely autobiographic, has a greater freshness and
reality than the others, and is full of personal recollections.  In
these novels, as in his short stories, Taylor's pictorial skill is
greater on the whole than his power of creating characters or inventing
plots.

Literature in the West now began to have an existence.  Another young
poet from Chester County, Pa., namely, Thomas Buchanan Read, went to
Cincinnati, and not to New York, to study sculpture and painting, about
1837, and one of his best-known poems, _Pons Maximus_, was written on
the occasion of the opening of the suspension bridge across the Ohio.
Read came East, to be sure, in 1841, and spent many years in our
sea-board cities and in Italy.  He was distinctly a minor poet, but
some of his Pennsylvania pastorals, like the _Deserted Road_, have a
natural sweetness; and his luxurious _Drifting_, which combines the
methods of painting and poetry, is justly popular.  _Sheridan's
Ride_--perhaps his most current piece--is a rather forced production,
and has been overpraised.  The two Ohio sister poets, Alice and Phoebe
Cary, were attracted to New York in 1850, as soon as their literary
success seemed assured.  They made that city their home for the
remainder of their lives.  Poe praised Alice Cary's _Pictures of
Memory_, and Phoebe's _Nearer Home_ has become a favorite hymn.  There
is nothing peculiarly Western about the verse of the Cary sisters.  It
is the poetry of sentiment, memory, and domestic affection, entirely
feminine, rather tame and diffuse as a whole, but tender and sweet,
cherished by many good women and dear to simple hearts.

A stronger smack of the soil is in the Negro melodies like _Uncle Ned_,
_O Susanna_, _Old Folks at Home_, _'Way Down South_, _Nelly was a
Lady_, _My Old Kentucky Home_, etc., which were the work, not of any
Southern poet, but of Stephen C. Foster, a native of Allegheny, Pa.,
and a resident of Cincinnati and Pittsburg.  He composed the words and
music of these, and many others of a similar kind, during the years
1847 to 1861.  Taken together they form the most original and vital
addition which this country has made to the psalmody of the world, and
entitle Foster to the first rank among American song-writers.

As Foster's plaintive melodies carried the pathos and humor of the
plantation all over the land, so Mrs. Harriet Beecher Stowe's _Uncle
Tom's Cabin_, 1852, brought home to millions of readers the sufferings
of the Negroes in the "black belt" of the cotton-growing States.  This
is the most popular novel ever written in America.  Hundreds of
thousands of copies were sold in this country and in England, and some
forty translations were made into foreign tongues.  In its dramatized
form it still keeps the stage, and the statistics of circulating
libraries show that even now it is in greater demand than any other
single book.  It did more than any other literary agency to rouse the
public conscience to a sense of the shame and horror of slavery; more
even than Garrison's _Liberator_, more than the indignant poems of
Whittier and Lowell or the orations of Sumner and Phillips.  It
presented the thing concretely and dramatically, and in particular it
made the odious Fugitive Slave Law forever impossible to enforce.  It
was useless for the defenders of slavery to protest that the picture
was exaggerated, and that planters like Legree were the exception.  The
system under which such brutalities could happen, and did sometimes
happen, was doomed.  It is easy now to point out defects of taste and
art in this masterpiece, to show that the tone is occasionally
melodramatic, that some of the characters are conventional, and that
the literary execution is in parts feeble and in others coarse.  In
spite of all, it remains true that _Uncle Tom's Cabin_ is a great book,
the work of genius seizing instinctively upon its opportunity and
uttering the thought of the time with a power that thrilled the heart
of the nation and of the world.  Mrs. Stowe never repeated her first
success.  Some of her novels of New England life, such as the
_Minister's Wooing_, 1859, and the _Pearl of Orr's Island_, 1862, have
a mild kind of interest, and contain truthful portraiture of provincial
ways and traits; while later fictions of a domestic type, like _Pink
and White Tyranny_ and _My Wife and I_, are really beneath criticism.

There were other Connecticut writers contemporary with Mrs. Stowe: Mrs.
L. H. Sigourney, for example, a Hartford poetess, formerly known as
"the Hemans of America," but now quite obsolete; and J. G. Percival, of
New Haven, a shy and eccentric scholar, whose geological work was of
value, and whose memory is preserved by one or two of his simpler
poems, still in circulation, such as _To Seneca Lake_ and the _Coral
Grove_.  Another Hartford poet, Brainard--already spoken of as an early
friend of Whittier--died young, leaving a few pieces which show that
his lyrical gift was spontaneous and genuine, but had received little
cultivation.  A much younger writer than either of these, Donald G.
Mitchell, of New Haven, has a more lasting place in our literature, by
virtue of his charmingly written _Reveries of a Bachelor_, 1850, and
_Dream Life_, 1852, stories which sketch themselves out in a series of
reminiscences and lightly connected scenes, and which always appeal
freshly to young men because they have that dreamy outlook upon life
which is characteristic of youth.  But, upon the whole, the most
important contribution made by Connecticut in that generation to the
literary stock of America was the Beecher family.  Lyman Beecher had
been an influential preacher and theologian, and a sturdy defender of
orthodoxy against Boston Unitarianism.  Of his numerous sons and
daughters, all more or less noted for intellectual vigor and
independence, the most eminent were Mrs. Stowe and Henry Ward Beecher,
the great pulpit orator of Brooklyn.  Mr. Beecher was too busy a man to
give more than his spare moments to general literature.  His sermons,
lectures, and addresses were reported for the daily papers and printed
in part in book form; but these lose greatly when divorced from the
large, warm, and benignant personality of the man.  His volumes made up
of articles in the _Independent_ and the _Ledger_, such as _Star
Papers_, 1855, and _Eyes and Ears_, 1862, contain many delightful
_morceaux_ upon country life and similar topics, though they are hardly
wrought with sufficient closeness and care to take a permanent place in
letters.  Like Willis's _Ephemera_ they are excellent literary
journalism, but hardly literature.

We may close our retrospect of American literature before 1861 with a
brief notice of one of the most striking literary phenomena of the
time--the _Leaves of Grass_ of Walt Whitman, published at Brooklyn in
1855.  The author, born at West Hills, Long Island, in 1819, had been
printer, school-teacher, editor, and builder.  He had scribbled a good
deal of poetry of the ordinary kind, which attracted little attention,
but finding conventional rhymes and meters too cramping a vehicle for
his need of expression, he discarded them for a kind of rhythmic chant,
of which the following is a fair specimen:

  "Press close, bare-bosom'd night!  Press close, magnetic,
      nourishing night!
  Night of south winds! night of the few large stars!
  Still, nodding night! mad, naked, summer night!"

The invention was not altogether a new one.  The English translation of
the psalms of David and of some of the prophets, the _Poems of Ossian_,
and some of Matthew Arnold's unrhymed pieces, especially the _Strayed
Reveller_, have an irregular rhythm of this kind, to say nothing of the
old Anglo-Saxon poems, like _Beowulf_, and the Scripture paraphrases
attributed to Caedmon.  But this species of _oratio soluta_, carried to
the lengths to which Whitman carried it, had an air of novelty which
was displeasing to some, while to others, weary of familiar measures
and jingling rhymes, it was refreshing in its boldness and freedom.
There is no consenting estimate of this poet.  Many think that his
so-called poems are not poems at all, but simply a bad variety of
prose; that there is nothing to him beyond a combination of affectation
and indecency; and that the Whitman _culte_ is a passing "fad" of a few
literary men, and especially of a number of English critics like
Rossetti, Swinburne, Buchanan, etc., who, being determined to have
something unmistakably American--that is, different from any thing
else--in writings from this side of the water, before they will
acknowledge any originality in them, have been misled into discovering
in Whitman "the poet of democracy."  Others maintain that he is the
greatest of American poets, or, indeed, of all modern poets; that he is
"cosmic," or universal, and that he has put an end forever to puling
rhymes and lines chopped up into metrical feet.  Whether Whitman's
poetry is formally poetry at all or merely the raw material of poetry,
the chaotic and amorphous impression which it makes on readers of
conservative tastes results from his effort to take up into his verse
elements which poetry has usually left out--the ugly, the earthy, and
even the disgusting; the "under side of things," which he holds not to
be prosaic when apprehended with a strong, masculine joy in life and
nature seen in all their aspects.  The lack of these elements in the
conventional poets seems to him and his disciples like leaving out the
salt from the ocean, making poetry merely pretty and blinking whole
classes of facts.  Hence the naturalism and animalism of some of the
divisions in _Leaves of Grass_, particularly that entitled _Children of
Adam_, which gave great offense by its immodesty, or its outspokenness,
Whitman holds that nakedness is chaste; that all the functions of the
body in healthy exercise are equally clean; that all, in fact, are
divine, and that matter is as divine as spirit.  The effort to get
every thing into his poetry, to speak out his thought just as it comes
to him, accounts, too, for his way of cataloguing objects without
selection.  His single expressions arc often unsurpassed for
descriptive beauty and truth.  He speaks of "the vitreous pour of the
full moon, just tinged with blue," of the "lisp" of the plane, of the
prairies, "where herds of buffalo make a crawling spread of the square
miles."  But if there is any eternal distinction between poetry and
prose, the most liberal canons of the poetic art will never agree to
accept lines like these:

  "And [I] remember putting plasters on the galls of his neck and ankles;
  He stayed with me a week before he was recuperated, and passed north."

Whitman is the spokesman of democracy and of the future; full of
brotherliness and hope, loving the warm, gregarious pressure of the
crowd and the touch of his comrade's elbow in the ranks.  He liked the
people--multitudes of people; the swarm of life beheld from a Broadway
omnibus or a Brooklyn ferry-boat.  The rowdy and the Negro truck-driver
were closer to his sympathy than the gentleman and the scholar.  "I
loaf and invite my soul," he writes; "I sound my barbaric yawp over the
roofs of the world."  His poem _Walt Whitman_, frankly egotistic,
simply describes himself as a typical, average man--the same as any
other man, and therefore not individual but universal.  He has great
tenderness and heartiness--"the good gray poet;" and during the civil
war he devoted himself unreservedly to the wounded soldiers in the
Washington hospitals--an experience which he has related in the
_Dresser_ and elsewhere.  It is characteristic of his rough and ready
comradery to use slang and newspaper English in his poetry, to call
himself Walt instead of Walter, and to have his picture taken in a
slouch hat and with a flannel shirt open at the throat.  His decriers
allege that he poses for effect; that he is simply a backward eddy in
the tide, and significant only as a temporary reaction against ultra
civilization--like Thoreau, though in a different way.  But with all
his shortcomings in art there is a healthy, virile, tumultuous pulse of
life in his lyric utterance and a great sweep of imagination in his
panoramic view of times and countries.  One likes to read him because
he feels so good, enjoys so fully the play of his senses, and has such
a lusty confidence in his own immortality and in the prospects of the
human race.  Stripped of verbiage and repetition, his ideas are not
many.  His indebtedness to Emerson--who wrote an introduction to the
_Leaves of Grass_--is manifest.  He sings of man and not men, and the
individual differences of character, sentiment, and passion, the
_dramatic_ elements of life, find small place in his system.  It is too
early to say what will be his final position in literary history.  But
it is noteworthy that the democratic masses have not accepted him yet
as their poet.  Whittier and Longfellow, the poets of conscience and
feeling, are the darlings of the American people.  The admiration, and
even the knowledge of Whitman, are mostly esoteric, confined to the
literary class.  It is also not without significance as to the ultimate
reception of his innovations in verse that he has numerous parodists,
but no imitators.  The tendency among our younger poets is not toward
the abandonment of rhyme and meter, but toward the introduction of new
stanza forms and an increasing carefulness and finish in the
_technique_ of their art.  It is observable, too, that in his most
inspired passages Whitman reverts to the old forms of verse; to blank
verse, for example, in the _Man-of-War-Bird_:

  "Thou who hast slept all night upon the storm,
  Waking renewed on thy prodigious pinions," etc.;

and elsewhere not infrequently to dactylic hexameters and pentameters:

  "Earth of shine and dark, mottling the tide of the river! . . .
  Far-swooping, elbowed earth! rich, apple-blossomed earth."

Indeed, Whitman's most popular poem, _My Captain_, written after the
assassination of Abraham Lincoln, differs little in form from ordinary
verse, as a stanza of it will show:

  "My captain does not answer, his lips are pale and still;
  My father does not feel my arm, he has no pulse nor will;
  The ship is anchored safe and sound, its voyage closed and done;
  From fearful trip the victor ship comes in with object won.
          Exult, O shores, and ring, O bells!
            But I, with mournful tread,
          Walk the deck, my captain lies
            Fallen, cold and dead."

This is from _Drum Taps_, a volume of poems of the civil war.  Whitman
has also written prose having much the same quality as his poetry:
_Democratic Vistas_, _Memoranda of the Civil War_, and, more recently,
_Specimen Days_.  His residence of late years has been at Camden, New
Jersey, where a centennial edition of his writings was published in
1876.

1. William Cullen Bryant.  _Thanatopsis_.  _To a Water-fowl_.  _Green
River_.  _Hymn to the North Star_.  _A Forest Hymn_.  "_O Fairest of
the Rural Maids_."  _June_.  _The Death of the Flowers_.  _The Evening
Wind_.  _The Battle-Field_.  _The Planting of the Apple-tree_.  _The
Flood of Years_.

2. John Greenleaf Whittier.  _Cassandra Southwick_.  _The New Wife and
the Old_.  _The Virginia Slave Mother_.  _Randolph of Roanoke_.
_Barclay of Ury_.  _The Witch of Wenham_.  _Skipper Ireson's Ride_.
_Marguerite_.  _Maud Muller_.  _Telling the Bees_.  _My Playmate_.
_Barbara Frietchie_.  _Ichabod_.  _Laus Deo_.  _Snow-Bound_.

3. Edgar Allan Poe.  _The Raven_.  _The Bells_.  _Israfel_.  _Ulalume_.
_To Helen_.  _The City in the Sea_.  _Annabel Lee_.  _To One in
Paradise_.  _The Sleeper_.  _The Valley of Unrest_.  _The Fall of the
House of Usher_.  _Ligeia_.  _William Wilson_.  _The Cask of
Amontillado_.  _The Assignation_.  _The Masque of the Red Death_.
_Narrative of A. Gordon Pym_.

4. N. P. Willis.  _Select Prose Writings_.  New York: Charles
Scribner's Sons.  1886.

5. Mrs. H. B. Stowe.  _Uncle Tom's Cabin_.  _Oldtown Folks_.

6. W. G. Simms, _The Partisan_.  _The Yemassee_.

7. Bayard Taylor.  _A Bacchic Ode_.  _Hylas_.  _Kubleh_.  _The Soldier
and the Pard_.  _Sicilian Wine_.  _Taurus_.  _Serapion_.  _The
Metempsychosis of the Pine_.  _The Temptation of Hassan Ben Khaled_.
_Bedouin Song_.  _Euphorion_.  _The Quaker Widow_.  _John Reid_.
_Lars_.  _Views Afoot_.  _By-ways of Europe_.  _The Story of Kennett_.
_The Echo Club_.

8. Walt Whitman.  _My Captain_.  "_When Lilacs Last in the Door-yard
Bloomed_."  _Out of the Cradle Endlessly Rocking_.  _Pioneers, O
Pioneers_.  _The Mystic Trumpeter_.  _A Woman at Auction_.  _Sea-shore
Memoirs_.  _Passage to India_.  _Mannahatta_.  _The Wound Dresser_.
_Longings for Some_.

9. _Poets of America_.  By E. C. Stedman.  Boston: Houghton, Mifflin &
Co.  1885.




CHAPTER VII.

LITERATURE SINCE 1861.

A generation has nearly passed since the outbreak of the civil war, and
although public affairs are still mainly in the hands of men who had
reached manhood before the conflict opened, or who were old enough at
that time to remember clearly its stirring events, the younger men who
are daily coming forward to take their places know it only by
tradition.  It makes a definite break in the history of our literature,
and a number of new literary schools and tendencies have appeared since
its close.  As to the literature of the war itself, it was largely the
work of writers who had already reached or passed middle age.  All of
the more important authors described in the last three chapters
survived the Rebellion except Poe, who died in 1849, Prescott, who died
in 1859, and Thoreau and Hawthorne, who died in the second and fourth
years of the war, respectively.  The final and authoritative history of
the struggle has not yet been written, and cannot be written for many
years to come.  Many partial and tentative accounts have, however,
appeared, among which may be mentioned, on the Northern side, Horace
Greeley's _American Conflict_, 1864-66; Vice-President Wilson's _Rise
and Fall of the Slave Power in America_, and J. W. Draper's _American
Civil War_, 1868-70; on the Southern side Alexander H. Stephens's
_Confederate States of America_, Jefferson Davis's _Rise and Fall of
the Confederate States of America_, and E. A. Pollard's _Lost Cause_.
These, with the exception of Dr. Draper's philosophical narrative, have
the advantage of being the work of actors in the political or military
events which they describe, and the disadvantage of being, therefore,
partisan--in some instances passionately partisan.  A store-house of
materials for the coming historian is also at hand in Frank Moore's
great collection, the _Rebellion Record_; in numerous regimental
histories of special armies, departments, and battles, like W.
Swinton's _Army of the Potomac_; in the autobiographies and
recollections of Grant and Sherman and other military leaders; in the
"war papers," lately published in the _Century_ magazine, and in
innumerable sketches and reminiscences by officers and privates on both
sides.

The war had its poetry, its humors, and its general literature, some of
which have been mentioned in connection with Whittier, Lowell, Holmes,
Whitman, and others, and some of which remain to be mentioned, as the
work of new writers, or of writers who had previously made little mark.
There were war-songs on both sides, few of which had much literary
value excepting, perhaps, James R. Randall's Southern ballad,
_Maryland, My Maryland_, sung to the old college air of _Lauriger
Horatius_, and the grand martial chorus of _John Brown's Body_, an old
Methodist hymn, to which the Northern armies beat time as they went
"marching on."  Randall's song, though spirited, was marred by its
fire-eating absurdities about "vandals" and "minions" and "Northern
scum," the cheap insults of the Southern newspaper press.  To furnish
the _John Brown_ chorus with words worthy of the music, Mrs. Julia Ward
Howe wrote her _Battle-Hymn of the Republic_, a noble poem, but rather
too fine and literary for a song, and so never fully accepted by the
soldiers.  Among the many verses which voiced the anguish and the
patriotism of that stern time, which told of partings and home-comings,
of women waiting by desolate hearths, in country homes, for tidings of
husbands and sons who had gone to the war; or which celebrated
individual deeds of heroism or sang the thousand private tragedies and
heartbreaks of the great conflict, by far the greater number were of
too humble a grade to survive the feeling of the hour.  Among the best
or the most popular of them were Kate Putnam Osgood's _Driving Home the
Cows_, Mrs. Ethel Lynn Beers's _All Quiet Along the Potomac_; Forceythe
Willson's _Old Sergeant_, and John James Piatt's _Riding to Vote_.  Of
the poets whom the war brought out, or developed, the most noteworthy
were Henry Timrod, of South Carolina, and Henry Howard Brownell, of
Connecticut.  During the war Timrod was with the Confederate Army of
the West, as correspondent for the _Charleston Mercury_, and in 1864 he
became assistant editor of the _South Carolinian_, at Columbia.
Sherman's "march to the sea" broke up his business, and he returned to
Charleston.  A complete edition of his poems was published in 1873, six
years after his death.  The prettiest of all Timrod's poems is _Katie_,
but more to our present purpose are _Charleston_--written in the time
of blockade--and the _Unknown Dead_, which tells

  "Of nameless graves on battle plains,
  Wash'd by a single winter's rains,
  Where, some beneath Virginian hills,
  And some by green Atlantic rills,
  Some by the waters of the West,
  A myriad unknown heroes rest."

When the war was over a poet of New York State, F. M. Finch, sang of
these and of other graves in his beautiful Decoration Day lyric, _The
Blue and the Gray_, which spoke the word of reconciliation and
consecration for North and South alike.

Brownell, whose _Lyrics of a Day_ and _War Lyrics_ were published
respectively in 1864 and 1866, was private secretary to Farragut, on
whose flag-ship, the _Hartford_, he was present at several great naval
engagements, such as the "Passage of the Forts" below New Orleans, and
the action off Mobile, described in his poem, the _Bay Fight_.  With
some roughness and unevenness of execution Brownell's poetry had a fire
which places him next to Whittier as the Körner of the civil war.  In
him, especially, as in Whittier, is that Puritan sense of the
righteousness of his cause which made the battle for the Union a holy
war to the crusaders against slavery:

  "Full red the furnace fires must glow
    That melt the ore of mortal kind;
  The mills of God are grinding slow,
    But ah, how close they grind!

  "To-day the Dahlgren and the drum
    Are dread apostles of his name;
  His kingdom here can only come
    By chrism of blood and flame."

One of the earliest martyrs of the war was Theodore Winthrop, hardly
known as a writer until the publication in the _Atlantic Monthly_ of
his vivid sketches of _Washington as a Camp_, describing the march of
his regiment, the famous New York Seventh, and its first quarters in
the Capitol at Washington.  A tragic interest was given to these papers
by Winthrop's gallant death in the action of Big Bethel, June 10, 1861.
While this was still fresh in public recollection his manuscript novels
were published, together with a collection of his stories and sketches
reprinted from the magazines.  His novels, though in parts crude and
immature, have a dash and buoyancy--an out-door air about them--which
give the reader a winning impression of Winthrop's personality.  The
best of them is, perhaps, _Cecil Dreeme_, a romance that reminds one a
little of Hawthorne, and the scene of which is the New York University
building on Washington Square, a locality that has been further
celebrated in Henry James's novel of _Washington Square_.

Another member of this same Seventh Regiment, Fitz James O'Brien, an
Irishman by birth, who died at Baltimore in 1862 from the effects of a
wound received in a cavalry skirmish, had contributed to the magazines
a number of poems and of brilliant though fantastic tales, among which
the _Diamond Lens_ and _What Was It?_ had something of Edgar A. Poe's
quality.  Another Irish-American, Charles G. Halpine, under the
pen-name of "Miles O'Reilly," wrote a good many clever ballads of the
war, partly serious and partly in comic brogue.  Prose writers of note
furnished the magazines with narratives of their experience at the seat
of war, among papers of which kind may be mentioned Dr. Holmes's _My
Search for the Captain_, in the _Atlantic Monthly_, and Colonel T. W.
Higginson's _Army Life in a Black Regiment_, collected into a volume in
1870.

Of the public oratory of the war, the foremost example is the
ever-memorable address of Abraham Lincoln at the dedication of the
National Cemetery at Gettysburg.  The war had brought the nation to its
intellectual majority.  In the stress of that terrible fight there was
no room for buncombe and verbiage, such as the newspapers and
stump-speakers used to dole out in _ante bellum_ days.  Lincoln's
speech is short--a few grave words which he turned aside for a moment
to speak in the midst of his task of saving the country.  The speech is
simple, naked of figures, every sentence impressed with a sense of
responsibility for the work yet to be done and with a stern
determination to do it.  "In a larger sense," it says, "we cannot
dedicate, we cannot consecrate, we cannot hallow this ground.  The
brave men, living and dead, who struggled here have consecrated it far
above our poor power to add or detract.  The world will little note nor
long remember what we say here, but it can never forget what they did
here.  It is for us, the living, rather to be dedicated here to the
unfinished work which they who fought here have thus far so nobly
advanced.  It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task
remaining before us; that from these honored dead we take increased
devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of
devotion; that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have
died in vain; that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of
freedom; and that government of the people, by the people, for the
people, shall not perish from the earth."  Here was eloquence of a
different sort from the sonorous perorations of Webster or the polished
climaxes of Everett.  As we read the plain, strong language of this
brief classic, with its solemnity, its restraint, its "brave old wisdom
of sincerity," we seem to see the president's homely features
irradiated with the light of coming martyrdom--

  "The kindly-earnest, brave, foreseeing man,
    Sagacious, patient, dreading praise, not blame,
  New birth of our new soil, the first American."

Within the past quarter of a century the popular school of American
humor has reached its culmination.  Every man of genius who is a
humorist at all is so in a way peculiar to himself.  There is no lack
of individuality in the humor of Irving and Hawthorne and the wit of
Holmes and Lowell, but although they are new in subject and application
they are not new in kind.  Irving, as we have seen, was the literary
descendant of Addison.  The character-sketches in _Bracebridge Hall_
are of the same family with Sir Roger de Coverley and the other figures
of the Spectator Club.  _Knickerbocker's History of New York_, though
purely American in its matter, is not distinctly American in its
method, which is akin to the mock heroic of Fielding and the irony of
Swift in the _Voyage to Lilliput_.  Irving's humor, like that of all
the great English humorists, had its root in the perception of
character--of the characteristic traits of men and classes of men, as
ground of amusement.  It depended for its effect, therefore, upon its
truthfulness, its dramatic insight and sympathy, as did the humor of
Shakespeare, of Sterne, Lamb, and Thackeray.  This perception of the
characteristic, when pushed to excess, issues in grotesque and
caricature, as in some of Dickens's inferior creations, which are
little more than personified single tricks of manner, speech, feature,
or dress.  Hawthorne's rare humor differed from Irving's in temper but
not in substance, and belonged, like Irving's, to the English variety.
Dr. Holmes's more pronouncedly comic verse does not differ specifically
from the _facetiae_ of Thomas Hood, but his prominent trait is wit,
which is the laughter of the head as humor is of the heart.  The same
is true, with qualifications, of Lowell, whose _Biglow Papers_, though
humor of an original sort in their revelation of Yankee character, are
essentially satirical.  It is the cleverness, the shrewdness of the
hits in the _Biglow Papers_, their logical, that is, _witty_ character,
as distinguished from their drollery, that arrests the attention.  They
are funny, but they are not so funny as they are smart.  In all these
writers humor was blent with more serious qualities, which gave
fineness and literary value to their humorous writings.  Their view of
life was not exclusively comic.  But there has been a class of jesters,
of professional humorists, in America, whose product is so indigenous,
so different, if not in essence, yet at least in form and expression,
from any European humor, that it may be regarded as a unique addition
to the comic literature of the world.  It has been accepted as such in
England, where Artemus Ward and Mark Twain are familiar to multitudes
who have never read the _One Hoss-Shay_ or _The Courtin'_.  And though
it would be ridiculous to maintain that either of these writers takes
rank with Lowell and Holmes, or to deny that there is an amount of
flatness and coarseness in many of their labored fooleries which puts
large portions of their writings below the line where real literature
begins, still it will not do to ignore them as mere buffoons, or even
to predict that their humors will soon be forgotten.  It is true that
no literary fashion is more subject to change than the fashion of a
jest, and that jokes that make one generation laugh seem insipid to the
next.  But there is something perennial in the fun of Rabelais, whom
Bacon called "the great jester of France," and though the puns of
Shakespeare's clowns are detestable the clowns themselves have not lost
their power to amuse.

The Americans are not a gay people, but they are fond of a joke.
Lincoln's "little stories" were characteristically Western, and it is
doubtful whether he was more endeared to the masses by his solid
virtues than by the humorous perception which made him one of them.
The humor of which we are speaking now is a strictly popular and
national possession.  Though America has never, or not until lately,
had a comic paper ranking with _Punch_ or _Charivari_ or the _Fliegende
Blätter_, every newspaper has had its funny column.  Our humorists have
been graduated from the journalist's desk and sometimes from the
printing-press, and now and then a local or country newspaper has risen
into sudden prosperity from the possession of a new humorist, as in the
case of G. D. Prentice's _Courier Journal_, or more recently of the
_Cleveland Plaindealer_, the _Danbury News_, the _Burlington Hawkeye_,
the _Arkansaw Traveller_, the _Texas Siftings_, and numerous others.
Nowadays there are even syndicates of humorists, who co-operate to
supply fun for certain groups of periodicals.  Of course, the great
majority of these manufacturers of jests for newspapers and comic
almanacs are doomed to swift oblivion.  But it is not so certain that
the best of the class, like Clemens and Browne, will not long continue
to be read as illustrative of one side of the American mind, or that
their best things will not survive as long as the _mots_ of Sydney
Smith, which are still as current as ever.  One of the earliest of them
was Seba Smith, who, under the name of "Major Jack Downing," did his
best to make Jackson's administration ridiculous.  B. P. Shillaber's
"Mrs. Partington"--a sort of American Mrs. Malaprop--enjoyed great
vogue before the war.  Of a somewhat higher kind were the
_Phoenixiana_, 1855, and _Squibob Papers_, 1856, of Lieutenant George
H. Derby, "John Phoenix," one of the pioneers of literature on the
Pacific coast at the time of the California gold fever of '49.  Derby's
proposal for _A New System of English Grammar_, his satirical account
of the topographical survey of the two miles of road between San
Francisco and the Mission Dolores, and his picture gallery made out of
the conventional houses, steam-boats, rail-cars, runaway Negroes, and
other designs which used to figure in the advertising columns of the
newspapers, were all very ingenious and clever.  But all these pale
before Artemus Ward--"Artemus the delicious," as Charles Reade called
him--who first secured for this peculiarly American type of humor a
hearing and reception abroad.  Ever since the invention of Hosea
Biglow, an imaginary personage of some sort, under cover of whom the
author might conceal his own identity, has seemed a necessity to our
humorists.  Artemus Ward was a traveling showman who went about the
country exhibiting a collection of wax "figgers" and whose experiences
and reflections were reported in grammar and spelling of a most
ingeniously eccentric kind.  His inventor was Charles F. Browne,
originally of Maine, a printer by trade and afterward a newspaper
writer and editor at Boston, Toledo, and Cleveland, where his
comicalities in the _Plaindealer_ first began to attract notice.  In
1860 he came to New York and joined the staff of _Vanity Fair_, a comic
weekly of much brightness, which ran a short career and perished for
want of capital.  When Browne began to appear as a public lecturer,
people who had formed an idea of him from his impersonation of the
shrewd and vulgar old showman were surprised to find him a
gentlemanly-looking young man, who came upon the platform in correct
evening dress, and "spoke his piece" in a quiet and somewhat mournful
manner, stopping in apparent surprise when any one in the audience
laughed at any uncommonly outrageous absurdity.  In London, where he
delivered his _Lecture on the Mormons_, in 1806, the gravity of his
bearing at first imposed upon his hearers, who had come to the hall in
search of instructive information and were disappointed at the
inadequate nature of the panorama which Browne had had made to
illustrate his lecture.  Occasionally some hitch would occur in the
machinery of this and the lecturer would leave the rostrum for a few
moments to "work the moon" that shone upon the Great Salt Lake,
apologizing on his return on the ground, that he was "a man short" and
offering "to pay a good salary to any respectable boy of good parentage
and education who is a good moonist."  When it gradually dawned upon
the British intellect that these and similar devices of the
lecturer--such as the soft music which he had the pianist play at
pathetic passages--nay, that the panorama and even the lecture itself
were of a humorous intention, the joke began to take, and Artemus's
success in England became assured.  He was employed as one of the
editors of _Punch_, but died at Southampton in the year following.

Some of Artemus Ward's effects were produced, by cacography or bad
spelling, but there was genius in the wildly erratic way in which he
handled even this rather low order of humor.  It is a curious
commentary on the wretchedness of our English orthography that the
phonetic spelling of a word, as for example, _wuz_ for _was_, should be
in itself an occasion of mirth.  Other verbal effects of a different
kind were among his devices, as in the passage where the seventeen
widows of a deceased Mormon offered themselves to Artemus.

"And I said, 'Why is this thus?  What is the reason of this thusness?'
They hove a sigh--seventeen sighs of different size.  They said:

"'O, soon thou will be gonested away.'

"I told them that when I got ready to leave a place I wentested.

"They said, 'Doth not like us?'

"I said, 'I doth--I doth.'

"I also said, 'I hope your intentions are honorable, as I am a lone
child--my parents being far--far away.'

"They then said, 'Wilt not marry us?'

"I said, 'O no, it cannot was.'

"When they cried, 'O cruel man! this is too much!--O! too much,' I told
them that it was on account of the muchness that I declined."

It is hard to define the difference between the humor of one writer and
another, or of one nation and another.  It can be felt and can be
illustrated by quoting examples, but scarcely described in general
terms.  It has been said of that class of American humorists of which
Artemus Ward is a representative that their peculiarity consists in
extravagance, surprise, audacity, and irreverence.  But all these
qualities have characterized other schools of humor.  There is the same
element of surprise in De Quincey's anti-climax, "Many a man has dated
his ruin from some murder or other which, perhaps, at the time he
thought little of," as in Artemus's truism that "a comic paper ought to
publish a joke now and then."  The violation of logic which makes us
laugh at an Irish bull is likewise the source of the humor in Artemus's
saying of Jeff Davis, that "it would have been better than ten dollars
in his pocket if he had never been born;" or in his advice, "Always
live within your income, even if you have to borrow money to do so;"
or, again, in his announcement that "Mr. Ward will pay no debts of his
own contracting."  A kind of ludicrous confusion, caused by an unusual
collocation of words, is also one of his favorite tricks, as when he
says of Brigham Young, "He's the most married man I ever saw in my
life;" or when, having been drafted at several hundred different places
where he had been exhibiting his wax figures, he says that if he went
on he should soon become a regiment, and adds, "I never knew that there
was so many of me."  With this a whimsical understatement and an
affectation of simplicity, as where he expresses his willingness to
sacrifice "even his wife's relations" on the altar of patriotism; or
where, in delightful unconsciousness of his own sins against
orthography, he pronounces that "Chaucer was a great poet but he
couldn't spell," or where he says of the feast of raw dog, tendered him
by the Indian chief, Wocky-bocky, "It don't agree with me.  I prefer
simple food."  On the whole, it may be said of original humor of this
kind, as of other forms of originality in literature, that the elements
of it are old, but their combinations are novel.  Other humorists, like
Henry W. Shaw ("Josh Billings") and David R. Locke ("Petroleum V.
Nasby"), have used bad spelling as a part of their machinery; while
Robert H. Newell ("Orpheus C. Kerr"), Samuel L. Clemens ("Mark Twain"),
and more recently "Bill Nye," though belonging to the same school of
low or broad comedy, have discarded cacography.  Of these the most
eminent, by all odds, is Mark Twain, who has probably made more people
laugh than any other living writer.  A Missourian by birth (1835), he
served the usual apprenticeship at type-setting and editing country
newspapers; spent seven years as a pilot on a Mississippi steam-boat,
and seven years more mining and journalizing in Nevada, where he
conducted the Virginia City _Enterprise_; finally drifted to San
Francisco, and was associated with Bret Harte on the _Californian_, and
in 1867 published his first book, _The Jumping Frog_.  This was
succeeded by the _Innocents Abroad_, 1869; _Roughing It_, 1872; _A
Tramp Abroad_, 1880, and by others not so good.

Mark Twain's drolleries have frequently the same air of innocence and
surprise as Artemus Ward's, and there is a like suddenness in his turns
of expression, as where he speaks of "the calm confidence of a
Christian with four aces."  If he did not originate, he at any rate
employed very effectively that now familiar device of the newspaper
"funny man," of putting a painful situation euphemistically, as when he
says of a man who was hanged, that he "received injuries which
terminated in his death."  He uses to the full extent the American
humorist's favorite resources of exaggeration and irreverence.  An
instance of the former quality may be seen in his famous description of
a dog chasing a coyote, in _Roughing It_, or in his interview with the
lightning-rod agent in Mark Twain's _Sketches_, 1875.  He is a shrewd
observer, and his humor has a more satirical side than Artemus Ward's,
sometimes passing into downright denunciation.  He delights
particularly in ridiculing sentimental humbug and moralizing cant.  He
runs atilt, as has been said, at "copy-book texts," at the temperance
reformer, the tract distributer, the Good Boy of Sunday-school
literature, and the women who send bouquets and sympathetic letters to
interesting criminals.  He gives a ludicrous turn to famous historical
anecdotes, such as the story of George Washington and his little
hatchet; burlesques the time-honored adventure, in nautical romances,
of the starving crew casting lots in the long-boat, and spoils the
dignity of antiquity by modern trivialities, saying of a discontented
sailor on Columbus's ship, "He wanted fresh shad."  The fun of
_Innocents Abroad_ consists in this irreverent application of modern,
common sense, utilitarian, democratic standards to the memorable places
and historic associations of Europe.  Tried by this test the Old
Masters in the picture galleries become laughable, Abelard was a
precious scoundrel, and the raptures of the guide-books are parodied
without mercy.  The tourist weeps at the grave of Adam.  At Genoa he
drives the _cicerone_ to despair by pretending never to have heard of
Christopher Columbus, and inquiring innocently, "Is he dead?"  It is
Europe vulgarized and stripped of its illusions--Europe seen by a
Western newspaper reporter without any "historic imagination."

The method of this whole class of humorists is the opposite of
Addison's or Irving's or Thackeray's.  It does not amuse by the
perception of the characteristic.  It is not founded upon truth, but
upon incongruity, distortion, unexpectedness.  Every thing in life is
reversed, as in opera bouffe, and turned topsy-turvy, so that paradox
takes the place of the natural order of things.  Nevertheless they have
supplied a wholesome criticism upon sentimental excesses, and the world
is in their debt for many a hearty laugh.

In the _Atlantic Monthly_ for December, 1863, appeared a tale entitled
_The Man Without a Country_, which made a great sensation, and did much
to strengthen patriotic feeling in one of the darkest hours of the
nation's history.  It was the story of one Philip Nolan, an army
officer, whose head had been turned by Aaron Burr, and who, having been
censured by a court-martial for some minor offense; exclaimed
petulantly, upon mention being made of the United States government,
"Damn the United States!  I wish that I might never hear the United
States mentioned again."  Thereupon he was sentenced to have his wish,
and was kept all his life aboard the vessels of the navy, being sent
off on long voyages and transferred from ship to ship, with orders to
those in charge that his country and its concerns should never be
spoken of in his presence.  Such an air of reality was given to the
narrative by incidental references to actual persons and occurrences
that many believed it true, and some were found who remembered Philip
Nolan, but had heard different versions of his career.  The author of
this clever hoax--if hoax it may be called--was Edward Everett Hale, a
Unitarian clergyman of Boston, who published a collection of stories in
1868, under the fantastic title, _If, Yes, and Perhaps_, indicating
thereby that some of the tales were possible, some of them probable,
and others might even be regarded as essentially true.  A similar
collection, _His Level Best, and Other Stories_, was published in 1873,
and in the interval three volumes of a somewhat different kind, the
_Ingham Papers_ and _Sybaris and Other Homes_, both in 1869, and _Ten
Times One Is Ten_, in 187l.  The author shelters himself behind the
imaginary figure of Captain Frederic Ingham, pastor of the Sandemanian
Church at Naguadavick, and the same characters have a way of
re-appearing in his successive volumes as old friends of the reader,
which is pleasant at first, but in the end a little tiresome.  Mr. Hale
is one of the most original and ingenious of American story-writers.
The old device of making wildly improbable inventions appear like fact
by a realistic treatment of details--a device employed by Swift and
Edgar Poe, and more lately by Jules Verne--became quite fresh and novel
in his hands, and was managed with a humor all his own.  Some of his
best stories are _My Double and How He Undid Me_, describing how a busy
clergyman found an Irishman who looked so much like himself that he
trained him to pass as his duplicate, and sent him to do duty in his
stead at public meetings, dinners, etc., thereby escaping bores and
getting time for real work; the _Brick Moon_, a story of a projectile
built and launched into space, to revolve in a fixed meridian about the
earth and serve mariners as a mark of longitude; the _Rag Man and Rag
Woman_, a tale of an impoverished couple who made a competence by
saving the pamphlets, advertisements, wedding-cards, etc., that came to
them through the mail, and developing a paper business on that basis;
and the _Skeleton in the Closet_, which shows how the fate of the
Southern Confederacy was involved in the adventures of a certain
hoop-skirt, "built in the eclipse and rigged with curses dark."  Mr.
Hale's historical scholarship and his habit of detail have aided him in
the art of giving _vraisemblance_ to absurdities.  He is known in
philanthropy as well as in letters, and his tales have a cheerful,
busy, practical way with them in consonance with his motto, "Look up
and not down, look forward and not back, look out and not in, and lend
a hand."

It is too soon to sum up the literary history of the last quarter of a
century.  The writers who have given it shape are still writing, and
their work is therefore incomplete.  But on the slightest review of it
two facts become manifest; first, that New England has lost its long
monopoly; and, secondly, that a marked feature of the period is the
growth of realistic fiction.  The electric tension of the atmosphere
for thirty years preceding the civil war, the storm and stress
of great public contests, and the intellectual stir produced by
transcendentalism seem to have been more favorable to poetry and
literary idealism than present conditions are.  At all events there are
no new poets who rank with Whittier, Longfellow, Lowell, and others of
the elder generation, although George H. Boker, in Philadelphia, R. H.
Stoddard and E. C. Stedman, in New York, and T. B. Aldrich, first in
New York and afterward in Boston, have written creditable verse; not to
speak of younger writers, whose work, however, for the most part, has
been more distinguished by delicacy of execution than by native
impulse.  Mention has been made of the establishment of _Harper's
Monthly Magazine_, which, under the conduct of its accomplished editor,
George W. Curtis, has provided the public with an abundance of good
reading.  The old _Putnam's Monthly_, which ran from 1853 to 1858, and
had a strong corps of contributors, was revived in 1868, and continued
by that name till 1870, when it was succeeded by _Scribner's Monthly_,
under the editorship of Dr. J. G. Holland, and this in 1881 by the
_Century_, an efficient rival of _Harper's_ in circulation, in literary
excellence, and in the beauty of its wood-engravings, the American
school of which art these two great periodicals have done much to
develop and encourage.  Another New York monthly, the _Galaxy_, ran
from 1866 to 1878, and was edited by Richard Grant White.  Within the
last few years a new _Scribner's Magazine_ has also taken the field.
The _Atlantic_, in Boston, and _Lippincott's_, in Philadelphia, are no
unworthy competitors with these for public favor.

During the forties began a new era of national expansion, somewhat
resembling that described in a former chapter, and, like that, bearing
fruit eventually in literature.  The cession of Florida to the United
States in 1845, and the annexation of Texas in the same year, were
followed by the purchase of California in 1847, and its admission as a
State in 1850.  In 1849 came the great rush to the California gold
fields.  San Francisco, at first a mere collection of tents and board
shanties, with a few adobe huts, grew with incredible rapidity into a
great city--the wicked and wonderful city apostrophized by Bret Harte
in his poem, _San Francisco_:

  "Serene, indifferent of fate,
  Thou sittest at the Western Gate;
  Upon thy heights so lately won
  Still slant the banners of the sun. . . .
  I know thy cunning and thy greed,
  Thy hard, high lust and willful deed."

The adventurers of all lands and races who flocked to the Pacific
coast, found there a motley state of society between civilization and
savagery.  There were the relics of the old Mexican occupation, the
Spanish missions, with their Christianized Indians; the wild tribes of
the plains--Apaches, Utes, and Navajoes; the Chinese coolies and
washermen, all elements strange to the Atlantic sea-board and the
States of the interior.  The gold-hunters crossed, in stages or
caravans, enormous prairies, alkaline deserts dotted with sage-brush
and seamed by deep canons, and passes through gigantic mountain ranges.
On the coast itself nature was unfamiliar: the climate was subtropical;
fruits and vegetables grew to a mammoth size, corresponding to the
enormous redwoods in the Mariposa groves and the prodigious scale of
the scenery in the valley of the Yosemite and the snow-capped peaks of
the sierras.  At first there were few women, and the men led a wild,
lawless existence in the mining camps.  Hard upon the heels of the
prospector followed the dram-shop, the gambling-hell, and the
dance-hall.  Every man carried his "Colt," and looked out for his own
life and his "claim."  Crime went unpunished or was taken in hand, when
it got too rampant, by vigilance committees.  In the diggings shaggy
frontiersmen and "pikes" from Missouri mingled with the scum of eastern
cities and with broken-down business men and young college graduates
seeking their fortune.  Surveyors and geologists came of necessity,
speculators in mining stock and city lots set up their offices in the
town; later came a sprinkling of school-teachers and ministers.
Fortunes were made in one day and lost the next at poker or loo.
To-day the lucky miner who had struck a good "lead" was drinking
champagne out of pails and treating the town; to-morrow he was
"busted," and shouldered the pick for a new onslaught upon his luck.
This strange, reckless life was not without fascination, and highly
picturesque and dramatic elements were present in it.  It was, as Bret
Harte says, "an era replete with a certain heroic Greek poetry," and
sooner or later it was sure to find its poet.  During the war
California remained loyal to the Union, but was too far from the seat
of conflict to experience any serious disturbance, and went on
independently developing its own resources and becoming daily more
civilized.  By 1868 San Francisco had a literary magazine, the
_Overland Monthly_, which ran until 1875, and was revived in 1883.  It
had a decided local flavor, and the vignette on its title-page was a
happily chosen emblem, representing a grizzly bear crossing a railway
track.  In an early number of the _Overland_ was a story entitled the
_Luck of Roaring Camp_, by Francis Bret Harte, a native of Albany, N.
Y. (1835), who had come to California at the age of seventeen, in time
to catch the unique aspects of the life of the Forty-niners, before
their vagabond communities had settled down into the law-abiding
society of the present day.  His first contribution was followed by
other stories and sketches of a similar kind, such as the _Outcasts of
Poker Flat_, _Miggles_, and _Tennessee's Partner_; and by verses,
serious and humorous, of which last, _Plain Language from Truthful
James_, better known as the _Heathen Chinee_, made an immediate hit,
and carried its author's name into every corner of the English-speaking
world.  In 1871 he published a collection of his tales, another of his
poems, and a volume of very clever parodies, _Condensed Novels_, which
rank with Thackeray's _Novels by Eminent Hands_.  Bret Harte's
California stories were vivid, highly colored pictures of life in the
mining camps and raw towns of the Pacific coast.  The pathetic and the
grotesque went hand in hand in them, and the author aimed to show how
even in the desperate characters gathered together there--the
fortune-hunters, gamblers, thieves, murderers, drunkards, and
prostitutes--the latent nobility of human nature asserted itself in
acts of heroism, magnanimity, self-sacrifice, and touching fidelity.
The same men who cheated at cards and shot each another down with tipsy
curses were capable on occasion of the most romantic generosity and the
most delicate chivalry.  Critics were not wanting who held that, in the
matter of dialect and manners and other details, the narrator was not
true to the facts.  This was a comparatively unimportant charge; but a
more serious question was the doubt whether his characters were
essentially true to human nature; whether the wild soil of revenge and
greed and dissolute living ever yields such flowers of devotion as
blossom in _Tennessee's Partner_ and the _Outcasts of Poker Flat_.
However this may be, there is no question as to Harte's power as a
narrator.  His short stories are skillfully constructed and effectively
told.  They never drag, and are never overladen with description,
reflection, or other lumber.

In his poems in dialect we find the same variety of types and
nationalities characteristic of the Pacific coast: the little Mexican
maiden, Pachita, in the old mission garden; the wicked Bill Nye, who
tries to cheat the Heathen Chinee at eucher and to rob Injin Dick of
his winning lottery ticket; the geological society on the Stanislaw who
settle their scientific debates with chunks of old red sandstone and
the skulls of mammoths; the unlucky Mr. Dow, who finally strikes gold
while digging a well, and builds a house with a "coopilow;" and Flynn,
of Virginia, who saves his "pard's" life, at the sacrifice of his own,
by holding up the timbers in the caving tunnel.  These poems are mostly
in monologue, like Browning's dramatic lyrics, exclamatory and abrupt
in style, and with a good deal of indicated action, as in _Jim_, where
a miner comes into a bar-room, looking for his old chum, learns that he
is dead, and is just turning away to hide his emotion when he
recognizes Jim in his informant:

  "Well, thar--Good-bye--
  No more, sir--I--
        Eh?
  What's that you say?--
  Why, dern it!--sho!--
  No? Yea! By Jo!
        Sold!
  Sold!  Why, you limb!
  You ornery,
        Derned old
  Long-legged Jim!"

Bret Harte had many imitators, and not only did our newspaper poetry
for a number of years abound in the properties of Californian life,
such as gulches, placers, divides, etc., but writers further east
applied his method to other conditions.  Of these by far the most
successful was John Hay, a native of Indiana and private secretary to
President Lincoln, whose _Little Breeches_, _Jim Bludso_, and _Mystery
of Gilgal_ have rivaled Bret Harte's own verses in popularity.  In the
last-named piece the reader is given to feel that there is something
rather cheerful and humorous in a bar-room fight which results in "the
gals that winter, as a rule," going "alone to singing school."  In the
two former we have heroes of the Bret Harte type, the same combination
of superficial wickedness with inherent loyalty and tenderness.  The
profane farmer of the South-west, who "doesn't pan out on the
prophets," and who had taught his little son "to chaw terbacker, just
to keep his milk-teeth white," but who believes in God and the angels
ever since the miraculous recovery of the same little son when lost on
the prairie in a blizzard; and the unsaintly and bigamistic captain of
the _Prairie Belle_, who died like a hero, holding the nozzle of his
burning boat against the bank

  "Till the last galoot's ashore."

The manners and dialect of other classes and sections of the country
have received abundant illustration of late years.  Edward Eggleston's
_Hoosier Schoolmaster_, 1871, and his other novels are pictures of
rural life in the early days of Indiana.  _Western Windows_, a volume
of poems by John James Piatt, another native of Indiana, had an
unmistakable local coloring.  Charles G. Leland, of Philadelphia, in
his Hans Breitmann ballads, in dialect, gave a humorous presentation of
the German-American element in the cities.  By the death, in 1881, of
Sidney Lanier, a Georgian by birth, the South lost a poet of rare
promise, whose original genius was somewhat hampered by his hesitation
between two arts of expression, music and verse, and by his effort to
co-ordinate them.  His _Science of English Verse_, 1880, was a most
suggestive, though hardly convincing, statement of that theory of their
relation which he was working out in his practice.  Some of his pieces,
like the _Mocking Bird_ and the _Song of the Chattahoochie_, are the
most characteristically Southern poetry that has been written in
America.  Joel Chandler Harris's _Uncle Remus_ stories, in Negro
dialect, are transcripts from the folk-lore of the plantations, while
his collection of stories, _At Teague Poteet's_, together with Miss
Murfree's _In the Tennessee Mountains_ and her other books, have made
the Northern public familiar with the wild life of the "moonshiners,"
who distill illicit whiskey in the mountains of Georgia, North
Carolina, and Tennessee.  These tales are not only exciting in
incident, but strong and fresh in their delineations of character.
Their descriptions of mountain scenery are also impressive, though, in
the case of the last-named writer, frequently too prolonged.  George W.
Cable's sketches of French Creole life in New Orleans attracted
attention by their freshness and quaintness when published, in the
magazines and re-issued in book form as _Old Creole Days_, in 1879.
His first regular novel, the _Grandissimes_, 1880, was likewise a story
of Creole life.  It had the same winning qualities as his short stories
and sketches, but was an advance upon them in dramatic force,
especially in the intensely tragic and powerfully told episode of "Bras
Coupé."  Mr. Cable has continued his studies of Louisiana types and
ways in his later books, but the _Grandissimes_ still remains his
masterpiece.  All in all, he is, thus far, the most important literary
figure of the New South, and the justness and delicacy of his
representations of life speak volumes for the sobering and refining
agency of the civil war in the States whose "cause" was "lost," but
whose true interests gained even more by the loss than did the
interests of the victorious North.

The four writers last mentioned, have all come to the front within the
past eight or ten years, and, in accordance with the plan of this
sketch, receive here a mere passing notice.  It remains to close our
review of the literary history of the period since the war with a
somewhat more extended account of the two favorite novelists whose work
has done more than any thing else to shape the movement of recent
fiction.  These are Henry James, Jr., and William Dean Howells.  Their
writings, though dissimilar in some respects, are alike in this, that
they are analytic in method and realistic in spirit.  Cooper was a
romancer pure and simple; he wrote the romance of adventure and of
external incident.  Hawthorne went much deeper, and with a finer
spiritual insight dealt with the real passions of the heart; and with
men's inner experiences.  This he did with truth and power; but,
although himself a keen observer of whatever passed before his eyes, he
was not careful to secure a photographic fidelity to the surface facts
of speech, dress, manners, etc.  Thus the talk of his characters is
book-talk, and not the actual language of the parlor or the street,
with its slang, its colloquial ease and the intonations and shadings of
phrase and pronunciation which mark different sections of the country
and different grades of society.  His attempts at dialect, for example,
were of the slenderest kind.  His art is ideal, and his romances
certainly do not rank as novels of real life.  But with the growth of a
richer and more complicated society in America fiction has grown more
social and more minute in its observation.  It would not be fair to
classify the novels of James and Howells as the fiction of manners
merely; they are also the fiction of character, but they aim to
describe people not only as they are, in their inmost natures, but also
as they look and talk and dress.  They try to express character through
manners, which is the way in which it is most often expressed in the
daily existence of a conventional society.  It is a principle of
realism not to select exceptional persons or occurrences, but to take
average men and women and their average experiences.  The realists
protest that the moving incident is not their trade, and that the
stories have all been told.  They want no plot and no hero.  They will
tell no rounded tale with a _denouement_, in which all the parts are
distributed, as in the fifth act of an old-fashioned comedy; but they
will take a transcript from life and end when they get through, without
informing the reader what becomes of the characters.  And they will try
to interest this reader in "poor real life" with its "foolish face."
Their acknowledged masters are Balzac, George Eliot, Turgénieff, and
Anthony Trollope, and they regard novels as studies in sociology,
honest reports of the writers' impressions, which may not be without a
certain scientific value even.

Mr. James's peculiar province is the international novel, a field which
he created for himself, but which he has occupied in company with
Howells, Mrs. Burnett, and many others.  The novelist received most of
his schooling in Europe, and has lived much abroad, with the result
that he has become half denationalized and has engrafted a cosmopolitan
indifference upon his Yankee inheritance.  This, indeed, has
constituted his opportunity.  A close observer and a conscientious
student of the literary art, he has added to his intellectual equipment
the advantage of a curious doubleness in his point of view.  He looks
at America with the eyes of a foreigner and at Europe with the eyes of
an American.  He has so far thrown himself out of relation with
American life that he describes a Boston horse-car or a New York hotel
table with a sort of amused wonder.  His starting-point was in
criticism, and he has always maintained the critical attitude.  He took
up story-writing in order to help himself, by practical experiment, in
his chosen art of literary criticism, and his volume on _French Poets
and Novelists_, 1878, is by no means the least valuable of his books.
His short stories in the magazines were collected into a volume in
1875, with the title, _A Passionate Pilgrim, and Other Stories_.  One
or two of these, as the _Last of the Valerii_ and the _Madonna of the
Future_, suggest Hawthorne, a very unsympathetic study of whom James
afterward contributed to the "English Men of Letters" series.  But in
the name-story of the collection he was already in the line of his
future development.  This is the story of a middle-aged invalid
American who comes to England in search of health, and finds, too late,
in the mellow atmosphere of the mother-country, the repose and the
congenial surroundings which he has all his life been longing for in
his raw America.  The pathos of his self-analysis and his confession of
failure is subtly imagined.  The impressions which he and his far-away
English kinsfolk make on one another, their mutual attraction and
repulsion, are described with that delicate perception of national
differences which makes the humor and sometimes the tragedy of James's
later books, like _The American_, _Daisy Miller_, _The Europeans_, and
_An International Episode_.  His first novel was _Roderick Hudson_,
1876, not the most characteristic of his fictions, but perhaps the most
powerful in its grasp of elementary passion.  The analytic method and
the critical attitude have their dangers in imaginative literature.  In
proportion as this writer's faculty of minute observation and his
realistic objectivity have increased upon him, the uncomfortable
coldness which is felt in his youthful work has become actually
disagreeable, and his art--growing constantly finer and surer in
matters of detail--has seemed to dwell more and more in the region of
mere manners and less in the higher realm of character and passion.  In
most of his writings the heart, somehow, is left out.  We have seen
that Irving, from his knowledge of England and America, and his long
residence in both countries, became the mediator between the two great
branches of the Anglo-Saxon race.  This he did by the power of his
sympathy with each.  Henry James has likewise interpreted the two
nations to one another in a subtler but less genial fashion than
Irving, and not through sympathy, but through contrast, by bringing
into relief the opposing ideals of life and society which have
developed under different institutions.  In his novel, _The American_,
1877, he has shown the actual misery which may result from the clashing
of opposed social systems.  In such clever sketches as _Daisy Miller_,
1879, the _Pension Beaurepas_, and _A Bundle of Letters_, he has
exhibited types of the American girl, the American business man, the
aesthetic feebling from Boston, and the Europeanized or would-be
denationalized American campaigners in the Old World, and has set forth
the ludicrous incongruities, perplexities, and misunderstandings which
result from contradictory standards of conventional morality and
behavior.  In _The Europeans_, 1879, and _An International Episode_,
1878, he has reversed the process, bringing Old World standards to the
test of American ideas by transferring his _dramatis personae_ to
republican soil.  The last-named of these illustrates how slender a
plot realism requires for its purposes.  It is nothing more than the
history of an English girl of good family who marries an American
gentleman and undertakes to live in America, but finds herself so
uncomfortable in strange social conditions that she returns to England
for life, while, contrariwise, the heroine's sister is so taken with
the freedom of these very conditions that she elopes with another
American and "goes West."  James is a keen observer of the physiognomy
of cities as well as of men, and his _Portraits of Places_, 1884, is
among the most delightful contributions to the literature of foreign
travel.

Mr. Howells's writings are not without "international" touches.  In _A
Foregone Conclusion_ and the _Lady of the Aroostook_, and others of his
novels, the contrasted points of view in American and European life are
introduced, and especially those variations in feeling, custom,
dialect, etc., which make the modern Englishman and the modern American
such objects of curiosity to each other, and which have been dwelt upon
of late even unto satiety.  But in general he finds his subjects at
home, and if he does not know his own countrymen and countrywomen more
intimately than Mr. James, at least he loves them better.  There is a
warmer sentiment in his fictions, too; his men are better fellows and
his women are more lovable.  Howells was born in Ohio.  His early life
was that of a western country editor.  In 1860 he published, jointly
with his friend Piatt, a book of verse--_Poems of Two Friends_.  In
1861 he was sent as consul to Venice, and the literary results of his
sojourn there appeared in his sketches, _Venetian Life_, 1865, and
_Italian Journeys_, 1867.  In 1871 he became editor of the _Atlantic
Monthly_, and in the same year published his _Suburban Sketches_.  All
of these early volumes showed a quick eye for the picturesque, an
unusual power of description, and humor of the most delicate quality;
but as yet there was little approach to narrative.  _Their Wedding
Journey_ was a revelation to the public of the interest that may lie in
an ordinary bridal trip across the State of New York, when a close and
sympathetic observation is brought to bear upon the characteristics of
American life as it appears at railway stations and hotels, on
steam-boats and in the streets of very commonplace towns.  _A Chance
Acquaintance_, 1873, was Howells's first novel, though even yet the
story was set against a background of travel-pictures.  A holiday trip
on the St. Lawrence and the Saguenay, with descriptions of Quebec and
the Falls of Montmorenci, etc., rather predominated over the narrative.
Thus, gradually and by a natural process, complete characters and
realistic novels, such as _A Modern Instance_, 1882, and _Indian
Summer_, evolved themselves from truthful sketches of places and
persons seen by the way.

The incompatibility existing between European and American views of
life, which makes the comedy or the tragedy of Henry James's
international fictions, is replaced in Howells's novels by the
repulsion between differing social grades in the same country.  The
adjustment of these subtle distinctions forms a part of the problem of
life in all complicated societies.  Thus in _A Chance Acquaintance_ the
heroine is a bright and pretty Western girl, who becomes engaged during
a pleasure tour to an irreproachable but offensively priggish young
gentleman from Boston, and the engagement is broken by her in
consequence of an unintended slight--the betrayal on the hero's part of
a shade of mortification when he and his betrothed are suddenly brought
into the presence of some fashionable ladies belonging to his own
_monde_.  The little comedy, _Out of the Question_, deals with this
same adjustment of social scales; and in many of Howells's other
novels, such as _Silas Lapham_ and the _Lady of the Aroustook_, one of
the main motives may be described to be the contact of the man who eats
with his fork with the man who eats with his knife, and the shock
thereby ensuing.  In _Indian Summer_ the complications arise from the
difference in age between the hero and heroine, and not from a
difference in station or social antecedents.  In all of these fictions
the misunderstandings come from an incompatibility of manners rather
than of character, and, if any thing were to be objected to the
probability of the story, it is that the climax hinges on delicacies
and subtleties which, in real life, when there is opportunity for
explanations, are readily brushed aside.  But in _A Modern Instance_
Howells touched the deeper springs of action.  In this, his strongest
work, the catastrophe is brought about, as in George Eliot's great
novels, by the reaction of characters upon one another, and the story
is realistic in a higher sense than any mere study of manners can be.
His nearest approach to romance is in _The Undiscovered Country_, 1880,
which deals with the Spiritualists and the Shakers, and in its study of
problems that hover on the borders of the supernatural, in its
out-of-the-way personages and adventures, and in a certain ideal poetic
flavor about the whole book, has a strong resemblance to Hawthorne,
especially to Hawthorne in the _Blithedale Romance_, where he comes
closer to common ground with other romancers.  It is interesting to
compare the _Undiscovered Country_ with Henry James's _Bostonians_, the
latest and one of the cleverest of his fictions, which is likewise a
study of the clairvoyants, mediums, woman's rights advocates, and all
varieties of cranks, reformers, and patrons of "causes," for whom
Boston has long been notorious.  A most unlovely race of people they
become under the cold scrutiny of Mr. James's cosmopolitan eyes, which
see more clearly the charlatanism, narrow-mindedness, mistaken
fanaticism, morbid self-consciousness, disagreeable nervous intensity,
and vulgar or ridiculous outside peculiarities of the humanitarians,
than the nobility and moral enthusiasm which underlie the surface.

Howells is almost the only successful American dramatist, and this in
the field of parlor comedy.  His little farces, the _Elevator_, the
_Register_, the _Parlor-Car_, etc., have a lightness and grace, with an
exquisitely absurd situation, which remind us more of the _Comedies et
Proverbes_ of Alfred de Musset, or the many agreeable dialogues and
monologues of the French domestic stage, than of any work of English or
American hands.  His softly ironical yet affectionate treatment of
feminine ways is especially admirable.  In his numerous types of
sweetly illogical, inconsistent, and inconsequent womanhood he has
perpetuated with a nicer art than Dickens what Thackeray calls "that
great discovery," Mrs. Nickleby.



1. Theodore Winthrop.  _Life in the Open Air_.  _Cecil Dreeme_.

2. Thomas Wentworth Higginson.  _Life in a Black Regiment_.

3. _Poetry of the Civil War_.  Edited by Richard Grant White.  New
York.  1866.

4. Charles Farrar Browne.  _Artemus Ward--His Book_.  _Lecture on the
Mormons_.  _Artemus Ward in London_.

5. Samuel Langhorne Clemens.  _The Jumping Frog_.  _Roughing It_.  _The
Mississippi Pilot_.

6. Charles Godfrey Leland.  _Hans Breitmann's Ballads_.

7. Edward Everett Hale.  _If, Yes, and Perhaps_.  _His Level Best, and
Other Stories_.

8. Francis Bret Harte.  _Outcasts of Poker Flat, and Other Stories_.
_Condensed Novels_.  _Poems in Dialect_.

9. Sidney Lanier.  _Nirvana_.  _Resurrection_.   _The Harlequin of
Dreams_.  _Song of the Chattahoochie_.  _The Mocking Bird_.  _The
Stirrup-Cup_.  _Tampa Robins_.  _The Bee_.  _The Revenge of Hamish_.
_The Ship of Earth_.  _The Marshes of Glynn_.  _Sunrise_.

10. Henry James, Jr.  _A Passionate Pilgrim_.  _Roderick Hudson_.
_Daisy Miller_.  _Pension Beaurepas_.  _A Bundle of Letters_.  _An
International Episode_.  _The Bostonians_.  _Portraits of Places_.

11. William Dean Howells.  _Their Wedding Journey_.  _Suburban
Sketches_.  _A Chance Acquaintance_.  _A Foregone Conclusion_.  _The
Undiscovered Country_.  _A Modern Instance_.

12. George W. Cable.  _Old Creole Days_.  _Madame Delphine_.  _The
Grandissimes_.

13. Joel Chandler Harris.  _Uncle Remus_.  _Mingo, and Other Sketches_.

14. Charles Egbert Craddook (Miss Murfree).  _In the Tennessee
Mountains_.




APPENDIX.


COTTON MATHER.

CAPTAIN PHIPS AND THE SPANISH WRECK.

[From _Magnalia Christi Americana_.]

Captain Phips, arriving with a ship and a tender at Port de la Plata,
made a stout canoe of a stately cotton-tree, so large as to carry eight
or ten oars, for the making of which periaga (as they call it) he did,
with the same industry that he did every thing else, employ his own
hand and adze, and endure no little hardship, lying abroad in the woods
many nights together.  This periaga with the tender, being anchored at
a place convenient, the periaga kept busking to and again,[1] but could
only discover a reef of rising shoals thereabouts, called "The
Boilers," which, rising to be within two or three feet of the surface
of the sea, were yet so steep that a ship striking on them would
immediately sink down, who could say how many fathom, into the ocean.
Here they could get no other pay for their long peeping among the
Boilers, but only such as caused them to think upon returning to their
captain with the bad news of their total disappointment.  Nevertheless,
as they were upon their return, one of the men, looking over the side
of the periaga into the calm water, he spied a sea-feather growing, as
he judged, out of a rock; whereupon he bade one of their Indians to
dive and fetch this feather, that they might, however, carry home
something with them, and make at least as fair a triumph as
Caligula's.[2]  The diver, bringing up the feather, brought therewithal
a surprising story, that he perceived a number of great guns in the
watery world where he had found his feather; the report[3] of which
great guns exceedingly astonished the whole company, and at once turned
their despondencies for their ill success into assurances that they had
now lit upon the true spot of ground which they had been looking for;
and they were further confirmed in these assurances when, upon further
diving, the Indian fetched up a sow, as they styled it, or a lump of
silver worth perhaps two or three hundred pounds.  Upon this they
prudently buoyed the place that they might readily find it again; and
they went back unto their captain, whom for some while they distressed
with nothing but such bad news as they formerly thought they must have
carried him.  Nevertheless, they so slipped in the sow of silver on one
side under the table, where they wore now sitting with the captain, and
hearing him express his resolutions to wait still patiently upon the
providence of God under these disappointments, that when he should look
on one side he might see that odd thing before him.  At last he saw it.
Seeing it he cried out with some agony, "Why! what is this?  Whence
comes this?"  And then, with changed countenances, they told him how
and where they got it.  "Then," said he, "thanks be to God!  We are
made," and so away they went all hands to work; wherein they had this
one further piece of remarkable prosperity, that whereas if they had
first fallen upon that part of the Spanish wreck where the pieces of
eight[4] had been stowed in bags among the ballast they had seen a more
laborious and less enriching time of it; now, most happily, they first
fell upon that room in the wreck where the bullion had been stored up;
and they so prospered in this new fishery that in a little while they
had, without the loss of any man's life, brought up thirty-two tuns of
silver; for it was now come to measuring of silver by tuns.  Besides
which, one Adderly, of Providence, who had formerly been very helpful
to Captain Phips in the search of this wreck, did, upon former
agreement, meet him now with a little vessel here; and he with his few
hands, took up about six tuns of silver; whereof, nevertheless, he made
so little use that in a year or two he died at Bermudas, and, as I have
heard, he ran distracted some while before he died.

Thus did there once again come into the light of the sun a treasure
which had been half an hundred years groaning under the waters; and in
this time there was grown upon the plate a crust-like limestone, to the
thickness of several inches; which crust being broken open by iron
contrived for that purpose, they knocked out whole bushels of rusty
pieces of eight; which were grown thereinto.  Besides that incredible
treasure of plate in various forms thus fetched up from seven or eight
fathom under water, there were vast riches of gold, and pearls, and
jewels, which they also lit upon; and, indeed, for a more comprehensive
invoice, I must but summarily say, "All that a Spanish frigate uses to
be enriched withal."


[1] Passing to and fro.

[2] The Roman emperor who invaded Britain unsuccessfully and made his
legionaries gather sea-shells to bring back with them as evidences of
victory.

[3] One of Mather's puns.

[4] Spanish piasters, formerly divided into eight reals.  The
piaster=an American dollar.




JONATHAN EDWARDS.

THE BEAUTY OF HOLINESS.

[From the author's Personal Narrative.]

Holiness, as I then wrote down some of my contemplations on it,
appeared to me to be of a sweet, pleasant, charming, serene, calm
nature; which brought an inexpressible purity, brightness,
peacefulness, and ravishment to the soul.  In other words, that it made
the soul like a field or garden of God, with all manner of pleasant
flowers; enjoying a sweet calm and the gently vivifying beams of the
sun.  The soul of a true Christian, as I then wrote my meditations,
appeared like such a little white flower as we see in the spring of the
year; low and humble on the ground, opening its bosom to receive the
pleasant beams of the sun's glory; rejoicing, as it were, in a calm
rapture; diffusing around a sweet fragrancy; standing peacefully and
lovingly in the midst of other flowers round about; all in like manner
opening their bosoms to drink in the light of the sun.  There was no
part of creature-holiness that I had so great a sense of its loveliness
as humility, brokenness of heart, and poverty of spirit; and there was
nothing that I so earnestly longed for.  My heart panted after this--to
lie low before God, as in the dust; that I might be nothing, and that
God might be all; that I might become as a little child.




THE WRATH OF GOD.

[From _Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God_.]

Unconverted men walk over the pit of hell on a rotten covering, and
there are innumerable places in this covering so weak that they will
not bear their weight, and these places are not seen.  The arrows of
death fly unseen at noonday; the sharpest sight cannot discern them.
God has so many different, unsearchable ways of taking wicked men out
of the world and sending them to hell that there is nothing to make it
appear that God had need to be at the expense of a miracle, or go out
of the ordinary course of his providence, to destroy any wicked man at
any moment. . . .  Your wickedness makes you as it were heavy as lead
and to tend downward with great weight and pressure toward hell; and,
if God should let you go, you would immediately sink and swiftly
descend and plunge into the bottomless gulf, and your healthy
constitution, and your own care and prudence, and best contrivance, and
all your righteousness, would have no more influence to uphold you and
keep you out of hell than a spider's web would have to stop a falling
rock. . . .  There are the black clouds of God's wrath now hanging
directly over your heads, full of the dreadful storm and big with
thunder; and were it not for the restraining hand of God it would
immediately burst forth upon you.  The sovereign pleasure of God, for
the present, stays his rough wind; otherwise it would come with fury,
and your destruction would come like a whirlwind, and you would be like
the chaff of the summer threshing-floor.  The wrath of God is like
great waters that are dammed for the present; they increase more and
more, and rise higher and higher, till an outlet is given; and the
longer the stream is stopped, the more rapid and mighty is its course
when once it is let loose. . . .

Thus it will be with you that are in an unconverted state, if you
continue in it; the infinite might and majesty and terribleness of the
omnipotent God shall be magnified upon you in the ineffable strength of
your torments; you shall be tormented in the presence of the holy
angels and in the presence of the Lamb; and, when you shall be in this
state of suffering, the glorious inhabitants of heaven shall go forth
and look on the awful spectacle, that they may see what the wrath and
fierceness of the Almighty is; and when they have seen it they will
fall down and adore that great power and majesty.  "And it shall come
to pass, that from one moon to another, and from one Sabbath to
another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, saith the Lord.
And they shall go forth and look upon the carcasses of the men that
have transgressed against me; for their worm shall not die, neither
shall their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring unto all
flesh."

It is everlasting wrath.  It would be dreadful to suffer this
fierceness and wrath of Almighty God one moment: but you must suffer it
to all eternity; there will be no end to this exquisite, horrible
misery; when you look forward you shall see along forever, a boundless
duration before you, which will swallow up your thoughts and amaze your
soul; and you will absolutely despair of ever having any deliverance,
any end, any mitigation, any rest at all; you will know certainly that
you must wear out long ages, millions of millions of ages, in wrestling
and conflicting with this Almighty merciless vengeance; and then, when
you have so done, when so many ages have actually been spent by you in
this manner, you will know that all is but a point to what remains.  So
that your punishment will indeed be infinite. . . .  If we knew that
there was one person, and but one, in the whole congregation, that was
to be the subject of this misery, what an awful thing it would be to
think of!  If we knew who it was, what an awful sight would it be to
see such a person!  How might all the rest of the congregation lift up
a lamentable and bitter cry over him!  But alas!  Instead of one, how
many is it likely will remember this discourse in hell!  And it would
be a wonder if some that are now present should not be in hell in a
very short time, before this year is out.  And it would be no wonder if
some persons, that now sit here in some seats of this meeting-house in
health, and quiet, and secure, should be there before to-morrow morning.




BENJAMIN FRANKLIN.

FRANKLIN'S ARRIVAL AT PHILADELPHIA.

[From _The Life of Benjamin Franklin, Written by Himself_.]

I was in my working dress, my best clothes being to come round by sea.
I was dirty from my journey; my pockets were stuffed out with shirts
and stockings, and I knew no soul nor where to look for lodging.  I was
fatigued with traveling, rowing, and want of rest; I was very hungry;
and my whole stock of cash consisted of a Dutch dollar and about a
shilling in copper.  The latter I gave the people of the boat for my
passage, who at first refused it, on account of my rowing; but I
insisted on their taking it, a man being sometimes more generous when
he has but a little money than when he has plenty, perhaps through fear
of being thought to have but little.

Then I walked up the street, gazing about, till near the market-house I
met a boy with bread.  I had made many a meal on bread, and, inquiring
where he got it, I went immediately to the baker's he directed me to,
in Second Street, and asked for biscuit, intending such as we had in
Boston; but they, it seems, were not made in Philadelphia.  Then I
asked for a three-penny loaf, and was told they had none such.  So, not
considering or knowing the difference of money, and the greater
cheapness, nor the names of his bread, I had him give me three-penny
worth of any sort.  He gave me, accordingly, three great puffy rolls.
I was surprised at the quantity, but took it, and, having no room in my
pockets, walked off with a roll under each arm, and eating the other.
Thus I went up Market Street as far as Fourth Street, passing by the
door of Mr. Read, my future wife's father, when she, standing at the
door, saw me, and thought I made, as I certainly did, a most awkward,
ridiculous appearance.  Then I turned and went down Chestnut Street and
part of Walnut Street, eating my roll all the way and, coming round,
found myself again at Market Street wharf, near the boat I came in, to
which I went for a draught of the river water; and, being filled with
one of my rolls, gave the other two to a woman and her child that came
down the river in the boat with us, and were waiting to go farther.

Thus refreshed, I walked again up the street, which by this time had
many clean-dressed people in it, who were all walking the same way.  I
joined them, and thereby was led into the great meeting-house of the
Quakers near the market.  I sat down among them, and, after looking
'round a while and hearing nothing said, being very drowsy through
labor and want of rest the preceding night, I fell fast asleep, and
continued so till the meeting broke up, when one was kind enough to
rouse me.  This was, therefore, the first house I was in, or slept in,
in Philadelphia.

Walking down again toward the river, and looking in the faces of the
people, I met a young Quaker man whose countenance I liked, and,
accosting him, requested he would tell me where a stranger could get
lodging.  We were near the sign of the Three Mariners.  "Here," says
he, "is one place that entertains strangers, but it is not a reputable
house; if thee wilt walk with me, I'll show thee a better."  He brought
me to the Crooked Billet in Water Street.  Here I got a dinner.



PAYING TOO DEAR FOR THE WHISTLE.

[From Correspondence with Madame Britton.]

I am charmed with your description of Paradise, and with your plan of
living there; and I approve much of your conclusion, that, in the
meantime, we should draw all the good we can from this world.  In my
opinion we might all draw more good from it than we do, and suffer less
evil, if we would take care not to give too much for _whistles_, for to
me it seems that most of the unhappy people we meet with are become so
by neglect of that caution.

You ask what I mean?  You love stories, and will excuse my telling one
of myself.

When I was a child of seven years old my friends, on a holiday, filled
my pocket with coppers.  I went directly to a shop where they sold toys
for children, and, being charmed with the sound of a _whistle_, that I
met by the way in the hands of another boy, I voluntarily offered and
gave all my money for one.  I then came home, and went whistling all
over the house, much pleased with my _whistle_, but disturbing all the
family.  My brothers and sisters and cousins, understanding the bargain
I had made, told me I had given four times as much for it as it was
worth; put me in mind what good things I might have bought with the
rest of the money, and laughed at me so much for my folly that I cried
with vexation; and the reflection gave me more chagrin than the
_whistle_ gave me pleasure.

This, however, was afterward of use to me, the impression continuing on
my mind, so that often when I was tempted to buy some unnecessary
thing, I said to myself, _Don't give too much for the whistle_; and I
saved my money.

As I grew up, came into the world, and observed the actions of men, I
thought I met with many, very many, who _gave too much for the whistle_.

When I saw one too ambitious of court favor, sacrificing his time in
attendance on levees, his repose, his liberty, his virtue, and perhaps
his friends to attain it, I have said to myself, _This man gives too
much for his whistle_.

When I saw another fond of popularity, constantly employing himself in
political bustles, neglecting his own affairs, and ruining them by that
neglect, _He pays, indeed_, said I, _too much for his whistle_. . . .

If I see one fond of appearance or fine clothes, fine houses, fine
furniture, fine equipages, all above his fortune, for which he
contracts debts and ends his career in a prison, _Alas_! say I, _he has
paid dear, very dear for his whistle_. . . .

In short, I conceive that a great part of the miseries of mankind are
brought upon them by the false estimates they have made of the value of
things and by their _giving too much for their whistles_.

Yet I ought to have charity for these unhappy people, when I consider
that with all this wisdom of which I am boasting, there are certain
things in the world so tempting, for example, the apples of King John,
which happily are not to be bought; for if they were put to sale by
auction I might very easily be led to ruin myself in the purchase, and
find that I had once more given too much for the _whistle_.




PHILIP FRENEAU.

THE INDIAN BURYING-GROUND.

  In spite of all the learned have said,
    I still my old opinion keep:
  The posture that we give the dead
    Points out the soul's eternal sleep.

  Not so the ancients of these lands:
    The Indian, when from life released,
  Again is seated with his friends,
    And shares again the joyous feast.

  His imaged birds and painted bowl
    And venison, for a journey dressed,
  Bespeak the nature of the soul,
    Activity that knows no rest.

  His bow for action ready bent,
    And arrows with a head of stone,
  Can only mean that life is spent,
    And not the finer essence gone.

  Thou, stranger that shalt come this way.
    No fraud upon the dead commit--
  Observe the swelling turf and say,
    They do not _lie_, but here they _sit_.

  Here still a lofty rock remains,
    On which the curious eye may trace
  (Now wasted half by wearing rains)
    The fancies of a ruder race.

  Here still an aged elm aspires,
    Beneath whose far-projecting shade
  (And which the shepherd still admires)
    The children of the forest played.

  There oft a restless Indian queen
    (Pale Sheba with her braided hair),
  And many a barbarous form is seen
    To chide the man that lingers there.

  By midnight moons, o'er moistening dews,
    In vestments for the chase arrayed,
  The hunter still the deer pursues,
    The hunter and the deer--a shade!

  And long shall timorous Fancy see
    The painted chief and pointed spear,
  And Reason's self shall bow the knee
    To shadows and delusions here.




DANIEL WEBSTER.

THE UNION.

[From the _Reply to Hayne_, January 25, 1830.]

I profess, sir, in my career hitherto, to have kept steadily in view
the prosperity and honor of the whole country, and the preservation of
our Federal Union.  It is to that Union we owe our safety at home and
our consideration and dignity abroad.  It is to that Union that we are
chiefly indebted for whatever makes us most proud of our country.  That
Union we readied only by the discipline of our virtues in the severe
school of adversity.  It had its origin in the necessities of
disordered finance, prostrate commerce, and ruined credit.  Under its
benign influences these great interests immediately awoke as from the
dead and sprang forth with newness of life.  Every year of its duration
has teemed with fresh proofs of its utility and its blessings; and
although our territory has stretched out wider and wider and our
population spread farther and farther, they have not outrun its
protection or its benefits.  It has been to us all a copious fountain
of national, social, and personal happiness.

I have not allowed myself, sir, to look beyond the Union to see what
might lie hidden in the dark recess behind.  I have not coolly weighed
the chances of preserving liberty when the bonds that unite us together
shall be broken asunder.  I have not accustomed myself to hang over the
precipice of disunion to see whether with my short sight I can fathom
the depth of the abyss below, nor could I regard him as a safe
counselor in the affairs of this government whose thoughts should be
mainly bent on considering not how the Union may be best preserved, but
how tolerable might be the condition of the people when it should be
broken up and destroyed.  While the Union lasts we have high, exciting,
gratifying prospects spread out before us, for us and our children.
Beyond that I seek not to penetrate the veil.  God grant that in my day
at least that curtain may not rise!  God grant that on my vision never
may be opened what lies beyond!  When my eyes shall be turned to behold
for the last time the sun in heaven, may I not see him shining on the
broken and dishonored fragments of a once glorious Union; on States
dissevered, discordant, belligerent; on a land rent with civil feuds,
or drenched, it may be, in fraternal blood!  Let their last feeble and
lingering glance rather behold the gorgeous ensign of the Republic, now
known and honored throughout the earth, still full high advanced, its
arms and trophies streaming in their original luster, not a stripe
erased or polluted, not a single star obscured, bearing for its motto
no such miserable interrogatory as "What is all this worth?" nor those
other words of delusion and folly, "Liberty first; and Union
afterward;" but every-where, spread all over in characters of living
light, blazing on all its ample folds as they float over the sea and
over the land, and in every wind under the whole heavens, that other
sentiment dear to every true American heart--Liberty and Union, now and
forever, one and inseparable!



SOUTH CAROLINA AND MASSACHUSETTS.

[From the same.]

When I shall be found, sir, in my place here in the Senate, or
elsewhere, to sneer at public merit because it happens to spring up
beyond the little limits of my own State or neighborhood; when I
refuse, for any such cause, or for any cause, the homage due to
American talent, to elevated patriotism, to sincere devotion to liberty
and the country; or, if I see an uncommon endowment of Heaven, if I see
extraordinary capacity and virtue, in any son of the South; and if,
moved by local prejudices or gangrened by State jealousy, I get up here
to abate the tithe of a hair from his just character and just fame, may
my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth!

Sir, let me recur to pleasing recollections; let me indulge in
refreshing remembrances of the past; let me remind you that, in early
times, no States cherished greater harmony, both of principle and
feeling, than Massachusetts and South Carolina.  Would to God that
harmony might again return!  Shoulder to shoulder they went through the
Revolution, hand in hand they stood round the administration of
Washington, and felt his own great arm lean on them for support.
Unkind feeling, if it exist, alienation and distrust are the growth,
unnatural to such soils, of false principle; since sown.  They are
weeds, the seeds of which that same great arm never scattered.

Mr. President, I shall enter upon no encomium of Massachusetts; she
needs none.  There she is.  Behold her and judge for yourselves.  There
is her history; the world knows it by heart.  The past, at least, is
secure.  There is Boston, and Concord, and Lexington, and Bunker Hill;
and there they will remain forever.  The bones of her sons, falling in
the great struggle for independence, now lie mingled with the soil of
every State from New England to Georgia, and there they will lie
forever.  And, sir, where American liberty raised its first voice, and
where its youth was nurtured and sustained, there it still lives, in
the strength of its manhood, and full of its original spirit.  If
discord and disunion shall wound it, if party strife and blind ambition
shall hawk at and tear it, if folly and madness, if uneasiness under
salutary and necessary restraint shall succeed in separating it from
that Union by which alone its existence is made sure, it will stand, in
the end, by the side of that cradle in which its infancy was rocked; it
will stretch forth its arm with whatever of vigor it may still retain,
over the friends who gather round it; and it will fall at last, if fall
it must, amidst the profoundest monuments of its own glory, and on the
very spot of its origin.




WASHINGTON IRVING.

THE STORM SHIP.

[From _Bracebridge Hall_.]

In the golden age of the province of the New Netherlands, when under
the sway of Wouter Van Twiller, otherwise called the Doubter, the
people of the Manhattoes were alarmed one sultry afternoon, just about
the time of the summer solstice, by a tremendous storm of thunder and
lightning.  The rain fell in such torrents as absolutely to spatter up
and smoke along the ground.  It seemed as if the thunder rattled and
rolled over the very roofs of the houses; the lightning was seen to
play about the Church of St. Nicholas, and to strive three times in
vain to strike its weather-cock.  Garrett Van Horne's new chimney was
split almost from top to bottom; and Boffne Mildeberger was struck
speechless from his bald-faced mare just as he was riding into
town. . . .  At length the storm abated; the thunder sank into a growl,
and the setting sun, breaking from under the fringed borders of the
clouds, made the broad bosom of the bay to gleam like a sea of molten
gold.

The word was given from the fort that a ship was standing up the
bay. . . .  She was a stout, round, Dutch-built vessel, with high bow
and poop, and bearing Dutch colors.  The evening sun gilded her
bellying canvas as she came riding over the long waving billows.  The
sentinel who had given notice of her approach declared that he first
got sight of her when she was in the center of the bay; and that she
broke suddenly on his sight, just as if she had come out of the bosom
of the black thunder-clouds. . . .  The ship was now repeatedly hailed,
but made no reply, and, passing by the fort, stood on up the Hudson.  A
gun was brought to bear on her, and, with some difficulty, loaded and
fired by Hans Van Pelt, the garrison not being expert in artillery.
The shot seemed absolutely to pass through the ship, and to skip along
the water on the other side; but no notice was taken of it!  What was
strange, she had all her sails set, and sailed right against wind and
tide, which were both down the river. . . .  Thus she kept on, away up
the river, lessening and lessening in the evening sunshine, until she
faded from sight like a little white cloud melting away in the summer
sky. . . .

Messengers were dispatched to various places on the river, but they
returned without any tidings--the ship had made no port.  Day after
day, week after week elapsed, but she never returned down the Hudson.
As, however, the council seemed solicitous for intelligence they had it
in abundance.  The captains of the sloops seldom arrived without
bringing some report of having seen the strange ship at different parts
of the river--sometimes near the Palisades, sometimes off Croton Point,
and sometimes in the Highlands; but she never was reported as having
been seen above the Highlands.  The crews of the sloops, it is true,
generally differed among themselves in their accounts of these
apparitions; but that may have arisen from the uncertain situations in
which they saw her.  Sometimes it was by the flashes of the
thunder-storm lighting up a pitchy night, and giving glimpses of her
careering across Tappan Zee or the wide waste of Haverstraw Bay.  At
one moment she would appear close upon them, as if likely to run them
down, and would throw them into great bustle and alarm, but the next
flash would show her far off, always sailing against the wind.
Sometimes, in quiet moonlight nights, she would be seen under some high
bluff of the Highlands; all in deep shadow, excepting her top-sails
glittering in the moonbeams; by the time, however, that the voyagers
reached the place no ship was to be seen; and when they had passed on
for some distance and looked back, behold! there she was again with her
top-sails in the moonshine!  Her appearance was always just after or
just in the midst of unruly weather; and she was known among the
skippers and voyagers of the Hudson by the name of "The Storm Ship."

These reports perplexed the governor and his council more than ever;
and it would be useless to repeat the conjectures and opinions uttered
on the subject.  Some quoted cases in point of ships seen off the coast
of New England navigated by witches and goblins.  Old Hans Van Pelt,
who had been more than once to the Dutch Colony at the Cape of Good
Hope, insisted that this must be the _Flying Dutchman_ which had so
long haunted Table Bay, but being unable to make port had now sought
another harbor.  Others suggested that if it really was a supernatural
apparition, as there was every natural reason to believe, it might be
Hendrik Hudson and his crew of the _Half-Moon_, who, it was well known,
had once run aground in the upper part of the river in seeking a
north-west passage to China.  This opinion had very little weight with
the governor, but it passed current out of doors; for indeed it had
always been reported that Hendrik Hudson and his crew haunted the
Kaatskill Mountains; and it appeared very reasonable to suppose that
his ship might infest the river where the enterprise was baffled, or
that it might bear the shadowy crew to their periodical revels in the
mountain. . . .

People who live along the river insist that they sometimes see her in
summer moonlight, and that in a deep still midnight they have heard the
chant of her crew, as if heaving the lead; but sights and sounds are so
deceptive along the mountainous shores, and about the wide bays and
long reaches of this great river, that I confess I have very strong
doubts upon the subject.  It is certain, nevertheless, that strange
things have been seen in these Highlands in storms, which are
considered as connected with the old story of the ship.  The captains
of the river craft talk of a little bulbous-bottomed Dutch goblin, in
trunk hose and sugar-loafed hat, with a speaking-trumpet in his hand,
which, they say, keeps about the Dunderberg.  They declare that they
have heard him, in stormy weather, in the midst of the turmoil, giving
orders in Low Dutch for the piping up of a fresh gust of wind or the
rattling off of another thunder-clap; that sometimes he has been seen
surrounded by a crew of little imps in broad breeches and short
doublets, tumbling head-over-heels in the rack and mist, and playing a
thousand gambols in the air, or buzzing like a swarm of flies about
Anthony's Nose; and that, at such times, the hurry-scurry of the storm
was always greatest.  One time a sloop, in passing by the Dunderberg,
was overtaken by a thunder-gust that came scouring round the mountain,
and seemed to burst just over the vessel.  Though light and well
ballasted she labored dreadfully, and the water came over the gunwale.
All the crew were amazed when it was discovered that there was a little
white sugar-loaf hat on the masthead, known at once to be the hat of
the Herr of the Dunderberg.  Nobody, however, dared to climb to the
mast-head and get rid of this terrible hat.  The sloop continued
laboring and rocking, as if she would have rolled her mast overboard,
and seemed in continual danger either of upsetting or of running on
shore.  In this way she drove quite through the Highlands, until she
had passed Pollopol's Island, where, it is said, the jurisdiction of
the Dunderberg potentate ceases.  No sooner had she passed this bourn
than the little hat spun up into the air like a top, whirled up all the
clouds into a vortex, and hurried them back to the summit of the
Dunderberg, while the sloop righted herself and sailed on as quietly as
if in a mill-pond.  Nothing saved her from utter wreck but the
fortunate circumstance of having a horse-shoe nailed against the
mast--a wise precaution against evil spirits, since adopted by all the
Dutch captains that navigate this haunted river.




JAMES FENIMORE COOPER.

THE RENDEZVOUS.

[From _The Deerslayer_.]

In the position in which the ark had now got, the castle was concealed
from view by the projection of a point, as, indeed, was the northern
extremity of the lake itself.  A respectable mountain, forest-clad, and
rounded like all the rest, limited the view in that direction,
stretching immediately across the whole of the fair scene,[1] with the
exception of a deep bay that passed its western end, lengthening the
basin for more than a mile.  The manner in which the water flowed out
of the lake, beneath the leafy arches of the trees that lined the sides
of the stream, has already been mentioned, and it has also been said
that the rock, which was a favorite place of rendezvous throughout all
that region, and where Deerslayer now expected to meet his friend,
stood near this outlet and no great distance from the shore.  It was a
large isolated stone that rested on the bottom of the lake, apparently
left there when the waters tore away the earth from around it, in
forcing for themselves a passage down the river, and which had obtained
its shape from the action of the elements during the slow progress of
centuries.  The height of this rock could scarcely equal six feet, and,
as has been said, its shape was not unlike that which is usually given
to bee-hives or to a hay-cock.  The latter, indeed, gives the best
idea, not only of its form, but of its dimensions.  It stood, and still
stands, for we are writing of real scenes, within fifty feet of the
bank, and in water that was only two feet in depth, though there were
seasons in which its rounded apex, if such a term can properly be used,
was covered by the lake.  Many of the trees stretched so far forward as
almost to blend the rock with the shore, when seen from a little
distance; and one tall pine in particular overhung it in a way to form
a noble and appropriate canopy to a seat that had held many a forest
chieftain, during the long succession of ages in which America and all
it contained existed apart in mysterious solitude, a world by itself,
equally without a familiar history and without an origin that the
annals of man can catch.

When distant some two or three hundred feet from the shore Deerslayer
took in his sail, and he dropped his grapnel as soon as he found the
ark had drifted in a line that was directly to windward of the rock.
The motion of the scow was then checked, when it was brought head to
wind by the action of the breeze.  As soon as this was done Deerslayer
"paid out line," and suffered the vessel to "set down" upon the rock as
fast as the light air would force it to leeward.  Floating entirely on
the surface, this was soon affected, and the young man checked the
drift when he was told that the stern of the scow was within fifteen or
eighteen feet of the desired spot.

In executing this maneuver, Deerslayer had proceeded promptly; for
while he did not in the least doubt that he was both watched and
followed by the foe, he believed he had distracted their movements by
the apparent uncertainly of his own, and he knew they could have no
means of ascertaining that the rock was his aim, unless, indeed, one of
the prisoners had betrayed him--a chance so improbable in itself as to
give him no concern.  Notwithstanding the celerity and decision of his
movements, he did not, however, venture so near the shore without
taking due precautions to effect a retreat, in the event of its
becoming necessary.  He held the line in his hand, and Judith was
stationed at a loop on the side of the cabin next the shore, where she
could watch the beach and the rocks and give timely notice of the
approach of either friend or foe.  Hetty was also placed on watch, but
it was to keep the trees overhead in view, lest some enemy might ascend
one, and, by completely commanding the interior of the scow, render the
defenses of the hut or cabin useless.

The sun had disappeared from the lake and valley when Deerslayer
checked the ark in the manner mentioned.  Still it wanted a few minutes
to the true sunset, and he knew Indian punctuality too well to
anticipate any unmanly haste in his friend.  The great question was,
whether, surrounded by enemies as he was known to be, he had escaped
their toils.  The occurrences of the last twenty-four hours must be a
secret to him, and, like himself, Chingachgook was yet young on a
war-path.  It was true he came prepared to encounter the party that
withheld his promised bride, but he had no means of ascertaining the
extent of the danger he ran or the precise positions occupied by either
friends or foes.  In a word, the trained sagacity and untiring caution
of an Indian were all he had to rely on amid the critical risks he
unavoidably ran.

"Is the rock empty, Judith?" inquired Deerslayer, as soon as he had
checked the drift of the ark, deeming it imprudent to venture
unnecessarily near.  "Is any thing to be seen of the Delaware chief?"

"Nothing, Deerslayer.  Neither rock, shore, tree, nor lake seems to
have ever held a human form."

"Keep close, Judith--keep close, Hetty--a rifle has a prying eye, a
nimble foot, and a desperate fatal tongue.  Keep close, then, but keep
up act_y_ve looks, and be on the alart.  'Twould grieve me to the heart
did any harm befall either of you."

"And _you_, Deerslayer!" exclaimed Judith, turning her handsome face
from the loop, to bestow a gracious and grateful look on the young man;
"do _you_ 'keep close' and have a proper care that the savages do not
catch a glimpse of you!  A bullet might be as fatal to you as to one of
us, and the blow that you felt would be felt by all."

"No fear of me, Judith--no fear of me, my good gal.  Do not look
this-a-way, although you look so pleasant and comely, but keep your
eyes on the rock and the shore and the--"

Deerslayer was interrupted by a slight exclamation from the girl, who,
in obedience to his hurried gestures, as much as in obedience to his
words, had immediately bent her looks again in the opposite direction.

"What is't?--what is't, Judith?" he hastily demanded.  "Is any thing to
be seen?"

"There is a man on the rock!--an Indian warrior in his paint, and
armed!"

"Where does he wear his hawk's feather?" eagerly added Deerslayer,
relaxing his hold of the line, in readiness to drift nearer to the
place of rendezvous.  "Is it fast to the warlock, or does he carry it
above the left ear?"

"'Tis as you say, above the left ear; he smiles, too, and mutters the
word 'Mohican.'"

"God be praised, 'tis the Sarpent at last!" exclaimed the young man,
suffering the line to slip through his hands until, hearing a light
bound in the other end of the craft, he instantly checked the rope and
began to haul it in again under the assurance that his object was
effected.

At that moment the door of the cabin was opened hastily, and a warrior
darting through the little room stood at Deerslayer's side, simply
uttering the exclamation "Hugh!"  At the next instant Judith and Hetty
shrieked, and the air was filled with the yell of twenty savages, who
came leaping through the branches down the bank, some actually falling
headlong into the water in their haste.

"Pull, Deerslayer," cried Judith, hastily barring the door, in order to
prevent an inroad by the passage through which the Delaware had just
entered; "pull for life and death--the lake is full of savages wading
after us!"

The young men--for Chingachgook immediately came to his friend's
assistance--needed no second bidding, but they applied themselves to
their task in a way that showed how urgent they deemed the occasion.
The great difficulty was in suddenly overcoming the _vis inertiae_ of
so large a mass; for, once in motion, it was easy to cause the scow to
skim the water with all the necessary speed.

"Pull, Deerslayer, for heaven's sake!" cried Judith, again at the loop.
"These wretches rush into the water like hounds following their prey!
Ah!  The scow moves! and now the water deepens to the armpits of the
foremost; still they rush forward and will seize the ark!"

A slight scream and then a joyous laugh followed from the girl; the
first produced by a desperate effort of their pursuers, and the last by
its failure, the scow, which had now got fairly in motion, gliding
ahead into deep water with a velocity that set the designs of their
enemies at naught.  As the two men were prevented by the position of
the cabin from seeing what passed astern, they were compelled to
inquire of the girls into the state of the chase.

"What now, Judith?--what next?  Do the Mingoes still follow, or are we
quit of 'em for the present?" demanded Deerslayer when he felt the rope
yielding, as if the scow was going fast ahead, and heard the scream and
the laugh of the girl almost in the same breath.

"They have vanished!--one, the last, is just burying himself in the
bushes of the bank--there! he has disappeared in the shadows of the
trees!  You have got your friend and we are all safe!"


[1] Otsego Lake.




  WILLIAM CULLEN BRYANT.

  TO A WATERFOWL.

  Whither, 'midst falling dew,
    While glow the heavens with the last steps of day,
  Far through their rosy depths dost thou pursue
  Thy solitary way?

  Vainly the fowler's eye
    Might mark thy distant flight to do thee wrong,
  As, darkly seen against the crimson sky,
    Thy figure floats along.

  Seek'st thou the plashy brink
    Of weedy lake or marge of river wide,
  Or where the rocking billows rise and sink
    On the chafed ocean side?

  There is a power whose care
    Teaches thy way along that pathless coast--
  The desert and illimitable air--
    Lone wandering but not lost.

  All day thy wings have fanned,
    At that far height, the cold, thin atmosphere
  Yet stoop not, weary, to the welcome land,
    Though the dark night is near.

  And soon, that toil shall end;
    Soon, shalt thou find a summer home and rest,
  And scream among thy fellows; reeds shall bend
    Soon o'er thy sheltered nest.

  Thou'rt gone, the abyss of heaven
    Hath swallowed up thy form; yet on my heart
  Deeply hath sunk the lesson thou hast given,
    And shall not soon depart.

  He who, from zone to zone,
    Guides through the boundless sky thy certain flight,
  In the long way that I must tread alone,
    Will lead my steps aright.



  THE DEATH OF THE FLOWERS.

  The melancholy days are come,
    The saddest of the year,
  Of wailing winds and naked woods,
    And meadows brown and sere.
  Heaped in the hollows of the grove,
    The autumn leaves lie dead;
  They rustle to the eddying gust,
    And to the rabbit's tread.
  The robin and the wren are flown,
    And from the shrubs the jay,
  And from the wood-top calls the crow
    Through all the gloomy day.

  Where are the flowers, the fair young flowers,
    That lately sprang and stood
  In brighter light and softer airs,
    A beauteous sisterhood?
  Alas! they all are in their graves;
    The gentle race of flowers
  Are lying in their lowly beds
    With the fair and good of ours.
  The rain is falling where they lie,
    But the cold November rain
  Calls not, from out the gloomy earth,
    The lovely ones again.

  The wind-flower and the violet,
    They perished long ago,
  And the brier-rose and the orchis died
    Amid the summer glow;
  But on the hill the golden-rod,
    And the aster in the wood,
  And the yellow sun-flower by the brook
    In autumn beauty stood,
  Till fell the frost from the clear cold heaven,
    As falls the plague on men,
  And the brightness of their smile was gone
    From upland, glade, and glen.

  And now when comes the calm, mild day,
    As still such days will come,
  To call the squirrel and the bee
    From out their winter home;
  When the sound of dropping nuts is heard,
    Though all the trees are still,
  And twinkle in the smoky light
    The waters of the rill,
  The south wind searches for the flowers
    Whose fragrance late he bore,
  And sighs to find them in the wood
    And by the stream no more.

  And then I think of one who in
    Her youthful beauty died,
  The fair meek blossom that grew up
    And faded by my side;
  In the cold, moist earth we laid her,
    When the forest cast the leaf,
  And we wept that one so lovely
    Should have a life so brief.
  Yet not unmeet it was that one,
    Like that young friend of ours,
  So gentle and so beautiful,
    Should perish with the flowers.



  THE UNIVERSAL TOMB.

  [From _Thanatopsis_.]

  Yet not to thine eternal resting-place
  Shalt thou retire alone, nor could'st thou wish
  Couch more magnificent.  Thou shalt lie down
  With patriarchs of the infant world--with kings,
  The powerful of the earth--the wise, the good,
  Fair forms, and hoary seers of ages past,
  All in one mighty sepulcher.  The hills,
  Rock-ribb'd and ancient as the sun,--the vales
  Stretching in pensive quietness between;
  The venerable woods--rivers that move
  In majesty, and the complaining brooks
  That make the meadows green; and, poured round all,
  Old Ocean's gray and melancholy waste,--
  Are but the solemn decorations all
  Of the great tomb of man.  The golden sun,
  The planets, all the infinite host of heaven,
  Are shining on the sad abodes of death,
  Through the still lapse of ages.  All that tread
  The globe are but a handful to the tribes
  That slumber in its bosom.  Take the wings
  Of morning, traverse Barca's desert sands,
  Or lose thyself in the continuous woods
  Where rolls the Oregon, and hears no sound
  Save his own dashings--yet the dead are there:
  And millions in those solitudes, since first
  The flight of years began, have laid them down
  In their last sleep--the dead reign there alone.



  So live, that when thy summons comes to join
  The innumerable caravan, which moves
  To that mysterious realm, where each shall take
  His chamber in the silent halls of death,
  Thou go not, like the quarry-slave at night,
  Scourged to his dungeon, but, sustained and soothed
  By an unfaltering trust, approach thy grave,
  Like one who wraps the drapery of his couch
  About him, and lies down to pleasant dreams.




RALPH WALDO EMERSON.

NATURE'S MINISTRY OF BEAUTY.

[From _Nature_.]

To speak truly, few adult persons can see nature.  Most persons do not
see the sun.  At least they have a very superficial seeing.  The sun
illuminates only the eye of the man, but shines into the eye and the
heart of the child.  The lover of nature is he whose inward and outward
senses are still truly adjusted to each other; who has retained the
spirit of infancy even into the era of manhood.  His intercourse with
heaven and earth becomes part of his daily food.  In the presence of
nature a wild delight runs through the man, in spite of real sorrows.
Nature says, He is my creature, and mauger all his impertinent griefs,
he shall be glad with me.  Not the sun or the summer alone, but every
hour and season yields its tribute of delight; for every hour and
change corresponds to and authorizes a different state of the mind,
from breathless noon to grimmest midnight.  Nature is a setting that
fits equally well a comic or a mourning piece.  In good health, the air
is a cordial of incredible virtue.  Crossing a bare common, in snow
puddles, at twilight, under a clouded sky, without having in my
thoughts any occurrence of special good fortune, I have enjoyed a
perfect exhilaration.  I am glad to the brink of fear.  In the woods,
too, a man casts off his years, as the snake his slough, and at what
period soever of life is always a child.  In the woods is perpetual
youth.  Within these plantations of God a decorum and sanctity reigns,
a perennial festival is dressed, and the guest sees not how he should
tire of them in a thousand years.  In the woods we return to reason and
faith.  There I feel that nothing can befall me in life--no disgrace,
no calamity (leaving me my eyes), which nature cannot repair.  Standing
on the bare ground--my head bathed by the blithe air, and uplifted into
infinite space--all mean egotism vanishes, I become a transparent
eyeball; I am nothing; I see all; the currents of the Universal Being
circulate through me; I am part or particle of God.  The name of the
nearest friend sounds there foreign and accidental; to be brothers, to
be acquaintances--master or servant, is then a trifle and a
disturbance.  I am the lover of uncontained and immortal beauty.  In
the wilderness I find something more dear and connate than in streets
or villages.  In the tranquil landscape, and especially in the distant
line of the horizon, man beholds somewhat as beautiful as his own
nature.

The greatest delight which the fields and woods minister is the
suggestion of an occult relation between man and the vegetable.  I am
not alone and unacknowledged.  They nod to me, and I to them.  The
waving of the boughs in the storm is new to me and old.  It takes me by
surprise, and yet is not unknown. . . .

I see the spectacle of morning from the hill-top over against my house,
from daybreak to sunrise, with emotions which an angel might share.
The long slender bars of cloud float like fishes in the sea of crimson
light.  From the earth, as a shore, I look out into that silent sea.  I
seem to partake its rapid transformations; the active enchantment
reaches my dust, and I dilate and conspire with the morning wind.  How
does Nature deify us with a few and cheap elements!  Give me health and
a day, and I will make the pomp of emperors ridiculous.  The dawn is my
Assyria; the sunset and moonrise my Paphos, and unimaginable realms of
faerie; broad noon shall be my England of the senses and the
understanding; the night shall be my Germany of mystic philosophy and
dreams.

Not less excellent, except for our less susceptibility in the
afternoon, was the charm, last evening, of a January sunset.  The
western clouds divided and subdivided themselves into pink flakes
modulated with tints of unspeakable softness; and the air had so much
life and sweetness that it was a pain to come within doors.  What was
it that Nature would say?  Was there no meaning in the live repose of
the valley behind the mill, and which Homer or Shakespeare could not
re-form for me in words?  The leafless trees become spires of flame in
the sunset, with the blue east for their background, and the stars of
the dead calices of flowers, and every withered stem and stubble ruined
with frost, contribute something to the mute music.



IDEALISM.

[From the same.]

To the senses and the unrenewed understanding belongs a sort of
instinctive belief in the absolute existence of nature.  In their view
man and nature are indissolubly joined.  Things are ultimates, and they
never look beyond their sphere.  The presence of Reason mars this
faith. . . .  Nature is made to conspire with spirit to emancipate us.
Certain mechanical changes, a small alteration in our local position,
apprises us of a dualism.  We are strangely affected by seeing the
shore from a moving ship, from a balloon, or through the tints of an
unusual sky.  The least change in our point of view gives the whole
world a pictorial air.  A man who seldom rides needs only to get into a
coach and traverse his own town, to turn the street into a puppet-show.
The men, the women--talking, running, bartering, fighting--the earnest
mechanic, the lounger, the beggar, the boys, the dogs are unrealized at
once, or at least wholly detached from all relation to the observer,
and seen as apparent, not substantial, beings.  What new thoughts are
suggested by seeing a face of country quite familiar, in the rapid
movement of the railway car!  Nay, the most wonted objects (make a very
slight change in the point of vision) please us most.  In a camera
obscura the butcher's cart and the figure of one of our own family
amuse us.  So a portrait of a well-known face gratifies us.  Turn the
eyes upside down, by looking at the landscape through your legs, and
how agreeable is the picture, though you have seen it any time these
twenty years!

In these cases, by mechanical means, is suggested the difference
between the observer and the spectacle, between the man and nature.
Hence arises a pleasure mixed with awe; I may say, a low degree of the
sublime is felt from the fact, probably, that man is hereby apprised,
that whilst the world is a spectacle, something in himself is stable.



  THE RHODORA.[1]

  In May, when sea-winds pierced our solitudes,
  I found the fresh Rhodora in the woods,
  Spreading its leafless blooms in a damp nook,
  To please the desert and the sluggish brook.
  The purple petals, fallen in the pool,
  Made the black water with their beauty gay;
  Here might the red bird come his plumes to cool,
  And court the flower that cheapens his array.
  Rhodora! if the sages ask thee why
  This charm is wasted on the earth and sky,
  Tell them, dear, that if eyes were made for seeing,
  Then Beauty is its own excuse for being:
  Why thou wert there, O rival of the rose,
  I never thought to ask, I never knew:
  But, in my simple ignorance, suppose
  The self-same power that brought me there brought you.


  [1] On being asked, Whence is the flower?



  HYMN.

  [Sung at the completion of the Concord Monument, April 19, 1836.]

  By the rude bridge that arched the flood,
    Their flag to April's breeze unfurled,
  Here once the embattled farmers stood,
    And fired the shot heard round the world.

  The foe long since in silence slept;
    Alike the conqueror silent sleeps;
  And time the ruined bridge has swept
    Down the dark stream which seaward creeps.

  On this green bank, by this soft stream,
    We set to-day a votive stone;
  That memory may their deed redeem,
    When, like our sires, our sons are gone.

  Spirit, that made those heroes dare
    To die, and leave their children free,
  Bid time and nature gently spare
    The shaft we raise to them and thee.




NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE.

THE HAUNTED MIND.

What a singular moment is the first one, when you have hardly begun to
recollect yourself, after starting from midnight slumber!  By unclosing
your eyes so suddenly you seem to have surprised the personages of your
dream in full convocation round your bed and catch one broad glance at
them before they can flit into obscurity.  Or, to vary the metaphor,
you find yourself, for a single instant, wide awake in that realm of
illusions whither sleep has been the passport, and behold its ghostly
inhabitants and wondrous scenery with a perception of their strangeness
such as you never attain while the dream is undisturbed.  The distant
sound of a church clock is borne faintly on the wind.  You question
with yourself, half seriously, whether it has stolen to your waking ear
from some gray tower that stood within the precincts of your dream.
While yet in suspense, another clock flings its heavy clang over
the slumbering town with so full and distinct a sound, and such a
long murmur in the neighboring air, that you are certain it must
proceed from the steeple at the nearest corner.  You count the
strokes--one--two, and there they cease, with a booming sound, like the
gathering of a third stroke within the bell.

If you could choose an hour of wakefulness out of the whole night it
would be this.  Since your sober bed-time, at eleven, you have had rest
enough to take off the pressure of yesterday's fatigue; while before
you till the sun comes from "far Cathay" to brighten your window there
is almost the space of a summer night; one hour to be spent in thought,
with the mind's eye half shut, and two in pleasant dreams, and two in
that strangest of enjoyments, the forgetfulness alike of joy and woe.
The moment of rising belongs to another period of time, and appears so
distant that the plunge out of a warm bed into the frosty air cannot
yet be anticipated with dismay.  Yesterday has already vanished among
the shadows of the past; to-morrow has not yet emerged from the future.
You have found an intermediate space, where the business of life does
not intrude, where the passing moment lingers and becomes truly the
present; a spot where Father Time, when he thinks nobody is watching
him, sits down by the way-side to take breath, O that he would fall
asleep and let mortals live on without growing older!

Hitherto you have lain perfectly still, because the slightest motion
would dissipate the fragments of your slumber.  Now, being irrevocably
awake, you peep through the half-drawn window-curtain and observe that
the glass is ornamented with fanciful devices in frost-work, and that
each pane presents something like a frozen dream.  There will be time
enough to trace out the analogy while waiting the summons to breakfast.
Seen through the clear portion of the glass, where the silvery mountain
peaks of the frost scenery do not ascend, the most conspicuous object
is the steeple, the white spire of which directs you to the wintry
luster of the firmament.  You may almost distinguish the figures on the
clock that has just tolled the hour.  Such a frosty sky, and the
snow-covered roofs, and the long vista of the frozen street, all white,
and the distant water hardened into rock, might make you shiver, even
under four blankets and a woolen comforter.  Yet look at that one
glorious star!  Its beams are distinguishable from all the rest, and
actually cast the shadow of the casement on the bed with a radiance of
deeper hue than moonlight, though not so accurate an outline.

You sink down and muffle your head in the clothes, shivering all the
while, but less from bodily chill than the bare idea of a polar
atmosphere.  It is too cold even for the thoughts to venture abroad.
You speculate on the luxury of wearing out a whole existence in bed,
like an oyster in its shell, content with the sluggish ecstasy of
inaction, and drowsily conscious of nothing but delicious warmth, such
as you now feel again.  Ah! that idea has brought a hideous one in its
train.  You think how the dead are lying in their cold shrouds and
narrow coffins through the drear winter of the grave, and cannot
persuade your fancy that they neither shrink nor shiver when the snow
is drifting over their little hillocks and the bitter blast howls
against the door of the tomb.  That gloomy thought will collect a
gloomy multitude and throw its complexion over your wakeful hour.

In the depths of every heart there is a tomb and a dungeon, though the
lights, the music, and revelry above may cause us to forget their
existence, and the buried ones or prisoners whom they hide.  But
sometimes, and oftenest at midnight, these dark receptacles are flung
wide open.  In an hour like this, when the mind has a passive
sensibility, but no active strength; when the imagination is a mirror,
imparting vividness to all ideas without the power of selecting or
controlling them, then pray that your griefs may slumber and the
brotherhood of remorse not break their chain.  It is too late!  A
funeral train comes gliding by your bed, in which Passion and Feeling
assume bodily shape and things of the mind become dim specters to the
eye.  There is your earliest Sorrow, a pale young mourner, wearing a
sister's likeness to first love, sadly beautiful, with a hallowed
sweetness in her melancholy features and grace in the flow of her sable
robe.  Next appears a shade of ruined loveliness, with dust among her
golden hair and her bright garments all faded and defaced, stealing
from your glance with drooping head, as fearful of reproach; she was
your fondest Hope, but a delusive one; so call her Disappointment now.
A sterner form succeeds, with a brow of wrinkles, a look and gesture of
iron authority; there is no name for him unless it be Fatality, an
emblem of the evil influence that rules your fortunes; a demon to whom
you subjected yourself by some error at the outset of life, and were
bound his slave forever, by once obeying him.  See! those fiendish
lineaments graven on the darkness, the writhed lip of scorn, the
mockery of that living eye, the pointed finger, touching the sore place
in your heart!  Do you remember any act of enormous folly, at which you
would blush, even in the remotest cavern of the earth?  Then recognize
your Shame.

Pass, wretched band!  Well for the wakeful one if, riotously miserable,
a fiercer tribe do not surround him, the devils of a guilty heart, that
holds its hell within itself.  What if Remorse should assume the
features of an injured friend?  What if the fiend should come in
woman's garments, with a pale beauty amid sin and desolation, and lie
down by your side?  What if he should stand at your bed's foot, in the
likeness of a corpse, with a bloody stain upon the shroud?  Sufficient
without such guilt is this nightmare of the soul; this heavy, heavy
sinking of the spirits; this wintry gloom about the heart; this
indistinct horror of the mind, blending itself with the darkness of the
chamber. . . .  Now comes the peal of the distant clock, with fainter
and fainter strokes as you plunge farther into the wilderness of sleep.
It is the knell of a temporary death.  Your spirit has departed, and
strays like a free citizen, among the people of a shadowy world,
beholding strange sights, yet without wonder or dismay.  So calm,
perhaps, will be the final change, so undisturbed, as if among familiar
things.  The entrance of the soul to its eternal home!




  HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW.

  THE BELEAGUERED CITY.

  I have read, in some old marvelous tale,
    Some legend strange and vague,
  That a midnight host of specters pale
    Beleaguered the walls of Prague.

  Beside the Moldau's rushing stream,
    With the wan moon overhead,
  There stood, as in an awful dream,
    The army of the dead.

  White as a sea-fog, landward-bound,
    The spectral camp was seen,
  And, with a sorrowful deep sound,
    The river flowed between.

  No other voice nor sound was there,
    No drum, nor sentry's pace;
  The mist-like banners clasped the air,
    As clouds with clouds embrace.

  But when the old cathedral bell
    Proclaimed the morning prayer,
  The white pavilions rose and fell
    On the alarmèd air.

  Down the broad valley fast and far
    The troubled army fled;
  Up rose the glorious morning star,
    The ghastly host was dead.

  I have read in the marvelous heart of man,
    That strange and mystic scroll,
  That an army of phantoms vast and wan
    Beleaguer the human soul.

  Encamped beside Life's rushing stream,
    In Fancy's misty light,
  Gigantic shapes and shadows gleam
    Portentous through the night.

  Upon its midnight battle-ground
    The spectral camp is seen,
  And, with a sorrowful deep sound,
    Flows the River of Life between.

  No other voice nor sound is there,
    In the army of the grave;
  No other challenge breaks the air,
    But the rushing of life's wave.

  And when the solemn and deep church-bell
    Entreats the soul to pray,
  The midnight phantoms feel the spell,
    The shadows sweep away.

  Down the broad Vale of Tears afar
    The spectral camp is fled;
  Faith shineth as a morning star,
    Our ghastly fears are dead.



  THE OCCULTATION OF ORION.

  I saw, as in a dream sublime,
  The balance in the hand of Time.
  O'er East and West its beam impended;
  And day, with all its hours of light,
  Was slowly sinking out of sight,
  While, opposite, the scale of night
  Silently with the stars ascended.

  Like the astrologers of eld,
  In that bright vision I beheld
  Greater and deeper mysteries.
  I saw, with its celestial keys,
  Its chords of air, its frets of fire,
  The Samian's great Aeolian lyre,
  Rising through all its sevenfold bars,
  From earth unto the fixèd stars.
  And through the dewy atmosphere,
  Not only could I see, but hear,
  Its wondrous and harmonious strings,
  In sweet vibration, sphere by sphere,
  From Dian's circle light and near,
  Onward to vaster and wider rings,
  Where, chanting through his beard of snows,
  Majestic, mournful Saturn goes,
  And down the sunless realms of space
  Reverberates the thunder of his bass.

  Beneath the sky's triumphal arch
  This music sounded like a march,
  And with its chorus seemed to be
  Preluding some great tragedy.
  Sirius was rising in the east;
  And, slow ascending one by one,
  The kindling constellations shone.
  Begirt with many a blazing star,
  Stood the great giant, Algebar,
  Orion, hunter of the beast!
  His sword hung gleaming by his side,
  And, on his arm, the lion's hide
  Scattered across the midnight air
  The golden radiance of its hair.

  The moon was pallid, but not faint;
  And beautiful as some fair saint,
  Serenely moving on her way
  In hours of trial and dismay.
  As if she heard the voice of God,
  Unharmed with naked feet she trod
  Upon the hot and burning stars,
  As on the glowing coals and bars
  That were to prove her strength, and try
  Her holiness and her purity.

  Thus moving on, with silent pace,
  And triumph in her sweet, pale face,
  She reached the station of Orion.
  Aghast he stood in strange alarm!
  And suddenly from his outstretched arm
  Down fell the red skin of the lion
  Into the river at his feet.
  His mighty club no longer beat
  The forehead of the bull; but he
  Reeled as of yore beside the sea,
  When, blinded by Oenopion,
  He sought the blacksmith at his forge,
  And, climbing up the mountain gorge,
  Fixed his blank eyes upon the sun,
  Then through the silence overhead,
  An angel with a trumpet said,
  "Forever more, forever more,
  The reign of violence is o'er."
  And, like an instrument that flings
  Its music on another's strings,
  The trumpet of the angel cast
  Upon the heavenly lyre its blast,
  And on from sphere to sphere the words
  Re-echoed down the burning chords,--
  "For evermore, for evermore,
  The reign of violence is o'er!"



  DANTE.

  Tuscan, that wanderest through the realms of gloom,
    With thoughtful pace, and sad, majestic eyes,
    Stern thoughts and awful from thy thoughts arise,
  Like Farinata from his fiery tomb.
  Thy sacred song is like the trump of doom;
    Yet in thy heart what human sympathies.
    What soft compassion glows, as in the skies
  The tender stars their clouded lamps relume!
    Methinks I see thee stand, with pallid cheeks,
      By Fra Hilario in his diocese,
    As up the convent wall, in golden streaks,
      The ascending sunbeams mark the day's decrease.
    And, as he asks what there the stranger seeks,
      Thy voice along the cloister whispers, "Peace!"




  JOHN GREENLEAF WHITTIER.

  RANDOLPH OF ROANOKE.

  O Mother Earth! upon thy lap
    Thy weary ones receiving,
  And o'er there, silent as a dream,
    Thy grassy mantle weaving,
  Fold softly in thy long embrace
    That heart so worn and broken,
  And cool its pulse of fire beneath
    Thy shadows old and oaken.

  Shut out from him the bitter word
    And serpent hiss of scorning;
  Nor let the storms of yesterday
    Disturb his quiet morning.
  Breathe over him forgetfulness
    Of all save deeds of kindness,
  And, save to smiles of grateful eyes,
    Press down his lids in blindness.

  There, where with living ear and eye,
    He heard Potomac's flowing,
  And, through his tall ancestral trees
    Saw autumn's sunset glowing,
  He sleeps--still looking to the West,
    Beneath the dark wood shadow,
  As if he still would see the sun
    Sink down on wave and meadow.

  Bard, Sage, and Tribune--in himself
    All moods of mind contrasting--
  The tenderest wail of human woe,
    The scorn like lightning blasting;
  The pathos which from rival eyes
    Unwilling tears could summon,
  The stinging taunt, the fiery burst
    Of hatred scarcely human!

  Mirth, sparkling like a diamond shower,
    From lips of life-long sadness;
  Clear picturings of majestic thought
    Upon a ground of madness;
  And over all Romance and Song
    A classic beauty throwing,
  And laureled Clio at his side
    Her storied pages showing.

  All parties feared him: each in turn
    Beheld its schemes disjointed,
  As right or left his fatal glance
    And spectral finger pointed.
  Sworn foe of cant, he smote it down
    With trenchant wit unsparing,
  And, mocking, rent with ruthless hand
    The robe Pretense was wearing.

  Too honest or too proud to feign
    A love he never cherished,
  Beyond Virginia's border line
    His patriotism perished.
  While others hailed in distant skies
    Our eagle's dusky pinion,
  He only saw the mountain bird
    Stoop o'er his Old Dominion.

  Still through each change of fortune strange,
    Racked nerve, and brain all burning,
  His loving faith in mother-land
    Knew never shade of turning;
  By Britain's lakes, by Neva's wave,
    Whatever sky was o'er him,
  He heard her rivers' rushing sound,
    Her blue peaks rose before him.

  He held his slaves, yet made withal
    No false and vain pretenses,
  Nor paid a lying priest to seek
    For scriptural defenses.
  His harshest words of proud rebuke,
    His bitterest taunt and scorning,
  Fell fire-like on the Northern brow
    That bent to him in fawning.

  He held his slaves, yet kept the while
    His reverence for the Human,
  In the dark vassals of his will
    He saw but man and woman.
  No hunter of God's outraged poor
    His Roanoke valley entered;
  No trader in the souls of men
    Across his threshold ventured.

  And when the old and wearied man
    Lay down for his last sleeping,
  And at his side, a slave no more,
    His brother-man stood weeping,
  His latest thought, his latest breath,
    To freedom's duty giving,
  With failing tongue and trembling hand
    The dying blest the living.

  O! never bore his ancient State
    A truer son or braver;
  None trampling with a calmer scorn
    On foreign hate or favor.
  He knew her faults, yet never stooped
    His proud and manly feeling
  To poor excuses of the wrong
    Or meanness of concealing.

  But none beheld with clearer eye,
    The plague-spot o'er her spreading,
  None heard more sure the steps of Doom
    Along her future treading.
  For her as for himself he spake,
    When, his gaunt frame up-bracing,
  He traced with dying hand "REMORSE!"
    And perished in the tracing.

  As from the grave where Henry sleeps,
    From Vernon's weeping willow,
  And from the grassy pall which hides
    The Sage of Monticello,
  So from the leaf-strewn burial-stone
    Of Randolph's lowly dwelling,
  Virginia! o'er thy land of slaves
    A warning voice is swelling.

  And hark! from thy deserted fields
    Are sadder warnings spoken,
  From quenched hearths, where thy exiled sons
    Their household gods have broken.
  The curse is on thee--wolves for men,
    And briers for corn-sheaves giving!
  O! more than all thy dead renown
    Were now one hero living.




  OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES.

  OLD IRONSIDES.

  Ay, tear her tattered ensign down!
    Long has it waved on high,
  And many an eye has danced to see
    That banner in the sky;
  Beneath it rung the battle shout,
    And burst the cannon's roar;
  The meteor of the ocean air
    Shall sweep the clouds no more.

  Her deck, once red with heroes' blood,
    Where knelt the vanquished foe,
  When winds were hurrying o'er the flood,
    And waves were white below,
  No more shall feel the victor's tread,
    Or know the conquered knee,--
  The harpies of the shore shall pluck
    The eagle of the sea.

  O, better that her shattered hulk
    Should sink beneath the wave;
  Her thunders shook the mighty deep,
    And there should be her grave;
  Nail to the mast her holy flag,
    Set every threadbare sail,
  And give her to the god of storms,
    The lightning and the gale!



  THE LAST LEAF.

  I saw him once before,
  As he passed by the door,
      And again
  The pavement stones resound,
  As he totters o'er the ground
        With his cane.

  They say that in his prime,
  Ere the pruning-knife of time
        Cut him down,
  Not a better man was found
  By the Crier on his round
        Through the town.

  But now he walks the streets,
  And he looks at all he meets
        Sad and wan,
  And he shakes his feeble head,
  That it seems as if he said,
        "They are gone."

  The mossy marbles rest
  On the lips that he has pressed
        In their bloom,
  And the names he loved to hear
  Have been carved for many a year
        On the tomb.

  My grandmamma has said--
  Poor old lady, she is dead
        Long ago--
  That he had a Roman nose,
  And his cheek was like a rose
        In the snow.

  But now his nose is thin,
  And it rests upon his chin
        Like a staff,
  And a crook is in his back,
  And a melancholy crack
        In his laugh.

  I know it is a sin
  For me to sit and grin
        At him here;
  But the old three-cornered hat,
  And the breeches, and all that,
        Are so queer!

  And if I should live to be
  The last leaf upon the tree
        In the spring,
  Let them smile, as I do now,
  At the old forsaken bough
        Where I cling.



  MY AUNT.

  My aunt! my dear, unmarried aunt!
    Long years have o'er her flown;
  Yet still she strains the aching clasp
    That binds her virgin zone;
  I know it hurts her, though she looks
    As cheerful as she can;
  Her waist is ampler than her life,
    For life is but a span.

  My aunt! my poor deluded aunt!
    Her hair is almost gray;
  Why will she train that winter curl
    In such a spring-like way?
  How can she lay her glasses down,
    And say she reads as well,
  When, through a double convex lens,
    She just makes out to spell?

  Her father--grandpapa! forgive
    This erring lip its smiles--
  Vowed she should make the finest girl
    Within a hundred miles;
  He sent her to a stylish school;
    'Twas in her thirteenth June;
  And with her, as the rules required,
    "Two towels and a spoon."

  They braced my aunt against a board,
    To make her straight and tall;
  They laced her up, they starved her down,
    To make her light and small;
  They pinched her feet, they singed her hair,
    They screwed it up with pins;
  O, never mortal suffered more
    In penance for her sins.

  So when my precious aunt was done,
    My grandsire brought her back
  (By daylight, lest some rabid youth
    Might follow on the track);
  "Ah!" said my grandsire, as he shook
    Some powder in his pan,
  "What could this lovely creature do
    Against a desperate man?"

  Alas! nor chariot, nor barouche,
    Nor bandit cavalcade,
  Tore from the trembling father's arms
    His all-accomplished maid.
  For her how happy had it been!
    And Heaven had spared to me
  To see one sad ungathered rose
    On my ancestral tree.




  EDGAR ALLAN POE.

  TO HELEN.

  Helen, thy beauty is to me
    Like those Nicean barks of yore,
  That gently, o'er a perfumed sea,
    The weary, wayworn wanderer bore
    To his own native shore.

  On desperate seas long wont to roam,
    Thy hyacinth hair, thy classic face,
  Thy Naiad airs have brought me home
    To the glory that was Greece
    And the grandeur that was Rome.

  Lo! in yon brilliant window-niche
    How statue-like I see thee stand,
  The agate lamp within thy hand!
    Ah! Psyche, from the regions which
    Are Holy Land!



  TO ONE IN PARADISE.

  Thou wast that all to me, love,
    For which my soul did pine:
  A green isle in the sea, love,
    A fountain and a shrine
  All wreathed with fairy fruits and flowers,
    And all the flowers were mine.

  Ah, dream too bright to last!
    Ah, starry hope! that did'st arise
  But to be overcast!
    A voice from out the future cries
  On! on!  But o'er the past
    (Dim gulf!) my spirit hovering lies,
  Mute, motionless, aghast!

  For, alas! alas! with me
    The light of life is o'er.
  "No more--no more--no more--"
    (Such language holds the solemn sea
  To the sands upon the shore)
    Shall bloom the thunder-blasted tree,
  Or the stricken eagle soar!

  And all my days are trances,
    And all my nightly dreams
  Are where thy dark eye glances,
    And where thy footstep gleams,--
  In what ethereal dances,
    By what eternal streams!



FROM "THE FALL OP THE HOUSE OF USHER."

At the termination of this sentence I started, and for a moment paused;
for it appeared to me (although I at once concluded that my excited
fancy had deceived me)--it appeared to me that, from some very remote
portion of the mansion there came, indistinctly, to my ears what might
have been, in its exact similarity of character, the echo (but a
stifled and dull one certainly) of the very cracking and ripping sound
which Sir Launcelot had so particularly described.  It was, beyond
doubt, the coincidence alone which had arrested my attention; for amid
the rattling of the sashes of the casements, and, the ordinary
commingled noises of the still-increasing storm, the sound, in itself,
had nothing, surely, which should have interested or disturbed me.  I
continued the story.



Here again I paused abruptly, and now with a feeling of wild
amazement--for there could be no doubt whatever that, in this instance,
I did actually hear (although from what direction it proceeded I found
it impossible to say) a low and apparently distant, but harsh,
protracted, and most unusual screaming or grating sound, the exact
counterpart of what my fancy had already conjured up for the dragon's
unnatural shriek, as described by the romancer.  Oppressed, as I
certainly was, upon the occurrence of this second and most
extraordinary coincidence, by a thousand conflicting sensations, in
which wonder and extreme terror were predominant, I still retained
sufficient presence of mind to avoid exciting, by any observation, the
sensitive nervousness of my companion.  I was by no means certain that
he had noticed the sounds in question; although, assuredly, a strange
alteration had, during the last few minutes, taken place in his
demeanor.  From a position fronting my own he had gradually brought
round his chair so as to sit with his face to the door of the chamber,
and thus I could but partially perceive his features, although I saw
that his lips trembled as if he were murmuring inaudibly.  His head had
dropped upon his breast; yet I knew that he was not asleep, from the
wide and rigid opening of the eye as I caught a glance of it in
profile.  The motion of his body, too, was at variance with this idea;
for he rocked from side to side with a gentle yet constant and uniform
sway.  Having rapidly taken notice of all this I resumed the narrative
of Sir Launcelot.



No sooner had these syllables passed my lips than--as if a shield of
brass had indeed, at the moment, fallen heavily upon a floor of
silver--I became aware of a distinct, hollow, metallic, and clangorous,
yet apparently muffled, reverberation.  Completely unnerved, I leaped
to my feet; but the measured, rocking movement of Usher was
undisturbed.  I rushed to the chair in which he sat.  His eyes were
bent fixedly before him, and throughout his whole countenance there
reigned a stony rigidity.  But as I placed my hand upon his shoulder
there came a strong shudder over his whole person; a sickly smile
quivered about his lips; and I saw that he spoke in a low, hurried, and
gibbering manner, as if unconscious of my presence.  Bending closely
over him, I at length drank in the hideous import of his words.

"Not hear it?  Yes, I hear it, and _have_ heard it.
Long--long--long--many minutes, many hours, many days have I heard
it--yet I _dared_ not--O, pity me, miserable wretch that I am!--I
_dared_ not--I dared not speak!  _We have put her living in the tomb_!
Said I not that my senses were acute?  I _now_ tell you that I heard
her first feeble movements in the hollow coffin.  I heard them many,
many days ago--yet I dared not--I _dared not speak_!  And
now--to-night--Ethelred--ha! ha!--the breaking of the hermit's door,
and the death-cry of the dragon, and the clangor of the shield!--say,
rather, the rending of her coffin, and the grating of the iron hinges
of her prison, and her struggles within the coppered archway of the
vault!  O, whither shall I fly?  Will she not be here anon?  Is she not
hurrying to upbraid me for my haste?  Have I not heard her footstep on
the stair?  Do I not distinguish that heavy and horrible beating of her
heart?  Madman!"--here he sprang furiously to his feet and shrieked out
his syllables, as if in the effort he were giving up his
soul--"_Madman!  I tell you that she now stands without the door_!"

As if in the superhuman energy of his utterance there had been found
the potency of a spell, the huge antique panels to which the speaker
pointed threw slowly back, upon the instant, their ponderous and ebony
jaws.  It was the work of the rushing gust; but then without those
doors there _did_ stand the lofty and enshrouded figure of the Lady
Madeline of Usher.  There was blood upon her white robes, and the
evidence of some bitter struggle upon every portion of her emaciated
frame.  For a moment she remained trembling and reeling to and fro upon
the threshold--then, with a low, moaning cry, fell heavily inward upon
the person of her brother, and, in her violent and now final
death-agonies, bore him to the floor a corpse and a victim to the
terrors he had anticipated.

From that chamber and from that mansion I fled aghast.  The storm was
still abroad in all its wrath as I found myself crossing the old
causeway.  Suddenly there shot along the path a wild light, and I
turned to see whence a gleam so unusual could have issued, for the vast
house and its shadows were alone behind me.  The radiance was that; of
the full, setting, and blood-red moon, which now shone vividly through
that once barely discernible fissure of which I have before spoken as
extending from the roof of the building, in a zigzag direction, to the
base.  While I gazed this fissure rapidly widened; there came a fierce
breath of the whirlwind--the entire orb of the satellite burst at once
upon my sight--my brain reeled as I saw the mighty walls rushing
asunder--there was a long, tumultuous, shouting sound like the voice of
a thousand waters--and the deep and dark tarn at my feet closed
sullenly and silently over the fragments of the House of Usher.




  NATHANIEL PARKER WILLIS.

  UNSEEN SPIRITS.

  The shadows lay along Broadway,
    'Twas near the twilight tide--
  And slowly there a lady fair
    Was walking in her pride.
  Alone walked she; but, viewlessly,
    Walked spirits at her side.

  Peace charmed the street beneath her feet,
    And Honor charmed the air;
  And all astir looked kind on her,
    And called her good as fair--
  For all God ever gave to her
    She kept with chary care.

  She kept with care her beauties rare
    From lovers warm and true;
  For her heart was cold to all but gold,
    And the rich came not to woo,
  But honored well are charms to sell,
    If priests the selling do.

  Now walking there was one more fair--
    A slight girl, lily-pale;
  And she had unseen company
    To make the spirit quail--
  'Twixt Want and Scorn she walked forlorn,
    And nothing could avail.

  No mercy now can clear her brow
    For this world's peace to pray;
  For, as love's wild prayer dissolved in air,
    Her woman's heart gave way!
  But the sin forgiven by Christ in heaven
    By man is cursed alway.



NAHANT.

Here we are, then, in the "Swallow's Cave."  The floor descends by a
gentle declivity to the sea, and from the long dark cleft stretching
outward you look forth upon the Atlantic--the shore of Ireland the
first _terra firma_ in the path of your eye.  Here is a dark pool, left
by the retreating tide for a refrigerator; and with the champagne in
the midst we will recline about it like the soft Asiatics of whom we
learned pleasure in the East, and drink to the small-featured and
purple-lipped "Mignons" of Syria--those fine-limbed and fiery slaves
adorable as peris, and by turns languishing and stormy, whom you buy
for a pinch of piastres (say 5L 5s.) in sunny Damascus.  Your drowsy
Circassian, faint and dreamy, or your crockery Georgian--fit dolls for
the sensual Turk--is, to him who would buy _soul_, dear at a penny the
hecatomb.

We recline, as it were, in an ebon pyramid with a hundred feet of floor
and sixty of wall, and the fourth side open to the sky.  The light
comes in mellow and dim, and the sharp edges of the rocky portal seem
let into the pearly heaven.  The tide is at half-ebb, and the advancing
and retreating waves, which at first just lifted the fringe of crimson
dulse at the lip of the cavern, now dash their spray-pearls on the rock
below, the "tenth" surge alone rallying as if in scorn of its
retreating fellow, and, like the chieftain of Culloden Moor, rushing
back singly to the contest.  And now that the waters reach the entrance
no more, come forward and look on the sea!  The swell lifts!  Would you
not think the bases of the earth rising beneath it?  It falls!  Would
you not think the foundation of the deep had given way?  A plain, broad
enough for the navies of the world to ride at large, heaves up evenly
and steadily as if it would lie against the sky, rests a moment
spell-bound in its place, and falls again as far--the respiration of a
sleeping child not more regular and full of slumber.  It is only on the
shore that it chafes.  Blessed emblem! it is at peace with itself!  The
rocks war with a nature so unlike their own, and the hoarse din of
their border onsets resounds through the caverns they have rent open;
but beyond, in the calm bosom of the ocean, what heavenly dignity! what
godlike unconsciousness of alarm!  I did not think we should stumble on
such a moral in the cave!

By the deeper bass of its hoarse organ the sea is now playing upon its
lowest stops, and the tide is down.  Hear how it rushes in beneath the
rocks, broken and stilled in its tortuous way, till it ends with a
washing and dull hiss among the sea-weed, and, like a myriad of small
tinkling bells, the dripping from the crags is audible.  There is fine
music in the sea!

And now the beach is bare.  The cave begins to cool and darken, and the
first gold tint of sunset is stealing into the sky, and the sea looks
of a changing opal, green, purple, and white, as if its floor were
paved with pearl, and the changing light struck up through the waters.
And there heaves a ship into the horizon like a white-winged bird,
lying with dark breast on the waves, abandoned of the sea-breeze within
sight of port, and repelled even by the spicy breath that comes with a
welcome off the shore.  She comes from "Merry England."  She is
freighted with more than merchandise.  The home-sick exile will gaze on
her snowy sail as she sets in with the morning breeze, and bless it,
for the wind that first filled it on its way swept through the green
valley of his home!  What links of human affection brings she over the
sea?  How much comes in her that is not in her "bill of lading," yet
worth to the heart that is waiting for it a thousand times the purchase
of her whole venture!

_Mais montons nous_!  I hear the small hoofs of Thalaba; my stanhope
waits; we will leave this half bottle of champagne, that "remainder
biscuit," and the echoes of our philosophy to the Naiads who have lent
us their drawing-room.  Undine, or Egeria!  Lurly, or Arethusa!
whatever thou art called, nymph of this shadowy cave! adieu!

Slowly, Thalaba!  Tread gingerly down this rocky descent!  So!  Here we
are on the floor of the vasty deep!  What a glorious race-course!  The
polished and printless sand spreads away before you as far as the eye
can see, the surf comes in below breast-high ere it breaks and the
white fringe of the sliding wave shoots up the beach, but leaves room
for the marching of a Persian phalanx on the sands it has deserted.  O,
how noiselessly runs the wheel, and how dreamily we glide along,
feeling our motion but in the resistance of the wind and in the
trout-like pull of the ribands by the excited animal before us.  Mark
the color of the sand!  White at high-water mark, and thence deepening
to a silvery gray as the water has evaporated less, a slab of Egyptian
granite in the obelisk of St. Peter's not more polished and
unimpressible.  Shell or rock, weed or quicksand, there is none; and,
mar or deface its bright surface as you will, it is ever beaten down
anew, and washed even of the dust of the foot of man by the returning
sea.  You may write upon its fine-grained face with a crow-quill--you
may course over its dazzling expanse with a troop of chariots.

Most wondrous and beautiful of all, within twenty yards of the surf, or
for an hour after the tide has left the sand, it holds the water
without losing its firmness, and is like a gay mirror, bright as the
bosom of the sea.  (By your leave, Thalaba!)  And now lean over the
dasher and see those small fetlocks striking up from beneath--the
flying mane, the thoroughbred action, the small and expressive head, as
perfect in the reflection as in the reality; like Wordsworth's swan, he

  "_Trots_ double, _horse_ and shadow."

You would swear you were skimming the surface of the sea; and the
delusion is more complete as the white foam of the "tenth wave" skims
in beneath wheel and hoof, and you urge on with the treacherous element
gliding away visibly beneath you.




HENRY DAVID THOREAU.

THE WINTER WOODS.

[From _Excursions_.]

There is a slumbering subterranean fire in nature which never goes out,
and which no cold can chill.  It finally melts the great snow, and in
January or July is only buried under a thicker or thinner covering.  In
the coldest day it flows somewhere, and the snow melts around every
tree.  This field of winter rye which sprouted late in the fall and now
speedily dissolves the snow is where the fire is very thinly covered.
We feel warmed by it.  In the winter warmth stands for all virtue, and
we resort in thought to a trickling rill, with its bare stones shining
in the sun, and to warm springs in the woods, with as much eagerness as
rabbits and robins.  The steam which rises from swamps and pools is as
dear and domestic as that of our own kettle.  What fire could ever
equal the sunshine of a winter's day, when the meadow-mice come out by
the wall-sides, and the chickadee lisps in the defiles of the wood?
The warmth comes directly from the sun, and is not radiated from the
earth as in summer; and when we feel his beams on our backs as we are
treading some snowy dell we are grateful as for a special kindness, and
bless the sun which has followed us into that by-place.

This subterranean fire has its altar in each man's breast, for in the
coldest day, and on the bleakest hill, the traveler cherishes a warmer
fire within the folds of his cloak than is kindled on any hearth.  A
healthy man, indeed, is the complement of the seasons, and in winter
summer is in his heart.  There is the South.  Thither have all birds
and insects migrated, and around the warm springs in his breast are
gathered the robin and the lark.

At length, having reached the edge of the woods and shut out the
gadding town, we enter within their covert as we go under the roof of a
cottage, and cross its threshold, all ceiled and banked up with snow.
They are glad and warm still, and as genial and cheery in winter as in
summer.  As we stand in the midst of the pines, in the flickering and
checkered light which straggles but little way into their maze, we
wonder if the towns have ever heard their simple story.  It seems to us
that no traveler has ever explored them, and notwithstanding the
wonders which science is elsewhere revealing every day, who would not
like to hear their annals?  Our humble villages in the plain are their
contribution.  We borrow from the forest the boards which shelter and
the sticks which warm us.  How important is their evergreen to the
winter, that portion of the summer which does not fade, the permanent
year, the unwithered grass.  Thus simply and with little expense of
altitude is the surface of the earth diversified.  What would human
life be without forests, those natural cities?  From the tops of
mountains they appear like smooth-shaven lawns; yet whither shall we
walk but in this taller grass?

In this glade covered with bushes of a year's growth see how the
silvery dust lies on every seared leaf and twig, deposited in such
infinite and luxurious forms as by their very variety atone for the
absence of color.  Observe the tiny tracks of mice around every stem,
and the triangular tracks of the rabbit.  A pure elastic heaven hangs
over all, as if the impurities of the summer sky, refined and shrunk by
the chaste winter's cold, had been winnowed by the heavens upon the
earth.

Mature confounds her summer distinctions at this season.  The heavens
seem to be nearer the earth.  The elements are less reserved and
distinct.  Water turns to ice; rain to snow.  The day is but a
Scandinavian night.  The winter is an arctic summer.

How much more living is the life that is in nature, the furred life
which still survives the stinging nights, and, from amidst fields and
woods covered with frost and snow, sees the sun rise!

        "The foodless wilds
  Pour forth their brown inhabitants."

The gray squirrel and rabbit are brisk and playful in the remote glens,
even on the morning of the cold Friday.  Here is our Lapland and
Labrador; and for our Esquimaux and Knistenaux, Dog-ribbed Indians,
Novazemblaites, and Spitzbergeners, are there not the ice-cutter and
wood-chopper, the fox, musk-rat, and mink?

Still, in the midst of the arctic day we may trace the summer to its
retreats and sympathize with some contemporary life.  Stretched over
the brooks, in the midst of the frost-bound meadows, we may observe the
submarine cottages of the caddice-worms, the larvae of the Plicipennes.
Their small cylindrical cases built around themselves, composed of
flags, sticks, grass, and withered leaves, shells and pebbles, inform
and color like the wrecks which strew the bottom, now drifting along
over the pebbly bottom, now whirling in tiny eddies and dashing down
steep falls, or sweeping rapidly along with the current, or else
swaying to and fro at the end of some grass-blade or root.  Anon they
will leave their sunken habitations, and, crawling up the stems of
plants or to the surface like gnats, as perfect insects henceforth,
flutter over the surface of the water or sacrifice their short lives in
the flame of our candle at evening.  Down yonder little glen the shrubs
are drooping under their burden, and the red alder-berries contrast
with the white ground.  Here are the marks of a myriad feet which have
already been abroad.  The sun rises as proudly over such a glen as over
the valley of the Seine or Tiber, and it seems the residence of a pure
and self-subsistent valor such as they never witnessed, which never
knew defeat or fear.  Here reign the simplicity and purity of a
primitive age and a health and hope far remote from towns and cities.
Standing quite alone, far in the forest, while the wind is shaking down
snow from the trees, and leaving the only human tracks behind us, we
find our reflections of a richer variety than the life of cities.  The
chickadee and nut-hatch are more inspiring society than statesmen and
philosophers, and we shall return to these last as to more vulgar
companions.  In this lonely glen, with the brook draining the slopes,
its creased ice and crystals of all hues, where the spruces and
hemlocks stand up on either side, and the rush and sere wild oats in
the rivulet itself, our lives are more serene and worthy to contemplate.

As the day advances, the heat of the sun is reflected by the
hill-sides, and we hear a faint but sweet music where flows the rill
released from its fetters, and the icicles are melting on the trees,
and the nut-hatch and partridge are heard and seen.  The south wind
melts the snow at noon, and the bare ground appears with its withered
grass and leaves, and we are invigorated by the perfume which exhales
from it as by the scent of strong meats.

Let us go into this deserted woodman's hut, and see how he has passed
the long winter nights and the short and stormy days.  For here man has
lived under this south hill-side, and it seems a civilized and public
spot.  We have such associations as when the traveler stands by the
ruins of Palmyra or Hecatompolis.  Singing birds and flowers perchance
have begun to appear here, for flowers as well as weeds follow in the
footsteps of man.  These hemlocks whispered over his head, these
hickory logs were his fuel, and these pitch-pine roots kindled his
fire; yonder fuming rill in the hollow, whose thin and airy vapor still
ascends as busily as ever, though he is far off now, was his well.
These hemlock boughs, and the straw upon this raised platform, were his
bed, and this broken dish held his drink.  But he has not been here
this season, for the phoebes built their nest upon this shelf last
summer.  I find some embers left, as if he had but just gone out, where
he baked his pot of beans; and while at evening he smoked his pipe,
whose stemless bowl lies in the ashes, chatted with his only companion,
if perchance he had any, about the depth of the snow on the morrow,
already falling fast and thick without, or disputed whether the last
sound was the screech of an owl or the creak of a bough, or imagination
only; and through this broad chimney-throat, in the late winter
evening, ere he stretched himself upon the straw, he looked up to learn
the progress of the storm, and, seeing the bright stars of Cassiopeia's
chair shining brightly down upon him, fell contentedly asleep.

See how many traces from which we may learn the chopper's history.
From this stump we may guess the sharpness of his ax, and from the
slope of the stroke, on which side he stood, and whether he cut down
the tree without going round it or changing hands; and from the flexure
of the splinters, we may know which way it fell.  This one chip
contains inscribed on it the whole history of the wood-chopper and of
the world.  On this scrap of paper, which held his sugar or salt
perchance, or was the wadding of his gun, sitting on a log in the
forest, with what interest we read the tattle of cities, of those
larger huts, empty and to let, like this, in High Streets and Broadways.




  WALT WHITMAN.

  THE MIRACLES OF NATURE.

  [From _Leaves of Grass_.]

  To me every hour of the light and dark is a miracle,
  Every inch of space is a miracle,
  Every square yard of the surface of the earth
        is spread with the same,
  Every cubic foot of the interior swarms with the same.



  To me the sea is a continual miracle,
  The fishes that swim--the rocks--the motion
        of the waves--the ships with men in them,
  What stranger miracles are there?



  I was thinking the day most splendid,
        till I saw what the not-day exhibited;
  I was thinking this globe enough,
        till there tumbled upon me myriads of other globes;
  O, how plainly I see now that this life cannot exhibit
        all to me--as the day cannot;
  O, I see that I am to wait for what will be exhibited by death.



  O Death!
  O, the beautiful touch of Death, soothing and benumbing
        a few moments, for reasons.



  The earth never tires,
  The earth is rude, silent, incomprehensible at first--
  Nature is rude and incomprehensible at first;
  Be not discouraged--keep on--there are divine things,
        well enveloped;
  I swear to you there are divine things more beautiful
        than words can tell.



  O CAPTAIN!  MY CAPTAIN!

  O captain! my captain! our fearful trip is done;
  The ship has weathered every rack, the prize we sought is won;
  The port is near, the bells I hear, the people all exulting,
  While follow eyes the steady keel, the vessel grim and daring:
      But O heart! heart! heart!
        Leave you not the little spot
          Where on the deck my captain lies,
            Fallen cold and dead.

  O captain! my captain! rise up and hear the bells;
  Rise up--for you the flag is flung--for you the bugle trills;
  For you bouquets and ribboned wreaths--for you the shores a-crowding;
  For you they call, the swaying mass, their eager faces turning;
      O captain! dear father!
        This arm I push beneath you;
          It is some dream that on the deck
            You've fallen cold and dead.

  My captain does not answer, his lips are pale and still;
  My father does not feel my arm, he has no pulse nor will;
  But the ship, the ship is anchored safe, its voyage closed and done;
  From fearful trip the victor ship comes in with object won;
      Exult, O shores, and ring, O bells!
        But I, with silent tread,
          Walk the spot my captain lies,
            Fallen cold and dead.




  JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL.

  THE COURTIN'.

  Zekle crep' up, quite unbeknown,
    An' peeked in thru the winder,
  An' there sot Huldy all alone,
    'ith no one nigh to hender.

  Agin the chimbly crooknecks hung,
    An' in amongst 'em rusted
  The ole queen's arm thet Gran'ther Young
    Fetched back from Concord busted.

  The wannut logs shot sparkles out
    Toward the pootiest, bless her!
  An' leetle fires danced all about
    The chiny on the dresser.

  The very room, coz she wuz in,
    Looked warm from floor to ceilin',
  An' she looked full ez rosy agin
    Ez th' apples she wuz peelin'.

  She heerd a foot an' knowed it, tu,
    A-raspin' on the scraper;
  All ways to once her feelin's new
    Like sparks in burnt-up paper.

  He kin' o' l'itered on the mat,
    Some doubtfle o' the seekle;
  His heart kep' goin' pitypat,
    But hern went pity Zekle.



  THE PIOUS EDITOR'S CREED.

  [From _Biglow Papers_.]

  I du believe in Freedom's cause,
    Ez fur away as Paris is;
  I love to see her stick her claws
    In them infarnal Pharisees;
  It's wal enough agin a king
    To dror resolves an' triggers--
  But libbaty's a kind o' thing
    Thet don't agree with niggers.

  I du believe the people want
    A tax on teas an' coffees,
  Thet nothin' aint extravygunt,
    Pervidin' I'm in office;
  Fer I hev loved my country sence
    My eye-teeth filled their sockets,
  An' Uncle Sam I reverence--
    Partic'larly his pockets.

  I du believe in any plan
    O' levyin' the taxes,
  Ez long ez, like a lumberman,
    I git jest wut I axes;
  I go free-trade thru thick an' thin,
    Because it kind o' rouses
  The folks to vote--an' keeps us in
    Our quiet custom-houses.



  I du believe with all my soul
    In the gret Press's freedom,
  To pint the people to the goal
    An' in the traces lead 'em;
  Palsied the arm thet forges jokes
    At my fat contracts squintin',
  An' withered be the nose that pokes
    Inter the gov'ment printin'!

  I du believe thet I should give
    Wut's his'n unto Caesar,
  Fer it's by him I move an' live,
    Frum him my bread and cheese air;
  I du believe thet all o' me
    Doth bear his souperscription,--
  Will, conscience, honor, honesty,
    An' things o' thet description.

  I du believe in prayer an' praise
    To him thet hez the grantin'
  O' jobs,--in every thin' that pays,
    But most of all in CANTIN';
  This doth my cup with marcies fill,
    This lays all thought o' sin to rest,--
  I _don't_ believe in princerple,
    But, O, I _du_ in interest.

  I du believe in bein' this
    Or thet, ez it may happen
  One way or t'other hendiest is
    To ketch the people nappin';
  It aint by princerples nor men
    My preudent course is steadied,--
  I scent wich pays the best; an' then
    Go into it baldheaded.

  I du believe thet holdin' slaves
    Comes nat'ral tu a Presidunt,
  Let 'lone the rowdedow it saves
    To hev a wal-broke precedunt;
  Fer any office, small or gret,
    I couldn't ax with no face,
  Without I'd ben, thru dry an' wet,
    Th' unrizzost kind o' doughface.

  I du believe wutever trash
    'll keep the people in blindness,--
  Thet we the Mexicuns can thrash
    Right inter brotherly kindness;
  Thet bombshells, grape, an' powder 'n' ball
    Air good-will's strongest magnets;
  Thet peace, to make it stick at all,
    Must be druv in with bagnets.

  In short, I firmly du believe
    In Humbug generally,
  Fer it's a thing that I perceive
    To hev a solid vally;
  This heth my faithful shepherd ben,
    In pasturs sweet heth led me,
  An' this 'll keep the people green
    To feed ez they hev fed me.




EDWARD EVERETT HALE.

[From _The Man Without a Country_.[1]]

The rule adopted on board the ships on which I have met "the man
without a country" was, I think, transmitted from the beginning.  No
mess liked to have him permanently, because his presence cut off all
talk of home or of the prospect of return, of politics or letters, of
peace or of war--cut off more than half the talk men liked to have at
sea.  But it was always thought too hard that he should never meet the
rest of us except to touch hats, and we finally sank into one system.
He was not permitted to talk with the men unless an officer was by.
With officers he had unrestrained intercourse, as far as he and they
chose.  But he grew shy, though he had favorites; I was one.  Then the
captain always asked him to dinner on Monday.  Every mess in succession
took up the invitation in its turn.  According to the size of the ship,
you had him at your mess more or less often at dinner.  His breakfast
he ate in his own state-room--he always had a state-room--which was
where a sentinel or somebody on the watch could see the door.  And
whatever else he ate or drank, he ate or drank alone.  Sometimes, when
the marines or sailors had any special jollification, they were
permitted to invite "Plain-Buttons," as they called him.  Then Nolan
was sent with some officer, and the men were forbidden to speak of home
while he was there.  I believe the theory was that the sight of his
punishment did them good.  They called him "Plain-Buttons" because,
while he always chose to wear a regulation army uniform, he was not
permitted to wear the army button, for the reason that it bore either
the initials or the insignia of the country he had disowned.

I remember soon after I joined the navy I was on shore with some of the
older officers from our ship and from the _Brandywine_, which we had
met at Alexandria.  We had leave to make a party and go up to Cairo and
the Pyramids.  As we jogged along (you went on donkeys then), some of
the gentlemen (we boys called them "Dons," but the phrase was long
since changed) fell to talking about Nolan, and some one told the
system which was adopted from the first about his books and other
reading.  As he was almost never permitted to go on shore, even though
the vessel lay in port for months, his time at the best hung heavy; and
every body was permitted to lend him books, if they were not published
in America, and made no allusion to it.  These were common enough in
the old days, when people in the other hemisphere talked of the United
States as little as we do of Paraguay.  He had almost all the foreign
papers that came into the ship, sooner or later; only somebody must go
over them first, and cut out any advertisement or stray paragraph that
alluded to America.  This was a little cruel sometimes, when the back
of what was cut might be as innocent as Hesiod.  Right in the midst of
one of Napoleon's battles, or one of Canning's speeches, poor Nolan
would find a great hole, because on the back of the page of that paper
there had been an advertisement of a packet for New York, or a scrap
from the President's message.  I say this was the first time I ever
heard of this plan, which afterward I had enough and more than enough
to do with.  I remember it, because poor Phillips, who was of the
party, as soon as the allusion to reading was made, told a story of
something which happened at the Cape of Good Hope on Nolan's first
voyage; and it is the only thing I ever knew of that voyage.  They had
touched at the Cape, and had done the civil thing with the English
admiral and the fleet, and then, leaving for a long cruise up the
Indian Ocean, Phillips had borrowed a lot of English books from an
officer, which, in those days, as indeed in these, was quite a
windfall.  Among them, as the devil would order, was the _Lay of the
Last Minstrel_, which they had all of them heard of, but which most of
them had never seen.  I think it could not have been published long.
Well, nobody thought there could be any risk of any thing national in
that, though Phillips swore old Shaw had cut out the "Tempest" from
Shakespeare before he let Nolan have it, because he said "the Bermudas
ought to be ours, and, by Jove, should be one day."  So Nolan was
permitted to join the circle one afternoon when a lot of them sat on
deck smoking and reading aloud.  People do not do such things so often
now; but when I was young we got rid of a great deal of time so.  Well,
so it happened that in his turn Nolan took the book and read to the
others; and he read very well, as I know.  Nobody in the circle knew a
line of the poem, only it was all magic and border chivalry, and was
ten thousand years ago.  Poor Nolan read steadily through the fifth
canto, stopped a minute and drank something, and then began without a
thought of what was coming:

  "Breathes there the man, with soul so dead,
  Who never to himself hath said"--

It seemed impossible to us that any body ever heard this for the first
time; but all these fellows did then, and poor Nolan himself went on,
still unconsciously or mechanically:

  "This is my own, my native land!"

Then they all saw something was to pay; but he expected to get through,
I suppose, turned a little pale, but plunged on:

    "Whose heart hath ne'er within him burned,
  As home his footsteps he hath turned
    From wandering on a foreign strand?--
  If such there breathe, go, mark him well."

By this time the men were all beside themselves, wishing there was any
way to make him turn over two pages; but he had not quite presence of
mind for that; he gagged a little, colored crimson, and staggered on:

  "For him no minstrel raptures swell;
  High though his titles, proud his name,
  Boundless his wealth as wish can claim,
  Despite these titles, power, and pelf,
  The wretch, concentered all in self;"--

and here the poor fellow choked, could not go on, but started up, swung
the book into the sea, vanished into his state-room.  "And by Jove,"
said Phillips, "we did not see him for two months again.  And I had to
make up some beggarly story to that English surgeon why I did not
return his Walter Scott to him."


[1]See page 195.




  FITZ-GREENE HALLECK.

  [From _Marco Bozzaris_.]

  Come to the bridal-chamber, Death!
    Come to the mother's when she feels
  For the first time her first-born's breath;
    Come when the blessed seals
  That close the pestilence are broke,
  And crowded cities wail its stroke;
  Come in consumption's ghastly form,
  The earthquake shock, the ocean-storm;
  Come when the heart beats high and warm,
    With banquet-song, and dance, and wine:
  And thou art terrible--the tear,
  The groan, the knell, the pall, the bier;
  And all we know, or dream, or fear
    Of agony, are thine.

  But to the hero, when his sword
    Has won the battle for the free,
  Thy voice sounds like a prophet's word;
  And in its hollow tones are heard
    The thanks of millions yet to be.
  Come, when his task of fame is wrought--
  Come, with her laurel-leaf, blood-bought--
    Come in her crowning hour--and then
  Thy sunken eye's unearthly light
  To him is welcome as the sight
    Of sky and stars to prisoned men;
  Thy grasp is welcome as the hand
  Of brother in a foreign land;
  Thy summons welcome as the cry
  That told the Indian isles were nigh
    To the world-seeking Genoese,
  When the land-wind, from woods of palm,
  And orange-groves, and fields of balm,
    Blew o'er the Haytian seas.

  Bozzaris! with the storied brave
    Greece nurtured in her glory's time,
  Rest thee--there is no prouder grave,
    Even in her own proud clime.
  She wore no funeral weeds for thee,
    Nor bade the dark hearse wave its plume,
  Like torn branch from death's leafless tree
  In sorrow's pomp and pageantry,
  The heartless luxury of the tomb;
  But she remembers thee as one
  Long loved, and for a season gone;
  For thee her poet's lyre is wreathed,
  Her marble wrought, her music breathed;
  For thee she rings the birthday bells;
  Of thee her babes' first lisping tells;
  For thine her evening prayer is said,
  At palace couch and cottage bed;
  Her soldier, closing with the foe,
  Gives for thy sake a deadlier blow;
  His plighted maiden, when she fears
  For him, the joy of her young years,
  Thinks of thy fate and checks her tears.
    And she, the mother of thy boys,
  Though in her eye and faded cheek
  Is read the grief she will not speak,
    The memory of her buried joys,
  And even she who gave thee birth,
  Will by their pilgrim-circled hearth
    Talk of thy doom without a sigh:
  For thou art Freedom's now and Fame's,
  One of the few, the immortal names,
    That were not born to die.



  ON THE DEATH OF JOSEPH RODMAN DRAKE.

  Green be the turf above thee,
    Friend of my better days!
  None knew thee but to love thee,
    Nor named thee but to praise.

  Tears fell, when thou wert dying,
    From eyes unused to weep,
  And long where thou art lying
    Will tears the cold turf steep.

  When hearts, whose truth was proven
    Like thine, are laid in earth,
  There should a wreath be woven
    To tell the world their worth;

  And I, who woke each morrow
    To clasp thy hand in mine,
  Who shared thy joy and sorrow,
    Whose weal and woe were thine--

  It should be mine to braid it
    Around thy faded brow;
  But I've in vain essayed it,
    And feel I cannot now.

  While memory bids me weep thee,
    Nor thoughts nor words are free,
  The grief is fixed too deeply
    That mourns a man like thee.




CHARLES FARRAR BROWNE.

[From _Lecture on the Mormons_.]

Brother Kimball is a gay and festive cuss, of some seventy summers, or
some'er's there about.  He has one thousand head of cattle and a
hundred head of wives.  He says they are awful eaters.

Mr. Kimball had a son, a lovely young man, who was married to ten
interesting wives.  But one day while he was absent from home these ten
wives went out walking with a handsome young man, which so enraged Mr.
Kimball's son--which made Mr. Kimball'a son so jealous--that he shot
himself with a horse-pistol.

The doctor who attended him--a very scientific man--informed me that
the bullet entered the parallelogram of his diaphragmatic thorax,
superinducing hemorrhage in the outer cuticle of his basilicon
thaumaturgist.  It killed him.  I should have thought it would.

(_Soft Music_.)

I hope this sad end will be a warning to all young wives who go out
walking with handsome young men.  Mr. Kimball's son is now no more.  He
sleeps beneath the cypress, the myrtle, and the willow.  The music is a
dirge by the eminent pianist for Mr. Kimball's son.  He died by request.

I regret to say that efforts were made to make a Mormon of me while I
was in Utah.

It was leap-year when I was there, and seventeen young widows, the
wives of a deceased Mormon, offered me their hearts and hands.  I
called on them one day, and, taking their soft white hands in mine,
which made eighteen hands altogether, I found them in tears, and I
said, "Why is this thus?  What is the reason of this thusness?"

They hove a sigh--seventeen sighs of different size.  They said:

"O, soon thou wilt be gonested away!"

I told them that when I got ready to leave a place I wentested.

They said, "Doth not like us?"

I said, "I doth--I doth."

I also said, "I hope your intentions are honorable, as I am a lone
child, my parents being far--far away."

Then they said, "Wilt not marry us?"

I said, "O, no, it cannot was!"

Again they asked me to marry them, and again I declined, when they
cried,

"O, cruel man! this is too much!  O, too much!"

I told them that it was on account of the muchness that I
declined. . . .

(_Pointing to Panorama_)

A more cheerful view of the desert.

The wild snow-storms have left us and we have thrown our wolf-skin
overcoats aside.  Certain tribes of far-western Indians bury their
distinguished dead by placing them high in air and covering them with
valuable furs.  That is a very fair representation of those mid-air
tombs.  Those animals are horses.  I know they are, because my artist
says so.  I had the picture two years before I discovered the fact.
The artist came to me about six months ago and said, "It is useless to
disguise it from you any longer, they are horses."

It was while crossing this desert that I was surrounded by a band of
Ute Indians.  They were splendidly mounted.  They were dressed in
beaver-skins, and they were armed with rifles, knives, and pistols.

What could I do?  What could a poor old orphan do?  I'm a brave man.
The day before the battle of Bull's Run I stood in the highway while
the bullets--those dreadful messengers of death--were passing all
around me thickly--in wagons--on their way to the battle-field.  But
there were too many of these Injuns.  There were forty of them, and
only one of me, and so I said:

"Great chief, I surrender."

His name was Wocky-bocky.  He dismounted and approached me.  I saw his
tomahawk glisten in the morning sunlight.  Fire was in his eye.
Wocky-bocky came very close

(_Pointing to Panorama_)

to me and seized me by the hair of my head.  He mingled his swarthy
fingers with my golden tresses, and he rubbed his dreadful tomahawk
across my lily-white face.  He said:

"Torsha arrah darrah mishky bookshean!"

I told him he was right.

Wocky-bocky again rubbed his tomahawk across my face, and said:

"Wink-ho-loo-boo!"

Says I, "Mr. Wocky-bocky," says I, "Wocky, I have thought so for years,
and so's all our family."

He told me I must go to the tent of the Strong Heart and eat raw dog.
It don't agree with mo.  I prefer simple food.  I prefer pork-pie,
because then I know what I'm eating.  But as raw dog was all they
proposed to give to me I had to eat it or starve.  So at the expiration
of two days I seized a tin plate and went to the chief's daughter, and
I said to her in a silvery voice--in a kind of German-silvery voice--I
said:

"Sweet child of the forest, the pale-face wants his dog."

There was nothing but his paws.  I had paused too long--which reminds
me that time passes--a way which time has.  I was told in my youth to
seize opportunity.  I once tried to seize one.  He was rich; he had
diamonds on.  As I seized him he knocked me down.  Since then I have
learned that he who seizes opportunity sees the penitentiary.




SAMUEL LANGHORNE CLEMENS.

THE JUMPING FROG OF CALAVERAS COUNTY.

"Well, there was a feller here once by the name of Jim Smiley in the
winter of '49, or may be it was the spring of '50--I don't recollect
exactly, somehow, though what makes me think it was one or the other is
because I remember the big flume warn't finished when he first come to
the camp.  But any way, he was the curiousest man about, always betting
on anything that turned up you ever see, if he could get any body to
bet on the other side; and if he couldn't he'd change sides.  Any way
that suited the other side would suit _him_--any way just so's he got a
bet _he_ was satisfied.  But still he was lucky, uncommon lucky; he
most always came out winner.  He was always ready and laying for a
chance.  There couldn't be no solit'ry thing mentioned but that
feller'd offer to bet on it and take any side you please, as I was just
telling you.  If there was a horse-race you'd find him flush or you'd
find him busted at the end of it.  If there was a dog-fight, he'd bet
on it; if there was a cat-fight, he'd bet on it; if there was a
chicken-fight, he'd bet on it.  Why, if there was two birds setting on
a fence, he would bet you which one would fly first.  Or if there was a
camp-meeting, he would be there reg'lar to bet on Parson Walker, which
he judged to be the best exhorter about here, and so he was, too, and a
good man.  If he even see a straddle-bug start to go anywheres he would
bet you how long it would take him to get to--to wherever he was going
to; and if you took him up he would follow that straddle-bug to Mexico
but what he would find out where he was bound for and how long he was
on the road.  Lots of the boys here has seen that Smiley, and can tell
you about him.  Why, it never made no difference to _him_, he'd bet
_any_ thing--the dangdest feller.  Parson Walker's wife laid very sick
once for a good while, and it seemed as if they warn't going to save
her; but one morning he come in and Smiley up and asked him how she
was, and he said she was consid'able better--thank the Lord for his
inf'nit mercy!--and coming on so smart that, with the blessing of
Providence, she'd get well yet; and Smiley, before he thought, says,
'Well, I'll resk two-and-a-half she don't, any way.'"



"Well, this yer Smiley had rat-terriers, and chicken-cocks, and
tom-cats, and all them kind of things till you couldn't rest, and you
couldn't fetch nothing for him to bet on but he'd match you.  He
ketched a frog one day and look him home, and said he cal'lated to
educate him, and so he never done nothing for three months but set in
his back-yard and learn that frog to jump.  And you bet you he _did_
learn him, too.  He'd give him a little punch behind, and the next
minute you'd see that frog whirling in the air like a doughnut--see him
turn one summerset, or may be a couple, if he got a good start, and
come down flat-footed and all right, like a cat.  He got him up so in
the matter of ketching flies, and kep' him in practice so constant,
that he'd nail a fly every time as fur as he could see him.  Smiley
said all a frog wanted was education and he could do 'most any thing,
and I believe him.  Why, I've seen him set Dan'l Webster down here on
this floor--Dan'l Webster was the name of the frog--and sing out,
'Flies, Dan'l, flies!' and quicker'n you could wink he'd spring
straight up and snake a fly off'n the counter there and flop down on
the floor ag'in as solid as a gob of mud, and fall to scratching the
side of his head with his hind foot as indifferent as if he hadn't no
idea he'd been doin' any more'n any frog might do.  You never see a
frog so modest and straightfor'ard as he was, for all he was so gifted.
And when it come to fair and square jumping on a dead level he could
get over more ground at one straddle than any animal of his breed you
ever see.  Jumping on a dead level was his strong suit, you understand,
and when it come to that, Smiley would ante up money on him, as long as
he had a red.  Smiley was monstrous proud of his frog, and well he
might be, for fellers that had traveled and been every-wheres all said
he laid over any frog that ever _they_ see.

"Well, Smiley kep' the beast in a little lattice-box, and he used to
fetch him down-town sometimes and lay for a bet.  One day a feller--a
stranger in the camp he was--come acrost him with his box and says:

"'What might it be that you've got in the box?'

"And Smiley says, sorter indifferent like, 'It might be a parrot, or it
might be a canary, may be, but it ain't--it's only just a frog.'

"And the feller took it, and looked at it careful, and turned it round
this way and that, and says, 'H'm--so 'tis.  Well, what's _he_ good
for?'

"'Well,' Smiley says, easy and careless, 'he's good enough for _one_
thing, I should judge--he can outjump any frog in Calaveras County.'

"The feller took the box again and took another long, particular look
and give it back to Smiley, and says, very deliberate; 'Well,' he says,
'I don't see no p'ints about that frog that's any better'n any other
frog.'

"'May be you don't,' Smiley says.  'May be you understand frogs, and
may be you don't understand 'em; may be you've had experience, and may
be you aint only a amature, as it were.  Anyways, I've got my opinion,
and I'll resk forty dollars that he can outjump any frog in Calaveras
County.'

"And the feller studied a minute, and then says, kinder sad like,

"'Well, I'm only a stranger-here, and I aint got no frog; but if I had
a frog I'd bet you!'

"And then Smiley says, 'That's all right--that's all right; if you'll
hold my box a minute I'll go and get you a frog.'  And so the feller
took the box, and put up his forty dollars along with Smiley's, and set
down to wait.

"So he set there a good while, thinking and thinking to hisself; and
then he got the frog out and pried his mouth open, and took a teaspoon
and filled him full of quail-shot--filled him pretty near up to his
chin--and set him on the floor.  Smiley, he went to the swamp and
slopped around in the mud for a long time, and finally he ketched a
frog, and fetched him in, and give him to this feller, and says, 'Now,
if you're ready, set him along-side of Dan'l, with his forepaws just
even with Dan'l, and I'll give the word.'  Then he says,
'One--two--three--_git_!' and him and the feller touched up the frogs
from behind, and the new frog hopped off lively, but Dan'l give a
heave, and hysted up his shoulders--so--like a Frenchman, but it warn't
no use--he couldn't budge; he was planted as solid as a church, and
wouldn't no more stir than if he was anchored out.  Smiley was a good
deal surprised, and he was disgusted too, but he didn't have no idea
what the matter was, of course.

"The feller took the money and started away; but when he was going out
at the door he sorter jerked his thumb over his shoulder--so--at Dan'l,
and says again, very deliberate, 'Well,' he says, 'I don't see no
p'ints about that frog that's any better'n any other frog.'

"Smiley, he stood scratching his head and looking down at Dan'l a long
time; and at last he says, 'I do wonder what in the nation that frog
throwed off for.  I wonder if there aint something the matter with
him--he 'pears to look mighty baggy, somehow.'  And he ketched Dan'l by
the nap of the neck, and hefted him, and says, 'Why, blame my cats if
he don't weigh five pound!' and turned him upside down, and he belched
out a double handful of shot.  And then he see how it was, and he was
the maddest man.  He set the frog down and took out after the feller,
but he never ketched him."




  INDEX.


  _An Index to the American Authors and Writings
  and the Principal American Periodicals mentioned
  in this Volume_.


  Abraham Lincoln, 143.
  Adams and Liberty, 60.
  Adams, John, 49.
  Adams, J. Q., 72, 85.
  Adams, Samuel, 43, 44.
  After-Dinner Poem, 135.
  After the Funeral, 142.
  Age of Reason, The, 51-53, 60.
  Ages, The, 153.
  Alcott, A. B., 93, 104.
  Aldrich, T. B., 170, 197.
  Algerine Captive, The, 63.
  Algic Researches, 130.
  Alhambra, The, 74.
  All Quiet Along the Potomac, 184.
  Alnwick Castle, 81.
  Alsop, Richard, 55, 56.
  American, The, 206.
  American Civil War, The, 182.
  American Conflict, The, 182.
  American Flag, The, 80.
  American Note-Books, 95, 114, 116, 119, 128.
  American Scholar, The, 93, 104, 123.
  Ames, Fisher, 50, 51.
  Among My Books, 143.
  Anabel Lee, 165.
  Anarchiad, The, 55.
  Army Life in a Black Regiment, 186.
  Army of the Potomac, The, 183.
  Art of Book-Making, The, 77.
  "Artemus Ward," 188, 189-193, 194.
  Arthur Mervyn, 63, 65.
  At Teague Poteet's, 203.
  Atlantic Monthly, The, 136, 143, 150, 151, 185, 186, 195, 197, 208.
  Atlantis, 169.
  Auf Wiedersehen, 142.
  Autobiography, Franklin's, 28, 38, 39, 40, 73.
  Autocrat of the Breakfast Table, The, 132, 136, 137.
  Autumn, 125.

  Backwoodsman, The, 72.
  Ballad of the Oysterman, 133.
  Ballads and Other Poems, 126.
  Bancroft, George, 123, 138, 145, 146.
  Barbara Frietchie, 158.
  Barlow, Joel, 51, 52, 55-58.
  Battle Hymn of the Republic, 183.
  Battle of the Kegs, 59.
  Battlefield, The, 154.
  Bay Fight, The, 184.
  Bay Psalm Book, The, 21.
  Bedouin Song, 172.
  Beecher, H. W., 175, 176.
  Beecher, Lyman, 98, 175.
  Beers, Mrs. E. L., 184.
  Beleaguered City, The, 126, 129.
  Belfry of Bruges, The, 126, 127.
  Beverly, Robert, 17.
  Biglow Papers, The, 139-142, 159, 188.
  "Bill Nye," 193.
  Black Cat, The, 166.
  Black Fox of Salmon River, The, 157.
  Blair, James, 14.
  Blithedale Romance, The, 95, 118, 172, 209.
  Bloody Tenent of Persecution, The, 22, 23.
  Blue and the Gray, The, 184.
  Boker, G. H., 197.
  Bostonians, The, 209.
  Boys, The, 134.
  Bracebridge Hall, 75, 76, 187.
  Bradford's Journal, 21, 24, 25, 31, 33.
  Brahma, 105, 109.
  Brainard, J. G. C., 156, 157, 175.
  Brick Moon, The, 196.
  Bridal of Pennacook, The, 157, 159.
  Bridge, The, 129.
  Broken Heart, The, 77.
  Brown, C. B., 63-65.
  Browne, C. F. (See "Artemus Ward.")
  Brownell, H. H., 184, 185.
  Bryant, W. C., 68, 80, 124, 125, 133, 151-155, 162, 169.
  Buccaneer, The, 89.
  Building of the Ship, The, 127.
  Bundle of Letters, A, 206.
  Burnett, Mrs. F. H., 205.
  Bushnell, Horace, 99.
  Busy-Body, The, 38, 53, 74.
  Butler, W. A., 170.
  Byrd, Wm., 16, 17.

  Cable, G. W., 203.
  Calhoun, J. C., 46, 86.
  Cambridge Thirty Years Ago, 123.
  Cape Cod, 111.
  Capture of Fugitive Slaves, 140.
  Cary, Alice, 173.
  Cary, Phoebe, 173.
  Cask of Amontillado, The, 166.
  Cassandra Southwick, 159.
  Cathedral, The, 144.
  Cecil Dreeme, 185.
  Century Magazine, The, 150, 183, 197.
  Chambered Nautilus, The, 135.
  Chance Acquaintance, A, 208.
  Channing, W. E., 73, 90-92, 93, 97-100, 106.
  Channing, W. E., Jr., 106, 110, 119.
  Channing, W. H., 106.
  Chapel of the Hermits, The, 158.
  Character of Milton, The, 91.
  Charleston, 184.
  Children of Adam, 177.
  Choate, Rufus, 89, 90.
  Christian Examiner, The, 91.
  Circular Letters, by Otis and Quincy, 44.
  City in the Sea, The, 162.
  Clara Howard, 63.
  Clari, 84.
  Clarke, J. F., 105, 106.
  Clay, Henry, 86.
  Clemens, S. L. (See "Mark Twain.")
  Columbiad, The, 56, 57.
  Common Sense, 51.
  Companions of Columbus, 74.
  Condensed Novels, 200.
  Conduct of Life, The, 107.
  Confederate States of America, The, 182.
  Conquest of Canaan, 57.
  Conquest of Granada, 73, 74, 78.
  Conquest of Mexico, 145.
  Conquest of Peru, 145.
  Conspiracy of Pontiac, The, 147.
  Constitution and the Union, The, 87.
  Constitution of the United States, The, 45, 85.
  Contentment, 85.
  Contrast, The, 63.
  Conversations on the Gospels, 104.
  Conversations on Some of the Old Poets, 143.
  Cooke, J. E., 169.
  Cooper, J. F., 61, 71, 73, 81-84, 89, 107, 130, 147, 168, 204.
  Coral Grove, The, 175.
  Cotton, John, 22, 23, 28, 29.
  Count Frontenac and New France, 147.
  Courtin', The, 141, 188.
  Courtship of Miles Standish, The, 26.
  Cow Chase, The, 59.
  Cranch, C.P., 95, 106.
  Crime against Kansas, The, 149
  Crisis, The, 51.
  Croaker Papers, The, 81.
  Culprit Fay, The, 80.
  Curtis, G. W., 95, 197.

  Daisy Miller, 206.
  Dana, C. A., 95, 106, 151.
  Dana, R. H., 68, 89.
  Danbury News Man, 59, 189.
  Dante, Longfellow's, 131.
  Davis, Jefferson, 182.
  Day is Done, The, 128.
  Day of Doom, The, 34.
  Death of the Flowers, The, 153, 154.
  Declaration of Independence, The, 45, 59, 85.
  Deerslayer, The, 83, 84.
  Democratic Vistas, 180.
  Derby, G. H., 190.
  Descent into the Maelstrom, 166.
  Deserted Road, The, 173.
  Dial, The, 93, 98, 105, 106.
  Dialogue Between Franklin and the Gout, 39.
  Diamond Lens, The, 186.
  Discourse of the Plantation of Virginia, A, 12.
  Dolph Heyliger, 75.
  Domain of Arnheim, The, 166.
  Dorchester Giant, The, 132.
  Drake, J. R., 80, 81, 89.
  Draper, J. W., 182.
  Dream Life, 175.
  Drifting, 173.
  Driving Home the Cows, 184.
  Drum Taps, 180.
  Dutchman's Fireside, The, 79.
  Dwight, J. S., 95, 100, 106.
  Dwight, Theodore, 55, 56.
  Dwight, Timothy, 55, 57, 58.

  Early Spring in Massachusetts, 111.
  Echo, The, 56.
  Echo Club, The, 172.
  Edgar Huntley, 63, 65.
  Edith Linsey, 170.
  Edwards, Jonathan, 35-37, 58, 91, 97, 99.
  Eggleston, Edward, 202.
  Elevator, The, 63, 210.
  Eliot, John, 21, 23.
  Elsie Venner, 137.
  Emerson, Charles, 106.
  Emerson, R. W., 88, 93, 96-113, 119, 122, 123,
      128, 129, 138, 151, 154, 160, 179.
  Endicott's Red Cross, 25, 118.
  English Note-Books, 119.
  English Traits, 103, 109.
  Ephemerae, 176.
  Epilogue to Cato, 60.
  Eternal Goodness, 158.
  Ethan Brand, 117.
  Europeans, The, 206, 207.
  Evangeline, 129, 130.
  Evening Wind, The, 153.
  Everett, Edward, 89, 90, 133, 138, 189.
  Excelsior, 127.
  Excursions, 111.
  Expediency of the Federal Constitution, 48.
  Eyes and Ears, 176.

  F. Smith, 170.
  Fable for Critics, A, 105, 142, 144.
  Facts in the case of M. Valdemar, The, 164.
  Fall of the House of Usher, The, 166.
  Familists' Hymn, The, 25.
  Fanshawe, 116.
  Farewell Address, Washington's, 49.
  Faust, Taylor's, 172.
  Federalist, The, 48, 49.
  Ferdinand and Isabella, 123, 145.
  Final Judgment, The, 35.
  Finch, F. M., 184.
  Fire of Driftwood, The, 128.
  Fireside Travels, 123.
  Fitz Adam's Story, 141.
  Flint, Timothy, 72.
  Flood of Years, The, 155.
  Footpath, The, 142.
  Footsteps of Angels, 126.
  Foregone Conclusion, A, 207.
  Forest Hymn, 152.
  Fortune of the Republic, 107.
  Foster, S. C., 173, 174.
  France and England in North America, 147.
  Franklin, Ben., 28, 37, 40, 52, 53, 73, 74.
  Freedom of the Will, 35.
  French Poets and Novelists, 205.
  Freneau, Philip, 60-62.
  Fuller, Margaret, 93, 95, 99, 100, 105, 106, 109, 119, 131.

  Galaxy Magazine, The, 197.
  Garrison, W. L., 26, 87, 147, 156, 157, 174.
  Garrison of Cape Ann, The, 32.
  Geography of the Mississippi Valley, 72.
  Georgia Spec, The, 63.
  Ghost Ball at Congress Hall, The, 170.
  Give Me the Old, 170.
  Godey's Lady's Book, 150, 160.
  Godfrey, Thomas, 63.
  Gold Bug, The, 163.
  Golden Legend, The, 130.
  Good News from Virginia, 18.
  Good Word for Winter, A, 143.
  Goodrich, S. G., 69, 72, 116.
  Graham's Magazine, 150, 160, 162, 164, 171.
  Grandfather's Chair, 32.
  Grandissimes, The, 203.
  Greeley, Horace, 95, 171, 182.
  Green River, 153.
  Greene, A. G., 85.
  Greenfleld Hill, 58.
  Guardian Angel, The, 137, 138.

  Hail, Columbia! 59, 60, 80.
  Hale, E. E., 122, 164, 195, 196.
  Halleck, F. G., 80, 81, 89, 109.
  Halpine, C. G., 186.
  Hamilton, Alexander, 48, 49, 51, 87.
  Hannah Thurston, 172.
  Hans Breitmann Ballads, 202.
  Hans Pfaall, 163.
  Harbinger, The, 94, 95.
  Harper's Monthly Magazine, 150, 151, 197.
  Harris, J. C., 202.
  Harte, F. B., 193, 198-202.
  Hasty Pudding, 57.
  Haunted Palace, The, 165.
  Hawthorne, Julian, 118.
  Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 9, 18, 25, 32, 56, 63,
     93, 95, 105, 106, 108, 114-120, 124, 128,
     129, 137, 138, 150, 160, 166, 172, 182, 185,
     187, 188, 204, 205, 209.
  Hay, John, 201, 202.
  Health, A, 85.
  Heathen Chinee, The, 200.
  Hedge, F. H., 95.
  Height of the Ridiculous, The, 132.
  Henry, Patrick, 43, 44, 48.
  Hiawatha, 61, 130.
  Higginson, T. W., 75, 95, 105, 186.
  His Level Best, 195.
  History of New England, Winthrop's, 24-27.
  History of Plymouth Plantation, Bradford's, 24, 25.
  History of the Dividing Line, 16, 17.
  History of the United Netherlands, 146.
  History of the United States, Bancroft's, 123, 146;
      Higginson's, 75.
  History of Virginia, Beverly's, 17; Smith's, 15; Stith's, 17.
  Hoffman, C. F., 170.
  Holland, J. G., 197.
  Holmes, O. W., 29, 85, 93, 94, 122, 123, 131-138,
      141, 151, 153, 160, 183, 186, 187, 188.
  Home, Sweet Home, 84.
  Homesick in Heaven, 135.
  Hooker, Thomas, 28, 30, 31, 99.
  Hoosier Schoolmaster, The, 202.
  Hopkins, Lemuel, 55.
  Hopkinson, Francis, 59.
  Hopkinson, Joseph, 59.
  Horse-Shoe Robinson, 168.
  House of the Seven Gables, The, 115, 118.
  Howe, Mrs. J. W., 183.
  Howells, W. D., 63, 203-205, 207-210.
  Humphreys, David, 55, 56.
  Hymn at the Completion of Concord Monument, 110.
  Hymn of the Moravian Nuns, 125.
  Hymn to the Night, 126.
  Hymn to the North Star, 152.
  Hyperion, 131.

  Ichabod, 158.
  If, Yes, and Perhaps, 195.
  Iliad, Bryant's, 155.
  Illustrious Providences, 29.
  In the Tennessee Mountains, 203.
  In the Twilight, 142.
  In War Time, 157.
  Independent, The, 176.
  Indian Bible, Eliot's, 21.
  Indian Burying-Ground, The, 61.
  Indian Student, The, 61.
  Indian Summer, 208, 209.
  Ingham Papers, 195.
  Inklings of Adventure, 169.
  Innocents Abroad, 193, 194.
  International Episode, An, 206, 207.
  Irving, Washington, 42, 53, 68, 71, 73-82,
      89, 117, 138, 187, 188, 194, 206.
  Israfel, 162.
  Italian Journeys, 208.
  Italian Note-Books, 119.

  James, Henry, 185, 203-210.
  Jane Talbot, 63.
  Jay, John, 48, 49.
  Jefferson, Thomas, 14, 45-48, 50, 52, 61.
  Jesuits in North America, The, 147.
  Jim, 201.
  Jim Bludso, 201.
  John Brown's Body, 59, 183.
  John Godfrey's Fortune, 172.
  "John Phoenix," 190.
  John Underhill, 25.
  Jonathan to John, 141.
  "Josh Billings," 193.
  Journey to the Land of Eden, A, 17.
  Judd, Sylvester, 144.
  Jumping Frog, The, 193.
  June, 153, 154.
  Justice and Expediency, 157.

  Kansas and Nebraska Bill, The, 149.
  Katie, 184.
  Kennedy, J. P., 168.
  Key into the Language of America, A, 23.
  Key, F. S., 60.
  Kidd, the Pirate, 75.
  King's Missive, The, 159.
  Knickerbocker Magazine, The, 75, 79, 116, 147, 160.
  Knickerbocker's History of New York, 68, 73, 75, 76, 187.

  Lady of the Aroostook, The, 207, 209.
  Lanier, Sidney, 202.
  La Salle and the Discovery of the Great West, 147.
  Last Leaf, The, 85, 133.
  Last of the Mohicans, The, 83, 84.
  Last of the Valerii, The, 205.
  Latest Form of Infidelity, The, 99.
  Laus Deo, 158.
  Leatherstocking Tales, 61, 83, 84.
  Leaves of Grass, 176, 177, 179.
  Lecture on the Mormons, 190-192.
  Legend of Brittany, 138.
  Legend of Sleepy Hollow, 75, 77.
  Legends of New England, 156, 157.
  Legends of the Province House, 118.
  Leland, C. G., 202.
  Letter on Whitewashing, 59.
  Letters and Social Aims, 107.
  Letters from Under a Bridge, 169, 170.
  Letters of a Traveler, 155.
  Liberator, The, 86, 147, 174.
  Life of Columbus, Irving's, 74, 78.
  Life of Goldsmith, 79.
  Life of John of Barneveld, 146.
  Life of Washington, Irving's, 78.
  Ligeia, 165.
  Light of Stars, The, 126.
  Lincoln, Abraham, 51, 133, 180, 186, 189.
  Lines on Leaving Europe, 170.
  Lippincott's Magazine, 197.
  Literary Recreations, 160.
  Literati of New York, 160.
  Little Breeches, 201.
  Livingston, William, 53.
  Locke, David R., 193.
  Longfellow, H. W., 18, 25, 26, 61, 115, 116,
      123-131, 133, 138, 139, 141, 142, 151, 159,
      160, 162, 167, 172, 179, 197.
  Lost Arts, 148.
  Lost Cause, The, 182.
  Lowell, J. R., 12, 93, 96, 104, 105, 107, 122,
      123, 138-144, 151, 154, 159, 160, 172, 174,
      183, 187, 188, 197.
  Luck of Roaring Camp, The, 199.
  Lunatic's Skate, The, 170.
  Lyrics of a Day, 184.

  MacFingal, 54, 55, 59, 73.
  Madison, James, 48, 49, 61.
  Madonna of the Future, The, 205.
  Magnalia Christi Americana, 19, 28-34,73.
  Mahomet and his Successors, 78.
  Maine Woods, The, 111.
  "Major Jack Downing," 189.
  Man of the Crowd, The, 166.
  Man-of-War Bird, The, 179.
  Man Without a Country, The, 164, 195.
  Marble Faun, The, 115, 117, 118, 119.
  Marco Bozzaris, 81.
  Margaret, 144.
  "Mark Twain," 188, 189, 193, 194.
  Maryland, My Maryland, 183.
  Masque of the Gods, The, 171.
  Masque of the Red Death, 166.
  Mather, Cotton, 19, 20, 21, 23, 26, 28-34, 36, 73.
  Mather, Increase, 29, 31.
  Maud Muller, 158.
  May-Day, 107.
  Maypole of Merrymount, The, 25.
  Memoranda of the Civil War, 180.
  Memorial History of Boston, 159.
  Men Naturally God's Enemies, 35.
  Merry Mount, 145.
  Messenger, R. H., 170.
  Miggles, 200.
  "Miles O'Reilly," 186.
  Minister's Black Veil, The, 117.
  Minister's Wooing, The, 175.
  Mitchell, D. G., 175.
  Mocking Bird, The, 202.
  Modern Instance, A, 208, 209.
  Modern Learning, 59.
  Modest Request, A, 134.
  Money Diggers, The, 75.
  Montcalm and Wolfe, 147.
  Monterey, 170.
  Moore, C. C., 170.
  Moore, Frank, 183.
  Moral Argument Against Calvinism, The, 90.
  Morris, G. P., 170.
  Morton's Hope, 145.
  Mosses from an Old Manse, 114, 117.
  Motley, J. L., 123, 138, 145, 146.
  Mount Vernon, 56.
  "Mrs. Partington," 189.
  MS. Found In a Bottle, 168.
  Murder of Lovejoy, The, 123.
  Murders in the Rue Morgue, The, 163.
  Murfree, Mary N., 203.
  Music-Grinders, The, 133.
  My Aunt, 133.
  My Captain, 180.
  My Double and How He Undid Me, 196.
  My Garden Acquaintance, 143.
  My Lite is Like the Summer Rose, 85.
  My Old Kentucky Home, 173.
  My Search for the Captain, 186.
  My Study Windows, 143.
  My Wife and I, 175.
  Mystery of Gilgal, The, 201.
  Mystery of Marie Roget, The, 163.

  Narrative of A. Gordon Pym, The, 166.
  Nathaniel Hawthorne and His Wife, 118.
  Nature, 93, 101, 103, 107.
  Naval History of the United States, 81.
  Nearer Home, 173.
  Negro Melodies, 173.
  Nelly was a Lady, 173.
  New England Tragedies, 25.
  New England Two Centuries Ago, 141, 143.
  New System of English Grammar, A, 190.
  New York Evening Post, The, 152, 155.
  New York Tribune, The, 95, 171.
  Newell, R. H., 193.
  North American Review, The, 89, 116, 124, 143, 151, 152.
  Norton, Andrews, 99.
  Notes on Virginia, 47.
  Nothing to Wear, 170.
  Nux Postcoenatica, 134.

  O, Susanna, 173.
  O'Brien, F. J., 185.
  Observations on the Boston Port Bill, 44.
  Occultation of Orion, The, 127, 139.
  Ode at the Harvard Commemoration, 142.
  Ode for a Social Meeting, 134.
  Ode to Freedom, 140.
  Odyssey, Bryant's, 155.
  Old Clock on the Stairs, The, 127.
  Old Creole Days, 203.
  Old Folks at Home, 173.
  Old Grimes, 85.
  Old Ironsides, 132.
  Old Oaken Bucket, The, 84.
  Old Pennsylvania Farmer, The, 171.
  Old Régime in Canada, The, 147.
  Old Sergeant, The, 184.
  On a Certain Condescension in Foreigners, 141.
  One Hoss Shay, The, 135, 188.
  Oregon Trail, The, 147.
  Ormond, 63, 64.
  "Orpheus C. Kerr," 193.
  Orphic Sayings, 105.
  Osgood, Mrs. K. P., 184.
  Otis, James, 43-45.
  Our Master, 158.
  Our Old Home, 119.
  Out of the Question, 209.
  Outcasts of Poker Flat, The, 199, 200.
  Outre-Mer, 124.
  Overland Monthly, The, 199.
  Over-Soul, The, 105.

  Paine, R. T., 60.
  Paine, Tom, 51-53.
  Panorama, The, 157.
  Paper, 39.
  Parker, Theodore, 97-100, 106.
  Parkman, Francis, 123, 145, 146, 147.
  Parlor Car, The, 210.
  Partisan, The, 168.
  Passionate Pilgrim, A, 305.
  Pathfinder, The, 83.
  Paulding, J. K., 72, 74, 79,80.
  Payne, J. H., 84.
  Pearl of Orr's Island, The, 175.
  Pencilings by the Way, 169.
  Pension Beaurepas, The, 206.
  Percival, J. G., 175.
  Percy, George, 12, 19.
  "Peter Parley," 69.
  "Petroleum V. Nasby," 193.
  Phenomena Quaedam Apocalyptica, 33.
  Phillips, Wendell, 122, 123, 147, 148, 157,
  Philosophic Solitude, 53.
  Philosophy of Composition, 163.
  Phoenixiana, 189.
  Piatt, J. J., 184, 202, 208.
  Pictures of Memory, 173.
  Pilot, The, 84.
  Pink and White Tyranny, 175.
  Pinkney, E. C., 85.
  Pioneer, The, 138.
  Pioneers, The, 71, 83.
  Pioneers of France in the New World, 147.
  Plain Language from Truthful James, 200
  Planting of the Apple-Tree, The, 155.
  Plato, Emerson on, 108.
  Poe, E. A., 63, 80, 85, 106, 116, 117, 130, 138,
      150, 153, 160-169, 182, 186, 196.
  Poems of the Orient, 171.
  Poems of Two Friends, 208.
  Poems on Slavery, 128.
  Poet at the Breakfast Table, The, 136.
  Poetic Principle, The, 164.
  Poetry: A Metrical Essay, 133.
  Poet's Hope, A, 105.
  Political Green House, The, 56.
  Pollard, E. A., 182.
  Pons, Maximus, 173.
  Poor Richard's Almanac, 39, 40.
  Portraits of Places, 207.
  Prairie, The, 83.
  Prentice, G. D., 156, 189.
  Prescott, W. H., 123, 145, 146, 151, 182.
  Present Crisis, The, 140.
  Pride of the Village, The, 77.
  Prince Deukalion, 171.
  Prince of Parthia, The, 63.
  Problem, The, 110.
  Professor at the Breakfast Table, The, 136, 137.
  Progress to the Mines, A, 17.
  Prologue, The, 135.
  Prophecy of Samuel Sewell, The, 33.
  Prophet, The, 171.
  Psalm of Life, The, 126, 127.
  Purloined Letter, The, 163.
  Putnam's Monthly, 123, 197.

  Quaker Widow, The, 171.
  Quincy, Josiah, 43-45.

  Rag Man and Rag Woman, The, 196.
  Randall, J. R., 183.
  Randolph, John, 46.
  Raven, The, 163, 165.
  Read, T. B., 173.
  Reaper and the Flowers, The, 126.
  Rebellion Record, The, 183.
  Recollections of a Life-time, 69, 72.
  Red Rover, The, 84.
  Register, The, 210.
  Remarks on Associations, 91.
  Remarks on National Literature, 91, 100.
  Reply to Hayne, Webster's, 87.
  Representative Men, 102, 107, 109.
  Resignation, 128.
  Reveries of a Bachelor, 175.
  Rhoecus, 138.
  Rhymes of Travel, 171.
  Riding to Vote, 184.
  Rights of the British Colonies, 45.
  Ripley, George, 95, 99, 100, 106, 151.
  Rip Van Winkle, 75.
  Rip Van Winkle, M.D., 134.
  Rise and Fall of the Confederate States, 182.
  Rise and Fall of the Slave Power, 182.
  Rise of the Dutch Republic, 146.
  Rob of the Bowl, 168.
  Roderick Hudson, 206.
  Roughing It, 193, 194.

  Salmagundi, 74, 79, 155.
  Sandys, George, 16, 19.
  San Francisco, 198.
  Scarlet Letter, The, 35, 117, 118.
  School Days, 156.
  Schoolcraft, H. R., 130.
  Science of English Verse, 202.
  Scribner's Monthly, 197.
  Scripture Poems, 169.
  Seaside and Fireside, 126, 127.
  Seaweed, 127, 129.
  Selling of Joseph, The, 33.
  September Gale, The, 133.
  Sewall, J, M., 60.
  Sewall, Samuel, 32, 33.
  Shakespeare, Ode, 89.
  Shaw, H. W., 193.
  Shepherd of King Admetus, The, 138.
  Sheridan's Ride, 173.
  Shillaber, B. P., 189.
  Sigourney, Mrs. L. H., 107, 175.
  Silas, Lapham, 209.
  Simms, W. G., 168.
  Simple Cobbler of Agawam, The, 20.
  Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God, 35.
  Skeleton in Armor, The, 127.
  Skeleton in the Closet, The, 196.
  Sketch Book, The, 73-75, 77.
  Skipper Ireson's Ride, 158.
  Sleeper, The, 165.
  Sleeping Car, The, 63.
  Smith, Elihu, 55.
  Smith, John, 11, 12, 15, 19, 24.
  Smith, Seba, 189.
  Snow-Bound, 159.
  Society and Solitude, 107.
  Song for a Temperance Dinner, 134.
  Song of the Chattahoochie, 202.
  Southern Literary Messenger, The, 160, 162.
  Southern Passages and Pictures, 169.
  Sparkling and Bright, 170.
  Specimen Days, 180.
  Specimens of Foreign Standard Literature, 100.
  Sphinx, The, 135.
  Sprague, Charles, 89.
  Spring, 170.
  Spy, The, 83.
  Squibob Papers, 180.
  Star Papers, 176.
  Star-Spangled Banner, The, 60, 80.
  Stedman, E. C., 197.
  Stephens, A. H., 182.
  Stith, William, 17.
  Stoddard, R. H., 170, 197.
  Story of Kennett, The, 172.
  Stowe, Mrs. H. B., 174, 175.
  Strachey, William, 11.
  Stuart, Moses, 98.
  Suburban Sketches, 208.
  Sumner, Charles, 122, 132, 124, 142, 148, 157, 174.
  Supernaturalism in New England, 160.
  Swallow Barn, 168.
  Swinton, W., 183.
  Sybaris and Other Homes, 195.

  Tales of a Traveler, 75.
  Tales of a Wayside Inn, 159.
  Tales of the Glauber Spa, 155.
  Tales of the Grotesque and Arabesque, 166.
  Tamerlane, 161.
  Tanglewood Tales, 119.
  Taylor, Bayard, 170-173.
  Telling the Bees, 159.
  Ten Times One is Ten, 195.
  Tennessee's Partner, 200.
  Tent on the Beach, The, 159.
  Thanatopsis, 68, 80, 125, 152, 153, 155.
  Their Wedding Journey, 208.
  Theology, Dwight's, 58.
  Thirty Poems, 154.
  Thoreau, H. D., 93, 96, 106, 109, 110, 114,
      119, 122, 123, 125, 151, 179, 182.
  Timrod, Henry, 184.
  To a Waterfowl, 153.
  To Helen, 162.
  To M---- from Abroad, 170.
  To One in Paradise, 165.
  To Seneca Lake, 175.
  Tour on the Prairies, A, 71.
  Tramp Abroad, A, 193.
  Transcendentalist, The, 101, 102.
  Travels, Dwight's, 53.
  Treatise Concerning Religious Affections, 36.
  Triumph of Infidelity, 58.
  True Grandeur of Nations, The, 149.
  True Relation, Smith's, 15.
  True Repertory of the Wrack of Sir Thomas Gates, 11.
  Trumbull, John, 54, 55, 73.
  Twice-Told Tales, 115, 117, 118.
  Two Rivers, 112.
  Tyler, Royall, 63.

  Ulalume, 165.
  Uncle Ned, 173.
  Uncle Remus, 202.
  Uncle Tom's Cabin, 174.
  Under the Willows, 142.
  Undiscovered Country, The, 209.
  Unknown Dead, The, 184.
  Unseen Spirits, 170.

  Valley of Unrest, The, 162.
  Vanity Fair, 190.
  Vassall Morton, 145.
  Venetian Life, 208.
  Views Afoot, 171.
  Villa Franca, 142.
  Village Blacksmith, The, 127.
  Virginia Comedians, The, 196.
  Vision of Columbus, The, 56, 57.
  Vision of Sir Launfal, The, 140, 141.
  Visit from St. Nicholas, A, 170.
  Voices of Freedom, 157.
  Voices of the Night, 124, 126.
  Voluntaries, 110.
  Von Kempelen's Discovery, 154.

  Walden, 111.
  Wants of Man, The, 85.
  War Lyrics, 184.
  Ward, Nathaniel, 20.
  Ware, Henry, 99.
  Washers of the Shroud, The, 142.
  Washington, George, 49, 51.
  Washington as a Camp, 185.
  Washington Square, 185.
  'Way Down South, 173.
  Webster, Daniel, 73, 86-89, 90, 158, 187.
  Webster's Spelling-Book, 69.
  Week on the Concord and Merrimac Rivers, A, 111.
  Western Windows, 202.
  Westminster Abbey, 77.
  Westover MSS., The, 16.
  Westward Ho! 72.
  What Mr. Robinson thinks, 140.
  What was It?, 186.
  Whistle, The, 39.
  Whitaker, Alexander, 18.
  White, R. G., 197.
  Whitman, Walt, 126, 176-180, 183.
  Whittier, J. G., 18, 25, 26, 32, 33, 93, 133,
      138, 155-160, 167, 174, 175, 179, 183, 185, 197.
  Wieland, 63, 65.
  Wigglesworth, Michael, 34.
  Wild Honeysuckle, The, 61.
  Wilde, R. H., 84.
  William Wilson, 166.
  Williams, Roger, 22, 23.
  Willis, N. P., 71, 153, 169, 171, 176.
  Willson Forceythe, 184.
  Wilson, Henry, 182.
  Winter Evening Hymn to My Fire, 142,
  Winthrop, John, 12, 21, 23-28, 31, 33.
  Winthrop, Theodore, 184.
  Witchcraft, 143.
  Witch's Daughter, The, 157.
  Wolfert's Roost, 75.
  Wolfert Webber, 75.
  Woman in the Nineteenth Century, 105.
  Wonder Book, 119.
  Wonders of the Invisible World, 21, 32.
  Woods, Leonard, 98.
  Woods in Winter, 125.
  Woodman, Spare that Tree, 170.
  Woodworth, Samuel, 84.
  Woolman's Journal, 65, 66, 157.
  Wound-Dresser, The, 178.
  Wrath Upon the Wicked, 35.
  Wreck of the Hesperus, The, 127, 129.

  Yankee Doodle, 59.
  Yankee in Canada, 111.
  Year's Life, A, 138.
  Yemassee, The, 168.