THE

                            CREATION.

                                A

                      Pindaric Illustration
                               OF A

                              POEM,

                      Originally written by

                              MOSES,

                         On That SUBJECT.

                              WITH A

                       PREFACE to Mr. POPE,

                            CONCERNING

           The Sublimity of the Ancient HEBREW POETRY,
        and a material and obvious Defect in the ENGLISH.

                            _LONDON_:

 Printed for T. BICKERTON, at the _Crown_ in _Pater-noster-Row._

                           M. DCC. XX.

                       Price One Shilling.








                      _PREFACE to MR. POPE_

Sir,

About two Years ago, upon a slight Misapprehension of some
Expressions of yours, which my Resentment, or perhaps my Pride,
interpreted to the Disadvantage of a Poetical Trifle, I had then
newly publish'd, I suffer'd myself to be unreasonably
transported, so far, as to inscribe you an angry, and
inconsiderate Preface; without previous Examination into the
Justness of my Proceeding. I have lately had the Mortification to
learn from your own Hand that you were entirely guiltless of the
fact charg'd upon you; so that, in attempting to retaliate a
suppos'd Injury, I have done a real Injustice.

The only Thing which an honest Man ought to be more asham'd of
than his faults, is a Reluctance against confessing them. I have
already acknowledg'd mine to yourself: But no publick Guilt is
well aton'd, by a private Satisfaction; I therefore send you a
Duplicate of my Letter, by way of the World, that all, who
remember my Offence, may also witness my Repentance.

   Sir,

   I am under the greatest Confusion I ever felt in my Life, to
   find by your Letter, that I have been guilty of a Crime, which
   I can never forgive Myself, were it for no other Reason, than
   that You have forgiven it. I might have learnt from your
   Writings the Extent of your Soul, and shou'd have concluded it
   impossible for the Author of those elevated Sentiments, to sink
   beneath them in his Practice.

   You are generously moderate, when you mitigate my Guilt, and
   miscall it a Credulity; 'twas a passionate, and most
   unjustifiable Levity, and must still have remain'd
   unpardonable, whatever Truth might have been found in its
   mistaken Occasion.

   What stings me most, in my Reflection on this Folly, is, that
   I know not how to atone it; I will endeavour it, however;
   being always asham'd, when I have attempted to revenge an
   Injury, but never more proud, than when I have begg'd pardon
   for an Error.

   If you needed an Inducement to the strengthening your
   Forgiveness, you might gather it from these two
   Considerations; First, The Crime was almost a Sin against
   Conviction; for though not happy enough to know you
   personally, your Mind had been my intimate Acquaintance, and
   regarded with a kind of partial Tenderness, that made it
   little less than Miracle, that I attempted to offend you. A
   sudden Warmth, to which, by Nature, I am much too liable,
   transported me to a Condition, I shall best describe in
   Shakespear's Sense, somewhere or other.

      Blind in th' obscuring Mist of heedless Rage,
      I've rashly shot my Arrows o'er a House,
      And hurt my Brother....

   A Second Consideration is, the Occasion you have gather'd to
   punish my Injustice, with more than double Sharpness, by your
   Manner of receiving it. The Armour of your Mind is temper'd so
   divinely, that my mere Human Weapons have not only fail'd to
   pierce, but broke to pieces in rebounding. You meet Assaults,
   like some expert Arabian, who, declining any Use of his own
   Javelin, arrests those which come against him, in the Fierceness
   of their Motion, and overcomes his Enemies, by detaining their
   own Weapons. 'Tis a noble Triumph you now exercise, by the
   Superiority of your Nature; and while I see you looking down upon
   the Distance of my Frailty, I am forc'd to own a Glory, which I
   envy you; and am quite asham'd of the poor Figure I am making, in
   the bottom of the Prospect. I feel, I am sure, Remorse, enough to
   satisfy you for the Wrong, but to express it, wou'd, I think,
   exceed even your own Power.

      Yours, whose sweet Songs can rival Orpheu's Strain,
      And force the wondring Woods to dance again,
      Make moving Mountains hear your pow'rful Call,
      And headlong Streams hang list'ning in their Fall.

   No Words can be worthy to come after these; I will therefore
   hasten to tell you, that I am, and will ever be, with the
   greatest Truth and Respect,

                                SIR,

                                  Your Most Humble,

                                    and Most Obedient Servant,

                                           A. Hill.

I have now attempted, as far as I am able, to throw off a Weight,
which my Mind has been uneasy under. I cannot say, in the City
Phrase, that I have balanc'd the Account, but you must admit of
Composition, where full Payment is impossible. I shall be so far
from regretting you the old Benefit of Lex talionis, that I
forgive you heartily, beforehand, for any thing you may hereafter
think fit to say, or do, to my Disadvantage; nay, the Pleasure I
enjoy by reflecting on your good Nature, will degenerate to a
Pain, if one Accident or other, in the Course of your Life, does
not favour me with some Occasion of advancing your Interest.

Having said thus much to you, in your Quality of a Good Man, I
will proceed to address you, in your other Quality, of a Great
Poet; in which Light I look up to you with extraordinary Comfort,
as to a new Constellation breaking out upon our World, with equal
Heat, and Brightness, and cross-spangling, as it were, the whole
Heaven of Wit with your milky way of Genius.

You cou'd never have been born at a Time, which more wanted the
Influence of your Example: All the Fire you bring with you, and
the Judgment you are acquiring, in the Course of your Journey,
will be put to their full stress, to support and rebuild the
sinking Honours of Poetry.

It was a Custom, which prevail'd generally among the Ancients, to
impute Celestial Descent to their Heroes; The Vanity, methinks,
might have been pardonable, and rational, if apply'd to an Art;
since Arts, when they are at once delightful and profitable, as
you will certainly leave Poetry, have one real Mark of Divinity,
they become, in some measure, immortal. And as the oldest, and, I
think, the sublimest Poem in the World, is of Hebrew Original,
and was made immediately after passing the Red-Sea, at a Time,
when the Author had neither Leisure, nor Possibility, to invent a
new Art: It must therefore be undeniable, either that the Hebrews
brought Poetry out of Egypt, or that Moses receiv'd it from God,
by immediate Inspiration. This last, being what a Poet should be
fondest of believing, I wou'd fain suppose it probable, that God,
who was pleas'd to instruct Moses with what Ceremony he wou'd be
worship'd, taught him also a Mode of Thinking, and expressing
Thought, unprophan'd by vulgar Use, and peculiar to that Worship.
God then taught Poetry first to the Hebrews, and the Hebrews to
Mankind in general.

But, however this may have been, there is, apparently, a divine
Spirit, glowing forcibly in the Hebrew Poetry, a kind of terrible
Simplicity; a magnificent Plainness! which is commonly lost, in
Paraphrase, by our mistaken Endeavours after heightening the
Sentiments, by a figurative Expression; This is very ill Judg'd:
The little Ornaments of Rhetorick might serve, fortunately
enough, to swell out the Leanness of some modern Compositions;
but to shadow over the Lustre of a divine Hebrew Thought, by an
Affectation of enliv'ning it, is to paint upon a Diamond, and
call it an Ornament.

It is a surprizing Reflection, that these noble Hebrew Poets
shou'd have written with such admirable Vigour three Thousand
Years ago; and that, instead of improving, we should affect to
despise them; as if, to write smoothly, and without the Spirit of
Imagery, were the true Art of Poetry, because the only Art we
practise. It puts me in Mind of the famous Roman Lady, who
suppos'd, that Men had, naturally, stinking Breaths, because she
had been us'd to it, in her Husband.

The most obvious Defect in our Poetry, and I think the greatest
it is liable to, is, that we study Form, and neglect Matter. We
are often very flowing, and under a full Sail of Words, while we
leave our Sense fast aground, as too weighty to float on
Frothiness; We run on, upon false Scents, like a Spaniel, that
starts away at Random after a Stone, which is kept back in the
Hand, though It seem'd to fly before him. To speak with Freedom
on this Subject, is a Task of more Danger than Honour; for few
Minds have real Greatness enough to consider a Detection of their
Errors, as a Warning to their Conduct, and an Advantage to their
Fame; But no discerning Judgment will consider it as ill Nature,
in one Writer, to mark the Faults of another. A general Practice
of that Kind wou'd be the highest Service to poetry. No Disease
can be cur'd, till its Nature is examin'd; and the first likely
Step towards correcting our Errors, is resolving to learn
impartially, that we have Errors to be corrected.

I will, therefore, with much Freedom, but no manner of Malice,
remark an Instance or two, from no mean Writers, to prove, that
our Poetry has been degenerating apace into mere Sound, or
Harmony; nor ought This to be consider'd as an invidious Attempt,
since whatever Pains we take, about polishing our Numbers, where
we raise not our Meaning, are as impertinently bestowed, as the
Labour wou'd be, of setting a broken Leg after the Soul has left
the Body. The Gunners have a Custom, when a Ball is too little
for the Bore of their Canon, to wrap Towe about it, till it
fills the Mouth of the Piece; after which, it is discharg'd, with
a Thunder, proportionable to the Size of the Gun; But its
Execution at the Mark, will immediately discover, that the Noise
of the Discharge was a great deal too big for the Diameter of the
Bullet. It is just the same thing with an unsinewy Imagination,
sent abroad in sounding Numbers; The Loftiness of the Expression
will astonish shallow Readers into a temporary Admiration, and
support it, for a while; but the Bounce, however loud, goes no
farther than the Ear; The Heart remains unreach'd by the Languor
of the Sentiment.

Poetry, the most elevated Exertion of human Wit, is no more than
a weak and contemptible Amusement, wanting Energy of Thought, or
Propriety of Expression. Yet we may run into Error, by an
injudicious Affectation of attaining Perfection, as Men, who are
gazing upward, when they shou'd be looking to their Footsteps,
stumble frequently against Posts, while they have the Sun in
Contemplation.

In attempting, for Example, to modernize so lofty an Ode as the
104th Psalm, the Choice of Metaphors shou'd, methinks, have been
considered, as one of the most remarkable Difficulties. There
seems to have been a Necessity, that they shou'd be noble, as
well as natural; and yet, if too much rais'd, they wou'd endanger
an Extinction of the Charms, which they were design'd to
illustrate. That powerful Imagination of 'the Sea, climbing over
the Mountains Tops, and rushing back, upon the Plains, at the
Voice of God's Thunder,' ought certainly to have been express'd
with as much Plainness as possible: And, to demonstrate how ill
the contrary Measure has succeeded, one need only observe how it
looks in Mr. Trapp's Metaphorical Refinement.

      "The Ebbing Deluge did its Troops recal,
       Drew off its Forces, and disclos'd the Ball,
       They, at th' Eternal's Signal march'd away."

Who does not discern, in this Place, what an Injury is done to
the original Image, by the military Metaphor? Recalling the
'Troops' of a Deluge, 'Drawing off its Forces'; and its 'Marching
away, at a Signal,' carry not only a visible Impropriety of
Thought, but are infinitely below the Majesty of That God, who is
so dreadfully represented thundering his Commands to the Ocean;
They are directly the Reverse of that terrible Confusion, and
overwhelming Uproar of Motion, which the Sea, in the Original, is
suppos'd to fall into. The March of an Army is pleasing, orderly,
slow; The Inundation of a Sea, from the Tops of the Mountains,
frightful, wild and tumultuous; Every Justness and Grace of the
original Conception is destroyed by the Metaphor.

In the same Psalm, the Hebrew Poet describing God, says, '....He
maketh the Clouds his Chariots, and walketh on the Wings of the
Wind.' Making the 'Clouds his Chariots,' is a strong and lively
Thought; But That of 'walking on the Wings of the Wind,' is a
Sublimity, that frightens, astonishes, and ravishes the Mind of a
Reader, who conceives it, as he shou'd do. The Judgement of the
Poet in this Place, is discernable in three different
Particulars; The Thought is in itself highly noble, and elevated;
To move at all upon the Wind, carries with it an Image of much
Majesty and Terror; But this natural Grandeur he first encreas'd
by the Word 'Wings,' which represents the Motion, as not only on
the Winds, but on the Winds in their utmost Violence, and
Rapidity of Agitation. But then at last, comes that finishing
Sublimity, which attends the Word 'walks'! The Poet is not
satisfied to represent God, as riding on the Winds; nor even as
riding on them in a Tempest; He therefore tells us, that He walks
on their Wings; that so our Idea might be heighten'd to the
utmost, by reflecting on this calm, and easy Motion of the Deity,
upon a Violence, so rapid, so furious, and ungovernable, to our
human Conception. Yet as nothing can be more sublime, so nothing
can be more simple, and plain, than this noble Imagination. But
Mr. Trapp, not contented to express, attempts unhappily to adorn
this inimitable Beauty, in the following Manner.

      "Who, borne in Triumph o'er the Heavenly Plains,
       Rides on the Clouds, and holds a Storm in Reins,
       Flies on the Wings of the sonorous Wind, &c."

Here his imperfect, and diminishing Metaphor, of the 'Rains,' has
quite ruin'd the Image; What rational, much less noble Idea, can
any Man conceive of a Wind in a Bridle? The unlucky Word 'Plains'
too, is a downright Contradiction to the Meaning of the Passage.
What wider Difference in Nature, than between driving a Chariot
over a Plain, and moving enthron'd, amidst That rolling, and
terrible Perplexity of Motions, which we figure to our
Imagination, from a 'Chariot of Clouds'? But the mistaken
Embellishment of the Word 'flies,' in the last Verse, is an Error
almost unpardonable; Instead of improving the Conception, it has
made it trifling, and contemptible, and utterly destroy'd the
very Soul of its Energy! 'flies' on the Wind! What an Image is
That, to express the Majesty of God? To 'walk' on the Wind is
astonishing, and horrible; But to 'fly' on the Wind, is the
Employment of a Bat, of an Owl, of a Feather! Mr. Trapp is, I
believe, a Gentleman of so much Candour, and so true a Friend to
the Interest of the Art he professes, that there will be no
Occasion to ask his pardon, for dragging a Criminal Metaphor, or
two, out of the Immunity of his Protection.

Mr. Philips has lately been told in Print, by one of our best
Criticks, that he has excell'd all the Ancients, in his Pastoral
Writings; He will, therefore, be apt to wonder, that I take the
Liberty to say, in downright Respect to Truth, and the Justice
due to Poetry, that I have not only seen modern pastorals, much
better than His, but that his appear, to me, neither natural,
nor equal. One might extend this Remark to the very Names of his
Shepherds; Lobbin, Hobbinol, and Cuddy are nothing of a Piece,
with Lanquet, Mico, and Argol; nor do his Personages agree
better with themselves, than their Names with one another. Mico,
for Example, at the first Sight we have of him, is a very polite
Speaker, and as metaphorical as Mr. Trapp.

      "This Place may seem for Shepherds Leisure made,
       So lovingly these Elms unite their Shade!
       Th'ambitious Woodbine! how it climbs, to breathe
       Its balmy Sweets around, on all beneath!"

But, alas! this Fit of Eloquence, like most other Blessings, is
of very short Continuance; It holds him but Just one Speech: In
the beginning of the next, he is as very a Rustick, as Colin
Clout, and has forgot all his Breeding.

      "No Skill of Musick can I, simple Swain,
       No fine Device, thine Ear to entertain;
       Albeit some deal I pipe, rude though it be,
       Sufficient to divert my, Sheep, and Me."

There is no Transformation In Ovid more sudden, or surprizing; He
has Reason indeed to say, that, when he "pipes some deal," his
'Sheep' are 'diverted' with him. His Readers, I am afraid too,
are as merry as his Sheep; If he was but as skilful in Change of
Time, as he is in Change of Dialect, commend me to him for a
Musician! The pied Piper, who drew all the Rats of a City out,
after his Melody, came not near him for Variety.

If the late excellent Mr. Addison, whose Verses abound in Graces,
which can never be too much admir'd, shall be, often, found
liable to an Overflow of his Meaning, by this Dropsical
Wordiness, which we so generally give into, it will serve at the
same time, as a Comfort, and a Warning; and incline us to a
severe Examination of our Writings, when we venture out upon a
World, that will, one time or other, be sure to censure us
impartially; In That Gentleman's Works, whoever looks close, will
discover Thorns on every Branch of his Roses; For Example, we all
hear, with Delight, in his celebrated Letter from Italy, that,
there,

      ... The Muse so oft her Harp has strung,
      That not a Mountain rears its Head unsung.

But, he adds, in the very next Line, that every shady Thicket
too, grows renown'd in Verse; now one can never help remembering,
that Thickets are Births, as it were of Yesterday; the mere
Infancy of Woods! and that the oldest Woods in Italy may be
growing on Foundations of ruin'd Cities, which flourish'd in the
Times he there speaks of; whence it must naturally be inferr'd,
that to say, the Italian Thickets grow renown'd in Roman Verse,
though the Mountains really do so, is to make Use of Words,
without Regard to their Meaning; A Lapse of dangerous
Consequence, because, when the Understanding is once shock'd,
this most rapturous Elevation of the Mind (as when cold Water is
thrown suddenly upon boiling) sinks at once to chilling Flatness,
and is considered as mere Gingle and childish Amusement.

No Man, I believe, has read without Pleasure, his fine and lively
Descriptions of the Nar, Clitumnus, Mincio, and Albula, but the
worst of it is, he winds us so long, in and out, between these
Rivers, that he loses himself in their Maeanders, and brings us,
at last, to a strange Stream indeed, which is 'immortaliz'd in
Song,' and yet 'lost In Oblivion.'

      "I look for Streams, immortaliz'd, in Song,
       Which lost, and buried in Oblivion lie."

The Thought, in this Place, is very lively and just, but quite
obscur'd by the Redundancy and Wantonness of the Expression. Had
he only said 'lost,' and 'buried,' It might have been urg'd, that
the Rivers were dry'd up, and no longer to be found, in their old
Channels. But, let them be lost, as to Existence, as certainly as
he will, they can never be lost in 'Oblivion,' if they are
'immortaliz'd' in Poetry. 'Immortal' is a favourite Word in this
Gentleman's Writings, and leads him, as most Favourites are apt
to do, into very frequent Errors.

It is naturally unpleasant, to be detain'd too long in the
Maziness of one tedious Thought, express'd many Ways
successively. When we read that the 'Tiber is destitute of
Strength,' what else can we conclude, but that its Stream is a
weak one? But we are oblig'd to hear, also, that it 'derives its
Source from an unthrifty Urn': Well, now, may we go on? No; its
'Urn' is not only 'unthrifty,' but its 'Source' is unfruitful. By
this time, one can scarce help, enquiring, what new Meaning is
convey'd to the Apprehension, by the Multiplication of the
Phrases? And not finding any, we have no Reflection to satisfy
ourselves with, but, that the strongest Flow of Fancy, is most
subject to Whirlpools.

It is from the same unweigh'd Redundancy, and Misapplication of
Words, that we so often find this excellent Writer falling into
the Anticlimax. As where, for Example, he informs us of Liberty,
that she is a Goddess,

      "Profuse of Bliss, and pregnant with Delight,
       Eternal Pleasures, in her Presence reign."

After 'Profusion of Bliss,' that is to say, the heap'd Enjoyment
of all Blessings to be wish'd for; how does it cool the
Imagination, to read of being 'pregnant with Delight'? Had she
been brought to Bed of 'Delight,' it had been but a poor
Delivery: For what imports 'Delight,' in Comparison with
'Bliss'? And how much less too is pregnant with Delight,' than
'Delight' in Possession! But then again, after both these, what
cou'd the Author hope to teach us, by adding, that 'Pleasure
reigns in her Presence.' Can there be 'Bliss' without 'Delight'?
Was there ever 'Delight' without 'Pleasure'? It shou'd gradually
have ascended thus, Pleasure, Delight, Bliss; But to turn it the
direct contrary Way, Bliss, Delight, Pleasure, is setting a poor
Meaning upon its Head, and the same thing as to say, Mr. Addison
writ incomparably, finely, nay, and tolerably. A Praise, which, I
dare say, he wou'd have given no Body Thanks for. One wou'd think
there were a kind of Fatality in Liberty, since scarce any Body
can meddle either with the Word or the Thing, but they turn all
topsey turvey.

But I am sliding insensibly into a Theme, that requires rather a
Volume, than a Page or two; I hasten therefore to present you a
Paraphrase on the Six Days Work of the Creator, as described to
us by Moses, in the First Chapter of Genesis, which, you know,
was written, originally, in Verse. It wou'd be difficult, I am
sure, to match the Greatness of that inspired Author's Images,
out of all the noble Writings, which have honour'd Antiquity; and
whose most remarkable Excellencies have been found, in those
Parts of their Works, which they elevated, and made more solemn,
by a Mixture of their Religion. Our Poetry, in so able a Hand as
Yours, might receive heavenly Advantages, from a Practice of like
Nature. But I am of Opinion, that no English Verse, except that,
which we, I think a little improperly, call Pindaric, can allow
the necessary Scope, to so masterless a Subject, as the Creation,
of all others the most copious, and illustrious; and which ought
to be touch'd with most Discretion, and Choice of Circumstances.

Mr. Milton, Mr. Cowley, Sir Richard Blackmore, and now, lately,
a young Gentleman, of a very lively Genius, have severally tried
their Strength in this celestial Bow; Sir Richard may be said
indeed to have shot farthest, but too often beside the Mark; He
will permit me the Liberty of owning my Opinion, that he is too
minute, and particular, and rather labours to oppress us with
every Image he cou'd raise, than to refresh and enliven us, with
the noblest, and most differing. He is also too unmindful of the
Dignity of his Subject, and diminishes it by mean, and
contemptible Metaphors. Speaking of the Skies, he says they were

      Spun thin, and wove, on Nature's finest Loom.

Longinus is very angry with Timaeus for saying of Alexander, that
he conquer'd all Asia, in less Time than Isocrates took to write
his Panegyric, "Because, says the Critick, it is a pitiful
Comparison of Alexander the Great with a Schoolmaster." What then
wou'd he have said of Sir Richard's Metaphorical Comparison of
the CREATOR Himself, to a Spinster, and a Weaver? The very Beasts
of Mr. Milton, who kept Moses in his Eye, carry Infinitely more
Majesty, than the Skies of Sir Richard.

      The Grassy Clods now calv'd; and half appear'd
      The tawny Lyon, pawing to get free
      His hinder Parts; then springs, as broke from Bonds,
      And, rampant, shakes aloft, his brinded Main!
      The heaving Leopard, rising, like the Mole,
      In Heaps the crumbling Earth about him threw!

These animated Images, or pictured Meanings of Poetry, are the
forcible Inspirers, which enflame a Reader's Will, and bind down
his Attention. They arise from living Words, as Aristotle calls
them; that is, from Words so finely chosen, and so Justly ranged,
that they call up before a Reader the Spirit of their Sense, in
that very Form, and Action, it impressed upon the Writer. But
when the Idea, which a Poet strives to raise, is in itself
magnificent and striking, the Dawb of Metaphor, or any spumy
Colourings of Rhetoric can but deaden, and efface it.

If Sir Richard had said, concerning the Skies, on any other
Subject but This, of the Creation, that they were 'spun thin, and
wove, on Nature's finest Loom,' the Thought had been so far from
Impropriety, as to have been pleasing, and praise-worthy; But
when the Image he wou'd set before us, is the Maker of Heaven and
Earth, in all the dreadful Majesty of his Omnipotence, producing
at a Word, the noblest Part of the Creation, and 'spreading out
the Heavens as a Curtain'; In this tremendous Exercise of his
Divinity, to compare him to a Weaver, and his Expansion of the
Skies, to the low Mechanism of a 'Loom,' is injudiciously to
diminish an Idea, he pretends to heighten and illustrate.

I will end with a Word or two concerning the different Measure of
the Verse, in which the following Poem is written; and which is
apt to disgust Readers, not well grounded in Poetry, because it
requires a fuller Degree of Attention than the Couplet, and, as
Mr. Cowley has said of it,

      ... Will no unskilful Touch endure,
      But flings Writer and Reader too, that sits not sure.

I have, in another Place, endeavoured by Arguments to demonstrate
the Preference of this Kind of Verse to any other; I will here
observe only, from my Experience of other Writers, that it wins,
insinuates, and grows insensibly upon the Relish of a Reader,
till the little seeming Harshness, which is supposed to be in it,
softens gradually away, and leaves a vigorous Impression behind
it, of mixed Majesty and Sweetness.

A Man, who is just beginning to try his Ear in Pindaric, may be
compared to a new Scater; He totters strangely at first, and
staggers backward and forward; Every Stick, or frozen Stone in
his Way, is a Rub that he falls at. But when many repeated Trials
have embolden'd him to strike out, and taught the true Poize of
Motion, he throws forward his Body with a dextrous Velocity, and
becoming ravish'd with the masterly Sweep of his Windings, knows
no Pleasure greater, than to feel himself fly through that
well-measured Maziness, which he first attempted with Perplexity.
But I will detain you no longer, and hasten now to the Poem,
which has given me this pleasing Opportunity of telling you how
much I am,

                                          Sir,

                                            Your Most Humble
                                              and Obedient Servant,

                                                    A. HILL







                  _THE AUGUSTAN REPRINT SOCIETY_

                          ANNOUNCES ITS

            Publications for the Third Year(1948-1949)

      _At least two_ items will be printed from each of the
      _three_ following groups:

Series IV: Men, Manners, and Critics

           Sir John Falstaff (pseud.), _The Theatre _(1720).

           Aaron Hill, Preface to _The Creation; _and Thomas
           Brereton, Preface to _Esther._

           Ned Ward, Selected Tracts.

Series V: Drama

           Edward Moore, _The Gamester _(1753).

           Nevil Payne, _Fatal Jealousy _(1673).

           Mrs. Centlivre, _The Busie Body _(1709).

           Charles Macklin, _Man of the World _(1781).

Series VI: Poetry and Language

           John Oldmixon, _Reflections on Dr. Swift's Letter to
           Harley _(1712); and
           Arthur Mainwaring, _The British Academy _(1712).

           Pierre Nicole, _De Epigrammate._

           Andre Dacier, Essay on Lyric Poetry.

 Issues will appear, as usual, in May, July, September, November,
 January, and March. In spite of rising costs, membership fees
 will be kept at the present annual rate of $2.50 in the United
 States and Canada; $2.75 in Great Britain and the continent.
 British and continental subscriptions should be sent to B.H.
 Blackwell, Broad Street, Oxford, England. American and Canadian
 subscriptions may be sent to any one of the General Editors.


TO THE, AUGUSTAN REPRINT SOCIETY:

_I enclose the membership fee for_

                                        _the third year_

                                        _the second and third
                                         year_

                                        _the first, second, and
                                         third year_

NAME....

ADDRESS....

NOTE: All income received by the Society is devoted to defraying
cost of printing and mailing.







                  _THE AUGUSTAN REPRINT SOCIETY_

                         MAKES AVAILABLE

              Inexpensive Reprints of Rare Materials

                               FROM

                    ENGLISH LITERATURE OF THE

               SEVENTEENTH AND EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES

Students, scholars, and bibliographers of literature, history,
and philology will find the publications valuable. _The
Johnsonian News Letter_ has said of them: "Excellent facsimiles,
and cheap in price, these represent the triumph of modern
scientific reproduction. Be sure to become a subscriber; and take
it upon yourself to see that your college library is on the
mailing list."

The Augustan Reprint Society is a non-profit, scholarly
organization, run without overhead expense. By careful management
it is able to offer at least six publications each year at the
unusually low membership fee of $2.50 per year in the United
States and Canada, and $2.75 in Great Britain and the continent.

Libraries as well as individuals are eligible for membership.
Since the publications are issued without profit, however, no
discount can be allowed to libraries, agents, or booksellers.

New members may still obtain a complete run of the first year's
publications for $2.50, the annual membership fee.

During the first two years the publications are issued in three
series: I. Essays on Wit; II. Essays on Poetry and Language; and
III. Essays on the Stage.







          _PUBLICATIONS FOR THE FIRST YEAR (1946-1947)_

MAY, 1946: Series I, No. 1--Richard Blackmore's _Essay upon
             Wit _(1716), and Addison's _Freeholder_ No. 45
             (1716).

JULY, 1946: Series II, No. 1--Samuel Cobb's _Of Poetry_ and
            _Discourse on Criticism_ (1707).

SEPT., 1946: Series III, No. 1--Anon., _Letter to A.H. Esq.;
             concerning the Stage_ (1698), and Richard Willis'
            _Occasional Paper_ No. IX (1698).

Nov., 1946: Series I, No. 2--Anon., _Essay on Wit_ (1748),
             together with Characters by Flecknoe, and Joseph
             Warton's _Adventurer_ Nos. 127 and 133.

JAN., 1947: Series II, No. 2--Samuel Wesley's _Epistle to a
             Friend Concerning Poetry _(1700) and _Essay on
             Heroic Poetry_ (1693).

MARCH, 1947: Series III, No. 2--Anon., _Representation of the
             Impiety and Immorality of the Stage_ (1704) and
             anon., _Some Thoughts Concerning the Stage_ (1704).




          _PUBLICATIONS FOR THE SECOND YEAR (1947-1948)_

MAY, 1947: Series I, No. 3--John Gay's _The Present State of
             Wit;_ and a section on Wit from _The English
             Theophrastus._ With an Introduction by Donald Bond.

JULY, 1947: Series II, No. 3--Rapin's _De Carmine Pastorali,_
             translated by Creech. With an Introduction by
             J.E. Congleton.

SEPT., 1947: Series III, No. 3--T. Hanmer's (?) _Some Remarks on
             the Tragedy of Hamlet._ With an Introduction by
             Clarence D. Thorpe.

Nov., 1947: Series I, No. 4--Corbyn Morris' _Essay towards Fixing
             the True Standards of Wit,_ etc. With an Introduction
             by James L. Clifford.

JAN., 1948: Series II, No. 4--Thomas Purney's _Discourse on the
             Pastoral._ With an Introduction by Earl Wasserman.

MARCH, 1948: Series III, No. 4--Essays on the Stage, selected,
             with an Introduction by Joseph Wood Krutch.


The list of publications is subject to modification in response to
requests by members. From time to time Bibliographical Notes will be
included in the issues. Each issue contains an Introduction by a
scholar of special competence in the field represented.

The Augustan Reprints are available only to
members. They will never be offered at "remainder" prices.

                        _GENERAL EDITORS_

             RICHARD C. BOYS, _University of Michigan_
   EDWARD NILES HOOKER, _University of California, Los Angeles_
  H.T. SWEDENBERG, JR., _University of California, Los Angeles_

                       _ADVISORY EDITORS_

          EMMETT L. AVERT, _State College of Washington_

            LOUIS I. BREDVOLD, _University of Michigan_

            BENJAMIN BOYCE, _University of Nebraska_

            CLEANTH BROOKS, _Louisiana State University_

             JAMES L. CLIFFORD, _Columbia University_

             ARTHUR FRIEDMAN, _University of Chicago_

             SAMUEL H. MONK, _University of Minnesota_

          JAMES SUTHERLAND. _Queen Mary College, London_

Address communications to any of the General Editors. Applications for
membership, together with membership fee, should be sent to

                   THE AUGUSTAN REPRINT SOCIETY

            310 ROYCE HALL, UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA

                    LOS ANGELES 24, CALIFORNIA
                                or
              _Care of_ PROFESSOR RICHARD C. BOYS

               ANGELL HALL, UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN

                       ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN


_Please enroll me as a member of the Augustan Reprint Society._

_I enclose $2.50 as the membership fee for the second year

           $5.00 as the membership fee for the first and second
             year

NAME....
Address....