GURRE KAMILAROI:

OR

KAMILAROI SAYINGS

BY

WILLIAM RIDLEY,

MISSIONARY.

THE ENGRAVINGS BY W. MASON.

“To whom he was not spoken of, they shall see; and they who have not heard
shall understand.”—Paul to Romans, xv., 21.

SYDNEY:
PRINTED AT THE EMPIRE GENERAL STEAM PRINTING OFFICE,
172, GEORGE STREET.

1856.

gurre kamilaroi.

a b d e g h i j k l m n ŋ
o p r t u v w y
ai ao oi

ippai, murri, kubbi, kumbo.
ippata, mata, kapota, buta.
yarai, gille, taon, wī, boiyoi.
giwīr, īnar, birrī, miē.
kaiŋal, buba, ŋumba.
wurume, ŋummuŋā.
daiādi, bōādi.

[Illustration: b  bundar.]

[Illustration: d  dīnoun.]

[Illustration: g  giwīr.]

[Illustration: i  īnar.]

[Illustration: j  jimba.]

[Illustration: k  karāŋi.]

[Illustration: m  mullion.]

[Illustration: n  nūrai.]

[Illustration: ŋ  ŋārūmnōn]

[Illustration: p  pīlar.]

[Illustration: t  tulu.]

[Illustration: w  wāru.]

[Illustration: y  yaraman.]

baiame gīr yarai, gille, mirri, taon ellibu gimobi.

baiame yalwuŋa murruba; baiame minnaminnabul
ŋummilda, minnaminnabul wīnuŋulda.

baiäme gīr kānuŋo kubba, kūnial, maian, tulu,
yindal, beran, boiyoi gimobi.

baiame gīr yārāman, būrumo, bundar, mūte, dūli,
dīnoun, buralga, biloela, millimumul, gulamboli, kobado,
mullion, guiya, nūrai, ŋundoba, burulu, muŋin, kānuŋo
di gombi.

baiame gīr giwīr gimobi; mal giwīr adam. baiame
goë: “kamil murruba giwīr ŋāndil ŋuddelago; ŋaia
giwīrgo īnar gimbille.” īla baiame īnar gimobi; mal
īnar īv: īv gulīr adamu.

adam buba murriŋu, buba wundaŋu, buba kānuŋo:
īv ŋumba murriŋu, ŋumba wundaŋu, ŋumba kānuŋo.

adam iv ellibu warawara yanani. kanuŋo giwīr
kānuŋo īnar warawara yanani, kānuŋo kagil ginyi.
baiame yili ginyi, goe, “kānuŋo giwīr, kānuŋo īnar
warawara yanani, kānuŋo kagil ginyi, ŋaia ŋārma bālu
bumāle.” immanuel, wurume baiameŋu, goe “kamil.
kamil ŋinda ŋārma bumala, ŋinda ŋunna bumala, ŋaia
balugi, giwīr īnar moron gigigo.”

immanuel ŋeanekūnda baiame: ŋerma baiame giwīr
ginyi. murruba immanuel; kamil ŋaragedūl murruba
yealokwai ŋerma.

īlambo immanuel taongo tai‐yanani, giwīr ginyi.
ŋērma gīr burula wībil murruba gimobi, burula mūga murruba
gimobi, burula mūga‐binna murruba gimobi.

giwīr
kair layāru. ŋerŋu bular boādi, māri, māta. layaru wibil
ginyi. bular boādi gurre wāala immanuelgo, goaldendai,
“ŋai daiadi, ŋinnu layaru, wibil.” kamil yanani immanuel.
Yerāla layaru balūni. bularbularo bābine bālūn
taonda. īla immanuel taiyanani. mari māta ellibu
yūgillona. immanuel goe, “ŋinnu daiadi yealo moron
gigi.” burula giwir burula inar yugillona. immanuel
daonmago yanani. yārul daonma kundawi; immanuel
goe “ŋindai ārul diomulla” ŋarma gīr yarul diome.
immanuel kākūldone “layaru taiyanuŋa.” ī layaru
moron ginyi, taiyanani. bular boadi burul guiyē.

ŋaragedūli miēdūl wībil ginyi; ŋumba boiyoi wune;
kamil miedul murruba ginyi; murru ginyi wibil, ŋullimun
balūni. buba yanani immanuel ŋummillego; gir
ŋummi; goe, “inda barai taiyanuŋa, murruba gimbildi
ŋai miedul. ŋai miedul burul wibil ŋullimun baluni;
inda taiyanuŋa ŋai kūndigo.” immanuel goe,
“ŋulle yanoai kundigo.” ila yanani bular
kundigo. ŋumba duri, yugillona, goe “ŋii! ŋii! ŋai
miedul baluni.” burula īnar yugillona goe “ŋii!
miedul baluni.” immanuel goe “kurria yūŋa. kamil
miedul baluni; yeal babillona.” burulabu gindami;
ŋārma gīr balundai wīnuŋi. immanuel murra kawāni
miedul, goe, “miēdūl waria.” īla miedul moron ginyi,
warine, gurre goe. ŋumba, buba ellibu, burul guiye.

ŋarageduli bular giwir mūga ŋuddelona turrubulda
immanuel aro yanani; bular muga wīnuŋi. kākūldone,
“immanuel, dūrunmi, wurume, dāvidu ŋummilla!
ŋurrāga ŋeane.” burula giwir goe “kurria! kurria
ŋindai kakūllego.” giwir muga yealo kakuldone
“durunmi, wurume davidu, ŋummilla! ŋurraga ŋeane.”

[Illustration: immanuel gīr bular muga murruba gimobi.]

ila immanuel warine, goe “minna ŋindai goalle? minna
ŋaia murramulle?” ŋarma goe, “durunmi, wuna
ŋeane ŋummildai.” ila immanuel ŋarma mil tāmūlda:
baianbu ŋarma murru ŋummillego.

burula kagil giwir immanuel kunmulta. ŋarma
kaogo bindēa yulalle. ŋarma gir tulu wīmi, ŋaragedul
tulu ŋanbīr wimi: ŋarma gir immanuel wimi; murra
biru‐dūni, dinna biru‐dūni; tului wirri. ŋarma tulu
tiome, immanuel tului pindelundai. yerāla immanuel
baluni. yerala giwir pilari turrur duni; gue dulirri.

bullului ŋarma gir immanuel taonda wimi, kundawi.
immanuel ŋūru bābine balūn taonda; yealo malo babine
balun taonda; yealo ŋaragedul ŋuru babine balun
taonda: ŋaragedul ŋuruko moron ginyi, warine.

[Illustration: immanuel baluni.]

yerala gūnagullago
yanani. yeladu immanuel gunagullada ŋuddela: ŋerma
kanuŋo ŋummilda, kanuŋo wīnuŋulda.

murruba immanuel; kamil ŋaragedul murruba
yealokwai ŋerma. yerala immanuel yealo taongo
taiyanille; ŋeane kanuŋo ŋummille. immanuel kaia
goalle; ila kanuŋo balun, giwir, inar, kaiŋal, kanuŋo
moron gigi. immanuel goalle “minna inda gimobi?
minna inda gimboi? inda murruba gimobi? inda
ŋununda taiyanuŋa gunagullago. inda kagil gimobi?
inda biru yanuŋa, urribū yanuŋa.”

giru ŋinda kagil ginyi; inda warawara yanani;
giru baiame yili ginyi. baiame yalwuŋa murruba;
ŋeane kanuŋo warawara yanani. wīnungulla: kamil
ŋaia yal goalda; giru ŋaia goalda. immanuel ŋirribatai
yarine, gūnagulladi taongo. kanuŋo giwir kagil ginyi:
immanuel ŋandil murruba; immanuel baluni, giwir
moron gigigo.

Yeladu baiame goalda; “ŋindai, kanuŋo giwir,
kurria kagil gigle, berūdi warraia; ŋeane murru
ŋurrile. kamil ŋaia yili gigla. murruba immanuel
baluni.” yeladu immanuel goalda: “taiyanuŋa ŋununda
kanuŋo ŋindai iŋgil, īla ŋaia ŋindai tubbiamulle.”

inda taiyanuŋa immanuelgo.

giwir ŋuddelona
littraga: bain dinna tuŋgōr, ŋurribu bain ge bain;
kamil yanelina. paul, barnaba ellibu, aro yanani. paul
goaldone; baindūl ŋerma wīnūŋailone. paul kaia
ŋummildone, kakuldone, “waria ŋurriba dinnaga.”
tuŋōrdūl parine, yanani ellibu.

burulabu giwir ŋummi, goe “ŋipai!” kākūldone
“baiame bular yarine yealokwai giwir.” paul, barnaba
ellibu, bunnaŋunne, kakuldone, “kurria! kamil ŋeane
baiame; ŋeane giwir yealokwai ŋindai. ŋeane guiye
murru ŋurriŋillone. ŋeane murru goalda burulabu;
kurria ŋindai yealo kagil gigle: berudi warraia,
ŋummilla baiame moron. baiame gīr gūnagulla, taon,
burul kolle, kanuŋo minnaminnabul gimobi. baiame
yalwuŋa baiame.”

Kamilaroi is the language spoken by the aborigines
along the Namoi River, on part of the Bundarra
and Balun, and 200 miles of the Barwan (or Darling);
also on Liverpool Plains, and about the head of the
Hunter.

The writer believes that any one who carefully
reads through this Key, _especially the first 2 pages_, will be
able to pronounce the foregoing Kamilaroi sentences,
and teach the aborigines to read them. Many of the
aborigines, especially the young men, are very quick at
learning to read.

It is very important that the rule of _naming_ the
letters according to their pronunciation in words should
be attended to, as it will remove great difficulties from
the way of beginners. How could an ignorant person
guess that the letter called “double you” had the sound
w in wit? or that “aitch” was merely a hard breathing?

The Christian into whose hands this little book may
come, and who has any aborigines speaking kamilaroi
near, is earnestly requested to consider, whether it is not
worth a patient and prayerful effort to teach them to
read those precious saving truths which are dimly and
scantily, but in some measure really, expressed in these
brief sentences.

KEY

To the foregoing “Kamilaroi speech.”

RULES OF PRONUNCIATION.

Pronounce ā as a in father
„ a as a in mat
„ ē as ey in obey
„ e as e in net
„ ī as i in marine
„ i as i in it
„ ō as o in bone
„ o as o in on
„ ū as oo in moon
„ u as u in bun
„ ai as i in wine
„ ao as ow in how
„ oi as oi in noise
„ g always as in go
„ ŋ as ng in ring.

In English we use the sound ŋ or ng only at the
end of a syllable; its frequent occurrence at the beginning
of a syllable in Kamilaroi is therefore a slight, but
only a slight difficulty. It is only necessary to use precisely
the same consonant sound which we have in ring,
sing, &c., with a vowel after and not before it.

N.B. Name the letters as they are pronounced; that
is, call g _ge_ (as in get), h _he_, ŋ _eng_, r _re_, w _we_, and
y _ye_. Thus the name will guide the learner to the
proper sound in spelling.

The first four words on page 3 are names of men;
the next four words are names of women; then, as
follow, each line hereunder containing the English words
for the correspond line of Kamilaroi:—

sun, moon, earth, fire, pennyroyal (herb).
man, woman, boy, girl.
child, father, mother.
son, daughter.
brother, sister.

God verily sun, moon, stars, earth also made.

God always is good; God everything
sees, everything hears.

God verily every hill, plain, watercourse, tree,
grass, beran (a herb), pennyroyal made.

God verily horse, dog, kangaroo, opossum, goanna,
emu, native companion, cockatoo, swallow, pelican, parrot,
eagle, fish, brown‐snake, deadly‐black‐snake, flies, mosquitoes, all
animals made.

God verily man made; first man Adam. God
said, “Not good man alone for to dwell; I
for man woman will make.” Then God woman made; first
woman Eve; Eve wife of Adam.

Adam is father of the blackfellows, father of the whites, father of all:
Eve the mother of blacks, mother of whites, mother of all.

Adam, Eve also, astray went. All men
all women astray went, all bad became.
God angry became, he said “All men, all women,
astray are gone, all bad have become. I them dead
will smite.” Immanuel, Son of God, said “Not so.
Not thou them smite; Thou me smite, I
will die; man, woman, alive for to be.”

Immanuel with us God: he God man
became. Good is Immanuel; not another is good like him.

Long ago Immanuel to earth came, man he became.
He verily many sick well made, many blind
well made, many deaf well made.

A man
name Lazarus. Belonging to him two sisters Mary, Marta. Lazarus sick
became. The two sisters word sent to Immanuel, saying,
“My brother, Thy Lazarus, is sick.” Not went Immanuel.
By and bye Lazarus died. Four days he lay dead
in the ground. Then Immanuel came. Mary, Martha also
were weeping.  Immanuel said “Your brother again alive
shall be.” Many men, many women, were weeping. Immanuel
to the grave went; a stone the grave covered; Immanuel
said “Ye the stone take away.” They the stone lifted up.
Immanuel cried aloud “Lazarus come forth.” Then Lazarus
alive became, he came forth. The two sisters were very glad.

At another time a little girl sick became; the mother pennyroyal gave;
not the little girl well became; much she grew sick, almost
dead. The father went Immanuel to see; truly
he found him; he said “Thou quickly come, well make
my little girl. My little girl is very sick, almost dead;
you come to my house.” Immanuel said
“We two will go to the House.” Then went the two
to the house. The mother came, she wept, said “Alas! alas! my
little girl is dead.” Many women were weeping, said “Alas!
the little girl is dead.” Immanuel said “Cease weeping. Not
the girl is dead; only she is asleep.” All of them laughed;
they verily her to‐be‐dead knew. Immanuel by hand took
the girl, said “damsel arise.” Then the girl alive became,
arose, words spoke. The mother, father also, very glad.

Another time, two men blind sat by the way.
Immanuel there came; the two blind heard, they cried aloud,
“Immanuel, King, Son of David, look!
pity us.” Many people said “Have done! cease
ye to cry aloud.” The men blind again cried aloud
“King, Son of David, look! pity us!”

Then Immanuel stood still, said “What you will say? What
I shall do?” They said “King, grant
us to see.” Then Immanuel them eyes touches;
instantly they are able to see.

Many bad men Immanuel seized. They
on his head thorns bound. They indeed a log laid, another
log across they laid: they indeed Immanuel laid down; hands
they pierced, feet they pierced; on cross fastened. They the cross
raised, Immanuel on the cross hanging. Soon Immanuel
died. Soon after a man with a spear his side pierced; blood flowed.

In evening they verily Immanuel in ground laid, covered.
Immanuel the night lay dead in ground; also one day he lay
dead in ground; also another night he lay dead
in ground; next morning alive he became, arose.
Soon after to heaven he went. Now Immanuel in heaven dwells; he
all sees, all knows.

Good is Immanuel; not another is good
like him. Hereafter Immanuel again to earth
will come; we all shall see. Immanuel aloud
will speak; then all the dead, men, women, children, all
alive shall become. Immanuel will say “What hast thou done?
What has thou done? thou good hast done? Thou
to me come to heaven. Thou evil hast done?
thou far go, very far go away.”

Truly thou bad hast become; thou astry hast gone;
truly God angry is. God always is good;
we all astray have gone. Hearken; not
I lies tell; truth I tell. Immanuel from above
came down, from heaven to earth. All men bad are become;
Immanuel only is good; Immanuel died, men
alive for to be.

Now God saith: “Ye, all men,
cease bad to be, turn ye; we will be
reconciled. Not I angry am. Good Immanuel
died.” Now Immanuel saith: “Come unto me
all ye weary, then I you will cause to rest.”

You come to Immanuel.

A man dwelt
at Lystra; with sick foot diseased, very ill indeed;
not he could walk. Paul, Barnabas also there came. Paul
was speaking; the lame man him was hearing. Paul earnestly
looked, he cried aloud “stand upright on feet.”
The lame man leapt, walked also.

All the people saw, they wondered, they cried aloud
“Gods two are come down like men.” Paul, Barnabas
also ran, cired aloud “Have done! not we
gods; we men like you. We glad
become, we sorry become, we angry become, again we
are reconciled. We good tell to all;
cease ye any more evil to be; turn ye
look to God the living. God verily heaven, earth
the great water, all, everything made. God
always is God (the same ever.”)