The women, showed more taste in their dress, for all wore loose-fitting
gowns of native cloth, gaudily colored, though the children were
attired similarly to the men, with little more than a breech cloth
about the loins.  Even the boys of a most tender age were each armed
with a javelin, none of them, however, having the points of the weapons
poisoned as did their fathers and elders when on the war-path.

Another striking characteristic of these people was the abundance of
gold and diamond ornaments.  Not a woman was visible from whose ears
were not suspended heavy rings of the precious metal, while the
majority had diamonds fastened in the gold, all of several carats'
weight, and some so large and brilliant that they would have sold for
immense sums in a civilized country.

The older females had not only rings hanging from their ears, but still
more valuable ornaments depended from their noses.  It would have
enriched an army to loot the Murhapa village.

Each of the whites carried his Winchester, and Bippo and Pedros did not
forget their almost harmless spears; but the rifle of Johnston was left
behind with the valuable property.

At the moment of starting, Ziffak called to two warriors and said
something in a commanding voice.  They instantly hastened to the edge
of the water and placed themselves in front of the large canoe.  Their
action left no doubt they were obeying an order to guard the treasures
during the absence of the owners.

Reaching the top of the bank, the party were in what might be called
the main or only street of the town.  The grass had been worn smooth by
the feet of the villagers, among whom was not a dog, cat, horse, and,
indeed, any four-footed animal.

The visitors had landed near the lower end of the village, so that it
was necessary to walk some way before reaching the house of the king,
which was their destination.

As they started, the whole population began falling in behind them.
The terrified Bippo and Pedros shrank still closer to those in front,
trembling and affrighted, for the experience to which they were
subjected was enough to upset them morally, mentally and physically.

Ziffak turned his head with such a threatening scowl that the foremost
instantly fell back, dreading his vengeance, but when he faced the
other way, they began crowding forward again.

There must have been that in the appearance and action of Bippo and
Pedros which excited the latent mirth of the Murhapas, for say what we
may, the trait exists in a greater or less degree in all human beings.
One of them reached forward with his javelin and gave Bippo a sharp
prick.  With a howl, he leaped several feet in air and yelled that he
was killed.

There was an instant expansion of dark faces into grins, showing an
endless array of black stained, teeth, for the spear point was not
poisoned, and the incident caused a laugh on the part of his white
friends when they came to know the whole truth.

But the author of the practical joke had reckoned without his host.
The cry had hardly escaped the victim, when Ziffak bounded to the rear
like a cyclone.  The fellow who was a full grown warrior was still
grinning with delight, when he found himself in the terrific grasp of
the head chieftain.  It was then his turn to utter a shriek of
affright, which availed him nothing.

Ziffak first smote him to the earth by a single tremendous blow.  Then,
before he could rise to his feet, he grasped his ankles, one with
either hand, and swung him round his head, as a child whirls a sling,
before throwing the stone.

To the awed spectators he seemed a black ring of fire, so dizzyingly
swift were the gyrations, from the midst of which came a buzzing moan
of terror.

Only for a second or two was he subjected to this torture.  Suddenly
Ziffak ran toward the Xingu and then let go of the ankles.  The black,
limp object went spinning far out in the air, as if driven from some
enormous catapult.

Across the remaining space he went, falling several feet from shore and
disappearing beneath the surface.  But such fellows are extinguished
with difficulty, and the cold water quickly revived him.

By and by he came up, blew the moisture from his mouth, swam to shore,
climbed timidly out, and, sneaking up the bank again, humbly took his
place at the rear of the procession.

But Ziffak, having disposed of the joker, paid no further attention to
him, caring naught whether he swam or was drowned.  The lesson was one
that he would not forget, and produced a salutary effect upon the rest
of the multitude.  They instantly fell back so far that Bippo, finding
he had not been seriously hurt, saw that he was safe from further
disturbance.

It was only a few minutes later that Ziffak halted, his friends
immediately doing the same.

The cause was apparent: they had reached the dwelling place of Haffgo
king of the Murhapas.




CHAPTER XXI.

HAFFGO, KING OF THE MURHAPAS.

It was a memorable interview which the explorers held with Haffgo, king
of the mighty Murhapas.

Since Bippo and Pedros were servants, they were not admitted to an
audience with the potentate.  Ziffak conducted the others into the hut
adjoining the palace.  This was his own building, where his aged mother
had charge.  She understood matters from her son, and the frightened
fellows were made to feel that they were safe for a time from the
annoyances and persecutions of the multitude.

The apartment was an oblong one, being at the front, and was
characteristically furnished.  Instead of the smooth bare ground which
formed the floors of the other buildings, the palace was entirely
covered with the skins of wild animals, gaudily stained.  The whole
looked like a gorgeous, oriental carpet, which was as soft as down to
the tread.

There were no chairs or benches for auditors, for no one presumed to
sit in the presence of majesty.  The walls were hung with the same
species of ornamented furs, set off here and there by spears, bows and
arrows, arranged in fantastic fashion.

At the further end of the apartment, was a platform several feet high,
with a broad seat, covered with still more brilliant peltries, a
footstool, and on each side a vase of magnificent flowers.  These vases
were of native manufacture, beautifully ornamented, while the flowers
were of a radiant loveliness, such as are seen nowhere outside of
tropical countries.  Their delicious fragrance filled the apartment and
affected the strangers the moment the blanket was pulled aside by
Ziffak and they stepped within the royal reception room.

On each side was a broad open window, without glass, which admitted
enough sunlight to flood the place with illumination.

At the right of the dais or throne, the curtains were draped so as to
serve as a door for the king or any member of the royal household to
enter or withdraw.

On this barbaric throne sat the extraordinary personage known as King
Haffgo, ruler of the warlike Murhapas.

To say the least, his appearance was stunning, if not bewildering.

In the first place, it maybe doubted whether the intrinsic value of his
crown was not the equal of any that can be found to-day in the
monarchical countries of Europe, Asia or Africa.  Its foundation seemed
to be a network of golden wire, in which were set scores upon scores of
diamonds, weighing from five to ten carats apiece, with a central sun
the equal of the great Pitt diamond.  The coruscations from these
brilliants were overwhelming.  As the king moved his head while
speaking, every hue of the rainbow flashed and scintillated, the rays
at times seeming to dart entirely across the room.

In addition, the neck of Haffgo was encircled by a double string of the
same dazzling jewels, of hardly less magnitude; while the wrist of the
right hand, which rested on a large javelin, was clasped by a golden
bracelet of what appeared to be living fire.

The king was dressed in a species of thin cloth, gathered by a girdle
at the waist.  The crimson tint of this garment was relieved by figures
of the sun, moon and stars, of dragons, birds, beasts and reptiles in
gold.  One of his feet was visible, disclosing a species of sandal such
as is seen among the natives of the East Indies.

Had King Haffgo been encountered anywhere else, he would have been set
down as a European with an unusually fair complexion.  It bore no
liking to that of the African or native Murhapa.  His skin had none of
that chalky, transparent appearance shown by the Albinos, but was
almost pinkish and ruddy.

His bushy hair was not white, but of a decided brown, his eyes hazel,
his nose Roman, with a strong chin and a keen expression, such as was
natural to a man who had reigned an absolute autocrat all his life.

He was about fifty years of age, but his face was wrinkled like a man
of threescore and more.

King Haffgo was seated on his throne when his visitors were ushered
into his presence, as though he expected and was waiting for them.

The white men were unacquainted with the etiquette prevailing in this
barbaric court, but there are certain ceremonies which are received as
expressive of courtesy and obeisance the world over.

Ziffak gave no instructions; but, placing himself at the side of
Professor Grimcke on the left, he surveyed his friends with much
curiosity, as if waiting to see how they would conduct themselves.

Grimcke, Long and Ashman removed their hats and bowed slowly, bending
their heads almost to their knees.  Then, as they straightened up
again, the Professor, who took upon himself the duty of spokesman, said:

"We greet the great King Haffgo, and beg that he will accept the homage
of his brothers from their homes near the great water."

"Why do my brothers come from their homes to hunt out the king of the
Murhapas, when he has not asked them to come?"

These words were uttered almost exactly as given.  The accent was thick
and somewhat broken, but they showed an astonishing command of the
English tongue, and proved that Waggaman and Burkhardt had found some
exceedingly apt pupils among this people.

It is not necessary to give the interview in detail.  There was a
certain stateliness about the manner of the king which was remarkably
becoming.  His guests had prepared themselves, when starting out on
their exploring enterprise, to make friends, by providing a large
supply of gaudy trinkets, such as is always pleasing to the average
savage; but, when they saw the wonderful crown and diamond ornaments of
this autocrat, they were ashamed to let the baubles in their possession
be seen.

They consisted mainly of children's toys; and, since they were entirely
different from anything in the country, Professor Grimcke finally made
bold to offer them, with another low obeisance, to his majesty.  The
latter may have been delighted, but, if so, he did not allow it to
appear in his face or manner.

Fred Ashman handed him two brightly-polished knives, fashioned somewhat
after the familiar Bowie pattern, and, despite his reserve, it was easy
to see that they pleased him more than anything else.

Jared Long's present was a handsomely-carved meerschaum pipe.  The king
was an inveterate smoker, and, even if he didn't do anything more than
nod his head when it was placed in his hand, he ought to have been very
grateful.

Despite the pains which our friends took to win the good will of King
Haffgo, it was apparent to all three that their visit was not welcome.
Waggaman and Burkhardt may not have whispered anything in his ear about
them, but the ruler was thoroughly filled with a distrust of all white
men, the only exceptions being the ones that were the cause of this
distrust.

Being a man of unquestioned native sagacity, it needed nothing more
from his first guests than their accounts of what the other race was
doing in the cities and towns along the sea coasts.  Any people who
builded canoes large enough to cross the awful waste of waters in quest
of diamonds and gold, were sure to seize the chance to force their way
up the Xingu where much more boundless wealth awaited them.

The famous diamond mines of Brazil were not very far from this portion
of the Matto Grosso, and the pains which the emperors of Brazil had
taken to draw a part of their riches from the earth was all the proof
Haffgo could ask of the rapacity of the nations which called themselves
civilized.

Now, while this remarkable ruler could not always make certain that no
white men should enter his dominions, there remained a very good chance
of preventing such intruders from getting away again, carrying the
glowing accounts of what they had discovered.  So long as he could
maintain this condition of affairs, so long was he safe; for if he
"absorbed" every foreigner ascending the Xingu, the supply could never
exceed the demand.

The King conversed with not only the Professor, but with Long and
Ashman in turn.  They were as deferential as they knew how to be, but
all the same, their sagacity told them he bore them no good will, and
would have been much better pleased had the Aryks wiped them out before
they ascended the rapids.

At the conclusion of the interview, which lasted about half an hour,
the King Haffgo informed them they were at liberty to remain two days
in the village, during which they were not to pass outside its
boundaries.  At the expiration of the period named, they would be
allowed to descend the Xingu to their homes, under their pledge to tell
no person what they had seen and learned about the Murhapas.




CHAPTER XXII.

ARIEL THE BEAUTIFUL.

It will be understood that during the interview described, the three
white men stood near the front entrance to the royal apartment with
their faces turned toward King Haffgo.

In this position each made good use of his eyes and Fred Ashman's, from
some cause or other, continually wandered to the draped curtains at the
right of the ruler, between which he must pass when entering or leaving
that part of his residence.

It was while his gaze was used on these curtains that he saw them
gently agitated in a way which left no doubt that some person on the
other side was the cause.

By and by he discerned part of a dainty hand, and the next minute
became aware that a pair of the most beautifully lustrous eyes on which
he had ever gazed was peering into the apartment.

"_It is Ariel_," was his instant thought, "and she as listening to the
words that we are speaking."

The thought had hardly found shape, when one eye, a part of a lovely
face and the top of the head were discerned, as the owner, giving rein
to her curiosity, ventured upon a little further view of the visitors.

Then, as if conscious of her breach of etiquette, she withdrew, like a
flash, from view altogether.

But he knew it was only for a brief interval, and sure enough, the eyes
speedily appeared at another portion of the curtains, where the
beauteous princess must have believed she was not observed, for she
looked steadily at the faces of the visitors, with a depth of interest
that it was vain for her to attempt to conceal.

The heart of Fred Ashman gave a flutter, when he realized that the
midnight orbs were fastened upon _him_, and, evidently studying his
countenance with more interest than those of his companions.

Feeling a peculiar boldness, because of the strange situation in which
he was placed, he deliberately smiled at the unknown one.

She could not have vanished more suddenly had she been snatched away by
the hand of some ogre.

A pang shot through Fred's heart, as he felt that he had driven away
the enchantress by his own forwardness.  He reproached himself bitterly
for having overreached himself.

But while he was lamenting, he once more discovered the eyes, rivalling
the diamonds in the crown of her royal father, slyly viewing him from
the other side of the curtain.  This time the fair one took care that
no part of her countenance was visible, and the young man was equally
guarded for the time, not to betray his sweet knowledge of the other's
scrutiny.

It was at this juncture, that King Haffgo addressed some pointed
questions to Ashman who was forced to withdraw his gaze from the
marvellously attractive sight, and fasten it upon the rugged and
wrinkled countenance of the king of the Murhapas.

But those eyes were in his field of vision, and, even while speaking to
the potentate, his glance continually wandered to the orbs which
attracted him as the lodestone draws the magnet.

But alas! the American forgot a fact of the first importance: the eyes
of the father were as observant as those of his only child.  He saw the
furtive glances at the curtains, and a slight rustling at his right
hand told him that his beloved Ariel, with the curiosity of her sex,
was playing the eavesdropper.

The indulgent father would have cared nothing for this, had he not
discovered the extraordinary interest which one of his three callers
manifested in his child.  In that moment, the distrust which he felt of
the strange race was turned to violent hatred toward one of its
members, because of his unpardonable insolence in daring to return the
gaze with a smile.

The king suddenly leaned the javelin in his hand against the chair in
which he was sitting, and partly rose from his seat as if about to
descend from the throne.  Instead of doing so, he leaned slightly to
one side, and, with a quick movement, seized one of the curtains and
snatched it aside.

The act, which was like the flitting of a bird's wing, caused Ariel,
his daughter, to stand forth fully revealed!

If the white men had been dazzled by the amazing collection of diamonds
on the brow of the king, it may be said that they were now blinded for
the moment by the vision of loveliness which burst upon them, like the
unexpected emergence of the sun from behind a dark cloud.

Before the princess could rally from her bewilderment, her father
sharply commanded her to advance.  She knew that that affectionate
parent could be stern and cruel as well as loving and affectionate, and
with her eyes bent modestly on the floor she stepped forward and stood
beside him.

Her hair, instead of being auburn like her parent's, was as black as
the raven's wing.  It hung in luxuriant wavy masses below her waist,
being gathered by a white clasp of burnished silver at the back of the
neck, without which it would have enveloped all the upper part of her
body in its fleecy veil.

Her gown of spotless white, composed of native cloth, as fine as satin,
was without any ornament.  It was encircled at the waist by a golden
girdle, falling in folds which concealed the rest of the figure,
leaving only one Cinderella-like foot to twinkle from the front, like a
jewel of rare beauty.

But no eye could fail to see that the slight girlish figure was of
ravishing perfection.  The waist was slender, the partly revealed arms
were as delicate as lilies, the tiny hands with their tapering fingers
were like those of a fairy, while the countenance was one of the
fairest that ever sun shone on.

The contour was such as Rubens delighted to place on canvas, and that
Michael Angelo loved to carve from the snowy marble.  The Grecian nose,
the small mouth, the white teeth, unstained like those of her
countrymen and countrywomen, the wealth of hair, the lustrous, soulful
eyes, the sea-shell-like tint of the cheeks, all these fell upon the
startled vision of the explorers with such overpowering suddenness that
for the moment they believed they were dreaming, or that some trick of
magic revealed to them a picture which had no reality.

"Look upon the white men!" commanded the king speaking in English, and
with a sternness which left disobedience out of the question; "look, I
say, for never will come the opportunity to see them again."

It was then that Ariel raised her eyes, and turned them toward the
trio, gazing at no one in particular--for she knew her parent was
closely studying her--but seeming to fix them upon some one miles
behind them.

Grimcke, Long and Ashman again bowed their heads almost to the ground,
and, feeling that the interview was over, began withdrawing.

Like the vassals leaving the presence of their sovereign, they did so
walking backward, with their faces toward the throne, and making a low
obeisance with each step.

The king looked steadily at them, without inclining his head or making
the slightest acknowledgment of the salutation.  Had not Fred Ashman
been mad with the intoxication of his new, overwhelming passion, he
would have observed that which was noticed by Grimcke and Long: the
King was watching him.

The young American hardly raised his gaze from the floor, until in his
retreat, he found himself at the entrance, by which all three had come
in to the apartment.  His companions had made their final obeisance and
disappeared, while he was left with Ziffak standing near the middle of
the apartment, his pose such that he could glance at his royal relative
or at him without shifting his body.

It now became Fred's duty to assume the perpendicular, in order to
effect a graceful withdrawal.

As he came upright once more, he looked straight into the countenance
of the scowling king.  Then--he could not help it---his eyes flashed in
the face of the blushing Ariel, who was gazing fixedly at him, and he
smiled and saluted her.

It was a daring thing to do, with the eyes of the king and the head
chieftain upon him.  He never understood how it was that it was done.
The salutation might have been forgiven, but that smile was an offense
like smiting King Haffgo's countenance with the back of the open hand.

But wonder of wonders! the ruby lips of the radiant beauty parted for
an instant in the faintest possible smile which lit up her countenance
like a burst of sunshine.  Ashman noticed not the diamond bracelet and
necklace, which flashed in all their prismatic beauty, but knew only
that she had returned the smile of recognition.  For that boon he would
have risked life a thousand times over.

Both Ziffak and the king were looking at the white man at the moment;
but, as if suspicion had entered the brain of the infuriated monarch,
he quickly shifted his head and glared at his daughter.

The movement was like the dart of a serpent, but that shadowy smile on
the face of Ariel had passed, as the lightning flash cleaves the
midnight, leaving the darkness deeper than before.

The king saw it not, and well for his child that so it was; for, much
as he cherished her, he would have smitten her to the earth had he
dreamed that she ventured on such a response to the impudence of the
white man, whose very life was his own only through the sufferance of
King Haffgo.

Not until Fred Ashman found himself in the air on the outside of the
place did he realize what he had done.  He feared that he had committed
a fatal indiscretion, but when he asked, himself whether he would
recall it if he could, his heart said "No."

The afternoon was drawing to a close, and there was a sensible coolness
in the air.  The natives who had remained standing round the front of
the palace, when the explorers first went inside, had grown tired of
waiting and, scattered in different directions.  The Murhapa village
wore its usual appearance, so in contrast with what met the eyes of our
friends when they first saw it.

The Professor and the New Englander were waiting near the door for
Ashman to join them.  As he came out, the former shook his head, with a
laugh, as an intimation that the young man in the ardor of his interest
had made a mistake.

Fred admitted that possibly he had forgotten himself, but added that it
was now too late to recall what had been done, and he was not sure that
he would do so, if the opportunity were given.

"At any rate," said he, "we are promised safe treatment for a couple of
days, provided we don't stray off or misbehave ourselves.  Our visit
can't amount to anything after all, since we must start for home
whenever King Haffgo gives his command."

"A good deal may take place in two days," said the Professor
significantly.

"And a good deal _after_ five days," was the more significant remark of
Jared Long.

It was evident from these declarations that Grimcke and Long had in
mind the same thought; which came to Ashman himself, when the ruler of
the Murhapas made known to his guests that they must take their
departure within such a brief period.

While no one of the three would have dared to signify dissent, yet they
were not the men to come so many hundred miles, forcing their way
through endless dangers to turn about and retrace their steps at the
command of a savage who looked upon himself as king, simply because he
was able to lord it over a horde of barbarians.

It was no place to discuss their plans, in front of the "palace,"
especially as the natives were beginning to gather around them again,
and among them it was certain was more than one who understood the
English tongue "as she is spoke."

They were waiting for the coming of Ziffak, who was still within.  He
was their chaperon, and without his guidance, they did not dare to move
from the spot.

"Hark!" suddenly exclaimed the Professor, raising his hand as a signal
for the whispering to cease.

The sound of voices was heard inside.  They recognized the tones of
Ziffak, to which they had become accustomed since the previous night.
Those of King Haffgo were also distinguishable, and there could be no
doubt to whom the low silvery accents heard only occasionally belonged.

The alarming feature of it all was, that the king was in an
unmistakably angry mood.  He not only talked fast but he talked loud,
sure evidence of his excited feelings.  It sounded as if Ziffak was
striving to placate him, but his royal brother grew more savage each
moment.

The words of all were uttered in the Murhapa tongue, so that the
listeners could form no idea of their meaning.  Had they been able to
do so, it is safe to say that they would have been in anything but a
comfortable frame of mind.




CHAPTER XXIII.

THE SHADOW OF DANGER.

A few minutes later, Ziffak came through the door of the king's
residence and greeted the explorers.

His dusky countenance showed unmistakable traces of emotion, but like a
true warrior, he knew how to govern his feelings.  When he spoke, there
was no agitation perceptible in his voice.

He motioned to his friends to enter the adjoining hut, where Bippo and
Pedros had been left.  The Professor showing a natural timidity, he
stepped forward and led the way.

Immediately, the party found themselves within a structure, which while
no larger than the others, still, in view of the royal prerogatives of
the occupant perhaps, possessed more conveniences.  The lower
apartment, or rather floor, was separated into three divisions, the
front being that in which the cooking was done, while serving also for
a sitting and general reception room.

The mother of Ziffak and King Haffgo was a tall, muscular widow of
threescore and ten, much wrinkled, but strong and active on her feet.
Her countenance was darker if possible than that of the head chieftain,
making it the more wonderful that Haffgo should be the reverse in that
respect of both.

The royal mother paid little heed to her visitors, probably believing
they were able to take care of themselves without help from her.
Indeed, shortly after the white men entered, she took her departure,
and was not seen again until dark, when she came in to help provide
them with their evening meal.

Bippo and Pedros finding themselves safe at last were doing what they
could to make up for the sleepless nights and hard labor they had
undergone on their way thither.  They were stretched upon some skins in
one corner, sleeping heavily and refreshingly.

Ziffak sat on the floor with the whites.  It was apparent from his
manner that he was on the point of making a communication of
importance, but he seemed to change his mind suddenly, and, for a time,
spoke upon matters of such trivial account that his listeners were
surprised.

The next astonishing thing which he did was to declare that the stories
he gave to Ashman the night before, when made a prisoner by him were
fables.  There was no enchanted lake in the neighborhood, and his
account of the burning mountain was a myth, as were his yarns about the
diamonds obtained from the same mountain.

The Professor nodded his head, laughed and said he was glad to be told
that; for, while he wished to believe their good friend, when he was in
earnest, he found it hard to swallow those marvellous narratives which
exceeded anything that had ever come to their ears.

Long and Ashman also expressed great relief at the naïve confession of
the head chieftain.  All the same, however, not one of them was
deceived by the fellow's subterfuge.

They knew that the stories which Ziffak related on the shore of the
Xingu were true.  Seized at that time by a burst of confidence, he had
unburdened himself to the young man for whom he formed such deep
admiration.

Since that time, and especially since his angry interview with his
royal brother, he appreciated the grievous mistake he made and was now
anxious to recall it.  He, therefore, declared the accounts to be of
the Munchausen order.  His listeners read his purpose and it suited
them to let him think they accepted every word of his remarkable
recantation.

He impressed upon them that the king was angry because of their coming
to his village.  Indeed Ziffak was afraid that he would recall his
permission to allow them to stay the two days, and might compel them to
leave that night.

This was startling news, and, when Ziffak was pressed, he admitted that
during his absence on the Xingu to meet them, Waggaman and Burkhardt
had returned and secured an audience with His Majesty.  This explained
the new phase of matters and was anything but welcome information, but
there was no help for it.

The Professor asked Ziffak whether he could not bring the two white men
to his home, in order that an interview might be had.  If that could be
done, Grimcke was hopeful that a better understanding could be
established, but the head chieftain replied that he had not seen either
of the white men since he returned, nor did he know where to find them.
They occupied a building on the opposite side of the king's home, but
he was told they were not there.  No doubt they were purposely keeping
out of the way of the new-comers.

Suddenly Ashman asked their friend whether there was any objection to
his taking a stroll around the village and whether he was likely to be
molested.  Ziffak promptly replied that there could be no earthly
objection to anything of that nature, and springing to his feet, gun in
hand, he bade his friends good-bye, saying he expected to be back with
them at the end of an hour or so.

It cannot be said that Ashman had any special errand in view, when he
formed this resolution, which was explainable upon the well known laws
governing the human mind.

He was tired of idleness.  The prospect of sitting for hours in the
darkening apartment, talking with Ziffak, who, instead of being willing
to give information, was doing his most to withhold it, was not
inviting, but beyond this, he was restless because he was haunted by
those marvellous eyes, peeping from behind the curtain in the king's
room, and that smile of recognition when the gaze of the two met,
thrilled him with a new and strange emotion.

It was this feeling which drove him forth.  He wanted to escape the
prying scrutiny of his friends, who, he fancied, suspected his secret.
He wanted to walk in the open air and think and revel in the bliss of
his new delight.

It was growing dark, when he stepped outside of the building.  There
was no light visible in any direction, though there would be plenty of
it later on.  The natives appeared to be moving aimlessly about, and
one or two near at hand scrutinized him curiously, but they neither
spoke nor made any movement to annoy him.  They had not yet forgotten
the lesson given by Ziffak some hours before.

To escape attention, he walked toward the river, passing down the long
sloping bank, until he reached the open, cleared space which has been
referred to as caused by the overflow of the water.  Here the walking
was easy, and, turning his face up stream, he walked slowly as a man
does who is in deep thought.

A man who is revelling in the first dream of love is not the one to pay
close attention to his surroundings.  He is so apt to be rapt in his
own sweet meditations, that he fails in the most ordinary observation.

Reaching the bottom of the slope, Ashman glanced behind and on his
right.  He caught glimpses of several figures moving about like
shadows, but so far as he could judge, none of them was interested in
him.  Dismissing them from his mind, he moved on.

He had walked less than one-third of the length of the village front,
when the form of a man slipped softly down the incline, following in
his footsteps and moving as silently as a Murhapa warrior tracking his
foe through the forest.

He was dressed similarly to the American, having the same style of
Panama hat, shirt and boots, and he carried a rifle in his hand.  Being
of the same race, he ought to have been a friend, but when the bright
moonlight fell upon his face, it showed the countenance of a demon.

He was Burkhardt, an escaped convict, who had lived for five years
among the Murhapas, and he was seeking the life of Fred Ashman, who, in
his enchanting visions of love, never dreamed of the awful shadow
stealing upon him.




CHAPTER XXIV.

YOUNG LOVE'S DREAM.

What in all the world so sweet as young love's dream?  It is the old,
old story, and yet it is as new and fresh and blissful to the soul as
it will be to the end of time, or until these natures of ours are
changed by the same Hand that framed them.

What more bewitching romance could cast its halo about the divine
passion than that which enshrined the affection of Fred Ashman for the
wonderful Ariel, the only child of the grim Haffgo, king of the
Murhapas?

He had met and chatted and exchanged glances with the beauties of his
own clime, and yet his heart remained unscathed.  He reverenced the sex
to which his adored mother and sister belonged, and yet never had he
felt the thrill that stirred his nature to the profoundest depths, when
his eyes met those of the barbarian princess and the two smiled without
either uttering a word.

"What care I for the gold and the diamonds and the precious stones of
the Matto Grosso?" the ardent lover asked himself; "is not she the
Koh-i-noor of them all?--the one gem whose preciousness is worth more
than all the world?"

He was willing that the Professor and Jared Long should risk their
lives in searching for the enchanted lake, and the burning mountain
where such priceless wealth existed.  Thousands of their kind had done
it before, and countless thousands would follow in their footsteps
through the generations to come.

But as for _him_, a new mission had broken upon his consciousness; he
had a sacred duty to perform.  Somewhere, in this broad world, a human
soul is always waiting for its mate.  Perchance it never comes, and the
weary one may be joined to that which heaven never intended it to be
joined, or it repines and goes to the grave unloved.

Fred Ashman was as sure as if he heard a voice from the stars, telling
him that Ariel, the daughter of Haffgo, was his other self.  He could
never rest, he could not really live until it should be his lot to
carry her from this lonely wilderness to his own home thousands of
miles away.

To the young lover, aglow and happy in his new passion, all things are
possible.  It is he who can appreciate even the days of chivalry, when
the valiant knight went forth, with lance and buckler to win his lady
against all comers, counting it his highest happiness to face the
perils of flood and field if perchance he could but win her smile.

And yet, amid all the roseate dreams which fairly lifted Fred Ashman
from the gross earth, he could not entirely lose sight of his peculiar
situation and the formidable difficulties which environed his path.  He
would not admit they were insurmountable, but they were hard to climb.

To come down to facts, he felt that the first, and, indeed, the
indispensable step was to secure a meeting with the princess that had
taken such complete possession of his heart.

Guarded as she was by her father, who was sure to resent with instant
death any such presumption on his part, he might well shrink from the
appalling attempt; but love has many ways of picking the locks that may
be fastened to keep hearts apart.

"Ziffak!"

That was the name which came to his tongue again and again, with the
question whether his friendship could not be enlisted on the side of
the youth, who had come so strangely to the Murhapa village.  He was a
shrewd fellow who must suspect the truth of those stolen glances.  He
had shown a sudden and strong affection for the explorers, and
especially for Ashman to whom he surrendered.  Was what friendship
strong enough to lead him to a step that would insure a rupture with
his royal brother and probably bring about war in his little kingdom?

"I wonder what revelation he was on the point of making when he sat
down with us in his mother's home," Ashman muttered, as he slowly
walked along the bank of the Upper Xingu, unmindful of the creeping
shadow behind him.

That it bore upon that interview and related to the angry quarrel he
did not doubt, but he could only conjecture its nature which was not
encouraging when he recalled that Ziffak had told him and his friends,
without protest on his part, that they were likely to be compelled to
leave the village that night.

Ashman ceased in his walk, for he saw, in spite of his absorbing
reverie, that he had passed above the uppermost house of the village.
The condition under which he was allowed to stay in peace, even for a
brief time, was that he should not wander beyond the limits of the town.

It was useless to excite resentment without reason, and he was about to
turn and retrace his steps, when a slight rustling of the undergrowth,
which marked the boundary of the forest on the south caused him to turn
his head, stop, and hold his rifle ready for danger.

His old habit of caution came back the instant peril seemed to threaten.

While he debated whether to advance and force the stranger to reveal
himself, the outlines of a form were distinguished and a slight figure
stepped forth in the moonlight.

Ashman's heart seemed to stop beating and life itself hang in suspense,
when he recognized the very being that had taken such full possession
of his thoughts.

Ay, Ariel, daughter of King Haffgo, stood before him.

For a moment, neither spoke or moved.  It was not strange perhaps that
she was the first to recover the power of utterance.

Advancing timidly, she said in a tremulous voice and with an accent
just broken enough to make it all the sweeter:

"You are in danger and I could not help coming to tell you."

"Heaven bless you!" he exclaimed, taking a step toward her, but still
observing a respectful distance.  "You have braved danger yourself to
give me the warning."

"I left my home and waited for a chance to speak to you; I dared not go
to the door of Ziffak's house for I would have been seen.  Then, while
I was wondering what to do, I saw you come forth and walk toward the
river.  I thought you would go to the end of the village, so I hurried
on and hid among the bushes until I could speak to you without any one
seeing me."

Ashman's head was in a swirl.  He was trembling in every limb, while
she seemed to be devoid of any agitation whatever.

"Your father King Haffgo was angry this afternoon, because I looked at
you; but," added the lover, "I could not have helped doing it, if I
knew my life would have paid for the act.  Ziffak told me about you, so
you see I did not feel that you were a stranger, even though I then saw
you for the first time and never heard the music of your voice until
now."

"The king is angry," said she, withdrawing a little as the happy fellow
took another step; "he says you shall be killed, but Ziffak persuaded
him to say your life should be spared if you went away to-night."

Ashman felt another delicious thrill as he reflected that if such were
the understanding, there would seem to be no cause for the lovely Ariel
to come thus far out of her way to repeat what Ziffak was sure to
explain before the departure of the explorers.

Ah, it must have been because of her interest in him that she had
sought this perilous stolen interview.

"Well, then," said he mournfully, "I must depart and never see you
again.  Death would be preferable to _that_!"

"But you may come back some time," said she in such a tremulous,
hesitating voice, that he impulsively sprang forward and caught her
dainty hand before she could escape him.

"O don't!" she plead like a timid bird, striving to withdraw the
imprisoned fingers which he still held fast.

"Nay, but you must, if I am never to see you again," he exclaimed
vehemently; "O, Ariel, I had hoped that I might stay here until I could
see and talk with you and tell you that I can never, never leave you;
that if I go, you must go with me; I will take you to my home which is
many many long miles away, but I will be your slave; I will love you; I
will make you happy; you shall never sigh for the land and the people
you leave behind you----"

There is no saying when the impetuous lover would have stopped his
wooing in this cyclone-like fashion hut for an alarming interruption.
He had been smitten profoundly, and the urgency of the case impelled
him to an ardor which could not have found expression under any other
conditions; but, all the time the frightened maiden was striving to
free her imprisoned hand, and the lover felt he ought to release it but
could not.

Suddenly she ceased her efforts and looked beyond him with a gasp and
such a startled expression, that he knew some unusual cause had
produced it.




CHAPTER XXV.

ZIFFAK'S BLOW.

Ziffak, head chieftain of the Murhapas, was a shrewder and more
far-seeing man than even his white friends suspected.

He had been the first to observe the significant glances of Fred Ashman
at the hanging curtains, as he was the first to detect the presence of
his beloved niece behind them.

Although King Haffgo saw not the smile which flitted over the face of
his daughter, when her eyes met those of the young American, yet Ziffak
observed it, and he could not have translated it wrongly had he wished
to do so.

An intimation has been given of the nature of the quarrel between
Ziffak and his royal brother.  The latter was so infuriated that he
declared that every one of the white men should die.  Ziffak reminded
him of his pledge that they should be safe for two days, a pledge that
he had repeated in their presence.

But in his hot anger, Ziffak said, he would break that pledge.  One of
the explorers had dared to look upon the face of Ariel and smile.  Had
he detected her returning it, he would have driven his javelin through
her body as she stood beside him.

Ziffak gave no hint of what he had observed.

The head chieftain was not afraid to brave his brother to his face; but
he wisely forbore carrying the quarrel beyond the point of
reconciliation.  He told his brother that he was so beside himself that
he forgot he was a Murhapa who never broke his word.  But if the king
insisted, he would see that the white men took their departure before
the rising of the morrow's sun.

King Haffgo consented that if that was done, he would permit them to go
in peace.  It was Ziffak's hope that his brother, after his anger had
time to cool, would modify his last declaration still further and allow
them to stay their two days, that led him to qualify his remark about
the necessity of their withdrawing that night.

The same cunning which stood the head chieftain so well during this
stormy interview remained with him to the end.  While he and his
brother were wrangling, Ariel stood mute and with bowed head.  She
durst not speak, but withdrew only a minute or two before her parent.

Ziffak was still warmly attached to Ashman, and was willing to risk his
life in his behalf.  Knowing that Waggaman and Burkhardt had had much
to do with stirring the resentment of the king, he was angry enough to
slay both of them.

When the most peculiar situation is considered, however, it is hardly
safe to believe the head chieftain was ready to go to the length of
helping to bring about a meeting between the lovers.

He understood his niece well enough to know that despite the fury of
her parent, she would brave a good deal to exchange words with the
handsome stranger that had made such an impression on his heart.

So long as this young man remained in Ziffak's house, so long was it
impossible for such meeting to take place; but, when Ashman sprang up
and announced his intention of taking a stroll, Ziffak believed that it
was with the intention of trying to see Ariel.  That is to say, he
suspected what really came to pass, though it was not in the mind of
the youth.

Ashman had not been gone long, when Ziffak made an excuse to withdraw,
saying he meant to find out, if he could, where Waggaman and Burkhardt
were hiding.  He counselled the Professor and the New Englander to stay
where they were until his return, which he promised should not be long
deferred.

Neither Grimcke nor Long dreamt of the object of their dusky friend in
leaving, and as the mother of the Murhapa reappeared about that time
and started a fire, with a view of preparing their evening meal, they
concluded that the best thing for them was to follow the advice of the
brave fellow.

The instant Ziffak was on the outside of his own house, he became as
alert as a cat scenting a mouse.  He held his ponderous javelin with
its poisoned tip in his right hand, and he looked keenly about in the
gathering gloom.

A warrior stopped in front of him and made a respectful inquiry about
the white men.  Ziffak uttered such an angry reply and raised his
weapon so menacingly that the native skurried away in terror of his
life.

All at once the keen black eyes caught sight of a small, petite figure
as it vanished in the darkness.  He smiled, for he recognized Ariel on
her way to the upper end of the village.  He knew on the instant what
_that_ meant.

Then the penetrating gaze outlined the figure of a man, sneaking like a
wild animal, down the river bank.  He was seen only faintly, but he was
equally sure of _his_ identity.  It was Burkhardt, one of the hated
white men that had poisoned the mind of his brother and caused him to
forget he was a Murhapa, whose word should be sacred.

An exultant gleam came into the dusky face, as he stole forward in the
same direction that the convict took.  The action of the miscreant
showed that he was following some prey, and who was it as likely to be
as the white man that was abroad and was held in such detestation by
the scoundrel?

Burkhardt, in one respect, acted precisely as did his intended victim.
The latter was so absorbed in his own delicious thoughts, that, after
that hurried glance around him, he did not once again look to the rear.
So Burkhardt, never once dreaming that he was under surveillance, kept
his gloating eyes fixed on the shadowy figure in front, without looking
to see that while the man was hunting the tiger another tiger was not
hunting him.

Being a slight distance to the rear of the convict, Ziffak could not
see the form in front of him with equal distinctness, but the faint
glimpse which he caught was all he needed.

Thus the strange procession passed up the western bank of the calmly
flowing Xingu.  Fred Ashman moving slowly and lost in reverie,
Burkhardt prowling like a wild beast behind him, with Ziffak clinging
to the heels of the wretch as if he were his very shadow.

The moon, which gave but faint light at the beginning, increased in
power as the minutes passed.  Ziffak fell back, so that if Burkhardt
should look around, he would not recognize though he might see him.

But the ruffian did not turn his head: he was too intent on the fearful
task before him.

Suddenly he stopped.  Instantly Ziffak crouched down into the smallest
possible space and clutched his javelin.  The increasing moonlight
showed that he had passed beyond the upper end of the village and was
watching the lovers on the fringe of the forest beyond.

A movement on the part of Burkhardt, as if he were making preparation
to fire his rifle, caused Ziffak to move swiftly and silently forward
until he was within twenty paces.  Then he paused, for he was close
enough.

The change of position on the part of the pursuer enabled him to catch
the outlines of the lovers, so absorbed in each other's presence that
they forgot to keep within the sheltering shadow of the trees.

Burkhardt could ask for no better opportunity than that which was now
before him.  He knew the inextinguishable hatred of King Haffgo for
this white man, and no greater favor could be done the ruler than to
slay him.

Sinking on one knee, he carefully brought his gun to a level.  The
gleam of the moonlight on the barrel insured unerring aim.

But a moment before it was perfected, Ashman stepped forward and seized
the hand of his adored one.  This caused such a change of the relative
situation of the two that the weapon could not be fired without
endangering the life of the maiden.

That would never do, and waiting a moment in the hope that another
charge would take place, Burkhardt began stealthily moving to the right
to secure the advantage.  A few steps up the slope were all that was
required, when he again knelt on one knee and pointed his rifle at the
unsuspicious American.

It was but an instant before that Ariel caught sight of the crouching
figure and was transfixed with terror.  The moonlight enabled her to
identify the person, who was aiming his gun either at her or her
companion.

Before she could speak, and at the moment Ashman turned his head, a
giant figure was seen to rise as if out of the very earth, directly
behind the miscreant.  He held his prodigious javelin poised over his
bead.  He was seen to make a sudden onward movement and then the weapon
vanished.

Speeding toward the couple with such amazing velocity it was invisible;
but, ere the crouching convict could press the trigger of his rifle, he
was seen to sprawl forward, his gun flying from his grasp.  The
terrible javelin had gone entirely through his body as though it were
tissue paper, and pinned him like an impaled insect to the earth!

"The scoundrel!" exclaimed Ashman, who was just too late to anticipate
their friend.

"It is Ziffak who has saved us!" gasped Ariel, shrinking against the
side of her lover.

The herculean chieftain towered aloft in more imposing proportions than
ever as he strode toward the startled couple.  Whether he was advancing
to regain his weapon, or whether he meant to join them could not be
known; for, before he reached the body of the assassin, he abruptly
stopped and looked in the direction of the village.

He had caught an ominous sound: it was that made by the discharge of
firearms!

"Great heaven!" exclaimed Ashman; "they have attacked my friends in
Ziffak's house; I must go to their help; dearest Ariel, what will
become of you?" added the distracted lover.

"Leave me alone," she replied, becoming calm again; "I can return home."

"Well, then, good-bye!  It may be for the last time," he impulsively
added, catching her, his one arm clasped about her yielding form and
drawing her to him.  Then, while she only faintly resisted, he kissed
her passionately, as a lover kisses the queen of his heart when he
believes he is bidding her farewell forever.

Suddenly, Ashman felt both of the willowy arms about his own neck, and
she returned his caresses with a fervor equal to his own.

"Heaven bless and keep you!" he murmured; "I now have everything to
live for!  I shall fight hard, for it is not the life of my friends or
my own that it is at stake!  It is _you_! It is YOU!"

The startled Ziffak had paused but an instant, when he read aright the
meaning of the sounds of guns from the village.  The explorers had been
attacked by the Murhapas.  King Haffgo must have given the order.  He
had violated his pledge for the first time in his life.  Great was his
provocation!

The bosom of the giant heaved with indignation.  He stood glaring like
a lion at the keepers who are torturing his mate to death, while he is
barred within the cage and cannot rush to her help.

Then, wheeling about, he broke into a run straight for his home, whence
came the shots that left no doubt that Professor Grimcke, Jared Long,
and perchance their servants were fighting for their lives.

The chieftain had not far to go, and half the distance was passed, when
he paused as suddenly as he had started.  A new and startling decision
had formed itself in his mind.

Again he wheeled and dashed toward the spot where he had left the
lovers a minute before.

They saw him coming, and Ashman released his beloved and started to
join the chieftain, who he suspected had come for him.

"Back!" he commanded, waving his immense arms; "neither of you must go
to the village!"

"But what shall we do?" asked Ariel, pausing in front of the excited
giant.

"Flee at once!  Delay not a moment!  If you do not, Haffgo will slay
both of you!  They are searching for Ariel!  They suspect she is with
you!  They will soon know it and death awaits each!"




CHAPTER XXVI.

THE FLIGHT.

Never had Ziffak shown such fearful excitement.  He swung his arms, and
in his wild agitation uttered some of his words in Murhapa, but his
meaning was caught by Ashman, who was infected by his overwhelming
emotion.  He was distraught for the moment, and stood undecided what to
do.

It was the lovely Ariel who showed the most self-command.

"Whither shall we go, Ziffak?" she asked in English.

"To the enchanted lake; to the burning mountain!  You know the way!
Nothing else will save you, and you are lost if you wait another
minute!"

And laying hands on the young man, he whirled him about and gave him a
shove which nearly threw him off his feet.  Then he reached to catch
her, but she eluded him and slipped like a bird to the side of her
lover.

"We will go!" said she; "leave us alone!"

Ashman turned his head and seizing the hand of his companion, said,

"You are my guide now!  Lead on, and I will follow you to the death!"

She made no answer, but moved rapidly through the wood until they came
to the open space along the river.  Here, since there were no
obstructions, they increased their pace almost to a run.  He sought to
maintain his place beside her, but she moved so fast, with little
apparent effort that it was hard to do so.

He had his Winchester and revolver, and he glanced behind to learn
whether they were followed.  Ziffak had vanished, and no one was in
sight.  It was well that such was the fact; for he would not have
hesitated to shoot down any that might appear.

The extraordinary flight continued for a furlong, and then Ariel paused
on the edge of the Xingu.  Her lover saw the reason: a small canoe lay
against the shore.

"Is this to be used?" he asked, glancing in her pale face.

She nodded her head, and, lifting her skirts, stepped daintily within,
and sat down near the stern.  He shoved the boat clear, sprang in and
sat down near the middle, as he seized the broad thin paddle.

Although considerably above the rapids, which had been the cause of all
his difficulty, Ashman noticed that the current was not so swift as
that encountered at many places leagues below; and, since the width was
no greater, it followed that that portion of the Upper Xingu was of
unusual depth.

In the strange excitement of the occasion, the lovers spoke few words.
They had said much, and, when the opportunity should again come, they
would say a great deal more; but they were fleeing for their lives, and
any distraction of their whole interest and effort was likely to be
fatal.

Ariel realized this as fully as did Ashman.  She continually glanced in
every direction, especially toward the village which was fast receding
behind them.  Fred swung the paddle powerfully, but with as little
noise as possible.

In such crises of a man's life he thinks rapidly.  While the young
man's heart was aglow with the ecstacy of a promised fulfillment of his
love--a more glorious fulfillment than he had dared to dream of--he saw
that a desperate struggle was not only certain but close at hand.

Very soon the flight of Ariel must be discovered, and her infuriated
father would stop at nothing to punish the elopers.  He could command
hundreds of the most valiant warriors of the Matto Grosso, and any one,
except such a lover as Fred Ashman, would have shrunk from the
prodigious task before him.

When the flight of the canoe had continued for several minutes, and he
could breathe a little more freely, he asked of his companion, whether
she was familiar with the region they expected to visit.

The reply was singular.  King Haffgo was accustomed to make regular
excursions to the wonderful place, and he rarely did so without Ariel
as his companion.  He had guards stationed night and day to watch for
the approach of strangers, for there was wealth enough to awaken the
avarice even of the Emperor of Brazil himself.

Leaving his warriors at the entrance to the lake, with instructions to
prevent any one following him, Haffgo would paddle the frail craft out
upon the lake, with his daughter as his only companion.

They explored much of the strange locality, visiting places unknown, so
far as they were aware, to every one else.

Ashman reflected that this was extremely fortunate so far as Ariel was
concerned, for it gave her the very knowledge that was so necessary in
their flight; but, unfortunately, their bitterest and most unrelenting
enemy possessed the same knowledge.

Now the Xingu broadened, and the flow became still more moderate.
Ashman held his paddle suspended and looked around.

"Are we entering the lake?"

"Not yet," she replied with a shake of her lovely head.

The oar was dipped again, and the light boat shot forward like a water
fowl over the smooth surface.

He had noticed that the boat was similar to that used by Ziffak, being
composed of a species of bark, the seams of which were skilfully joined
with tendons, and the outside covered with a gum which rendered it
close enough to exclude even air itself.

What seemed to be a creek a hundred feet wide, suddenly opened on the
right, winding through an exuberant forest whose branches overhung the
water.  She motioned with her hand for him to guide the boat into this,
adding that it was the entrance to the enchanted lake of which he had
heard such glowing accounts, and whose existence, he remembered, had
been denied by Ziffak, though it had been admitted by him only a brief
while before.

The course of the canoe was changed, and Ashman involuntarily slackened
the pace, while he gazed around with increasing wonder.

The distance was not far, when a towering rock was observed jutting out
from the bank.  It was fully twenty feet high, rough, jagged and
massive and obtruded half-way across the stream.

She whispered to him to proceed as cautiously as he could, for on the
rock was stationed one of the lookouts of King Haffgo, whose duty it
was to challenge every one on his way to the enchanted lake.  Ashman
was told to keep his lips mute, in case they were hailed, as they were
likely to be, and to leave to her any explanation it might be necessary
to make.

In the bright moonlight, the sentinel was sure to notice the presence
of a white man in the boat, but would be likely to believe he was
either Waggaman or Burkhardt, while he would not dare to question the
daughter of the king, however much he might be astonished at her
presence at this time.

Ashman saw the figure of a Murhapa, but instead of being erect, he was
seated on a ledge of the rock, his body half prone and in a motionless
posture.  The paddle was dipped more softly than ever as the craft came
opposite him, but he did not speak, or stir.

"He's asleep?" whispered Ashman, looking inquiringly at her.

She nodded her head, and he did not require to be told of the great
gain that would be secured, if they could pass without awaking him.

With that view, he used the utmost care, causing only the faintest
ripple, as he propelled the light craft over the mirror-like surface.

In a few seconds, the massive rock was passed, and still the sentinel
remained as motionless, as if he were a part of the solid stone, on
which he was seated.  He surely was a negligent servant to lose his
consciousness thus early in the night.

A few more strokes, and a turn in the creek left him out of sight.
_That_ danger was safely passed, and Fred Ashman drew a sigh of relief,
accepting it as a good omen of their future.

He now dipped the paddle deeper, and, within the following five
minutes, the canoe and its occupants debouched upon the waters of the
wonderful enchanted lake.




CHAPTER XXVII.

SHUT IN.

The situation in which the visitors to the dominions of King Haffgo
were placed, was such as to sharpen their wits to the keenest edge.

After the departure of Fred Ashman, Ziffak talked more plainly with the
Professor and New Englander.  The head chieftain told his white friends
what they had suspected; Haffgo was enraged at Ashman's presumption
with his daughter.  He was in that mood indeed, in which, but for his
promise, he would have hurled his javelin at the youth before he left
the audience chamber.

Ziffak, however, was hopeful that the anger of his royal brother would
cool sufficiently to allow the visitors to remain there two days; but
he doubted whether, after all, they would want to stay that long under
the strained condition of things.

When the chieftain took his departure, it was without any hint that he
wished to have an eye to the young gentleman, but Grimcke and Long
suspected it, and their conversation became of the gravest character,
for they fully realized their peril.

They regretted the mad infatuation of their young friend with Ariel the
princess, and yet they did not blame him, for, as the New Englander
remarked, could they have believed there was any hope for them, they
would have fallen as irrestrainably in love as he.

But they did not, and, therefore, were in a frame of mind to consider
the situation more coolly than the hot-headed lover.

Both agreed that the stroll taken by Ashman was likely to bring about
trouble, but they were powerless to do anything.  Ziffak was the only
individual who could manage matters in such an emergency.

It will be remembered that night had fully come at the time of the
chieftain's departure.  The interior of the room would have been
wrapped in gloom, had not the mother of Ziffak made her appearance and
started a fire on the hearth at the further end of the apartment.

The white men watched her closely to see how the Murhapas were
accustomed to secure ignition.  But they were disappointed.  She raked
aside the ashes until some embers were disclosed beneath, which were
readily fanned into a flame.  This caused the apartment to shine with a
light like that at mid-day.

She had brought in an earthen vessel of water and began broiling
several thin slices of meat on the coals.  They were quickly finished,
and she then handed to each of her guests the prepared meat on an
earthen plate.  All ate heartily, using their fingers for knives and
forks, while the cool water could not have been more refreshing.

Bippo and Pedros had been sleeping and resting so long that they
desired to get out doors.  Since they were not likely to be recognized
in the night, if they used caution, Grimcke and Long told them to go,
but to take care they did not lose themselves.

They had hardly departed when their hostess also left, passing out by
the rear way.  She did not speak, but as she was disappearing, gave the
two men such a strange look that their suspicions were awakened.  Both
at that moment were reflecting upon the ominous news brought them by
Ziffak.

By a common impulse, both hastened to the rear to learn all they could
about the building in which they might be compelled to fight for their
lives.

The result was rather pleasing.  The structure was heavier and more
compact than the ordinary buildings, and, in addition to the usual
opening in front, had one at the rear, through which the woman
undoubtedly passed on her way to her royal son.

Neither of these openings were provided with anything in the nature of
a door that could be closed.  Whenever the rare occasions arose for
such a sealing of the inhabitants of a house, it was done by means of
furs suspended in front of the entrance.

The white men noted this with quick eyes, and then went back to the
front apartment.

"In the event of attack," said the Professor with the utmost coolness,
"you can take the rear door and I the front."

Long nodded his head; he understood and was ready.

They had hardly entered the front apartment, when both were struck by
the unusual chatter of voices on the outside.  There must have been a
large gathering of people who were growing excited about something.

The Professor was about to step into the opening to learn what it
meant, when Bippo burst into the apartment, the picture of fright and
terror.

"Going to kill us!" was his alarming exclamation; "make me run--almost
kill me!"

"Where's Pedros?" asked Long.

"He scared--run into woods--won't come back--run all way to Am'zon!"

"I think he'll have to stop once or twice to get breath before he
reaches there," was the characteristic comment of the Professor, who
standing near the door, listened more closely to the threatening words
and exclamations on the outside.

It sounded singular to recognize more than one expression uttered in
English by these people, who, until a few years before were unaware
that such people were living.

But for the proof Ziffak had given of his loyalty the whites might have
connected his absence with the ugly signs outside; but the confidence
even of Jared Long in his friendship was unshaken.

"Bippo," said the Professor, speaking with the same quiet
self-possession he had shown in the first place, "they are going to
attack us; more than likely we shall be killed, but there is a chance
for you, because you are dressed like these people, and, so long as you
can keep in the shadow, you can pass for one of them; you can slip out
by the opening at the rear without being noticed; steal away, find
Pedros if you can, and leave."

The eyes of the servant seemed to protrude from his head, as he grasped
the fearful meaning of these words.  Then, clutching his spear in his
hand, he whisked like a shadow into the rear apartment beyond sight.

Grimcke and Long smiled in each other's face; they could not blame the
fellow for thinking of his own safety.

"The music will begin in a few minutes," added the Professor.  "I think
you had better guard the rear; you understand, Jared, that it's no time
to throw away any powder."

"I don't propose to waste my ammunition," muttered the New Englander,
as he stepped softly into the rear apartment.

Only a slight reflection from the fire on the hearth found its way into
that part of the house, which had no window; but by the dim light Jared
Long saw a dusky figure come rapidly from the door toward him.  He was
on the point of raising his gun, when it spoke:

"It's me--Bippo."

"I thought you had left.  Why didn't you go?"

"Love my white folks--can't leave 'em, stay die wid 'em."

This sounded very fine, but the New Englander was incredulous.  He
believed that their servant was more afraid to leave than to stay.  He
had probably taken a look outside and decided that he was safer under
the shelter of those three Winchesters (for the weapon of poor Aaron
Johnston was still in the possession of his friends).

Long was inclined to ask him to take charge of the extra rifle, and use
it in helping to defend themselves; but, recalling the antipathy of the
fellow against handling firearms, he decided that he would only throw
away his cartridges.

He, therefore, cautioned him to keep out of the reach of any of the
missiles that were likely to come flying into the apartment, and urged
him, in case he saw any opening, to dart out among the people and do
his best to escape.

Professor Grimcke firmly believed that the impending fight would be to
the death, and that the only issue would be the slaying of himself and
companion.  It was the same danger they had faced many times, with the
difference that this was to be the last.

He surveyed his surroundings, like a general making ready to receive
the assault of a foe, and die fighting in the last ditch.

There was the door in front and the two windows, through which the
attack could be made.  He could cover all three with his repeating
rifle, and, when the last struggle came, appeal to his revolver and
knife.  He smiled, grimly at the reflection, that he had every ground
for believing, that the victory of the Murhapas would prove the most
costly they had ever won.  Jared Long was his equal in markmanship and
coolness, and, as he coolly remarked, there would be no ammunition
wasted, by either.




CHAPTER XXVIII.

BESIEGERS AND BESIEGED.

Suddenly a bushy bead, with a black face, horribly distorted by
passion, appeared at the window furthest from where Professor Grimcke
was standing.

The right hand was raised and in the act of poising a javelin to hurl
at the white man; but the latter, with an incredibly quick movement,
brought his Winchester to a level and fired.

The bronze skull was shattered as though it were a rotten apple, and
the Murhapa, with a resounding shriek, went backward in the darkness.

A slight rustling at the other window drew the white man's attention
thither, and, without lowering his weapon, he let fly at a group who
were simply peering within, evidently believing there was no call to
use their javelins.

Another screech told that the bullet had found its mark, and the other
faces vanished.

Then Grimcke stepped out from the wall to gain a view of the opening
which answered for a door.  A rustling there told him a crowd were
gathering, but they had taken warning just in time to avoid a third
shot.  Then he slipped a couple more cartridges from his belt into the
magazine, so as to keep it full, and awaited the next step in this
extraordinary business.

"I've about a hundred left," he reflected, "and that's enough to keep
things on a jump, if I can dodge their javelins."

Meanwhile, Jared Long was not idle.  He had but the opening at the rear
to watch, and he did the duty well.  Almost at the moment that his
comrade fired his first shot, he descried the figure of a Murhapa
trying to steal into the apartment without detection; but just enough
of the moonlight that was shut from the front doors and windows,
reached the rear of the building, to disclose the outlines of the head
and shoulders, as he began stealthily creeping into the building.

Bippo had discovered the peril at the same moment, and clutched the arm
of his master with a nervous intensity of terror.  Long impatiently
shook him off, and, with the same cool quickness of Professor Grimcke,
drove a bullet through the head of the dusky miscreant, who was slain
so suddenly that he rolled convulsively backward, without any outcry.

Almost at the same instant, a second native emitted a wild shout.  He
was directly behind the first and the latter lurched against him,
causing such fright that he leaped back several feet with the
involuntary cry fully understood by all whose ears it reached.

Long stood as rigid as a statue for several minutes, waiting for
another chance, but none presented.  Then he reflected that his
position was much more favorable than Grimcke's, for not only had he
but the single opening to guard, but his apartment was so shrouded in
gloom that the sharpest-eyed warrior could not locate him from the
outside.

The New Englander stepped to the door communicating with the front
apartment and, barely showing himself, spoke:

"I can attend to the window on the right, Professor; leave that to me,
while you watch the door and the other one."

"Thanks," returned his friend; "I think there is a little too much
light in this part of the house."

Moving quickly to the hearth he heaped the ashes with his foot upon the
blazing embers, until they were so smothered that only a few tiny
twists of flame struggled through the covering.  This left the place in
such darkness that a sense of security instantly came to him.

"Good!" called the New Englander, who could no longer be discerned;
"that makes matters more nearly equal!"

Although, as we have said, the moonlight was substantially shut off
from the front of the heavy structure, yet the moon itself, being full,
so illumined the surroundings that it was quite easy to distinguish the
head and figure of any one of their enemies the instant he presented
himself at one of the openings.

What both the defenders feared was, that the savages would make a
sudden rush and force themselves within the cabin in spite of the
disastrous reception they were sure to be given.  Such an essay was
certain to result in the overthrow of the whites, but the Murhapas must
have realized the cost it would be to them.  Brave as they were, they
hesitated to incur the consequences until other means had failed.

Professor Ernest Grimcke now did a most daring thing.  The fierce
welcome he had given the attacking Murhapas resulted in their temporary
demoralization.  Knowing they would speedily recover, he decided to
take advantage of the panic by an attempt to intensify it.

Striding to the door he paused on the very threshold and peered out
upon the large space in his field of vision.

Fully a hundred savages were in sight.  Apparently they had been
crowding around the entrance when the shots from within caused a hasty
scattering.  They had halted a dozen yards or so away, where they were
talking excitedly, still frightened and enraged, and with no thought of
relinquishing the fight.

They had withdrawn so far from the front of the building that they were
in the strong moonlight, and consequently in full view of the white
man, who saw others of the natives hurrying from the right and left.
Among them were women and children and the confusion and excitement
were fearful.

Standing thus, Grimcke again raised his repeater and deliberately
opened fire on the crowd.  It seemed cruel, but it was an act of
self-defence, for those people were clamoring for the lives of the two
men within, and would not be satisfied until they were at their mercy.

It was a strange scene that followed.  The interior of the building
being dark, while the moonlight failed to touch the front, the figure
of the white man was invisible to the dusky wretches howling on the
outside.

All at once, from the black opening of the building, came the crash of
the repeating Winchester.  Spouts of fire shot out into the gloom in
terrific succession, as if fiery serpents were darting their heads in
different directions; for the marksman aimed, quickly to the right, to
the left and to the front, never pausing until he had discharged half a
score of shots.

The panic for a minute or two was indescribable.  Men, women and
children shrieked and scattered for the nearest available shelter.
Behind the buildings and down the river bank they dashed, stumbled and
rolled, until, but for the tragic nature of the scene, the white man
would have smiled.

But he had done enough, and he stepped back within the room to
replenish the magazine of his rifle.

Jared Long had been drawn into the room by the furious fusillade, and
now put the startling question whether advantage could not be taken of
the panic to make a sudden dash for the woods.  It would never do to
make for the boat still resting against the shore, for it would be
filled with poisoned javelins before they could shove out into the
Xingu.

"I believe we can," replied the Professor; "it will take them some
minutes to get over their panic and that will be enough for us."

"Let us leave by the rear," said Long, "for I don't think that is so
well guarded."

The two turned to attempt the dash for freedom, when a cry from Bippo
struck them.

"Stay here," exclaimed the New Englander, fearing that a diversion was
on foot; "and I'll attend to him!"

He was back in the apartment in an instant.  The light on the hearth
having been extinguished, the gloom in this portion of the building was
impenetrable, but a fearful struggle of some kind was going on.  Some
animal or person had got within and grappled Bippo who was fighting
like a tiger.

Had the New Englander been able to distinguish the combatants, he would
have ended the contest in a twinkling, but though the two rolled
against his feet, he dared not fire through fear of hurting his friend.

"Are you under or on top?" he asked, bending downward at the moment he
knew from the peculiar sounds the foes had become stationary.

"_He on top_," was the doleful response.

Long extended his right hand to learn precisely how matters stood, or
rather lay, when it came in contact with the arm of a Murhapa in the
act of raising it aloft to bury his knife in the body of the helpless
Bippo, who was at the mercy of the savage, holding him inextricably in
his grasp.

The American secured a firm hold of the forearm, and with a powerful
wrench, not only jerked the miscreant free, but flung him from one side
of the room clean to the door, where he was visible in the faint light
beyond.

Evidently concluding that his mission in that place was over, he nimbly
came to his feet and shot like a rocket through the opening.

The New Englander was in no mood for sentimentality, and, he levelled
his weapon with the intention to kill; but quick as he was, he was just
a fraction of a minute too late, and, much to his chagrin, the dusky
wretch got away unharmed.

Long darted into the front room, ready for the proposal he had made
just before.

The Professor was peering out, seemingly debating whether it was not
advisable to re-open his bombardment.

"It beats creation," he remarked, as his friend appeared at his elbow,
"how quickly those fellows rally; their heads are popping up in every
direction, and it won't do to try to steal out this way."

"But I suggested the rear," reminded Long.

"Let's see how matters look there."

The survey from the other opening was disappointing.  Although all the
Murhapas had been affected in a greater or less degree by the panic,
yet it was more incomplete at the rear, because the confusing volley
had not come from that direction.

There seemed to be fully as many warriors on this side, which, with the
exception of the river, was quite similar in appearance to the other.
The shadowy figures were observed moving noiselessly in a dozen
different directions, their heads bent down and their bodies crouching,
as if in expectation of a shot, but, at the same time, they were not to
be frightened off by any fusilade from within.

"We're just too late," remarked the Professor, quick to take in every
point of the situation; "we might have done it a minute ago, but they
are watching too closely now."

"Let's open again," suggested the New Englander.

"Better wait awhile; they can be stampeded easier then than now," was
the reply of the Professor.

During this lull, when it may be said the defenders were becoming
accustomed to the siege, they had time to give a few minutes' thought
to their absent friends, Fred Ashman and Ziffak, regarding whom it was
natural to feel great curiosity.

They believed themselves warranted in hoping for the best, so far as
Ashman was concerned.  He had probably strolled some distance, and must
have been warned by the firing of the Professor's Winchester from the
front, of the serious danger in which his friends were involved.  If
all had gone well with the youth up to that time, he ought to be wise
enough to get away without an instant's delay.  What was feared was,
that in his anxiety to help his comrades, he would run into a peril
from which he could not extricate himself.

The real hope for the youth was centered on Ziffak.  Believing he had
gone forth to look after Ashman, they were confident he would speedily
get upon his track.  If so, he would not permit him to return to the
village.

From what the reader has been told, it will be seen that the defenders
were not far off in their conjectures.

But, when they came to speculate upon the part that the head chieftain
was likely to take, affecting Grimcke and Long, they were all at sea.
It would ever be a source of wonder that he had been transformed from a
relentless enemy into the strongest of friends, but they fully realized
that such friendship must have its bounds.

Ziffak might not shrink from using very plain speech when talking face
to face with his brother, but it was hardly to be supposed that he
would raise his arm against his authority.   At the time Ziffak made
known the probability that the explorers might be compelled to take
their departure that evening, he gave no intimation of any purpose of
helping them to resist such an order.

Accustomed as he was to lead the warlike Murhapas in battle, he might
well hesitate to ask them to turn their weapons against the king, and
if he should presume on such treason, all the probabilities were that
such weapons would be turned against the head chieftain himself.




CHAPTER XXIX.

ACROSS THE LAKE.

A few minutes after passing the bend in the stream, which hid the rock
and the sleeping sentinel from sight, Fred Ashman observed that the
smooth current broadened into a lake, forming the extraordinary sheet
of water of which he had heard such strange accounts.

He held the paddle suspended, and looked around.

The surface was as calm as the face of a mirror, and in the strong
moonlight, as he looked down he could see that it was of crystalline
clearness--so much so, indeed, that a boat or any floating object
looked as if suspended in mid-air.

It expanded right and left and in front, until he could barely discern
the dim outlines of trees and rocks that shut it in.  It was probably
two or three square miles in extent, and to the westward the shore
appeared to be composed of enormous boulders and masses of rocks.

Directly ahead, was a crag more massive than the rest, towering a
hundred feet above the lake, with a breadth fully one half as great.
It resembled some gigantic sentinel, keeping ward and watch over the
strange region unknown to few if any white man.

Ashman turned to his companion with the question, what course he should
take, and, without speaking, she pointed to the rock which she saw had
attracted his attention.

Very slight effort was required to propel the delicate craft, which
seemed to become sentient, and to move forward in obedience to the
wishes of its occupants.  He barely dipped the blade into the water,
when it skimmed forward like a swallow.  After a number of strokes he
ceased and fixed his eyes on the landmark by which he was proceeding.

A singular emotion held him speechless for the time.  The vast mass of
stone appeared to be slowly rising from the bosom of the lake, and,
instead of remaining motionless, was advancing to meet the tiny canoe
and its awed occupants.  One moment, it was like some vast ogre,
stealing silently about to crush them beneath the clear waters, and
then it became a friendly giant, reaching out its hand to lead them
forward.

But for the distant sounds of firing at the Murhapa village, Fred
Ashman would have felt that it was all a vision of sleep, from which he
must soon awake to the realities of life.

But that horrible, grinding discord continually creeping into their
ears told too plainly the dreadful scenes at comparatively a short
distance.  Even in his exalted mental state, Ashman began to ask
himself what was to be the end of the strange venture upon which he had
started.  A disquieting misgiving arose, that perhaps he had not done
the wisest thing in leaving his imperilled friends.

But he reflected that he had only obeyed the orders of Ziffak, who
indeed would not have permitted his wishes to be disregarded, for who
should know the wisest course so well as he?  Besides, his own reason
told him that if the Professor and his companion were attacked in the
cabin, it was impossible for him to raise a finger in their behalf.

And so he dismissed that phase of the marvellous business from his mind
and faced the present situation.

He had fled with Ariel from her father, King Haffgo.  Instead of
turning to the northward down the Xingu, they had gone further up the
stream and directly away from the right course out of the perilous
country.

But while, in one sense, this might be looked upon as the height of
recklessness, he saw it was unavoidable.  Had they turned down the
Xingu, there would have been no escaping their foes, while the
enchanted lake and its surroundings must afford secure shelter for a
time.

But for how long?

That was the question which obtruded itself, even while filled with the
delightful thrill of his new love, and when _en rapport_ with his
marvellous surroundings.

The intimate knowledge which Ariel possessed of the region would guide
them to some spot where they could reasonably hope to be safe from
pursuit, unless such pursuit was led by her enraged parent.

Ashman was still scrutinizing the great mass of rock, steadily assuming
more definite shape in the moonlight as the intervening distance
decreased, when he was surprised that he had not noticed the
mountainous elevation behind it.  The immense rock seemed but the
beginning of others rising beyond to the height of a thousand feet,
while they broadened to the right and left until they stretched over an
extent of several miles.

It seemed to him that these constituted a spur of the Geral range,
which extend in a northwesterly direction between the Guapore River
(forming a part of the eastern boundary of Bolivia) and the headwaters
of the Tapajos and Xingu.  If so, their extent was continuous for a
hundred miles.

Ashman had ceased paddling, though, under the faint momentum remaining,
the canoe continued slowly moving over the lake and gradually drawing
near the rock.  He did not break the silence, but asked himself what
could be the reason of Ariel's direction for him to paddle toward the
rock.  He supposed there was some place of concealment which she had in
mind, though he discerned nothing of that nature.

"We cannot stay there forever," was the practical thought in the mind
of the lover, who felt the next moment as though he would be happy to
dwell forever anywhere with her.

"After we have staid here until pursuit is given up--_if it ever will
be_--then we must leave the country.  I will take her to my home in
North America, where I shall love and cherish her and become the envied
of all men."

"We are approaching the rock," he said, addressing her; "what next,
dearest Ariel."

"Paddle right on," was the astonishing reply.

He looked at her with a questioning smile.  Could she be in earnest?

"Right on," she repeated, reading his thoughts aright.

"Very well; the slave obeys his mistress," he replied, giving the
paddle another dip in the water.

Gazing ahead, he instantly discovered the cause of her reply.  A tunnel
opened into the rock, seemingly near the centre.  It was perhaps ten
feet in height and with a width slightly greater.  Could it be she
meant he should enter that black forbidding passage?  He asked the
question and she replied that such was her wish.

He could not decline to take her whither she desired to go.  Gently
swaying the blade, he sent the boat within the dark opening, which
appeared to distend its jaws to swallow the canoe and them from the
world to which they had bidden good-bye.

Ashman was beginning to ask himself how he was to continue the advance
in the darkness, which must become impenetrable as they passed beyond
the limit of the moonlight, when he perceived the water into which he
dipped the paddle.

Not only that, but it grew more distinct as he progressed, until once
more the form of his beloved came out to view, as she sat near him in
the canoe.

Wondering what it all meant, he gazed ahead.  The surface of the water
grew plainer, as his eye ranged along the tunnel, until, only a short
distance away, the view was clearer than on the lake itself, beneath
the full moon.

What was the explanation of this wonderful sea of illumination into
which he was guiding the canoe?




CHAPTER XXX.

A GUESS.

Standing in the door of the building, his figure so wrapped in gloom
that it was invisible to the fierce Murhapas, Professor Grimcke
cautiously peered out upon the multitude that were clamorously seeking
the death of himself and comrade.

The horde seemed to be everywhere.  They were glaring over the river
bank, behind which they could find secure shelter by merely dropping
their heads; they were crouching at the corners of the adjacent houses,
the king's residence affording screen to fully a score.  Not yet fully
recovered from their panic, they appeared to be awaiting the leadership
of some strong man who held the fire-arms of the explorers in less
dread than they.

A form rose upright along the Xingu, at the upper portion of the line
of savages.  In the full moonlight he was as clearly revealed as if at
mid-day.

It was with strange feelings that Professor Grimcke saw that this
individual belonged to the same race as himself.  He was one of the two
white men that had lived for years among the Murhapas and who had
instigated the furious assault upon them.

"You have earned your fate," muttered the German, bringing his unerring
Winchester once more to his shoulder, and sighting as best he could at
the unconscious miscreant, who appeared to be conversing with some one
sitting on the ground at his side.

The finger of Grimcke was pressing the trigger when, yielding to an
unaccountable impulse, he lowered the weapon.  He was impatient with
himself that his heart should fail him at the critical moment, but
perhaps it was well it was so.

"You and I ought to be friends," he reflected, "and it is not my fault
that we are not, however, I cannot shoot you down like a dog, though
you deserve it."

The emotion which checked him so unexpectedly, also prevented his
renewing fire upon the Murhapas, who were really less guilty than he.

He had decided to await the next demonstration before discharging his
gun again.

Jared Long was as vigilant and alert as his friend.  It may be doubted
whether he would have spared Waggaman, had he been given the
opportunity to draw bead on him.  He realized too vividly that the two
defenders never would have been in this fearful situation but for the
machinations of those two men.

It seemed to him that Bippo was curiously quiet.  He had not spoken,
nor, so far as he could judge, moved since his own return from his
brief conference with the Professor.

He pronounced his name in a low voice, but there was no reply.  A call
in a louder tone also failed of response.

"I wonder whether he was killed?" was the thought which led Long to
leave his station at the door, and to set out on a tour of
investigation around the room, using his hands and feet to aid him.

He expected every minute to come in contact with the lifeless figure of
his helper, whom he supposed to have been pierced by the poisoned
weapon of the Murhapa; but when he had passed around the apartment and
across it several times, until assured that not a foot of square space
had been neglected he awoke to the fact that Bippo was not there.

It was hardly probable that he had entered the front apartment, but he
made inquiry of the Professor.  The latter replied that he had heard
nothing of him; but, since he had a few minutes that could be spared
without danger for that purpose, he went through a search similar to
that of his friend.

"He is not here," called the Professor, in a guarded undertone.

The surprising conclusion followed that the fellow after all had
effected his escape from the building, though how it was done puzzled
the two whom he left behind.

Bippo had got away by yielding to one of those sudden inspirations
which sometimes come to a person.  Hearing the explorers speaking about
a stealthy withdrawal by the rear, he decided to anticipate them.
Without pausing to debate the matter or ask for permission, he slipped
out the rear door and moved rapidly off in a crouching posture.

He must have been seen by numbers of the Murhapas, but was mistaken for
one of their own number.

The error cannot be regarded as remarkable, when it is recalled that
Bippo bore a strong resemblance to the savages around them.  He was
dressed the same and carried a spear similar to the missiles used by
them.  Though he lacked their bushy heads and stature, these were not
marked enough to attract notice at a time when the Murhapas knew that
several of their number had been defeated in their efforts to enter the
structure from the rear.

With his wits sharpened by his danger, Bippo displayed admirable
discretion.  Showing no undue haste or flurry, he avoided too close
acquaintance with the savages, who were so absorbed in the work of
securing the destruction of the white men that they paid less attention
to such an incident than they would at any other time.

So it was that he edged farther and farther away, until he found
himself so close to the woods that he whisked among the trees without
any one questioning or trying to check him.  He was free at last, and,
as if Dame Fortune had decided to take him in charge, he had hardly
reached the margin of the Xingu, at a point considerably below the
village, when he almost stumbled over Pedros, who was waiting and
wondering what he ought to do next.

Both the Professor and his friend were glad that Bippo had managed to
get away.  They liked the fellow, and, even if they must be sacrificed,
it was a relief to know that the poor native, who had had such a woful
experience since leaving the Amazon, now had a fighting chance of
escaping from the dreadful region.

Besides, as has been shown, the presence of the fellow was more of an
incumbrance than a help.  But for the delay caused by Long's rush to
his help, the whites would have made a dash for liberty themselves,
though the question of their escape was problematical to the last
degree.

Precious little ground could the explorers see for extricating
themselves from their peril.  The Murhapas numbered a hundred, all were
brave, and the weapons in their hands were dreaded tenfold more than
firearms.  It seemed miraculous that Grimcke and Long had not been
pierced long before.  Why did not the Murhapas set fire to the
building, after the manner of the North American Indians?

This was the question which both the defenders had asked themselves
several times, but in the case of each the answer was obvious.

The house, it will be recalled, adjoined that of King Haffgo, and,
although there was no wind blowing, the burning of the less important
structure was sure to endanger the other.  As a last resort, the white
men might be driven out in that way, but not yet.

If the besiegers could persuade themselves to make a united rush, they
would be sure to prevail; but, as has been explained, the cost of such
an essay was sure to be frightful, and led the Murhapas to defer that,
also, until assured less risky means would not prevail.

It seemed to our friends that there were scores of schemes which ought
to be successful, and, such being the case, it will be understood why
they believed their last fight was on, and why they were disposed to
show no mercy to their assailants.

The Professor was surprised, knowing, as he did, the part taken against
them by Waggaman and Burkhardt, that no reports of firearms had yet
been heard among the assailants.  It would seem as if something of the
kind was required in order that those miscreants should retain their
prestige among the people.

Now, all these thoughts and many more passed through the minds of the
defenders in a tenth of the time it has taken us to put them on paper.
It was yet early in the evening, and the crisis in the siege must come
before long.

Jared Long peeped out of the rear entrance.  A study of what he saw
showed little change in the situation.  He was convinced that the next
demonstration would be from the front.  He, therefore, did not hesitate
to leave his post and slip into the next room for a few hasty words
with the Professor.

"There's no use of staying in here," he said, "for we are sure to be
overwhelmed within the next hour."

"I fully agree with you."

"And I can see but one desperate hope."

"What is that?"

"To follow Bippo."

"I agree with you again; let us make such a demonstration from the
front that we shall be able to draw most of them there; then one of us
will make a rush."

"Why not both."

"We shall fail; one must keep up the firing while they think both are
at it, and then the other can make the attempt."

"Very well; let me open here."

"No; we will both do it; you know that this station is mine and as soon
as there appears to be a chance, you can make the start."

Now, both of the men believed in their hearts that if the desperate
scheme could work, that the utmost it could do would be to save one:
there could be no earthly chance for the other.

It was characteristic of the chivalrous friendship of each that he had
fully determined that that forlorn opportunity should be given to the
other.

But they understood their mutual natures too well to waste any words in
argument, for neither would yield.

"Very well, Professor; we'll draw lots."

"I will agree to that."

It was so dark in the room that they could not see each other, nor did
either window afford light enough for their purpose.

Grimcke glanced out the door.  No immediate movement seemed impending,
and they moved to the fire-place.  The Professor kicked some of the
ashes aside and a tiny blaze arose, throwing a dull illumination over a
few feet of the room.

The Professor drew an American coin from his pocket,--one that he had
kept ever since entering South America.

"Now," said he, placing both hands behind his back, "tell me which
contains it."

"The right," said the New Englander.

"You have lost," coolly replied the Professor, bringing the two hands
quickly to the front and opening the palms.

Sure enough the coin was in the left, but the sly fellow did not
confess that he had deftly changed it after his companion made his
guess.




CHAPTER XXXI.

A DESPERATE SCHEME.

Not another word was said.  The question had been submitted to the
arbitrament of chance and the New Englander had lost, and that, too
without any suspicion on his part of the little trick played upon him.

Before resorting to the last opportunity, Long slipped through the back
room and ascertained the outlook there.  He was surprised at the
result.  Hardly a native was visible.  It looked indeed as if they were
working their way round to the front, and that some scheme of attack
had been agreed upon by the leaders from that point.

The Professor's survey confirmed the theory of his friend.  The
Murhapas were more plentiful than ever.  They appeared to be
marshalling along the bank of the Xingu, where there were so many that
it was impossible to count the heads and shoulders rising above the
slope.

Waggaman was not in sight, though there could be no doubt that he was
the inspiring spirit in the movement.  All the indications were that a
rush had been agreed upon.  Should it be permitted to come off
unopposed in its incipiency, it would be all up with the men who had
defended themselves so bravely thus far.

"I will begin at the head of the row," said the Professor, "and you at
the foot; make every shot tell."

"All right; begin!"

The fusillade was opened the same instant.  Both men fired rapidly,
and, though they could not pause to make their aim as sure as they
wished, and though it is not to be supposed that every shot was
effective, yet the execution was dreadful.

Arms were seen flung spasmodically upwards, figures leaped clear off
the ground and then fell back out of sight, shrieks and shouts filled
the air, and still the crack of the Winchesters continued without
intermission.

One gratifying feature of the fearful scene was that the warriors began
flocking around to the front, though they kept well back, as if to
avoid the murderous discharge.  These new arrivals not only afforded
additional targets to the riflemen, despite their furious efforts to
screen themselves, but proved that the scheme of the defenders was
working as they desired: the natives were swarming from the rear to the
front.

"Off with you; don't wait!" commanded the Professor.

"Good-bye!" was all that Jared Long said, as he darted from the side of
his gallant friend and vanished.

Professor Grimcke took a few seconds to refill his magazine, when up
went his Winchester again and the furious discharges seemed to be more
rapid than before.

It would naturally be supposed that if the assailants saw that both of
the white men had concentrated their fusillade at the front, they would
make a dash to the rear.  That, it may be said, would be the second
step in the programme.  It was calculated that the sudden volleys of
the rifles would draw all the natives thither, and then, after learning
what had taken place, a large part of them would rush back again.

The New Englander had been gone only a few minutes, when the Professor
saw evidences that the second step was about to be taken.  The savages
were beginning to move back to the rear, though at a greater distance
then from the building than before.

All at once Grimcke ceased firing.  While looking sharply out of the
door, he mechanically refilled the magazine of his rifle from his stock
of cartridges which was running low.

"Now or never!" he said to himself, and then, turning, he ran swiftly
through the two rooms to the rear door, through which he bounded
without a moment's hesitation.

He expected his flight would be announced by a series of shouts and a
storm of poisoned javelins.  He held his breath, and, as the seconds
passed, began wondering whether there was a possibility after all of
successfully following the footsteps of his friend.

He was encouraged by the sounds of the deafening tumult from the front
of the house.  The Murhapas had swarmed into the front-room, proving
that they had decided upon making the very rush of which the defenders
stood in such dread.

This, although only a momentary diversion, was immeasurably in favor of
the daring attempt of the flying fugitive.

Lest the reader may pronounce the escape of these two white men
incredible, we hasten to explain that which, if left unexplained, would
warrant such disbelief on the part of our friends.

The individual who gave the wild scheme an ending that otherwise it
never could have had, was Ziffak, the head chieftain of the Murhapas.
He proved to be the all-potent factor in the terrible problem.

From what has been related about these strange inhabitants of the Matto
Grosso, it need not be said that they were too cunning, if left to
themselves, to allow a door to stand open for their intended victims to
escape, after penning them in such a trap.

Ziffak was the shrewdest member of the Murhapa tribe and much more
fitted to be its ruler than King Haffgo.  After bidding good-bye to the
lovers, he hastened back to the middle of the village, where he arrived
after the first disastrous repulse given his people by Professor
Grimcke.

It took the fellow but a few moments to grasp the situation.  He told
no one of the death of Burkhardt, but busied himself in learning
precisely how matters stood.  Had he dared to do so, he would have
ordered a cessation of the attack, but the latter was made by the
direct orders of King Haffgo, and Ziffak was not the chieftain to butt
his head against a stone wall, by an open defiance of his royal
brother's authority.

The assault was under the direction of Waggaman himself.  The king from
his own door, where he could not be reached by any bullet of the
defenders, was watching the futile assault with an impatience and anger
that could hardly be restrained.  His soul became like a volcano, as he
saw his brave warriors fall back, with many of them biting the dust.
Had not the traditions of his country forbade such a proceeding, he
would have placed himself at the head of the natives and led the
decisive charge.

Seeing how it was at the front, Ziffak cautiously made his way to the
rear.  There were few warriors there, and he instinctively felt that if
his white friends were to get off at all, it must be through the rear
opening.

While intently debating with himself what he could do to help them, he
stealthily slipped down to where the large boat was lying under the
bank.  No one was near it, for the attention of all was concentrated on
the fight under way.  Unobserved, he shoved the craft out into the
stream and saw it drift with the current.

Returning to the rear of the besieged building again, he formed the
plan of getting the warriors to the front and then dashing back and
helping them out.  This was a wild scheme, and involved great personal
risk to himself, for he was sure to be punished for rendering aid whose
discovery was inevitable.

At the very moment he was about to make the attempt, Grimcke and Long
gave him unexpected help by opening their united fire from the front
upon the warriors marshalling for the decisive charge.

This afforded him just the pretext he wanted, to order the Murhapas to
hasten to the other side of the building to assist in what was in
contemplation there, though, even with such a movement under way, it
will be seen that the right place for a portion of the savages was at
the rear, in order to head off the very thing that was attempted.

Thus it was, that, while the two explorers were congratulating
themselves on the success of their clever scheme, they never suspected
that its success was due to their giant friend, who kept himself so
well in the background that neither of them caught sight of him.

Having got his men away, Ziffak slipped back with the purpose of
carrying out the rest of the plan he had formed; but before he could
reach the rear entrance, he caught sight of Professor Grimcke running
like a deer toward the woods.

Ziffak was puzzled, not knowing that his friend had preceded him, and
he dashed into the building to hurry him out.  As he came in at one
door, Waggaman and the Murhapas swarmed in at the other, and
pandemonium was let loose.

The certainty of another murderous fire from the rifles of the
defenders caused some lagging at the threshold, but those in the rear
forced those at the front forward, and the next moment the mob was
inside.

Still there was no sound of firearms, though, the savages were crowding
into both apartments.  Some one kicked the ashes from the embers, and
the blaze which followed made known the astounding fact that both of
the white men had fled.

Ziffak seemed to be in a towering rage because such a blunder had been
made, and called upon the fleetest runners to follow him.

Out of the door he went as if shot from the throat of a columbiad, with
a procession of sinewy-limbed warriors at his heels.  All ran as fast
as they could, though none were his equal in fleetness.

It need hardly be said that Ziffak took mighty good care that he did
not pursue the course of Professor Grimcke, and presumably that of his
companion who preceded him.  Instead of aiming for the woods, he
diverged toward the river, and seemed to find it necessary to shout and
yell every second or two at the top of his voice.

His followers may have imagined he was laboring under uncontrollable
rage or deemed it necessary to keep their courage up to the highest
point by such means; but the two fugitives who had joined each other in
the woods, and were picking their way with the utmost care, held a
strong suspicion that the prodigious shouts were intended for their
special benefit.  At any rate, they accepted them as such, and took
pains to continue their flight in a different course from that of the
howling Murhapas.

It did not require Ziffak long to find out that the fugitives were
irrecoverably gone, and he came back with his report to the king.

There he was met by astounding news.  Burkhardt had been slain by a
poisoned javelin, and Ariel, the beloved daughter of the ruler, had
been seen in full flight toward the enchanted lake in the company of
the execrated white man, Ashman.  Pursuit was to be organized at once,
and, though Ziffak was to take part, yet the chosen warriors were to be
led by the king in person.




CHAPTER XXXII.

THE BURNING MOUNTAIN.

The tunnel through which Ashman propelled the canoe containing himself
and Ariel, was more than a hundred yards in length.  It was only for
the smallest distance that the craft was in darkness, when the water
began to reflect light and reveal its outlines.

A few minutes later the tunnel was passed, and they debouched into an
expansion of the enchanted lake.  The second division was similar to
the other and almost as large, but its appearance was tenfold more
wonderful.

The sheet of water may be said to have been divided into two nearly
equal parts by the narrow tunnel running under the mass of rocks
described.  One division was in the outer air, after the usual fashion
of lakes, while the other was wholly underground.

The interior lake was nearly circular in shape, with an arching roof
hundreds of feet high.  It was surrounded by towering crags, and
volcanic masses of stone, which gave it an appearance different from
anything on which Fred Ashman had ever looked.  Nothing grander,
wilder, more picturesque or romantic can be conceived.  It was a scene
which an explorer could stand for hours and contemplate in rapt
admiration.

But the most amazing feature of this underground lake was the way in
which it was illuminated, so that every portion stood out in as bold
relief as if under the flaming sun of mid-day.

At the western side, the shore, as was the case in nearly all other
directions, was a mass of jagged rocks, piled upon each other in the
wildest confusion.  Beyond these rocks, was a vast chasm above the
level of the lake, and extending right and left for a distance of fifty
rods.  This huge chasm was one mass of crimson light, whose rays
pierced every nook and cranny on every side of the lake.

The eye gazing in that direction saw something similar to that which
greets the traveller in the far north, when viewing the play of the
aurora borealis in the horizon, or when the red sun is rising from its
ocean bed.

This enormous opening was so surcharged with light that Ashman, after
contemplating it but a minute or two, did not need to ask its source.
Beyond the area of illumination was the burning mountain whose
blood-red glow covered the entire surface and shores of the underground
portion of the enchanted lake.  The volcano had been aflame for ages,
and was likely to continue to burn for centuries to come.

Such an eternal conflagration must have an outlet for the vast quantity
of vapor generated, and Ashman wondered that he had not noticed the
ascending smoke on his way thither.  He recalled that when he and his
friend were coming up the Xingu, far below the last rapids, they
observed a dark cloud resting in the western horizon.  There was no
thought at that time that it was caused by a burning mountain, but such
must have been the fact.  The most singular fact was, that while on his
way across the lake to the tunnel, he had failed to notice and remark
it.

There was a steady draft in the direction of the flaming cavern.  He
had observed it while paddling through the tunnel where it was strong
enough to assist in the propulsion of the canoe.  It was caused by the
ascent of the vapor through the chimney of the fiery mountain, and
averted the intolerable heat that otherwise would have been felt over
every portion of the lake.  As it was, a moderate increase of
temperature was perceptible.

Ashman was tempted to paddle the canoe to the black rocks which
separated the chasm from the lake, and he timidly moved the blade,
restrained by the fear of something in the nature of a "back draft,"
which might consume them before they could escape.

Ariel assured him that she had never encountered or heard of anything
of the kind, though she had often visited this remarkable region in the
company of her father.  Thereupon Ashman sent the boat ahead faster
than before, and a minute later the bow touched the rocky wharf.

Stepping out, he drew the bow upon the rocks, so as to hold it fast,
and, extending his hand, assisted her to shore.  Then he drew the craft
still further up, and, taking her hand again in his own, began picking
their way over the jagged bowlders and stones to the edge of the
volcano.

From the margin of the lake to the other side of the mass of rocks was
a hundred feet.  This may be defined as a solid wall, shutting out the
water from the burning mountain.  The rocks rose to a height of a dozen
rods or so, attaining which a spectator found himself half-way across
the dividing ridge, where, viewed from the lake, his figure looked as
if stamped in ink on the crimson background.

It was here that the lovers paused and viewed the striking picture
spread out before their vision.

That which they saw might properly be considered the crater of the
volcano.  It was four or five acres in extent, irregular in contour,
and so filled with gases and vapors that one could not see the bottom,
while the jagged boundary on the farther side came out to view only at
intervals, when the obstructing smoke was swept aside.

Spiral columns of black vapor twisted swiftly upward from the fiery
depths, sometimes side by side, and sometimes they would unite and
climb toward the opening above, like a couple of huge serpents
struggling together.  The air quivered and pulsated in certain
portions, as if with fervid heat, and Ashman fancied once or twice that
he caught glimpses of a vast mass of molten stuff, far down in the
mountain, surging; seething and turning upon itself with terrific
violence.  But the glare was so dazzling that it was like staring at
the sun, and he was compelled to withdraw his gaze.

The opening above, through which all this vapor and gas effected its
escape into the clear atmosphere outside, was of irregular outline and
no more than twenty feet across.  It was at a great height above the
spectators, and ought to have been visible many miles in every
direction.

Now and then Ashman caught the odor of the sulphurous fumes rising from
the naming depth, and he could not help reflecting that if the
ascending vapors should swerve toward them only for a minute or two,
they would be asphyxiated before they could get away; but he could not
shrink, when his lovely companion stood so boldly by his side, unmoved
by the impressive scene.

When he had become accustomed in a degree to the sight, the like of
which he had never viewed before, he recalled that they could not
occupy a more conspicuous position, in the event of being pursued by
their enemies to the underground lake.

As we have explained, they were standing on the highest portion of the
rocky wall, separating the burning mountain from the subterranean
portion of the enchanted lake.  In this situation, they were in sight
from every portion of the shore; any one entering by the tunnel, as
they had done, would descry them almost at once, because of the vivid
background against which their figures were thrown.

This fact led Ashman to turn to his love and suggest that they should
leave the spot.  She nodded her head in acquiescence, and, still
clasping hands, they began picking their way down among the bowlders to
the spot where they had left their canoe a short time before.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE PURSUERS.

Haffgo, king of the Murhapas, intended to keep his promise to Ziffak,
so far as permitting the explorers to remain in his village until the
morrow, at which time he intended that the men should be allowed to go
in safety.

But the barbarian was very similar to some of us whose resentment grows
with reflection.  When he recalled the admiring glances of the handsome
young member of the company towards his beloved Ariel, his anger became
intense, fanned by the strong suspicion that the princess herself felt
some interest in the stranger.

At this critical time, Waggaman put in an appearance.  The ruffian was
shrewd enough to see his opportunity, and it took him but a few minutes
to rouse him to the exploding point.  He determined that every one of
the whites should die, and he ordered the assault which has already
been described.

As has been explained, the king kept within his home, while the attack
was under way; but since he resided adjoining the structure which was
assaulted, he was aware of every phase of the progress.

His rage has been hinted at because of the repulse of his warriors
directly under his own eyes; but when he came to learn that the youth
against whom his resentment burned so hotly was not within the
building; that the two who had fought so bravely had escaped with their
native helpers; that his own daughter the princess was absent; that she
had been seen fleeing with the white youth in the direction of the
enchanted lake:--when all this became known to the ruler, it may be
said that his fury was such that no language could do it justice.  It
is not impossible that the despot felt thus himself, for, without
pausing to give utterance to a few of his imaginings, he made instant
preparations to follow the couple to the region which he never
permitted a white man to look upon.

A native woman had seen the princess pass up the side of the river,
followed a few minutes later by the young man.  Her curiosity led her
to watch them.  She saw the two meet and stand for some time in loving
converse.  Then one of the white men stole behind them and was about to
fire his dreadful weapon, when Ziffak hurled his terrible javelin which
pinned him to the ground.  Then the native woman hastened to the palace
to tell the news, but she could not gain the chance for some time.

When the king turned upon his brother for an explanation of what he had
done, Ziffak was prepared.  It was the intention of Burkhardt to shoot
not the white man but the princess herself, because she had refused his
love.  He heard Burkhardt mutter those words to himself and it was
because of those words that Ziffak drove his javelin through his body.

King Haffgo looked sharply at his kinsman when he made this unblushing
response, but his doubts if there were any quickly vanished, when he
recalled the impetuosity with which he had attacked the defenders in
the house and the vigor of his pursuit and his evident indignation and
chagrin at the escape of the two white men.  No, Ziffak might talk
plainly with his royal brother, but when the time for action came he
was a true Murhapa, who knew only his duty to his king.

Besides, the little flurry between the two had helped to clear away the
fogs of misunderstanding as the lightning often purifies the murky
atmosphere.  The pursuit of the lovers was quickly organized, for they
now occupied the thoughts of the king to the exclusion of everything
else.  Grimcke and Long could not be far off, and a vigorous hunt was
likely to discover one or both of them, but the king gave orders that
no attempt of the kind should be made.  It was his intention to leave
the village for an indefinite time, and he wished every one of his
warriors to remain while he was absent.  It cannot be said that he was
afraid of such an insignificant force, but there was a strong vein of
superstition in his nature, which caused a vague fear of the men that
had escaped him with such wonderful cleverness.  Individuals who could
do _that_ sort of thing, were capable of doing things still more
marvellous, and to use homely language, King Haffgo was taking no
chances.

The party in pursuit numbered just ten persona including the king,
Ziffak, Waggaman, and the very pick of the tribe.  They were all
splendid fellows, fit to be the body-guard of a king, who, when he laid
aside the robes of cumbrous dress he was accustomed to wear, and
arrayed himself similarly to the warriors, proved himself no mean
leader of such a party.

Any one looking upon the little company would have been most impressed
by the fact that there were nine dusky barbarians, half naked and as
black as Africans, under the guidance of a man as fair as any European;
and yet, as the reader knows, the most prominent warrior of the party
was the brother of that king, dusky, tall and a giant in stature.

A tribe living in a country as well watered as the Matto Grosso, is
sure to be well provided with the means of navigation, though the
explorers, when they first reached the neighborhood of the rapids,
deemed there was an unusual absence of such craft.  A canoe, longer
even than that used by our friends in ascending from the Amazon, was
carried a short distance down the bank and launched in the Xingu.  Five
of the warriors seized their long paddles and swung them with the skill
of veterans.  They were accustomed to that kind of work, and sent the
craft up the current with much greater speed than would have been
suspected, even by those accustomed to see such work.

Two of the dusky occupants were furnished with bows and arrows, while
Waggaman carried his rifle.  Thus every species of weapon known to the
Murhapas was in the boat.

King Haffgo sat at the stern, his brow dark and threatening, his arms
folded and his lips set.  His thoughts were too deep for utterance and
no one ventured to disturb him.  Though the pale countenance was
outwardly calm, yet a volcano was raging in that breast, hot and
furious enough to burst out and consume the barbarian.

Just in front of him, Ziffak was facing toward the prow, directing the
actions of the crew, though for a time little of that was required of
him.  Waggaman was at the prow, silent, glum, scowling.  He did not
speak for a long while, but, now and then, glanced at Ziffak.  When he
did so, he was pretty sure to find the black eyes of the head chieftain
fixed upon him.

The two thoroughly distrusted each other.  Waggaman knew why that
javelin had been driven through the body of his associate and, though
the convict felt little sorrow for the loss of his companion, yet he
hated the chieftain with a deadly hatred, well aware as he was that the
feeling was thoroughly reciprocated by Ziffak.

Whether King Haffgo suspected the truth cannot be known, nor is it of
importance to know.  All the energy of his nature was concentrated in
the emotion of fury against Fred Ashman, who had committed the
unparalleled presumption of robbing him of his daughter; and even
against that lovely maiden he was so incensed that he stood ready to
bury his spear in her snowy bosom.

Though it may have seemed strange to Ashman that Ziffak had ordered him
to make all haste to the enchanted lake, instead of starting on a
direct flight through the woods, returning to the Xingu at a lower
point, yet the sagacious chieftain had the best of reasons for his
course, as will soon appear.

Had Ashman fled through the forest, the fact would have been discovered
at daybreak, if not before, and such a vigorous pursuit would have been
pressed as to render escape out of the question.  There was a
possibility of outwitting Haffgo by the flight to the lake, though it
was remote enough to cause the giant warrior to shudder when he
reflected upon it.

That which caused Ziffak regret was, that he had not paused long enough
before parting from the couple, to arrange a better understanding with
them.  As it was, he was mostly in the dark concerning their movements,
and greatly handicapped by the necessity of appearing to be the devoted
ally of his royal brother.

Under the powerful propulsion of the five paddles, the long narrow
canoe sped swiftly up the Xingu, and, sooner than even Ziffak
anticipated, it turned into the narrow stream leading to the enchanted
lake.  Along this it sped like a swallow until the huge rock with its
sentinel came in sight.

It was here that King Haffgo, for the first time, showed some interest
in his surroundings.  He scanned the massive rock closely and
manifestly was surprised that the guard did not rise to his feet and
challenge them.

Observing that the figure remained motionless, he commanded the craft
to approach the rock.  This was silently done, the boat halting with
the prow touching the mass of black stone.

Still the sentinel moved not, all unaware of his peril.  One keen
glance showed he was committing the unpardonable sin of sleeping at his
post.

Rising quickly to his feet, the king stood upright for an instant, and
then, with a furious exclamation, drove the javelin which he snatched
from the hands of one of the warriors through the breast of the
unfaithful servant, who uttered but a single groan as he perished by
the hands of his master and sovereign.

Then Haffgo commanded one of his men to take his place.  The fellow
instantly sprang from the boat and took his station on the rock, as the
successor of him who had died so ignominiously.  Little fear of his
falling asleep on his post.

A minute later the boat shot out upon the moonlit surface of the
enchanted lake.  There the occupants used their eyes for all they were
worth, the craft making a partial circuit of the sheet of water.  There
was a possibility that the fugitives were there, though it was slight.
Many places afforded a landing, where they might have found temporary
shelter, but nothing was seen of the boat, and Haffgo ordered the
oarsmen to pass through the tunnel leading to the underground lake.

This was speedily effected, and the large boat debouched into the
wonderful body of water, so brilliantly illuminated by the glare from
the burning mountain on the western side.

Instinctively every eye was cast in that direction, but nothing
rewarded the scrutiny.  Then the vision swept along the shores, every
portion of which, as will be remembered, was in plain view.

Almost at the same moment; Ziffak uttered an excited exclamation, and
pointed to the northern shore.  As the gaze of every one was directed
thither, they caught sight of the craft for which they were so eagerly
hunting.




CHAPTER XXXIV.

WATCHING AND WAITING.

When Professor Ernest Grimcke realized that his desperate flight from
the besieged building had been attended with complete success, and that
he was standing among the dense shadows of the forest, with no enemy
near, he devoutly uncovered his head, and, looking upward, uttered his
fervent thanks to heaven for its amazing mercy.

"If ever a man was snatched from the jaws of death," he said, "I am
that man."

"And I am another," added Jared Long, who approached in the gloom.  "It
seems to me like a veritable miracle."

The New Englander explained that, after his furious dash for shelter
from the building, he did not believe his chances were any better than
those of the man he left behind him.  He started, with the intention of
making his way by a circuitous course to the river, but had not gone
far when he was struck by the baseness of his desertion of his friend.
He, therefore, turned about with the resolve to try to do something for
him, but had no more than caught sight of the structure again when he
descried the Professor coming like a whirlwind for the trees.

Long moved to the point at which he saw he was aiming, and held his
Winchester ready to open on any pursuers that might try to follow him.
He would have picked off a dozen or so, for he was cool and collected,
and fully determined to stand by his friend to the death.

Fortunately, however, for all parties concerned, none of the Murhapas
pursued the Professor, though, as has been told, a number under the
leadership of Ziffak dashed off in another direction, without
endangering the fugitives in the least.

It was a marvellous deliverance, indeed, for our friends, and they
understood the part the giant head chieftain had taken in extricating
them from the peril.  Their hearts glowed with gratitude to the savage,
whose friendship for them they could not understand, but who had proven
it in such a striking manner.

But it could not be said that they were yet free from danger; and there
was much to do before they could breathe freely.

It needed but a brief consultation to agree that after what had taken
place, it was the height of madness to attempt to push on to the
enchanted lake and burning mountain.  King Haffgo was so roused that
there was not the slightest chance of escape.  The only earthly
probability of accomplishing anything in that direction, was by
bringing a force strong enough to sweep the warlike Murhapas from their
path.

Thankful would the little party of explorers be if they were permitted
to get out of the Matto Grosso with their lives.

They waited in the margin of the wood until the return of Ziffak and
his baffled company.  It was easy to understand the clever trick played
by the chieftain upon his followers, and Grimcke and Long were
convinced that no further attempt, at least for a time, would be made
to capture them.

But being free to attend to their own safety, their thoughts naturally
turned to the missing members of the company, especially to Ashman, who
unquestionably was involved in the most imminent peril.

It was clear that his two friends could do nothing in his behalf.  They
did not know where to look for him, and such an attempt was sure to be
followed by disastrous consequences to themselves.

It was a singular conclusion to which Grimcke and Long arrived and yet
perhaps it was natural.  They believed that Ashman had escaped before
they did themselves, and that he was probably waiting at some point
down the Xingu for them.  They decided to pass in the same direction
and strive to open communication with him.

How little did they suspect that though he was for the time out of the
power of his enemies, yet the Princess Ariel was his companion, and
that instead of seeking to flee from the dangerous country, he had
actually penetrated farther into it.

After carefully reconnoitering their surroundings, therefore, the
Professor and Long approached the Xingu at a point a third of a mile
below the Murhapa village.  Everything seemed to be quiet and
motionless around them, with the exception of the river, yet they were
given precious little time for wonderment or speculation.

The first amazing sight on which their eyes rested was their own large
canoe drifting down stream.  They stood a moment, not knowing what to
make of it, but speedily reached the right conclusion: Ziffak had set
it free for their special benefit.

It was floating sideways near the middle of the Xingu, and showed there
was no one on board.

It was too invaluable to be allowed to get away from them, or to run
the risk of a passage through the rapids below.  Long decided to swim
out to it, but, before he could enter the water, the Professor showed
him that some one had anticipated them.  A short distance up the bank,
a native was in the act of entering the Xingu, while his companion
stood on the bank, evidently about to follow him.

The clear moonlight enabled the explorers to identify them as Bippo and
Pedros, the former being the one already in the water.

"Let them go," whispered the Professor, "they may as well do it for us."

Pedros was but a few strokes behind his friend, and the two were seen
to clamber over the side of the craft at the moment it came opposite
where the delighted white men were standing.

At this juncture, the Professor called to them in a guarded voice.
Their expressions of amazement were ludicrous, and it was only after
they had stared for several minutes and the call was repeated that they
comprehended that their friends were near.

Then the two showed their extravagant delight by leaping up and down
like a couple of children, and uttering cries that, to say the least,
were imprudent.

The Professor sternly ordered them to hold their peace and paddle the
boat to shore.  They set to work with a will and brought the craft to
land, only a short distance below, where the white men had reached the
river.  Instantly, they stepped on board, and with the exception of the
single absent member, our friends stood in the same situation as a
short time before.

It was Jared Long that in his flight from the beleaguered building took
the extra Winchester with him, so that the little party could not have
been better armed.  Luckily, too, there was an abundant supply of
ammunition on board, so that the old feeling of confidence came back to
the party when they once more felt they were masters of the boat and
all it contained.

Their desire now was to increase the distance between themselves and
the Murhapa village, from which all had had such a narrow escape.  When
Bippo timidly asked his masters whether they meant to return or attempt
to go any farther up the Xingu, they were assured that no such thought
was in the mind of either of the explorers.  They would only be
thankful if they could get back to the Amazon without ever meeting
another Murhapa.

This was enough for the natives, who were willing to jump overboard and
tow the boat faster than it was already going.  That, however, was
unnecessary, and they were told that they had only to obey orders as
cheerfully as they had done from the beginning and that undoubtedly
everything would come out well.

It was past midnight, when the roaring just below, which was increasing
every minute, warned them they were approaching the dangerous rapids.
Possibly the craft might have passed safely through but it would have
been imprudent to make the attempt for which no necessity existed.

Accordingly, the boat was once more run ashore and drawn against the
bank, with the view of raising it upon their shoulders to be
transported to the calmer waters below.

The four men were in the very act of lifting the craft, when to their
terror, fully a score of Aryks suddenly emerged from the wood and
surrounded them.  All were armed with the frightful javelins, a prick
from one of which was enough to cause almost instant death.

The whites could not have been caught at greater disadvantage, and
Bippo and Pedros were so overcome that they were unable to move.  Long
was on the point of opening a fusillade, when Professor Grimcke was
struck by the fact that no one of the Aryks offered to harm them.  They
chattered like a lot of magpies, and gathering round them made a
movement as if to take possession of their boat.

The New Englander would have showed fight, had not his companion said
in a low tone:

"They are friendly!  They mean to do us no harm!"

Such was the astounding truth, and it was easily explained.  Ziffak on
his way up the Xingu with his new friends had warned the Aryks that
they must do the whites no harm: they were on their way at that time to
the Murhapa village as friends, and the head chieftain told his allies
that any further hostility would be visited with the punishment of
death.

The Aryks were not likely to forget such a notice.  They had seen the
boat approaching; and, being totally unsuspicious of what had occurred
during the earlier part of the evening, were anxious to manifest their
good will by carrying the canoe around the rapids.

Jared Long could hardly credit the truth, and held himself ready for a
desperate fight; but, when the boat was lifted upon the shoulders of a
half dozen stalwart warriors who started down the shore with it, he
smiled grimly and admitted that the Professor was right.

The load was quite burdensome, but the carriers stepped off, highly
pleased with the privilege, while the rest of their party straggled
after them, the whites and their servants bringing up the rear.

Bippo and Pedros were not quite able to comprehend the extraordinary
condition of affairs, and kept close to the heels of their masters like
a couple of frightened dogs.

At the base of the rapids, the Aryks set down the boat, with great
care, saluted in their rude way, and turning about, disappeared in the
forest from which they had emerged.

"_If they only knew_," said Long when they were drifting down stream
once more.

"But they _don't_," replied the Professor, "and yet they will learn the
truth before long."

The boat was allowed to drift a half mile further, when, convinced they
had gone far enough, they ran into land, disembarked and carried it in
among the trees, where it was out of the sight of any one passing up or
down the Xingu.  Then they prepared to await the coming of Fred Ashman,
doubtful, however, whether he ever would come.




CHAPTER XXXV.

THE CAVERN OF DIAMONDS.

Fred Ashman was greatly relieved when he had assisted Ariel down from
the high, rocky wall, and they had picked their way to the spot where
the little canoe had been left but a short time before.

He had felt a singular misgiving from the first about the boat, fearful
that in this region of enchantment, as it seemed to him, something
would cause it to disappear, and he and his lovely companion be left in
a most exposed and dangerous situation.

But it was found just where it had been left, and helping her in it, he
shoved it clear and then looked to her for directions as to what was to
be the next step.

The maiden now made a singular statement.  She said that some weeks
before, she had visited this place with no companion but her father.
They landed at a point which she indicated, and he ordered her to stay
on the shore until his return.  He was gone so long, however, that she
undertook a little exploration on her own account, and made a discovery
which she now hoped to turn to account.

The canoe touched at the spot she pointed out, and they stepped ashore.
She said that her parent strolled off to the left, toward a passage
which she showed, and which she had entered with him several times
before, but from which he seemed desirous to exclude her on the
occasion named.

It was while he was absent at that time, that Ariel walked some
distance to the right.  She clambered up the rocks a little way to a
clump of bushes.  She was examining a species of crimson berry, growing
upon them, when she observed a passage, which she followed far enough
to find that it led into a large cavern, whose full extent she did not
attempt to learn.  She withdrew, and, fearful of offending the king,
told him nothing about it when he returned and found her with the boat.

Ariel was confident that neither her parent nor any of her people knew
of her discovery, and she now proposed to Ashman that they should enter
the strange cavern, and remain until the present danger was over.  She
believed that if her friends or enemies, as they might be considered,
did not discover them soon, they would conclude that they had
voluntarily met death together, and would give up the hunt.

Ashman was struck with the sagacity of the lady, and eagerly agreed to
her suggestion.  It would never do to leave the canoe as a tell-tale,
and he gave it a shove which carried it far out on the lake.
Discovered in that situation, no one could tell what point on the shore
it had touched, and, being adrift, near the middle of the lake, it
would suggest the theory of suicide, which they were anxious to impress
upon their pursuers.

Carefully picking their way through the mass of brush and undergrowth
which showed remarkable vigor, considering that the revivifying
sunlight never touched it, Ashman readily found the opening described
by his companion.

It was just broad enough to allow the passage of their bodies, its
height being such that they could move by stooping slightly.  Holding
his Winchester in hand, he led the way with Ariel pressing him close.

The same fact was noticeable that struck him when paddling through the
tunnel connecting the outer and the underground lake.  The light
increased as they progressed until everything was seen with a
distinctness hardly less than that shown in the water they had just
left behind them.

Suddenly Ashman paused with an expression of amazement.  He had entered
a cavern so striking in appearance that it almost took away his wreath.

It was several acres in extent, with an arching, dome-like roof rising
fully two hundred feet above their heads.  Stalactites and stalagmites
dozens of feet in length were visible hanging from the roof and
obtruding from the floor, the latter being broken by chasms and
ravines, many of which seemed to have a depth that was fathomless.

No water was visible, but the proximity of the lake rendered it likely
that some of the abysses were filled at the bottom with the element.
It looked impossible for the lovers to advance beyond the entrance, and
yet while Ashman was standing motionless he observed that a ledge put
out on their right, along which they could make their way indefinitely,
its course being hidden by scores of intervening obstacles.

It looked like a scene of enchantment indeed, the wonderful cavern
illumined by the flood of crimson light, which was on every hand, while
the radiating point was invisible.

Ariel stood silent and waited for her companion to recover from his
astonishment.  She had viewed all this before and had witnessed so many
similar scenes that they produced less effect upon her imagination than
upon his.

By and by he looked around, and she smilingly nodded her head.  He
began picking his way along the ledge, carefully feeling his way, for a
misstep or a treacherous support was liable to precipitate him to the
fathomless depths below with the inevitable certainty of instant death.

It was while the young American was working forward in this guarded
manner, that he particularly noticed that the roof overhead, and all
parts of the walls were dotted with what seemed points of living fire.
While some were small, others were larger and gave out a light that was
dazzling to the point of blindness.

He supposed they were composed of a species of quartz or mineral, but
observing one of them within reach at his side, he reached upward with
his knife and extracted it from the shale in which it was imbedded.

Taking it in his hand he turned it over several times with increasing
curiosity.  It appeared to be a rough pebble, from which he brushed
away a portion of the dirt, so as to permit it to shine with a splendor
that would have been tenfold greater in the full light of the sun.

"Don't you know what it is?" asked Ariel with another smile at his
perplexed expression.

"I do not; can you tell me?"

"It is a diamond!"

"And," he asked, with a sweep of his arm, "are all those diamonds?"

"They are."

"Great heavens!" gasped the astounded Ashman; "we have entered a cavern
of diamonds."

"There can be no doubt of that," she calmly replied; "there are plenty
of them among the rocks along other portions of the lake, for that is
where the king has obtained them for years.  There is gold there too.
You know now the reason why he guards the approaches of the lake so
jealously.  I have seen our men digging for diamonds and they looked
just like what these seem around us."

Ashman had paused again and his eyes roved around the magnificent
scene, whose splendors were enough to turn the head of Solomon himself.
Thousands of the points were gleaming from all portions of the roof,
walls, and even on the ledge along which they were walking.  There was
enough wealth within his gaze to pay the national debt of his country
and to effect a revolution in any nation.

"I would be a fool," he reflected, "not to gather some of these while
the chance is mine, even though I may never live to carry them away."




CHAPTER XXXVI.

PURSUERS AND PURSUED.

It may be doubted whether the most cool-headed of men could find
himself in such a situation as that of Fred Ashman, without being
overwhelmed by the bewildering wealth surrounding him.  He forgot for
the time that the lives of himself and lovely companion were at stake,
and that, despite her assurance that they were the first persons who
had ever entered the wonderful cavern of diamonds, its existence might
be known or discovered by their vengeful pursuers.

With the aid of his hunting knife, he set himself to work picking out
the precious gems that were within his reach at all times.

Now and then, when some one of unusual size fell into his palm he
uttered an exclamation of delight, and turned and held it up for Ariel
to admire.  She smiled at his pleasure, and showed her sympathy by
assisting in the excavation of the marvellous pebbles.

As they toiled, they advanced, sometimes a step at a time, and then for
several paces.  Conscious that he could carry away only an infinitely
small portion of the riches, Ashman found himself in the unparalleled
situation of casting aside the smaller gems and taking only those that
were large and of the first water.

Who before was compelled to fling away diamonds worth hundreds of
dollars apiece, simply because they were of too insignificant value to
be carried with him?  Ariel, who was a much better expert than he,
carefully selected the choicest until she was burdened with all she
could conveniently carry.  He filled his pockets and thrust others into
every receptacle at command.  The partially emptied cartridge-belt was
made to do duty as a casket, and it is safe to say that no similar
contrivance was ever laden with a tithe of the riches that particular
one held.

"Ah," reflected the young man again and again, "if only the Professor
and Long were here to help me!"

But there came the time, all too soon, when he was forced to admit that
it was useless to attempt to carry more.  He had the wealth of a prince
about his person, and yet the storehouse showed no diminution of its
boundless supply, which was enough to burden a regiment of soldiers.

Gold, the most precious of all metals, for which men delve and starve
and toil and die, still lies hidden in immeasurable masses, in
unsuspected places, screened perhaps by a thin sheeting of earth, over
which thousands have tramped, never dreaming of the boundless riches
just beneath their feet.  And rubies and diamonds strew the bottom of
the ocean or scintillate within caverns and caves, as they have shone
and gleamed through ages, still waiting for the fortunate miner or
explorer to bring them to light and the gaze of an admiring world.

"If I ever live to get away from this spot," added Ashman, when he
ceased his wonderful garnering, "I will bring a force here; I can
afford to make it irresistible by King Haffgo, for every one of the men
can take away a fortune and leave more than enough for these
barbarians."

"I can take no more," he said, turning his flushed face upon the
radiant countenance just behind him; "King Haffgo will never miss
these, but when I carry you to my distant home, Ariel, where I shall
cherish and love you forever, these diamonds will bring us such wealth
that we shall never know the meaning of want; every luxury that
affection can dream of, or heart can crave, shall be yours."

"The greatest luxury my heart yearns for," said she softly, "is _your_
love."

"And that you have now," he replied catching her in his arms and
straining her to his heart.

"I am sure of it," replied the happy maiden, resisting no longer the
ardent embrace of him whose affection seemed to grow with every passing
hour.

"All that I pray heaven to grant is the opportunity to prove to you
that you are not mistaken.  I do not want to leave here or ever see my
home again unless you are with me.  I shall live or die with you, for
death with you is preferable to life without you, my cherished, my own
Ariel."

The radiant countenance was illumined by a light such as only the
divine passion can impart.  She did not speak, for there are some
emotions of the soul beyond the power of language.

The hunt for the diamonds had taken the lovers to a point almost
opposite the entrance.  They observed what they had not noticed during
their absorbing work,--the ledge along which they advanced, steadily
ascended until it carried them to a point half-way to the top of the
mighty dome.  Standing there, they could look back on the awful chasms
spread below their feet, the crimsoned walls, sparkling and
scintillating with innumerable gems, with the craggy roof seemingly
almost within their reach.

Looking over the wild, dazzling, unapproachable scene, the American was
considering the practical question of what was next to be done, when
Ariel at his side abruptly seized his arm with an intensity which
startled and caused him to ask,

"What has frightened you, dearest?"

With a gasp, she pointed to the other side of the cavern, where they
had entered this region of enchantment and wonders.

A procession of figures was moving along the ledge, over which they had
just made their way.  The intervening objects shut them partly out of
sight, but the heads and shoulders of several were always in view and
they were moving with the utmost haste possible.

The foremost figure was a white man; the next was a dusky giant, and
the third was of fair complexion, while all the others were of the hue
of native Africans.

There could be no mistaking the identity of the leaders: the foremost
was Waggaman, the second, Ziffak, and the third, King Haffgo.  Those
who followed were the pick of the Murhapa warriors.

It mattered not whether Ariel was right in her belief that the
existence of the cavern of diamonds was unknown to every one else, or
that some fateful good fortune had directed the party to the entrance.
It was enough that they had found it, and were now pressing forward
along the very ridge on which they had halted, and stood gazing back in
amazement and horror, unable for the moment to divine what could be
done to help themselves.

But Ashman needed but a few seconds to decide his course.  He held his
Winchester and revolver and was ready to die in the defence of the idol
of his heart.

"Have courage," he said; "all is not yet lost."

The ledge on which they stood was so narrow that there was no room for
two to walk beside each other.  Lifting the gentle form in one arm, he
swung her over the abyss at his feet and placed her on the ledge in
front of him.

The danger was at the rear, and that was the place for him.

"Now advance," he added; "we may find a better spot than this for
defence."

He feared that his pursuers might divide, and some of them start around
the other way, so as to come upon him from the opposite side.  If that
were done, he would be caught between two fires; and, since one of the
party possessed a gun, the advantage would be preponderatingly against
him.

There was subject, too, for perplexing thought in the situation.  He
had no wish to shoot King Haffgo, and would not do it if any possible
way of avoiding it should present itself.  He determined that he should
be spared until the last one, when he could probably be handled,
without resorting to the last extremity.

Then, too, he felt no doubt about the presence of the giant Ziffak.  He
was the friend of himself and Ariel, though for politic reasons he had
assumed the guise of an enemy.  His situation was a most delicate one,
and, even in his bewilderment and anxiety, Ashman could not help
wondering how he would conduct himself in the crisis at hand.

Inasmuch as the American was resolved to avoid injuring the dusky
Hercules, it will be observed that there were two of the company of
pursuers whom he was much more anxious to spare than he was to inflict
harm upon the rest.

He was hopeful for a moment that he and his companion had not been
detected, but a resounding shout echoed through the cavern of
diamonds--a shout of such amazing power that he knew it had come from
the throat of Ziffak himself, who, as if to make sure his meaning was
not misunderstood, brandished his mighty javelin over his prodigious
head and shoulders, as he almost pushed his leader from the path in
front of him.




CHAPTER XXXVII.

AT BAY.

Ariel flitted so rapidly along the ledge that her lover felt obliged to
ask her to desist, as he found it difficult to keep pace with her.

The narrow path ascended more rapidly than before, and he saw they were
steadily climbing toward the top of the roof.  The shelly support to
their feet, too, became less substantial, crumbling and giving way at a
rate that threatened the most serious consequences.

He again cautioned the maiden, who seemed to dart over the rocky ground
with the graceful ease of a bird, and without producing any more
effect, with her dainty sandals.

Suddenly she paused.  She had reached the margin or break in the ledge.
A chasm, whose black depths the eye could not fathom, yawned between
her and the support on the opposite side.

"We will make our stand here," said he; "keep behind me--"

He checked himself in astonishment; for, at that moment, she bounded as
lightly across as a fawn.  He never would have permitted it had he
dreamed of her intention; but it was done.

He could only follow, and, gathering his muscles, he ran rapidly the
slight distance and bounded from the support.

It was a tremendous leap, and, for one instant, he believed he would
fail; but he cleared the chasm of breathless darkness and landed on the
edge, where, for a single second, he tottered between life and death.

But, at the critical instant, a tiny hand was outstretched, and,
seizing one of the fluttering arms, his poise was restored, and he
stood firmly by her side.

Even then, as he stepped forward, the ground crumbled and gave way for
fully two feet, the debris rattling down the abyss as long as the ear
could detect the sound, growing fainter and fainter as it hastened
toward the far-away bottom.

"There is no one in that party except Ziffak who can leap it now," said
Ashman, gazing with a shudder behind him.

By this time the pursuers were close at hand and gaining fast.

The ledge led straight away and upward for a hundred feet, when it
terminated at a point in the dome as high as the middle portion.  There
the rocks were piled in irregular masses, and, knowing they could go no
further, Ashman resolved that the last stand should be made there.

As he hurried onward, another shout fell upon his ear.  It was a
different voice, and he recognized it as Waggaman's, who was leading
the advance.

The fugitive glanced backward, while toiling up the slope, and saw that
the white man in his eagerness was fully a rod ahead of the herculean
Ziffak, while the rest were stringing along behind him.

He might have wondered how the chieftain contrived to lose so much
ground had he not seen him clambering to his feet.  It followed that he
must have fallen in his hurry to get forward.

"We have them!" shouted the exultant convict; "there is no escape; they
are cornered!"

The words were yet ringing in his mouth, when he came to a stop.

He had reached the edge of the abyss and might well pause before trying
to leap across.

The fierce king called to him to make the jump.  It had been done not
only by the man, but by the girl who preceded him; why should he
hesitate?

Spurred by the taunt, the white man withdrew a few paces, and, like
Ashman, ran swiftly, the next instant his body rising in air, as he
made the fatal effort.

The American stood coolly watching the result.  If the miscreant
succeeded, where it looked impossible, he meant to shoot him.  Thus the
prospect before the convict could not have been worse.

It was a tremendous leap indeed, and the fellow struck the opposite
ledge with his chest, his feet dropping below.

In his furious efforts to save himself, he let go of his weapon, which
went ringing down the chasm, and seized the ledge with both hands.

Even then, had the ground been firm, he might have succeeded, but it
gave way like rotten ice, and, with a shriek of agony, he vanished
forever from the sight of men.

The frightful occurrence brought the pursuers to a halt and gave the
fugitives a minute or two in which to prepare for the end.

Ariel, by command of her lover, placed herself behind the rocks and
bowlders, where she was secure against any of the missiles, that were
sure to be soon flying through the air.  Ashman also placed himself so
that all of his body was hidden, except his head and shoulders, but his
Winchester was thrust out, ready for instant use.  He was resolved that
no one of the party should leap that chasm and live after reaching the
other side.

There were two exceptions, be it remembered, to this resolution.

Ziffak, being next to Waggaman, approached the chasm, where he also
stopped and peered into the impenetrable depth, his dusky face showing
a horrified expression at the awful fate that had befallen the foremost
of the little party.

Ashman, who was closely watching the chieftain with a natural wonder us
to how he would conduct himself (for he did not waver in his faith that
the giant was still loyal to him), saw him suddenly raise his eyes and
gaze at the opposite ledge, which was fully two feet above that upon
which he was standing.

Haffgo was immediately behind him, and peering under his arms at the
opening.  There being no room for the two to stand beside each other,
this was the nearest position he could secure.

Beyond him the other figures could be partly discerned, all standing
motionless until some way should present itself for their advance.

Ashman observed the chieftain, as his eyes followed the ledge until
they rested upon him, crouching behind one of the bowlders with his
rifle leveled at the war party.

The two looked into each other's eyes for a single instant, when
Ziffak, knowing he could not be seen by any of those behind, contracted
his brows and moved his lips.

He did not speak, for that would have "given the whole thing away," but
his dusky mouth was contorted with such vigorous care that the words
were understood, as readily as if shouted aloud.

They formed the single sentence,

"_I am your friend!_"

No need of saying that, for, as we have stated, Fred Ashman had never
doubted it.

Haffgo now began urging his brother to make the leap, which had proven
the death of Waggaman, saying, with reason, that the strength and
activity of the head chieftain of the Murhapas were sure to carry him
over where no one else could succeed.

The two talked in their native tongue, but their meaning was so clear
that the American needed no one to interpret the words.

Ziffak replied that he would gladly do so, but for the treacherous
character of the other side of the ledge.  He showed that considerable
had fallen away, and intimated that the fugitives had loosened it for
the purpose of entrapping all the party just as Waggaman had been
entrapped.

Then the king took another look at the chasm.  It so happened that
while he was doing this, a large slice of the ledge sloughed off and
went down the abyss, after the miserable wretch who must have been
lying at that moment a shapeless mass far down the fearful gorge.

Haffgo could not gainsay such testimony, and, for the first time, his
face showed an expression of disappointment.  It was not the look of a
baffled man, but of one forced to see a sweet pleasure deferred.

He had only to peer up the ledge, as it led toward the roof, to realize
that the fugitives were as safely caged as if bound and secured in his
own home.

They had penetrated as far as possible in the cavern of diamonds.  If
the pursuers could not reach them, neither could they return over the
chasm by which they had attained the spot where they still defied him.

The most athletic man living could not leap across that chasm, nor
could it be passed until it was bridged artificially, and that could
only be accomplished from below, where the pursuers were glaring
across.  They might erect a structure, if, the king so willed, which
would open a way of advance; but he was in no mood to care for or think
of anything of the kind.

Haffgo now talked earnestly for a few minutes to his head chieftain.
The latter listened respectfully, nodding his head several times in
acquiescence.  Then he suddenly looked up the ledge again, steadied
himself for an instant, and hurled his javelin with terrific force at
the head of Ashman.

It was done with such incredible deftness that the American had no time
in which to dodge the fearful missile.  Had it been accurately aimed,
it would have been driven straight through his skull!

But it missed by a hair's breadth, shooting up to the roof, where it
struck the rock with such violence that the head was shattered and the
remaining portion fell uselessly down among the rocks.

It was a close call, but Ashman was not frightened; he knew why it
missed him.

He now sighted along the barrel, as if he meant to shoot the chieftain,
who instantly ducked his head, and began crowding backward.  It was the
first time King Haffgo had been placed in such a grave situation, and
he was panic-stricken.  He turned so suddenly and began crowding to the
rear so hard, that he came within a hair of precipitating himself and
those immediately behind him from the ledge.

But Ashman did not pull trigger.  He could not do so without
endangering the lives of Ziffak and the king, and as yet the other
warriors had made no demonstration against him.

But, seeing that the white man did not fire, Ziffak seemed to gather
courage and straightened up again.  The king passed his own javelin to
him, and he glared up the ledge as if looking for another favorable
chance to launch, it with greater effect than before.

Ashman, who was narrowly watching every movement of his enemies, now
observed that the warrior directly behind the king, carried a bow and
arrow, and he was in the act of fitting a missile to the string, with
the evident intention of trying his hand at the business in which the
head chieftain had failed only a minute before.




CHAPTER XXXVIII.

THE POISONED ARROW.

Such being the case, Ashman concluded that the time had arrived when he
should also take a hand.

Ziffak and King Haffgo placed their backs against the face of the
rocks, along which the ledge ran, so as to open a clear course for the
archer.  The latter fitted his arrow with great care and then
straightening up drew back the string and slowly levelled, the missile
at the head and breast of the American.

"Does that fool imagine I am going to keep still and let him practice
on me?" the latter asked himself, an instant before discharging his
rifle, whose bullet went straight through the dusky miscreant and sent
him toppling off the side of the ledge as dead as dead could be.

Not only that, but the ball wounded the warrior directly behind him,
causing him to utter a howl which rang with piercing force from side to
side of the cavern of diamonds.

This prompt act caused something like a panic, Ziffak seemed the most
terrified of any.  Facing about, he flung his arms aloft and shouted to
the rest to hurry away before the white man killed them all.

They lost no time in obeying, and it was noticeable that King Haffgo,
being well at the rear, added his frenzied commands for his warriors to
lose no time in leaving the fatal spot.

Ashman could have sent a succession of shots along the ridge, as the
party scrambled away, which would have toppled the dusky barbarians off
like so many ten-pins; but he had no desire to inflict needless
slaughter, and, in answer to the appeal of the shrinking Ariel, he had
promised her that, so far as he was concerned, her parent should
receive no harm.

He therefore contented himself with watching them, until a bend in the
ledge hid them from sight, with the exception of their heads, and they,
too, soon disappeared; because the frightened warriors, glancing back,
and seeing their peril, crouched low to escape the bullets which they
seemed to expect would come whistling about their crowns.

As long as the natives kept at such a distance, they could do no harm
to the defenders; for they were too far off to make use of their
javelins, and the single archer left was not likely to attempt to bring
his weapon into play.

Naturally, Ashman and Ariel, finding they were left to themselves for a
time, fell to speculating upon what was likely to be the next move of
their enemies.  He believed they would make an attempt to bridge the
chasm separating them, a task which, as will be seen, was comparatively
easy of accomplishment.

But should such a structure be laid, it must be so strait that only one
could pass at a time, and the American could pick them off as often as
they presented themselves.  There were now no firearms at the command
of the Murhapas, unless some one recovered the weapon of Burkhardt, and
even then, Ashman would feel little fear of harm from the savages.

Ariel thought her parent and his little company would simply keep guard
at the entrance of the cavern, in order to intercept them, if they
discovered some way of re-crossing the chasm and attempted to leave.

But both were wrong.

The young man was resolved that no march should be stolen upon him.  It
was impossible for the Murhapas to pass far enough around to leave the
place, without being seen, provided he kept unremitting watch, which he
felt competent to do for a number of hours to come.

If the siege was prolonged, he could take turns with Ariel, whose
bright eyes were quicker of perception than his.

In the cavern of diamonds, there was no means of telling when it was
day or night on the earth outside.  Lit by the eternal fires of the
volcano, it was always day; but he carried a watch, which told him that
the night was far advanced, and that the bright sun would soon shine
upon mountain, forest, and river again, though his heart sank at the
faint prospect of it ever being his privilege to greet the orb again.

The incidents of the next hour mystified both Ashman and Ariel.

The first movement which attracted their notice, was Ziffak, who,
rising to the upright posture, so that his immense shoulders were in
plain sight, was seen picking his way along the ledge, until he reached
the opening on the other side.  Through this he passed and was seen no
more.

It was useless to speculate as to the meaning of this proceeding, which
could not be explained until made clear by occurrences themselves.  It
was safe to assume, however, that it was ostensibly in the interests of
King Haffgo, and therefore against those of the fugitive lovers.

Probably a half-hour after the disappearance of the chieftain, two of
the party were seen stealing along the ledge in the direction of the
entrance to the cavern.  These, however, were of such slight stature,
when compared with Ziffak, and they made such efforts to conceal their
movements, that it was hard to follow or identify them.  Ashman thought
that Haffgo was one of the number, but he could not make certain, and,
since Ariel did not catch as favoring a glimpse as he, she could give
no help in solving the question.

The best solution of the singular acts was that while the Murhapas
seemed to try to hide themselves from the lovers, they still took pains
to allow enough to be disclosed to reveal the movements, which they
wished the couple to observe.

And here again, both Ashman and Ariel were in error.

Strange that a possibility which had once been thought of by the two
did not occur again to them.

King Haffgo, despite his confidence in Ziffak, began to feel some
distrust of him.  His refusal to attempt the leap of the chasm, and his
former friendship for the explorers, might have been reasonably
explained, but his failure to drive his javelin through the white man,
who was so near and who never stirred from his position, could not be
an accident.  He knew the marvellous skill of the head chieftain, who
could have had but one cause for missing Ashman: that was an
intentional deviation of his weapon, which, slight though it was,
proved as effective as if hurled in the opposite direction.

And yet, shrewd as was Ziffak; he really believed he had deceived his
royal brother.  No suspicion of the distrust in the mind of the king
came to the chieftain, when he was directed to return to the village
and bring ten more warriors with him.

But this errand secured the absence of Ziffak for a couple of hours at
least, and that was the sole purpose of Haffgo in sending him out of
the cavern of diamonds.

When the chieftain was gone, the archer was directed to ascertain how
far he could steal around the cavern, by taking the opposite course.
Haffgo followed, directing the others to stay where they were until
further orders were given them.

The archer set out at once, ahead of the king, both doing their best to
avoid detection.

Fortune favored them in an unexpected manner.  The ledge was found
easier of travel than they expected, and, by using great care, they
worked their way to a point less than two hundred feet from where the
fugitives were standing on guard.  They had traversed the whole
distance, too, without detection.

When King Haffgo peered carefully over the shoulders of the crouching
bowman, he saw the couple standing with their backs toward him, as they
faced the chasm which had been found impassable for the Murhapas.

The slumbering anger in the parent's breast was kindled to a white
heat, when he observed the white man holding the hand of his daughter,
and he saw him lean over and touch his lips to hers.  He whispered to
the warrior to lose no time.

The latter quickly examined his arrows, and picked out the one which
not only seemed the best, but was most plentifully provided with the
deadly poison.  This was speedily fitted to the string, and he
deliberately took aim, his nerves like steel, for the king had
whispered to him that he must not fail.

At the instant the string twanged, something caused Ariel to look
behind them.

She uttered a faint scream as she caught sight of the two crouching
figures.  She descried a flitting shadow which she knew was the
approaching missile on its deadly mission.

Knowing that it was aimed at her lover, she threw both her arms around
his neck and interposed her body to protect him while he stood
bewildered, not comprehending what it all meant.

Her figure was too slight to serve the purpose of a shield.  The
poisoned arrow whizzed straight at the breast of Ashman, who had turned
about, but instead of entering his body, the point, surcharged with
venom, was imbedded in the snowy arm of Ariel herself!




CHAPTER XXXIX.

CONCLUSION.

The horrified Fred Ashman saw that the poisoned arrow, aimed at his own
heart had buried itself in the fair arm of Ariel, as she clasped him
about the neck anxious to shield him from harm at the expense of her
own life.

She had saved him, but at what a fearful cost!  The agonized lover
realized it all, as he tenderly placed her on the rock beside which
they were standing.  Then, like the man who, knowing he has been
fatally struck by the rattlesnake or cobra, turns to stamp the life out
of the reptile, before looking after his own wound, he faced about and
brought his rifle to his shoulder.  The dusky miscreant cowered low,
but he could not save himself, for the bullet which left the
Winchester, entering at the skull, ranged through the length of his
body, and he rolled off the ledge like a rotten log and went down the
yawning abyss that afforded a fit sepulture for such as he.

King Haffgo was standing erect, as if defying the white man to fire at
him.  He had seen the result of the shot and he did not regret it.

"Die the death you deserve!" he called out in English; "for you are not
the daughter of Haffgo!"

Then he turned about and moved along the ledge, while Ashman stood for
an instant, with weapon levelled, feeling that the awful occurrence had
absolved him from the pledge made a short time before.

He was aiming, when a faint voice at his side said:

"No, hurt him not; _I shall get well_!"

Letting the rifle fall from his grasp, he wheeled around as if he had
been shot himself.

What did he see?

The brave Ariel had drawn the arrow from her arm, and was sitting
erect.  In her right hand, was a small earthen bottle such as was in
common use among the Murhapas.

"Great heaven! what does this mean?" demanded her lover, uncertain
whether he was awake or dreaming.

She smiled faintly, and said:

"I feel a little faint, but the danger is past."

"But,--but,"--he added, "the arrow was poisoned!"

"Yes, but the poison has a remedy; it is in _that_," she added, holding
up the bottle; "my parent always carried it; I brought it with me when
I left home."

The overjoyed lover could not repress a shout of joy,--a shout which
penetrated every portion of the cavern of diamonds, but whose meaning,
fortunately for the couple, was not understood by the ears on which it
fell.

He knelt beside her, so that the bowlders shut both from the view of
any prowlers who might seek to reach them.  He kissed the happy face
again and again; he called her the sweetest names that ever mortal
uttered, and he assured her that they should both live and be happy
forever.

In his overflowing bliss, he could not realize that they were still
walled in on every hand.  All that he could know and feel, was, that
she was spared from a dreadful death,--that she had interposed her own
precious body to protect him from harm.

Enwrapped in his arms, she was obliged to confess that the bringing of
the potent remedy was an inspiration, when she stole out of her
father's house, for she never dreamed of the use to which it would be
put.

She had forgotten all about it, until the sharp twinge in her arm
apprised her that she was struck by the fearful missile.  Then, as she
was about to swoon, she recalled that she carried the remedy in her
bosom.

Drawing it quickly forth, while her lover's face was turned away, she
drank the whole contents, which were sufficient to save the lives of
three or four persons.  Not a drop, however, was left; and she remarked
in her own peculiar manner, that they must be careful not to be struck
by any more such missiles, since the remedy was gone, and it would be
hard to secure more.

With a full realization of the remarkable deliverance of his beloved,
Ashman was roused to a stronger resolution than before of making a
desperate effort to extricate themselves from their perilous situation,
which looked indeed as if without hope.

Rising to his feet, but screening his body as he could, he carefully
peered around the cavern of diamonds.  He cautioned Ariel to keep out
of sight, for, if it should become know that her life was saved, her
father and his warriors would doubtless make another attempt to reach
them.

Looking in the direction of the opening on the other side, he saw
Haffgo pass out, followed the next minute or two by the rest of the
Murhapas.  To Ashman this was proof that the party had decided to
withdraw from the cavern, but would keep watch of the egress to make
sure that the white man did not get away by some freak of fortune.

Since they were sure he was caught in a trap from which there was no
escape, he had his choice of remaining and starving to death, of coming
forth and giving himself up, or of ending it all by precipitating
himself down the rocks.

A terrible punishment indeed for the white man that had dared to defy
the king of the Murhapas, and had been the cause of the death of the
beloved princess!

Ashman was still studying the insoluble problem, when a strange impulse
led him to look aloft.  It will be remembered that he was near the roof
of the cavern, among a mass of bowlders and rocks which touched the
dome.

Several times it had seemed to him that a felt a slight, upward
draught, as though a portion of the air found vent in that direction.
When he mentioned it to Ariel she admitted that she had noticed the
same thing, and urged him to investigate.

Leaving his Winchester with her, he began a cautious ascent of the
rugged stairs.  He had about twenty feet to climb, and the greatest
care was necessary.  Not until at the very top, did he pass from the
sight of the maiden who was attentively watching his movements.

Five minutes later, he let go his hold and dropped, down beside her.
His face was flushed and his eyes glowing with excitement.

"Thank heaven!" he exclaimed, greatly agitated; "there is an opening by
which we can reach the outer world."

"I was sure of it," she replied with a happy smile.

During his brief absence, she had bandaged her arm as best she could by
tearing a slip from her dress.  The wound bled less than would be
supposed, and caused her little pain.

Taking her other hand, Ashman began helping her up among the rocks and
bowlders.  She needed little aid, however, for she was lighter and more
graceful on her feet than he.

Sure enough, when they arrived at the top, they came upon a broader
opening than that by which they had entered the cavern.  It was hidden
from sight by a projecting table of rock, and when they came to pass
through, the outer opening was seen to be so covered by bushes that it
never could have been found except by the accident which first showed
Ariel the way into the cavern.

But with hearts overflowing with gratitude to heaven, they found
themselves on the earth again, with the sun shining and the pure air of
heaven fanning their fevered faces.

They had emerged at the crest of the mountainous mass, which covered a
portion of the enchanted lake and the cavern of diamonds.  Fortunately,
too, they were among the woods, where they could not see far in any
direction.  This rendered them less liable to discovery by their
enemies in the neighborhood.

Ashman held his position until the two could study their location and
gain an idea of the points of the compass.  The rising sun helped them
to do this, and, by moving carefully about until they gained sight of
the lake and the Upper Xingu, they soon ascertained in what direction
the Murhapa village lay, and the course necessary to take in order to
avoid it.

It was decided to put back in the forest and thread their way through
the dense wilderness, striking the Xingu at a point below the rapids.
There, if they found nothing of their friends, they would manage to
secure a boat in which they could press their flight in the direction
of the Amazon.

The forests abounded with wild animals and huge serpents, but the
ardent lover was admirably armed and confident that he could protect
his beloved from all harm, provided they could escape discovery by the
Murhapas and Aryks.

If Haffgo should venture on an approach to the rocks, where the
fugitives made their stand, he could not fail to find out the
extraordinary manner in which they had eluded him, and he would be
certain to organize instant pursuit.

But this was not likely to take place for a considerable time, though
the possibility led Ashman to push forward with all vigor, often
pausing to listen for sounds of pursuit.

The extreme caution of the lovers led them to trend much further into
the woods than was really necessary, and they were a long time,
therefore, in reaching the Xingu.

Neither had eaten food for an unusual while, but they cared nothing for
that.  They were too anxious for any thought except that of getting
forward as fast as possible.

As they progressed, startled now and then by the prowling wild beasts
which threatened attack more than once, and by the sight of enormous
serpents, some in trees and some on the ground, Fred Ashman's thoughts
naturally went forward, and he speculated as to what was the result of
the attack on his friends the preceding night in the village.

He could comprehend the frightful situation in which they were placed
by the enmity of the king, and it seemed incredible that any, or at
least all of them, could have extricated themselves from their peril.
Gladly would he have risked everything in their defence, but, as has
been shown, that was beyond his power at any time.

The young American shrank from firing his gun, through fear of the
report reaching the ears of the Murhapas.  If that should take place,
it would be sure to excite their suspicions, and prompt an
investigation which the fugitives dreaded.

Once a jaguar became so threatening, that he leveled his weapon
convinced that he must fire or be attacked, but the snarling beast
finally withdrew, after sneaking behind them for a long distance.

The sun had passed the meridian when the wanderers caught the gleam of
water among the trees in front.  They hastened forward, and a moment's
survey of the stream convinced them that they had reached the Xingu
beyond all question.

Ashman recognized several features along the banks which he had noticed
on his way up the river.  Ariel was equally positive, so they dismissed
the question from their minds.

Both were nearly exhausted, for they had had a tiresome tramp, during
all of which they were under a severe mental strain.  They felt that,
at last, they could sit down and rest themselves before resuming their
journey.

"The next thing to be done," said Ashman as he imprisoned the hand of
Ariel and drew her head upon his shoulder, "is to find some boat in
which we can float down stream.  It will be less work than we had in
ascending it."

"I suppose," she replied, "that there are people all the way along the
river until you reach the end of it."

"There are; but we found most of them unfriendly long before we struck
the region of the Aryks."

"Are they likely to attack us?" she asked, raising her head and looking
at her lover with an alarmed expression.

"We had little difficulty, so long as we kept in the middle of the
stream, and one discharge from our guns was generally enough to drive
them away."

"And for how far does this prevail?"

"Two or three days ought to take us out of the danger.  Then it will be
plain sailing all the rest of the way.  The river is long, but,
dearest, we shall be with each other, and it will seem brief."

She parted her lips to make a suitable reply, when a startled
expression came upon her lovely countenance and she whispered:

"They must have followed us through the woods."

"What do you mean?" he asked, grasping his rifle.

"I hear some one moving behind us."

"It is a wild animal----"

He checked himself, for, to his unspeakable amazement, Professor
Grimcke at that instant stepped to view.

The two men caught sight of each other at the same moment.  They stared
as if in doubt, and then, with exclamations of delight, clasped hands.

By great good fortune, the lovers had emerged from the forest within a
stone's throw of the point where Grimcke, Long, Bippo, and Pedros were
waiting with the canoe hidden among the trees.

After this reunion they set out for home.

A few days carried them beyond danger, and in good time the Amazon was
reached.  Bippo and Pedros were left at Marcapa, at which port the
explorers secured passage for home, where they arrived in safety.  And
in that land, so strange to the beauteous Ariel, daughter of Haffgo,
king of the Murhapas, we bid good-by to our friends.  But to her,
Ashman was all the world; and in the sunshine of their mutual love they
dwell to-day, happy, grateful, contented, and envying no one, assured,
as they are, that none can be more blessed than they.