OXFORD, _1st December_ (1884).

I gave my fourteenth, and last for this year, lecture this afternoon
with vigor and effect, and am safe and well (D.G.), after such a spell
of work as I never did before. I have been thrown a week out in all my
plans, by having to write two new Lectures, instead of those the
University was frightened at. The scientists slink out of my way now,
as if I was a mad dog, for I let them have it hot and heavy whenever
I've a chance at them.

But as I said, I'm a week late, and though I start for the North this
day week, I can't get home till this day fortnight at soonest, but I
hope not later than to-morrow fortnight. Very thankful I shall be to
find myself again at the little room door.

Fancy Mary Gladstone forgiving me even that second _naughtiness_![37]
She's going to let me come to see her this week, and to play to me,
which is a great comfort.

[Footnote 37: The first attack on Mr. Gladstone is in "Fors",
September, 1875, the apology and withdrawal in "Fors", February, 1878.
The second "naughtiness" will be found in "Arrows of the Chace", Vol.
II., and a final attack is made in an interview in the _Pall Mall
Gazette_, 21st April, 1884. The subject is summarized in an article in
the _Daily News_ of 4th July, 1898.]




                              ST. SUSIE, _27th November, 1885_.

Behold Athena and Apollo both come to bless you on your birthday, and
all the buds of the year to come, rejoice with you, and your poor
cat[38] is able to purr again, and is extremely comfortable and even
cheerful "to-day." And we will make more and more of all the days,
won't we, and we will burn our candle at both beginnings instead of
both ends, every day beginning two worlds--the old one to be lived
over again, the new to learn our golden letters in. Not that I mean to
write books in that world. I hope to be set to do something, there;
and what lovely "receptions" you will have in your little heavenly
Thwaite, and celestial teas! And you won't spoil the cream with hot
water, will you, any more?

The whole village is enjoying itself, I hear, and the widows and
orphans to be much the better for it, and altogether, you and I have a
jolly time of it, haven't we?

[Footnote 38: J. R.]




                                        _20th February, 1886._

I haven't had anything nice to send you this ever so long, but here's
a little bird's nest of native silver which you could almost live in
as comfortably as a tit. It will stand nicely on your table without
upsetting, and is so comfortable to hold, and altogether I'm pleased
to have got it for you.




                              BRANTWOOD, _1st March, 1886_.

Yes, I knew you would like that silver shrine! and it _is_ an
extremely rare and perfect specimen. But you need not be afraid in
handling it; if the little bit of spar does come off it, or out of it,
no matter.

But of course nobody else should touch it, till you give them leave,
and show them how.

I am sorry for poor Miss Brown, and for your not having known the
Doctor. He should have come here when I told him. I believe he would
have been alive yet, and I never should have been ill.




I believe you know more Latin than I do, and can certainly make more
delightful use of it.

Your mornings' ministry to the birds must be remembered for you by the
angels who paint their feathers. They will all, one day, be birds of
Paradise, and say, when the adverse angel accuses you of being naughty
to _some_ people, "But we were hungry and she gave us corn, and took
care that nobody else ate it."

I am indeed thankful you are better. But you must please tell me what
the thing was I said which gave you so much pain. Do you recollect
also what the little bit in "Proserpina" was that said so much to you?
Were you not thinking of "Fors"?




I am very thankful for all your dear letters always--greatly delighted
above all with the squirrel one, and Chaucer. Didn't he love
squirrels![39] and don't I wish I was a squirrel in Susie's pear trees,
instead of a hobbling disconsolate old man, with no teeth to bite,
much less crack, anything, and particularly forbidden to eat nuts!

[Footnote 39:

          "And many squireles, that sett
           Ful high upon the trees and ete
           And in his maner made festys."
                            "The Dethe of Blaunche," 430.]




Your precious letter, showing me you are a little better, came this
morning, with the exquisite feathers, one, darker and lovelier than
any I have seen, but please, I still want one not in the least
flattened; all these have lost just the least bit of their shell-like
bending. You can so easily devise a little padding to keep two strong
cards or bits of wood separate for one or two to lie happily in. I
don't mind giving you this tease, for the throat will be better the
less you remember it. But for all of us, a dark sky is assuredly a
poisonous and depressing power, which neither surgery nor medicine can
resist. The difference to me between nature as she is now, and as she
was ten years ago, is as great as between Lapland and Italy, and the
total loss of comfort in morning and evening sky, the most difficult
to resist of all spiritual hostility.




                                        _22d May, 1886._

Of course the little pyramid in crystal is a present. With that
enjoyment of Pinkerton,[40] you will have quite a new indoors interest,
whatever the rain may say.

How very lucky you asked me what basalt was! How much has come out of
it (written in falling asleep)! I've been out all the morning and am
_so_ sleepy.

But I've written a nice little bit of "Præterita" before I went out,
trying to describe the Rhone at Geneva. I think Susie will like it, if
nobody else.

That "not enjoying the beauty of things" goes ever so much deeper than
mere blindness. It is a form of antagonism, and is essentially
Satanic. A most strange form of demonology in otherwise good people,
or shall we say in "good people"? You know _we_ are not good at all,
are we now?

I don't think you've got any green in your mica. I've sent you a bit
inclosed with some jealous spots in.

[Footnote 40: Pinkerton on "Petralogy."]




                                        _26th November, 1886._

_Do_ you know how to make sugar candy? In my present abject state the
only way of amusing myself I can hit on is setting the girls of the
school to garden and cook! By way of beginning in cooking I offered to
pay for any quantity of wasted sugar if they could produce me a
crystal or two of sugar candy. (On the way to Twelfth cakes, you know,
and sugar animals. One of Francesca's friends made her a life-size
Easter lamb in sugar.) The first try this morning was brought me in a
state of sticky jelly.

And after sending me a recipe for candy, would you please ask Harry to
look at the school garden? I'm going to get the _boys_ to keep that in
order; but if Harry would look at it and order some mine gravel down
for the walks, and, with Mr. Brocklebank's authority (to whom I have
spoken already), direct any of the boys who are willing to form a
corps of little gardeners, and under Harry's orders make the best that
can be made of that neglected bit of earth, I think you and I should
enjoy hearing of it.

I told a Cambridge man yesterday that he had been clever enough to put
into a shilling pamphlet all the mistakes of his generation.




                                        _27th November, 1886._

For once, I have a birthday stone for you, a little worth your having,
and a little gladsome to me in the giving. It is blue like the air
that you were born into, and always live in. It is as deep as
gentians, and has their gleams of green in it, and it is precious all
through within and without, as Susie herself is. Many and many returns
of all the birthdays that have gone away, and crowds yet of those that
never were here before.






MISCELLANEOUS.




                              CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE, OXFORD,
                                     _24th December, 1877_.

This is just for Christmas love, and I'm quite well and up to work
this morning, and the first thing I opened here was St. Ursula from
Mr. Gould--and I hope the darling will be with me and you and him, and
all good lovers and laborers everywhere. Love to Mary. Also to the
servants. Also to the birds. If any mice are about--also to them,--and
in a hush-a-bye to the Squirrels--wherever they are.




                                        BRANTWOOD.

This reminiscence of birds--entirely delightful--puts me on a thought
of better work that you can do for me than even the Shakespeare notes.
Each day, when you are in spirits,--never as an effort, sit down and
tell me--as in this morning's note--whatever you remember about
birds--going back to very childhood--and just chatting on, about all
you have seen of them and done for them.

You will make a little book as delightful--nay, much more delightful
than White of Selborne--and you will feel a satisfaction in the
experience of your real knowledge--power of observation--and loving
sentiment, in a way to make them even more exemplary and helpful.

Now don't say you can't--but begin directly to-morrow morning.




                                        BRANTWOOD, 1880.

What am I about all this while?

Well--I wake every morning at four--can't help it--to see the morning
light--Perhaps I go to sleep again--but never for long--then I do
really very good work in the mornings--but by the afternoon I'm quite
beaten and can do nothing but lie about in the wood.

However--the Prosody and Serpent lectures are just finishing off and
then I shall come to see you in the morning! while I am awake.

I went out before breakfast this morning, half asleep--and saw what I
thought was a red breasted woodpecker as big as a pigeon! Presently it
came down on the lawn and I made up my mind it was only a robin about
the size of a small partridge!

Can it have been a cross-bill?




                                        BRANTWOOD.

I've had this cold five days now and it's worse than ever, and yet I
feel quite well in other respects, and the glorious sunshine is a
great joy to me. Also Prince Leopold's words,[41] seen to-day. Very
beautiful in themselves--and--I say it solemnly--just, more than ever
I read before of friend's sayings. It is strange--I had no conception
he saw so far into things or into _me_.

It is the greatest help that has ever been given me (in the view the
public will take of it).

[Footnote 41: In a speech delivered at the Mansion House, February 19,
1870, in support of the extension of university teaching. See Cook's
"Studies in Ruskin," p. 45.]




                                        BRANTWOOD.

A heap half a foot high of unanswered letters pouring and tottering
across the table must pour and fall as they will, while I just say how
thankful I am for yours always, and how, to-day, I must leave letters,
books and all to work on that lovely Trientalis which Mary sent me. It
has a peculiar set of trine leaves which Linnæus noticed and named it
for--modern botanists have no notion of it.

I think both Mary and you will be deeply interested in seeing it
worked out. I've been at it since seven o'clock.

Yes, if I had known you were in the garden! Alas--one never can know
what one wants to--I was all that afternoon seeing the blacksmith make
a chopper!




                                        BROADLANDS, ROMSEY,
                                         _15th October_ (1875).

I was very thankful for your letter this morning--having heard you
were unwell and being a little despondent myself--more than of
late--an Italian nobleman is here who cares for nothing but shooting,
and everybody thinks it perfectly right!

It is a great joy to me that you find so much in the "Stones of
Venice"--I hope that book is worth the time it took me to write it,
every year of youth seems to me in looking back, now so precious.

How very strange I should give you _quietness_, myself being always
disquieted in heart--a Ghost of poor Samuel--helpless--in sight of
ruining Israel.

To think of the difference between these two scenes,--Samuel at his
feast sending the prepared portion to the expected Saul.

And Samuel the Ghost--with his message.

Well--this is a cheering letter to send my poor Susie. It's all that
Italian Duke.




                                        BRANTWOOD.

If ever a Gentiana Verna demeans itself to you at Brantwood--I'll
disown it and be dreadfully ashamed for it! The other little things if
they'll condescend to come shall be thanked and honored with my best.
Only please now _don't_ send me more asparagus!

I feel so piggish and rabbitish in eating you out of all your
vegetables, that I'm afraid to speak lest it should turn out grunting,
and to shake my head for fear of feeling flappy at the ears.

But--please--Is the bread as brown as it used to be? I think you're
cosseting me up altogether and I don't like the white bread so well!




                                        BRANTWOOD.

What _can_ you mean about your ignorance--or my astonishment at it?
Indeed you are a naughty little Susie to think such things. I never
come to the Thwaite but you and your sister tell me all kinds of
things I didn't know, and am so glad to know.

I send a book of architect's drawings of Pisa, which I think will
interest you--only you must understand that the miserable Frenchman
who did it, could not see the expression of face in any of the old
sculptures, nor draw anything but hard mechanical outlines--and the
charm of all these buildings is this almost _natural_ grace of free
line and color.

The little tiny sketch of mine, smallest in the sheet of 4 (the other
sheet only sent to keep its face from rubbing) will show you what the
things really are like--the whole front of the dome, plate XI. (the
wretch can't even have his numbers made legibly) is of arches of this
sweet variable color.

Please can your sister or you plant a grain or grains of corn for me,
and watch them into various stages of germination.[42] I want to study
the mode of root and blade development. And I am sure you two will
know best how to show it me.

[Footnote 42: "Proserpina,"]




                                   BRANTWOOD, _30th December, 1883_.

I heard with extreme sorrow yesterday of your mischance, and with the
greater, that I felt the discomfort and alarm of it would be increased
to you--in their depressing power by a sense of unkindness to you on
my part in not having been to see you--nor even read the letter which
would have warned me of your accident. But you must remember that
Christmas is to me a most oppressive and harmful time--the friends of
the last thirty years of life all trying to give what they cannot
give--of pleasure, or receive what--from me, they can no more
receive--the younger ones especially thinking they can amuse me by
telling me of their happy times--which I am so mean as to envy and am
doubly distressed by the sense of my meanness in doing so.

And my only resource is the quiet of my own work, to which--these last
days--I have nearly given myself altogether. Yet I _had_ read your
letter as far as the place where you said you wanted one and then,
began to think what I should say--and "read no further"[43] that
day--and now here is this harm that had befallen you--which I trust,
nevertheless, is of no real consequence, and this one thing I must say
once for all, that whatever may be my feelings to you--you must
_never_ more let yourself imagine for an instant they can come of any
manner of offense? _That_ thought is real injustice to me. I have
never, and never can have, any other feeling towards you than that of
the deepest gratitude, respect, and affection--too sorrowfully
inexpressible and ineffectual--but never changing. I will drive, walk,
or row, over to see you on New Year's day--if I am fairly well--be the
weather what it will. I hope the bearer will bring me back a
comforting report as to the effects of your accident and that you will
never let yourself again be discomforted by mistrust of me, for I am
and shall ever be

      Your faithful and loving servant,
                                          JOHN RUSKIN.

[Footnote 43: Dante, "Inferno," v. 144.]




I never heard the like--my writing good! and just now!! If you only
saw the wretched notes on the back of lecture leaves!

But I am so very glad you think it endurable, and it is so nice to be
able to give you a moment's pleasure by such a thing. I'm better
to-day, but still extremely languid. I believe that there is often
something in the spring which weakens one by its very tenderness; the
violets in the wood send one home sorrowful that one isn't worthy to
see them, or else, that one isn't one of them.

It is mere Midsummer dream in the wood to-day.

You could not possibly have sent me a more delightful present than
this Lychnis; it is the kind of flower that gives me pleasure and
health and memory and hope and everything that Alpine meadows and air
can. I'm getting better generally, too. The sun _did_ take one by
surprise at first.

How blessedly happy Joanie and the children were yesterday at the
Thwaite! I'm coming to be happy myself there to-morrow (D.V.).

Here are the two bits of study I did in Malham Cove; the small couples
of leaves are different portraits of the first shoots of the two
geraniums. I don't find in any botany an account of their little round
side leaves, or of the definite central one above the branching of
them.

Here's your lovely note just come. I am very thankful that the
"Venice" gives you so much pleasure.

I _have_, at least, one certainty, which few authors could hold so
surely, that no one was ever harmed by a book of mine; they may have
been offended, but have never been discouraged or discomforted, still
less corrupted.

_There's_ a saucy speech for Susie's friend. You won't like me any
more if I begin to talk like that.




A sapphire is the same stone as a ruby; both are the pure earth of
clay crystallized. No one knows why one is red and the other blue.

A diamond is pure _coal_ crystallized.

An opal, pure flint--in a state of fixed _jelly_.

I'm in a great passion with the horrid people who write letters to
tease my good little Susie. _I won't have it._ She shall have some
more stones to-morrow.

I must have a walk to-day, and can't give account of them, but I've
looked them out. It's so very nice that you like stones. If my father,
when I was a little boy, would only have given me stones for bread,
how I should have thanked him.

What infinite power and treasure you have in being able thus to enjoy
the least things, yet having at the same time all the fastidiousness
of taste and imagination which lays hold of what is greatest in the
least, and best in all things!

Never hurt your eyes by writing; keep them wholly for admiration and
wonder. I hope to write little more myself of books, and to join with
you in joy over crystals and flowers in the way we used to do when we
were both more children than we are.






TO MISS BEEVER.


I am ashamed not to have sent you a word of expression of my real and
very deep feelings of regard and respect for you, and of my not
_fervent_ (in the usual phrase, which means only hasty and ebullient),
but serenely _warm_, hope that you may keep your present power of
benevolent happiness to length of many days to come. But I hope you
will sometimes take the simpler view of the little agate box than
that of birthday token, and that you will wonder sometimes at its
labyrinth of mineral vegetable! I assure you there is nothing in all
my collection of agates in its way quite so perfect as the little
fiery forests of dotty trees in the corner of the piece which forms
the bottom. I ought to have set it in silver, but was always afraid to
trust it to a lapidary.

What you say of the Greek want of violets is also very interesting to
me, for it is one of my little pet discoveries that Homer means the
blue iris by the word translated "violet."




                                        _Thursday morning._

I'm ever so much better, and the jackdaw has come. But why wasn't I
there to meet his pathetic desire for art knowledge? To think of that
poor bird's genius and love of scarlet ribbons, shut up in a cage!
What it might have come to!

If ever my St. George's schools come to any perfection, they shall
have every one a jackdaw to give the children their first lessons in
arithmetic. I'm sure he could do it perfectly. "Now, Jack, take two
from four, and show them how many are left." "Now, Jack, if you take
the teaspoon out of this saucer, and put it into _that_, and then if
you take two teaspoons out of two saucers, and put them into this, and
then if you take one teaspoon out of this, and put it into that, how
many spoons are there in this, and how many in that?"--and so on.

Oh, Susie, when we _do_ get old, you and I, won't we have nice schools
for the birds first, and then for the children?

That photograph is indeed like a visit; how thankful I am that it is
still my hope to get the real visit some day!

I was yesterday and am always, certainly at present, very unwell, and
a mere trouble to my Joanies and Susies and all who care for me. But
I'm painting another bit of moss which I think Susie will enjoy, and
hope for better times.

Did you see the white cloud that stayed quiet for three hours this
morning over the Old Man's summit? It was one of the few remains of
the heaven one used to see. The heaven one had a Father in, not a
raging enemy.

I send you Rogers' "Italy," that is no more. I do think you'll have
pleasure in it.




I've been made so miserable by a paper of Sir J. Lubbock's on flowers
and insects, that I must come and whine to you. He says, and really as
if he knew it, that insects, chiefly bees, entirely originate flowers;
that all scent, color, pretty form, is owing to bees; that flowers
which insects don't take care of, have no scent, color, nor honey.

It seems to me, that it is likelier that the flowers which have no
scent, color, nor honey, don't get any attention from the bees.

But the man really knows so much about it, and has tried so many
pretty experiments, that he makes me miserable.

So I'm afraid you're miserable too. Write to tell me about it all.

It is very lovely of you to send me so sweet a note when I have not
been near you since the tenth century. But it is all I can do to get
my men and my moor looked after; they have both the instinct of doing
what I don't want, the moment my back's turned; and then there has not
been light enough to know a hawk from a hand-saw, or a crow from a
ptarmigan, or a moor from a meadow. But how much better your eyes must
be when you can write such lovely notes!

I don't understand how the strange cat came to love you so quickly,
after one dinner and a rest by the fire! I should have thought an
ill-treated and outcast animal would have regarded everything as a
trap, for a month at least,--dined in tremors, warmed itself with its
back to the fire, watching the door, and jumped up the chimney if you
stepped on the rug.

If you only knew the good your peacock's feathers have done me, and if
you could only see the clever drawing I'm making of one from the blue
breast! You know what lovely little fern or equisetum stalks of
sapphire the filaments are; they beat me so, but they're coming nice.




That is so intensely true what you say about Turner's work being like
nature's in its slowness and tenderness. I always think of him as a
great natural force in a human frame.

_So_ nice all you say of the "Ethics"! And I'm a monster of
ingratitude, as bad as the Dragon of Wantley. Don't like Dr. Brown's
friend's book at all. It's neither Scotch nor English, nor fish nor
flesh, and it's tiresome.

I'm in the worst humor I've been in this month, which is saying much;
and have been writing the wickedest "Fors" I ever wrote, which is
saying more; you will be _so_ angry.




I'm so very glad you will mark the bits you like, but are there not a
good many here and there that you _don't_ like?--I mean that sound
hard or ironical. Please don't mind them. They're partly because I
never count on readers who will really care for the prettiest things,
and it gets me into a bad habit of expressing contempt which is not
indeed any natural part of my mind.

It pleases me especially that you have read "The Queen of the Air." As
far as I know, myself, of my books, it is the most useful and careful
piece I have done. But that again--did it not shock you to have a
heathen goddess so much believed in? (I've believed in English ones
long ago). If you can really forgive me for "The Queen of the Air,"
there are all sorts of things I shall come begging you to read some
day.




                                        _21st July._

I'm always looking at the Thwaite, and thinking how nice it is that
you are there. I think it's a little nice, too, that _I'm_ within
sight of you, for if I hadn't broken, I don't know how many not
exactly promises, but nearly, to be back at Oxford by this time, I
might have been dragged from Oxford to London, from London to France,
from France who knows where? But I'm here, and settled to produce, as
soon as possible, the following works--

      1. New number of "Love's Meinie," on the Stormy Petrel.
      2. New ditto of "Proserpina," on sap, pith, and bark.
      3. New ditto of "Deucalion," on clouds.
      4. New "Fors," on new varieties of young ladies.
      5. Two new numbers of "Our Fathers," on Brunehaut, and
         Bertha her niece, and St. Augustine and St. Benedict.
      6. Index and epilogue to four Oxford lectures.
      7. Report and account of St. George's Guild.

And I've had to turn everything out of every shelf in the house, for
mildew and moths.

And I want to paint a little bank of strawberry leaves.

And I've to get a year's dead sticks out of the wood, and see to the
new oat field on the moor, and prepare lectures for October!

I'm _so_ idle. I look at the hills out of bed, and at the pictures off
the sofa. Let us _both_ be useless beings; let us be butterflies,
grasshoppers, lambs, larks, anything for an easy life. I'm quite
horrified to see, now that these two have come back, what a lot of
books I've written, and how cruel I've been to myself and everybody
else who ever has to read them. I'm too sleepy to finish this note.




                                        _13th June._

I do not know when I have received, or how I _could_ receive so great
an encouragement in all my work, as I do in hearing that you, after
all your long love and watchfulness of flowers, have yet gained
pleasure and insight from "Proserpina" as to leaf structure. The
examples you send me are indeed admirable. Can you tell me the exact
name of the plant, that I may quote it?

Yes, and the weather also is a great blessing to me--so lovely this
morning.




I'm getting steadily better, and breathing the sunshine a little again
in soul and lips. But I always feel so naughty after having had
morning prayers, and that the whole house is a sort of little Bethel
that I've no business in.

I'm reading history of early saints too, for my Amiens book, and feel
that I ought to be scratched, or starved, or boiled, or something
unpleasant, and I don't know if I'm a saint or a sinner in the least,
in mediæval language. How did saints feel themselves, I wonder, about
their saintship?




It is _such_ a joy to hear that you enjoy anything of mine, and a
double joy to have your sympathy in my love of those Italians. How I
wish there were more like you! What a happy world it would be if a
quarter of the people in it cared a quarter as much as you and I do,
for what is good and true:

That Nativity _is_ the deepest of all. It is by the master of
Botticelli, you know; and whatever is most sweet and tender in
Botticelli he owes to Lippi.

But, do you know, I quite forget about Cordelia, and where I said it!
please keep it till I come. I hope to be across to see you to-morrow.

They've been doing photographs of me again, and I'm an orang-outang as
usual, and am in despair. I thought with my beard I was beginning to
be just the least bit nice to look at. I would give up half my books
for a new profile.

What a lovely day since twelve o'clock! I never saw the lake shore
more heavenly.

I am very thankful that you like this "St. Mark's" so much, and do not
feel as if I had lost power of mind. I think the illness has told on
me more in laziness than foolishness. I feel as if there was as much
_in_ me as ever, but it is too much trouble to say it. And I find
myself reconciled to staying in bed of a morning to a quite woeful
extent. I have not been affected so much by melancholy, being very
thankful to be still alive, and to be able to give pleasure to some
people.

You have greatly helped me by this dear little note. And the bread's
all right, brown again, and I'm ready for asparagus of any stoutness,
there! Are you content! But my new asparagus is quite _visible_ this
year, though how much would be wanted for a dish I don't venture to
count, but must be congratulated on its definitely stalky appearance.

I was over the water this morning on school committee. How bad I have
been to let those poor children be tormented as they are all this
time! I'm going to try and stop all the spelling and counting and
catechising, and teach them only--to watch and pray.

The oranges make me think I'm in a castle in Spain!




Your letters always warm me a little, not with laughing, but with the
soft glow of life, for I live mostly with "la mort dans l'ame." (It is
curious that the French, whom one thinks of as slight and frivolous,
have this true and deep expression for the forms of sorrow that kill,
as opposed to those that discipline and strengthen.) And your words
and thoughts just soften and warm like west wind.

It is nice being able to please you with what I'm writing, and that
you can tell people I'm not so horrid.

Here's the "Fors" you saw the proof of, but _this_ isn't quite right
yet.

The Willy[44] quotations are very delightful. Do you know that naughty
"Cowley" at all? There's all kind of honey and strawberries in him.

It is bitter cold here these last days. I don't stir out, but must
this afternoon. I've to go out to dinner and work at the Arundel
Society. And if you only knew what was in my thoughts you would be
_so_ sorry for me, that I can't tell you.

[Footnote 44: Shakespeare.]




                                   CORPUS CHRISTI COLLEGE, OXFORD.

What a sad little letter! written in that returned darkness. How can
_you_ ever be sad, looking forward to eternal life with all whom you
love, and God over all?

It is only so far as I lose hold of that hope, that anything is ever a
trial to me. But I can't think how I'm to get on in a world with no
Venice in it.

You were quite right in thinking I would have nothing to do with
lawyers. Not one of them shall ever have so much as a crooked sixpence
of mine, to save him from being hanged, or to save the Lakes from
being filled up. But I really hope there may be feeling enough in
Parliament to do a right thing without being deafened with lawyers'
slang.

I have never thanked you for the snowdrops. They bloomed here
beautifully for four days. Then I had to leave them to go and lecture
in London. It was nice to see them, but my whole mind is set on
finding whether there is a country where the flowers do not fade. Else
there is no spring for me. People liked the lecture, and so many more
wanted to come than could get in, that I had to promise to give
another.




Here's your little note first of all. And if you only knew how my
wristbands are plaguing me you'd be very sorry. They're too much
starched, and _would_ come down like mittens; and now I've turned
them up, they're just like two horrid china cups upside down, inside my
coat, and I'm afraid to write for fear of breaking them. And I've a
week's work on the table, to be done before one o'clock, on pain of
uproar from my friends, execution from my enemies, reproach from my
lovers, triumph from my haters, despair of Joanie, and--what from
Susie? I've had such a bad night, too; woke at half-past three and
have done a day's work since then--composing my lecture for March, and
thinking what's to become of a godson of mine whose----

Well, never mind. I needn't give _you_ the trouble, poor little
Susie, of thinking too.




I'm going to Oxford to-day (D.V.), really quite well, and rather
merry. I went to the circus with my new pet, and saw lovely riding and
ball play; and my pet said the only drawback to it all, was that she
couldn't sit on both sides of me. And then I went home to tea with
her, and gave mamma, who is Evangelical, a beautiful lecture on the
piety of dramatic entertainments, which made her laugh whether she
would or no; and then I had my Christmas dinner in advance with Joanie
and Arfie and Stacy Marks, and his wife and two pretty daughters, and
I had six kisses--two for Christmas, two for New Year's Day, and two
for Twelfth Night--and everybody was in the best humor with everybody
else. And now my room is ankle deep in unanswered letters, mostly on
business, and I'm going to shovel them up and tie them in a parcel
labeled "Needing particular attention;" and then that will be put into
a cupboard in Oxford, and I shall feel that everything's been done in
a business-like way.

That badger's beautiful. I don't think there's any need for such
beasts as _that_ to turn Christians.




I am indeed most thankful you are well again, though I never looked on
that deafness very seriously; but if you _like_ hearing watches tick,
and boots creak, and plates clatter, so be it to you, for many and
many a year to come. I think I should _so_ like to be deaf, mostly,
not expected to answer anybody in society, never startled by a bang,
never tortured by a railroad whistle, never hearing the nasty cicadas
in Italy, nor a child cry, nor an owl. Nothing but a nice whisper into
my ear, by a pretty girl. Ah well, I'm very glad I can chatter to you
with my weak voice, to my heart's content; and you must come and see
me soon now. All that you say of "Proserpina" is joyful to me. What a
Susie you are, drawing like that! and I'm sure you know Latin better
than I do.




I am better, but not right yet. There is no fear of sore throat, I
think, but some of prolonged tooth worry. It is more stomachic than
coldic, I believe, and those tea cakes are too crisply seductive! What
_can_ it be, that subtle treachery that lurks in tea cakes, and is
wholly absent in the rude honesty of toast?

The metaphysical effect of tea cake last night was, that I had a
perilous and weary journey in a desert, in which I had to dodge
hostile tribes round the corners of pyramids.

A very sad letter from Joanie tells me she was going to Scotland last
night, at which I am not only very sorry but very cross.

A chirping cricket on the hearth advises me to keep my heart up.




Your happy letters (with the sympathetic misery of complaint of dark
days) have cheered me as much as anything could do.

The sight of one of my poor "Companions of St. George," who has sent
me, not a widow's but a parlor-maid's (an old school-mistress) "all
her living," and whom I found last night, dying, slowly and quietly,
in a damp room, just the size of your study (which her landlord won't
mend the roof of), by the light of a single tallow candle--dying, I
say, _slowly_, of consumption, not yet near the end, but
contemplating it with sorrow, mixed partly with fear, lest she should
not have done all she could for her children!

The sight of all this and my own shameful comforts, three wax candles
and blazing fire and dry roof, and Susie and Joanie for friends!

Oh me, Susie, what _is_ to become of me in the next world, who
have in this life all my good things!




What a sweet, careful, tender letter this is! I re-inclose it at once
for fear of mischief, though I've scarcely read, for indeed my eyes
are weary, but I see what gentle mind it means.

Yes, you will love and rejoice in your Chaucer more and more. Fancy,
I've never time, now, to look at him,--obliged to read even my Homer
and Shakespeare at a scramble, half missing the sense,--the business
of life disturbs one so.




                                        HERNE HILL.

[Illustration: Plan of Ruskin's room]

Here's your letter first thing in the morning, while I'm sipping my
coffee in the midst of such confusion as I've not often achieved at my
best. The little room, which I think is as nearly as possible the size
of your study, but with a lower roof, has to begin with--A, my bed;
B, my basin stand; C, my table; D, my chest of drawers; thus arranged
in relation to E, the window (which has still its dark bars to prevent
the little boy getting out); F, the fireplace; G, the golden or
mineralogical cupboard; and H, the grand entrance. The two dots with a
back represent my chair, which is properly solid and not _un_-easy.
Three others of lighter disposition find place somewhere about. These
with the chimney-piece and drawer's head are covered, or rather
heaped, with all they can carry, and the morning is just looking in,
astonished to see what is expected of it, and smiling--(yes, I may
fairly say it is smiling, for it is cloudless for its part above the
smoke of the horizon line)--at Sarah's hope and mine, of ever getting
that room into order by twelve o'clock. The chimney-piece with its
bottles, spoons, lozenge boxes, matches, candlesticks, and letters
jammed behind them, does appear to me entirely hopeless, and this the
more because Sarah,[45] when I tell her to take a bottle away that has
a mixture in it which I don't like, looks me full in the face, and
says "she _won't_, because I may want it." I submit, because it is
so nice to get Sarah to look one full in the face. She really is the
prettiest, round faced, and round eyed girl I ever saw, and it's a
great shame she should be a housemaid; only I wish she would take
those bottles away. She says I'm looking better to-day, and I think
I'm feeling a little bit more,--no, I mean, a little bit less
demoniacal. But I still can do that jackdaw beautifully.

[Footnote 45: Our Herne Hill parlor-maid for four years. One of quite
the brightest and handsomest types of English beauty I ever saw,
either in life, or fancied in painting.--J. R.]




I am quite sure you would have felt like Albert Dürer, had you gone on
painting wrens.

The way Nature and Heaven waste the gifts and souls they give and
make, passes all wonder. You might have done anything you chose, only
you were too modest.

No, I never _will_ call you my dear lady; certainly, if it comes to
that, something too dreadful will follow.




I am most interested in your criticism of "Queen Mary." I have not
read it, but the choice of subject is entirely morbid and wrong, and I
am sure all you say must be true. The form of decline which always
comes on mental power of Tennyson's passionately sensual character, is
always of seeing ugly things, a kind of delirium tremens. Turner had
it fatally in his last years.

I am so glad you enjoy writing to me more than any one else. The book
you sent me of Dr. John Brown's on books, has been of extreme utility
to me, and contains matter of the deepest interest. Did you read it
yourself? If not I must lend it to you.

I am so glad also to know of your happiness in Chaucer. Don't hurry in
reading. I will get you an edition for your own, that you may mark it
in peace.




I send you two books, neither I fear very amusing, but on my word, I
think books are always dull when one really most wants them. No, other
people don't feel it as you and I do, nor do the dogs and ponies, but
oughtn't we to be thankful that we _do_ feel it. The thing I fancy we
are both wanting in, is a right power of enjoying the past. What
sunshine there _has_ been even in this sad year! I have seen beauty
enough in one afternoon, not a fortnight ago, to last me for a year if
I could rejoice in memory.

I have a painter friend, Mr. Goodwin, coming to keep me company, and
I'm a little content in this worst of rainy days, in hopes there _may_
be now some clearing for him.

Our little kittens pass the days of their youth up against the wall at
the back of the house, where the heat of the oven comes through. What
an existence! and yet with all my indoor advantages

                           I am your sorrowful and repining
                                                            J. R.




I am entirely grateful for your letter, and for all the sweet feelings
expressed in it, and am entirely reverent of the sorrow which you feel
at my speaking thus. If only all were like you! But the chief sins and
evils of the day are caused by the Pharisees, exactly as in the time
of Christ, and "they make broad their phylacteries" in the same way,
the Bible superstitiously read, becoming the authority for every error
and heresy and cruelty. To make its readers understand that the God of
their own day is as living, and as able to speak to them directly as
ever in the days of Isaiah and St. John, and that He would now send
messages to His Seven Churches, if the Churches would hear, needs
stronger words than any I have yet dared to use, against the idolatry
of the historical record of His messages long ago, perverted by men's
forgetfulness, and confused by mischance and misapprehension; and if
instead of the Latin form "Scripture" we put always "writing" instead
of "written" or "write" in one place, and "Scripture" as if it meant
our English Bible, in another, it would make such a difference to our
natural and easy understanding the range of texts.

The peacock's feathers are marvelous. I am very glad to see them. I
never had any of their downy ones before. My compliments to the bird,
upon them, please.

I found a strawberry growing just to please itself, as red as a ruby,
high up on Yewdale crag yesterday, in a little corner of rock all its
own; so I left it to enjoy itself. It seemed as happy as a lamb, and
no more meant to be eaten.

Yes, those are all sweetest bits from Chaucer (the pine new to me);
your own copy is being bound. And all the Richard,--but you must not
copy out the Richard bits, for I like all my Richard alike from
beginning to end. Yes, my "seed pearl" bit is pretty, I admit; it was
like the thing. The cascades here, I'm afraid, come down more like
seed oatmeal.




I believe in my hasty answer to your first kind letter I never noticed
what you said about Aristophanes. If you will indeed send me some
notes of the passages that interest you in the "Birds," it will not
only be very pleasant to me, but quite seriously useful, for the
"Birds" have always been to me so mysterious in that comedy, that I
have never got the good of it which I know is to be had. The careful
study of it put off from day to day, was likely enough to fall into
the great region of my despair, unless you had chanced thus to remind
me of it.

Please, if another chance of good to me come in your way, in another
brown spotty-purple peacock's feather, will you yet send it to me, and
I will be always your most grateful and faithful

                                                            J. R.




                                        HERNE HILL.

What translation of Aristophanes is that? I must get it. I've lost I
can't tell you how much knowledge and power through false pride in
refusing to read translations, though I couldn't read the original
without more trouble and time than I could spare; nevertheless, you
must not think this English gives you a true idea of the original. The
English is much more "English" in its temper than its words.
Aristophanes is far more dry, severe, and concentrated; his words are
fewer, and have fuller flavor; this English is to him what currant
jelly is to currants. But it's immensely useful to me.

Yes, that is very sweet about the kissing. I have done it to rocks
often, seldom to flowers, not being sure that they would like it.

I recollect giving a very reverent little kiss to a young sapling
that was behaving beautifully in an awkward chink, between two great
big ones that were ill-treating it. Poor me, (I'm old enough, I hope,
to write grammar my own way,) my own little self, meantime, never by
any chance got a kiss when I wanted it,--and the better I behaved, the
less chance I had, it seemed.




I never thought the large packet was from you; it was thrown aside
with the rest, till evening, and only opened _then_ by chance. I was
greatly grieved to find what I had thus left unacknowledged. The
drawings are entirely beautiful and wonderful, but, like all the good
work done in those bygone days, (Donovan's own book being of
inestimable excellence in this kind,) they affect me with profound
melancholy in the thought of the loss to the entire body of the nation
of all this perfect artistic capacity, and sweet will, for want of
acknowledgment, system, and direction. I must write a careful passage
on this matter in my new Elements of Drawing. Your drawings have been
sent me not by you, but by my mistress Fors, for a text. It is no
wonder, when you can draw like this, that you care so much for all
lovely nature. But I shall be ashamed to show you my peacock's
feather; I've sent it, however.




It is _very_ sweet of you to give me your book, but I accept it at
once most thankfully. It is the best type I can show of the perfect
work of an English lady in her own simple peace of enjoyment and
natural gift of truth, in her sight and in her mind. And many pretty
things are in my mind and heart about it, if my hands were not too
cold to shape words for them. The book shall be kept with my Bewicks;
it is in nowise inferior to them in fineness of work. The finished
proof of next "Proserpina" will, I think, be sent me by Saturday's
post. Much more is done, but this number was hindered by the revisal
of the Dean of Christ Church, which puts me at rest about mistakes in
my Greek.




It is a great joy to me that _you_ like the Wordsworth bits; there are
worse coming; but I've been put into a dreadful passion by two of my
cleverest girl pupils "going off pious!" It's exactly like a nice pear
getting "sleepy;" and I'm pretty nearly in the worst temper I _can_ be
in, for W. W. But what _are_ these blessed feathers? Everything that's
best of grass and clouds and chrysoprase. What incomparable little
creature wears such things, or lets fall! The "fringe of flame" is
Carlyle's, not mine, but we feel so much alike, that you may often
mistake one for the other now.




You cannot in the least tell what a help you are to me, in caring so
much for my things and seeing what I try to do in them. You are quite
one of a thousand for sympathy with everybody, and one of the ten
times ten thousand, for special sympathy with my own feelings and
tries. Yes, that second column is rather nicely touched, though I say
it, for hands and eyes of sixty-two; but when once the wind stops I
hope to do a bit of primrosey ground that will be richer.




Here, not I, but a thing with a dozen of colds in its head, am!

I caught one cold on Wednesday last, another on Thursday, two on
Friday, four on Saturday, and one at every station between this and
Ingleborough on Monday. I never was in such ignoble misery of cold.
I've no cough to speak of, nor anything worse than usual in the way of
sneezing, but my hands are cold, my pulse nowhere, my nose tickles
and wrings me, my ears sing--like kettles, my mouth has no taste, my
heart no hope of ever being good for anything, any more. I never
passed such a wretched morning by my own fireside in all my days, and
I've quite a fiendish pleasure in telling you all this, and thinking
how miserable you'll be too. Oh me, if I ever get to feel like myself
again, won't I take care of myself.




The feathers nearly made me fly away from all my Psalters and
Exoduses, to you, and my dear Peacocks. I wonder when Solomon got his
ivory and apes and peacocks, whether he ever had time to look at them.
He couldn't always be ordering children to be chopped in two. Alas, I
suppose his wisdom, in England of to-day, would have been taxed to
find out which mother lied in saying which child _wasn't_ hers!

I've been writing to Miss R. again, and Miss L.'s quite right to stay
at home. "She thinks I have an eagle's eye." Well, what else should I
have, in day time? together with my cat's eye in the dark? But you may
tell her I should be very sorry if my eyes were _no_ better than
eagles'! "Doth the eagle know what is in the pit"?[46] _I_ do.

[Footnote 46: Blake.]




I hope you will be comforted in any feeling of languor or depression
in yourself by hearing that I also am wholly lack lustrous,
_de_pressed, _op_pressed, _com_pressed, and _down_pressed
by a quite countless pressgang of despondencies, humilities, remorses,
shamefacednesses, all overnesses, all undernesses, sicknesses,
dullnesses, darknesses, sulkinesses, and everything that rhymes to
lessness and distress, and that I'm sure you and I are at present the
mere targets of the darts of the ----, etc., etc., and Mattie's
waiting and mustn't be loaded with more sorrow; but I can't tell you
how sorry I am to break my promise to-day, but it would not be safe
for me to come.




I'm a little better, but can't laugh much yet, and won't cry if I can
help it. Yet it always makes me _nearly_ cry, to hear of those poor
working men trying to express themselves and nobody ever teaching
them, nor anybody in all England, knowing that painting is an _art_,
and sculpture also, and that an untaught man can no more carve or
paint, than play the fiddle. All efforts of the kind, mean simply that
we have neither master nor scholars in any rank or any place. And I,
also, what have _I_ done for Coniston schools yet! I don't deserve an
oyster shell, far less an oyster.




                                        KIRBY LONSDALE,
                                          _Thursday evening_.

You won't get this note to-morrow, I'm afraid, but after that I think
they will be regular till I reach Oxford. It is very nice to know that
there is some one who does care for a letter, as if she were one's
sister. You would be glad to see the clouds break for me; and I had
indeed a very lovely morning drive and still lovelier evening, and
full moonrise here over the Lune.

I suppose it is Kirk-by-Lune's Dale? for the church, I find, is a very
important Norman relic. By the way, I should tell you, that the
_colored_ plates in the "Stones of Venice" do great injustice to my
drawings; the patches are worn on the stones. My _drawings_ were not
_good_, but the plates are total failures. The only one even of the
engravings, which is rightly done is the (_last_, I think, in
Appendix) inlaid dove and raven. I'll show you the drawing for that
when I come back, and perhaps for the San Michele, if I recollect to
fetch it from Oxford, and I'll fetch you the second volume, which has
really good plates. That blue beginning, I forgot to say, is of the
Straits of Messina, and it is really _very_ like the color of the sea.

That is intensely curious about the parasitical plant of Borneo.
But--very dreadful!




You are like Timon of Athens, and I'm like one of his parasites. The
oranges are delicious, the brown bread dainty; what the melon is going
to be I have no imagination to tell. But, oh me, I had such a lovely
letter from Dr. John, sent me from Joan this morning, and I've lost
it. It said, "Is Susie as good as her letters? If so, she must be
better. What freshness of enjoyment in everything she says!"

Alas! not in everything she feels in _this_ weather, I fear. Was ever
anything so awful?




Do you know, Susie, everything that has happened to me (and the leaf I
sent you this morning may show you it has had some hurting in it) is
_little_ in comparison to the crushing and depressing effect on me, of
what I learn day by day as I work on, of the cruelty and ghastliness
of the _nature_ I used to think so Divine? But, I get out of it by
remembering, This is but a crumb of dust we call the "world," and a
moment of eternity which we call "time." Can't answer the great
question to-night.




I can only thank you for telling me; and say, Praised be God for
giving him back to us.

Worldly people say "Thank God" when they get what they want; as if it
amused God to plague them, and was a vast piece of self-denial on His
part to give them what they liked. But I, who am a simple person,
thank God when He hurts me, because I don't think he likes it any more
than I do; but I can't _praise_ Him, because--I don't understand
why--I can only praise what's pretty and pleasant, like getting back
our doctor.




                                        _26th November._

And to-morrow I'm not to be there; and I've no present for you, and I
am so sorry for both of us; but oh, my dear little Susie, the good
people all say this wretched makeshift of a world is coming to an end
next year, and you and I and everybody who likes birds and roses are
to have new birthdays and presents of such sugar plums. Crystals of
candied cloud and manna in sticks with no ends, all the way to the
sun, and white stones; and new names in them, and heaven knows what
besides.

It sounds all too good to be true; but the good people are positive of
it, and so's the great Pyramid, and the Book of Daniel, and the "Bible
of Amiens." You can't possibly believe in any more promises of mine, I
know, but if I _do_ come to see you this day week, don't think it's a
ghost; and believe at least that we all love you and rejoice in your
birthday wherever we are.

I'm so thankful you're better.

Reading my old diary, I came on a sentence of yours last year about
the clouds being all "trimmed with swansdown," _so_ pretty. (I
copied it out of a letter.) The thoughts of you always trim _me_
with swansdown.




I never got your note written yesterday; meant at least to do it even
after post time, but was too stupid, and am infinitely so to-day also.
Only I _must_ pray you to tell Sarah we all had elder wine to finish
our evening with, and I mulled it myself, and poured it out in the
saucepan into the expectants' glasses, and everybody asked for more;
and I slept like a dormouse. But, as I said, I am so stupid this
morning that----. Well, there's no "that" able to say how stupid I
am, unless the fly that wouldn't keep out of the candle last night;
and _he_ had some notion of bliss to be found in candles, and I've
no notion of anything.




The blue sky is so wonderful to-day and the woods after the rain so
delicious for walking in that I must still delay any school talk one
day more. Meantime I've sent you a book which is in a nice large print
and may in some parts interest you. I got it that I might be able to
see Scott's material for "Peveril;" and it seems to me that he might
have made more of the real attack on Latham House, than of the
fictitious one on Front de Boeuf's castle, had he been so minded, but
perhaps he felt himself hampered by too much known fact.




But you gave my present before[47] a month ago, and I've been
presenting myself with all sorts of things ever since; and now it's
not half gone. I'm very thankful for this, however, just now, for St.
George, who is cramped in his career, and I'll accept it if you like
for him. Meantime I've sent it to the bank, and hold him your debtor.
I've had the most delicious gift besides, I ever had in my life,--the
Patriarch of Venice's blessing written with his own hand, with his
portrait.

I'll bring you this to see to-morrow and a fresh Turner.

[Footnote 47: "Frondes" money.]




The weather has grievously depressed me this last week, and I have not
been fit to speak to anybody. I had much interruption in the early
part of it though, from a pleasant visitor; and I have not been able
to look rightly at your pretty little book. Nevertheless, I'm quite
sure your strength is in private letter writing, and that a curious
kind of shyness prevents your doing yourself justice in print. You
might also surely have found a more pregnant motto about bird's nests!

Am not I cross? But these gray skies are mere poison to my thoughts,
and I have been writing such letters, that I don't think many of my
friends are likely to speak to me again.






SUSIE'S LETTERS.




The following Letters and the little Notes on Birds are inserted here
by the express wish of Mr. Ruskin. I had it in my mind to pay Susie
some extremely fine compliments about these Letters and Notes, and to
compare her method of observation with Thoreau's, and above all, to
tell some very pretty stories showing her St. Francis-like sympathy
with, and gentle power over, all living creatures; but Susie says that
she is already far too prominent, and we hope that the readers of
"Hortus" will see for themselves how she reverences and cherishes all
noble life, with a special tenderness, I think, for furred and
feathered creatures. To all outcast and hungry things the Thwaite is a
veritable Bethlehem, or House of Bread, and to her, their sweet
"Madonna Nourrice," no less than to her Teacher, the sparrows and
linnets that crowd its thresholds are in a very particular sense "Sons
of God."

                                                            A. F.




                                        _April 14th, 1874._

I sent off such a long letter to you yesterday, my dear friend. Did
you think of your own quotation from Homer, when you told me that
field of yours was full of violets? But where are the four fountains
of _white_ water?--through a meadow full of violets and parsley? How
delicious Calypso's fire of finely chopped cedar! How shall I thank
you for allowing _me_, Susie the little, to _distill_ your writings?
Such a joy and comfort to me--for I shall need much very soon now. I
do so thank and love you for it; I am sure I may say so to _you_. I
rejoice again and again that I have such a friend. May I never love
him less, never prove unworthy of his friendship! How I wanted my
letter, and now it has come, and I have told our Dr. John of your safe
progress so far. I trust you will be kept safe from _everything_ that
might injure you in any way.

The snow has melted away, and this is a really sweet April day and
_ought_ to be enjoyed--if only Susie _could_. But both she and her
dear friend must strive with their grief. When I was a girl--(I was
once)--I used to delight in Pope's Homer. I do believe I rather
enjoyed the killing and slaying, specially the splitting down the
_chine_! But when I tried to read it again not _very_ long ago, I got
tired of this kind of thing. If _you_ had only translated Homer! then
I should have had a feast. When a school-girl, going each day with my
bag of books into Manchester, I used to like Don Quixote and Sir
Charles Grandison with my milk porridge. I must send you only this
short letter to-day. I can see your violet field from this window. How
sweetly the little limpid stream would _tinkle_ to-day; and how the
primroses are sitting listening to it and the little birds sipping it!
I have come to the conclusion that bees go more by _sight_ than by
scent. As I stand by my peacock with his gloriously gorgeous tail all
spread out, a bee comes _right at it_ (very vulgar, but expressive);
and I have an Alpine Primula on this window stone brightly in flower,
and a bee came and alighted, but went away again at once, not finding
the expected honey. I wonder what you do the livelong day, for I know
you and idleness are not acquaintances. I am so sorry your favorite
places are spoiled. But dear Brantwood will grow prettier and prettier
under your care.




                                        _April 9th._

I have just been pleased by seeing a blackbird enjoying with
school-boy appetite, portions of a moistened crust of bread which I
threw out for him and his fellow-creatures. How he dug with his orange
bill!--even more orange than usual perhaps at this season of the year.
At length the robins have built a nest in the ivy in our yard--a very
secure and sheltered place, and a very convenient distance from the
crumb market. Like the old woman _he_ sings with a merry devotion, and
_she_ thinks there never was such music, as she sits upon her eggs; he
comes again and again, with every little dainty that his limited
income allows, and _she_ thinks it all the sweeter because _he_ brings
it to her. Now and then she leaves her nest to stretch her wings, and
to shake off the dust of care, and to prevent her pretty _ankles_
being cramped. But she knows her duty too well to remain absent long
from her precious eggs.

Now another little note from Dr. John, and he actually begins, "My
dear 'Susie,'"--and ends, "Let me hear from you soon. Ever yours
affectionately." Also he says, "It is very kind in you to let me get
at once close to you." The rest of his short letter (like you, he was
busy) is nearly all about _you_, so of course it is interesting to
_me_, and he hopes you are already getting good from the change, and I
indulge the same hope.




                                        _10th April._

Brantwood looked so very nice this morning decorated by the coming
into leaf of the larches. I wish you could have seen them in the
distance as I did: the early sunshine had glanced upon them lighting
up one side, and leaving the other in softest shade, and the tender
green contrasted with the deep browns and grays stood out in a
wonderful way, and the trees looked like spirits of the wood, which
you might think would melt away like the White Lady of Avenel.

Dear sweet April still looks coldly upon us--the month you love so
dearly. Little white lambs are in the fields now, and so much that is
sweet is coming; but there is a shadow over this house _now_; and
also, my dear kind friend is far away. The horse-chestnuts have thrown
away the winter coverings of their buds, and given them to that dear
economical mother earth, who makes such good use of everything, and
works up old materials again in a wonderful way, and is delightfully
unlike most economists,--the very soul of generous liberality. Now
some of your own words, so powerful as they are,--you are speaking of
the Alp and of the "Great Builder"--of your own transientness, as of
the grass upon its sides; and in this very sadness, a sense of strange
companionship with past generations, in seeing what they saw. They
have ceased to look upon it, you will soon cease to look also; and the
granite wall will be for others, etc., etc.

My dear friend, was there ever any one so pathetic as you? And you
have the power of bringing things before one, both to the eye and to
the mind: you do indeed paint with your pen. Now I have a photograph
of you--not a very satisfactory one, but still I am glad to have it,
rather than none. It was done at Newcastle-on-Tyne. Were you in search
of something of Bewick's?

I have just given the squirrel his little _loaf_; (so you see I am a
lady,)[48] he has bounded away with it, full of joy and gladness. I
wish that this were my case and _yours_, for whatever we may wish for,
that we have not. We have a variety and abundance of loaves. I have
asked Dr. J. Brown whether he would like photographs of your house and
the picturesque breakwater. I do so wish that you and he and I did not
suffer so much, but _could_ be at least moderately happy. I am sure
you would be glad if you knew even in this time of sorrow, when all
seems stale, flat, unprofitable, the pleasure and interest I have had
in reading your Vol. 3 ["Modern Painters"]. I study your character in
your writings, and I find so much to elevate, to love, to admire--a
sort of education for my poor old self--and oh! such beauty of thought
and word.

Even yet my birds want so much bread; I do believe the worms are
sealed up in the dry earth, and they have many little mouths to fill
just now--and there is one old blackbird whose devotion to his wife
and children is lovely. I should like him never to die, he is _one_ of
my heroes. And now a dog which calls upon me sometimes at the window,
and I point kitchenwards and the creature knows what I mean, and goes
and gets a good meal. So if I can only make a dog happy (as you do,
only you take yours to live with you, and I cannot do that) it is a
pleasant thing. I do so like to make things happier, and I should like
to put bunches of hay in the fields for the poor horses, for there is
very scant supply of grass, and too many for the supply.

[Footnote 48: See "Fors Clavigera", Letter XLV., and "Sesame and Lilies."]




                                        _1st May._

I cannot longer refrain from writing to you, my dear kind friend, so
often are you in my thoughts. Dearest Joanie has told you, I doubt
not, and I know how sorry you are, and how truly you are feeling for
your poor Susie. So _knowing that_ I will say no more about my sorrow.
There is no need for words. I am wishing, oh, so much, to know how you
are: quite safe and well, I hope, and able to have much real enjoyment
in the many beautiful things by which you are surrounded. May you lay
up a great stock of good health and receive much good in many ways,
and then return to those who so much miss you, and by whom you are so
greatly beloved.

Coniston would go into your heart if you could see it now--so very
lovely, the oak trees so early, nearly in leaf already. Your beloved
blue hyacinths will soon be out, and the cuckoo has come, but it is
long since Susie has been out. She only stands at an open window, but
she must try next week to go into the garden; and she is finding a
real pleasure in making extracts from your writings, _for you_, often
wondering "will he let that remain?" and hoping that he will.

Do you ever send home orders about your Brantwood? I have been
wishing so much that your gardener might be told to mix quantities of
old mortar and soil together, and to fill many crevices in your new
walls with it; then the breezes will bring fern seeds and plant them,
or rather sow them in such fashion as no human being can do. When time
and the showers brought by the west wind have mellowed it a little,
the tiny beginnings of mosses will be there. The sooner this can be
done the better. Do not think Susie presumptuous.

We have hot sun and a _very_ cool air, which I do not at all like.

I hope your visit to Palermo and your lady have been all that you
could wish. Please _do_ write to me; it would do me so much good and
so greatly refresh me.

This poor little letter is scarcely worth sending, only it says that I
am your loving Susie.




                                        _14th May._

MY DEAREST FRIEND,--Your letter yesterday did me so much good, and
though I answered it at once, yet here I am again. A kind woman from
the other side has sent me the loveliest group of drooping and very
tender ferns, soft as of some velvet belonging to the fairies, and of
the most exquisite green, and primroses, and a slender stalked white
flower, and so arranged, that they continually remind me of that
enchanting group of yours in Vol. 3, which you said I might cut out.
What would you have thought of me if I had? Oh, that you would and
could sketch this group--or even that your eye could rest upon it! Now
you will laugh if I ask you whether harpies[49] ever increase in
number? or whether they are only the "old original." They quite
torment me when I open the window, and blow chaff at me. I suppose at
this moment, dearest Joanie is steaming away to Liverpool; one always
wants to know now whether people accomplish a journey safely. When the
blackbirds come for soaked bread, they generally eat a nice little lot
themselves, before carrying any away from the window for their little
ones; but Bobbie, "our little English Robin," has just been twice,
took none for himself, but carries beak-load after beak-load for his
speckled infants. How curious the universal love of bread is; so many
things like and eat it--even flies and snails!

You know you inserted a letter from Jersey about fish.[50]
A lady there tells me that formerly you might have a bucket
of oysters for sixpence and that now you can scarcely get
anything but such coarse kinds of fish as are not liked; and
she has a sister, a sad invalid, to whom fish would be a very
pleasant and wholesome change. This is really a sad state of
things, and _here_ the railways seem very likely to carry away
our butter, and it is now such a price, quite ex[h]orbitant.
Why did I put an _h_ in? Is it to prove the truth of what
you say, that ladies do not spell well? A letter which I once
wrote when a girl was a wonderful specimen of bad spelling.

[Footnote 49: See "Queen of the Air,"]

[Footnote 50: See "Fors Clavigera," Letter XXX.]




                                        _15th May._

I have found such lovely passages in Vol. 1 this morning that I am
delighted, and have begun to copy one of them. You do float in such
beautiful things sometimes that you make me feel I don't know how!

How I thank you for ever having written them, for though late in the
day, they were written for _me_, and have at length reached me!

You are so candid about your age that I shall tell you mine! I am
astonished to find myself sixty-eight--very near the Psalmist's
threescore and ten. Much illness and much sorrow, and then I woke up
to find myself _old_, and as if I had lost a great part of my life.
Let us hope it was not all lost.

I think _you_ can understand me when I say that I have a great fund of
love, and no one to spend it upon, because there are not any to whom
I could give it _fully_, and I love my pets so dearly, but I _dare
not_ and cannot enjoy it fully because--they _die_, or get injured,
and then my misery is intense. I feel as if I could tell _you_ much,
because your sympathy is so refined and so tender and true. Cannot I
be a sort of second mother to you? I am sure the first one was often
praying for blessings for you, and in this, at least, I resemble her.

Am I tiresome writing all this? It just came, and you said I was to
write what did. We have had some nice rain, but followed not by
warmth, but a cruel _east_ wind.






ABOUT WRENS.


This year I have seen wrens' nests in three different kinds of
places--one built in the angle of a doorway, one under a bank, and a
third near the top of a raspberry bush; this last was so large that
when our gardener first saw it, he thought it was a swarm of bees. It
seems a pleasure to this active bird to build; he will begin to build
several nests sometimes before he completes one for Jenny Wren to lay
her eggs and make her nursery. Think how busy both he and Jenny are
when the sixteen young ones come out of their shells--little helpless
gaping things wanting feeding in their turns the livelong summer day!
What hundreds and thousands of small insects they devour! they catch
flies with good-sized wings. I have seen a parent wren with its beak
so full that the wings stood out at each side like the whiskers of a
cat.

Once in America in the month of June, a mower hung up his coat under a
shed near a barn: two or three days passed before he had occasion to
put it on again. Thrusting his arm up the sleeve he found it
completely filled with something, and on pulling out the mass he found
it to be the nest of a wren completely finished and lined with
feathers. What a pity that all the labor of the little pair had been
in vain!

Great was the distress of the birds, who vehemently and angrily
scolded him for destroying their house; happily it was an empty one,
without either eggs or young birds.






HISTORY OF A BLACKBIRD.


We had had one of those summer storms which so injure the beautiful
flowers and the young leaves of the trees. A blackbird's nest with
young ones in it was blown out of the ivy on the wall, and the little
ones with the exception of one, were killed! The poor little bird did
not escape without a wound upon his head, and when he was brought to
me it did not seem very likely that I should ever be able to rear him;
but I could not refuse to take in the little helpless stranger, so I
put him into a covered basket for a while.

I soon found that I had undertaken what was no easy task, for he
required feeding so early in a morning that I was obliged to take him
and his bread crumbs into my bedroom, and jump up to feed him as soon
as he began to chirp, which he did in very good time.

Then in the daytime I did not dare to have him in the sitting-room
with me, because my sleek favorites, the cats, would soon have
devoured him, so I carried him up into an attic, and as he required
feeding very often in the day, you may imagine that I had quite enough
of exercise in running up and down stairs.

But I was not going to neglect the helpless thing after once
undertaking to nurse him, and I had the pleasure of seeing him thrive
well upon his diet of dry-bread crumbs and a little scrap of raw meat
occasionally; this last delicacy, you know, was a sort of imitation of
worms!

Very soon my birdie knew my step, and though he never exactly said so,
I am sure he thought it had "musick in't," for as soon as I touched
the handle of the door he set up a shriek of joy!

The bird that we nurse is the bird that we love, and I soon loved
Dick. And the love was not all on one side, for my bonnie bird would
sit upon my finger uttering complacent little chirps, and when I sang
to him in a low voice he would gently peck my hair.

As he grew on and wanted to use his limbs, I put him into a large
wicker bonnet-basket, having taken out the lining; it made him a large
cheerful airy cage. Of course I had a perch put across it, and he had
plenty of white sand and a pan of water; sometimes I set his bath on
the floor of the room, and he delighted in bathing until he looked
half-drowned; then what shaking of his feathers, what _preening_ and
arranging there was! And how happy and clean and comfortable he looked
when his toilet was completed!

You may be sure that I took him some of the first ripe currants and
strawberries, for blackbirds like fruit, and so do boys! When he was
fledged I let him out in the room, and so he could exercise his wings.
It is a curious fact that if I went up to him with my bonnet on he did
not know me at all, but was in a state of great alarm.

Blackbirds are wild birds, and do not bear being kept in a cage, not
even so well as some other birds do; and as this bird grew up he was
not so tame, and was rather restless. I knew that, though I loved him
so much, I ought not to keep him shut up against his will. He was
carried down into the garden while the raspberries were ripe, and
allowed to fly away; and I have never seen him since. Do you wonder
that my eyes filled with tears when he left?