REPORT
OF THE
KNARESBROUGH RAIL-WAY
COMMITTEE.


                                  TO THE
                         NOBLEMEN AND GENTLEMEN,

                         Proprietors of Estates,

                           ON THE ADOPTED LINE;

                                  TO THE
                       SUBSCRIBERS FOR THE SURVEY,
               _AND TO AN ENLIGHTENED AND LIBERAL PUBLIC_,

                               This Report
                                  OF THE
                          KNARESBROUGH RAIL-WAY,

                   (_Originally intended for a Canal_)

                                      IS WITH ALL DUE DEFERENCE AND REGARD
                                               PRESENTED BY THEIR FAITHFUL
                                                    AND OBEDIENT SERVANTS,
                                                            THE COMMITTEE.




PREFACE.


If the River Nidd and the brooks adjacent, in the vicinity of Knaresbro',
up the valley to Ramsgill, near Pateley-Bridge, and near the adopted
line, had not possessed the many water-falls, and given motion to the
sixty-seven mills which they do;--or had the great landed proprietors, on
the line now adopted been hostile to this all improving project, of this
highly favoured and not less honoured, their native district;--or had the
hand of Nature, when it varied the surface of our earth, no doubt for
wise purposes, and formed those high hills, composed their bowels of any
other substance than what it is;--or had the commercial necessities of
Knaresbro' and its neighbourhood not existed, and the slow progress of
their redemption, compared with others, at one time of far less note, not
been too apparent; then, perhaps, this project, commendable as it is,
would have shared the same fate, during a season of sickness, which it
did twenty years ago.

But since these falls of water do exist, and are always ready to lend
their willing aid to turn the ponderous wheels which impart motion to
many mill-stones and many thousand spindles, beyond the possibility of
denial;--and since the great landed proprietors have expressed nothing
unfriendly to the project, but, if any thing, the reverse, at this moment
of national difficulties and distress, highly to their credit and
understanding;--and since the all-wise hand of Providence hath permitted
an unceasing demand in one place, and a never-failing supply in another,
at distances perhaps the most suitable and interesting for a work of this
kind; {vi}--and, considering the necessity which the commerce of this
district so evidently requires in an improved mode of transporting, from
place to place, its heavy weights, with despatch and cheapness; then
there can be no doubt of the propriety of prosecuting a scheme of this
kind, so long, as we believe, on substantial data, that the completion of
it will reward the shareholder, and give to this place what it once
possessed, and be the means of rendering it again the first district in
the kingdom for the manufacture of linens.




REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE.


At a meeting held the 16th day of March, 1818, in the Town's-Hall, at
Knaresbro', your Committee were authorised to appoint a suitable person
to take a survey of the country, in order to point out the most eligible
line for a Canal to Knaresbro'.

After various correspondence with different engineers, the choice of your
Committee fell upon Thomas Telford, Esq. a gentleman of long experience,
and of whose abilities, as a civil engineer, every reliance was placed.
About the latter end of May following, this gentleman visited Knaresbro',
viewed the localities of the place, took running and comparative levels
over the shortest and most convenient ground, to the higher side of
Linton-lock, and also towards Tadcaster.  In the latter direction, as
being a more direct communication with the port of Hull, he fully
recommended a close survey to be made, for which purpose he sent his
assistant Mr. Palmer, who commenced the survey with such other assistance
as he required, about the latter end of June, and continued surveying and
levelling in various directions until the middle of September;--about
this time your Committee became alarmed for the success of the intended
Canal, both on account of the unfavourable ground between the town of
Knaresbro' and Ribston, and the difficulty of obtaining a sufficient head
of water in a natural manner.

Besides at this time the elevated situation of Knaresbro' above the
Wharfe was ascertained to be 198 feet, equal to 22 locks of 9 feet each;
and hence, even if water could be obtained at a cheap rate, by artificial
means, the number of locks requisite for locking down into a navigable
part of the river Wharfe or Ouse, distant about twenty miles, would alone
render the project unadvisable, by swelling the expense of the work in
such a manner as would totally destroy the expected advantages to be
derived by the trade of Knaresbro' and the surrounding neighbourhood, or
leave little or no hopes for the shareholders receiving a fair per
centage for their money embarked.

Under these circumstances your committee abandoned all further hopes of a
Canal, and notwithstanding the funds then collected for the survey were
exhausted, they relied on the same spirit which gave rise to the project,
and felt convinced of the great utility and advantages of a Rail-way, if
taken from a navigable part of the river Wharfe, and continued, passing
Knaresbro', up the valley to Pateley-Bridge.

The object of extending the work thus far, was, in order to secure the
back carriage of the lead, which is produced on a large scale in that
neighbourhood, besides the excellent lime for agricultural purposes made
at Greenhow-Hill, and the very excellent stone to be had there for making
and repairing of highways; together with the inexhaustible quantities of
stone for all purposes of building, which by the accounts we have of it,
cannot be excelled; and also the produce of many flax and cotton mills,
all of which are turned by water, and hence more likely to increase in
number than diminish; the quantity of tonnage to be found in that
direction, at a comparatively small expense in obtaining it, added to the
tonnage of the lower end of the line, would, undoubtedly increase, not
only the utility of the work, as regards the country in general, but give
a preponderating quantity of tonnage in a descending direction; the
advantages of which were so obvious to your Committee, that a survey
nearly upon new ground was undertaken, and continued under very
favourable hopes, till at length it was brought within the compass of
both plans and sections, and exhibited to your Committee about the latter
end of January, 1819.

From which data, and what more Mr. Palmer was able to give Mr. Telford
from his own observations, your Committee requested Mr. Telford to give
his estimates of the most advantageous manner of communicating this place
with the navigable part of the river Ouse at Acaster Sailby, (this being
at that time the point fixed on at the lower end of the line) either by a
double Rail-way only, or by a double Rail-way to the Brook Crimple, and
hence by a Canal to Acaster Sailby, taking the water from this brook as a
supply, and forward from Knaresbro' to Pateley-bridge, by a single
Rail-way, with passing places.

The separate expenses of each, as furnished by Mr. Telford, are below:--



MR. TELFORD'S ESTIMATE.
                                                Pounds
4.75 miles, with 116    From the lowest part    15,794
feet fall.              of the Bond End, at
                        the bottom of the
                        High-Street, in
                        Knaresbro', to the
                        Brook Crimple, on
                        Ribston-Green, a
                        double Railway
9m. 1140 yds. with 82   From the Crimple        68,628
feet fall.              Brook to Acaster
                        Sailby, a Canal
                        Add Ten per Cent. for   8,442
                        Contingencies
                                                92,864
20 m. 142 yds. with     From the same point     60,000
198 feet fall.          in Knaresbro' to
                        Acaster Sailby, by a
                        double Rail-way
14.75 m. with a fall    From the same point     38,830
of 11 feet per mile.    in Knaresbro' to
                        Pateley-Bridge, with
                        Passing-places

In the foregoing estimates Mr. Telford has considered the Canal, with its
locks and bridges, as suitable for the Humber Sloops, and the Rail-way
sufficiently strong to admit of one ton and a half being carried by one
waggon.

When it was originally intended for the lower end of the line to commence
at Acaster Sailby, it was unknown to your Committee that an Act of
Parliament existed, levying duties on merchandise on the River Ouse,
after the same had passed the Wharfe mouth towards York; for the better
information of the public, we insert as much as relates thereto.



ACT OF THE 5TH OF GEORGE II.


    "An Act for rendering more effectual an Act passed in the 13th year
    of the reign of his late Majesty King George the First, entitled an
    Act for improving the Navigation of the River Ouse, in the County of
    York:--

    "That from and after the 24th day of June, 1732, all and every the
    goods, wares, and merchandises, and other commodities, carried and
    conveyed on the said River Ouse, above Wharfe mouth, except such
    manure, dung, compost, or lime only, as shall be water borne, and
    used and applied in tillage; and also except all timber, stone, and
    other materials, made use of in or about the works necessary for
    improving of the navigation of the said river, shall pay the tolls or
    rates following, that is to say,--

    "For every ton of wines and groceries, almonds, Areack brandy, cyder,
    cydar egar, hops, fish oil, line-oil, Florence oil, Seville oil, and
    turpentine oil, rum, spirits, tobacco, vinegar, bacon, hams, sides,
    and pork; cases and chests by measure, china, coffee, cork, drugs,
    and medicines; dyers' ware, (except logwood, copperas, and alum);
    flour, glass, (except green glass bottles); haberdashers' wares,
    household furniture, iron wrought, linen, linen-drapers' wares,
    lemons, oranges, and nuts; leather and calves' skins; mercery ware,
    silk and woollen, paper white and books, garden seeds, salt, tea, and
    woollen-drapery ware,--two shillings and sixpence respectively;--and
    so in proportion for any greater or less quantity.  For every ton of
    cheese, flax, pewter, soap, marble, bell-metal, brass battery, and
    copper, two shillings respectively, and so in proportion for any
    greater or less quantity.

    "For every ton of oak, bark, corn of all sorts, earthenware, green
    glass bottles, iron cast and unwrought, lead white and red; paper,
    cap, white, and brown; grass-seeds, beans and peas, rapeseed, stone,
    tallow, tin-plates and wire; timber, oak, ash and elm,--one shilling
    respectively; and so in proportion for every greater or less
    quantity.

    "For every ton of alum, copperas, logwood, brimstone, bricks, tiles,
    coals, hemp, hay, lime for building, lead, and turfs,--sixpence
    respectively; and so in proportion for any greater or less quantity.

    "For every firkin, pot, cask, or other vessel of butter, one penny.
    For every hundred of oysters, one penny.  And that all other goods,
    not herein particularly rated, shall pay ad valorem, such rates or
    duties as shall be ascertained by the said commissioners, appointed
    by or in pursuance of the said former Act."

Soon as your Committee had clearly ascertained the existence of this Act,
and its consequent increase on the tonnage of flax, a deputation went
down to the Wharfe mouth, to examine the river, as far up as Bolton
Percy, and found from their own observations, but more particularly from
the information they collected, that vessels of seventy tons burden can
navigate the river, nearly always once in twelve hours the whole year;
and that, if a little improvement was made in the river at three places,
which are rather too shallow for vessels of this burden, they might pass
at all times without interruption; the deputation were also of opinion
that the improvement was practicable at a moderate expense.  This
deputation also examined the line below Bolton Percy, (see the map {12})
and found it passed through the estate of Sir Wm. Milner Bart. near his
residence, and over lands in his own occupation, consequently more likely
to meet with his opposition than his approbation.

Under these accumulated circumstances, your Committee decidedly
recommended a double Rail-way, to commence at a bend in the river, near
Bolton Percy, (see the map) which will shorten the length of the original
line about one mile and a half, and lessen the expense of the project at
the same time; thence in a line, nearly straight, to Bow-Bridge, passing
on the South side of the village of Wighill, and close to the North end
of the village of Walton.  Thence in a circuitous direction towards
Wetherby;--but if the line was permitted to pass from the North end of
the village of Walton to the North side of Ingmanthorpe, the seat of
Richard Fountaine Wilson, Esq. distant from his residence about four
hundred yards, it would pass over very suitable ground, and shorten the
length of the line five-eights of a mile more.  By either of these lines
it would cross the great North Road, near the Drover's Inn, then proceed
on the North side of the village of Little Ribston, and by the banks of
the River Nidd, sufficiently high to avoid the broken parts, crossing the
said river by a bridge, near St. Robert's Well, and thence proceeding
along the Eastern side of the town of Knaresbro', ascending, in an
uniform manner, to the level of the bottom of the High-Street, commonly
called Bond-End; where it will most conveniently pass behind, or on the
West side of Mr. Wm. Clayton's house; or, if more desirable to the owners
of property at this point, it is possible to pass it under ground, and
enter the valley of the Nidd without affecting or destroying any
property, except two or three old houses belonging to Mrs. Stubbs.  The
line, for a single Rail-way, will then wind along the North bank of the
valley, till it crosses the Nidd by another bridge, the clumps of trees
on Scotton Moor; from this point it will keep on very favourable ground
along the South side of the river, passing half way between Killinghall
village and Killinghall bridge; thence through the middle of Hampsthwaite
village, and close by Wreaksmill crossing the Nidd again below the
village of Birstwith; after which it winds along the North bank of the
River Nidd to Pateley-Bridge.

Your Committee having stated their reasons for abandoning the project of
a Canal, and recommending that of a Railway, and having also pointed out
the adopted line, the next duty which presents itself to their notice is
the Revenue;--the nature and quantity of Tonnage which is likely to come
upon the line, and within the limits of its attraction;--and give to each
such a charge as will equally benefit the various consumers.  Such as we
conceive to be of the most general importance, first attracts notice,
which is the article of



COAL,


Wherein there is little doubt but a saving of eight shillings per
chaldron will, on the completion of the work, be effected--a most
material object for the poor, and the general benefit of commerce.  The
rule by which this computation is made, compared with others we have
seen, is very much on the safe side, but should a trifling mistake occur,
we confidently believe that the decrease in the price of this article
will very much enhance its consumption, without anticipating any
increased demand at the lime-works and bleach-grounds, arising from an
increase of business, which naturally follows the cheapness of carriage,
and the rapid transport of goods from place to place.  The increase of
population, while speaking of this article, must not be omitted, since,
in the last twenty-one years it hath increased from four to near seven
thousand, including Knaresbro', Scriven-with-Tentergate, and Brearton.
The most correct statement we are able to give is below:--

                                    TONS.
Knaresbro' and Scriven with         11,000
Tentergate, including lime-kilns
and bleach-grounds
Brearton                            100
Flaxby                              50
Goldsborough                        100
Haverah Park                        25
Killinghall                         350
Plumpton                            100
Harrowgate and Bilton               3,000
Ribston                             150
Scotton                             200
Stainburn                           200
                                    15,275
Birstwith Township                  500
Hampsthwaite and Felliscliffe do.   600
Clint do.                           260
Darley do.                          400
Hartwith do.                        450
Thornthwaite do.                    200
Dacre do.                           500
Bewerley do.                        1,600
Bishopside do.                      50
Updale do.                          1,500
   Pateley Tonnage                  6,060
   Knaresbro' do.                   15,275
Total Tonnage of Coals              21,335

From good authority we are informed that Kippax and Haigh-Moor coals can
be delivered at Bolton-Percy for ten shillings per chaldron, or 8s. to 8s
6d. per ton.; and if any back carriage could be procured they would be
delivered for less, hence the advantage of taking yarns, &c. from
Knaresbro', and the neighbourhood of Pateley-Bridge to Barnsley, and
bringing coals back; but independent of such an advantage we are able to
prove the great saving named before in these coals:

                  Pounds            _s._              _d._
Cost per          0                 10                0
chaldron of the
Kippax, or
Haigh-moor
coals, at the
end of the
Rail-way, at or
near Bolton
Percy, is
Removing do.      0                 0                 9
into the
waggon, (if not
landed 4d.)
Rail-way dues,    0                 3                 0
18 miles, at
2d. per ton,
per mile
Waggon dues, 18   0                 2                 3
miles, at l.5d.
per ton, per
mile
                  0                 16                0

The present cost by way of Boroughbridge, is one pound five shillings,
and hence the saving to the public on every ton, or chaldron of coals,
will be nine shillings, except the merchants' profit.

By the foregoing statement the tonnage of the Knaresbro' and
Pateley-Bridge coal, when it reaches Knaresbro', will yield a revenue of
3200 pounds annually, being 21,335 tons, at 2d. per ton, per mile, for 18
miles, and the tonnage on the coal belonging the district up to
Pateley-Bridge will be 6000 tons, for 6 miles, the average distance at
2d. per ton, per mile, or 303 pounds 0s. 0d. making together 3503 pounds
0s. 0d.

The next topic for our consideration which naturally presents itself, is
the surplus



PRODUCE OF THE SOIL,


Which although composed of a great variety, we shall here only notice
that of Corn; and although the town of Knaresbro' and its vicinity,
cannot complain of a scanty or contracted supply, nor yet of exorbitant
prices, compared with their more western neighbours, the inhabitants of
Craven, and the borders of Lancashire: who, at least must pay such
suitable advance as will compensate for a long and expensive land, or a
longer and protracted water carriage, neither of which in all
probability, can in these days of depression, bear a further reduction of
rate.--Under these circumstances, knowing the soil in the neighbourhood
of Wetherby and Tadcaster to be rich and fertile, we feel some confidence
that corn and its produce in flour and meal, (which can so conveniently
be converted by mills upon the line,) will soon become an article of
tonnage in no small degree, nearly the whole length of the line; and
thence being removed by land carriage from Pateley-Bridge to Skipton and
other places further west, will be found cheaper than heretofore.  The
quantity of tonnage on this head is not so clearly ascertained, still it
will have some reference to the quantity of coals brought from Skipton
into the neighbourhood of Pateley-Bridge, or the quantity of lead taken
from Pateley-Bridge, to Ripon as either one or the other of these
articles, in both directions must be considered back carriage, otherwise
they could not be removed, as heretofore, at the usual low rates.  From
these data, and the fact of three waggons three days each week from
Knaresbro' towards Skipton, we believe the tonnage under this head in
that direction will be three thousand tons annually, which being nearly
the whole length of the line, or twenty-five miles at 3d. per ton, per
mile, will yield a revenue of 937 pounds 10s.  Being aware some doubt may
arise as to the computation of this tonnage being correct, we feel no
apprehension as to the result.

For while it must be admitted, that lead in this case ceases to be a back
carriage, hence the expense of carrying corn from Ripon to Pateley-Bridge
must naturally increase, whilst on the contrary, the expense by the
Railway must as naturally decrease; these two circumstances in all
probability will fully support the estimate, if not greatly exceed it.

We now come to the present principal trade of the town and neighbourhood
of Knaresbro', which is that of dressing Flax and spinning Yarns; and
what first takes our notice upon the subject of tonnage, is that of



FLAX.


This article during the latter period of the late war, was dressed and
manufactured here in greater quantities than at present, probably owing
to the profits upon it at that time being more adequate to the heavy
expense of carriage, than they are now.  The depressed state of the trade
since that period has caused one flax-mill, turned by water, to be
converted into a corn-mill, no doubt to the detriment of others in that
line; and two more, turned by the power of steam, to stand still, and
become useless; whereas, if carriage could be considerably reduced upon
this article, and also in that of coal as stated already there remains
little doubt but this useless property would regain its former value, and
additional employment be afforded to the increasing population of the
neighbourhood; an object at all times deserving the notice of the opulent
and rich, and which of late, hath, with partial success engaged the
united efforts of the legislature.

In calculating on the tonnage of this article we have it in our power to
be more exact than on that of any named before, for every individual
concerned with it, has made his own return, and which added together
amounts to two thousand four hundred and forty tons, being for the town
of Knaresbro', one thousand seven hundred; and for the neighbourhood up
to Pateley-Bridge, seven hundred and forty.  Hence the amount of revenue
from this tonnage will be as follows:

                  Pounds            _s._              _d._
From Bolton       732               0                 0
Percy to
Knaresbro' 2440
tons per ann.
18 miles, at
4d. per ton,
per mile
From Knaresbro'
to
Pateley-Bridge,
which is 14.75
miles, but for
safety sake is
only taken at
12.
740 tons, 12      148               0                 0
miles at 4d.
per ton, per
mile
                  880               0                 0

Having pointed out the probable amount of revenue which the article of
Flax will yield to the Railway; we shall next endeavour to exhibit how
much will be saved between the present and the projected mode of
conveying it to Knaresbro':

From                                        Pounds 1   2          0
Hull,
via B.
Bridge,
the
present
expense
per ton,
is
And the
time of
coming
from 10
to 21
days
From       0          5          0
Hull to
Bolton
Percy,
per ton
Removing   0          0          9
from the
boat
into the
waggon
Rail       0          6          0
dues, 18
miles,
at 4d.
per ton
per mile
Waggon     0          2          3          0          14         0
dues, 18
miles,
at 1.5d.
per ton,
per mile
                                            0          8          0

By this statement it appears there is a saving of 8s. per ton from Hull
to Knaresbro'; and nothing seems to prevent the same ratio holding good
from Hull to Pateley-Bridge; besides should the Flax come from Hull on
board the regular traders, it will in all probability arrive at the
Wharfe mouth in two tides, and from thence to Knaresbro' in eight or nine
hours; but should the trade of Knaresbro' attract the notice of the
owners of steam vessels, its dispatch would doubtless be greater; and
more in proportion it would benefit the trade of the place; in as much as
cheapness of carriage and dispatch of goods whether manufactured or
otherwise are the very sinews of commerce, and in such proportion as
these are obtained, so will the wealth and prosperity of the town or
neighbourhood be regulated.

In presuming upon any increase of tonnage on this head, we feel equally
safe as on any other, or more so; for if the present mills turned by
water, and spinning Flax were found insufficient, some corn-mills might
easily be converted, and in lieu of them, wind-mills might be erected,
for which purpose many fine situations present themselves on both sides
of the valley, where there is abundance of stone and lime always
contiguous, which would render such erections less expensive than in many
other places.

The next subject for our consideration, and which naturally follows the
last, is the tonnage arising from manufactured



LINEN,


Which in former times when spinning was done by hand, was the staple
trade of Knaresbro' and its vicinity, but which, of late years has been
much on the decline, perhaps owing to many causes.

The principal one we are disposed to believe, arose from the capitalists
originally engaged in that line becoming mill owners; and as mills for
sometime did not increase by their numbers so rapidly as to glut the
market with their produce, the profits in that branch were better than
the other; and as this became apparent, its effects soon spread; so that
few more reasons are requisite to prove the fact, of the Linen
Manufacture having given place to that of Yarns.

Another reason why it hath not made equal progress with other places, may
be the length of time manufactured goods are on their passage to London,
where there is a market for every thing every day; the port of York is
the only one where these goods have been shipped, and from what cause we
cannot say, but they have been frequently so long on their passage, that
good connections have been entirely lost on that account; whereas if the
Railway was completed, Hull would naturally become the port of
Knaresbro', and all produce of its manufacture would reach Hull in two
days, at a much less expense than at present, and London most probably in
five or six days more.  Thus it is highly probable an order from London
might be executed and warehoused in eight days, or sometimes in half that
time; a convenience perhaps unenjoyed by any other place of the kind.

Notwithstanding the manufacture of Linens here has not till lately been
carried forward in that variety, nor the great increase of Looms been
made compared with other places, still the character of Knaresbro' Linens
is maintained, when brought into service.

With regard to the tonnage arising from Linens, it alone will not be
considerable, but as it is one article of tonnage in a descending
direction, we beg leave to class with it, that of Linen Yarns, for
should, by this improved mode of conveyance, either of these increase in
quantity in a descending direction, the other as naturally will decrease,
and as a considerable proportion of Yarns made in this neighbourhood,
finds a market at Barnsley, and in that direction, it is presumed that
along the Railway, and thence by a Barnsley boat, will be the cheapest
mode of conveyance; and in the reverse direction coal will naturally
become an article of tonnage and traffic.  Having already from good and
safe data, stated the quantity of Flax likely to come on this improved
line of conveyance, at 2440 tons, and why a great proportion of it when
made into Linens, Yarns, and Tow, should naturally be tonnage in a
descending direction, we hope the public will give us credit for
estimating this tonnage, at 2000 tons, per annum, and which we will
suppose to be all delivered at Knaresbro'; hence the tonnage of it to
Bolton Percy, will be 2000 tons, 18 miles, at 4d. per ton, per mile 600
pounds per annum, in a descending direction.

We now come to that consideration belonging the tonnage arising from



GENERAL MERCHANDIZE,


Which will include every thing consumed for the support of the
population, and which there is no occasion to dwell upon separately under
respective heads.  This tonnage is made up from entries of different
individuals, and amounts to 1035 tons, per annum, in an ascending
direction; 570 for the town of Knaresbro'; and for the district, up to
Pateley-Bridge, 465; the revenue arising from this source will be as
under:

1035 tons, 18     465 pounds        15                0
miles, at 6d.
per ton, per
mile
465 do. do. do.   139               10                0
do. do.
                  605               5                 0

Although the distance from Knaresbro' to Pateley-Bridge is 14.75 miles,
still we have only rated it at 12 miles.



TIMBER AND IRON


Will also become articles of tonnage in an ascending direction, and
although different when considered respectively, are in their application
so liable to meet, that perhaps it may not infringe much on their
respective rights if classed together for their amount of tonnage; the
amount handed to us is composed of returns made by such individuals as
are concerned in the trade, and although it does not form a conspicuous
figure, nor produce a great sum, still perhaps it is not the less likely
to make up its full share of increase; for with these, cast metal may be
classed, and recollecting the great wear and tear in mills, machinery,
and waggons on the Railway, the quantity is more likely to be doubled, in
a short period, than that of any named before; the amount of revenue as
at present calculated, would be 1250 tons, up to Knaresbro' from Bolton
Percy, being 18 miles, at 3d. per ton, per mile, is 281 pounds 5s. 0d.
And for the district of Pateley-Bridge, the returns are 450 tons, taken
at 12 miles, at 3d. per ton, per mile, amounts to 67 pounds 10s. 0d. per
annum.

Another article of tonnage both ascending and descending may be named,
and on which some revenue may be expected to arise, although the data for
estimating it may be greatly clouded; it is that of



PASSENGERS.


The market of Knaresbro' is generally well supplied, and prices moderate,
as they are in other equally fertile districts, except in a few articles,
such as poultry, butter and eggs; but the increase of price in these
articles is the most felt during the Harrogate season, when large
quantities are in great demand for that improving place.  Contemplating
the execution of this project, it would immediately afford a most
complete opening for all produce of this kind, coming to the market, in
an easy, comfortable, and cheap manner, from a neighbourhood which hath
not before enjoyed such an advantage, and would bring with it a
corresponding demand for such articles of merchandize as are sold at
Knaresbro', and in daily consumption in all farm houses.  Contemplating
again the prospect of a steam conveyance from the lower end of the
Railway to Hull, which is highly probable, it is only natural to suppose,
that very few journies would be taken, by the inhabitants of Knaresbro',
and its vicinity, by any other conveyance to Hull, because cheapness,
expedition, and comfort would recommend it.

Having stated such as we can at present call the ascending tonnage, our
next duty is to say what there is which presents itself, that we can rely
upon for a descending tonnage, more than what hath already been treated
of.

Of these we find a tolerable variety, and of some articles a never
failing supply; viz. lead; stone for building; stone for highways; lime
and lime stone; slates; flags; oak bark; wood; cotton twist; Irish flax
and linens; ashes and several other kinds of American produce; which if
we treat of as they are respectively named, that of



LEAD


First takes our attention.  This article from time immemorial has been
extracted from the bowels of the earth, at Greenhowhill, near
Pateley-Bridge, in large quantities, the greatest part of which, of late
years, has been carted to Ripon, a distance of twelve miles, and thence
shipped for Hull, at an expense of one pound per ton.

From good authority we are informed that these mines produce annually,
3000 tons, out of which quantity 2500 will become tonnage along the
Railway, as below:--2500 tons, 33 miles, 1.5d. per ton, per mile, is 515
pounds 12 6.

The advantage which the proprietors of these mines will derive from this
improved mode of conveyance, is made apparent, by the following
statement:--

From Pateley                         Pounds 1         0         0
Bridge to Hull,
by way of Ripon
and
Boroughbridge,
per ton, is
BY THE RAILWAY,
From              4        1.5
Pateley-Bridge
to Bolton
Percy, 33
miles, 1.5d.
per ton
Rail dues, 33     4        1.5
miles, at l.5d.
per ton, per
mile
Removing from     0        3
the waggon into
the boat
Freight to Hull   4        0             0             12          6
from Bolton
Percy
                                         0             7           6

By this statement it appears there is a clear saving of 7s. 6d. per ton;
but should the freight and carriage at present be only 19s. instead of
20s. as before stated, then the saving will be 6s. 6d. which is an object
of no small moment, and contributes its full share of recommendation to
the project.



STONE FOR BUILDING,


Next claims our attention: It is of various kinds and qualities, some
about Birstwith is of a strong coarse grit, will bear an immense
pressure, is well adapted for bridges, locks, wiers, &c. but is not to be
had in blocks large enough for pier works.  There is another kind of
stone at Dacre-Pasture, of a much finer grit than the last, paler in
colour, and well adapted for finer masonry, such as columns, pediments,
&c.  Blocks of this kind may be had of large dimensions.  Another kind of
stone is found at Wilsill, in quality similar to that at Birstwith, but
may be risen in much larger blocks.  When the Ouse-bridge at York was
building, in 1818, the contractors for, or the inspectors of that work,
got some stone from this neighbourhood for the piers, and by a letter
from Mr. William Craven, one of the inspectors, there is no doubt of its
being fit for any kind of public works, as bridges, locks, &c.  The
expense of land carriage from the quarry to Ripon was the sole cause why
a greater quantity was not made use of.

There is another kind of stone found a little way above Pateley-bridge,
well adapted for flags, window heads and soles, staircases, landings,
tomb-stones, and grind-stones; but owing to the beds being thin, it is
not well adapted for general building purposes.

At Fellbeck, near Smelthouse-mill, a slate quarry has lately been opened,
which produces a slate of a darker colour than that of Idle, is very
sound, lays well on, and will probably improve in fineness, if pursued to
a greater depth.  A ton of it will cover about ten square yards.

Another Slate-Quarry, at Bouthwaite, near Pateley-Bridge, has recently
been discovered; the produce of which is much superior to that of Idle; a
ton of it will cover about 14 square yards.

All this stone and slate is immediately upon the adopted line, or can be
brought to it for 4.25d. per foot, which, with the expense of carriage to
Bolton-Percy will cost at that place as below:--

                  Pounds            _s._              _d._
Rail-dues 30      0                 3                 1.5
miles, at
1.25d. per ton
per mile
Waggon-dues,      0                 3                 1.5
do. do.
                  0                 6                 3
Calculating 16    0                 0                 4.75
feet of this
stone to weigh
one ton, it
appears the
carriage of
each foot will
cost
And the           0                 0                 4.25
original cost
delivered on
the line
Cost of this      0                 0                 9
stone at
Bolton-Percy
per foot

Which if necessity requires, may experience a little reduction.  At this
time the Bramley-fall stone delivered at Selby, costs 1s. per foot; and
at York during the building of Ouse-bridge it cost from 15d. to 16d.



STONE FOR HIGHWAYS.


This is found in immense quantities at Greenhow-hill, distant from
Pateley-bridge two miles, it resembles a grey flint; the road from
Pateley-bridge to Skipton is principally composed of it; it is hard but
easily broken small, and after a little using almost resembles one entire
stone; its use and extraordinary properties are not known to a great
distance, particularly towards Ripon or Ripley; this may be accounted for
in two ways--first, the hills in either direction are long and steep; and
2dly, other materials are just at hand, of a quality sufficient for a
road where the forbidding ascents deny the frequent passing of heavy
carriages.

This stone has been compared to that at Middleton-Tyas, near Richmond,
and when analysed is found to be exactly of the same quality, although a
little lighter in colour; it was compared to this merely to prove a
corresponding property.

For it is a certain fact, that the Middleton-Tyas stone has been for some
time, and is now, carted from the quarry to Northallerton and Brompton,
distant 14 and 15 miles, for the use of their highways, at an expence of
8s. 2d. per ton to the former, and 9s. to the latter place.  This fact is
the more remarkable, since there has been a quarry open for many years,
within 200 yards of Northallerton, but the stone is only of a common
kind.  From this circumstance, it is fair to expect, that provided the
stone of Greenhow-hill can be delivered at Bolton-Percy for 6s. 6d. per
ton, and at Cawood, Selby, Booth-Ferry, and Howden for 8s. it will both
become an article of tonnage in a descending direction, and a great
acquisition to that district; but as that neighbourhood has never been in
the habit of paying such a high price for highway materials, it will
probably in the first instance meet with many objections, which may be
replied to in two ways--1st, that whatever is worth doing, is worth well
doing; and that the best materials are the cheapest;--and 2dly, if the
surveyors and overseers of Northallerton and Brompton have, by their
experience, established the above fact, and found this stone cheaper than
that at home, it is reasonable to conclude that the surveyors and
overseers of the highways in the neighbourhood of Cawood, Selby, and
Howden, may do the same; for the soil of that district is equally fertile
and rich as that of Northallerton; and the occupiers of it equally
opulent--hence their ability to do well whatever is worth doing.

The expense of this stone at the before-mentioned places we state
below:--

                  Pounds            _s._              _d._
One ton of        0                 1                 3
stone delivered
at
Pateley-bridge
33 miles Rail     0                 2                 9
dues at 1d. per
ton per mile
33 miles waggon   0                 2                 9
dues, do.
Cost of stone     0                 6                 9
at Bolton-Percy
per ton
Removing do.      0                 0                 6
into the boat,
do.
Freight of do.    0                 1                 0
Selby, Cawood,
or Howden
                  0                 8                 3

It is probable the expense of delivering this stone at Pateley-bridge,
might be reduced by the application of a Railway from that place to the
quarry; by this estimate horses are expected to be used; it is also
possible to remove it from the waggon to the boat at less than is stated
above.

The neighbourhood of Pateley-bridge possessing many water-falls on which
more mills might be built, gave rise to an idea of cutting this
last-mentioned stone by water-sawing, into scantlings for fire-places,
hearths, and slabs; but upon an experiment being tried, it was found to
contain what is termed the dry heads, which cause a division of the parts
when brought into service, otherwise it yields a beautiful polish, and
exhibits much of the shell and feather; but notwithstanding this last
attempt hath failed to augment its value, another in reserve still
remains of no small moment, which is that of the most excellent



GREENHOW-HILL LIME.


In the district where it has long been used as a manure either for arable
or grassing land, no comment on its superior utility is requisite; but to
those parts where its presence hitherto hath been forbidden by the rugged
and steep hills, and to others at too great a distance to warrant the
expense of a long land carriage, something of its superior quality as a
manure in this place may not, we hope, be deemed unseasonable, especially
as the carriage of it, when the Railway is constructed, will be an object
of less notice, and this will be exemplified hereafter.

We have said before, the stone of Greenhow-hill has been submitted to
analysis, to prove a corresponding property with that of Middleton-Tyas;
this inquiry was extended to ascertain if they produced similar lime, and
we have great satisfaction to inform the public this was the case.

We say a great satisfaction, because we have it in proof, that the
Middleton-Tyas lime is situated in a country, where a knowledge of its
excellence is not confined to narrow limits by steep and forbidding
hills, but being more favourably situated, it has been for a great number
of years, and is now, with increasing demand, conveyed generally 17 or 18
miles, and in some instances, into the immediate vicinity of other kilns,
even at 24 miles distance.

The reader will be best able to calculate the expense of this lime to the
consumer, when he is informed that the cost at the kilns is 12s. per
chaldron of 32 bushels Winchester, one of which weighs 7st. 8lb.

Under this view of the case, we hope it may not be deemed impertinent to
recommend a trial of this lime, even in districts where lime is plentiful
and cheap, and which hath been upon proof hitherto satisfactory; and
should it unexpectedly fail upon arable land, we still beg it may be
admitted to a trial on grassing land.  For the purpose of bleaching it
hath been carted to Bilton-cum-Harrogate, and used with satisfaction, and
frequently 9 or 10 miles towards Ripley, to places distant from the Nidd
lime-kilns only 3 or 3.5 miles.  To say any thing of this lime for the
purpose of building we are completely unable; for whenever it became a
topic of conversation, its excellence as a manure alone may be named as
one reason, and that of having at Knaresbro' kilns, a kind as well
adapted for building as any lime probably can be, and at a rate as
reasonable as circumstances will admit of, may be offered as another
reason.

Having ascertained that two tons of this lime stone will make one
chaldron of lime, weighing 1 ton 7 cwt. 2qrs. we give below a statement
of what it will cost at different points on the line, recommending at the
same time on all occasions the lime-stone to meet the coal.

                  Pounds            _s._              _d._
Cost of the       0                 2                 6
stone at
Pateley-bridge,
2 tons
10 miles          0                 1                 8
Rail-dues, at
1d. per ton per
mile
10 do.            0                 1                 8
Waggon-dues,
do.
7.5 bushels of    0                 4                 4.5
coals, at 7d.
per bushel
Breaking stone    0                 1                 0
and burning
At Killinghall    0                 11                2.5
Toll-bar the
chaldron of
lime is
5 miles           0                 1                 8
additional
tonnage on
stone
                  0                 12                10.5
5 miles           0                 0                 7.5
decrease of
tonnage on coal
At the Bond-End   0                 12                3
Knaresbro' the
lime per chal.
6 miles           0                 2                 0
additional
tonnage on
stone
                  0                 14                3
6 miles           0                 0                 9
decrease of
Tonnage on coal
                  0                 13                6

By the above statement it appears the Greenhow-hill lime can be burnt at
Ribston, for 13s. 6d. per chaldron, a circumstance not unlikely to make
it in great demand, whenever its properties are known for agricultural
purposes.

Adverting now to some articles the exact quantity of which is difficult
to ascertain, such as slate, oak bark, wood, Irish flax and linens, ashes
and some other kinds of American and colonial produce imported into
Liverpool, and which will have a cheap conveyance from Liverpool to
Skipton by canal, and naturally become a back carriage from Skipton to
Pateley-Bridge; as corn, &c. will move in the other direction, and from
Pateley-Bridge to Knaresbro', by the Railway at a much cheaper rate than
heretofore, and will as a matter of course, increase the tonnage, as
example will prove:



VIA SKIPTON.

                  Pounds            _s._              _d._
The present       1                 6                 8
cost per ton
from Liverpool
to Skipton in
general
Merchandize, is
Do. from          1                 7                 6
Skipton to
Knaresbro'
                  2                 14                2
VIA LEEDS.
The present       2                 0                 0
cost per ton
from Liverpool
to Leeds
Do. Leeds to      0                 15                0
Knaresbro'
                  2                 15                0
VIA RAILWAY.
The present       1                 6                 8
cost per ton at
Skipton
Skipton to        0                 16                0
Pateley-Bridge
Pateley-Bridge    0                 3                 9
to Knaresbro',
per Railway, 15
miles, at 3d.
per ton, per
mile
Waggon dues, 15   0                 1                 10.5
miles, at 1.5d.
per ton, per
mile
                  2                 8                 3.5

By the foregoing statement it appears, that when an average of the cost
is taken, which the present modes of conveyance afford, and contrasted
with the Railway when completed, the latter will have a preference of 6s.
3.5d. per ton, being a reduction of more than ten per cent. upon the
present charges.

Having now dwelt on the different articles of tonnage in each direction,
with as much accuracy as we are able, and finding the tonnage in the
ascending direction amount to 31,735 tons per annum, and that in the
contrary to 4,000; and believing from the best information we are able to
obtain, that for every two tons moved in an ascending direction, three
tons may be moved in the contrary; consequently we look to building
stone, stone for highways and lime, and some other articles not
enumerated, to make up the quantity of tonnage required to keep the whole
waggons in full work; and to produce the greatest possible revenue.

Having enumerated such tonnage as falls within our power of calculation,
and named a source with strong probability of much more; we come next to
the general summary, and to contrast it with the expense of the project
as stated by Mr. Telford, wherein we have no doubt, but every ample
consideration is embraced.



COST OF THE RAILWAY.

Bolton Percy to Knaresbro', 18      54,000 pounds
miles, at 3,000 pounds per mile,
double Railway
Knaresbro' to Pateley-Bridge,       38,830
14.75 miles, with passing places,
single Railway
                                    92,830

REVENUE ASCENDING.

                            Pounds        _s._          _d._
21,335        Tons of       3503          0             0
              Coal, see
              page 15
3,000         . . . Corn,   937           10            0
              &c. p. 16
2,440         . . . Flax,   880           0             0
              p. 17
1,035         . . .         605           5             0
              Merchandise
              21
1,250         . . .         281           5             0
              Timber and
              Iron 21
29,060                      6207          0             0

REVENUE DESCENDING.

                            Pounds        _s._          _d._
2,000         Tons Linens   600           0             0
              and Yarns,
              (see page
              20)
2,500         . . .  Lead   515           12            6
              . . . 23
4,500                       1115          12            6
Total                       7322          12            6
amount of
revenue at
present
estimated

By the above statements it appears the project will cost 92,830 pounds;
and the amount of revenue arising from such tonnage as is comprehensible,
will amount annually to 7,322 pounds 12s. 6d. which is rather more than 8
per cent. per annum for the shareholders, independent of 39,090 tons more
which the works will be able to perform, if required, and which from the
low price of one penny per ton for Rail dues, for twenty miles, will
amount to 3,257 pounds 10s. 0d. and when only another penny per ton, per
mile is estimated for waggon dues, this kind of tonnage will be conveyed
at a cheap rate, and delivered in the neighbourhood where it is so much
wanted, at prices agreeable to the foregoing estimates; a circumstance of
itself likely to improve the value of all estates, containing the
articles of stone and lime, and ultimately bring a great increase of
tonnage in that direction, most desirable in all Railway projects.

In the foregoing estimates it is calculated that the waggons will be
drawn by horses, at the same time we believe, that loco-motive engines
might be applied to do the work at a less expense: but not having
employed an engineer perfectly acquainted therewith, we are not
authorized to say more on the subject.

With regard to the annual repairs of a Rail-way our engineer, Mr. Telford
hath not supplied the information; but from other sources we have
ascertained the repairs are in proportion to the quantity of business
done; upon Rail-ways well constructed, and made strong in the first
instance, about l-8th of the annual proceeds is highly sufficient, but if
the castings are light and laid upon timber instead of stone, at least
twice that sum will be required.

Having as a Committee, accomplished in the best way we are able, what was
originally intrusted to our care, (except deviating from a Canal to a
Rail-way;) we now beg leave to lay the subject before the public, not
doubting but that public will duly appreciate its utility, and also
recommend to the Noblemen and Gentlemen who have estates on the line, to
give it such a consideration as a work of this magnitude deserves, either
as regards its importance, by the employment it will afford to the
partially employed labouring poor, during the time the work is in
progress, but more particularly during all the time hereafter; so long as
one ton of lead, or stone may be found near the higher end of the line;
or the river Nidd flow in its present course; or the neighbourhood of
Selby or Howden continue to produce more corn than is sufficient for its
population; or as may regard its importance in an agricultural view, a
sight of which should never be lost, nor whatever can promote its
advancement, be treated with disdain or neglect, but quite the contrary;
for upon the best, the cheapest, and most skilful method of causing the
earth to bring forth abundantly, depends in a great measure our national
prosperity; it gives a plentiful supply at home, will tend to reduce our
alarming pauperism, and hence promote peace, the welcome inhabitant of
every breast; of every cottage; of every mansion; of every state; and the
safest rampart of every throne; for while we consider the soil only as an
agent, let us not forget it is one of an incorruptible class; and
whatever is skilfully committed to its care is generally repaid tenfold;
then it should not be forgotten what was the state of the high-roads in
this country eighty years ago, they were chiefly composed of clay; and
now contrast that period, with the present, and say how much their
improvement hath, or hath not, contributed to the advancement of that
ancient, useful, respectable, and princely profession, of agriculture; if
this is not denied, then contrast the present highways of the district
through which the adopted line will pass, remembering the many steep and
rugged hills, with the present much improved Rail-ways where the
uniformity of ascent and descent is maintained as a principal object, and
permit it to come within your calculating powers to show, what benefit it
may contribute to the perfection of a science on which so much wealth and
public benefit depend.

Or as may regard its importance by the constant employment it will afford
to nearly all ages and classes of people, who may be concerned directly
or indirectly in the manufacture of Yarns, Linens, and Cottons, and
probably at better wages than are regularly paid at other manufacturing
places, for should a considerable saving of carriage be effected,
together with the quick dispatch and transport of goods from place to
place, as we have contemplated; the profits of the masters would be
improved, their business extended, competition created, and hence wages
would be advanced; industry would thereby be promoted, and could morality
and economy be taught by example, then pauperism would only be known by
its name.

If there be any doubt, that the completion of this project will not open
new channels for such tillage as the various soils which are contiguous
to the line require, we are unacquainted with it; because instead of
that, we believe it will not only facilitate the transport of the various
limes as may be requisite to suit the different soils, but also afford an
opportunity of introducing great quantities of manure from the towns of
Leeds and Hull, into places which the present modes in use never will
accommodate.

To enumerate all the advantages which a well constructed Rail-way
possesses over every other mode of conveyance, on lines where the ascent
is great, as in this, would be a work of time, and therefore we shall
dismiss it after quoting a passage from Dupini's Report to the French
Government:

    "The advantages which Iron Rail-ways present are immense.--England
    owes to them a part of her wealth.  Never without them could coal,
    lime, minerals, and other raw materials have been conveyed to such
    distances, and at the same time, at so trifling an expense."

To the Noblemen and Gentlemen who have money vested in the security of
the tolls, arising from the highways contiguous to the line, we beg to
offer some observations, particularly to those who may feel alarm for
their interests:--It is the opinion of others, better informed on these
subjects than ourselves, that instead of reducing the annual amount of
tolls, they have invariably been found to increase, particularly on such
roads as cut the line in a transverse direction; but on roads parallel to
the line, the increase has not been so great; and when it is remembered
the great quantity of tonnage, a project of this kind must require to
make it profitable, it must be admitted that a disposal of it in all
directions will necessarily be the case; thus it is accounted for why the
tolls have increased.

To such Noblemen and Gentlemen who may at some future period (we hope not
far distant) form themselves into a Committee to ascertain the merits of
this report, we beg to express a request, which we trust will be treated
with attention, that they will permit all the money advanced towards the
expenses of the survey already made, to become share money, (if the work
should go forward) and the subscribers who may not be disposed to
purchase shares, to have the option of receiving back the sum or sums so
advanced by them.

JOHN ETESON.
MATTHEW OATES.
WM. THACKWRAY.
FRANCIS COOPER.
WM. DRIFFIELD.
JOHN ELLISON.
THOMAS SIMPSON.
LAMBERT ELLISON.
ROBT. DEARLOVE.
ISAAC NEWTON.
MICHAEL MEEK.

An account of the sixty-seven mills named in the preface of this Report,
showing how each mill is at this time employed:--

                  Corn.          Flax.          Cotton.        Lead.
Shaw Mills        2              2              0              0
Thornton          0              1              0              0
Wreaks            1              0              1              0
Waite             1              0              0              0
Fewstone          1              0              0              0
West House        1              1              0              0
West End          0              3              0              0
Bramley Head      0              2              0              0
Darley            1              1              0              0
Thornthwaite      1              1              0              0
Summer-bridge     1              1              0              0
Fellbeck          1              0              0              0
Braisty Wood      0              1              0              0
Low Laith         0              1              0              0
Smelt House       0              3              0              0
Glass House       1              1              0              0
Holling House     0              1              0              0
Pateley-Bridge    1              1              0              0
Bridge-house      1              0              0              0
Gate
Cockhill          0              0              0              1
Sun Side          0              0              0              1
Scarah            1              0              0              0
Providence        0              0              0              1
Prosperous        0              0              0              1
Merry Field       0              0              0              1
Low Mill          0              0              0              1
Grass Field       0              1              0              1
New Bridge        0              0              0              0
Gouthwaite Hall   1              0              0              0
Ramsgill          1              0              0              0
Killinghall       l              0              0              0
Scotton           0              l              0              0
Knaresbro'        0              1              0              0
   Do. Chapman    1              0              0              0
   Do. Do.        1              0              0              0
Calverley's
Plumpton          1              0              0              0
Goldsbro'         1              0              0              0
Staveley          1              1              0              0
Hunsingore        1              0              0              0
Knox              1              0              0              0
Crimple           0              1              0              0
Spofforth         1              0              0              0
Wetherby          3              0              0              0
Thorp-Arch        2              1              0              0
Tadcaster         1              0              0              0
Clifford          1              1              0              0
                  32             27             1              7

Besides the before-named mills, flax is sent from Knaresbro' to be spun
at

Scotland Mill, near Leeds.
Mickley Mill, near Ripon.
Bishopton Mill, near Ripon.
Ripon Mill, and
Masham Mill.

N.B.  Soon as additional Subscriptions are received, by the Committee, to
cover the expenses of the Survey, a list of the same will be printed, and
distributed to each Subscriber, setting forth, also, the expenses of the
Survey, with every particular.

                      Edward Baines, Printer, Leeds.




Footnotes:


{vi}  The Committee alludes to the immense quantities of excellent stone
for highways near Pateley-Bridge, and the great want of it in the
neighbourhoods of Howden and Selby; and the surplus produce of the earth
in these districts, and the increasing demand for it at Skipton and
Pateley, and the Eastern parts of Lancashire.

{12}  No surviving copies of this map are known.--DP.