The morning of the 23d, however, brought no battle, nor did the enemy
attempt any advance for three days. Washington made Sullivan an early
visit, saw the situation there for himself, and during the day issued
another of his fervent orders to the army. He formally announced the
landing of the British, and again reminded his troops that the moment
was approaching on which their honor and success and the safety of the
country depended. "Remember, officers and soldiers," he said, "that
you are freemen, fighting for the blessings of liberty; that slavery
will be your portion, and that of your posterity, if you do not acquit
yourselves like men. Remember how your courage and spirit have been
despised and traduced by your cruel invaders; though they have found
by dear experience at Boston, Charleston, and other places what a few
brave men, contending in their own land and in the best of causes, can
do against base hirelings and mercenaries." He urged them, too, to be
cool, but determined; not to fire at a distance, but wait for the word
from their officers; and gave express orders that if any man
attempted to skulk, lie down, or retreat, he must be instantly shot
down as an example. Those who should distinguish themselves for
gallantry and good conduct were assured that they might depend upon
being honorably noticed and suitably rewarded. Strict orders as to
other matters were also issued. The commissary-general was to have
five days' baked bread on hand for distribution; the men were to have
constantly ready with them two days' hard bread and pork, and the
officers were to see not only that they had it, but kept it. The
officers of the newly arrived militiamen were instructed also to see
that the cartridges fitted their soldiers' muskets, and that each man
had twenty-four rounds and two flints.

On the Long Island front, Sullivan was alert, and kept his division in
readiness for the attack, which was now hourly expected. He ordered
his command that afternoon, the 23d, to prepare two days' provisions
and turn out the next morning at three o'clock. For the night, he
assigned Hitchcock's and Little's regiments to guard the Flatbush
Pass, Johnston's and Martin's to the coast road, and Remsen's Long
Island militia to support Miles on the Bedford Road. They were all to
be at their posts at six o'clock, and the regiments they relieved were
to return to their encampments and, like the rest, "get two days'
provisions dressed, and be ready for action."

Meanwhile some brisk skirmishing occurred in front of Flatbush. In the
afternoon of this day, the enemy, as Sullivan reported, formed, and
attempted to pass the road by Bedford, but meeting a warm reception
from the riflemen, some "musketry" sent to their support, and two or
three of our field pieces, they fell back. "Our men," wrote Sullivan
to Washington, "followed them to the house of Judge Lefferts (where a
number of them had taken lodgings), drove them out, and burnt the
house and a number of other buildings contiguous. They think they
killed a number; and, as evidence of it, they produced three officers'
hangers, a carbine, and one dead body, with a considerable sum of
money in pocket. I have ordered a party out for prisoners
to-night."[115] The enemy returned in force, and the American
skirmishers, having but two wounded, withdrew to the hills; but their
conduct in the affair was so highly appreciated by Sullivan, that he
issued a congratulatory order in the following terms:

"The general returns his thanks to the brave officers and soldiers
who, with so much spirit and intrepidity, repulsed the enemy and
defeated their designs of taking possession of the woods near our
lines. He is now convinced that the troops he has the honor to command
will not, in point of bravery, yield to any troops in the universe.
The cheerfulness with which they do their duty, and the patience with
which they undergo fatigue, evince exalted sentiments of freedom and
love of country, and gives him most satisfactory evidence that when
called upon they will prove themselves worthy of that freedom for
which they are now contending."[116]

[Footnote 115: Referring evidently to this skirmish,
Lieutenant-Colonel Chambers says: "Strong guards were maintained all
day on the flanks of the enemy, and our regiment and the Hessian
yagers kept up a severe firing, with a loss of but two wounded on our
side. We laid a few Hessians low, and made them retreat out of
Flatbush. Our people went into the town and brought the goods out of
the burning houses. The enemy liked to have lost their field-pieces.
Captain Steel acted bravely. We would certainly have had the cannon
had it not been for some foolish person calling retreat. The main body
of the foe returned to town, and when our lads came back they told of
their exploits."]

[Footnote 116: Little's Order Book, _Document_ 2. But it seems that
Remsen's Long Island militiamen were seized by a panic, either during
this skirmish or at a later hour, on the Bedford Road, and ran from
their posts. Sullivan rebuked them sharply in his orders of the 24th
(_Document_ 2), and confined them thereafter to "fatigue" duty. This
proved to be only the first of several militia panics experienced in
this campaign.]

On the 24th, Washington was still in doubt as to the intentions of the
enemy. Reports represented their numbers on Long Island at not more
than eight thousand, whereas they were double this estimate; and it
was suspected at headquarters that their landing might only be a feint
to draw off our troops to that side, while the real attack should be
made on New York. But the imprudence of running any risks on the
Brooklyn side was obvious, and Washington sent over a further
reinforcement of four regiments, which appear to have been Wyllys's,
Huntington's, and Tyler's of Parsons' brigade (his entire command was
there on the next day) together with the Pennsylvania detachments
under Lieutenant-Colonel Lutz and Major Hay. On this date
Brigadier-General Lord Stirling crossed over, where more than half his
brigade had preceded him; and Brigadier-General John Nixon, whose name
now first appears in connection with the operations on Long Island,
was detailed as field officer of the day, with orders to take command
of the outer line and post his men "in the edge of the woods next the
enemy."[117]

[Footnote 117: Sullivan's Orders, August 24th. _Document_ 2.]

But the principal event of the 24th was the change made in the chief
command on Long Island. Sullivan was superseded by Putnam. There were
now on that side the whole of Nixon's and Heard's brigades (the two
regiments on Governor's Island excepted), the larger part of
Stirling's and Parson's, and half of Scott's and Wadsworth's. As this
roster included one third of the army's effective force, the command
could properly be assigned to Putnam as the senior major-general
present; but it does not appear that the question of his rank entered
into the reasons for the change. In a letter to Governor Livingston
from Colonel Reed, the adjutant-general, dated August 30th, 1776, the
statement is made that Washington, "finding a great force going to
Long Island, sent over Putnam;" leaving the inference to be drawn
that, apart from his rank, Putnam was considered the proper officer,
or an officer competent, to command such a force. Reed states further
that some movements had been made on Long Island of which the
commander-in-chief did not entirely approve, and this also called for
a change. Sullivan, too, was wholly unacquainted with the ground;
although, as to this, Putnam's knowledge of it was not extensive, as
he had been over it only "occasionally." That Sullivan was a brave,
zealous, and active officer, his military career abundantly proves.
Appointed a brigadier-general from New Hampshire, he commanded a
brigade under Lee throughout the Boston siege, and had been sent, as
already stated, in the spring of this year to help repair the
misfortunes attending our force on the Canada border; but success was
not to be met with there, and Sullivan, finding Gates promoted to the
chief command in that quarter, returned, after visiting Congress, to
the New York army. Like most of our general officers at that date, he
as yet lacked military experience, especially in an independent
capacity, for which his ambition to succeed was not a sufficient
equivalent. How far Putnam was more competent to assume the command on
Long Island, is a point which the issue there, at least, did not
determine. His record before this was all in his favor. A veteran of
the old war, a man of known personal courage, blunt, honest,
practical, and devoted to the American cause, he had the confidence
of at least the older part of the army, with which he had been
identified from the beginning of the struggle. As he had never been
tried in a separate department, Washington could not say how he would
manage it, but he could say, from his experience with him at Boston,
that Putnam was "a most valuable man and fine executive officer,"[118]
and such he continued to prove himself through the present campaign.
He seconded Washington heartily and efficiently in all his plans and
preparations, and when he was sent to Long Island the commander-in-chief
had reason to feel that whatever directions he might give as to
operations there, Putnam would follow them out to the letter. But if
Putnam took the general command across the river, Sullivan continued
in active subordinate control, as second in command.[119]

[Footnote 118: Washington to Congress, January 30th, 1776.]

[Footnote 119: In regard to the change in the command, the
adjutant-general's statement in full is this: "On General Greene's
being sick, Sullivan took the command, who was wholly unacquainted
with the ground or country. Some movements being made which the
general did not approve entirely, and finding a great force going to
Long Island, he sent over Putnam, who had been over occasionally; this
gave some disgust, so that Putnam was directed to soothe and soften as
much as possible." (_Sedgwick's Life of Livingston_, p. 201.) What
movements were referred to, unless it was the random firing of the
skirmishers and the burning of houses at Flatbush by some of our men,
or how Putnam was to reconcile Sullivan to the change, as he was
directed (this evidently being the meaning of Reed's last phrase),
does not appear. From subsequent occurrences, the inference is
justified that Putnam did not disturb Sullivan's arrangements, but
left the disposition of the troops to him. What Sullivan himself says
is given in a note further along in the chapter. That Putnam went over
on the 24th, and in the forenoon, is evident from a letter from Reed
to his wife of that date, in which he says: "While I am writing, there
is a heavy firing and clouds of smoke rising from the wood [on Long
Island]. General Putnam was made happy by obtaining leave to go
over--the brave old man was quite miserable at being kept here."
(_Reed's Life of Reed._) This firing, as Washington wrote to Schuyler
on the same date, occurred in the morning. Putnam had been engaged
during the summer, principally, in looking after the defences in the
city and the river obstructions. He had charge, also, of the water
transportation, boats, pettiaugers, etc. His division was in the city
or close to it. Had the enemy, accordingly, attacked the city
directly, it would have fallen largely to Putnam to conduct the
defence; and this is doubtless the reason why, as Reed says, he was
"kept here." But as it now seemed certain that the British were
concentrating on Long Island, he evidently wished to be with the
troops there, where that morning there was "a heavy firing" going on,
and obtained leave to cross. Finding a change desirable, Washington,
probably at the same time, gave Putnam the command and "sent" him
over.]

On the 25th, Putnam received written instructions from Washington. He
was directed to form a proper line of defence around his encampment
and works on the most advantageous ground; to have a brigadier of the
day constantly upon the lines that he might be on the spot to command;
to have field-officers go the rounds and report the situation of the
guards; to have the guards particularly instructed in their duty; and
to compel all the men on duty to remain at their camps or quarters and
be ready to turn out at a moment's warning. The wood next to Red Hook
bordering Gowanus Creek was to be well attended to, and the woods
elsewhere secured by abattis, if necessary, to make the enemy's
progress as difficult as possible. The militia, or troops which were
least disciplined and had seen the least service, were to man the
interior lines, while the best men were "at all hazards" to prevent
the enemy's passing the woods and approaching the works. He
disapproved also of the unmeaning picket firing and the burning of
houses, and warned the general finally that when the attack came it
was certain to be "sudden and violent."[120]

[Footnote 120: Mr. Davis, in his Life of Aaron Burr, who was Putnam's
aid at this time, states that after crossing to Long Island and making
the round of the outposts, he (Burr) urged his general to beat up the
enemy's camp, but that Putnam declined, on the ground that his orders
required him to remain strictly on the defensive.]

For brigadier for the day, General Lord Stirling was assigned to duty
on this date.[121]

[Footnote 121: Sullivan's Orders, August 25th. _Document_ 2.]

In the skirmishing that continued from the 24th to the 26th the
Americans showed skill and bravery, although at times indulging in
desultory firing. The riflemen, supported by field-pieces, made
occasioned dashes upon the enemy and picked off their men with almost
no loss to themselves. Among the troops on picket near Flatbush, on
the 25th, were Colonel Silliman and his Connecticut battalion; and
from the colonel, who wrote from there, on a drum-head, to his wife,
we get a glimpse of the situation at that point during his tour of
duty. "I am now posted," he says, "within about half a mile from the
Regulars with my Regt. under the covert of a woody hill to stop their
passage into the country. There are a number of Regts. posted all
around the town within about the same distance and for the same
purpose. The Regulars keep up an almost constant fire from their
Cannon and Mortars at some or other of us, but neither shott nor shell
has come near my Regt. as yet and they are at too great a distance to
fire muskets at. I have a scouting party going out now to see if they
can't pick up some or get something from them.... They have wounded in
all of our men in 3 days skirmish about 8 or 9, one or two mortally,
which is not half the number that we have killed for them besides
wounded." On the 26th a considerable party with artillery attacked the
Hessians and drove them in, killing several men belonging to the Von
Lossberg regiment, which later in the day advanced in turn and
compelled our skirmishers to fall back. In this affair Colonel Ephraim
Martin, of New Jersey, was severely wounded.

On the morning of the 26th, Washington again crossed to Long Island,
where he remained until night. The records are quite silent as to how
he passed the most of his time, but judging from his letter to
Congress of this date, in which he expressed his belief that the enemy
had landed nearly all their force on that side, and that it was there
they would make their "grand push," it was doubtless a busy, watchful,
and anxious day with him. To suppose that he did not inform himself of
all the preparations made to meet the enemy, that he did not know what
number of men were posted on the hills and at what points, that he did
not study the several modes and directions of attack possible for the
enemy to adopt, and that he did not himself give personal directions,
would be to charge that at the most important moment of the campaign
he failed to exercise that care and attention to detail which he
exercised on so many occasions both before and after. Indeed, although
Putnam and Sullivan were in immediate command on Long Island,
Washington never shifted the final responsibility from his own
shoulders, and as a matter of fact was probably as well acquainted
with the ground as either of these generals. Towards evening, in
company with Putnam, Sullivan, and other officers, he rode down to the
outposts near Flatbush and examined the position of the enemy. How
long he remained, or what information he was able to gather, does not
appear; but both the other generals, Putnam and Sullivan, made a
detour of the pickets either at this time or at an earlier hour in the
day, visited Miles and Brodhead on the extreme left, took their
opinion as to the movements and intentions of the British, so far as
one could be formed by them, and then rode off to the right "to
reconnoitre the enemies lines."[122]

[Footnote 122: Several writers, Mr. Sparks among them, make the
statement that neither Washington nor Putnam went outside of the
Brooklyn lines. It would be impossible to credit this without absolute
proof of the fact. Washington always reconnoitred the position of the
enemy whenever they were near each other; in the last scenes of the
war at Yorktown he was among the first at the outposts examining the
British works. Undoubtedly he rode out to the Flatbush Pass on the
26th, as stated by the writer of the letter to the _South Carolina
Gazette_ (Document 19), who says: "The evening preceding the action,
General Washington, with a number of general officers, went down to
view the motions of the enemy, who were encamped at Flatbush." A
letter from a survivor of the Revolution, present on Long Island,
published in a newspaper several years since, well authenticated, and
preserved in one of Mr. Onderdonk's scrap-books in the Astor Library,
New York, confirms this statement. The soldier recollects that he saw
Washington and others looking at the enemy with their glasses.]

On this day also, the 26th, additional regiments were sent over. Two
of these were the remainder of Stirling's brigade--Haslet's Delaware
battalion, the largest in the army, as we have seen, and Smallwood's
Marylanders, one of the choicest and best equipped. Either on this or
one of the two previous days, Lieutenant-Colonel Kachlein's incomplete
battalion of Pennsylvania riflemen, with two or three independent
companies from Maryland, crossed; and among the last to go over were
one hundred picked men, the nucleus of the "Rangers," from Durkee's
Connecticut Continentals at Bergen, with Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas
Knowlton at their head.[123] These additions raised the force on Long
Island on the night of the 26th to a total of about seven thousand men
fit for duty.[124]

[Footnote 123: Statement of Colonel Thomas Grosvenor to the late David
P. Hall, Esq., of New York, who knew Grosvenor well, and preserved
many facts in writing in regard to his military career. Knowlton's
captains were Grosvenor and Stephen Brown, of Pomfret, Conn. The
detachment was on duty at the outposts on the night of the 26th. The
soldier whose letter is referred to in the note preceding this was one
of the "Rangers," and he states that their number was about one
hundred. That Smallwood's and Haslet's regiments crossed on the 26th,
we have from Smallwood himself.--_Force_, 5th Series, vol. ii., p.
1011.]

[Footnote 124: The regiments were Little's and Ward's, from
Massachusetts; Varnum's and Hitchcock's, from Rhode Island;
Huntington's, Wyllys's, Tyler's, Chester's, Silliman's, and Gay's, and
Knowlton's "Rangers," from Connecticut; Lasher's and Drake's, from New
York; Smith's and Remsen's, from Long Island; Martin's, Forman's,
Johnston's, Newcomb's, and Cortland's, from New Jersey; Hand's,
Miles', Atlee's, Lutz's, Kachlein's, and Hay's, detachment from
Pennsylvania; Haslet's, from Delaware; and Smallwood's, from Maryland.
Among other artillery officers on that side were Captains Newell and
Treadwell, Captain-Lieutenants John Johnston and Benajah Carpenter;
Lieutenants Lillie and "Cadet" John Callender. This list is believed
to include all the battalions and detachments on Long Island at the
time the British attacked.]

Following in turn after Nixon and Stirling, Brigadier-General Parsons
was detailed as field officer of the day[125] for the next twenty-four
hours--the day of the engagement.

[Footnote 125: Parson's own statement, letter of October 5th: "On the
day of the surprise I was on duty."--_Document_ 5.]



At about the time that Washington started to return to his
headquarters at New York, on this evening, Sir William Howe began to
set his columns in motion for the attack, and on the next morning, at
the passes in the hills and along their inner slopes, was fought what
is known in our Revolutionary history as the battle of Long Island.



Fortunately, a point so essential to the comprehension of the progress
of any engagement, the position of both armies on Long Island, just
before the attack, is now known nearly to the last detail. The record
here is clear and satisfactory. On the night of the 26th, the various
regiments and detachments on guard at the American outposts numbered
not far from twenty-eight hundred men. At the important Flatbush Pass,
supporting the two or three gun battery there, and with strong pickets
thrown out to the edge of the woods nearest the enemy, were posted
Hitchcock's and Little's Continental regiments, and Johnston's New
Jersey battalion, the two former being commanded by their
lieutenant-colonels, Cornell and Henshaw. To this point, also,
Knowlton and his rangers appear to have been sent. The battery or
redoubt here stood about where the Flatbush and narrow Port Road
united, and was apparently no more than a plain breastwork, with
felled trees in front of it, thrown up across the road, and perhaps
extending to the rising ground on the left.[126] At the coast road,
around and beyond the Red Lion, the guards consisted of Hand's
riflemen, half of Atlee's musketry, detachments of New York troops,
and part of Lutz's Pennsylvanians under Major Burd. At the Bedford
Pass, to the left of the Flatbush Road, were stationed Colonel Samuel
Wyllys's Connecticut Continentals, and Colonel Chester's regiment from
the same State, under Lieutenant-Colonel Solomon Wills, of Tolland,
who had seen service in the French war and at Havana. Still further to
the left, Colonel Miles was now encamped a short distance beyond, in
the woods. Between these several passes, sentinels were stationed at
intervals along the crest of the ridge, to keep communication open
from one end of the line to the other.[127]

[Footnote 126: The site of this breastwork is now within the limits of
Prospect Park, and it stood across what is known as "Battle Pass." Dr.
Stiles in his History of Brooklyn, and Mr. Field in vol. ii. of the
L.I. Hist. Society's _Memoirs_, put a well-constructed redoubt at this
point on a hill-top to the left of the road. The account in the _South
Carolina Gazette_ says that the Flatbush Pass guards were posted "near
a mile from the parting of the road [_i.e._, a mile from where the
Flatbush Road branched from the Jamaica Road] where an _abattis_ was
formed across the road, and a breastwork thrown up and defended by two
pieces of cannon." In the original sketch of the "engagement," made by
John Ewing, who was Hand's brother-in-law, and with him on the spot,
there is this reference: "F. Where a considerable Number of our people
were stationed with several Field-pieces & Breast-works made with
Trees felled across the Road to defend themselves when attacked."
(_Document_ 15.) Colonel Miles speaks of "a small redoubt in front of
the village [Flatbush]" (_Document_ 20.) The breastwork across the
road was doubtless the principal defence here, and this was merely
temporary.]

[Footnote 127: The number of men at each of the three passes was about
eight hundred, and on the left of these were Miles' two battalions,
with perhaps five hundred men on duty. Sullivan's orders of August
25th give the detail which was to mount for picket on the following
morning. This detail, therefore, was the one on duty on the night of
the 26th. The order runs: "Eight hundred [men] properly officered to
relieve the troops on Bedford Road to-morrow morning, six field
officers to attend with this party. The same number to relieve those
on Bush [Flatbush] Road, and an equal number those stationed towards
the Narrows. A picket of three hundred men under the command of a
Field Officer, six Captains, twelve subalterns to be posted at the
wood on the west side of the creek every night till further orders."
(See also _Documents_ 5, 18, 19.) That Miles was on the extreme left,
we well know; that Wyllys was at the Bedford Pass, appears from both
Miles' and Brodhead's accounts; that Chester's regiment was with him,
appears from an extract quoted below--Chester's lieutenant-colonel
being Solomon Wills; that Johnston was at the Flatbush Pass, appears
from the same and other authorities; that Henshaw with Little's
regiment was there, he himself states; that Cornell was also there
with Hitchcock's Rhode Islanders, appears from Captain Olney's
narrative as given in _Mrs. Williams' Life of Olney_, and from the
lists of prisoners; that Hand was at the lower road, until relieved,
and Major Burd also, the major himself and Ewing's sketch both state;
the New York detachment there was probably a part of Lasher's
regiment. The extract referred to is from the _Connecticut Courant_,
containing a letter from an officer engaged in the battle, which says:
"The night before August 27th, on the west road, were posted Colonel
Hand's regiment, a detachment from Pennsylvania and New York; next
east were posted Colonel Johnson, of Jersey, and Lieutenant-Colonel
Henshaw, of Massachusetts; next east were posted Colonel Wyllys and
Lieutenant-Colonel Wills, of Connecticut. East of all these Colonel
Miles, of Pennsylvania, was posted towards Jamaica, to watch the
motion of the enemy and give intelligence."]

As far, then, to the left as Miles' position the hills were as well
guarded as seemed possible with the limited force that could be
spared, and at the passes themselves a stout resistance could have
been offered. But it was still an attenuated line, more than four
miles long, not parallel but oblique to the line of works at Brooklyn,
and distant from it not less than one and a half, and at the farthest
posts nearly three miles. Should the enemy pierce it at any one point,
an immediate retreat would have been necessary from every other. The
line could have been defended with confidence only on the supposition
that the British would not venture to penetrate the thick woods, but
advance along the roads through the passes.

It will be noticed that in this disposition no provision was made for
holding the fourth or Jamaica Pass far over to the left. That the
enemy could approach or make a diversion by that route, must have been
well understood. But the posting of a permanent guard there would
obviously have been attended with hazard, for the distance from the
lines to this pass was four miles, and from the Bedford Pass two miles
and a half through the woods. The position was thus extremely
isolated, if the troops stationed there were expected to make the
fortified line their point of retreat. None were stationed there
during the five days since the British landed, and it nowhere appears
that any were intended or ordered to be so stationed by either
Sullivan, Putnam, or the commander-in-chief. There was but one
effective way of preventing surprise from that quarter, and that was
to have squads of cavalry or troops constantly patrolling the road,
who on the appearance of an enemy could carry the word immediately and
rapidly to the outposts and the camp. But in all Washington's army
there was not a single company of horsemen, except the few Long Island
troopers from Kings and Queens counties, and these were now engaged
miles away in driving off stock out of reach of the enemy. The duty,
accordingly, of looking after the open left flank fell, in part, upon
Colonel Miles' two battalions. Lieutenant-Colonel Brodhead leaves it
on record that it was "hard duty." The regiment sent out scouting
parties every day a distance of four or five miles; one hundred men
were mounted for guard daily, and thirty more with a lieutenant were
kept on duty on the left, evidently in the direction of the Jamaica
Road. General Parsons reports that "in the wood was placed Colonel
Miles with his Battalion to watch the motion of the Enemy on that
part, with orders to keep a party constantly reconnoitering to and
across the Jamaica road." Should he discover the enemy at any time,
it would have been expected of him to report the fact at once, oppose
them vigorously, and retreat obstinately in order to give time for the
other detachments to govern their movements accordingly.

One other circumstance is to be noticed in regard to this Jamaica
Pass. General Sullivan, subsequently referring to his connection with
this battle, claimed that while he was in sole command he paid
horsemen out of his own purse to patrol the road, and that he
predicted the approach of the enemy by that road. Whatever inferences
may be drawn from this is not now to the point; but we have the fact
that upon the evening of the 26th he exercised the same authority he
had exercised in making other details, and sent out a special patrol
of five commissioned officers to watch the Jamaica Pass. Three of
these officers belonged to Colonel Lasher's New York City
battalion--Adjutant Jeronimus Hoogland and Lieutenants Robert Troup
and Edward Dunscomb; and the other two were Lieutenant Gerrit Van
Wagenen, a detached officer of McDougall's old regiment, and a
Lieutenant Gilliland, who with Van Wagenen had crossed to Long Island,
as a volunteer. What part this patrol played in the incidents of the
following morning will presently appear.

Thus on the night of the 26th the American outposts stretched along
the hills from the harbor to the Jamaica Pass, with unguarded
intervals, a distance of more than six miles, while in the plains
below lay the enemy, nearly ten times their number, ready to fall upon
them with "a sudden and violent" shock. During the night one change
was made in the picket guard. Colonel Hand's riflemen, who had been on
almost constant duty since the arrival of the British, were relieved
at two o'clock in the morning by a detachment from the flying camp,
which may have been a part of Hay's and Kachlein's men, and returning
to the lines, dropped down to sleep.[128]

[Footnote 128: Hand's letter of August 27th: "I escaped my part by
being relieved at 2 o'clock this morning." (Document 12.) See John
Ewing's letter and sketch.]



If we leave our outposts now upon the hills and pass into the enemy's
camp on the plain below, we shall find them on the eve of carrying out
a great plan of attack. The four days since the 22d had been given to
preparation. On the 25th, Lieutenant-General De Heister crossed from
Staten Island with the two Hessian brigades of Von Stirn and Von
Mirbach, leaving behind Von Lossberg's brigade, with some detachments
and recruits, for the security of that island. With this addition,
Howe's force on Long Island was swelled to a total of about twenty-one
thousand officers and men, fit for duty and in the best condition for
active service.[129] As disposed on the 26th, the army lay with the
Hessians and the reserves under Cornwallis at Flatbush, the main body
under Clinton and Percy massed at Flatlands, and Grant's division of
the fourth and sixth brigades nearer the Narrows.

[Footnote 129: Extract from a British officer's letter dated, _Statton
Island, August 4, 1776_: ... "We are now in expectation of attacking
the fellows very soon, and if I may be allowed to judge, there never
was an army in better spirits nor in better health, two very important
things for our present business."--_Hist. Mag._, vol. v., p. 69.]

Outnumbering the Americans three to one on the island, Howe could lay
his plans with assurance of almost absolute success. He proposed to
advance upon the "rebels" in three columns. Grant was ordered to move
up from the Narrows along the lower road, and De Heister was to engage
the attention of the Americans at the Flatbush Pass, while Clinton,
Percy, and Cornwallis, with Howe himself, were to conduct the main
body as a flanking force around the American left by way of the
Jamaica Pass. A previous reconnoissance made by Clinton and Erskine,
and information gathered from the Tories, showed the practicability of
this latter movement.[130] Grant and De Heister were simply to make a
show of an attack until they were assured by the sound of the firing
that the flanking column had accomplished its design, when their
demonstrations were to be turned into serious fighting. It was
expected that by this plan the Americans stationed at the hills and
passes would be entirely enveloped and thoroughly beaten if not
captured in a body. With what nice precision this piece of strategy
was executed, events will show.

[Footnote 130: Stedman, the British historian, who served as an
officer under Howe, says: "Sir Henry Clinton and Sir William Erskine,
having reconnoitred the position of the enemy, saw that it would not
be a difficult matter to turn their left flank, which would either
oblige them to risk an engagement or to retire under manifest
disadvantage. This intelligence being communicated to Sir William
Howe, he consented to make the attempt."]



The first collision was ominous. Grant's advance-guard, marching up
from the Narrows, struck the American pickets in the vicinity of the
Red Lion about two o'clock on the morning of the 27th. Whether because
they were all new troops, a part of whom had but just come upon the
ground, and were alarmed by the night attack, or because they were
surprised at their posts and put in danger of capture, or whatever the
reason, our picket guard at that point retreated before the enemy
without checking their march. There was hardly more than an exchange
of fire with Major Burd's detachment, as the major himself writes, and
in the confusion or darkness he, with many others probably, was taken
prisoner. This was an unfortunate beginning, so far as our men had
abandoned one of the very posts which it had been proposed to hold;
but otherwise, there being other positions available, it was not
necessarily fatal to the plan of defending the hills.[131]

[Footnote 131: Hardly more than a general statement can be made in
regard to the attack on the pickets at the lower road. A part of them
watched Martense Lane, where, it would appear from Ewing's sketch,
Hand's riflemen were posted before being relieved. Major Burd's
detachment, on the same authority, was probably on the direct road to
the Narrows, both parties communicating with each other at the Red
Lion Tavern, which stood near the fork of the roads. Grant's main
column advanced by the Narrows Road, and possibly a party of the enemy
came through the Martense Lane at about the same time. The skirmish
Major Burd speaks of occurred in the vicinity of Thirty-eighth and
Fortieth streets, on the Narrows Road, where former residents used to
say the Americans had a picket guard stationed. When the enemy came up
firing took place and some men were killed; and this firing "was the
first in the neighborhood." The pickets retreated, though General
Parsons was misinformed when he wrote that they did so "without firing
a gun." There was firing, but no stand made.]

Word of the attack was quickly carried to General Parsons at his
quarters and to General Putnam in camp. Parsons, as the brigadier on
duty, rode at once to the spot, and found "by fair daylight" not only
that the guards had "fled," but that the enemy were through the woods
and already on this side of the main hills. Hastily collecting some
twenty of the scattered pickets, he made a show of resistance, which
temporarily halted the enemy's column.[132] At the same time Putnam,
whose instructions were to hold the outposts "at all hazards" with his
best men, called up Stirling and directed him in person to take the
two regiments nearest at hand and march down to meet the enemy.[133]
Stirling promptly turned out Haslet's and Smallwood's battalions and
marched down. Colonel Atlee, who was also ordered forward, was on the
road before him, with that part of his regiment, about one hundred and
twenty men, not already on picket; and Huntington's Connecticut
Continentals, under Lieutenant-Colonel Clark (Huntington himself being
sick),[134] and Kachlein's Pennsylvania riflemen were soon after
started in the same direction. Meanwhile, within the lines, the
alarm-guns were fired, the whole camp roused, and the troops drawn up
at the forts and breastworks. Hand's riflemen, who had but just lain
down, "almost dead with fatigue," were turned out to take post in Fort
Putnam and the redoubt on its left.[135]

[Footnote 132: _Parsons' Letters._ Part II., Document 5.]

[Footnote 133: _Stirling to Washington, Aug. 29th:_ "About three
o'clock on the morning of the 27th I was called up, and informed by
General Putnam that the enemy were advancing," etc.--_Force_, 5th
Series, vol. i., p. 1245.]

[Footnote 134: "Col. Huntington is unwell, but I hope getting a little
better. He has a slow fever. Maj. Dyer is also unwell with a slow
fever. Gen'l Greene has been very sick but is better. Genls. Putnam,
Sullivan, Lord Sterling, Nixon, Parsons, & Heard are on Long Island
and a strong part of our army."--_Letter from Col. Trumbull, Aug.
27th, 1776._ _Document_ 7.]

[Footnote 135: See references on Ewing's sketch, Document 15: "H. Fort
Putnam where part of Colo. Hand's men commanded by Lieut C.
[Lieutenant-Colonel] Chambers were detached from the Regt. to man the
fort.--I. A small upper Fort where [I] was with the Colo the Day of
the Engagement." Lieutenant-Colonel Chambers says: "We had just got to
the fort, and I had only laid down, when the alarm-guns were fired. We
were compelled to turn out to the lines, and as soon as it was light
saw our men and theirs engaged with field-pieces." Nearly all the
accounts put Hand and his battalion at the Flatbush Pass during the
battle on the 27th. This, as we now find, is an error. The battalion
was worn out by its continued and effective skirmishing since the
landing of the enemy, and required rest; but of this it was to get
very little, even within the lines.]

When Stirling reached a point within half a mile of the Red Lion he
found, as Parsons had before him, that the enemy had met with little
opposition or delay at the outposts on that road, and were now on the
full march towards the Brooklyn lines. As there were still good
positions which he could occupy, he immediately made a disposition of
his force to offer resistance. The road here ran in a winding course
along the line of the present Third Avenue, but a short distance from
the bay, with here and there a dwelling which together constituted the
Gowanus village or settlement. Where the present Twenty-third Street
intersects the avenue there was a small bridge on the old road which
crossed a ditch or creek setting up from the bay to a low and marshy
piece of ground on the left, looking south; and just the other side of
the bridge, the land rose to quite a bluff at the water's edge, which
was known among the Dutch villagers as "Blockje's Bergh." From the
bluff the low hill fell gradually to the marsh or morass just
mentioned, the road continuing along between them.[136] Right here,
therefore, the approach by the road was narrow, and at the corner of
Twenty-third Street was confined to the crossing at the bridge.

[Footnote 136: The writer is indebted to the Hon. Teunis G. Bergen, of
Bay Ridge, L.I., for an accurate description and sketch of the Gowanus
Road, as it lay at the time of the battle. His survey is followed in
the "Map of the Brooklyn Defences," etc., Title, Maps. Part II.]

[Illustration: [signature: Jed Huntington]

COLONEL SEVENTEENTH REGIMENT OF FOOT (CONN.) BRIGADIER GENERAL 1777.

Steel Engr. F. von Egloffstein N.Y.]

According to his own account, and from our present knowledge of the
topography, Stirling evidently came to a halt on or just this side of
"Blockje's Bergh." Seeing the British not far in his front, and taking
in the situation at a glance, he ordered Atlee to post his men on the
left of the road and wait the enemy's coming up, while he himself
retired with Smallwood's and Haslet's to form line on a piece of "very
advantageous ground" further back. Atlee reports this preliminary move
as follows: "I received orders from Lord Stirling to advance with my
battalion and oppose the enemy's passing a morass or swamp at the foot
of a fine rising ground, upon which they were first discovered, and
thereby give time to our brigade to form upon the heights. This order
I immediately obeyed, notwithstanding we must be exposed without any
kind of cover to the great fire of the enemy's musketry and
field-pieces, charged with round and grapeshot, and finely situated
upon the eminence above mentioned, having entire command of the ground
I was ordered to occupy. My battalion, although new and never before
having the opportunity of facing an enemy, sustained their fire until
the brigade had formed; but finding we could not possibly prevent
their crossing the swamp, I ordered my detachment to file off to the
left and take post in a wood upon the left of the brigade."[137]
General Parsons says: "We took possession of a hill about two miles
from camp, and detached Colonel Atlee to meet them further on the
road; in about sixty rods he drew up and received the enemy's fire and
gave them a well-directed fire from his regiment, which did great
execution, and then retreated to the hill."

[Footnote 137: _Atlee's Journal._ _Force_, 5th Series, vol. i., p.
1251.]

This advantageous site, where Stirling had now drawn up his brigade to
dispute Grant's progress, was the crest of the slope which rose
northerly from the marsh and low ground around "Blockje's Bergh," and
which to-day is represented by about the line of Twentieth
Street.[138] Here was an elevation or ridge favorable for defence,
and here Stirling proposed to make a stand. On the right, next to the
road, he posted Smallwood's battalion, under Major Gist; further along
up the hillside were the Delawares, under Major MacDonough;[139] and
on their left, in the woods above, Atlee's men formed after falling
back from their attempt to stop the enemy.

[Footnote 138: Probably the earliest of modern attempts to identify
the site where Stirling formed his line was that made in 1839 by Maj.
D.B. Douglass, formerly of the United States Army. Greenwood Cemetery,
says Mr. Cleveland in his history of _Greenwood_, owes its present
beautiful appearance largely to this officer's "energy and taste,"
Douglass having been one of the first surveyors of the ground. He
located Stirling's position on what was then known as Wyckoff's hill,
between Eighteenth and Twentieth streets; and tradition and all the
original documents confirm this selection. This was a lower elevation
in the general slope from the main ridge towards the bay. Stirling
simply drew his men up in a straight line from the road towards the
hill-tops, and beyond him on the same line or more in advance, was
Parsons. The map in Sparks' _Washington_ putting Stirling down near
the Narrows is erroneous.]

[Footnote 139: The colonels and lieutenant-colonels of both these
regiments were detained at New York as members of the court-martial
which tried Lieutenant-colonel Zedwitz, of MacDougall's regiment,
charged with treasonable correspondence with the enemy. They joined
their regiments after the battle.]

When Kachlein's[140] riflemen came up, the general stationed part of
them along hedges near the foot of the hill in front of the
Marylanders, and part in front of the woods near Atlee. The line had
hardly been formed before it was observed that the enemy threatened to
overlap it on the left, and Parsons was accordingly ordered to take
Atlee's and Huntington's regiments and move still further into the
woods to defeat the designs on that flank.

[Footnote 140: This name appears in other accounts as Kichline or
Keichline. It is properly Kachlein, being so spelled by other members
of this officer's family.]

Finding Stirling thus thrown across their path, the British also drew
up in line and disposed their force as if intending to attack him at
once. About opposite to the Marylanders, possibly on Blockje's Bergh,
Grant posted the sixth brigade in two lines, while the fourth brigade
was extended in a single line from the low ground to the top of the
hills in Greenwood Cemetery.

Here, then, was a regular battle formation--Grant and Stirling
opposing each other--and we may regard it with interest not only as
the only line of battle preserved, on the American side at least,
during this day's struggle, but as being the first instance in the
Revolution where we met the British in the open field. Before this it
had been fighting under different conditions--the regulars mowed down
at Bunker Hill, Montgomery attempting to storm Quebec, or Moultrie
bravely holding a fort against a fleet; now the soldiers on either
side stood face to face, and the opportunity seemed at hand to fairly
test their native courage. Greatly disproportionate, however, was the
strength of these two lines. Stirling's, all told, contained not more
than sixteen hundred men; while Grant's, which besides the two
brigades included the Forty-second Highlanders and two companies of
American loyalists, was little less than seven thousand strong. But if
we find here a threatening attitude, let us not expect any desperate
fighting. It was not Grant's object to bring on an engagement at this
early hour, now seven o'clock in the morning, for he wished to keep
Stirling where he was until the other movements of the day were
developed. He contented himself with appearing to be on the point of
attack, and Stirling could do no more than prepare for a stubborn
defence of his ground.

The first move of the British was to send forward a small body of
light troops from their left, which advanced to within one hundred and
fifty yards of Stirling's right. This would bring them not far from
the little bridge on the road, where, from behind hedges and
apple-trees, they opened fire on our advanced riflemen, who replied
with spirit.

In the mean time, Stirling was reinforced by a two-gun battery from
Knox's artillery, under Captain-Lieutenant Benajah Carpenter, of
Providence, R.I., which was at once placed on the hillside to command
the road, and, according to Stirling, "the only approach for some
hundred yards," which must have been that part of the road running
over the bridge. The skirmishing was kept up at a lively rate for
about two hours, and occasionally, it would appear, our entire line
engaged in the fire. Of the particular incidents which occurred at
this point we have almost nothing; but perhaps, from one or two mere
references that have been preserved, the whole scene can be imagined.
"The enemy," writes one of the Maryland soldiers, "advanced towards
us, upon which Lord Stirling, who commanded, drew up in a line and
offered them battle in true English taste. The British then advanced
within about 200 yards of us, and began a heavy fire from their cannon
and mortars, for both the Balls and Shells flew very fast, now and
then taking off a head. Our men stood it amazingly well; not even one
of them shewed a Disposition to shrink. Our orders were not to fire
until the Enemy came within fifty yards of us, but when they perceived
we stood their fire so cooly and resolutely they declined coming any
nearer, altho' treble our number."[141] Colonel Haslet, although not
with his regiment, reported to his friend Cæsar Rodney that "the
Delawares drew up on the side of a hill, and stood upwards of four
hours, with a firm, determined countenance, in close array, their
colors flying, the enemy's artillery playing on them all the while,
not daring to advance and attack them;"[142] and his ensign, Stephens,
pointed with pride to the standard "torn with shot" while held in his
hands.

[Footnote 141: _Extracts from the Stiles Diary_ in vol. ii., p. 488,
of the Long Island Historical Society's _Memoirs_.]

[Footnote 142: _Haslet to Rodney._ _Force_, 5th Series, vol. ii., p.
881.]

Galled perhaps by the fire of Carpenter's battery, the British light
troops retired to their main line, and the firing from this time was
continued chiefly by the artillery. On their left they advanced one
howitzer to within three hundred yards of Stirling's right, and in
front of his left they opened with another piece at a distance of six
hundred yards, and until about eleven o'clock the cannonading was
vigorously sustained. Here was an engagement begun, and for four hours
Stirling's men were encouraged with the belief that they were holding
back the invaders. Their general inspired them with his own resolution
and bravery, both by word and example; and their good conduct in this
their first experience under fire, exposed without cover to cannon and
musket shot, indicated that Grant could not have pushed them back
without suffering severely. The casualties had not been large, but the
nerves of the men were none the less tested by the ordeal. Among the
Marylanders, Captain Edward Veazey, who commanded one of the
independent companies, doing duty with Smallwood's regiment, fell
"early in the engagement;" and either here, or on the retreat at a
later hour, also fell Captain Carpenter, whose battery had been doing
good work on Stirling's line. Of the Delawares, Major MacDonough and
Lieutenants Anderson and Course were slightly wounded. Accounts agree
that few of the men in either Smallwood's, Haslet's, or Kachlein's
battalions were killed or wounded while holding this position.

The three regiments immediately under Stirling thus not only appeared
to be doing well, but had actually proved themselves the best of
soldiers, both by keeping an unwavering line when the British light
troops advanced, as if to be followed by the main column, and in
maintaining their ranks and discipline when subjected to the
subsequent fire of the artillery.

Nor were these the only men who did themselves credit. That little
party composed of Atlee's and Huntington's battalions, under General
Parsons, which had gone into the woods to protect Stirling's left,
must not be forgotten. Our published accounts heretofore fail to
particularize the service it did; but it was of no small account, as
Parson's and Atlee's independent testimony and the returns of the
British losses clearly show. The party, not much over three hundred
strong, filed off to the left, and soon came in sight of "a hill of
clear ground" about three hundred yards distant, which was judged to
be the proper situation from which to watch the enemy.[143] The
direction Parsons' men took, the distances mentioned, and the fact
that tradition associates the site with part of the fighting on that
day, can leave no doubt but that the hill referred to here was one of
the two or three distinct elevations in the north-western section of
Greenwood Cemetery, and to one of which has since been given the
commemorative title of "Battle Hill." A spot fitly named, for around
it some brave work was done! As the detachment neared the hill, the
British flanking troops were also observed to be marching to seize it.
Atlee seeing this hurried his men to reach it first, but the enemy
were there before him and poured a volley into his battalion.
Fortunately, not being well aimed, this did trifling damage, but under
the shock a part of his men, with two companies from the Delaware
regiment, which had been ordered to join them, wavered. Rallying the
most of them, Atlee soon ordered an advance up the hill, telling the
men at the same time "to preserve their fire and aim aright;" and they
all pushed forward with so much resolution, and apparently with such
an effective discharge of their pieces, that the enemy fell back,
leaving behind them twelve killed and a lieutenant and four privates
wounded. In this encounter Atlee lost his "worthy friend" and
lieutenant-colonel, Caleb Parry, who fell dead upon the field without
a groan, while cheering on the battalion. Ordering four soldiers to
take the remains of "the hero" back into the Brooklyn lines, Atlee
halted his "brave fellows" on the hill, and all Parsons' command here
took post to await the further movements of the British on this flank.
The force they had met and repulsed consisted of the Twenty-third and
Forty-fourth and a part of the Seventeenth regiments, by whom they
were soon to be attacked again. In half an hour after the first affair
the enemy formed for another effort to seize the hill, but again
Atlee's and Huntington's men opened upon them, and for a second time
compelled their retreat, with the loss of Lieutenant-Colonel Grant, a
brave and valued field-officer of the Fortieth Regiment, whose fall
gave ground for the report, credited for some days after in the
American army, that Major-General Grant, the division commander, was
among the enemy's killed in the battle of Long Island. Parsons' men by
this time had fired away all their ammunition (Atlee says that his
battalion, at least, had entirely emptied their cartridge-boxes), and
had used what charges could be got from the enemy's dead and wounded,
when Huntington's ammunition cart "very luckily" came on the ground,
and the men were re-supplied for still a third attack, which was
threatened with the assistance of the Forty-second Highlanders; but
the British this time kept a safe distance, and Parsons and Atlee
remained on the hill, where they collected the enemy's dead and placed
their wounded under the shelter of the trees. Thus bravely and
effectively had this small body of Americans protected Stirling's
flank and dealt the enemy the severest blows they suffered at any one
point during the day, and this, as in the case of Stirling's men, with
but small loss to themselves. From behind fences and trees, and, if
tradition is correct, from the tops of trees as well, and from open
ground on the hill, they kept up their destructive fire and
successfully accomplished what they had been called upon to do.[144]
That the British did not intend at this hour to drive Parsons and
Atlee from their post is no detraction from the spirited fight made by
these officers and their men, who knew nothing of the enemy's
intentions, and who actually won the field from the troops they met.
All along this front, from Stirling holding the road on the right to
Parsons holding the left, with a long gap between them, the fighting
thus far had resulted most favorably to the American side. The main
line, as already stated, had lost not more than two officers killed
and three or four wounded, with a small number of men; while Parsons
and Atlee both report that in addition to the death of Lieutenant-Colonel
Parry they lost only one or two men wounded. But, on the part of the
British, Grant's two brigades, with the Forty-second Highlanders and
the two companies of New York loyalists, lost, according to Howe's
official report, two officers killed and four wounded, and among the
men twenty-five killed and ninety-nine wounded. The four regiments
alone which at different times encountered Parsons--the Seventeenth,
Twenty-third, Forty-fourth, and Forty-second--lost in the aggregate
eighty-six officers and men killed and wounded.

[Footnote 143: _Atlee's Journal._ _Force_, 5th Series, vol. i., p.
1251.]

[Footnote 144: Parsons' reference to this affair at or near "Battle
Hill" in Greenwood is as follows: "I was ordered with Col. Atlee and
part of his Reg't, and Lt. Col. Clark with Col. Huntington's Reg't to
cover the left flank of our main body. This we executed though our
number did at no time exceed 300 men and we were attacked three
several times by two regiments, ye 44th and 23d and repulsed
them in every attack with considerable loss. The number of dead we had
collected together and the heap the enemy had made we supposed
amounted to about 60. We had 12 or 14 wounded prisoners who we caused
to be dressed and their wounds put in the best state our situation
would admit."--_Document_ 5.

See Colonel Atlee's journal in _Force's Archives_ for a full account
of the part his battalion took in this fighting.]



While, now, Stirling and Parsons seemed to be effectually blocking the
advance of the British by the lower road and the Greenwood hills, what
was the situation at the other passes?

Up to eight o'clock, some five hours after Grant's appearance at the
Red Lion, no determined attack had been reported from either the
Flatbush or Bedford roads. The Hessians had made some show of
advancing from Flatbush at an early hour, but they had not as yet
driven in our pickets, although approaching near enough for the guns
at the breastwork on the road to fire upon them. No word had come from
Miles; nothing had been heard from the patrol of officers at the
Jamaica Pass. Whatever tactics the enemy were pursuing, it was evident
that at this hour they had not developed indications of a simultaneous
advance "all along the line." Were they making their principal push
against Stirling? Were they waiting for the fleet to work its way up
to co-operate? or would they still attempt to force the passes and the
hills at all points and overcome the American outguards by sheer
weight of numbers? Whatever theory our generals may have entertained
at this time as to the intentions of the British--a point which we
have no means of determining--it is certain that at about half-past
eight or nine o'clock Major-General Sullivan rode out from the
Brooklyn lines to the Flatbush Pass, with the evident purpose of
examining the situation at that and other points, and of obtaining the
latest information respecting the enemy's movements. We have this
substantially from his own pen: "I went," he says, "to the hill near
Flatbush to reconnoitre the enemy."[145] Nothing more natural, and
nothing more necessary; the situation at that hour required that some
responsible general officer should be in this vicinity to direct the
disposition of the troops the moment the enemy uncovered their plan.
Stirling on the lower road had his hands full, and it became some
one's duty to see that he was not put in danger by any possible mishap
elsewhere on the hills. Sullivan, therefore, the second in command,
went out to "examine" and to "reconnoitre." He had been out the
evening before, making the rounds with Putnam; to him Miles had
reported the situation of affairs on the extreme left; and it was by
his general orders that the last detail of guards had been made for
each of the passes. He was accordingly familiar with the plan of the
outer defence, and upon reaching the Flatbush Pass, where, as Miles
states, he took his station at the redoubt or barricade on the road,
he seems to have given certain directions on the strength of the
information he had obtained. If we may credit the writer of one of the
letters published at the time, the general was told that the main
body of the enemy were advancing by the lower road, "whereupon he
ordered another battalion to the assistance of Lord Stirling, keeping
800 men to guard the pass."[146] It is not difficult to accept this as
a correct statement of what actually occurred, because it is what we
should expect would have taken place under the circumstances. That
Sullivan took out any additional troops with him when he went to the
pass does not appear, but doubtless some were sent there. But as to
this Flatbush Pass, the most that can be said with any degree of
certainty is, that at about nine o'clock in the morning the Hessians
still remained comparatively quiet at the foot of the hills below;
that our guards and pickets stood at their different posts, not in
regular line, but detached on either side of the road, the commander
of each party governing himself as necessity required; that they were
expected to hold that point stubbornly, if for no other purpose now
than to secure Stirling's line of retreat; and that if attacked they
were to be reinforced. At the hour Sullivan reached the pass the
situation at all points appeared to be satisfactory.

[Footnote 145: Most of our writers are led into the error of supposing
that Sullivan was already at the Flatbush Pass, and that when he went
to reconnoitre he started from this point. The general says: "I went
to the Hill near Flatbush to reconnoitre the enemy, and with a picket
of four hundred men was surrounded by the enemy," etc. He went to the
hill--where from? The main camp, necessarily. We already had our
pickets well out in front, and had Sullivan gone beyond these he would
have come upon the Hessians. Besides his position fully overlooked
Flatbush, and no reconnoissance was necessary. Miles states that the
general remained at the redoubt. The quotation above means no more
than that Sullivan went out from the Brooklyn lines, and afterwards
was surrounded and fought with four hundred of the guard who were
there at the Pass with him.]

[Footnote 146: _Document_ 19.]



But little did the Americans suspect that at the very moment their
defence seemed well arranged and their outguards vigilant they were
already in the web which the enemy had been silently weaving around
them during the night. That flanking column! Skilfully had it played
its part in the British plans, and with crushing weight was it now to
fall upon our outpost guards, who felt themselves secure along the
hills and in the woods. Cross again into the opposite camp and follow
the approach of this unlooked-for danger. First, Lord Howe withdrew
Cornwallis from Flatbush to Flatlands towards evening on the 26th,
and at nine o'clock at night set this flanking corps in motion. Sir
Henry Clinton commanded the van, which consisted of the light dragoons
and the brigade of light infantry. Cornwallis and the reserve
immediately followed; and after him marched the First Brigade and the
Seventy-first Regiment, with fourteen pieces of field artillery. These
troops formed the advance corps, and were followed at a proper
interval by Lord Percy and Howe himself, with the Second, Third, and
Fifth brigades, the guards, and ten guns. The Forty-ninth Regiment,
with four twelve-pounders, and the baggage with a separate guard,
brought up the rear. All told, this column was hardly less than ten
thousand strong. With three Flatbush Tories acting as guides, it took
up the march and headed, as Howe reports, "across the country through
the new lots" towards the Jamaica Pass, moving slowly and cautiously
along the road from Flatlands until it reached Shoemaker's Bridge,
which crossed a creek emptying into Jamaica Bay, when the column
struck over the fields to the Jamaica Road, where it came to a halt in
the open lots a short distance south-east of the pass, and directly in
front of Howard's Halfway House.[147]

[Footnote 147: Consult map of the battle-field, Part II.]

Here now occurred one of those incidents which, though insignificant
in themselves, sometimes become fatalities that turn the scale of
battle. The five American officers whom General Sullivan had sent out
the evening before to patrol this pass had stationed themselves at
this time, now between two and three o'clock on the morning of the
27th, a short distance east of Howard's house, apparently waiting for
sounds of the enemy on the line of the road. Evidently they had no
thought of his approach "across lots" from the direction of Flatlands,
or they could not have left the pass unwatched by one or more of the
party. For most of them, this was the first tour of military duty of
so responsible a nature, and whatever mistakes they made may be
referred to their inexperience or ignorance of the relative situation
of the roads in that vicinity. Who had charge of the party does not
appear. So far as known, only one of them, Lieutenant Van Wagenen, had
seen any considerable service; but although something of a veteran,
having entered the army in 1775 and charged with Montgomery upon
Quebec, he could have known nothing of the country he was now
patrolling. Lieutenants Troup and Dunscomb were young Columbia College
graduates of two years' standing, who had eagerly taken up the cause
of the colonists in the midst of adverse associations. Gilliland may
have once been an officer in McDougall's regiment, and Hoogland was
adjutant of Colonel Lasher's battalion. Had these officers, who
without doubt were all mounted, been patrolling at the pass or nearer
the lines, the events of the 27th might have worn a far different
aspect. As it was, the British by coming into the road at Howard's had
put themselves in the rear of the patrol, and its capture was quickly
effected. Captain William Glanville Evelyn, "a gallant officer" of the
Fourth Infantry, or King's Own, and a descendant of the eminent John
Evelyn, of England, led the British advance this night, and it fell to
his fortune to surround and capture all five American officers and
send them immediately to Clinton, who commanded the leading column.
Here was a blow inflicted upon us by the British, the real importance
of which they themselves even were ignorant of, for they had made
prisoners of the only patrol that was watching the Jamaica route from
the pass down to the very lines themselves!

Clinton "interrogated" the prisoners upon the spot, and ascertained
from them that the pass had not been occupied by the Americans. He
then attempted to obtain information of the position at Brooklyn and
the number of troops now there, by pressing the officers with
questions, when Dunscomb, indignant at the advantage he was taking of
their situation, replied to Clinton that "under other circumstances he
would not dare insult them in that manner." For this the young
lieutenant was called "an impudent rebel," and the British officers
threatened to have him hanged. Dunscomb's courage was equal to the
occasion, and, scouting the threat, declared that Washington would
hang man for man in return, and that as for himself he should give
Clinton no further information. But stoutly as Dunscomb and his
fellows maintained their rights and honor as prisoners, their capture
was one of the fatal turns that brought misfortune to the American
army.[148]

[Footnote 148: Hardly one of our modern accounts refers to this patrol
or its capture. The incident, however, affected the situation gravely.
Howe mentions it in his report as follows: "General Clinton being
arrived within half a mile of the pass about two hours before
daybreak, halted, and settled his disposition for the attack. One of
his patrols falling in with a patrol of the enemy's officers took
them; and the General learning from their information that the Rebels
had not occupied the pass, detached a battalion of Light Infantry to
secure it." Gordon says this: "One of his [Clinton's] patrols falls in
with a patrol of American officers on horseback, who are trepanned and
made prisoners." The letter in the _South Carolina Gazette_
(_Document_ 19) is to similar effect: "Five officers were also sent
out on horseback to patrol the last-mentioned road and that leading to
Jamaica, ... and were all made prisoners." Still stronger is the
testimony of a letter to be found in the _Autobiography and
Correspondence of Mary Granville, Mrs. Delany, with Interesting
Reminiscences of George III. and Queen Charlotte, &c., London, 1862_.
"The Hon. Mrs. Boscawen to Mrs. Delany.--_Glan Villa_, 17th Oct.
1776.... To compleat the prosperity of my journey I found on my return
to ye inn the most delightful news of our success on Long Island so
that I had a most agreeable supper and drank health to the noble
brothers [the two Howes]. We have had a letter from Capt. Evelyn from
the field of battle; he was in ye brigade of light infantry, and
took 5 officers prisoners who were sent to observe our motions. He
mentions Dr. Boscawen's son being well, for whom we were in great
care, being the only child. O! to compleat this by good news from N.
York and then peace!" We know who these officers were from several
sources, the most authoritative and important being the documents left
by one of the party himself, Lieutenant Van Wagenen, and now in the
possession of his grandson, Mr. Gerret H. Van Wagenen, of Brooklyn.
This officer had been sent down to Philadelphia in charge of prisoners
from Canada. At this point his deposition states that "on his return
to New York he found the enemy landing upon Long Island, and being a
supernumerary he went to Long Island and offered his services to Gen'l
Sullivan, who requested him, and four other officers, namely, Robert
Troup, Edward Dunscomb, William Guilderland and Jeromus Hooghland, to
go and reconnoitre the enemy, who were observed to be in motion, and
in the various advances on the enemy, fell in with a body of horse and
infantry by whom he and his little party were made prisoners, and
continued a Prisoner for about twenty-two months." Respecting the
questioning of the officers by Clinton, there is good authority.
Lieutenants Troup and Dunscomb, who afterwards rose to the rank of
Lieutenant-colonel and Captain respectively, have daughters still
living in New York, and from their own recollections and from papers
in their possession, the account given in the text is collated. At the
time of Captain Dunscomb's death one or more letters were published by
friends who had the particulars of the incident directly from him.
(See biographical sketches of these officers, Part II.) The sending
out of officers on such duty as was required this night, was not
unusual. The British scouts who preceded the expedition to Lexington
in 1775 were officers in disguise. Similar instances during the war
could be recalled as at Brandywine. Mr. Henry Onderdonk, Jr., of
Jamaica, states, in his carefully compiled and valuable collection of
_Revolutionary Incidents on Long Island_, that the patrol was captured
under a tree east of Howard's House.]

Upon learning that the pass was unguarded, Clinton, as Howe reports,
ordered one of the light infantry battalions to occupy it, and soon
after the main column followed. It would appear, however, that he
still moved cautiously, and that the battalion, or the troops that
followed, avoided a direct approach, and reached the Jamaica Road on
the other side of the pass by a roundabout lane known as the Rockaway
Path. The innkeeper Howard was waked up, and with his son compelled
to guide the British around to the road, where it was discovered, as
the patrol had stated, that the pass was unguarded. When the whole
force had marched through to the other side it was halted for a brief
"rest and refreshment," and then continued down the road to Bedford,
where the van, consisting of dragoons and light infantry, arrived
about half-past eight o'clock in the morning. So this flanking corps
had succeeded in making a slow, difficult, and circuitous march of
some nine miles from Flatlands during the night, and had placed itself
directly in the rear of the left of the American outposts, before its
approach was known in the Brooklyn camp. It was now nearer the lines
than were our picket guards at either of the outposts on the hills,
and by a swift advance down the Jamaica Road and along the Gowanus
Road to its intersection with the Port Road, it could have interposed
itself across every avenue of retreat from the hills to the lines. It
was Howe's plan to cut off the American retreat entirely, but while
successful in reaching our rear he fortunately failed to reap the
fullest advantage of his move. The loss he was now able to inflict
upon us was hardly a third of what might have been possible. But for
the Americans it was more than enough. From this point followed trial
and disaster. The day, which had opened so promisingly on the lower
road, had already, at early dawn, been lost to them at the Jamaica
Pass.

What next happened after the British reached Bedford? What, in the
first place, had Miles been about in the woods on the extreme left
that the enemy should gain his rear before he knew it? Fortunately we
have the colonel himself and his lieutenant-colonel, Brodhead, to tell
us much if they do not explain all. Miles then puts it on record that,
on the day before the engagement, General Sullivan came to his camp,
to whom he reported his belief that when the enemy moved they would
fall into the Jamaica Road, and he hoped there were troops there to
watch them. On the following morning, at about seven o'clock, firing
began at the redoubt on the Flatbush Road, and he immediately marched
in that direction, but was stopped by Colonel Wyllys at the Bedford
Pass, who informed him that he could not pass on, as they were to
defend the Bedford Road. "Colonel Wyllys bearing a Continental, and I
a State commission," says Miles, "he was considered a senior officer,
and I was obliged to submit; but I told him I was convinced the main
body of the enemy would take the Jamaica Road, that there was no
probability of their coming along the road he was then guarding, and
if he would not let me proceed to where the firing was, I would return
and endeavor to get into the Jamaica Road before General Howe. To this
he consented, and I immediately made a retrograde march, and after
marching nearly two miles, the whole distance through woods, I arrived
within sight of the Jamaica Road, and to my great mortification I saw
the main body of the enemy in full march between me and our lines, and
the baggage guard just coming into the road."

Had Miles been surprised? This is one of the problems of the battle.
For four days he had been on the watch on this flank, and now the
British were in his rear! Would he have made that "retrograde" march
this morning, when the strictest attention to one's particular orders
was necessary, unless he had known that there were no troops on the
Jamaica Road, and unless it was a part of his duty to reconnoitre in
that direction? But he was now making a stout effort to find and fight
Howe, and before charging him with a blunder let us follow the battle
to its close.

One of Miles' soldiers hurried into camp and reported to Putnam that
infantry and cavalry were marching down from the Jamaica Pass;[149]
but all too late, for right upon the heels of the information came the
enemy! They pushed down the road from Bedford, and across the country,
to attack the American outguards in the rear, while the Hessians were
to come up in front. So, if we glance over the field again at about
half-past nine or ten o'clock on this eventful morning, we find the
whole aspect changed, and our entire force on the hills apparently
caught in a trap. Stirling was still facing Grant upon the right, but
his rear was in danger; while Sullivan and the picket guards at the
other passes were wedged in between the two powerful columns under
Howe and De Heister. What now was done? Who escaped?

[Footnote 149: _Force_, 5th Series, vol. i., p. 1195.]

Evidently Miles, way out in the woods on the left, had the least
prospect of getting back to the Brooklyn lines. When he found the
British on the road between him and camp he first proposed to attack
their baggage guard and cut his way through to the Sound, but on
consulting his officers (his first battalion alone being with him) he
turned about, determined to attempt a retreat to camp. It was
impossible for him to succeed, for he had a march of full three miles
to make; and after encountering the enemy once or twice in the woods,
he, with many of his men, was compelled to surrender. Brodhead, while
marching through the woods in Indian file to join him, was also
attacked and his men dispersed, though most of them, with the
lieutenant-colonel himself, escaped to the lines. The rout was
speedily communicated to the guards at the two remaining points. At
the Bedford Pass the detachments under Colonel Wyllys and
Lieutenant-Colonel Wills appear to have realized their danger about
the time the British reached Bedford village. Finding Miles' troops
broken up and flying, they too, through fear of being intercepted,
took up the retreat. Finally, at the Flatbush Pass--the last point in
the outpost line to be attacked--the peril was still greater, for now
the Hessians were moving up in front. Here, as we have seen, General
Sullivan had just arrived to examine the situation. He had not long to
wait, however, before the nature of that situation fully dawned upon
him and the troops at the pass. While watching the Hessians at
Flatbush they suddenly hear the rattle of musketry on the left of
their rear, where British light infantry and dragoons are beginning to
chase and fire upon Miles, Brodhead, and Wyllys, and their broken
detachments. The Flatbush Pass was a point to be held, for it was the
centre of the outpost line, and retreat therefrom would endanger
Stirling; but Sullivan and his men must act promptly if they would do
no more even than save themselves, for the enemy by this time are much
nearer the Brooklyn lines than they. Just what occurred at this
juncture the records fail to tell us clearly. Did Sullivan, as one
letter states, immediately send word to Stirling to retreat?[150]
This would have been the first and natural step. Whoever the
commanding officer might be at the Flatbush Pass, it was for him to
watch the situation at the outpost line and give orders to the right
and left. All depended on what was done at that pass. If the guards
there gave way all the others must give way instantly. Whether the
word, therefore, reached Stirling or not, we must believe that
Sullivan sent it, as he ought to have done, and is reported to have
done. As for the general himself and his party, retreat was the only
alternative. Leaving the advanced pickets to fall back before the
Hessians, they turned towards the British in their rear. Very soon
they encountered the light infantry and dragoons, who were now
engaging in the attack with the highest dash and spirit. Reinforced by
four companies of the guards, the latter captured three pieces of our
artillery--the same, doubtless, which had just been playing upon the
Hessians, but were now turned, in the retreat, upon the British--and
which our gunners defended "heroically" to the last. Sullivan and his
men fought well, and apparently in separate parties, until nearly all
that had been stationed at the Flatbush Pass succeeded in breaking or
making their way through to the lines.

[Footnote 150: The supposition that Stirling commanded outside of the
lines on Long Island is erroneous. He had command of the reserves in
camp (Orders of August 25th), and was the proper officer to call upon
to reinforce any part of the outer line in case of attack. Sullivan
says, "Lord Stirling commanded the main body without the lines;" by
which is meant that he was with the principal force that went out, as
he was. Until the attack, the general officer of the day was in charge
of the outposts. Sullivan governed himself according to circumstances.
He was to be second in command under Putnam within the lines, he
writes; but the situation soon required his presence outside, where he
was also familiar with the dispositions.]

Meanwhile the Hessians appeared. They came up from the Flatbush plains
with drums beating and colors flying. Donop's grenadiers and yagers
led, and immediately after them followed the veteran De Heister at the
head of the brigades. Reaching the summit of the ridge, they deployed
their lines, and putting their sharpshooters in advance, moved rapidly
upon the position which our Flatbush Pass guard had just abandoned.
They met with little opposition, for they had nothing before them but
our scattered pickets. Soon, however, they fell in with the
retreating groups which the British had cut off from the lines and had
pushed back into the hills, and upon these they fell fiercely, and in
many instances cruelly. Where they found a rifleman resisting too
long, they pinned him with their bayonets, and to some of the wounded
they showed no mercy. Most of the prisoners fell into their hands, for
the reason that they had been driven towards the Hessians by the
British; but otherwise the day afforded no opportunity for fair
fighting between these "foreigners" and our troops.[151]

[Footnote 151: The Hessians are usually credited with taking a
prominent part in this battle, whereas the day was practically decided
before they came up. Necessarily our guards at the Flatbush Pass knew
that the British were in their rear as soon or sooner than the
Hessians knew it. They therefore turned to meet this unexpected enemy.
What Olney and Henshaw say settles this point. Olney states that
Cornell marched towards the lines on hearing firing in his rear,
leaving Olney to reinforce his pickets in front of the Hessians.
Henshaw writes that, finding the enemy between him and the lines, and
knowing no orders could come to retreat, he marched for camp. Cornell
and Henshaw were old officers, knew the ground thoroughly, and saw at
once that they must retreat. No mention is made of the Hessians.
Lieutenant Olney was in front of the latter some time before he
followed after his regiment. Howe reports that it was the _British_
who took our guns in that part of the field. If there was any such
severe fighting at that pass, as Von Elking makes out, would the
Hessians have lost but two men killed--all that they lost during the
day? There are errors of fact in this writer's account. The most that
the Hessians did was to chase, capture, and sometimes bayonet those of
our soldiers whom the British had already routed. The real fighting of
the day was done by Howe's English troops, and the very best he had,
principally the light infantry, grenadiers, dragoons, and
Highlanders.]

Thus all along the hills, from the Flatbush Pass to the extreme left,
our outer guards were in full retreat! It was a flight and fight to
reach the Brooklyn lines! Ten o'clock--and Miles, Brodhead, Wyllys,
Wills, Johnston, Henshaw, and Cornell, with two thousand men, were
hurrying through the woods, down the slopes and across the fields,
some singly, some in groups, some keeping together in companies, some
in battalions, all aiming for one objective--the camp! Here they
fought the light infantry; there they were charged upon by the
dragoons; those who were intercepted fell into the hands or upon the
bayonets of the Hessians. It was a trying and desperate situation from
which there was no relief and for a long time the woods echoed with
the shouts and cries of the contending parties. But upon the whole the
loss to the Americans up to this time was not heavy, and could
Stirling have been saved, the enemy would have had no great victory to
boast of. Full half of Miles' two battalions reached the lines;
Wyllys' and Chester's suffered but slightly; Henshaw and Cornell
brought their men in without much loss, and in comparatively good
order; the greatest blow to the Jerseymen was the death of their brave
colonel, Johnston, their casualties otherwise being light; and
Knowlton's hundred rangers just saved themselves from the dragoons,
"with the utmost difficulty and on the full run." The artillerymen
suffered more. General Sullivan himself, after showing good courage
and avoiding capture until noon, endeavored to conceal himself, but
was found and made prisoner by three Hessian grenadiers.[152]

[Footnote 152: During this fighting by the British infantry,
Cornwallis and the reserves moved straight down the Jamaica Road. The
Thirty-third Regiment and the grenadiers in their pursuit of some of
the American fugitives approached the fortified lines between Fort
Greene and Fort Putnam, and showed such eagerness to storm them that,
according to Howe's report, it required repeated orders to hold them
back. On the part of the Americans, Little reports that the enemy
"attempted to force our lines, but soon retreated, being met with a
smart fire from our breastworks;" and Little, no doubt, was at Fort
Greene, an eye-witness.]



The day was lost at the left and centre, and it only remains to return
to Stirling on the right. This general stood his ground firmly, though
the firing in his rear grew ominously distinct. He refused to
retreat, says Scott, for want of orders. If Sullivan sent him orders,
as we have assumed on one writer's authority that he did, they failed
to reach him. The time had come for the general to act on his own
judgment, and finding his salvation dependent on an immediate retreat,
he fell back from Grant's front between eleven and twelve o'clock, but
only to discover that he too was surrounded. The force which had
anticipated him was Cornwallis with the Seventy-first Regiment and the
Second Grenadiers, and they were holding his line of retreat on the
Gowanus Road. Stirling, realizing his danger, at once determined upon
the only manoeuvre that promised escape for any of his command. Upon
his left lay the Gowanus marsh and creek, where both were at their
broadest, and where a crossing had never been attempted. But now the
attempt must be made, or every man is lost. Upon the other side of the
creek are the Brooklyn peninsula, the lines, and safety. Stirling
therefore ordered his men to make their way across as they could,
while, to protect them as they forded or swam, he himself took Gist
and half the Maryland battalion and proceeded to attack Cornwallis.
Against all the misfortunes of the day this piece of resolution and
true soldiership stands out in noble relief. The Marylanders followed
their general without flinching, and were soon "warmly engaged" with
the enemy, who had posted themselves at a house--the old "Cortelyou"
house--above the upper mills near the intersection of the Port and
Gowanus roads. They rallied to the attack several times, as Stirling
reports, and seemed on the point of dislodging Cornwallis, when
reinforcements came up, and the British drove back the Marylanders
into a piece of woods. Here, with conspicuous courage and
determination, they formed again for still another effort to break
through. Stirling's example was inspiring. "He encouraged and animated
our young soldiers," writes Gist, "with almost invincible resolution."
But his handful of brave men had done all that was possible, and in
their last charge they were met by great numbers and forced to retire
again, "with much precipitation and confusion."[153] They broke up
into small parties and sought escape. Nine only, among whom was Major
Gist, succeeded in crossing the creek, the rest having retreated into
the woods.[154] Stirling endeavored to get into the lines between the
British and Fort Box, or by way of the mill-dam, but finding this
impossible, he turned, ran through their fire, and eluding pursuit
around a hill, made his way to the Hessian corps and surrendered
himself to General De Heister. He had sacrificed himself and party as
prisoners, but his main object was accomplished. The rest of the
command was saved! They crossed the marsh and creek with a loss of but
two or three killed and six or eight drowned.

[Footnote 153: The conduct of the Marylanders was soldierly beyond
praise. But some accounts subject them to a singular martyrdom,
killing every man of the two hundred and fifty-nine reported missing.
As there was but one officer wounded, or at the most one killed and
one wounded in the party, according to the official returns, the
proportion of men killed was doubtless small. The letter in _Force_,
5th Series, vol. i., p. 1232, referring to this attack, bears every
evidence of having been written by Gist himself, and it is quoted as
his in the text. In this letter Gist speaks of being surrounded on all
sides, and then adds: "The impracticability of forcing through such a
formidable body of troops rendered it the height of rashness and
imprudence to risk the lives of our remaining party in a third
attempt, and it became necessary for us to endeavor to effect our
escape in the best manner we possibly could." This shows that there
were many left to disperse. Their prudence was equal to their
courage.]

[Footnote 154: Before Stirling's fight with Cornwallis took place, the
mill and little bridge at the further end of the mill-dam across
Gowanus Creek were burned down. Colonel Smallwood charged "a certain
Colonel Ward" with the act, and claimed that the destruction of the
bridge prevented the escape of Stirling and the Marylanders with him.
Mr. Bancroft and Mr. Field repeat the charge. But Smallwood is
contradicted both by Stirling and Gist, the former stating that he
could not get by the British on the road full half a mile beyond the
bridge, and the latter adding that he was driven back into the woods.
The charge had no foundation, the bridge not having been set on fire
until after the enemy took possession of the road above (see Ewing's
sketch). The "Colonel Ward" was Colonel Jonathan Ward, of
Massachusetts; and the probability is that he and Colonel Tyler, both
of whom lost some men during the day, had been sent out on the Port
Road, but, finding Cornwallis there, retreated, burning mill and
bridge to obstruct the latter's possible advance in that quarter.]

It was during this scene in the incidents of the day that Washington
and his staff came upon the ground. They had remained at New York
watching the fleet, when, finding that no danger was to be apprehended
from that quarter, they crossed to Long Island. From the top of one of
the hills within the lines, possibly Cobble Hill, the Chief witnessed
Stirling's retreat and fight, and is said there to have been
profoundly moved as he saw how many brave men he must inevitably lose.
Colonel Smallwood, of the Marylanders, who had rejoined his regiment,
petitioned for a force to march out and assist Stirling, but the
general declined on account of the risks involved. Douglas's
Connecticut levies, just coming up from the ferry,[155] were sent to
the extreme right opposite the mouth of Gowanus Creek, where, with
Captain Thomas' Maryland Independent Company and two pieces of
artillery, they stood ready to prevent pursuit of the retreating party
by the enemy.

[Footnote 155: The reinforcements that came over during the forenoon,
besides Douglas's regiment, were Sage's and Selden's, which, with
Douglas, completed Wadsworth's brigade on that side; Charles Webb's,
of McDougall's brigade; and Scott, with Malcom and Humphrey's men, or
the rest of his brigade.]

Last of all, where were Parsons and Atlee? Had they been holding that
hill in Greenwood all the morning, with a tenacity worthy of veterans,
only to be swallowed up in the defeat and confusion of the day? Such
was to be their fate. For some unexplained reason, when Stirling fell
back, he failed to inform Parsons of his move. Both Parsons and Atlee
state that no word reached them to join the general, and that it was
greatly to their surprise when they found the line, whose flank they
had been protecting, no longer there. Whatever the mistake, there was
no time to lose, for the enemy were now pressing on this little force,
and it must retreat as Stirling had done. But it soon found itself
more effectually hemmed in than any party in the field. Cornwallis,
after driving the Marylanders back, had complete command of the road,
and as Parsons and Atlee came along they found it impossible even to
reach the marsh. Some escaped, but the greater part turned into the
woods and were all taken. Atlee, with twenty-three men, avoided
capture until five o'clock in the afternoon; while Parsons, more
fortunate, hid in a swamp, having escaped from the action and pursuit
"as by a miracle," and with seven men made his way into our lines at
daylight next morning.[156]

[Footnote 156: "Colonel Huntington's and the Maryland regiment
suffered the most. General Parsons says that some of our men fought
through the enemy not less than 7 or 8 times that day. He lay out
himself part of the night concealed in a swamp, from whence he made
his escape with 7 men to our lines about break of day the next
morning."--_Letter from an Officer, Conn. Journal_, September 18th,
1776. "I came in with 7 men yesterday morning, much fatigued."--_General
Parsons_, August 29th, 1776.]



The battle was over. It had continued at intervals, at one point or
another, over a range of five miles, from three o'clock in the morning
until nearly two in the afternoon. Less than five thousand Americans
at the passes, including Stirling's command and all others who had
marched out during the morning, had been swept up or swept back by
nearly twenty thousand British and Hessians. For our troops it was a
total defeat. They had been forced to abandon the outer line of
defence--the very line Washington wished should be held "at all
hazards"--and had been driven into the fortified camp on the Brooklyn
peninsula. This result would have inevitably come, sooner or later,
but no one could have entertained the possibility of its coming in
this sudden and disastrous shape.



Looking back over the day's work, the cause of the defeat is apparent
at once: _We had been completely outflanked and surprised on the
Jamaica Road._ Where the responsibility for the surprise should rest
is another question. Evidently, if that patrol of officers had not
been captured, but, upon discovering the approach of the enemy, had
carried the word directly to Miles' camp and to headquarters, the
enemy would not have gained the rear of our outposts without warning.
Miles and Wyllys could have interposed themselves across their path,
and held the ground long enough at least to put our troops at the
other points on their guard. The surprise of this patrol, therefore,
can alone explain the defeat. But as the officers appear to have been
sent out as an additional precaution, the responsibility must be
shared by Miles and his regiment, who were the permanent guard on the
left. Brodhead, who wrote eight days after the event, distinctly
asserts that there were no troops beyond them, and that, for want of
videttes, that flank was left for them to watch. Parsons, as officer
of the day, reports that Miles was expected to patrol across the
Jamaica Road. But to charge the colonel personally with a fatal
mistake or neglect is not warranted by the facts. His own patrols and
pickets may have failed him. The simple fact appears that this
regiment was put upon our left, that our left was turned, and the
battle lost in consequence. As to the generalship of the day, if the
responsibility falls on any one, it falls first on Sullivan, who sent
out the mounted patrol in the first instance, and to whom it belonged
to follow up the precautions in that direction. Putnam was in chief
command, but nothing can be inferred from contemporary records to
fasten neglect or blunder upon him any more than upon Washington, who,
when he left the Brooklyn lines on the evening of the 26th, must have
known precisely what disposition had been made for the night at the
hills and passes. And upon Washington certainly the responsibility
cannot rest.[157]

[Footnote 157: RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE DEFEAT.--According to some of
our more recent versions of this battle, the disaster is to be
referred to the wilful disobedience, criminal inattention, and total
incapacity of General Putnam. Several writers make the charge so
pointedly and upon such an array of fact, that the reader is left to
wonder how all this should have escaped the notice of the
commander-in-chief at the time, and why Putnam was not immediately
court-martialled and dismissed the service, instead of being
continued, as he was, in important commands. The charge is the more
serious as it is advanced by so respectable an authority as Mr.
Bancroft. Mr. Field, Mr. Dawson, and Dr. Stiles, following the latter,
incline strongly in the same direction.

Mr. Bancroft first assails Putnam for sending Stirling out to the
right when word came in that the enemy were advancing and our pickets
flying. This is criticised as "a rash order," because it sent Stirling
to a position which was "dangerous in the extreme," with the Gowanus
marsh in his rear. But as to this, it only needs to be said that
Putnam's written instructions from Washington were imperative to
prevent the enemy from passing the hills and approaching the works. It
would have been a clear disregard of Washington's intention had Putnam
not sent Stirling out precisely as he did. The enemy were coming up
from the Narrows and must be checked "at all hazards." Furthermore,
the position Stirling took up at about Nineteenth Street was actually
safer than any other on the outpost line. His right could not be
turned, for it rested on the bay, and he could see every movement of
the fleet. His left was well covered by Parsons, and no one could have
imagined his rear in danger with the other outposts guarding it for
more than three miles. As a matter of fact, Stirling was nearer the
lines than either Miles or Wyllys.

Again, it is charged that when Putnam and Sullivan visited the extreme
left on the 26th "the movements of the enemy plainly disclosed that it
was their intention to get into the rear of the Americans by the
Jamaica Road," yet nothing was done. The foundation of this is
probably a statement of Brodhead's and another by Miles to the effect
that these generals might have themselves observed that the enemy were
preparing for the Jamaica move. But if the intentions of the latter
were so obvious at that time, it is proper to ask why it was not
equally obvious on the next morning that they were actually carrying
out their intentions, and why Miles and Brodhead did not so report at
an early hour. These officers were rightly impressed with the
conviction that the enemy would come by way of Jamaica, but it is
certain that the enemy made no observable move in that direction from
Flatlands, where they had been for three days, until nine o'clock that
night. So says Howe. It was clearly in the plan of the British to give
our outposts no ground for suspecting a flanking manoeuvre. Their
movements were far from being "plainly disclosed." The quotation given
by Mr. Bancroft in this connection, namely, that "Washington's order
to secure the Jamaica Road was not obeyed," unfortunately appears as
original in a "Review of the War" published in 1779 and written by
some irresponsible individual in England, who could neither have known
what Washington's orders were, nor whether any attempt was made to
carry them out.

A further charge is this: "Early in the morning, Putnam was informed
that infantry and cavalry were advancing on the Jamaica Road. He gave
Washington no notice of the danger; he sent Stirling no order to
retreat." This is doubtless on the authority of a letter in _Force_,
5th Series, vol. i., p. 1195. But how early was Putnam informed? The
writer of the letter who brought the word was probably one of Miles'
or Brodhead's men, for he tells us that his regiment was dressed in
hunting-shirts, and he makes the very important statement that on his
way back to his post he met the enemy! The information came too late,
for the British were now marching down towards the lines. Sullivan had
gone to the Flatbush Pass, where he could understand the situation
better than Putnam, and he was the proper officer to give directions
to the outposts at that moment.

The charges made by Mr. Dawson have still less foundation. General
Putnam is stated never to have reconnoitred the enemy's position.
Brodhead, however, states distinctly that he did. "It is also a
well-established fact," says this writer, "that no general officer was
outside the lines at Brooklyn on the night of the 26th." What is the
authority for this? Nixon, Stirling, and Parsons had been successively
officers of the day, and presumably did their duty. Parsons, on the
morning of the 27th, was on the lower road trying to rally the pickets
before Stirling appeared with reinforcements. "The mounted patrols
which General Sullivan had established, as well as the guards at some
of the passes established by General Greene, were withdrawn." The fact
that all the passes were well guarded and a special patrol sent out,
is a complete answer to this assertion, so far as the night of the
26th is concerned. In this light the general conclusion arrived at by
Mr. Dawson, that "General Putnam paid no attention to the orders of
General Washington," cannot be sustained.

With regard to General Sullivan, it is but just to give his own
explanation. A year after the battle, he wrote: "I know it has been
generally reported that I commanded on Long Island when the actions
happened there. This is by no means true; _General Putnam_ had taken
the command from me four days before the action. Lord Stirling
commanded the main body without the lines; I was to have command under
General Putnam within the lines. I was very uneasy about a road
through which I had often foretold the enemy would come, but could not
persuade others to be of my opinion. I went to the Hill near Flatbush
to reconnoitre the enemy, and, with a piquet of four hundred men, was
surrounded by the enemy, who had advanced by the very road I had
foretold, and which I had paid horsemen fifty dollars for patrolling
by night, while I had the command, as I had no foot for the purpose,
for which I was never reimbursed, as it was supposed unnecessary." In
another letter he adds: "I was so persuaded of the enemy's coming the
[Jamaica] route, that I went to examine, and was surrounded by the
British army, and after a long and severe engagement was made
prisoner." These letters were written when Sullivan was restless under
charges brought against him in connection with the defeat at
Brandywine--charges which were properly dropped, however--and are not
conclusive as to the Long Island affair. His statements are no doubt
strictly true, but they in no way affect the main point, namely, did
we or did we not have a patrol out on the Jamaica Road _on the night
of the 26th_? We have seen that there was such a patrol, and probably
the best that had yet been sent out, and sent out, according to
Lieutenant Van Wagenen, by General Sullivan himself.

There are but few references to the question of responsibility in
contemporary letters and documents. Gordon blames Sullivan as being
over-confident. Miles and Brodhead leave us to infer that this general
had much to do with the plan of action, and must be held at least in
part responsible. Sullivan, on the other hand, according to Brodhead,
blamed Miles for the defeat, as Parsons did. When these officers
wrote, they wrote to defend their own conduct, and their testimony is
necessarily incomplete so far as others are concerned.

In brief, the case seems to be this: On the night of the 26th we had
all the roads guarded. On the morning of the 27th Putnam promptly
reinforced the guards on the lower road when the enemy were announced.
The arrangements were such that if an attack was made at any of the
other points he and Sullivan were to have word of it in ample time. No
word came in time from the left, for the reason that those who were to
bring it were captured, or surprised, or failed of their duty. Hence
the disaster. The dispositions on Long Island were quite as complete
as those at Brandywine more than a year later, where we suffered
nearly a similar surprise and as heavy a loss. Suppose the very small
patrols sent out by Washington and Sullivan to gain information before
that battle had been captured, as at Long Island--we should have
sustained a greater disaster than at Long Island.

Under this state of facts, to charge Putnam with the defeat of the
27th, in the terms which some writers have employed, is both unjust
and unhistorical. That misfortune is not to be clouded with the
additional reflection, that it was due to the gross neglect and
general incapacity of the officer in command. No facts or inferences
justify the charge. No one hinted it at the time; nor did Washington
in the least withdraw his confidence from Putnam during the remainder
of the campaign.]

What has been said of other defeats may be said with equal truth of
this one: if it was a disaster, it was not a disgrace. Even the
surprise upon the left discloses no criminal misconduct. In the
actual fighting of the day our soldiers stood their ground.
Necessarily we suffered heavily in prisoners, but otherwise our loss
was inconsiderable. All the light that we have to-day goes to
establish the very important fact, originally credited and reported by
Washington himself, but which hardly a single historical writer has
since ventured to repeat, that at the battle of Long Island _the
British and Hessians suffered a loss in killed and wounded equal to
that inflicted upon the Americans_.[158] Howe reported his total
casualties at three hundred and sixty-seven officers and soldiers. On
the side of the Americans the total loss did not exceed one thousand.
About eight hundred, including ninety-one officers, were taken
prisoners; not more than six officers and about fifty privates were
killed; and less than sixteen officers and one hundred and fifty
privates wounded. No frightful slaughter of our troops, as sometimes
pictured, occurred during the action. It was a field where the
American soldier, in every fair encounter, proved himself worthy of
the cause he was fighting for.

[Footnote 158: See note at the close of the chapter.]



To those who fell in the engagement we may render here a grateful
tribute, though something more than this is due. Their services and
sacrifices are deserving of remembrance rather by a lasting memorial;
for men died here who showed not less of individual worth and heroism
than others who are immortalized on victorious fields. Thus at the
Flatbush Road we find Philip Johnston, colonel of the Jersey
battalion, which formed part of the guard there during the night. He
was the son of the worthy Judge Samuel Johnston, of the town of Sidney
in Hunterdon County. In his youth he had been a student at Princeton,
but, dropping his books, he took up the sword for the colonies in the
French war, from which he returned with honor. The troubles with Great
Britain found him ready again to fight in defence of common rights and
his native soil. Parting from his wife and child with touching
affection, he took the field with his regiment, and when attacked on
Long Island he showed all the qualities which mark the true soldier. A
gentleman of high principle, an officer of fine presence, one of the
strongest men in the army, he fought near Sullivan with the greatest
bravery until he fell mortally wounded. That August 27th was his
thirty-fifth birthday.

Equally glorious and regretted was the death of Lieutenant-Colonel
Caleb Parry, of Atlee's regiment, which occurred, as already noticed,
at an earlier hour and in another part of the field. He too was in the
prime of life, and eager to render the country some good service. A
representative colonist, descended from an ancient and honorable
family long seated in North Wales, and a man of polish and culture, he
stood ready for any sacrifice demanded of him at this crisis. Parry
came from Chester County, Pennsylvania, leaving a wife and five
children, and crossed with his regiment to Long Island four days
before the battle. Under what circumstances he fell has been told. As
they crossed the line of Greenwood Cemetery to take position at or
near "Battle Hill," the little command was greeted with a sudden
though harmless volley from the enemy. The men shrunk and fell back,
but Atlee rallied and Parry cheered them on, and they gained the hill.
It was here, while engaged in an officer's highest duty, turning men
to the enemy by his own example, that the fatal bullet pierced his
brow. When some future monument rises from Greenwood to commemorate
the struggle of this day, it can bear no more fitting line among its
inscriptions than this tribute of Brodhead's, "Parry died like a
hero."

Captain Edward Veazey, of the Marylanders, belonged to the family of
Veazeys who settled in Cecil County, on the eastern shore of that
State, and who traced their lineage back to the Norman De Veazies of
the eleventh century. The captain was fifty-five years of age, took up
the colonial cause at the start, raised the Seventh Independent
Company of Maryland troops, and was among the earliest to fall in
Stirling's line.

Captain Joseph Jewett, of Huntington's Continentals, perhaps defending
himself to the last, even when escape was impossible, was three times
stabbed with British bayonets after surrendering his sword. Cared for
by a humane surgeon, but still lingering in pain, he died on the
morning of the 29th, and was buried in the Bennett orchard, near
Twenty-second Street and Third Avenue. He left a family at Lyme, on
the Connecticut, where he lived, and from where he went to join the
army on the Lexington alarm. A soldier who fought on Long Island
remembers him as "an officer much respected and beloved, of elegant
and commanding appearance, and of unquestionable bravery."

The officers and men of the artillery, who fought the six pieces we
had in the action, covered themselves with honor. They were "the
flower" of Knox's regiment, picked for a field fight. Captain
Carpenter, of Providence, fell in Stirling's command, leaving a widow
to mourn him. Captain John Johnston, of Boston, was desperately
wounded, but recovered under the care of Surgeon Eustis. The record
which John Callender, of the same place, made for himself is a
familiar story. To wipe out the stain of an undeserved sentence passed
upon him after Bunker Hill, by which he was cashiered, he rejoined the
artillery as a private soldier, and then, as a "cadet," fought his
piece on Long Island until the enemy's bayonets were at his breast.
Upon his exchange as prisoner a year later, Washington restored him to
his rank as captain-lieutenant, and he served honorably to the end of
the war. Harmanus Rutgers, one of the patriotic Rutgers brothers in
New York, serving, it would seem, as a gunner, was struck in the
breast by a cannon-shot, and fell dead at his post. The tradition
preserved in his family is that he was the first man killed in the
battle. Knox, hearing how well his men had done, wrote to his wife: "I
have met with some loss in my regiment. They fought like heroes and
are gone to glory."

Of three others known to have been killed during the day, and who
probably complete the list of officers, we have no more than the fact
that they fell. They were Lieutenant Joseph Jacquet, of Miles' first
battalion, and Lieutenants David Sloan and Charles Taylor, of the
second battalion--all apparently from Chester County, Pennsylvania.
Hardly more than three or four names of the private soldiers who were
killed have been preserved, owing doubtless to the fact that, if they
were ever known, it was not until long after, when no rolls would show
their fate.

To the roll of the dead must be added also the honored name of General
Nathaniel Woodhull, of Long Island. On the day after the battle, a
party of British light horse, under Oliver De Lancey, rode out on the
Jamaica Road and surprised the general at an inn, where without
provocation he was cruelly hacked in the head and arm, and carried off
a prisoner. He survived until the 20th, when he died at New Utrecht.
His loss was greatly regretted, for he was a man of energy and
ability, and had the success of the Revolutionary cause most fervently
at heart.[159]

[Footnote 159: Mr. Onderdonk, Mr. Thompson, and others have gathered
and published all the known incidents respecting the fate of General
Woodhull, which are doubtless familiar to those interested in the
history of Long Island. See General Scott's brief reference to him in
_Document_ 6.]



This battle was regarded at the time as one of very great importance,
and the result created a deep impression on both sides of the water.
In England they had long been waiting for the news, and the king
became depressed at the British delay in moving; in addition, the
first reports, coming by way of France, were unfavorable. But at last,
at three o'clock on the morning of October 10th, Major Cuyler, of
Howe's staff, reached the government with the official accounts of the
victory. Immediately, as Walpole tells us, the Court was filled with
"an extravagance of joy." The relief was so great that it was
displayed with "the utmost ostentation." The king at once determined
to send Howe "a red riband;" and Lord Mansfield, who had thrown the
weight of his great legal abilities against America, was created an
earl. The Mayor and Corporation of York voted an address to his
Majesty "on the victory at Long Island;" at Leeds they rang the
bells, lighted windows, fired cannon, and started a huge bonfire which
made the town "quite luminous;" and at Halifax, Colne, Huddersfield,
and many other places, similar rejoicings were held. At Limerick
Lieutenant-Colonel Campbell ordered the garrison under arms, and fired
three volleys "on account of the success of his Majesty's troops at
Long Island;" and, for the same reason, in the evening "a number of
ladies and gentlemen were elegantly entertained at dinner by the
bishop." From Paris Silas Deane wrote to Congress: "The want of
instructions or intelligence or remittances, with the late check on
Long Island, has sunk our credit to nothing." In Amsterdam, the centre
of exchange for all Europe, English stocks rose; but the Dutch, with
characteristic shrewdness, failed to accept "our misfortune" as final,
and took the opportunity to sell out. In London Tory circles they
considered the American war as practically over, and some began to
talk of new schemes of colonial government.

As for America, the defeat, coupled with the subsequent retreat,
everywhere carried alarm and keen disappointment. Greene speaks of the
"panic" in the county. But at the same time many brave voices were
raised to counteract despondency. Parsons, in the army, wrote: "I
think the trial of that day far from being any discouragement, but in
general our men behaved with firmness." Bartlett, in Congress, sent
word home to New Hampshire that he hoped the event would only make our
generals more careful in their future operations. "We have lost a
battle and a small island," said Dr. Rush, of Philadelphia, in one of
the sessions a few days later, "but we have not lost a State. Why
then should we be discouraged? Or why should we be discouraged even
if we had lost a State? If there were but one State left, still that
one should peril all for independence." "The panic may seize whom it
will," wrote John Adams; "it shall not seize me." But the grandest
words inspired by the pervading anxiety were those penned by Abigail
Adams, the noble wife of the Massachusetts delegate. "We have had many
stories," she wrote from Braintree, September 9th, "concerning
engagements upon Long Island this week, of our lines being forced and
of our troops returning to New York. Particulars we have not yet
obtained. All we can learn is that we have been unsuccessful there;
having many men as prisoners, among whom are Lord Stirling and General
Sullivan. _But if we should be defeated, I think we shall not be
conquered. A people fired, like the Romans, with love of their country
and of liberty, a zeal for the public good, and a noble emulation of
glory, will not be disheartened or dispirited by a succession of
unfortunate events. But, like them, may we learn by defeat the power
of becoming invincible!_"

This was the true inspiration of the hour. It was this that sustained
Washington and the strong men of the country through all the dark
period that followed. The disaster of the 27th was a disciplinary
experience. It was but the first of a series of blows that were to
harden us for future endurance. The event was accepted in this spirit
by all who had taken up the cause in earnest; and in this light the
memory of the day deserves to be forever celebrated and perpetuated.
Here, on Long Island, all was done that could be done, for we had met
the enemy at the sea. Here America made her first stand against
England's first great effort to subdue her; and here her resolution to
continue resistance was first tested and tempered in the fire of
battle.



     THE LOSSES AT THE BATTLE.--So many widely different
     estimates have been made as to the extent of the American
     loss on Long Island, that it becomes a matter of historical
     interest to fix the actual figures, if possible, beyond
     dispute.

     The first official reference to the matter occurs in the
     letter which Washington directed Colonel Harrison, his
     secretary, to write to Congress on the evening of the
     battle. Nothing definite on this point being known at that
     hour, Harrison, after announcing the attack of the enemy,
     and the retreat of the troops into the Brooklyn lines, could
     only make the vague report that the American loss was
     "pretty considerable." On Thursday morning, the 29th, at
     "half after four A.M.," Washington himself wrote to Hancock
     that he was still uncertain how far the army had suffered.
     On Saturday, the 31st, he wrote again, and in this letter
     gave an estimate in figures. This was the only report he
     made to Congress in the matter, except indirectly. "Nor have
     I," he writes, "been yet able to obtain an exact account of
     our loss; we suppose it from seven hundred to a thousand
     killed and taken." In subsequent public and private letters
     to his brother, to Governor Trumbull, General Schuyler, and
     the Massachusetts Assembly, Washington did not vary these
     figures materially (except to make the estimate closer,
     about 800), and they stand, therefore, as his official
     return of the casualties of that day.

     Sir William Howe's report, on the other hand, presented
     altogether a different showing. It left no room for doubt as
     to the extent of the British victory. Dated September 3d,
     seven days after the affair, it contained all those
     particulars of events up to that time which a successful
     general is well aware will be received with special
     satisfaction by his government. The landing at Gravesend,
     the occupation of Flatbush, the skilful march of the
     flanking column, the bravery of the troops, and the complete
     success of the entire plan of action were mentioned in
     order; while a detailed statement and estimate of the losses
     on either side, including a tabulated return of prisoners
     taken, only fortified the impression that a most damaging
     defeat had been served upon the Americans. Against
     Washington's estimate of a total of one thousand or less for
     his own loss, Howe reported that the enlisted men he
     captured alone numbered one thousand and six, and that in
     addition he took ninety-one commissioned officers, of whom
     three were generals, three colonels, four
     lieutenant-colonels, three majors, eighteen captains,
     forty-three lieutenants, eleven ensigns, one adjutant, three
     surgeons, and two volunteers; and he "computed" that in
     killed, wounded, and drowned, the Americans lost two
     thousand two hundred more. On the part of the British, Howe
     reported five officers and fifty-six men killed, twelve
     officers and two hundred and fifty-five men wounded, and one
     officer and thirty men prisoners and missing. The Hessians
     lost two men killed, three officers and twenty-three men
     wounded. Howe's total loss, in a word, was made to appear at
     less than four hundred; Washington's full three thousand
     three hundred.

     The apparent exactness of this report has secured it, in
     general, against close analysis. English historians, almost
     without exception, quote it as it stands, while there are
     American writers who respect it so far as to pronounce
     Washington's report clearly, and even purposely, inaccurate.
     Thus the most recent English history of this period says:
     "The Americans fled in confusion, leaving upwards of three
     thousand killed, wounded, and prisoners, including their
     three generals of division;" and in a note the writer adds:
     "Washington's estimate of the loss on both sides was grossly
     incorrect. In his letter to Congress of the 30th August,
     giving a very meagre and evasive account of the action, he
     says that his loss in killed and prisoners was from 700 to
     1000; and that he had reason to believe the enemy had
     suffered still more. This would seem to be a wilful
     misrepresentation to prevent the public alarm which might
     have been caused by the knowledge of his real loss; were it
     not that in a private letter to his brother, three weeks
     afterwards, he makes a similar statement. General Howe's
     returns of _prisoners_, and of his own killed and wounded,
     are precise." (_History of England during the Reign of
     George the Third._ By the Right Hon. William Massey, 1865.)
     Among Brooklyn writers, Mr. Field asserts that Washington
     concealed the actual extent of his loss, and Dr. Stiles
     accepts the British report as it stands. Marshall puts the
     American loss at over 1000; Irving, 2000; Lossing, 1650;
     Field, 2000; Sparks, 1100; Bancroft, 800; Carrington, 970.
     Stedman, the earliest British historian, gives 2000, while
     Adolphus, Jesse, and Massey, who cover the reign of George
     III., blindly follow Howe and give over 3000 for the
     American loss.

     There is but one explanation of this wide discrepancy
     between the British and American returns, namely:
     Washington's original estimate at its largest limit--one
     thousand, killed, wounded, and prisoners--_was almost
     precisely correct_.

     Of this there can be no question whatever, the proof being a
     matter of record. Thus, on the 8th of October, Washington
     issued the following order: "The General desires the
     commanding officers of each regiment or corps will give in a
     list of the names and the officers and men who were killed,
     taken, or missing in the action of the 27th of August on
     Long Island and since that period. He desires the returns
     may be correct, &c." (_Force_). A large number of these
     lists are preserved in _Force_, 5th series, vol. iii., and
     from these we obtain the losses of the following regiments:
     Hitchcock's, total loss, one officer and nine men; Little's,
     three men; Huntington's, twenty-one officers and one hundred
     and eighty-six men; Wyllys', one officer and nine men;
     Tyler, three men; Ward, three men; Chester, twelve men; Gay,
     four men; Lasher, three officers. Smallwood's lost,
     according to Gist, twelve officers and two hundred and
     forty-seven men; Haslet, according to his own letters, two
     officers and twenty-five men; Johnston's New Jersey, two
     officers and less than twenty-five men, the rolls before and
     after the battle showing no greater difference in the
     strength of the regiment; Miles' two battalions, sixteen
     officers and about one hundred and sixty men (_Document_
     61); Atlee, eleven officers and seventy-seven men. (_Ibid._)
     No official report of the losses in Lutz's, Kachlein's, and
     Hay's detachments or the artillery can be found, but to give
     their total casualties at one hundred and fifty officers and
     men is probably a liberal estimate. Lutz lost six officers
     (all prisoners); Kachlein not more; Hay, one; the artillery,
     three. The regiments named in the foregoing list include all
     from which Howe reported that he took officers prisoners,
     from which it is safe to conclude that these were all that
     lost any. No others are mentioned as having been engaged.
     These figures show in round numbers a total of _one
     thousand_, and this was our total loss, according to
     official returns in nearly every case.

     How many of these, in the next place, were killed and
     wounded? If we are to credit certain Hessian and British
     accounts, as well as those of our own local historians, the
     battle-field on Long Island was a scene of carnage, a pen in
     which our men were slaughtered without mercy. The confused
     strife, says one writer, "is too terrible for the
     imagination to dwell upon." "An appalling massacre," says
     another, "thus closed the combat." "The forest," writes a
     Hessian officer, "was a scene of horror; there were
     certainly two thousand killed and wounded lying about." Lord
     Howe himself, as we have seen, "computed" that the American
     loss in killed and wounded alone was two thousand three
     hundred. But a striking commentary on this computation is
     not only the total omission on his part to mention how many
     of this very large number he buried on the field, but the
     important admission he makes that not more than sixty-seven
     wounded American officers and soldiers fell into his hands!
     Where were the twenty-two hundred other maimed and fallen
     rebels? Obviously, and as Howe must have well known, the
     Americans could carry few if any of their dead with them on
     their precipitate retreat, nor could any but the slightly
     hurt of the wounded make their escape. Full two thousand, by
     this calculation, must have been left upon the field. Who
     buried them? Were they the victims of the supposed frightful
     slaughter? Did the British general purposely give an evasive
     estimate to cover up the inhumanity which would thus have
     forever stained the glory of his victory? Far from it. That
     "computation" has no basis to stand upon; but, on the
     contrary, our loss in killed and wounded was not greater
     than the enemy's, but most probably less.

     This statement will bear close examination. On the 19th of
     September, after he must have been able to satisfy himself
     as to the extent of the defeat on Long Island, the
     commander-in-chief wrote to the Massachusetts Assembly that
     he had lost about eight hundred men, "more than three
     fourths of which were taken prisoners." He wrote the same
     thing to others. So Washington felt authorized to state
     positively that we lost in killed and wounded that day not
     over two hundred men and officers. "The enemy's loss in
     killed," he added, "we could never ascertain; but have many
     reasons to believe that it was pretty considerable, and
     exceeded ours a good deal." General Parsons, who saw as much
     of the field as any other officer, wrote to John Adams two
     days after the battle: "Our loss in killed and wounded is
     inconsiderable." General Scott, writing to John Jay, a week
     later, could say: "What our loss on Long Island was I am not
     able to estimate. I think from the best accounts we must
     have killed many of the enemy." Colonel Douglas wrote,
     August 31st: "The enemy surrounded a large detachment of our
     army, took many, killed some and the rest got off.... By the
     best account we killed more of them than they did of us. But
     they took the most prisoners." Lieutenant-Colonel Chambers,
     who was in the way of gathering many particulars from the
     Pennsylvanians who escaped, says: "Our men behaved as
     bravely as men ever did; but it is surprising that, with the
     superiority of numbers, they were not cut to pieces.... Our
     loss is chiefly in prisoners." Lieutenant-Colonel Brodhead,
     who had to retreat among the last over the very ground which
     others have marked out as the scene of the massacre, as the
     site where "lay nearly one thousand men, slain in the shock
     of battle, or by subsequent murder" (_Field_)--Brodhead
     says: "I retreated to the lines, having lost out of the
     whole battalion, about one hundred men, officers included,
     which, as they were much scattered, must be chiefly
     prisoners.... No troops could behave better than the
     Southern, for though they seldom engaged less than five to
     one, they frequently repulsed the Enemy with great
     Slaughter, and I am confident that the number of killed and
     wounded on their side, is greater than on ours,
     notwithstanding we had to fight them front and rear under
     every disadvantage." Colonel Silliman, of Connecticut, who
     appears to have made particular inquiries in the matter,
     wrote, September 10th: "I think upon the best information I
     can get that we are about 1000 men the worse for that
     action. The Enemy say they have about 800 of them prisoners.
     We have about 50 of them in the hospital wounded. Of the
     other 150 'tis said that in the engagement a considerable
     number of the riflemen deserted and went over to the enemy
     and some no doubt escaped towards the other end of the
     Island. On the whole I do not think we had 50 men killed in
     the action." (_MS. letter._) These are statements made by
     officers who were present at the battle, and who wrote
     within a few days of the event. They all, with many others,
     reach the same conclusion that the enemy suffered in killed
     and wounded as much if not more than the Americans. Their
     testimony, moreover, is strengthened by what we know
     directly and indirectly from the returns and other sources.
     The loss in officers, of which we have exact figures, is one
     basis of calculation. Ninety-one, as already stated, were
     taken prisoners, of whom nine were reported wounded in
     Howe's return. Among these were General Woodhull, Colonel
     Johnston, and Captain Jewett, all three mortally wounded,
     and Captain Bowie and Lieutenant Butler, of the Marylanders;
     Captain Johnston, of the artillery; Captain Peebles, of
     Miles', and Lieutenant Makepeace, of Huntington's. [Colonel
     Johnston is usually mentioned as having been killed on the
     field. But Howe's return gives one New Jersey colonel
     prisoner, and Elking's Hessian account states that he was
     wounded after being made prisoner.] Among officers known to
     be wounded, not captured, were Major McDonough, Lieutenants
     Course and Anderson, of the Delawares; Lieutenant Hughes, of
     Hitchcock's; and Captain Farmer, of Miles'. Lieutenant
     Patterson, of Hay's detachment, was either killed or
     captured (Colonel Cunningham's return). The officers killed
     were Lieutenant-Colonel Parry, Captain Carpenter, Captain
     Veazey, and Lieutenants Sloan, Jacquet, and Taylor. Various
     accounts state that Colonel Rutgers, Lieutenant-Colonel
     Eppes, Major Abeel (of Lasher's), Captain Fellows, and
     Lieutenant Moore (of Pennsylvania) were killed, but there is
     an error in each case, all these officers being reported
     alive at different dates after the battle. We have, then,
     twenty-one killed or wounded (six only killed on the field)
     among the American officers engaged in the action. If, as we
     have a right to assume, the same proportion held among the
     enlisted men, our total loss in killed and wounded could not
     have exceeded two hundred or two hundred and fifty, or more
     than one hundred less than the enemy's loss. Parsons and
     Atlee write that they lost but two or three. Miles says that
     in one of his skirmishes he lost a number of men, but nearly
     all were made prisoners. Little's regiment lost one killed;
     Hitchcock's the same. The five companies of Smallwood's
     battalion that attacked Cornwallis lost but one officer
     wounded, or at the most one killed and one wounded, and
     there is no reason to suppose that the men suffered very
     heavily. The loss among the Delawares was nearly all in
     prisoners. Lutz had six officers taken, but none killed or
     wounded; Hay lost one officer, either killed or prisoner. In
     Kachlein's detachment it is certain that the
     lieutenant-colonel, major, adjutant, three captains, and
     three lieutenants were not killed, which leaves little room
     for casualties in a party of not over four or five
     companies. So of all the other regiments engaged, they
     suffered but slightly in killed or wounded.

     Howe's list of prisoners was undoubtedly swelled by captures
     among the Long Island militia and citizen Whigs after the
     battle. He includes General Woodhull and two lieutenants,
     for instance, who were not taken at the battle but on the
     day following, and who, as Washington says, were "never
     arranged" in his army.

     The reports of the slaughter and massacre of our troops
     current in the enemy's camp at the time were greatly
     exaggerated. Some of our men were probably cut down most
     wantonly in the pursuit through the woods, both by British
     and Hessians, but the number was small. It is a noticeable
     and significant fact that the American accounts make no
     mention of any such wholesale cruelty, and certainly our
     soldiers would have been the first to call attention to it.
     That word "massacre" should have no place in any accurate
     description of the battle.




CHAPTER V.

THE RETREAT TO NEW YORK.


The situation at the Brooklyn lines was relieved on the 29th by the
famous retreat of our army to New York. If Howe had surprised us by an
unexpected manoeuvre on the 27th, Washington was now to surprise the
British with a different manoeuvre, conducted with greater skill. "A
fine retreat," says Jomini, "should meet with a reward equal to that
given for a great victory." History assigns such a reward to
Washington at Long Island.

This success--the extrication of the army from what was soon felt to
be a dangerous position--was not to be achieved without a previous two
days' experience of great hardship, trial, and despondency on the part
of the troops; and unceasing anxiety and watchfulness on the part of
the commander-in-chief. The night of the 27th had closed cheerlessly
on the devoted Americans. The hills had been wrested from them; many
of their best officers and soldiers were slain or prisoners; before
them stood the whole British army, flushed with success, and liable at
any hour to rush upon their works, and in their rear flowed a deep,
wide river.

Washington realized the position the moment of the retreat from the
passes, and immediately took measures to guard against further
disaster. Satisfied that Howe had his whole force with him, and that
an attack was not to be apprehended at any other point, he ordered
forward more troops to replace his losses and strengthen the lines.
Mifflin brought down from Harlem Heights the two well-drilled
Pennsylvania regiments under Colonels Magaw and Shee, with some
others; and Glover's Massachusetts was sent on from Fellows' brigade.
These all crossed to Long Island early on the morning of the 28th. At
the same time, the afternoon of the 27th, Washington sent word to
General Mercer in New Jersey to march all the forces under his command
"immediately to Powle's Hook";[160] they might be needed in New York,
they might be needed on Long Island. By the morning of the 28th, the
commander-in-chief had drawn to the Brooklyn lines all the troops that
could be spared from other points, and all with which he proposed to
resist the British if they attempted to carry his position by storm.
He had on that side the largest and best part of his army. The whole
of Greene's division was there, the whole of Spencer's, half of
Sullivan's, one third of Putnam's, and a part of Heath's--in all not
less than thirty-five regiments or detachments, which numbered
together something over nine thousand five hundred men fit for
duty.[161]

[Footnote 160: This order was sent at two o'clock through General
Wooster, then temporarily in New York, and Mercer received it in the
evening near Newark. He sent word at once to the militia at Amboy,
Woodbridge, and Elizabethtown to march to Powle's Hook. _Force_, 5th
Series, vol. ii.]

[Footnote 161: A close analysis of the returns of September 12th,
estimating all additions or reductions which should be made since the
battle, shows that this was about the number on Long Island at this
date and at the time of the retreat. The brigades now there were
Nixon's, Heard's, Parson's, Wadsworth's, Stirling's, Scott's, two
regiments of Mifflin's, one at least of McDougall's (Webb's),
Glover's, and Fellows', the Long Island militia, artillery, rangers,
and several independent companies. We know at what part of the lines
some of these troops were posted. Greene's four old regiments
doubtless occupied the forts. Varnum was at Red Hook; Little at Fort
Greene; Hitchcock at Fort Putnam, and Hand with him there and in the
redoubt on the left. Forman's New Jersey had been at Fort Box. Three
of Scott's battalions were assigned to the centre, where the
breastworks crossed the Jamaica Road. Magaw, Shee, and Glover guarded
the line from Fort Putnam to the Wallabout; Silliman was at the
"northern part" of the works, probably on the right of Fort Putnam;
Gay's was between Fort Box and the Marsh; Douglas watched the extreme
right in the woods at the mouth of Gowanus Creek; and there was a
"reserve," which perhaps included among others the remnants of
Stirling's shattered brigade. Encircling them a mile or a mile and a
half distant in the edge of the woods, lay the British army with tents
already pitched in many places. North and south of the Jamaica Road,
just below Bedford, was Howe's main column; within and west of
Prospect Park were the Hessians; and on the right, Grant's division
bivouacked along the Gowanus Road.]

Had all things been relatively equal, the Americans within the lines,
according to military experience, should have been well able to hold
that front. But there was a total inequality of conditions. The enemy
were thoroughly equipped, disciplined, and provided for. They were an
army of professional soldiers, superior to any that could be brought
against them the world over. Thus far they had carried everything
before them, and were eager to achieve still greater victories. Behind
the Brooklyn works stood a poorly armed, badly officered, and for the
most part untrained mass of men, hurriedly gathered into the semblance
of an army. The events of the previous day, moreover, had greatly
depressed their spirits. Not a few of those who had been engaged in or
witnessed the battle were badly demoralized. To make matters worse,
the very elements seemed to combine against them. The two days they
were still to remain on the island were days of "extraordinary wet."
It rained almost continuously, and much of the time heavily. No fact
is better attested than this. August 28th, writes Colonel Little,
"weather very rainy;" "29th, very rainy." Major Tallmadge speaks of
the fatigue as having been aggravated by the "heavy rain." "The heavy
rain which fell two days and nights without intermission, etc.," said
the council which voted to retreat. Pastor Shewkirk in his diary notes
the weather particularly: "Wednesday 28th," he writes, ... "in the
afternoon we had extraordinary heavy rains and thunder." The flashes
of the cannons were intermixed with flashes of lightning. On the 29th,
"in the afternoon, such heavy rain fell again as can hardly be
remembered." To all this deluge our soldiers were exposed with but
little shelter. Necessity required that they should be at the lines,
and constantly on the watch, ready to repel any attempt to storm them.
When they lay down in the trenches at brief intervals for rest, they
kept their arms from the wet as they could. Cooking was out of the
question, and the men were compelled to take up with the unaccustomed
fare of hard biscuits and raw pork. Their wretched plight is referred
to in more than one of the letters of the day. Writes General Scott:
"You may judge of our situation, subject to almost incessant rains,
without baggage or tents, and almost without victuals or drink, and in
some part of the lines the men were standing up to their middles in
water." Captain Olney puts it on record that "the rain fell in such
torrents that the water was soon ankle deep in the fort. Yet with all
these inconveniences, and a powerful enemy just without musket-shot,
our men could not be kept awake." Captain Graydon, of Shee's
Pennsylvanians, says in his well-known "Memoirs:" "We had no tents to
screen us from the pitiless pelting, nor, if we had them, would it
have comported with the incessant vigilance required to have availed
ourselves of them, as, in fact, it might be said that we lay upon our
arms during the whole of our stay upon the island. In the article of
food we were little better off." Under the circumstances could
Washington's force have withstood the shock of a determined assault by
the enemy?

In spite, however, of weather, hunger, and fatigue, there was many a
brave man in the American camp who kept up heart and obeyed all orders
with spirit. One thing is certain, the British were not permitted to
suspect the distressed condition of our army. Our pickets and
riflemen, thrown out in front of the works, put on a bold face. On the
28th there was skirmishing the greater part of the day, and in the
evening, as Washington reports, "it was pretty smart." Writing from
the trenches on the 29th, Colonel Silliman says: "Our enemy have
encamped in plain sight of our camp at the distance of about a mile
and a half. We have had no general engagement yet, but no day passes
without some smart and hot skirmishes between different parties, in
which the success is sometimes one way and sometimes another. We are
in constant expectation of a general battle; no one can be here long
without getting pretty well acquainted with the whistling of cannon
and musket shot." Scarcely any particulars of these encounters[162]
are preserved, though one of them, at least, appears to have been
quite an important affair. The enemy had determined to approach the
lines by regular siege rather than hazard an assault, and late in the
afternoon of the 28th they advanced in some force to break ground for
the first parallel. The point selected was doubtless the high ground
between Vanderbilt and Clinton avenues, on the line of De Kalb. As to
what occurred we have but the briefest account, and that is from the
pen of Colonel Little. "On the morning of the 28th," he writes, "the
enemy were encamped on the heights in front of our encampment. Firing
was kept up on both sides from the right to the left. Firing on both
sides in front of Fort Putnam. About sunset the enemy pushed to
recover the ground we had taken (about 100 rods) in front of the fort.
The fire was very hot; the enemy gave way, and our people recovered
the ground. The firing ceased, and our people retired to the fort. The
enemy took possession again, and on the morning of the 30th [29th] had
a breastwork there 60 rods long and 150 rods distant from Fort
Putnam." It was this move of the British, more than any incident since
the battle, that determined Washington's future course.

[Footnote 162: In vol. ii. of the L.I. Hist. Society's "Memoirs," the
author, Mr. Field, devotes pages 254-258 to the skirmishing of some
Connecticut soldiers on the extreme right on the other side of Gowanus
Creek, which appears to him to have been rash and foolhardy, and
strangely in contrast with what also appears to him to have been an
exhibition of cowardice on their part the day before. The narrative
from which the incidents are taken (Martin's) shows no such singular
inconsistency in the conduct of these men. This was Colonel Douglas'
regiment, and, as Martin himself says, it moved promptly under orders
from the ferry to the right to cover Stirling's retreat. "Our
officers," he writes, "pressed forward towards a creek, where a large
party of Americans and British were engaged." They very properly did
not halt to help a company of artillerymen drag their pieces along.
The skirmish on the following day was nothing remarkable in its way.
It was just such brushes as the men engaged in that Washington, on
Graydon's authority, encouraged. The regiment displayed no particular
rashness on the 28th, nor any cowardice on the 27th--that is, if
Martin is to be credited.]

During all these trying hours since the defeat on the 27th, the most
conspicuous figure to be seen, now at one point and now at another of
the threatened lines, was that of the commander-in-chief. Wherever his
inspiring presence seemed necessary, there he was to be found. He
cheered the troops night and day. All that the soldiers endured, he
endured. For forty-eight hours, or the whole of the 28th and 29th, he
took no rest whatever, and was hardly once off his horse. As he rode
among the men in the storm he spoke to some in person, and everywhere
he gave directions, while his aids were as tireless as their Chief in
assisting him.

But circumstanced as the army was, it was inevitable that the question
should come up: Can the defence of the Brooklyn front be continued
without great hazard? It could not have escaped the notice of a single
soldier on that side, that if, with the river in their rear, the enemy
should succeed in penetrating the lines, or the fleet be able to
command the crossing, they would all be lost. There was no safety but
in retreat; and for twenty-four hours from the morning of the 29th,
all the energies of the commander-in-chief were directed towards
making the retreat successful.

To few incidents of the Revolution does greater interest attach than
to this final scene in the operations on Long Island. The formal
decision to abandon this point was made by a council of war, held late
in the day of the 29th, at the house of Phillip Livingston, then
absent as a member of the Continental Congress at Philadelphia. The
mansion made historic by this event stood on the line of Hicks Street,
just south of Joralemon.[163] There were present at the council, the
commander-in-chief, Major-Generals Putnam and Spencer, and
Brigadier-Generals Mifflin, McDougall, Parsons, Scott, Wadsworth, and
Fellows. As far as known, Scott alone of these generals has left us
any thing in regard to what transpired on the occasion beyond the
final result. He preserves the interesting fact that when the
proposition to retreat was presented it took him by surprise and he as
suddenly objected to it, "from an aversion to giving the enemy a
single inch of ground." It was the soil of his own State. As a member
of the New York Convention and of the Committee of Safety, and now as
a general officer, he had spent months in uninterrupted preparations
to defend that soil, and on the first impulse of the moment the
thought of yielding any more of it to the invaders was not to be
entertained. But he was soon "convinced by unanswerable reasons," and
the vote of the council was unanimous for retreat. Eight separate
reasons were embodied in the decision. _First._ A defeat had been
sustained on the 27th, and the woods lost where it was proposed to
make "a principal stand." _Second._ The loss in officers and men had
occasioned great confusion and discouragement among the troops.
_Third._ The rain had injured the arms and much of the ammunition, and
the soldiers were so worn out, that it was feared that they could not
be kept at the lines by any order. _Fourth._ The enemy appeared to be
endeavoring to get their ships into the East River to cut off
communication with New York, but the wind as yet had not served them.
_Fifth._ There were no obstructions sunk in the Channel between Long
and Governor's Island, and the council was assured by General
McDougall, "from his own nautic experience," that small ships could
sail up by that channel; the hulks, also, sunk between Governor's
Island and the Battery were regarded as insufficient obstructions for
that passage. _Sixth._ Though the lines were fortified by several
strong redoubts, the breastworks were weak, being "abattised with
brush" only in some places, and the enemy might break through them.
_Seventh._ The divided state of the army made a defence precarious.
_Eighth._ Several British men-of-war had worked their way into
Flushing Bay from the Sound, and with their assistance the enemy could
cross a force to the mainland in Westchester County, and gain the
American rear in the vicinity of King's Bridge. In view of these
considerations a retreat was considered imperative.

[Footnote 163: See _Document_ 6, in which General Scott says: "I was
summoned to a council of war at Mr. Phillip Livingston's house on
Thursday, 29th ult., etc."]

This was the official record of the council's action as afterwards
transmitted to Congress. It is not to be inferred, however, that
retreat was not thought of, or that nothing was done to effect it
until the council met. That Washington had foreseen the necessity of
the move, that he discussed it with others, and that he had already
begun the necessary preparations, is obvious both from the record and
from all that occurred during the day. The council did no more than to
coincide in his views and confirm his judgment.[164]

[Footnote 164: ORIGIN OF THE RETREAT.--Precisely when and why
Washington came to a determination in his own mind to retreat has been
made the subject of a somewhat nice historical inquiry. Gordon gives
one story; Mr. William B. Reed, biographer of Colonel Reed, gives
another; and Mr. Bancroft, General Carrington, and others indulge in
more or less extended criticisms on the point. Gordon's account is the
most probable and the best supported.

Whatever Washington may have thought of the situation on Long Island
after the defeat, it is enough to know that he immediately reinforced
himself there, and that on the 27th and 28th he made no preparations
to withdraw to New York. It far from follows, however, that he had
concluded to stay and fight it out "on that line" at all hazards. He
was acting on the defensive, and was necessarily obliged to guide
himself largely by the movements of the enemy. On Long Island,
therefore, he could only be on the watch, and, like a prudent general,
decide according to circumstances. Up to the morning of the 29th he
was still watching--watching not only the enemy, but his own army
also. In his letter to Congress, written at "half after 4 o'clock
A.M." of this date, he gives no intimation of a retreat, but rather
leaves that body to infer that he proposed to remain where he was. He
speaks, for instance, of expecting tents during the day to make the
troops more comfortable. On the same morning Reed wrote: "We hope to
be able to make a good stand, as our lines are pretty strong;" and he
doubtless reflected the views of his Chief at the time.

The two particular dangers now to which the army was exposed were the
danger of having its communication with New York cut off by the ships,
and the danger of being approached by the enemy in front by siege
operations, which the army was not prepared to meet. The first danger
had existed ever since the arrival of the enemy, and had been provided
for. All the batteries on Governor's Island and on both sides of the
East River had been built to guard against it. In addition, ships had
been sunk in the channel. Washington accordingly must have thoroughly
canvassed the risks he ran in regard to his communications. _These
alone had not decided him to retreat._ On the morning of the 29th,
however, he first became aware of the second danger. It was not until
then that the enemy fully developed their intention of advancing by
trenches. After working all night, as Howe reports, they had thrown up
by morning, as Little reports, a parallel sixty rods long and one
hundred and fifty rods distant from Fort Putnam. Reed wrote, "They are
intrenching at a small distance." In twenty-four hours at the farthest
they would have come within very close range, and the hazardous
alternative would have been forced upon us to attempt to drive them
out of their own works. Washington well knew that, in view of the
condition of his men and the great disparity of numbers, this could
not be done. When, therefore, he became assured of Howe's intentions
he acted promptly--_he determined to retreat_; and this determination
he reached early on the morning of the 29th.

This is substantially the theory which Gordon presents as a fact, and
it is most consistent with fact. Gordon's account is this: "The
victorious army encamped in the front of the American works in the
evening; and on the 28th at night broke ground in form about 4 or 500
yards distant from a redoubt which covered the left of the Americans.
The same day Gen. Mifflin crossed over from New York with 1000 men; at
night he made an offer to Gen. Washington of going the rounds, which
was accepted. He observed the approaches of the enemy, and the
forwardness of their batteries; and was convinced that no time was to
be lost. The next morning he conversed with the General upon the
subject, and said, 'You must either fight or retreat immediately. What
is your strength?' The General answered, 'Nine thousand.' The other
replied, 'It is not sufficient, we must therefore retreat.' They were
both agreed as to the calling of a Council of war; and Gen. Mifflin
was to propose a retreat. But as he was to make that proposal, lest
his own character should suffer, he stipulated, that if a retreat
should be agreed upon, he would command the rear; and if an action the
van."

The fact that Mifflin was given the command of the rear on the
retreat, and the fact that he sent the order to Heath that morning to
send down all the boats from King's Bridge, lend the highest
probability to Gordon's version of the story. Parsons, who was one of
the members of the council, mentions this particularly as one of the
reasons for withdrawing, namely, that the enemy were "not disposed to
storm our lines, but set down to make regular approaches to us." Reed
also puts as much stress on this point as any other. Giving the
reasons for the retreat to Governor Livingston, he said: "The enemy at
the same time possessed themselves of a piece of ground very
advantageous and which they had [fortified]. We were therefore reduced
to the alternative of retiring to this place or going out with
[troops] to drive them off." Washington, too, is to be quoted. In his
letter to Trumbull, September 6th, he writes: "As the main body of the
enemy had encamped not far from our lines, and as I had reason to
believe they intended to force us from them by regular approaches,
which the nature of the ground favoured extremely, and at the same
time meant, by the ships of war, to cut off the communication between
the City and Island, and by that means keep our men divided and unable
to oppose them anywhere, by the advice of the General officers, on the
night of the 29th, I withdrew our troops from thence without any loss
of men and but little baggage."

William B. Reed's account (Reed's Life of Reed) is to the effect,
briefly, that a heavy fog settled over Long Island on the 29th, and
that during the day Colonel Reed, Colonel Grayson, and General Mifflin
rode to Red Hook inspecting the lines. While at the Hook, "a shift of
wind" cleared the fog from the harbor, enabling the officers to catch
a glimpse of the fleet at the Narrows. From certain movements of boats
they inferred that the ships would sail up with the favorable breeze
if it held until the tide turned and the fog cleared off. They
immediately hurried to Washington, informed him of the impending
danger, and induced him to call a council and order a retreat. Mr.
Bancroft, however, has shown very thoroughly that this account cannot
be accepted, because the fog did not come up until the morning of the
30th, and no change of wind occurred. Colonel Reed himself says in the
Livingston letter, written only the next morning, that the enemy's
fleet were attempting every day to get up to town with "the wind
_ahead_"--thus directly contradicting his biographer. The Reed account
has several errors of detail, one being the statement that the Red
Hook battery had been badly damaged by the guns of the Roebuck on the
27th. It would be nearer the truth to say that it was not hit at all.
The fleet could do nothing that day; as Admiral Howe reports, the
Roebuck was "the only ship that could fetch high enough to the
northward to exchange _a few random shot_ with the battery on Red
Hook."

In a word, Washington, after receiving Mifflin's report in regard to
the approaches of the enemy, and probably other reports from Grayson,
Reed, and others in regard to the general condition of the troops (for
instance, Colonel Shee's uneasiness, referred to by Graydon), found
that the moment had come for decision. That decision was to retreat
that night; and during the forenoon, several hours before the council
met, he issued secret orders for the concentration of boats at the
ferry, as described in the text.]

The first thing necessary was to provide all the transportation
available in order to accomplish the retreat in the shortest time
possible after beginning it. There were boats at the Brooklyn ferry
and across at New York, but these were too few for the purpose.
Accordingly, on the forenoon of the 29th, Washington sent an order
through Mifflin to General Heath at King's Bridge to the following
effect:

     LONG ISLAND, August 29th, 1776.

     DEAR GENERAL--We have many battalions from New Jersey which
     are coming over to relieve others here. You will please
     therefore to order every flat bottomed boat and other craft
     at your post, fit for transporting troops, down to New York
     as soon as possible. They must be manned by some of Colonel
     Hutchinson's men and sent without the least delay. I write
     by order of the General. I am Affectionately Yours

     MIFFLIN.

At about the same time, Colonel Trumbull, the commissary-general, was
directed to carry a verbal order to Assistant Quartermaster Hughes at
New York, "to impress every kind of water craft from Hell Gate on the
Sound to Spuyten Duyvil Creek that could be kept afloat and that had
either sails or oars, and have them all in the east harbor of the City
by dark."[165] These two orders were carried out with great energy,
promptness, and secrecy by all who had any part in their execution.
Heath "immediately complied" with what Mifflin had written, and sent
down all his boats under Hutchinson's men from Salem, who, like
Glover's from Marblehead, were, many of them, the best of sailors. He
brooked the less delay, perhaps, because he saw at once that
Washington's "real intention" was, not to be reinforced from New
Jersey, but to retreat from Long Island.[166] Hughes, on his part, was
untiring, and rendered the greatest service. He would have been
mistaken this day rather for the master of a military school, than for
what he had been--the master of a classical one. For twenty-two hours,
as his biographer tells us, he never dismounted from his horse, but
superintended the collection of the vessels from all points, and at
evening had them ready for their purpose.[167]

[Footnote 165: Memorial of Colonel Hugh Hughes. Leake's Life of
General Lamb.]

[Footnote 166: Heath's Memoirs.]

[Footnote 167: There is an interesting letter of Washington's
preserved in the Hughes Memorial, which adds light on this point.
Eight years after the event, when Hughes needed some official
certificate showing his authority to impress all the craft he could
find, the general replied to him as follows:

"My memory is not charged with the particulars of the verbal order
which you say was delivered to you through Col. Joseph Trumbull, on
the 27th, August, 1776, 'for impressing all the sloops, boats, and
water craft from Spyhten Duyvel, in the Hudson, to Hell Gate, in the
Sound.' I recollect that it was a day which required the utmost
exertion, particularly in the Quarter-Master's department, to
accomplish the retreat which was intended, under cover of the
succeeding night; and that no delay or ceremony could be admitted in
the execution of the plan. I have no doubt, therefore, of your having
received orders to the effect, and to the extent which you have
mentioned; and you are at liberty to adduce this in testimony thereof.
It will, I presume, supply the place of a more formal certificate, and
is more consonant with my recollection of the transactions of that
day." It appears from this that Washington remembered that the _entire
day_ of the 29th was devoted to planning and preparing for the
retreat, and this fits the theory advanced in the note on the "Origin
of the Retreat." As to the delivery of the orders about boats, it is
probable that Trumbull crossed to New York with Mifflin's letter to
Heath and gave it to Hughes to forward. At the same time he gave
Hughes his instructions verbally. Hughes received them, says his
biographer, about noon. He then had eight hours to carry them out,
which gave him time to send to Heath and for Heath to comply, while he
and his assistants scoured the coast everywhere else for boats, from
Hell Gate down. Among other sloops impressed was the Middlesex,
Captain Stephen Hogeboom, while on its way to Claverack. "I was
prevented from proceeding," says the captain, "by Coll Wardsworth and
Commissary Hughes who ordered your memorialist over with the sloop to
Long Island ferry where she was used to carry off the Troops and
stores after the unfortunate retreat, &c."--_N.Y. Hist. MS._, vol. i.,
p. 620.]

The final withdrawal of the troops from the lines was effected under
the cover of a plausible general order, which was the only one known
to have been issued by the commander-in-chief while on Long
Island.[168] This order now comes to light for the first time, and is
important as serving to correct the improbable though standard theory
that the regiments were moved from their posts under the impression
that they were to make a night attack upon the enemy.[169] The order
as actually given was far more rational, and less likely to excite
suspicion as to its true intent. In the first place, the sick, "being
an encumbrance to the army" were directed to be sent to the hospital,
their arms and accoutrements taken with them, and from there to be
conveyed across to New York and reported to Surgeon-General Morgan. In
the next place, the order announced that troops under General Mercer
were expected that afternoon from New Jersey, with whom it was
proposed to relieve a proportionate number of the regiments on Long
Island, and "make a change in the situation of them." In view of the
distressed condition of most of the troops at the lines, the propriety
of such a "change" was obvious; and in all probability Washington did
originally intend to make the relief. And last, as it was apparently
undecided what regiments were to be relieved, they were all, or the
greater part of them, directed "to parade with their arms,
accoutrements, and knapsacks, at 7 o'clock, at the head of their
encampments and there wait for orders." On the evening of the 29th,
accordingly, we find the troops ready at their camps and the lines to
march off at a moment's notice, and all prepared for a retreat by the
most natural arrangement that could have been devised to conceal the
real design.[170]

[Footnote 168: _Document_ 3. "General Orders. Head-Quarters Long
Island, Aug. 29, 1776. Parole, _Sullivan_, Countersign,
_Greene_."--_Col. Douglas' Order Book._]

[Footnote 169: All our principal accounts follow Graydon, who states
that the order to attack the enemy was given "regimentally." Colonel
Hand, in his letter describing the night's incidents (Reed's Life of
Reed), makes no allusion to such an order, but on the contrary states
that he and the other colonels of the covering party were told that
they were to retreat. An order to attack would have been a poor
disguise for a retreat, for every man must have felt its utter
rashness and at once suspected some other move.]

[Footnote 170: A letter from Tilghman, Washington's aid, shows that
the troops received the impression that they were to be relieved. The
retreat, he says, "was conducted with so much Secrecy that neither
Subalterns or privates knew that the whole army was to cross back
again to N. York; they thought only a few regiments were to go
back."--_Document_ 29.]

At dark, the withdrawal began. As one regiment moved away towards the
ferry another would have its situation "changed" to fill the gap, or
extended from right to left. Every move at first was conducted busily,
yet quietly and without confusion. Colonel Little, referring to his
part this night, leaves the simple record that the general ordered
each regiment to be paraded on their own parades at seven o'clock
P.M., and wait for orders. "We received orders," he says, "to strike
our tents and march, with our baggage, to New York." Colonel Douglas
writes: "I received orders to call in my guard _all_, and march
immediately with the utmost silence." Hitchcock's Rhode Islanders
carried their baggage and camp equipage to the boats on their
shoulders "through mud and mire and not a ray of light visible." The
embarkation was made from the ferry--the present Fulton Ferry--where
General McDougall superintended the movements. Between seven and eight
o'clock the boats were manned by Glover's and Hutchinson's men, and
they went to work with sailor-like cheer and despatch. The militia and
levies were the first to cross, though there was some vexing delay in
getting them off. Unluckily, too, about nine o'clock the adverse wind
and tide and pouring rain began to make the navigation of the river
difficult. A north-easter sprang up, and Glover's men could do nothing
with the sloops and sail-boats. If the row-boats only were to be
depended upon, all the troops could not be ferried over before
morning. Discouraged at the prospect, McDougall sent Colonel Grayson,
of Washington's staff, to inform the general as to how matters stood,
but unable to find him Grayson returned, and McDougall went on with
the embarkation in spite of its difficulties. Most fortunately,
however, at eleven o'clock there was another and a favorable change in
the weather. The north-east wind died away, and soon after a gentle
breeze set in from the south-west, of which the sailors took quick
advantage, and the passage was now "direct, easy, and expeditious."
The troops were pushed across as fast as possible in every variety of
craft--row-boats, flat-boats, whale-boats, pettiaugers, sloops, and
sail-boats--some of which were loaded to within three inches of the
water, which was "as smooth as glass."

[Illustration: [signature: J.W. Glover]

COLONEL FOURTEENTH REGIMENT OF FOOT (MASS.) BRIGADIER GENERAL 1777.

Steel Engr. F. von Egloffstein N.Y.]

Meanwhile nearly a fatal blunder occurred at the lines. Early in the
evening, a force had been selected, consisting of Hand's, Smallwood's,
Haslet's, Shee's, Magaw's, and Chester's regiments, to remain at the
works to the last and cover the retreat. General Mifflin commanded the
party. Smallwood's men were stationed in Fort Putnam, part of Hand's
under Captain Miller in the redoubt on the left, and the rest at the
lines on the right of the main road; and the other regiments near
them. Brooklyn Church was to be the alarm-post, where the covering
party was to concentrate in case the enemy attacked during the night.
About two o'clock in the morning, Major Scammell, one of Sullivan's
aids now serving with Washington, mistook his orders and started
Mifflin's entire command for the ferry. All the regiments had left the
lines and were marching down the main road, when Washington, who
seemed to be everywhere during the night, met them and exclaimed in
astonishment that unless the lines were immediately re-manned "the
most disagreeable consequences" might follow, as every thing then
was in confusion at the ferry. Mifflin's party promptly faced about
and reoccupied their stations until dawn, when Providence again
"interposed in favor of the retreating army." To have attempted to
withdraw in clear daylight would have been a hazardous experiment for
these regiments, but just before dawn a heavy fog began to settle over
Long Island, and the covering party was safe. So dense was this
"heavenly messenger," as Gordon happily describes it, that it
effectually hid the American lines from the British pickets. When the
final order, therefore, came about sunrise for Mifflin's men to retire
to the ferry, they were enabled to do so under cover of the fog
without exciting any suspicion of their movements in the enemy's
camp.[171] "We kept up fires, with outposts stationed," says
Lieutenant-Colonel Chambers, "until all the rest were over. We left
the lines after it was fair day and then came off." As our soldiers
withdrew they distinctly heard the sound of pickaxe and shovel at the
British works.[172] Before seven o'clock the entire force had crossed
to New York, and among the last to leave was the commander-in-chief.
"General Washington," adds Chambers, "saw the last over himself."

[Footnote 171: Mr. Reed, the biographer, states that the fog rose on
the 29th. Dr. Stiles, in his "History of Brooklyn," says: "At midnight
a dense fog arose, which remained motionless and impenetrable over the
island during the whole of the next day [the 29th]." "A dense fog,"
writes Mr. Field, "hung over the island and river, when the morning of
the 29th dawned." Now nothing is more certain than that the fog did
not rise until shortly before dawn of the 30th, full six hours after
the retreat had begun. The 28th and 29th, as already seen, were days
of rain-storms, not mist, nor fog, but storm, "torrents," such rain at
times the like of which could "hardly be remembered." Contemporary
writers who mention the rains say nothing of fog on the 29th, whereas
they do notice its appearance the next morning. Major Tallmadge
writes: "As the dawn of the next day approached, those of us who
remained in the trenches became very anxious for our own safety, and
when the dawn appeared, there were several regiments still on duty. At
this time a very dense fog began to rise, and it seemed to settle in a
peculiar manner over both encampments. I recollect this peculiar
providential occurrence perfectly well; and so very dense was the
atmosphere that I could scarcely discern a man at six yards'
distance." This officer's regiment was one of the covering party, and
he adds that after leaving the lines by mistake, and receiving orders
to return, "Col. Chester immediately faced to the right about and
returned, where we tarried until the sun had risen, but the fog
remained as dense as ever." "At sunrise a great fog came up," says a
spectator (_Stiles' MS. Diary_). An officer or soldier of either
Shee's or Magaw's regiment, also of the covering party, wrote a few
hours after crossing: "We received orders to quit our station about
two o'clock this morning, and had made our retreat almost to the ferry
when Gen. Washington ordered us back to that part of the lines we were
first at, which was reckoned to be the most dangerous post. We got
back undiscovered by the enemy, and continued there until daylight.
Providentially for us, a great fog arose, which prevented the enemy
from seeing our retreat from their works which was not more than
musket shot from us."--_Force_, 5th Series, vol. i., p. 1233. So also,
Stedman, the British historian, referring to the events of the night
of the 29th-30th, says: "Another remarkable circumstance was, that on
Long Island hung a thick fog, which prevented the British troops from
discovering the operations of the enemy." Washington did not, as often
stated in popular accounts, take advantage of a fog to cover his
retreat. More than half the army was over before the fog appeared; but
it protected the covering party, and saved us the loss of considerable
baggage and other material.]

[Footnote 172: An English patrol under Captain Montressor discovered
the retreat of the Americans very soon after the latter left the
lines, and reported the fact at once. But for some unexplained reason
pursuit was delayed until too late. One boat with four stragglers was
taken by the enemy.]

By the army the retreat was welcomed as a great relief, a salvation
from probable calamity. Not a few appreciated its completeness and
success as a strictly military move. "This evacuation," writes one,
"is a masterpiece." "That grand retreat from the Island which will
ever reflect honour to our Generals," says another. "Considering the
difficulties," is Greene's criticism, "it was the best effected
retreat I ever read or heard of." "It was executed," says Scott, "with
unexpected success." But in the country at large it was generally
associated with the defeat of the 27th, and the skilfulness with which
it was conducted little compensated for the fact that the retreat was
forced upon us.




CHAPTER VI.

LOSS OF NEW YORK--KIP'S BAY AFFAIR--BATTLE OF HARLEM HEIGHTS.


Long Island surrendered, could New York be held? Columbia Heights,
where Fort Stirling stood, had been regarded by Lee as the "capital
point," the key of the position. Greene called the Brooklyn front "the
pass," on the possession of which depended the security of the city.
Both pass and heights were now in the enemy's hands, and New York was
at their mercy. "We are in hourly expectation," wrote Commissary
Trumbull, September 1st, "that the town will be bombarded." Lieutenant
Jasper Ewing, of Hand's riflemen, saw that the British could reduce
the place to "a heap of ashes" in a day's time. Colonel Douglas looked
for an immediate cannonade from Fort Stirling, "which," he says, "I
have the mortification to think I helped build myself." But the enemy
kept their guns quiet, as they wished neither to injure the city nor
drive our army away. They contented themselves at first with
stretching their troops along the water front from Red Hook to Hell
Gate, Newtown, and Flushing on Long Island, and threatening to land at
any point on Manhattan Island from the Battery to Harlem, or beyond on
the Westchester shore.

As for Washington, the successful retreat had not in the least
relieved him from care or anxiety. He had escaped one trap: it was of
the utmost consequence now to see that he did not fall into another.
What he feared most was a sudden move upon his rear in Westchester
County, for in that case he would be hopelessly hemmed in on Manhattan
Island. "The enemy," continued Trumbull on the 1st, "are drawing their
men to the eastward on Long Island, as if they intended to throw a
strong party over on this island, near Hell Gate, so as to get on the
back of the city. We are preparing to meet them." Haslet wrote August
31st: "I expect every moment orders to march off to Kingsbridge to
prevent the enemy crossing the East River and confining us on another
nook.... If they can coop us up in N. York by intrenching from river
to river, horrid will be the consequences from their command of the
rivers." General Heath pressed the matter of watching the Westchester
coast, and Washington, concurring with him "as to the probability of
the enemy's endeavoring to land their forces at Hunt's Point," above
Hell Gate, wrote him on the 31st: "In order to prevent such an attempt
from being carried into execution I have sent up General Mifflin with
the troops he brought from your quarters, strengthened by
reinforcements. With this assistance I hope you will be able to defeat
their intentions. I beg you will exert yourself to the utmost of your
abilities on this momentous occasion." Several days passing without
any demonstration by the enemy, Washington's suspense was only
protracted, and on September 5th he wrote again to Heath as follows:

     "As everything in a manner depends upon obtaining
     intelligence of the enemy's motions, I do most earnestly
     entreat you and General Clinton to exert yourselves to
     accomplish this most desirable end. Leave no stone
     unturned, nor do not stick at expense to bring this to pass,
     as I never was more uneasy than on account of my want of
     knowledge on this score.

     "Keep, besides this precaution, constant lookouts (with good
     glasses) on some commanding heights that look well on to the
     other shore (and especially into the bays, where boats can
     be concealed), that they may observe, more particularly in
     the evening, if there be any uncommon movements. Much will
     depend upon early intelligence, and meeting the enemy before
     they can intrench. I should much approve of small harassing
     parties, stealing, as it were, over in the night, as they
     might keep the enemy alarmed, and more than probably bring
     off a prisoner, from whom some valuable intelligence may be
     obtained."[173]

[Footnote 173: "The Heath Correspondence," Mass. Hist. Soc. Coll.,
1878.]

To add to his burdens, the commander-in-chief found the condition of
his army growing worse instead of improving. The experiences on Long
Island had disheartened many of the troops, and their escape had not
revived their spirits.[174] The militia became impatient and went home
in groups and whole companies, and indeed in such numbers as to
materially diminish the strength of the army. To restore order and
confidence, Washington exerted himself to the utmost. Tilghman, one of
his aids, speaks of "the vast hurry of business" in which the general
was engaged at this time. "He is obliged," he writes, "to see into,
and in a manner fill every department, which is too much for one man."
To Rodney, Haslet wrote: "I fear Genl Washington has too heavy a
task, assisted mostly by beardless boys."[175] But fortunately for the
country the general's shoulders were broad enough for these great
duties, and his faith and resolution remained unshaken.

[Footnote 174: Pastor Shewkirk notes in his diary that immediately
after the retreat "a general damp" seemed to spread over the army.
"The merry tones on drums and fifes had ceased, and they were hardly
heard for a couple of days." The wet clothes, accoutrements, and tents
were lying about in front of the houses and in the streets, and every
thing was in confusion. But this was to be expected. General Scott,
referring evidently to expressions heard among his own men, says that
some declared that they had been "sold out," and others longed to have
Lee back from the South.--_Scott's MS. Letter_, September 6th, 1776.]

[Footnote 175: Washington's aids were most of them quite young men.]

As soon as possible the army was reorganized and stationed to meet the
new phase of the situation. Several changes were made in the brigades,
and the whole divided into three grand divisions, under Putnam,
Spencer, and Heath. Putnam's, consisting of five brigades, remained in
the city and guarded the East River above as far as Fifteenth Street;
Spencer's, of six brigades, took up the line from that point to Horn's
Hook and Harlem; and Heath with two brigades watched King's Bridge and
the Westchester shore. Greene had not sufficiently recovered from his
illness, and his old troops, under Nixon and Heard, were temporarily
doing duty with Spencer's command.[176] This disposition was effected
by the 2d of September, and by it our army again occupied an extended
line, endeavoring to protect every point on the east side from the
battery to King's Bridge, or the entire length of the island, a
distance of fourteen and a half miles.

[Footnote 176: A large number of changes were made in the organization
of the army after the retreat. The Connecticut militia were divided up
and formed into brigades with the levies under General Wadsworth,
Colonel Silliman, Colonel Douglas, and Colonel Chester. A brigade was
given also to Colonel Sargent, of Massachusetts. Putnam's division
included Parsons', Scott's, James Clinton's (Glover's), Fellows', and
Silliman's brigades; Spencer's and Greene's divisions included
Nixon's, Heard's, McDougall's, Wadsworth's, Douglas', Chester's and
Sargent's brigades; while Heath had his former brigades, with a change
of some regiments, under Mifflin and George Clinton.]

The question of abandoning New York and all that part of the island
below Harlem Heights was, meanwhile, under consideration. The city
would obviously be untenable under a bombardment, and the island
equally so if the British crossed into Westchester County. Yet
Washington, strangely, we may say, expressed the conviction that he
could hold both provided his troops could be depended upon.[177] Among
his generals, Greene earnestly opposed any such attempt, and advocated
the evacuation and destruction of the place. "The City and Island of
New York," he wrote to his chief, September 5th, "are no objects for
us; we are not to bring them into competition with the general
interests of America.... The sacrifice of the vast property of New
York and the suburbs, I hope has no influence on your Excellency's
measures. Remember the King of France. When Charles the Fifth, Emperor
of Germany, invaded his Kingdom, he laid whole Provinces waste; and by
that policy he starved and ruined Charles's army, and defeated him
without fighting a battle. Two-thirds of the property of the City of
New York and the suburbs belong to the tories. We have no very great
reason to run any considerable risk for its defence.... I would give
it as my opinion that a general and speedy retreat is absolutely
necessary, and that the honour and interest of America require it. I
would burn the city." John Jay before this also proposed its
destruction. Scott urged abandonment of the place for sound military
reasons, though the move would ruin him. Washington, however, on the
2d, presented the whole question to Congress. Also convinced by the
condition of the army, that the city must be evacuated, he asked, "If
we should be obliged to abandon the town, ought it to stand as winter
quarters for the enemy?" Congress voted, in reply, that "it should in
no event be damaged, for they had no doubt of being able to recover
it, even though the enemy should obtain possession of it for a time."
On the 7th, a council of war, inferring that Congress wished the place
to be held, decided to retain five thousand troops in the city and
concentrate the rest around and above Harlem; but on the 12th the
matter was reconsidered, and a second council voted to evacuate the
city and retire to Harlem Heights. The removal of stores and the sick
had already commenced; and on the 14th, when the enemy appeared to be
on the point of crossing from Montressor's, now Randall's, Island to
the mainland, all the teams and wagons that could be found were
impressed by the quartermasters to remove the remaining stores. In one
day more the removal would have been complete and the troops all
withdrawn to the heights. In the evening of the 14th Washington left
the city, and established his headquarters at the Morris Mansion, at
One Hundred and Sixty-first Street, overlooking Harlem River and the
plains.[178]

[Footnote 177: "Till of late I had no doubt in my own mind of
defending this place, nor should I have yet, if the men would do their
duty, but this I despair of. It is painful, and extremely grating to
me, to give such unfavorable accounts; but it would be criminal to
conceal the truth at so critical a juncture."--_Washington to
Congress_, September 2d, 1776.]

[Footnote 178: Colonel Reed, the adjutant-general, wrote to his wife,
September 14th, from New York: "My baggage is all at King's bridge. We
expect to remove thither this evening. I mean our headquarters."--_Reed's
Reed._ Washington, writing of the events of the 15th, says: "I had
gone the night before to the main body of the army which was posted on
the plains and heights of Harlem." These references fail to confirm
the common statement that Washington made the Murray House on
Thirty-sixth Street his quarters for a short time after leaving the
city.]



The enemy made no advance from Long Island until more than two weeks
after the battle. Howe's preparations were delayed because dependent
upon the co-operation of the fleet. On the night of the 3d of
September, the frigate Rose, of thirty-two guns, sailed up the East
River convoying thirty boats, and running through the fire of our guns
at the Grand Battery, the ship-yards, and Corlears Hook, anchored
close into Wallabout Bay, where on the 5th our artillerists "briskly
cannonaded" her. After dark on the 12th, thirty-six additional boats
passed our batteries to Bushwick Creek, and the night after forty more
followed. Then towards sunset on the 14th, the frigates Roebuck,
Phoenix, Orpheus, and Carysfort, with six transports, joined the
Rose without receiving material injury from the heavy fire poured upon
them by our gunners.

On the following morning, the 15th, the British moved against
Manhattan Island, and in the afternoon New York City fell into their
possession. What occurred beforehand during the day is known as the
"Kip's Bay affair."[179]

[Footnote 179: According to the Hessian major, Baurmeister, the 13th
had been first named as the date for the attack. "On this day," he
writes, "General Howe wished to land upon the island of New York,
because 18 years ago on this day General Wulff [Wolfe] had conquered
at Quebec, but also lost his life. The watchword for this end was
'Quebec' and the countersign 'Wulff,' but the frigates were too late
for this attack as they only sailed out of the fleet at five o'clock
on the evening of the 14th."

The sailing up of these ships is described as follows by the Hon.
Joshua Babcock, one of the Rhode Island Committee who had come down to
consult with Washington in regard to military matters: "Just after
Dinner 3 Frigates and a 40 Gun Ship (as if they meant to attack the
city) sail'd up the East River under a gentle Breeze towards
Hell-Gate, & kept up an incessant Fire assisted with the Cannon at
Governrs Island: The Batteries from the City return'd the Ships the
like Salutation: 3 Men agape, idle Spectators had the misfortune of
being killed by one Cannon-Ball, the other mischief suffered on our
Side was inconsiderable Saving the making a few Holes in some of the
Buildings; one shot struck within 6 Foot of Genl Washington, as He
was on Horseback riding into the Fort."--_MS. Letter in R.I. Public
Archives._ Also in _Force_.

Baurmeister preserves the incident that Washington was often to be
seen at the East River batteries in New York, and on one occasion
"provoked the Hessian artillery Captain Krug [on the Long Island side]
to fire off 2 Cannon at him and his suite." "A third shot too would
not have been wanting, if the horses of the enemy had been pleased to
stay," adds the major.]

Kip's Bay was the large cove which then set in from the East River at
about the foot of Thirty-fourth Street. It took its name from the old
Kip family, who owned the adjacent estate. From this point breastworks
had been thrown up along the river's bank, wherever a landing could be
made, down as far as Corlears Hook or Grand Street. Five brigades had
been distributed at this front to watch the enemy. Silliman's was in
the city; at Corlears Hook was Parsons' brigade, to which Prescott's
Massachusetts men had now been added; beyond, in the vicinity of
Fifteenth Street, on the Stuyvesant estate, Scott's New York brigade
took post; above him, at about Twenty-third Street, was Wadsworth's
command, consisting of Sage's, Selden's, and Gay's Connecticut levies;
and further along near Kip's Bay was Colonel Douglas, with his brigade
of three Connecticut militia regiments under Cooke, Pettibone, and
Talcott, and his own battalion of levies.[180] Up the river a chain of
sentinels communicated with the troops at Horn's Hook, and every half
hour they passed the watchword to each other, "All is well."

[Footnote 180: We know the position of the troops from the statements
of their officers. Douglas says: "I lay with my brigade a little below
Turtle [Kips] Bay where we hove up lines for more than one mile in
length. Gen'l Wadsworth managed the lines on the right and I on the
left." Brigade-Major Fish says of Scott's brigade that they were
"marched to the lines back of Stuyvesant's," about the foot of
Fifteenth Street. Parsons was below at Corlears Hook as appears from
_Document_ 32. Silliman himself says that he was in the city. Consult
map of New York, Part II., where the position at the time of the
British attack is given.]

Very early on the morning of the 15th, which was Sunday, the five
British frigates which had anchored under the Long Island shore sailed
up and took position close within musket-shot of our lines at Kip's
Bay, somewhat to the left of Douglas. This officer immediately moved
his brigade abreast of them. The ships were so near, says Martin, one
of Douglas' soldiers, that he could distinctly read the name of the
Phoenix, which was lying "a little quartering." Meanwhile, on the
opposite shore, in Newtown Creek, the British embarked their light
infantry and reserves, and Donop's grenadiers and yagers, all under
Clinton and Cornwallis, in eighty-four boats, and drew up in regular
order on the water ready to cross to the New York side.[181] The
soldier just quoted remembered that they looked like "a large clover
field in full bloom." All along the line our soldiers were watching
these movements with anxious curiosity--that night they would have
been withdrawn from the position--when suddenly between ten and eleven
o'clock the five frigates opened a sweeping fire from their seventy or
eighty guns upon the breastworks where Douglas and his brigade were
drawn up. It came like "a peal of thunder," and the militiamen could
do nothing but keep well under cover. The enemy fired at them at their
pleasure, from "their tops and everywhere," until our men soon found
it impossible to stay in that position. "We kept the lines," says
Martin, "till they were almost levelled upon us, when our officers,
seeing we could make no resistance, and no orders coming from any
superior officer, and that we must soon be entirely exposed to the
rake of the guns, gave the order to leave." At the same time the
flotilla crossed the river, and getting under cover of the smoke of
the ships' guns, struck off to the left of Douglas, where the troops
effected a landing without difficulty. Howe says: "The fire of the
shipping being so well directed and so incessant, the enemy could not
remain in their works, and the descent was made without the least
opposition." The ordeal the militia were subjected to was something
which in similar circumstances veteran troops have been unable to
withstand.[182] Retreating from the lines, Douglas's men scattered to
the rear towards the Post Road, and the enemy who landed and formed
rapidly were soon after them. Douglas himself, who was an excellent
officer, was the last to leave, and all but escaped capture.[183]
There was no collecting the brigade, however, in any new position in
the field, for the thought of being intercepted had created a panic
among the militia, and they fled in confusion.

[Footnote 181: "The first landing was of 84 boats with English
infantry and Hessian grenadiers under command of Lieut-General
Clinton. Commodore Hotham conducted this landing, under cover of 5
frigates anchored close before Kaaps [Kip's] Bay above Cron Point, and
maintained a 3 hours cannonade on the enemy's advanced posts in the
great wood. The signal of the red flag denoted the departure of the
boats, the blue on the contrary the stoppage of the passage, and if a
retreat should become necessary, a yellow flag would be
shown."--_Baurmeister._ "Sunday morning at break of day, five ships
weighed anchor and fell in close within a musket shot of our lines
quite to the left of me. I then moved my brigade abreast of them. They
lay very quiet until 10 o'clock and by that time they had about 80 of
their boats from under Long Island shore full with men which contained
about five or six thousand and four transports full ready to come in
the second boats."--_Col. Douglas._

Major Fish wrote September 19th that the enemy's ships of war were
drawn up "in line of Battle parallel to the shore, the Troops to the
amount of about 4000 being embarked in flat bottom Boats, and the
Boats paraded."--_Hist. Mag._]

[Footnote 182: All accounts agree that it was next to impossible to
remain under the fire of the men-of-war. Major Fish says that "a
Cannonade from the ships began, which far exceeded my Ideas, and which
seemed to infuse a Panic thro' the whole of our Troops, &c." Silliman
speaks of the "incessant fire on our lines" with grapeshot as being
"so hot" that the militia were compelled to retreat. Douglas's
description is as quaint as it is expressive: "They very suddenly
began as heavy a cannonade perhaps as ever was from no more ships, as
they had nothing to molest them." Martin thought his head would "go
with the sound." Lieutenant John Heinrichs, of the Hessian yagers,
writes: "Last Sunday we landed under the thundering rattle of 5
men-of-war."]

[Footnote 183: The enemy's boats, says Douglas, "got under cover of
the smoke of the shipping and then struck to the left of my lines in
order to cut me off from a retreat. My left wing gave way which was
formed of the militia. I lay myself on the right wing waiting for the
boats until Capt. Prentice came to me and told me, if I meant to save
myself to leave the lines, for that was the orders on the left and
that they had left the lines. I then told my men to make the best of
their way as I found I had but about ten left with me. They soon moved
out and I then made the best of my way out."--See further in
_Documents_, Part II., p. 71.]

When the cannonade at Kip's Bay began, Washington was four miles
distant, at Harlem. At the first sound of the guns he mounted his
horse and rode with all possible despatch to the scene. At about the
same time, General Parsons, probably by Putnam's order, directed
Prescott's, Tyler's, and the remnant of Huntington's regiment, not
over eighty strong, to march immediately to the assistance of the
troops where the enemy were landing.[184] Fellows' brigade was also
ordered along for the same purpose.

[Footnote 184: _Document_ 32.]

At about the corner of the present Thirty-sixth Street and Fourth
Avenue stood at that time the residence of Robert Murray, the Quaker
merchant, on what was known as "Inclenberg" heights, now Murray Hill.
His grounds extended to the Post Road, which there ran along the line
of Lexington Avenue. Just above him a cross-road connected the Post
and Bloomingdale roads, which is represented to-day by the line of
Forty-second and Forty-third streets. On the south side of the
cross-road where it intersected the Post Road was a large corn-field
adjoining or belonging to Murray's estate. When Washington reached
this vicinity he found the militia retreating in disorder along both
the cross and the Post roads, and Fellows' brigade just coming on to
the field. The general, with Putnam and others, was then on the rising
ground in the vicinity of the present Forty-second Street reservoir.
In a very short time Parsons and his regiments arrived by the
Bloomingdale Road, and Washington in person directed them to form
along the line of the Post Road in front of the enemy, who were
rapidly advancing from Kip's Bay. "Take the walls!" "Take the
corn-field!" he shouted; and Parsons' men quickly ran to the walls and
the field, but in a confused and disordered manner. Their general did
his best to get them into line on the ground, but found it impossible,
they were so dispersed, and, moreover, they were now beginning to
retreat. The panic which had seized the Connecticut militia was
communicated to Fellows' Massachusetts men, who were also militia; and
now it was to sweep up Parsons' Continentals, including Prescott's men
of Bunker Hill. The latter brigade had been brought on to the ground
in bad shape through the fugitive militiamen, and when the British
light infantry appeared they broke and retreated with the rest.

To Washington all this confusion and rout seemed wholly unnecessary
and unreasonable, and dashing in among the flying crowds he endeavored
to convince them that there was no danger, and used his utmost
exertions to bring them into some order. He was roused to more than
indignation at the sight, and in his letter to Congress on the
following day denounced the conduct of these troops as "disgraceful
and dastardly."[185] Putnam, Parsons, Fellows, and others were
equally active in attempting to stop the flight, but it was to no
purpose. "The very demons of fear and disorder," says Martin, "seemed
to take full possession of all and everything on that day." Nothing
remained but to continue the retreat by the Bloomingdale Road to
Harlem Heights.

[Footnote 185: Washington's account of the panic is as follows:

"As soon as I heard the firing, I rode with all possible despatch
towards the place of landing, where to my great surprise and
mortification I found the troops that had been posted in the lines
retreating with the utmost precipitation and those ordered to support
them (Parsons' and Fellows' brigades) flying in every direction, and
in the greatest confusion, notwithstanding the exertions of their
generals to form them. I used every means in my power to rally and to
get them into some order; but my attempts were fruitless and
ineffectual; and on the appearance of a small party of the enemy, not
more than sixty or seventy, their disorder increased, and they ran
away in the greatest confusion, without firing a single shot."

There were several stories current after the affair which cannot be
traced to any responsible source. One was that the Commander-in-Chief
was so "distressed and enraged" at the conduct of the troops that "he
drew his sword and snapped his pistols to check them;" and that one of
his suite was obliged to seize his horse's reins and take him out of
danger from the enemy. Another account represents that he threw his
hat on the ground and exclaimed whether such were the troops with
which he was to defend America; another states that he sought "death
rather than life." Mr. Bancroft has shown how far these statements are
to be accepted.]

During these scenes, Wadsworth's and Scott's brigades, which were
below Douglas on the river lines, saw that their only safety lay,
also, in immediate retreat, and falling back, they joined the other
brigades above, though not without suffering some loss. The parties
now in the greatest danger were Silliman's brigade and Knox with
detachments of the artillery, who were still in the city three miles
below. When Putnam, to whose division they belonged, found that no
stand could be made at Kip's Bay or Murray's Hill, he galloped down
through Wadsworth's and Scott's retreating troops, to extricate
Silliman and the others.[186] Not a moment's time was to be lost, for
should the British stretch out their troops west of the Bloomingdale
Road to the North River, escape would be impossible. Silliman,
meanwhile, had taken post with Knox in and to the right of Bayard's
Hill Fort, from the top of which they could see the enemy occupying
the island above them. At this juncture, Major Aaron Burr, Putnam's
aid, rode up to the fort with orders to retreat. He was told that
retreat was out of the question. Knox said that he should defend the
fort to the last. But Burr, who knew the ground thoroughly, declared
that he could pilot them safely to the upper end of the island, and
Silliman's men set out for the attempt.[187] Putnam also had called in
other guards, and the entire force then took to the woods above
Greenwich, on the west side, and keeping under cover wherever it was
possible, made their way along without opposition. But it proved to be
a most trying and hazardous march. The day was "insupportably hot;"
more than one soldier died at the spring or brook where he drank; any
moment the enemy, who at some points were not half a mile away, might
be upon them. Officers rode in advance and to the right to reconnoitre
and see that the way was clear. Putnam, Silliman, Burr, and others
were conspicuous in their exertions. Silliman was "sometimes in the
front, sometimes in the centre, and sometimes in the rear." The men
extended along in the woods for two miles, and the greatest
precautions were necessary to keep them out of sight of the main
road.[188] Putnam encouraged them continually by flying on his horse,
covered with foam, wherever his presence was most necessary. "Without
his extraordinary exertions," says Colonel Humphreys, who frequently
saw Putnam that day, "the guards must have been inevitably lost, and
it is probable the entire corps would have been cut in pieces." Much,
too, of the success of the march was due to Burr's skill and
knowledge. Near Bloomingdale, the command fell in with a party of the
British, when Silliman formed three hundred of his men and beat them
off. After making a winding march of at least "twelve miles," these
greatly distressed troops finally reached Harlem Heights after dark,
to the surprise and relief of the other brigades, who had given them
up for lost.

[Footnote 186: Hezekiah Munsell, a soldier of Gay's regiment in
Wadsworth's brigade, says: "We soon reached the main road which our
troops were travelling, and the first conspicuous person I met was
Gen. Putnam. He was making his way towards New York when all were
going from it. Where he was going I could not conjecture, though I
afterwards learned he was going after a small garrison of men in a
crescent fortification which he brought off safe."--_Hist. of Ancient
Windsor_, p. 715.]

[Footnote 187: Affidavits in Davis' "Life of Burr," vol. i.]

[Footnote 188: The line of Putnam's retreat appears to have been from
Bayard's Hill Fort on Grand Street across the country to Monument Lane
(now Greenwich Avenue), which led to the obelisk erected in honor of
General Wolf and others at a point on Fifteenth Street, a little west
of Eighth Avenue. (See Montressor's Map of New York in 1775,
"Valentine's Manual.") The lane there joined with an irregular road
running on the line of Eighth Avenue, known afterwards as the Abington
or Fitz Roy road, as far as Forty-second or Third Street. There
Putnam, under Burr's guidance probably, pushed through the woods,
keeping west of the Bloomingdale Road, and finally taking the latter
at some point above Seventieth Street, and so on to Harlem Heights.
(See Map of New York, Part II.)]

Although skilfully conducted, this escape is to be referred, in
reality, to Howe's supineness and the hospitality of Mrs. Robert
Murray, at whose house the British generals stopped for rest and
refreshment after driving back our troops. Instead of continuing a
vigorous pursuit or making any effort to intercept other parties, they
spent a valuable interval at the board of their entertaining hostess,
whose American sympathies added flavor and piquancy to the
conversation. "Mrs. Murray," says Dr. Thacher in his military journal,
"treated them with cake and wine, and they were induced to tarry two
hours or more, Governor Tryon frequently joking her about her American
friends. By this happy incident, General Putnam, by continuing his
march, escaped a rencounter with a greatly superior force, which must
have proved fatal to his whole party. Ten minutes, it is said, would
have been sufficient for the enemy to have secured the road at the
turn and entirely cut off General Putnam's retreat. It has since
become almost a common saying among our officers, that Mrs. Murray
saved this part of the American army."



Of the Kip's Bay affair there is but one criticism to be made--it was
an ungovernable panic. Beginning with a retreat from the water-line,
it grew into a fright and a run for safer ground. Panics are often
inexplicable. The best troops as well as the poorest have been known
to fly from the merest shadow of danger. In this case, so far as the
_beginning_ of the rout is concerned, probably the militiamen did no
worse than Washington's best men would have done. A retreat from the
ship's fire could not have been avoided, though, with better troops,
the subsequent rout could have been checked and the enemy retarded.

The incident was especially unfortunate at that time, as it served to
increase existing jealousies between the troops from the different
States, and so far impair the morale of the army. It excites a smile
to-day to read that men from New York, Pennsylvania, and Maryland
charged New Englanders generally with provincialism and cowardice, and
that the charge was resented; but such was the fact. The feeling
between them grew to such an extent that Washington was obliged to
issue orders condemning its indulgence. The Kip's Bay panic offered a
favorable opportunity for emphasizing these charges, and the
Connecticut and Massachusetts runaways came in for their full share of
uncomplimentary epithets. The Connecticut men were remembered
particularly, "dastards" and "cowards" being the terms which greeted
their ears. All this of course could not but be ruinous to the
discipline of the army, and it was an alarming fact to be dealt
with.[189] The men south of New England were not without reason in
making their harsh criticisms, for many of the New England regiments,
the militia in particular, came upon the ground with an inferior
military organization. They were miserably officered in many cases,
and the men, never expecting to become soldiers as such, were
indifferent to discipline. But in another view the criticisms were
unfair, because the Pennsylvanians and others, in making comparisons,
compared their best troops with New England's poorest. As two thirds
of the army were from New England--more than one third from
Connecticut--men from this section were necessarily represented
largely in every duty or piece of fighting, and whenever any
misconduct of a few occurred, it was made to reflect discredit upon
the whole. There was no difference between the better drilled and
officered regiments from the several States, just as there was little
difference between their hastily gathered militia. Thus it may be
mentioned as a notable and somewhat humorous coincidence that at the
very moment the Connecticut militia were flying from the bombardment
of the ships at Kip's Bay, New Jersey and Pennsylvania militia were
flying with equal haste from the bombardment of other ships at Powle's
Hook as they sailed up the North River to Bloomingdale on the same
morning; and that while Reed, Tilghman, Smallwood, and others, were
denouncing the Kip's Bay fugitives in unmeasured terms, the indignant
Mercer was likewise denouncing the "scandalous" behavior of the
fugitives in his own command.[190]

[Footnote 189: This jealousy disappeared when the army was reorganized
and the troops became proficient in discipline. The American soldier
was then found to be equal to any that could be brought against him,
regardless of the locality from which he hailed. But in the present
campaign the sectional feeling referred to came near working mischief,
especially as it was kept alive by so prominent an officer as Colonel
Reed, the Adjutant-general. New England officers protested against the
"rancor" and "malice" of his assertions, and represented their
injurious influence to members of Congress. Washington, finding that
the matter was becoming serious, took the occasion to send a special
invitation to Colonels Silliman and Douglas to dine with him in the
latter part of September, when he "disavowed and absolutely
disapproved every such piece of conduct" which had been a grievance to
these and other Eastern officers.--_Silliman's MS. Letter._ See also
extracts in Gordon's history as to the condition of the army at this
time.]

[Footnote 190: "The militia of Pennsylvania and New Jersey, stationed
on Bergen and at Paulus-Hook, have behaved in a scandalous manner,
running off from their posts on the first cannonade from the ships of
the enemy. At all the posts we find it difficult to keep the militia
to their duty." (_Mercer to Washington_, Sept. 17th, 1776.) "I don't
know whether the New Engd troops will stand there [at Harlem
Heights], but I am sure they will not upon open ground,"
etc.--_Tilghman._ _Document_ 29.]

The events of the 15th naturally and justly roused the wrath of both
Washington and Mercer, and their denunciations become a part of the
record of the time. But in recording them it belongs to those who
write a century later to explain and qualify. Justice to the men who
figured in these scenes requires that the terms of reproach should not
be perpetuated as a final stigma upon their character as soldiers of
the Revolution. All military experience proves that troops who have
once given way in a panic are not therefore or necessarily poor
troops; and the experience at Kip's Bay and Powle's Hook was only an
illustration in the proof. These men had their revenge. If the records
of New Jersey and Pennsylvania were to be thoroughly examined, they
would doubtless show that large numbers of Mercer's militia re-entered
the service and acquitted themselves well. This is certainly true of
many of the routed crowd whom Washington found it impossible to rally
on Murray's Hill and in Murray's corn-field. Some of those who ran
from the Light Infantry on the 15th assisted in driving the same Light
Infantry on the 16th. Prescott's men a few weeks later successfully
defended a crossing in Westchester County and thwarted the enemy's
designs. Not a few of the militia in Douglas's brigade were the
identical men with whom Oliver Wolcott marched up to meet Burgoyne a
year later, and who, under Colonels Cook and Latimer, "threw away
their lives" in the decisive action of that campaign, suffering a
greater loss than any other two regiments on the field. Fellows, also,
was there to co-operate in forcing the British surrender. In Parsons'
brigade were young officers and soldiers who formed part of the select
corps that stormed Stony Point, and among Wadsworth's troops were
others who, five years later, charged upon the Yorktown redoubt with
the leading American Light Infantry battalion.[191]

[Footnote 191: The Major of this battalion (Gimat's) was John
Palsgrave Wyllys, of Hartford, who, as Wadsworth's Brigade-Major, was
taken prisoner at Kip's Bay. Alexander Hamilton and Brigade-Major
Fish, of New York, who were swept along in this retreat, also figured
prominently at Yorktown. Two young ensigns in the Connecticut
"levies," Stephen Betts and James Morris, were captains of Light
Infantry in that affair. Lieutenant Stephen Olney, of Rhode Island,
who barely escaped capture on Long Island by Cornwallis's grenadiers,
led Gimat's battalion as captain, and was severely wounded while
clambering into the redoubt; and there were probably a considerable
number of others, officers and men, who were chased by this British
general in the present campaign, who finally had the satisfaction of
cornering him in Virginia in 1781. Scammell, Huntington, Tilghman,
Humphreys, and others, could be named.]



When Washington found that the enemy had made their principal landing
at Thirty-fourth Street, and that a retreat was necessary, he sent
back word to have Harlem Heights well secured by the troops there,
while at the same time a considerable force under Mifflin marched
down to the strong ground near McGowan's to cover the escape of troops
that might take the King's Bridge road. Chester and Sargent evacuated
Horn's Hook and came in with Mifflin. Upon the landing of more troops
at Kip's Bay, Howe sent a column towards McGowan's, and in the evening
the Light Infantry reached Apthorpe's just after Silliman's retreat.
Washington had waited on the Bloomingdale Road until the last, and
retired from the Apthorpe Mansion but a short time before the British
occupied it. Here at Bloomingdale the enemy encamped their left wing
for the night, while their right occupied Horn's Hook, their outposts
not being advanced on the left beyond One Hundredth Street. The
Americans slept on Harlem Heights, not quite a mile and a half above
them.

"That night," says Humphreys, "our soldiers, excessively fatigued by
the sultry march of the day, their clothes wet by a severe shower of
rain that succeeded towards the evening, their blood chilled by the
cold wind that produced a sudden change in the temperature of the air,
and their hearts sunk within them by the loss of baggage, artillery,
and works, in which they had been taught to put great confidence, lay
upon their arms, covered only by the clouds of an uncomfortable
sky."[192]

[Footnote 192: The American loss in prisoners in the Kip's Bay affair
was seventeen officers and about three hundred and fifty men, nearly
all from Connecticut and New York. A very few were killed and wounded,
Major Chapman, of Tyler's regiment, being among the former.

The officer of highest rank among the prisoners was Colonel Samuel
Selden, of Hadlyme, Conn., mentioned on page 121. (See biographical
sketches, Part II.) One of his officers was Captain Eliphalet Holmes,
afterwards of the Continental line, a neighbor of the Colonel's. Being
a man of great strength he knocked down two Hessians, who attempted to
capture him, and escaped.]

During the day, meantime, the British occupied the city. After the
departure of the last troops under Silliman (Knox with others escaping
to Powle's Hook by boats) a white flag was displayed on Bayard's Hill
Redoubt by citizens, and in the afternoon a detachment from the fleet
first took possession.[193] In the evening a brigade from Howe's force
encamped along the outer line of works. The next forenoon, the 16th,
"the first of the English troops came to town," under General
Robertson, and were drawn up in two lines on Broadway. Governor Tryon
was present with officers of rank and a great concourse of people.
"Joy and gladness seemed to appear in all countenances;" while the
first act of the victors was to identify and confiscate every house
owned and deserted by the rebels. "And thus," says the now happy
loyalist pastor Shewkirk, "the city was delivered from those Usurpers
who had oppressed it so long."

[Footnote 193: _Baurmeister's Narrative._ _Shewkirk's Diary._]



Fortunately, the demoralizing effect of the panic of the 15th was to
be merely temporary. Indeed, before the details of the affair had time
to circulate through the camps and work further discouragement or
depression, there occurred another encounter with the enemy on the
following morning, which neutralized the disgrace of the previous day
and revived the spirits of our army to an astonishing degree. So much
importance was attached to it at the time as being a greatly needed
stimulant for the American soldier that it becomes of interest to
follow its particulars. It has passed into our history as the affair
or

BATTLE OF HARLEM HEIGHTS.[194]

Never for a moment relaxing his watch over the enemy's movements,
Washington, before daylight on the morning of the 16th, ordered a
reconnoitring party out to ascertain the exact position of the
British. The party consisted of the detachment of "Rangers,"[195] or
volunteers from the New England regiments, which had been organized
for scouting service since the battle of Long Island, and placed under
the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas Knowlton, of Connecticut. No
better man could have been found in the army to head such a corps, for
he had proved his courage at Bunker Hill, and on more than one
occasion since had shown his capacity for leadership. The detachment
started out, not more than one hundred and twenty strong, and passing
over to the Bloomingdale heights, marched for the Bloomingdale Road,
where the enemy were last seen the night before.

[Footnote 194: The centennial anniversary of this battle was
celebrated in 1876, under the auspices of the New York Historical
Society. The oration delivered on the occasion by the Hon. John Jay
has been published by the Society, with an appendix containing a large
number of documents bearing upon the affair, the whole making a
valuable contribution to our Revolutionary history.]

[Footnote 195: THE RANGERS.--The small corps known by this name
consisted, first, as already stated, of about one hundred men of
Durkee's Connecticut Regiment (Twentieth Continentals), who appear to
have accompanied Lieutenant-Colonel Knowlton, of that regiment, when
he went on any special service. These he took with him to Long Island.
After the battle there the Rangers were formally organized as a
separate body, composed of volunteer officers and men from several of
the New England regiments. These were borne on their respective
regimental rolls as detached "on command." For captains, Knowlton had
at least three excellent officers, men from his own region, whom he
knew and could trust--Nathan Hale, of Charles Webb's regiment, and
Stephen Brown and Thomas Grosvenor, of his own. The rolls in _Force_
show that there were officers and men in the Rangers from Durkee's,
Webb's, Chester's, Wyllys', and Tyler's Connecticut; Ward's and
Sargent's Massachusetts; and Varnum's Rhode Island. For a time they
received orders directly from Washington and then from Putnam, and
were of great service to the army in watching the enemy along the
Harlem front. They distinguished themselves on the 16th, and later in
the season, when Colonel Magaw was in command of Fort Washington, he
begged to have the Rangers remain with him, as he declared that they
were the only safe protection to the lines. (Greene to Washington.)
They remained and were taken prisoners at the surrender of the fort,
November 16th. Though probably not over one hundred and fifty strong,
their losses seem to have been heavy. Knowlton fell at Harlem Heights;
Major Coburn, who succeeded him, was severely wounded a few weeks
later; Captain Nathan Hale was executed as a spy; and Captain Brown, a
man as cool as Knowlton, was killed at the defence of Fort Mifflin
near Philadelphia, in 1777, a cannon-ball severing his head from his
body. Grosvenor served through the war, retiring as Lieutenant-Colonel
commanding the Fifth of the Connecticut line. These facts are gathered
from MS. Order Books, documents in _Force_ and _Hist. Mag._, and from
MS. letter of the late Judge Oliver Burnham, of Cornwall, Conn., a
soldier in Wyllys' regiment and one of the Rangers, in which he says:
"Soon after the retreat from Long Island, Colonel Knowlton was ordered
to raise a battalion of troops from the different regiments called the
Rangers, to reconnoitre along our shores and between the armies. Being
invited by a favorite officer, I volunteered, and on the day the enemy
took New York we were at Harlem and had no share in the events of that
day."]

The ground which Knowlton reconnoitred and which became the scene of
the action remains to-day unchanged in its principal features. What
was then known as Harlem Heights is that section of the island which
rises prominently from the plain west of Eighth Avenue and north of
One Hundred and Twenty-fifth Street. Its southern face extended from
an abrupt point, called "Point of Rocks," at One Hundred and
Twenty-sixth Street, east of Ninth Avenue, northwesterly to the
Hudson, a distance of three quarters of a mile. At the foot of these
heights lay a vale or "hollow way," through the centre of which now
runs Manhattan Street, and opposite, at distances varying from a
quarter to a third of a mile, rose another line of bluffs and slopes
parallel to Harlem Heights. This lower elevation stood mainly in the
Bloomingdale division of the city's out-ward, and is generally known
to-day as Bloomingdale Heights. In 1776 there were two farms on these
heights, owned and occupied by Adrian Hogeland and Benjamin
Vandewater, which were partly cultivated, but mainly covered with
woods. The Bloomingdale Road, as stated in a previous chapter,
terminated at Hogeland's lands about One Hundred and Eighth or Tenth
streets, and from there a lane or road ran easterly by Vandewater's
and joined the King's Bridge road near One Hundred and Twentieth
Street. East of the Bloomingdale and south of Harlem Heights stretched
the tract of level land called Harlem Plains.

After the retreat of the 15th, Washington's army encamped on Harlem
Heights, with their pickets lining the southern slope from Point of
Rocks to the Hudson. The British, as we have seen, lay at Bloomingdale
and across the upper part of Central Park to Horn's Hook. An enemy,
posted at the lower boundary of Harlem Plains, around McGowan's Pass,
where the ground again rises at the northern end of the Park, might be
easily observed from the Point of Rocks, and any advance from that
quarter could be reported at once. Nothing, however, could be seen of
movements made on the Bloomingdale Road or Heights, and it was in that
direction that the "Rangers" now proceeded to reconnoitre at dawn on
the 16th.

Knowlton, marching under cover of the woods, soon came upon the
enemy's pickets, somewhere, it would appear, between Hogeland's and
Apthorpe's houses on the Bloomingdale Road, more than a mile below the
American lines. This was the encampment of the Light Infantry, and
their Second and Third Battalions, supported by the Forty-second
Highlanders, were immediately pushed forward to drive back this party
of rebels who had dared to attack them on their own ground.
Anticipating some such move, Knowlton had already posted his men
behind a stone wall, and when the British advanced he met them with a
vigorous fire. His men fired eight or nine rounds a piece with good
effect, when the enemy threatened to turn his flanks, and he ordered a
retreat, which was well conducted. In this brief encounter the Rangers
lost about ten of their number, and believed that they inflicted much
more than this loss upon the Infantry.[196]

[Footnote 196: The Rangers were thus engaged in a distinct skirmish
before the main action of the day. Washington wrote to Congress early
on the 16th: "I have sent some reconnoitring parties to gain
intelligence, if possible, of the disposition of the enemy." A letter
in the _Connecticut Gazette_, reprinted in Mr. Jay's documents, and
which was probably written by Captain Brown, says: "On Monday morning
the General ordered us to go and take the enemy's advanced guard;
accordingly we set out just before day and found where they were; at
day-brake we were discovered by the enemy, who were 400 strong, and we
were 120. They marched up within six rods of us and there formed to
give us Battle, which we were ready for; and Colonel Knowlton gave
orders to fire, which we did, and stood theirs till we perceived they
were getting their flank-guards round us. After giving them eight
rounds apiece the Colonel gave orders for retreating, which we
performed very well, without the loss of a man while retreating,
though we lost about 10 while in action." Judge Burnham says
substantially the same: "Colonel Knowlton marched close to the enemy
as they lay on one of the Harlem Heights, and discharged a few rounds,
and then retreated over the hill out of sight of the enemy and
concealed us behind a low stone wall. The Colonel marked a place about
eight or ten rods from the wall, and charged us not to rise or fire a
gun until the enemy reached that place. The British followed in solid
column, and soon were on the ground designated when we gave them nine
rounds and retreated.... Our number engaged was only about 120."]

At his headquarters in the Morris Mansion, Washington, meantime, was
writing his despatches to Congress. The unwelcome duty fell to him to
report the scenes of the previous day which had so deeply stirred his
indignation. He made a plain statement of the facts, described the
retreat from New York, acknowledged the loss of baggage and cannon,
and despondently expressed his misgivings as to the soldierly
qualities of a majority of his troops. "We are now," he wrote,
"encamped with the main body of the army on the Heights of Harlem,
where I should hope the enemy would meet with a defeat in case of an
attack, if the generality of our troops would behave with tolerable
bravery. But experience, to my extreme affliction, has convinced me
that this is rather to be wished for than expected. However, I trust
that there are many who will act like men, and show themselves worthy
of the blessings of freedom." Not unfounded was this trust, for at the
very time the commander-in-chief was writing the words, the Rangers
were bravely fighting in the Bloomingdale Woods, and many others soon
after, including one of the very regiments which fled from Kip's Bay
twenty-four hours before, were likewise to act "like men" and prove
their real worth in the open field. Just as the letters were sent off
word came in to headquarters that the enemy had appeared in several
large bodies upon the plains, and Washington rode down to the
picket-posts to make the necessary dispositions in case of an attack.
Adjutant-General Reed and Lieutenant Tilghman, who had also been
writing private letters describing Sunday's panic, and other members
of the staff, went to the front about the same time. Knowlton's men
had not yet come in, and their fire was distinctly heard from the
Point of Rocks, where the commander-in-chief was now surveying the
situation. Anxious to learn whether the British were approaching in
force on the Bloomingdale Heights, no attack being threatened from the
plains, Colonel Reed received permission to go "down to our most
advanced guard," namely, to the Rangers, whom he found making a
momentary halt on their retreat. The enemy soon came up again in
large numbers, and the Rangers continued to retire. Colonel Reed,
describing his experience at this point, states that the British
advanced so rapidly that he had not quitted a house (which may have
been Vandewater's) five minutes before they were in possession of it.
"Finding how things were going," to use Reed's words, he returned to
Washington "to get some support for the brave fellows who had behaved
so well." Knowlton, however, fell back to our lines, and the enemy
halted in their pursuit on the north-east edge of Bloomingdale
Heights, opposite the Point of Rocks, where a part of them appeared in
open sight, and "in the most insulting manner" sounded their
bugle-horns as if on a fox chase. "I never felt such a sensation
before," says Reed; "it seemed to crown our disgrace." But the chase
was not yet over.

Learning from Knowlton that the British Infantry who had followed him
in were about three hundred strong, and knowing that they were some
distance from their main army, Washington determined, if possible, to
effect their capture. Knowlton's men, who had done nobly, were ready
for another brush, and there were troops at hand who could be depended
upon to behave well under any circumstances. The opportunity for a
brisk and successful skirmish presented itself, and the general
proposed to improve it. Accordingly he formed the plan of engaging the
enemy's attention in their front, while a flanking party should
attempt to get into their rear and cut off their escape. The troops
that were stationed nearest to the Point of Rocks at this time appear
to have been Nixon's brigade, of Greene's division, Weedon's newly
arrived regiment of Virginians, General Beall's Marylanders, Colonel
Sargent's eastern brigade, Clinton's and Scott's brigades, and other
regiments belonging to Putnam's and Spencer's divisions. For the
flanking detachment, the general selected Knowlton's Rangers, to whom
he added a reinforcement of three of the Virginia companies, about one
hundred and twenty men, under Major Andrew Leitch. These were directed
to make their way or "steal around" to the rear of the enemy by their
right flank. To make a demonstration against the enemy in their front,
while the flanking party effected its object, a detachment of
volunteers was organized from Nixon's brigade, under Lieutenant-Colonel
Archibald Crary, of Varnum's Rhode Islanders,[197] who marched down
into the "hollow way" directly towards the British on the opposite
ridge. As Washington hoped, this move had the desired effect. The
British, seeing so small a party coming out against them, immediately
ran down the rocky hill into an open field, where they took post
behind some bushes and a rail fence that extended from the hill to the
post road about four hundred yards in front of the Point of
Rocks.[198] This field was part of the old Kortwright farm, lying
just west of the present Harlem Lane, above One Hundred and Eighteenth
Street, in which the line of that fence had been established for more
than half a century before this engagement, and where it remained the
same for more than half a century after. It is possible to-day to fix
its exact position, for the march of modern improvements has not yet
disturbed the site.

[Footnote 197: Captain John Gooch, of Varnum's regiment, wrote
September 23d: "On the 16th the enemy advanced and took possession of
a hight on our right flank about half a mile Distance with about 3000
[300?] men; a party from our brigade of 150 men, who turned out as
volunteers, under the command of Lieutenant-Colonel Crary, of the
regmt I belong to, were ordered out if possible to dispossess
them."--_Document_ 30.]

[Footnote 198: Tilghman's reference to these movements is as follows:
"The General rode down to our farthest lines, and when he came near
them heard a firing, which he was informed was between our scouts and
the outguards of the enemy. When our men [Knowlton's] came in they
informed the General that there was a party of about 300 behind a
woody hill, tho' they only showed a very small party to us. Upon this
the General laid a plan for attacking them in the rear and cutting off
their retreat, which was to be effected in the following manner: Major
Leitch, with three companies of Colo Weedon's Virginia regiment,
and Colo Knowlton with his Rangers, were to steal round while a
party [Crary's] were to march towards them and seem as if they
intended to attack in front, but not to make any real attack till they
saw our men fairly in their rear. The bait took as to one part; as
soon as they saw our party in front the enemy ran down the hill and
took possession of some fences and bushes and began to fire at them,
but at too great distance to do much execution," etc.--_Document_ 29.
See also Washington's letter to Congress, Sept. 18th, 1776.]

In order to keep the enemy engaged at that point, Crary's party opened
fire at long range, to which the British replied, but not much
execution was done on either side. Meanwhile Knowlton and Leitch moved
out to get in the rear. Colonel Reed accompanied the party, and as he
had been over the ground he undertook the lead, with the Virginians in
advance. It was probably his intention to march down under cover of
the bushes, cross the Kortwright farm unobserved some little distance
below the enemy, and reach the top of the Bloomingdale ridge before
they were discovered. Once there, the British would be effectually
hemmed in. Unfortunately, however, some "inferior officers," as it
would appear, gave unauthorized directions to the flanking party; or
the party forming the "feint" in front pushed on too soon, in
consequence of which Leitch and Knowlton made their attack rather on
the British flank than in their rear.[199] The latter now finding a
retreat necessary, left the fence and started back up the hill which
they had descended. Our men quickly followed, Crary in front, Knowlton
and Leitch on the left, and with the Virginians leading, joined in the
pursuit with splendid spirit and animation. They rushed up the slope,
on about the line of One Hundred and Twentieth Street, and, climbing
over the rocks, poured in their volleys upon the running Light
Infantry.

[Footnote 199: It is quite clear that Knowlton and Leitch did not form
two parties, as some accounts state, one moving against the right
flank of the enemy and the other against the left. They acted as one
body, the Virginians marching in front, having been ordered on to
"reinforce" Knowlton. Thus Captain Brown writes that after retreating
they "sent off for a reinforcement," which they soon received; and
Colonel Reed confirms this in his testimony at the court-martial of a
soldier who acted a cowardly part in the fight. "On Monday forenoon,"
he says, "I left Colonel Knowlton with a design to send him a
reinforcement. I had accordingly ordered up Major Leitch, and was
going up to where the firing was," etc. (_Force_, 5th Series, vol. ii.
p. 500.) Reed's letters to his wife show that Leitch and Knowlton fell
near him, within a few minutes of each other, which could not have
been the case had they been on opposite flanks. The accounts of
Tilghman, Marshall, the soldier Martin, and others, leave no doubt as
to this point that there was but one flanking party, and that Knowlton
commanded it.]

It was right here, now, just on the crest of the ridge, and when our
gallant advance was turning the tide against the enemy, that we
suffered the loss of those two noble leaders whose memory is linked
with this day's action. In a very short time after the first rush,
Leitch was severely wounded not far from Reed, having received three
balls in his side in as many minutes; and in less than ten minutes
after a bullet pierced Knowlton's body, and he too fell mortally
wounded. We can identify the spot where the fall of these brave
officers occurred as on the summit of the Bloomingdale Heights below
One Hundred and Nineteenth Street, and about half way between the line
of Ninth and Tenth Avenues. The site is included within the limits of
the proposed "Morningside Park," which will thus have added to its
natural attractiveness a never-fading historical association.[200]

[Footnote 200: Judge Burnham refers to the flank attack briefly as
follows: "Passing over we met the enemy's right flank which had been
posted out of our sight on lower ground. They fired and killed Colonel
Knowlton and nearly all that had reached the top of the height." This
reference to the _top of the height_, taken in connection with Reed's
statement that "our brave fellows mounted up the rocks and attacked
them as they ran in turn," goes to confirm the selection of the spot
where Leitch and Knowlton fell. Burnham states that he was within a
few feet of the latter when he was shot.]

Leitch was borne to the rear to be tenderly cared for until his death
at a later day. In after years the Government remembered his services
by granting his widow a generous pension. Knowlton met his fate with a
soldier's fortitude and a patriot's devotion. "My poor Colonel,"
writes an officer of the Rangers, who without doubt was Captain
Stephen Brown, next in rank to Knowlton, "my poor Colonel, in the
second attack, was shot just by my side. The ball entered the small of
his back. I took hold of him, asked him if he was badly wounded? He
told me he was; but says he, 'I do not value my life if we do but get
the day.' I then ordered two men to carry him off. He desired me by
all means to keep up this flank. He seemed as unconcerned and calm as
tho' nothing had happened to him." Reed, on whose horse the colonel
was carried to the lines, wrote to his wife on the following day: "Our
loss is also considerable. The Virginia Major (Leitch) who went up
first with me was wounded with three shot in less than three minutes;
but our greatest loss was a brave officer from Connecticut, whose name
and spirit ought to be immortalized--one Colonel Knowlton. I assisted
him off, and when gasping in the agonies of death, all his inquiry was
if we had drove the enemy." Washington spoke of him in his letters and
orders as "a valuable and gallant officer," who would have been "an
honor to any country."

Meanwhile the Rangers and Virginians kept up their attack under their
captains, and Washington, finding that the entire party needed
support, sent forward three of the Maryland Independent companies,
under Major Price, and parts of Griffith's and Richardson's Maryland
Flying Camp.[201] At the same time, as Washington reports, some
detachments from the Eastern regiments who were nearest the place of
action, which included most of Nixon's and Sargent's brigades, Colonel
Douglas's Connecticut levies, and a few others, were ordered into the
field. Our total force engaged at this time, now about noon, was not
far from eighteen hundred strong, and very soon a considerable battle
was in progress. Besides Reed and other members of Washington's staff,
Generals Putnam, Greene, and George Clinton accompanied the
detachments, and encouraged the men by individual examples of
bravery.[202] The troops now "charged the enemy with great
intrepidity," and drove them from the crest of the heights back in a
south-westerly direction through a piece of woods to a buckwheat
field, about four hundred paces, as General Clinton describes it, from
the ridge, or just east of the present Bloomingdale Asylum, where the
Light Infantry, now reinforced by the Forty-second Highlanders,
finally made a stand. The distance the latter troops had advanced and
the sound of the firing had evidently warned Howe, at his headquarters
at Apthorpe's, that they needed immediate assistance, and he promptly
ordered forward the reserve with two field-pieces, together with the
Yagers and Linsingen's grenadiers of Donop's corps. The field-pieces
and Yagers came into action at the buckwheat field, and here a
stubborn contest ensued for about an hour and a half.[203] But our
troops pressed the enemy so hard at this point, and the Highlanders
and Yagers having fired away their ammunition, the latter all again
fell back, and the Americans pursued them vigorously to an orchard a
short distance below, in the direction of the Bloomingdale Road. Here
had been hard fighting in the open field, and the best British troops
were beaten! At the orchard the result was the same, the enemy making
little resistance, their fire "being silenced in a great measure," and
the chase continued down one of the slight hills on Hogeland's lands
and up another, near or quite to the terminus of the Bloomingdale
Road. Beyond this third position our troops were not allowed to follow
the enemy, whose main encampment was not far distant. The Fifth
Regiment of Foot had been trotted up "about three miles without a halt
to draw breath," reaching the ground at the close of the action.
Linsingen's grenadiers appeared about the same time, while Block's and
Minegerode's men were sent to McGowan's Pass, which had not yet been
occupied. A large body of the enemy were put under arms, and within
their camp every preparation was made for a general engagement; but
this, above all things, Washington wished to avoid, and, quite content
with the brilliant success of his troops thus far, he despatched
Lieutenant Tilghman to the front to bring them off. Before turning
from the field they had won so gloriously, they answered the bugle
blast of the morning with a cheer of victory, and marched back in good
order.[204]

[Footnote 201: There appear to have been nine companies of Maryland
troops engaged, three under Major Price, three under Major Mantz, and
three others of Richardson's regiment. Among these were one or more
companies of Colonel Ewing's as yet incomplete battalion. One of his
officers, Captain Lowe, was wounded.--_Force_, 5th Series, vol. ii. p.
1024. Also Capt. Beatty's letter in Mr. Jay's Documents.]

[Footnote 202: Greene wrote at a latter date: "Gen. Putnam and the
Adj. Gen. were in the action and behaved nobly." "I was in the latter
part, indeed almost the whole of the action."--_Gen. Geo. Clinton._
(See his two letters in Jay's documents.) "Gen. Putnam and Gen. Greene
commanded in the Action with about 15 to eighteen hundred
men."--_Stiles's MS. Diary._]

[Footnote 203: "A very smart action ensued in the true Bush-fighting
way in which our Troops behaved in a manner that does them the highest
honor."--_Letter from Col. Griffith, of Maryland._ Lossing's
_Historical Record_, vol. ii., p. 260.]

[Footnote 204: "The General fearing (as we afterwards found) that a
large body was coming up to support them, sent me over to bring our
men off. They gave a Hurra and left the field in good order."--_Tilghman's
Letters_, Doc. 29.

THE BATTLE-FIELD.--Recently gathered material seems to settle all
doubts as to the several points occupied by the British and Americans
during the action. Where did it begin and where did it end? As to the
first skirmish, it began near the British encampment at Bloomingdale.
Here was Howe's left, and, as Howe reports, Knowlton approached his
advanced posts under cover of the woods "by way of Vandewater's
Height." This was what we call Bloomingdale Heights. The original
proprietor of the greater part of this site was Thomas De Key. From
him all or a large part of it passed to Harman Vandewater and Adrian
Hogeland, as the deeds on record show. In 1784 the property was
purchased by Nicholas De Peyster. The position of Hogeland's and
Vandewater's houses as given on the accompanying map is taken from old
surveys which mark the location and give the names. The Bloomingdale
Road at that time stopped at these farms. That part of it above One
Hundred and Tenth Street, running through Manhattanville and
continuing until recently to the King's Bridge Road at One Hundred and
Forty-sixth Street, did not exist during the Revolution, but was
opened a few years later. (Hoffman's _Est. and Rights of the
Corporation of New York_, vol. ii.) A lane or road running from
Hogeland's by Vandewater's connected the Bloomingdale with the King's
Bridge road at One Hundred and Nineteenth Street. Washington himself
gives us the general line. Before the battle of Long Island he ordered
Heath to have troops ready to march to New York as soon as called for,
and he describes the proper route thus: "There is a road out of the
Haerlem flat lands that leads up to the hills, and continues down the
North River by Bloomingdale, Delancy's, &c., which road I would have
them march, as they will keep the river in sight, and pass a tolerable
landing-place for troops in the neighborhood of Bloomingdale." (_Heath
Correspondence_, Mass. Hist. Coll. for 1878.) From this topography and
the records the position becomes clear: Howe camped around
Bloomingdale with his advance posts along the Bloomingdale Road,
perhaps as far as its terminus near Hogeland's. They were last seen in
this vicinity the night before. Knowlton, next morning, marches out
from Harlem Heights, reconnoitres "by way of Vandewater's," and comes
upon the British posts on and along the line of the Bloomingdale Road.
Then he falls back under cover of the woods and over fences towards
the Point of Rocks, the enemy following him.

As to succeeding movements, if we can fix Washington's station and the
hill which all agree that the British descended, there is no
difficulty in following them after. Point of Rocks was the extreme
limit of Harlem Heights. There were our advanced posts overlooking the
country south. Washington states that he rode down to "our advanced
posts" to direct matters. Where better could he do so than at Point of
Rocks? And in a sketch of the field preserved in the Stiles Diary, and
reproduced among Mr. Jay's documents, Washington is given just that
station where an earthwork had been thrown up. To confirm this and
also to locate the next point, we have a letter from Major Lewis
Morris (Jay documents), in which he says: "Colonel Knowlton's regiment
was attacked by the enemy upon a height a little to the south-west of
Days's Tavern, and after opposing them bravely and being overpowered
by their numbers they were forced to retreat, and the enemy advanced
upon the top of the hill opposite to that which lies before Days's
door, with a confidence of success, and after rallying their men by a
bugle horn and resting themselves a little while, they descended the
hill," etc. In one of Christopher Colles's road maps (published in the
N.Y. Corporation Manual for 1870, p. 778), Days's tavern is put
directly opposite Point of Rocks on the King's Bridge Road, which
fixes the hill occupied by the enemy as the north-east bluff of
Bloomingdale Heights, or about One Hundred and Twenty-third Street,
between Ninth and Tenth avenues. They ran down this bluff to fences
and bushes at the edge of "a clear field." This was part of the
Kortwright farm, and the farm lines of 1812 show the same northern
boundary that surveys show in 1711. This northerly fence line is given
in the accompanying map, and it will be noticed that it would be the
natural line for the British Infantry to take in opposing Crary's
party. The soldier Martin speaks of their taking a post and rail fence
with a field in their rear. General George Clinton, who gives a clear
description of the fighting from this point, also mentions this field
and fence, but appears to have been mistaken in stating that the enemy
were driven back to that position. They ran down the hill and took up
that position. Then, when driven back, they retreated in the general
direction of their first advance--that is, towards their camp, passing
through a buckwheat field, and orchard to the Bloomingdale Road, and
not, as generally stated, to the high ground in Central Park east of
Eighth Avenue. General Clinton says they fell back from the orchard
"across a hollow and up another hill not far distant from their own
lines," which doubtless refers to undulations on Hogeland's place, and
possibly to the then hilly ground about One Hundred and Seventh Street
and Eleventh Avenue. One of the Hessian accounts states that the
Yagers who were sent to support the Light Infantry came into "a hot
contest on Hoyland's Hill"--a reference clearly to Hogeland's lands;
and this with the fact that the Yagers and Grenadiers afterwards
bivouacked "in the wood not far from Bloomingdale," and that the
British "encamped in two lines" at the same place, indicates the point
where the action terminated--namely, near Bloomingdale, between
Hogeland's and Apthorpe's.

In regard to the beginning of the action, General Clinton, in his
account, starts with a locality called "Martje Davits Fly," and
estimates distances from it. This name, more properly "Marritje
David's Vly," strictly described the round piece of meadow at the
western end of the Hollow Way close to the Hudson. It formed part of
Harlem Cove. Old deeds, acts, and surveys give the name and site
exactly. Clinton speaks of the "Point of Martje David's Fly" as if he
had reference to a point of land in its vicinity, possibly the Point
of Rocks, and from which he gives his distances.

The name of the battle appears perhaps most frequently in modern
accounts as that of Harlem _Plains_. Greene and others speak of it as
the action of Harlem _Heights_ or the heights of Harlem. As the
movements were directed by Washington from the Heights, and as the
fighting was done practically in defence of the Heights, this seems to
be the proper name to adopt. Heath says the fighting took place "on
the Heights west of Harlem Plains," and Washington, Clinton, and
others make similar references to the high ground, showing that the
affair was not associated with the Plains.]

[Illustration: FIELD of the HARLEM HEIGHTS "AFFAIR" Sept 16, 1776.

Topography from RANDALL'S MAP OF NEW YORK and old Surveys.

J. Bien Photo. Lith. N.Y.]

This affair, as Washington wrote to Schuyler, "inspirited our troops
prodigiously." The next day the general most heartily thanked the men
"commanded by Major Leitch, who first advanced upon the enemy, and the
others who so resolutely supported them;" and once more he called upon
all to act up to the noble cause in which they were engaged.

The British loss, according to Howe, was fourteen killed and about
seventy wounded, but Baurmeister puts it much higher--seventy killed
and two hundred wounded. The Americans lost not far from eighty, of
whom at least twenty-five were killed or mortally wounded. The loss
in officers, besides Knowlton and Leitch, included Captain Gleason, of
Nixon's Massachusetts, and Lieutenant Noel Allen, of Varnum's Rhode
Island, both of whom were killed. Captain Lowe, of Ewing's
Marylanders, was wounded, also Captain Gooch, of Varnum's, slightly.
The heaviest loss fell upon Nixon's and Sargent's brigades, namely:
Nixon's regiment, four killed; Varnum's, four; Hitchcock's, four;
Sargent's, one; Bailey's, five, and two mortally wounded. Colonel
Douglas lost three killed. Among the Marylanders there were twelve
wounded and three missing. The loss in the Virginia detachment and
the Rangers does not appear. General Clinton on the next day buried
seventeen of our men on the field, and reported over fifty wounded.
Lieutenant-Colonel Henshaw, of Little's regiment, simply writes to his
wife in regard to the action, "I was there," and adds that our loss
was one hundred. He puts the casualties in his brigade alone [Nixon's]
at seventy-five. All the troops behaved well. Greene speaks with pride
of the conduct of his Rhode Islanders, Varnum's and Hitchcock's.
Captain Gooch wrote to a friend enthusiastically, "The New England men
have gained the first Laurells;" while Tilghman wrote with equal
enthusiasm, "The Virginia and Maryland troops bear the Palm." In
reality, palm and laurel belonged to both alike.

Knowlton, on the 17th, was buried with the honors of war near the road
on the hill slope, not far from the line of One Hundred and
Forty-third Street, west of Ninth Avenue. Leitch died on the 1st of
October, and is said to have been buried by Knowlton's side, where
Major Thomas Henly, a Massachusetts officer, killed on Montressor's
Island on September 23d, was also buried.[205] On the 22d, Captain
Nathan Hale, "the martyr-spy," was executed in New York. Finding
Washington anxious to have information of the enemy's numbers and
designs, Hale volunteered to enter their camp in disguise. Captured at
the last moment as he was on the point of escape, he frankly avowed
his mission, and just before his execution, on the Rutgers farm, he
told the spectators around him that he only regretted he had but one
life to give for his country. The war saw no more courageous or
unselfish sacrifice. Few worthier of a monument than he!

[Footnote 205: Heath states that Henley was buried by Knowlton's side,
and the spot is indicated in the orders of September 24th: "Thomas
Henley will be buried this P.M. from the quarters of Maj. David Henley
below the hill where the redoubt is thrown up on the road." During the
action of the 16th, troops were throwing up intrenchments across the
island at about One Hundred and Forty-fifth Street. This was the first
and most southerly of the three lines constructed on the Heights.
Sauthier's map, the authority in the case, shows this line with a
battery across the King's Bridge Road, just at the top of what is
known as Breakneck Hill. It was on the slope of this hill that
Knowlton and Henley were buried. Mr. Lossing puts his grave in one of
the redoubts on the second line, afterwards included in Trinity
Cemetery; but that line had not been thrown up when Knowlton died.
(Silliman's letter of September 17th, P.M. Part II., page 55.) Mr. Jay
and others have suggested the erection of a monument to Knowlton and
Leitch. No finer site could be found than the spot where they fell in
Morningside Park.

Respecting Major Henley, spoken of by Washington as "another of our
best officers," see Glover's letter, _Document_ 35.]

The battle of the 16th was followed by inactivity on the part of the
British, and Washington securely established himself on Harlem
Heights. The chief excitement was the occurrence of the great fire on
the night of the 21st of September, which broke out near Whitehall
Slip, in New York, and destroyed a fourth of the city. In addition to
accounts of the calamity already published and generally familiar, the
experiences of Pastor Shewkirk, as given in his diary in the present
work, will be read with interest.




CHAPTER VII.

WHITE PLAINS--FORT WASHINGTON.


What now remains to be noticed as coming within the scope of the
present narrative are those incidents which led to the evacuation of
Harlem Heights by our army, and the subsequent capture of Fort
Washington, by which the British finally came into the possession of
the whole of New York Island.

The American position at the Heights, strong by nature, was made still
more so by defensive works. Three lines of intrenchments and redoubts
were thrown across the island between One Hundred and Forty-fifth and
One Hundred and Sixty-second streets; batteries were built around
King's Bridge, and at several points on the heights overlooking the
Harlem; and on the commanding site on the line of One Hundred and
Eighty-third Street, two hundred and thirty feet above the Hudson,
stood the powerful fortress called Fort Washington. Describing these
works more in detail, the first of the three lines, that furthest
south, was the one already referred to on which troops were digging
during the action of Harlem Heights. It extended along the line of One
Hundred and Forty-sixth Street. The second line, which was much
stronger, was laid out a short distance above at One Hundred and
Fifty-third Street. There were four redoubts in the line. Less than
half a mile above, between One Hundred and Sixtieth and One Hundred
and Sixty-second streets, and not extending east of Tenth Avenue, or
the old Post Road, was the third line. It mainly commanded the
depression in the heights which is now known as Audubon Park, and
included no redoubts. In addition to this triple line, there were
single breastworks and batteries at various points from Point of Rocks
north, along the ridge. The high and rugged bank of the Harlem
overlooking the present High Bridge was known as Laurel Hill, and at
the northern extremity, at One Hundred and Ninety-second Street, there
was an American battery, which the British afterwards named Fort
George. On the west side, at One Hundred and Ninety-sixth Street,
there was a small battery which became Fort Tryon. On the further side
of Spuyten Duyvil Creek stood Fort Independence, commanding King's
Bridge and its approaches.[206]

[Footnote 206: The position of the various works at Harlem Heights
appears on Sauthier's plan which seems to have accompanied Howe's
report of the capture of Fort Washington. Good copies of it may be
found in Stedman's history and in the _New York Revolutionary MS._,
vol. i. In 1812, when Randall surveyed the island, many of these works
were still traceable. He gives parts of the second and third lines,
Fort Washington and the others above, all of which agree with
Sauthier's locations. Some of the works remain well preserved to-day.]

Fort Washington was a large, five-sided work with bastions, strong by
virtue of its position, and important as commanding the passage of the
Hudson in connection with Fort Lee (first named Constitution),
opposite, on the summit of the Palisades on the Jersey side. Much
labor had been expended upon it, and it was generally regarded as
impregnable. The obstructions in the river consisted mainly of a line
of vessels chained together, loaded with stone, and then sunk and
anchored just below the surface of the river. It was expected that
they would resist the passage of the British ships, which would thus
be also brought to a stop under the guns from either shore, and made
to suffer heavily. Both the Continental Congress and the Provincial
Congress of New York had urged that no means or expense should be
spared to make the obstructions effectual, in view of the serious
results that would follow the enemy's possession of the river above.

Nearly a month now had elapsed since the retreat of our army to Harlem
Heights, and the British had made no further progress. They had in the
mean time thrown up a series of works across the island in front of
their main camps at Bloomingdale and McGowan's Pass, which could be
defended by a comparatively small force. On the 9th, however, they
showed indications of taking the field again by sending two frigates
up the Hudson. In spite of the sunken obstructions, the ships made
their way through without difficulty. Then, on the morning of the
12th, Howe embarked the greater part of his army in boats, and passing
through Hell Gate, under cover of a fog, landed on Throg's Neck, an
arm of the Westchester coast, about six miles above. Percy was left to
protect New York with three brigades. By this move the British general
placed himself on Washington's flank in Westchester County, and
threatened his communications. But the Neck was a poor selection for a
landing-place.[207] It was practically an island, the crossings to
the mainland being a causeway and fords, the opposite approaches of
which were fortified by the Americans. Colonel Hand's riflemen had
pulled up the planks on the bridges, and Prescott's Massachusetts were
ready behind breastworks to resist any attempt on the part of the
enemy to cross. Here the British wasted five days in collecting their
stores, while the Americans kept a sufficient force to meet them at
the causeway and vicinity. Among other regiments which relieved each
other at this point were Nixon's, Varnum's, Malcom's, Graham's, and
Ritzema's.

[Footnote 207: "Frog's Neck and Point is a kind of island; there are
two passages to the main which are fordable at low water, at both of
which we have thrown up works, which will give some annoyance should
they attempt to come off by either of these ways."--_Tilghman to
William Duer_, October 13th, 1776. _MS. Letter._ On hearing that they
had landed on the Neck, Duer replied from the Convention at Peekskill,
on the 15th: "There appears to me an actual fatality attending all
their measures. One would have naturally imagined from the Traitors
they have among them, who are capable of giving them the most minute
description of the Grounds in the county of Westchester, that they
would have landed much farther to the Eastward. Had they pushed their
imaginations to discover the worst place, they could not have
succeeded better than they have done."--_MS. Letter._]



During and for some time before these movements an interesting
correspondence was carried on between Washington's headquarters and a
committee of the New York Convention, a portion of which may be
introduced in this connection. It gives us a glimpse of the deep
interest and anxiety felt in the Convention in matters affecting the
protection of the State, and the internal difficulties that had to be
encountered. The correspondence was conducted mainly between
Lieutenant Tilghman for headquarters and Hon. William Duer for the
Convention.[208] Thus, on September 20th, the latter writes to
Tilghman as follows:

[Footnote 208: The Convention's Committee on Correspondence consisted
of William Duer, R.R. Livingston, Egbert Benson, and two others.
Nearly all of Tilghman's letters to the committee have been published
either in Force or in the Proceedings of the N.Y. Provincial Congress.
Of Duer's replies, however, but few are in print, the originals being
in the possession of Oswald Tilghman, Esq., of Easton, Talbot County,
Md., to whom the writer is under obligations for the favor of quoting
the extracts given in the text. (See biographical sketch of Colonel
Tilghman.)]

     "I can easily imagine that Genl Howe must be both
     chagrined and disappointed at the Retreat of our Army from
     New York. I have no doubt but what he expected fully to have
     taken them in a net; and he certainly would have succeeded
     had we pertinaciously persisted in the plan of defending the
     city. You observe that if the passage of the North River is
     sufficiently obstructed that our lines will keep the enemy
     from making any progress in front. This is certainly true;
     but you must recollect that the Sound is, and must ever be,
     open; and if they should succeed in landing a Body of Men in
     Westchester County, they might, by drawing lines to the
     North River, as effectually hem us in, as if we were in New
     York. From Sutton's Neck to the North River (if I am not
     mistaken) is not above twelve miles."

Again on the 2d of October, speaking of the possibility of the enemy's
getting on our flank or rear, Duer says:

     "I wish they would delay this attempt till Genl. Lee
     arrives, or till Mifflin comes from Philada. I am
     sensible that however great General Washington's abilities
     and vigilance are, he must stand in need of the assistance
     of such excellent officers. Is Genl Greene with the Army,
     or is he still in Jersey? If he could be spared from that
     quarter his presence, I think, would be of great
     consequence. I am much mistaken, if he is not possest of
     that Heaven-born Genius which is necessary to constitute a
     great General.--I can scarcely describe to you my feelings
     at this interesting Period--what, with the situation of our
     enemies in your quarter and the cursed machinations of our
     Internal Foes, the fate of this State hangs on a single
     battle of importance."

Again on the 8th:

     "I am sorry to tell you (for the credit of this State) that
     the Committee I belong to make daily fresh discoveries of
     the infernal Practices of our Enemies to excite
     Insurrections amongst the inhabitants of the State.
     To-morrow one Company, actually enlisted in the enemy's
     service, will be marched to Philadelphia, there to be
     confined in jail, till the establishment of our Courts
     enables us to hang the Ringleaders."

And on the following day Robert R. Livingston added on this subject:

     "Tho' we are constantly employed in the detection of
     treasons, yet plots multiply upon us daily, and we have
     reason every moment to dread an open rebellion. We have
     ordered troops to be raised but fear they will be too slow
     in coming, and that we shall be under the disagreeable
     necessity of asking a small and temporary aid from the
     Genl; but we shall defer this till reduced to the last
     extremity."

When the ships went up the river on the 9th, it was feared they had
troops on board who might make an attempt on the Highlands, whereupon
Duer wrote on the 10th:

     "In this [attempt] they will undoubtedly be joined by the
     villains in Westchester and Duchess County; it is therefore
     of the utmost consequence that a Force should be immediately
     detached from the main body of our army to occupy these
     posts.... By the Influence and Artifices of the capital
     tories of this State the majority of Inhabitants in those
     counties are ripe for a revolt."

But with a stout heart Duer continues:

     "It is our Duty, however, to struggle against the tide of
     adversity, and to exert ourselves with vigour adequate to
     our circumstances. This, as an Individual, I am determined
     to do in the Capacity in which I am at present acting, and I
     have no doubt those friends I have in the military line will
     do the same. We are not to expect to purchase our Liberties
     at a cheaper rate than other nations have done, or that
     _our_ soldiers should be Heaven born more than those of
     other nations. Experience will make us both have and win;
     and in the end teach Great Britain that in attempting to
     enslave us she is aiming a dagger at her own vitals."

On the 12th, before he heard of the landing at Throg's Neck, he wrote
to Tilghman:

     "Notwithstanding the enemy had, agreeable to your last
     advices, sent no vessels up the Sound, depend upon it, they
     will endeavor to make an attack upon your Flanks by means of
     Hudson's and the East River.... If General Lee is returned
     from the Southward and arrived at your camp (which I suppose
     to be the case) I beg my affectionate compliments to him. I
     wish to Heaven I could come and see you, but I am so
     embarrassed with the Committee I am engaged in that I have
     not hardly an hour, much less a few days to spare. This
     morning we marched off a Company of men, who had been
     enlisted to join the Battalion to be raised by Major Rogers,
     to the City of Philadelphia. We have an admirable clue of
     their abominable conspiracies, and (however late this
     undertaking has been) I hope by spirit and perseverance we
     may baffle their wretched Plots of occasioning a revolt in
     this State."[209]

[Footnote 209: As evidence of the estimation in which Lee was held at
this time, Duer writes on the 15th to Colonel Harrison: "I beg my
affectionate compliments to Genl Lee, whom I sincerely congratulate
on his arrival in camp--partly on account of himself as he will have
it in his [power] to reap a fresh Harvest of Laurels, and more on
account of his Country which looks to him as one of the brave
asserters of her dearest rights."--_MS. Letter._

Lee had just returned from South Carolina, and was associated by the
army with the brave defence of Charleston harbor. The honor of that
affair, however, belonged entirely to Moultrie.]

On the 13th, Tilghman wrote to Duer:

     "When your favor of the 10th came to hand, I was attending
     his Excellency, who was obliged to ride up to West Chester
     upon the Alarm of the Enemy's Landing at Frog's Point....
     From their not moving immediately forward, I imagine they
     are waiting for their artillery and stores, which must be
     very considerable if they seriously intend to set down in
     the country upon our rear. The grounds leading from Frog's
     Point towards our Post at King's bridge are as defensible as
     they can be wished. The roads are all lined with stone
     fences and the adjacent Fields divided off with stone
     [fences] likewise, which will make it impossible for them to
     advance their artillery and ammunition waggons by any other
     Rout than the great roads, and I think if they are well
     lined with troops, we may make a Considerable Slaughter if
     not discomfit them totally. Our riflemen have directions to
     attend particularly to taking down their Horses, which if
     done, will impede their march effectually. Our troops are in
     good spirits and seem inclined and determined to dispute
     every inch of Ground."

On the 15th he wrote to Duer again as follows, after informing him
that the enemy had not moved from the Neck:

     "From the number of vessels that have been continually
     passing up the Sound we conclude that they are transporting
     cannon and stores necessary to enable them to penetrate the
     country and set down in our rear. To hinder them from
     effecting this, Genl Lee, who arrived yesterday, has
     taken the command in that quarter. He will be posted in such
     a situation with a very considerable number of Light Troops
     that, let the Enemy advance by what road they will, they
     cannot elude him; if they march in one great body he can
     easily draw his Divisions together; if they divide and take
     different Routs, they will fall in with the different
     parties. He will have the Flower of the Army with him, as
     our lines in front are so strong that we can trust them to
     Troops who would not stand in the field."

Duer, on the 17th, replied:

     "I expect daily to hear of some grand attempt made by the
     Enemy.... If one half of our army think as much of the
     Importance of the approaching Contest as you do, I shall
     entertain no Doubt of our success. May Heaven protect you,
     and all my Friends who are venturing their Lives in so great
     and good a cause."

On the same date Tilghman wrote:

     "I have not time to describe the Disposition of our Army
     perfectly to you, but you may depend that every step is
     taken to prevent the enemy from outflanking us and at the
     same time to secure our Retreat in case of need. The Enemy
     have made no move from Frog's Point.... I don't know how it
     is, but I believe their design to circumvent us this time
     will prove as abortive as the former ones. If we can but
     foil Genl Howe again, I think we knock him up for the
     Campaign. You ask if Genl Lee is in Health and our people
     feel bold? I answer both in the affirmative. His appearance
     among us has not contributed a little to the latter. We are
     sinking the ships as fast as possible; 200 men are daily
     employed, but they take an immense quantity of stone for the
     purpose."

To meet this move upon their flank and rear, the Americans were
obliged to abandon their strong camp at Harlem Heights. On the 16th,
while the British were still at Throg's Neck, Washington called a
council of war, when it was agreed that they could not keep their
communications open with the back country, if they remained where they
were and the British advanced. At the same it was voted to hold Fort
Washington. To be ready to counteract the next move of the enemy, a
part of the army was stationed at advantageous points in Westchester
County, the main camps being extended along the hills west of the
Bronx River. Both Valentine's Hill and Miles Square were occupied and
fortified.

On the 18th, Howe left Throg's Neck and transferred his army further
eastward to Pell's Point below New Rochelle. The Light Infantry
advanced from the coast, but were faced by Glover's brigade from
behind stone walls, and made to suffer some loss.[210] Glover and his
men were complimented for their conduct both by Washington and Lee.
The enemy again delayed in the vicinity of East Chester and New
Rochelle until the 22d.

[Footnote 210: In this skirmish Captain Evelyn, the British officer
who captured the patrol of American officers on Long Island, was
mortally wounded, and died soon after, much regretted. He is supposed
to have been buried in New York.]

Wishing exact information of the position of the enemy and of the
topography of the country, the commander-in-chief, on the morning of
the 20th, requested Colonel Reed and Colonel Putnam, his engineer, to
undertake a reconnoissance in person. Setting out from King's Bridge
with a foot-guard of twenty men, these officers proceeded to the
heights at East Chester, where they saw some of the enemy near the
church, but could obtain no intelligence. The houses in the vicinity
were deserted. From this point Reed returned to attend to his office
duties, while Putnam, disguising his appearance as an officer by
taking out his cockade, loping his hat, and concealing his sword and
pistols under his loose coat, continued on alone in the direction of
White Plains. Learning from a woman at a house that the British were
at New Rochelle, he passed on to within three or four miles of White
Plains, where he met some "friends to the cause" and ascertained the
general situation. "I found," he writes, "that the main body of the
British lay near New Rochelle, from thence to White Plains about nine
miles, good roads and in general level open country, that at White
Plains was a large quantity of stores, with only about three hundred
militia to guard them, that the British had a detachment at Mamaroneck
only six miles from White Plains, and from White Plains only five
miles to the North River, where lay five or six of the enemies ships
and sloops, tenders, etc. Having made these discoveries, I set out on
my return." Reporting this information to the commander-in-chief about
nine o'clock in the evening, Colonel Putnam retired to "refresh"
himself and horse, only to receive orders soon after to proceed
immediately to Lord Stirling's brigade,[211] now in Spencer's
division, which had already advanced on the road towards White Plains.
He reached Stirling at two o'clock that night, and at dawn the general
pushed on to White Plains, arriving there about nine o'clock on the
morning of the 21st. Washington himself and Heath's division followed
during the day, and the troops set to work throwing up lines at that
important point. By delaying near New Rochelle, Howe had missed his
opportunity. During the night of the 21st, Colonel Haslet, of
Stirling's brigade, surprised and captured some thirty men belonging
to the partisan Rogers' Scouts, and soon after Colonel Hand with his
now veteran riflemen proved himself more than a match for an equal
party of yagers encountered near Mamaroneck. In the first of these
skirmishes, Major Greene, a fine Virginia officer, was mortally
wounded.

[Footnote 211: Stirling, who with Sullivan had recently been exchanged
as prisoner, was now in command of Mifflin's brigade, Mifflin being
absent in Philadelphia.]

Washington concentrated his army at White Plains, completed two lines
of works, with his right on the river Bronx, and awaited the advance
of the British. Howe had moved from New Rochelle to Scarsdale, and on
the morning of the 28th marched against the Americans. A mile or more
from White Plains, on the main road to New York, he fell in with
General Spencer's advance parties under Colonels Silliman,
Douglas,[212] and Chester, who offered resistance and lost some men,
but they were driven back by superior numbers. On the left of the
American position, across the Bronx, rose Chatterton's Hill, which
offered a good site for the better defence of that flank. Colonel
Putnam had just arrived on the hill to throw up works when the enemy
made their appearance below.[213] According to Haslet, the Delawares
were the first troops to report on this hill, where they took post
with one of General Lincoln's Massachusetts militia regiments, under
Colonel Brooks, on their right. They were followed immediately by
McDougall's brigade, consisting of what was lately his own battalion,
which had no field officers, Ritzema's, Smallwood's, and Webb's. The
troops formed along the brow of the hill, and stood waiting for the
enemy. The two-gun battery brought up at the same time was Captain
Alexander Hamilton's.

[Footnote 212: See letters of these officers, _Documents_ 17, 22. Also
Tallmadge's account, _Document_ 26.]

[Footnote 213: "October 29th [28th] the British advanced in front of
our lines at White Plains about 10 o'clock A.M. I had just arrived on
Chatterton Hill in order to throw up some works when they hove in
sight; as soon as they discovered us they commenced a severe cannonade
but without any effect of consequence. General McDougal about this
time arriving with his brigade from Burtis's and observing the British
to be crossing the Bronx below in large bodies in order to attack us,
our troops were posted to receive them in a very advantageous
position. The British in their advance were twice repulsed; at length,
however, their numbers were increased so that they were able to turn
our right flank. We lost many men, but from information afterwards
received there was reason to believe they lost many more than we. The
rail and stone fence behind which our troops were posted proved as
fatal to the British as the rail fence and grass hung on it did at
Charlestown the 17th of June 1775."--_Colonel Rufus Putnam, Document_
43.]

The British marched up in brilliant array towards Washington's
position, but unexpectedly declined to make an attack in front,
although the centre was our weakest point. Chatterton's Hill appeared
to engage Howe's attention at once, and it became the first object of
capture. The troops assigned for this purpose were the Second British
brigade and Hessians under Donop, Rall, and Lossberg, in all about
four thousand men. They crossed the Bronx, under cover of their
artillery, and prepared to ascend the somewhat abrupt face of the hill
on the other side. McDougall's men reserved their fire until the enemy
were within short range, when they poured a destructive shower of
bullets upon them. The British recoiled, but moved up again to the
attack, while Rall came around more on the left, and after a brisk
fight, in which the militia facing Rall failed to stand their ground,
they succeeded in compelling McDougall to retreat. Had the militia
held their own, the fight might have been another Bunker Hill for the
enemy. As it was, Colonel Putnam compared it to that engagement. In
falling back, McDougall suffered some loss, but the whole force
escaped to the right of our lines, with fewer casualties than they
inflicted on the enemy. The latter lost about two hundred and thirty;
the Americans something over one hundred and forty. Colonel Smallwood
was wounded, and lost two of his captains, killed. Ritzema's New York
Continentals suffered the most, having made a brave fight.
Lieutenant-Colonel Samuel B. Webb, of Wethersfield, Ct., one of
Washington's aids, who had shown his coolness under fire on Bunker
Hill, was slightly wounded and had a horse shot under him while
carrying orders.[214]

[Footnote 214: Statement of his son, General James Watson Webb, of New
York.]

This affair on Chatterton's Hill is known as the Battle of White
Plains. On the side of the Americans, not more than sixteen hundred
troops were engaged, but the action was an important one, as it had
the effect of changing the direction of future operations.[215]

[Footnote 215: The details of the various movements in Westchester
County would fill a long and interesting chapter; but in the present
connection not more than an outline can be attempted.]

On the following day, the 29th, Howe waited for reinforcements. On the
30th, the rain postponed an intended attack. On the 31st the weather
proved fine about noon, but the British General "did not think proper
to put his former intentions in execution." The next morning, November
1st, there was a further excuse for not attacking: Washington during
the night had fallen back to the almost unassailable heights of North
Castle, in his rear. Howe was thus again baffled in his attempt to
bring the Americans to a decisive engagement, or to surround them, and
he now turned his attention to another line of campaign. Stedman, the
British historian, probably gives the correct reason why Washington
was not followed. The American position, he says, was now "so
advantageous that any attack on them must have proved unsuccessful,
for the river Croton stretched along their front, and their rear was
defended by woods and heights. Convinced that it was part of the
enemy's system studiously to avoid an action, and that their knowledge
of the country enabled them to execute this system with advantage,
General Howe resolved to cease an ineffectual pursuit, and employ
himself in the reduction of King's Bridge and Fort Washington." This
accomplished, he could then push on to Philadelphia and close the
year's operations with the occupation of that place. The capture of
two cities, the successive defeats inflicted upon the Americans, and
the good prospect of ending the rebellion in the next campaign, would
be a brilliant military record with which to gratify the home
government.


FORT WASHINGTON.

Howe broke up his camp near White Plains on November 5th, and marched
west to the Hudson at Dobb's Ferry. Knyphausen, who had lately arrived
with a second division of "foreigners," had already been despatched to
King's Bridge. After various movements and delays, the entire British
force also moved on the 12th to the immediate vicinity of the bridge,
and dispositions were made to attack and capture Fort Washington. On
the 15th, Howe sent a summons for the surrender of the fort, in which
he intimated that a refusal to comply would justify the putting of the
garrison to the sword.

The commander of Fort Washington was Colonel Robert Magaw, of
Pennsylvania. In addition to his own regiment and Colonel Shee's, now
under Lieutenant-Colonel Cadwallader, he had with him several
detachments of troops from the Pennsylvania Flying Camp, under
Colonels Baxter, Swoope, and others, together with a Maryland rifle
battalion, under Colonel Rawlings, whose major was Otho Holland
Williams, an officer distinguished later in the war. The artillery
numbered about one hundred men, under Captain Pierce, and there were
also the "Rangers," parts of Miles's and Atlee's old regiments, such
as escaped the Long Island defeat, and about two hundred and fifty
from Bradley's Connecticut levies, many of whom were to die in
captivity. The whole force under Magaw numbered about twenty-eight
hundred officers and men. The ground they were expected to hold was
that part of Harlem Heights from the first of the three lines already
described, northward to the end of Laurel Hill on the Harlem, and the
hill west on the Hudson, a distance of two miles and a half.

At the lower lines at One Hundred and Forty-sixth Street,
Cadwallader's men, the Rangers, and some others were posted; at Laurel
Hill, Colonel Baxter, and west of him, at the northern termination of
the level summit of the ridge where Fort Washington stood, was Colonel
Rawlings. Magaw remained at the fort to direct movements during the
attack. The outer defences where the troops were stationed were to be
held as long as possible, while the fort and the intrenchments
immediately surrounding it were to be the point of retreat. Magaw
believed he could hold the post against almost any force until
December, and when the summons for a surrender reached him he returned
the following spirited reply:

     "15 NOVEMBER, 1776.

     "SIR: If I rightly understand the purport of your message
     from General Howe communicated to Colonel Swoope, this post
     is to be immediately surrendered or the garrison put to the
     sword. I rather think it a mistake than a settled resolution
     in General Howe to act a part so unworthy of himself and the
     British Nation. But give me leave to assure his Excellency
     that actuated by the most glorious cause that mankind ever
     fought in, I am determined to defend this post to the last
     extremity.

     "ROB'T MAGAW, Colonel Commanding.

     "To the Adjutant-General of the British Army."

On the morning of the 16th, the enemy opened the attack from three
directions.[216] The Hessians moved forward from King's Bridge against
Rawlings' position, Rall on the right nearest to the Hudson,
Knyphausen a short distance to his left nearer the King's Bridge road.
Brigadier-General Matthews, supported by Cornwallis, came down the
Harlem from the bridge in boats, and landed at the foot of Laurel Hill
(One Hundred and Ninety-sixth Street), where Baxter was posted. These
formed the attacking columns from the north side. On the south side
Percy marched up from Harlem Plains and engaged Cadwallader at the
lower lines.

[Footnote 216: Consult "Map of New York," etc., Part II.]

At about the moment the cannonade began, Washington, Putnam, Greene,
and Mercer were putting off from the Jersey shore at Fort Lee to make
a final visit to Fort Washington, and determine whether to defend or
evacuate the post. When they reached the island they found the
threatened attack in actual progress, and evacuation then was out of
the question. They saw Percy making his dispositions, and could see
nothing to modify on their own side. All they could do was to await
the result. "There," says Greene, "we all stood in a very awkward
situation." Had they remained much longer it would have been more than
awkward. Putnam, Greene, and Mercer felt that Washington at least
ought not to be exposed in a position which might become dangerous,
and they all urged him to return to Fort Lee, while each in turn
offered to stay and conduct the defence. But the chief, who never
wished to hold the fort as an isolated post, foresaw the possible, if
not the probable, result of the British attack as clearly as his
generals, and he advised the return of the entire party. Entering
their boat they were rowed back to the Jersey side.[217]

[Footnote 217: Read the letter Greene wrote to Knox on the following
day.--_Document_ 36.]

The fighting began under a heavy fire from the enemy's artillery
posted at advantageous points, both on the island and on the east side
of the Harlem River. The several columns pushed forward nearly at the
same time. Rall and Knyphausen encountered the most serious obstacles,
and met with the most obstinate resistance. Their course lay through
woods and underbrush and heavy abattis, felled by the Americans. As
they approached Rawlings, his men received them with a destructive and
determined fire, which lasted a long time. Rall's force, including the
newly arrived Waldeckers, fought desperately, and, as Cornwallis
afterwards declared, "to the admiration of the entire British
army."[218] Knyphausen led his men and tore down obstructions with his
own hands. Matthews and Cornwallis climbed up the steep hill, and
drove back Baxter's men; but not before Baxter had fallen while
fighting manfully. Percy, with whose column Lord Howe had taken his
station, held Cadwallader's attention and made some progress in that
direction, when Howe ordered a fourth column, consisting of the
Forty-second Highlanders, under Lieutenant-Colonel Sterling, and two
supporting regiments, to cross Harlem River, and attempt to land
between Cadwallader and Fort Washington. This movement was
successfully conducted under difficulties. The Highlanders rushed up
the steep side of Harlem Heights just below the Morris Mansion, and
captured over one hundred and fifty of the Americans whom Cadwallader
and Magaw had detached to oppose them. Sterling's force, however,
suffered considerably in making the landing. By this attack in flank,
Cadwallader could maintain his position no longer, and his entire
party retreated rapidly towards the fort.

[Footnote 218: Testimony of Cornwallis before Parliamentary Committee
on Howe's case in 1779.]

Knyphausen and Rall, meanwhile, succeeded in driving back Rawlings,
who had made the best resistance during the day, and the former soon
reached Fort Washington, where all the Americans had now retreated.
The German general at once sent in a summons for surrender, and Magaw
finding that the fort was so crowded with his beaten troops, and that
it was impossible to attempt further resistance without great
sacrifice of life, agreed to a capitulation on favorable terms,
officers and men to be guaranteed personal safety and allowed to
retain private baggage.[219]

[Footnote 219: Washington, who with his officers watched the fighting
from Fort Lee, sent over Captain Gooch to tell Magaw to maintain
himself until night, when an effort would be made to withdraw the
garrison to New Jersey. The captain reached the fort, delivered his
message, and, running through the fire of the enemy, got to his boat
again and recrossed in safety.]

By this surrender the Americans lost in prisoners two thousand six
hundred and thirty-seven enlisted men and two hundred and twenty-one
officers,[220] the greater part from Pennsylvania, and nearly half of
them well-drilled troops. These were the men, with those taken on Long
Island and at Kip's Bay, for whose accommodation the Presbyterian and
Reformed churches in New York were turned into prisons, and who were
to perish by hundreds by slow starvation and loathsome disease, which
brutal keepers took little trouble to alleviate. The loss of the enemy
in killed and wounded was something over four hundred and fifty, about
two thirds of which fell upon the Hessians. The American casualties
were four officers and fifty privates killed, and not over one hundred
wounded.

[Footnote 220: Henshaw's copy of return of prisoners.--_Document No._
59.]



Upon whom the responsibility for the loss of this post should rest is
a question on which divided opinions have been expressed.[221] Greene
had urged the retention of the fort as necessary, both to command the
passage of the river, and because it would be a threatening obstacle
to the enemy's future operations. For them to advance into the country
with such a fortification in their rear would be a hazardous move.
These reasons were sound, and, as already stated, when the main army
evacuated Harlem Heights, Washington's council voted to retain Fort
Washington. But on the 7th of November, some British men-of-war again
passed the obstructions without difficulty, and Washington wrote to
Greene on the 8th from White Plains as follows:

     "SIR: The late passage of the three vessels up the North
     River (which we have just received advice of) is so plain a
     proof of the inefficacy of all the obstructions we have
     thrown into it, that I cannot but think it will fully
     justify a change in the disposition which has been made. If
     we cannot prevent vessels passing up, and the enemy are
     possessed of the surrounding country, what valuable purpose
     can it answer to attempt to hold a post from which the
     expected benefit cannot be had? I am therefore inclined to
     think it will not be prudent to hazard the men and stores at
     Mount Washington; but as you are on the spot, leave it to
     you to give such orders as to evacuating Mount Washington as
     you judge best, and so far revoking the order given to Col.
     Magaw to defend it to the last."

[Footnote 221: Two weeks before the attack on the fort, Magaw's
adjutant, William Demont, deserted to the enemy. This fact has lately
been established by the recovery, by Mr. Edward F. de Lancey, of the
New York Historical Society, of Demont's own letter confessing the
desertion. It is dated London, January 16th, 1792, and is in part as
follows:

"On the 2d of Nov'r 1776 I Sacrificed all I was Worth in the World to
the Service of my King & Country and joined the then Lord Percy,
brought in with me the Plans of Fort Washington, by which Plans that
Fortress was taken by his Majesty's Troops the 16 instant, Together
with 2700 Prisoners and Stores & Ammunition to the amount of 1800
Pound. At the same time, I may with Justice affirm, from my Knowledge
of the Works, I saved the Lives of many of His Majesty's
Subjects--these Sir are facts well-known to every General Officer
which was there."

Mr. De Lancey makes this letter the text of a detailed and highly
interesting account of the fall of Fort Washington (published in the
_Magazine of American History_, February, 1877), in which the new
theory is advanced that the disaster was due in the first instance to
Demont's treason. It is quite probable, as the deserter claimed, that
his information was of some use to the British general in making his
dispositions for the attack, but beyond this the incident could hardly
have affected the situation on either side. Up to the night preceding
the assault, Howe did not know whether the Americans would remain in
the fort or not. Indeed, he gave them the opportunity to evacuate it
by allowing a whole night to intervene between the summons to
surrender and the attack. He could not, therefore, have changed his
plans, as alleged, in the confident expectation of taking a large
garrison prisoners and sending home word of another great victory.
Fort Washington was simply in his way, and he would have moved against
it under any circumstances, regardless of Demont and his treachery.]

General Greene on the following day replied that he did not think the
garrison in any danger, and that it could be drawn off at any time.
He believed, too, that the stores could be removed at the last moment,
in spite of an attack; and again he called attention to the advantage
of holding the post as an annoyance to the enemy. No further
communications passed on the subject, but Washington rode to the
Highlands, and, returning on the Jersey side of the Hudson, reached
Greene's headquarters at Fort Lee on the 14th, to find no steps taken
to withdraw men or stores from Mount Washington. Had the enemy in the
mean time invested and captured the fort, it is pertinent to inquire
whether Greene, having been acquainted with the distinct wishes of the
commander-in-chief not to hazard the post, could not have been justly
and properly charged with its loss. Washington's instructions were
discretionary only so far as related to the details or perhaps the
time of the evacuation; and to leave Greene free, he revoked the order
already given to Magaw to defend the fort to the last. Upon the
arrival of Washington at Fort Lee, however, one phase of the question
changed. By not renewing his instructions to evacuate the mount when
he found that nothing had been done in the case, or not making the
instructions peremptory, he entirely relieved Greene of the charge of
non-compliance, which could have been brought against him before. The
commander-in-chief was now present, and Greene was no longer under
instructions, discretionary or otherwise. Washington accepted the
situation as he now found it, and was reconsidering the propriety of a
total evacuation. Finding Greene, of whose military judgment he had "a
good opinion," strong in favor of holding the post, and others
agreeing with him, among whom evidently were Putnam, Mercer, and
Magaw, and knowing that Congress and the country would not easily be
reconciled to its abandonment, Washington hesitated for the moment to
enforce his own views and opinions. On the 14th and 15th, he still
delayed a final decision. So says Greene. "His Excellency General
Washington," he writes, "has been with me several days. The evacuation
or reinforcement of Fort Washington was under consideration, but
finally nothing concluded on;" and it was not until the morning of the
16th, just at the time of the attack, that they all went over to the
fort "to determine what was best to be done." This clearly settles the
fact that Greene was not under instructions at the time of the
surrender of the post.

But at the same time, upon a review of all the circumstances, it is
difficult to escape the conviction that but for General Greene's
earnest opposition to an abandonment of the fort, the disaster would
not have occurred. It was an error of judgment, an over-confidence in
the sufficiency of the preparations made for the defence, and a belief
that if matters came to the worst the garrison could be withdrawn in
spite of the enemy. That Greene himself felt that he would be held
largely accountable for the loss of the post, is evident from his own
expressions in the letter he wrote to Knox on the next day. "I feel
mad, vexed, sick, and sorry," are his words. "Never did I need the
consoling voice of a friend more than now. Happy should I be to see
you. This is a most terrible event; its consequences are justly to be
dreaded. Pray, what is said upon the occasion?"[222]

[Footnote 222: This is what Tilghman said upon the occasion: "The loss
of the post is nothing compared to the loss of men and arms, and the
damp it will strike upon the minds of many. We were in a fair way of
finishing the campaign with credit to ourselves and I think to the
disgrace of Mr. Howe, and had the General followed his own opinion the
garrison would have been withdrawn immediately upon the enemy's
falling down from Dobb's Ferry; but Gen'l Greene was positive that our
forces might at any time be drawn off under the guns of Fort Lee.
Fatal experience has evinced the contrary."--_Correspondence in
Proceedings of the N.Y. Provincial Congress_, vol. ii.]

There were those who censured Washington for not overruling Greene,
but the chief kept his counsels to himself, and it was not until
nearly three years later, in August, 1779, that he gave his version of
the affair in a private letter to Colonel Reed. In that he frankly
admits that Greene's representations and other reasons caused a
"warfare" and "hesitation" in his mind, by which the evacuation was
delayed until too late. But he indulged in no censures on Greene. His
confidence in the latter remained steadfast. The disaster was one of
those misfortunes which occur in the career of every great general,
and become, indeed, a step by which he rises to greatness. Greene,
more than any general of the Revolution, learned by experience. Every
battle, whether a defeat or victory, was for him a training-school;
and at the close of the war we find him ranking hardly second to the
commander-in-chief, in military talents, and enjoying nearly an equal
reputation for his achievements.



This disaster at Fort Washington, the heaviest suffered by the
Americans during the entire war, closed the campaign in the vicinity
of New York. All the western part of Long Island, New York City, and
all Manhattan Island, had fallen into the possession of the British,
and their fleet came into undisturbed control of the Hudson, the East
River, and the waters of the Sound. Every thing that Washington and
his soldiers had sought to secure and defend was wrested from their
hands. Their losses too, in men and material, were almost
irreparable. Much the greater part of their artillery had been
captured--two hundred and eighteen pieces of all calibres, according
to the enemy's report. Three hundred and twenty-nine officers and four
thousand one hundred men had been taken prisoners; nearly six hundred
had been killed or wounded; and numbers had been swept off by disease.
The enemy suffered more heavily, except in prisoners and cannon, in
which their loss was nothing; but they had recovered territory, won
victories, and they were now to find before them only a flying and
dissolving body of rebels.

The situation at this point presented a gloomy prospect for America.
But had the cause been then surrendered, we could still contemplate
this struggle around New York and Brooklyn with respect, as a noble
effort to gain an end worth fighting for. As success, however, was
finally achieved, and achieved through the experience of these events,
they challenge our deepest interest.




CHAPTER VIII.

TRENTON--PRINCETON--CLOSE OF THE CAMPAIGN.


To appreciate the full significance of what has been described in the
preceding pages, follow the campaign in outline to its closing scenes.

Thus far the American army had met with nothing but defeat, retreat,
sacrifice, hardship, and discouragement. First came the months of
preparation, with England straining every nerve to conquer the
colonies; then the first and disastrous collision on Long Island, on
which so much depended; then the retreat, the loss of New York, the
withdrawal to White Plains, and a battle which was not a victory for
the Americans; and, finally, the heavy blow struck in the fall of Fort
Washington. Much had been endured and learned alike by general and
private soldier during these gloomy months, and both were now destined
to profit by the trial. All this faith and patience had its legitimate
reward, as we shall find if we now place ourselves in the last days of
the year upon the banks of the Delaware.

What had occurred in the mean time was the evacuation of Fort Lee, a
hasty retreat through New Jersey, the dwindling away of the army, the
advance of the British towards Philadelphia, the removal of Congress
to Baltimore, and an increase of despondency throughout the
country.[223] Washington with the remnants of his army had taken post
on the right bank of the Delaware, and, still strong in hope, was
calling for militia to come to his assistance. At the same time he
watched the opportunity to inflict upon the enemy some happy
counter-stroke that might temporarily raise the spirits of his
soldiers and the people. The opportunity came. The British delayed
crossing the Delaware, and divided their force among different posts
throughout New Jersey. At Trenton they stationed Colonel Rall with a
body twelve hundred strong, composed chiefly of Hessians. This was the
Rall who marched up with De Heister on Long Island, and figured in the
capture of prisoners, who afterwards turned our right on Chatterton's
Hill, at White Plains, and whose attack on Rawlings at Fort Washington
was the brilliant feature of that day. He was every inch a soldier,
except in possessing that reserve of caution which every commander is
bound to exercise in the presence of an enemy, however remote the
probability of an attack. Rall despised Washington's troops, and would
throw up no intrenchments around Trenton.

[Footnote 223: After the battle of White Plains, Howe, we have seen,
moved against Fort Washington. On the other hand, Washington,
supposing that Howe would aim next for Philadelphia, prepared to cross
part of his force into Jersey and endeavor to protect that city. He
proposed to continue the policy of "wasting" the campaign. Heath was
left to look after the Highlands; Lee with another force remained at
Northcastle, and Connecticut troops were posted at Saw Pits and the
borders of that State. Washington took with him Putnam, Greene,
Stirling, and Mercer, with less than four thousand men, and fell back
before the British through Brunswick, Princeton, and Trenton. He wrote
several times to Lee to join him, but Lee was full of excuses and
utterly failed Washington at this crisis. While marching in no haste
by a westerly route through Jersey, Lee was surprised at his quarters
at Baskingridge on the morning of December 13th, and made prisoner by
Lieutenant-Colonel Harcourt and a party of dragoons. (The account of
the capture by Captain Bradford, Lee's aid, not heretofore published,
is given in _Document_ 46. In Wilkinson's _Memoirs_ there is another
account.) Sullivan then took command of Lee's troops and joined
Washington, who at Trenton had crossed to the Pennsylvania side of the
Delaware, removing all boats to delay the enemy, and had halted in
camp a few miles above.]

Washington resolved to make a sudden dash upon this Hessian. A
surprise, an irresistible attack, the capture of a post with a
thousand men, might work wonders in their moral effect. The soldiers
with him were trusty men, twenty-four hundred of whom he proposed to
lead himself on this enterprise. Many of the regiments we have already
become familiar with, and their leaders are men who have led them from
the first. Here are Greene, Sullivan, Stirling, Mercer, Glover, and
Sargent, for division and brigade commanders; and with them we meet
new officers--Brigadier-Generals Adam Stephen, of Virginia; Arthur St.
Clair, of Pennsylvania, and De Fermoy, a French officer, lately
commissioned by Congress. Here also are Hand's battalion, parts of
Smallwood's and Haslet's, Knox and his artillerymen, Durkee's, Charles
Webb's, Ward's, and parts of Chester's and Bradley's, from
Connecticut; Sargent's, Glover's, Hutchinson's, Baldwin's, Shepherd's,
Bailey's, and Paterson's, of Massachusetts; Stark's, Poor's, and
Reed's, from New Hampshire, who, with Paterson's, have just arrived in
camp from Ticonderoga; the remnants of McDougall's and Ritzema's New
York Continentals, and Weedon's, Scott's, Elliot's, Buckner's, and
Reed's Virginians. How depleted are these battalions, many of them
less than a hundred strong!

Washington's plan included a simultaneous move from several points.
The body he was to lead was concentrated, on the night of December
24th, at McConkey's Ferry, nine miles above Trenton. The troops were
to cross at night, reach the town at dawn, and take its garrison by
surprise. Lower down were two other bodies of troops. About opposite
Trenton, General Ewing was posted with Pennsylvania militia and
Nixon's Continental brigade, now commanded by Colonel Daniel
Hitchcock, of Rhode Island. At Bristol, General Cadwallader commanded
still another corps of Pennsylvanians, including many young men from
the best families in Philadelphia. Ewing and Cadwallader were to cross
and intercept the retreat of the Hessians from Trenton, or prevent
Donop at Burlington from affording relief. Putnam was to make a
demonstration from Philadelphia.

To his own force Washington issued minute and stringent orders. The
troops he divided into two divisions, giving Sullivan the first, and
Greene the second. Sullivan's brigades were Glover's, Sargent's, and
St. Clair's; Greene's were Stephen's, Mercer's, and Stirling's. De
Fermoy was to follow in Greene's rear with Hand's riflemen and
Hausegger's German battalion from Pennsylvania. To each brigade were
attached from two to four pieces of artillery, eighteen guns in all,
under Knox. Greene's division was to cross first, Stephen's in
advance, provided with spikes and hammers to spike the enemy's guns,
and with ropes to drag them off if that proved feasible. After the
crossing, Captain Washington, of the Third Virginia, was to proceed
with a guard on the road towards Trenton, and halt and detain any one
who might be passing in either direction. Three miles from the ferry
the road branched, making two lines of approach to the town. Greene's
division was to take the upper road; Sullivan's the lower one near the
river. Stirling's and St. Clair's brigades were to act as reserves for
their respective columns, and in case of necessity were to form
separately or join forces, as the emergency required. The officers
set their watches by Washington's. Profound silence was enjoined. Not
a man to leave the ranks, read the orders, _under penalty of
death_.[224]

[Footnote 224: Order of march to Trenton.--_Drake's Life of Knox._]

The night of the 24th brought storm, snow, and sleet. Ewing and
Cadwallader could do nothing on account of the ice in the river. But
Washington was determined on the attempt. He called upon Glover's men
to man the boats; and these amphibious soldiers, who had transported
the army on the retreat from Long Island, were ready again to strain
every nerve for the plans of their chief. It was a long, tedious night
as they pushed across the Delaware, through ice and chilling spray,
and it was not until four o'clock in the morning that the force was
ready to take up the march on the Jersey side. They could not surprise
the Hessians before daylight, but a return was not to be thought of.
The troops then marched on in the worst weather that could be
encountered. "As violent a storm ensued of Hail & Snow as I ever
felt," wrote Captain William Hull, of Webb's Continentals. The river
was crossed, says Knox, "with almost infinite difficulty," the
floating ice making the labor incredible. Fortunately the storm was
against our backs, "and consequently in the faces of our enemy." The
march was kept up swiftly and quietly. In Sullivan's column some of
the soldiers could not cover their muskets from the wet, and word was
sent to Washington of the unfitness of their arms. Washington promptly
sent word back by his aid, Lieutenant-Colonel Samuel B. Webb, that if
the men could not discharge their pieces they must use the bayonet,
for the town must be taken.

At eight o'clock the two columns neared the enemy's
outposts--Sullivan striking them on the lower road but three minutes
after Greene on the upper one. Greene's van was led by Captain
Washington and Lieutenant James Monroe, the future President;
Sullivan's by Stark's New Hampshire men. Surprising the Hessian
outguards, our troops dashed after them "pell-mell" into Trenton, gave
the enemy no time to form, cleared the streets with cannon and
howitzers "in the twinkling of an eye," under Washington's own
direction, dislodged them from the houses, drove them beyond into a
plain, surrounded and forced them to surrender, with the loss of their
commander Rall, who fell mortally wounded. A fine and remarkable
exploit! The turning-point of the campaign--if not, indeed, the
decisive stroke of the war! Gathering up their nine hundred and fifty
prisoners, six brass field-pieces, standards, horses, and "a vast
quantity of Plunder," the Americans marched back again, having lost
not a man killed, and hardly more than two or three wounded.

In General Orders next day, Washington congratulated his soldiers in
the warmest terms. He had been in many actions, in all of which he had
seen misbehavior on the part of some; but at Trenton, he told them
their conduct was admirable, without exception. Among others he
thanked Knox for his services in terms "strong and polite."
"Providence seemed to have smiled upon every part of this enterprise."
"What can't men do," said Hull, "when engaged in so noble a cause!"
"That victory," writes Bancroft, "turned the shadow of death into the
morning."



One more encounter with the enemy, one more success, and the campaign
closes with final victory assured for America.

Convinced that inaction would be as demoralizing as defeat, Washington
once more determined to try his fortunes in New Jersey, and at once
prepared again "to beat up" the enemy's quarters. Crossing the
Delaware as before, he marched on the 30th to Trenton, which the
British had not reoccupied since Christmas. Hearing of this move,
Cornwallis at Princeton gathered a force of seven thousand veterans,
and on the 2d of January started for Trenton. Washington sent out
detachments, and delayed his entry into the town until evening. At
nightfall he took up position on the east bank of the Assanpink Creek,
which ran along the east edge of the town and emptied into the
Delaware. The British pursued our troops to the bridge, but were there
repulsed by Knox's artillery. Cornwallis rested at Trenton, sent off
for reinforcements, and expected the next morning to cross the
Assanpink at the bridge or the fords above, and bring Washington to an
engagement. Obviously the Americans were in a hazardous position.
Should the British drive them back, there was no escape, for the
Delaware flowed in their rear. They must save themselves that night. A
council of war was called, and the situation discussed. From Trenton
to Princeton ran a second roundabout road east of the main highway,
along which Cornwallis had marched, and which it was possible for the
Americans to take, and put themselves in the rear of Cornwallis, with
lines of retreat open beyond to Morristown and the back country.
Washington proposed escape by this route, and the council seconded
him. Orders for a secret night march were given to the officers, and
the regiments were silently withdrawn from their posts along the
Assanpink, and set in motion along this back road towards Princeton.
The camp-fires on the banks of the creek were kept up by guards left
behind for the purpose. Nothing occurred to excite suspicion of the
movement in the minds of the British sentinels, nearly within
musket-shot on the opposite bank.

Washington's troops reached a point within two miles of Princeton
about sunrise. The main column pushed on for the village, while
Mercer's brigade, consisting of the remnants of Haslet's Delawares,
Smallwood's Marylanders, and the First Virginia regiment under Captain
Fleming, turned to the left to break down a bridge on the main road
over Stony Creek, which the enemy would have to cross on returning
from Trenton, in pursuit of Washington.

Three British regiments had been left at Princeton by Cornwallis, but
were now, on the morning of the 3d, proceeding under orders to join
him. These were the Fifty-fifth, the Fortieth, and Seventeenth, the
latter commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Mawhood. Mawhood was a mile in
advance of the others, and had just crossed the Stony Creek bridge,
when, looking across the country to his left and rear, he discovered
Mercer's party on its march. Surprised at the appearance of a force of
rebels where he least expected to see one, Mawhood, nevertheless, with
a soldier's instinct, promptly wheeled about and proceeded to attack
Mercer. They met on a hill and exchanged fire, when Mawhood ordered a
bayonet charge, and put the Americans to rout. Mercer, on horseback,
attempted in vain to rally his men, and was mortally wounded with
bayonet thrusts. Haslet, gallantly fighting on foot, and also trying
to form the broken brigade, fell dead with a bullet wound in his
forehead. Captain Fleming, of Virginia, suffered a like fate, as well
as Captain Neal of the artillery. This sudden and serious reverse
required instant attention, for Washington could not afford to be
detained long in this position. Cadwallader's brigade, which had
followed Mercer's, was accordingly brought up into line, while
Washington attempted to rally the latter's force; but Mawhood was
making a surprising fight, and he threw Cadwallader's militiamen into
confusion as he had Mercer's. Matters now were worse, and the
commander-in-chief made strenuous exertions, at great personal hazard,
to bring the troops into some order. Meanwhile, he sent word for
Hitchcock's brigade to advance upon the enemy, while Hand's riflemen
endeavored to turn their left. The "gallant Hitchcock" promptly took
his command into action--all that remained of it, five regiments
together hardly five hundred strong--and formed in line. On the right
was Lieutenant-Colonel Nixon, next Varnum's battalion, under
Lieutenant-Colonel Crary, in the centre Colonel Lippett, with the
largest number, one hundred and twenty-eight men, next Hitchcock's,
under Major Angell, and on the left Little's battalion, under
Lieutenant-Colonel Henshaw.[225] They opened fire at one hundred
yards, and then, in conjunction with Cadwallader's men, whom
Washington had rallied in part, they rushed upon Mawhood's force,
recaptured the two guns we had lost, and joined in putting the enemy
completely to rout.

[Footnote 225: _Stiles' MS. Diary._ Statement of Rhode Island officers
engaged at Princeton.]

No doubt these old troops experienced a glow of satisfaction over this
brief and final work of the campaign, for they had endured hard
service from the outset. Here was Greene's old brigade, which crossed
with him to Long Island on the 1st of May--Varnum's, Hitchcock's,
Little's, and, by a happy accident, Hand's, on the left--to assist in
reversing the record of the year. These men had built the lines around
Brooklyn; Hitchcock's and Little's at the Flatbush Pass had been
caught and all but captured in the surprise of August 27th; they
fought manfully, and suffered the most at Harlem Heights; many of them
responded to Washington's appeal to remain six weeks beyond their term
of service, and now they had shared in the successful manoeuvre at
Princeton, which changed the whole aspect of affairs.

Hitchcock, who had temporarily succeeded Nixon in command of the
brigade, received the thanks of Washington for himself and for his men
in front of Princeton College for their aid and conduct in the action.
But the colonel, a brilliant, promising officer, whose regiment built
and guarded Fort Putnam in Brooklyn, was destined to only a brief
career henceforth. Overcome by the fatigue and hardships of the
campaign, he died in camp at Morristown, on the 13th of January, and
was buried by the Philadelphia and Delaware Light Infantry companies,
under Rodney, with all the honors of war. It was a fitting escort to
the remains of the brave soldier, for Rodney and most of his men had
behaved well at Princeton.

Sullivan's troops drove the other two British regiments out of
Princeton towards Brunswick, and Washington's tired army then pushed
on, and on the 6th went into camp at Morristown.[226]

[Footnote 226: In connection with the battles of Trenton and
Princeton, read the interesting letters from Knox, Haslet, Rodney, and
Hull in Part II. They have all appeared since our general accounts
were written.]



The effect of these two unexpected strokes at Trenton and Princeton
was to baffle Howe, and utterly disconcert his plans. Expecting to
march upon Philadelphia at his leisure, he suddenly finds Washington
turning about and literally cutting his way through the British posts,
back to a point where he threatened Howe's flank and rear. The enemy
were at once compelled to retire from all their positions below
Brunswick, give up the thought of wintering in Philadelphia, and fall
back to the vicinity of New York. When Horace Walpole heard of these
movements, he wrote to Sir Horace Mann: "Washington has shown himself
both a Fabius and a Camillus. His march through our lines is allowed
to have been a prodigy of generalship. In one word, I look upon a
great part of America as lost to this country."[227]

[Footnote 227: In another letter Walpole says:

"It is now the fashion to cry up the manoeuvre of General Washington
in this action [Princeton] who has beaten two English regiments, too,
and obliged General Howe to contract his quarters--in short, the
campaign has by no means been wound up to content.... It has lost a
great deal of its florid complexion, and General Washington is allowed
by both sides not to be the worst General in the field."

Again, in a humorous vein:

"Caius Manlius Washingtonius Americanus, the dictator, has got
together a large army, larger than our ally, the Duke of Wirtemberg
was to have sold us; and General Howe, who has nothing but salt
provisions in our metropolis, New York, has not twenty thousand
pounds' worth of pickles, as he had at Boston."--_Walpole's Letters
and Correspondence. Cunningham._]

Here the campaign closed. Washington could not be dislodged from his
strong mountain position, and Howe was satisfied to rest his troops
and postpone further operations until the next season. Meantime the
country took heart, Congress voted troops and supplies, and the army
was recruited and organized on a better basis. "The business of war is
the result of Experience," wrote Wolcott from Congress, with faith
unshaken during the darkest hours of the campaign; and experience was
now put to good profit.

The crisis was passed. Events proved decisive. Hardship and anxiety
were yet to come during succeeding years of the war; but it was the
result of this year's struggle that cleared away misgivings and
confirmed the popular faith in final success. England could do no more
than she had done to conquer America; while America was now more ready
than ever to meet the issue. Independence was established in the
present campaign--in the year of its declaration; and more than to any
others we owe this political privilege to the men who fought from Long
Island to Princeton.


NOTES.

OBSTRUCTIONS IN THE HUDSON.--The following letter from Mr. Duer to the
Secret Committee of the New York Provincial Congress refers to the
defence of the Hudson at Fort Washington:

"WHITE PLAINS, Sunday 21st July, 1776.

"DEAR GENTL:--I have just arrived at this place from New York where I
have conversed with Genl. Washington on the Purport of the Letter from
the Secret Committee.

"Gens. Putnam and Mifflen have made an exact Survey of the River
opposite Mount Washington and find that the Depth in no Part exceeds
seven Fathoms; the Width, however, of the Channel (which is from three
to seven Fathoms) is not much less than 1800 Yards, the shallow Part
of the River running in an oblique Direction. Genl. Washington
expresses himself extremely anxious about the Obstruction of that
Channel, and Measures are daily used for executing that Purpose. It is
impossible to procure Vessels enough at New York, so that the Measure
must be delayed till such Time as more Vessels can be brought through
the Sound from Connecticut; however, I am not without Apprehensions
that this Resource will be cut off, as I understand that some of the
Enemy's Vessels have sailed out of the Hook with an Intention
(probably) of cutting off our Communication with the Sound.

"It is, however an Object of so much Importance that no Difficulties,
however great, ought to deter us from our Attempts to carry it into
Execution; _if we succeed, the Designs of the Enemy in this Campaign
are effectually baffled_--if we fail, we cannot be in a more
lamentable Situation than we are now.

"Exclusive of the great Advantage we should reap in obstructing the
Channel so far to the Southward, it is, I fear, the only Place we can
depend upon shallowing to the Southward of the Highlands, whilst the
Men-of-War are in the River, for if proper Batteries are erected near
the Water at Mount Washington, and on the opposite Side, mounted with
Guns of 18, 24 and 32 Pounders, it will not be practicable for any
Vessels to be so near as to prevent our working under the Cover of
these Works. I have strongly urged Genl. Washington to send Gen.
Mifflen some heavier Metal, and he seems half inclined. This necessary
operation has not yet taken place.

"The Genl. is anxious to have either of you (as Members of the Secret
Committee) to be with him in Town, and has authorized me to make the
Offer to you of his House during your Residence. Let me entreat One of
you immediately to come Down, and not to quit Genl. Washington till
such Time as this Measure on which our Safety depends is effected....

"I am very sincerely, yours, etc.,
  "WM. DUER.

"P.S.--For God's sake exert yourself to secure the Sea Vessels which
are in the River."[228]

[Footnote 228: From the Clinton papers as published in E.M.
Ruttenber's _Obstructions to the Navigation of Hudson's River, etc.
Munsell, Albany_.]

To hasten the completion of the obstructions General Putnam proposed
the following plan of sinking ships, as appears in a letter from him
to General Gates, dated July 26, 1776 (in Sparks'):

"We are preparing _Chevaux-de-Frize_, at which we make great Despatch
by the Help of Ships, which are to be Sunk; a Scheme of mine, which
you may be assured is very simple, a Plan of which I send you. The two
Ships' Sterns lie towards each other, about Seventy Feet apart. Three
large Logs, which reach from Ship to Ship, are fastened to them. The
two Ships and Logs stop the River two hundred and eighty Feet. The
Ships are to be sunk, and, when hauled down on one side, the Picks
will be raised to a proper Height, and they must inevitably stop the
River, if the Enemy will let us sink them."

On the 21st of September, the New York Convention resolved:

"That the Secret Committee for obstructing the Navigation of Hudson's
River be empowered and directed to purchase or impress for the Service
of the State any Number of Vessels not exceeding six, which they shall
think best calculated for the Purpose of completing the Obstructions
in the Hudson's River opposite to Mount Washington....

"That the said Committee be directed to send all the Oak Plank which
they may have in their Possession, to Mount Washington with the utmost
Dispatch."

GOVERNOR'S ISLAND.--The obstructions in the East River between
Governor's Island and the Battery consisted of hulks sunk in the
Channel. This was not done until a few days before the battle on Long
Island. Colonel Douglas, as he states, sounded the river. The present
Buttermilk Channel, between the island and Brooklyn, was not
obstructed. Governor's Island was evacuated on the morning of the
retreat from Long Island, but the enemy failed to take possession for
two days. The interval was improved by the Americans in carrying off
all except the heavy pieces to New York in the night-time.

BATTLE OF LONG ISLAND.--The prisoners named in _Document_ 58 as having
been captured by us at the battle of Long Island were a small party of
marines, who mistook the Delaware regiment in Stirling's force for
Hessians. They came too near and were taken by Lieut. Wm. Popham, who
was ordered to march them into camp. He made them cross Gowanus Creek
on Stirling's retreat, and brought all but one in safe. Popham
afterwards became major and aid to General James Clinton, and settled
in New York, where he lived to be over ninety years old. Was a member
of the New York Cincinnati. During the battle the marines landed from
the fleet, which could not make its way up above Gowanus Bay, and,
according to one letter, Admiral Howe furnished Grant with ammunition
while fighting Stirling. The Roebuck alone, as already stated, could
work its way along far enough to send some harmless long-range shot at
the Red Hook fort.




PART II.

DOCUMENTS.




[No. 1.]

GENERAL GREENE'S ORDERS

CAMP ON LONG ISLAND

[_Colonel Little's Order Book_]

GENERAL ORDERS.[229]

[Footnote 229: These orders are from the Order Book kept by Colonel
Moses Little, of Greene's brigade, while encamped on Long Island
during the months of May, June, July, and August, 1776, the original
being in the possession of Benjamin Hale, Esq., of Newburyport, Mass.
They cover the whole period of active operations there after the
arrival of the main army at New York. The book also contains
Washington's general orders from headquarters, New York, General
Sullivan's orders while in command on Long Island, Colonel Little's
regimental orders, and scattering orders from Generals Lee, Spencer,
Greene, and Nixon, in September and October, 1776. As all Washington's
orders are to be found in Force's Archives, a few only are inserted
here to preserve the connection. They are distinguished as "General
Orders." Sullivan's and the others are given separately.]

HEAD QUARTERS, April 30, 1776.

(Parole, SAWBRIDGE.) (Countersign, OLIVER.)

... Genl Greene's Brigade is to encamp tomorrow at 10 A.M. on the
ground marked out on Long Island....

GEN. GREENE'S ORDERS.

[NEW YORK] April 30, 1776.

The Qr. Mrs. of the 9th, 11th, 12th regts. are to apply
to the Q. M. Genl. for tents & camp utensils this evening to be in
readiness to encamp agreeably to general orders to morrow morning--at
4 o'clock this P.M. Col. Varnum & Col. Hitchcock & Col. Little are
desired to attend at the General's quarters to go over to Long Island
& view the encampment marked out. A sergt. & 20 men are to parade
at White Hall to morrow at 7 o'clock, to be under the direction of
Engineer Smith.

[LONG ISLAND] May 4th, 1776.

Captain Spurs is to draw out a party of carpenters to make Bell tents,
they are to apply to Col. Miflin for tools, boards & nails to make
them of. 300 men for fatigue to morrow. The Quarter Master is to make
an estimate of the necessary quantity of boards to floor the tents &
apply to the Quarter Master general for them. The Cols. or commanding
officers of each regiment is to give an order for the boards,
certifying the quantity wanted. A return is to be made of the state of
the cartridges now in possession of the troops & the number wanted to
make up each man's twenty rounds.

REGIMENTAL ORDERS.

[_Col. Little's._]

Officers for fatigue to-morrow, Cap. Gerrish, Lt. Kent, & Lt.
Atkinson.

GEN. GREENE'S ORDERS.

May 5th, 1776.

A fatigue party of 200 men to morrow morning properly officered. No
non-commissioned Officer or Soldier is to pass the ferries to New York
without permission from some of ye Field Officers. Any of the
troops attempting to pass over without permission will be confined &
tried for disobedience of orders. Any of the fatigue parties that
leave their work without liberty, shall do constant fatigue duty for a
whole week. As the security of New York greatly dependeth on this
_pass_, when these works are constructing the General hopes the troops
will carefully forward the same as fast as possible.

The inhabitants having entered a complaint that their meadow ground
was injured by the troops going upon it to gather greens, they are for
the future strictly prohibited going on the ground of any inhabitants,
unless in the proper passes to & from the encampments & the forts,
without orders from some commissioned officer. The General desires the
troops not to sully their reputation by any undue liberty in speech
or conduct but behave themselves towards the inhabitants with that
decency & respect that becomes the character of troops fighting for
the preservation of the rights & liberties of America.

The General would have the troops consider that we came here to
protect the inhabitants & their property from the ravages of the
enemy, but if instead of support & protection, they meet with nothing
but insult & outrage, we shall be considered as banditti & treated as
oppressors & enemies.

GENERAL ORDERS.

HEAD QUARTERS May 7, 1776.

(Parole, DEVONSHIRE.) (Countersign, CAVENDISH.)

Every regiment encamped in the lines & every regt. in the brigade
on Long Island, exclusive of their quarter & rear guards, are to mount
a picket every evening at retreat beating at sun set, consisting of
one Capt. 2 Subs, 1 drum & 1 fife & 50 rank & file--they are to lay
upon their arms, & be ready to turn out at a moments notice.

One Col. one Lt. Col. & one major are to mount every evening at
sunset as Field Officers of the picket.

Immediately upon any alarm or order from the Brig. Genl. of the
day, the pickets are to form in the front of their respective
encampments, & there wait the orders of the Field Officer commanding
the pickets, who is instantly to obey the orders of the Brigr.
Genl. of the Day.

A Brig. Genl. is to mount every morning at ten o'clock who will
receive all reports, visit all the outguards in the day time & report
all extraordinary occurrences to the Commander in Chief & the
Brigde Major of the day is constantly to attend head quarters to
receive all orders, & distribute them immediately.

The Col. is to go the grand rounds, & the Lt. Col. & the major the
visiting rounds of the Camp.

Brig. Genl. Greene will order the same picket to be mounted by the
regiments in his brigade as are mounted in the grand Camp. He will
also direct one field officer to mount daily to command them. Gen.
Greene will report all extraordinaries to the Commander in Chief.

Col. Prescott or the officer commanding on Nutten's or Governor's
Island & the officer commanding at Red Hook, are to report all
extraordinaries to the Commander in Chief on any appearance of the
enemy. The commanding officer at Red Hook will also dispatch a
messenger to Genl. Greene.

The officer commanding the riflemen upon Long Island will constantly
report all extraordinaries to Genl. Greene, & the officer
commanding upon Staten Island will do the same to the Commander in
Chief.

GEN. GREENE'S ORDERS.

May 8, 1776.

Field officers for the picket, Major Angell, Adjt. for the day from
Col. Hitchcock's regiment.

REGIMENTAL ORDERS.

Officers for picket tonight, Cap. Parker, Lt. Jenkins, Lt.
Burnham, Ensign Story. Officers for fatigue to-morrow, Cap. Dodge,
Lt. Jared Smith & Ensign Proctor.

GEN. GREENE'S ORDERS.

LONG ISLAND, May 10th 1776.

The Brigde Major is to regulate the duty of the regiments, both
officers & soldiers, by their number & not by regiments, some being
much larger than others, & to establish a regular roster for the
regulation of the same. A subaltern & 11 men are to guard the stores &
ferries.

The officer commanding the guard is to receive his orders from Deputy
Commissary Brown for the number of sentries necessary for securing the
stores, to be relieved daily.

The Cols. or commanding officers of the ninth, eleventh, twelfth
Regts are to draw as many cartridges from the laboratory as will
furnish each man 20 rounds; as many to be delivered out as the
cartridge boxes will contain, the remainder to be tied up by the
capt of companies, & every man's name written on his cartridges,
that they may be delivered without confusion: All the bad cartridges
now in the regiments are to be returned to the Laboratory. The
Brigde Major will send a party to the Qr Mr Genl to draw
tents for the establishment of the main guard, to consist of a
subaltern and 21 men. An orderly sergeant from each regiment will
attend at the general's quarters daily; they are to bring their
provisions with them.

The commanding officers of the 9th 11th & 12th Regts are
to make returns of the guns out of repair & the number wanted to
furnish every non commissioned officer & soldier with a gun.

May 10th 1776.

A subaltern & 30 men are to parade immediately to fetch over 300
spears from the Qr Mr Genl's store. The officer must pick
those that are fit for use. He is also to bring over a grindstone to
sharpen the spears on. Col. Hitchcock will send over the arms of his
regiment that are out of order, to Mr. John Hillyard, foreman of a
shop at the King's Works (so called) where they will be immediately
repaired. Any soldier that has his gun damaged by negligence or
carelessly injured, shall pay the cost of repairing, the caps &
subs are desired to report all such.

May 11th 1776.

Field officer for picket tomorrow night Lt. Col. Henshaw, Adjt from
Col. Hitchcock's regt.

DETAIL.

             C.  S.  S.  C.  D.  F.  P.
Picket       1   2   2   2   1   1   50
Fatigue      1   2   2   2   1   1   80
Main Guard           1                8

REGIMENTAL ORDERS FOR THE 12th REGt OF FOOT.

Those non commissioned officers & soldiers who have occasion to go
over the ferry to New York will apply to Lt. Col. Henshaw for their
permits.

A regimental Court Martial will sit today at 12 o'clock at Capt
Wade's tent to try such prisoners as are contained in the Quarter
Guard of the regiment. Cap. Wade, Pres. Lt. Hodgkins, Lt. Parsons, Lt.
Knot & Ensn Pearson, members.

GEN. GREENE'S ORDERS.

May 12th, 1776.

The 12th regiment exempt from fatigue tomorrow having to be
mustered.

May 14, 1776.

Field officer for picket tomorrow night, Major Collins, adjt. for
the day from Col. Hitchcock's Regt.

REGl. ORDERS FOR THE 12th REGt. OF FOOT.

IN CAMP LONG ISLAND May 15, 1776.

The Col. desires hereby to remind the officers & soldiers of this
regiment of the Rules & Regulations of the army, & of the general
orders issued by the Commander in Chief agreable to them, especially
that the Rules & Regulations be often read to the men that no one
plead ignorance if he is called to account for the breach of any of
them.

The Col. desires & orders that the officers pay particular attention
that the Rules & Regulations be read to the men agreable to the
resolves of Congress, likewise that the officers of each company, off
duty, attend morning & evening to the calling of the roll & if
possible that a report be made every day of such as be absent. The
Col. is sorry to see so much inattention, of the officers & men to the
duties of religious worship, & he desires as we are all engaged in the
cause of God & our country, & are dependent on the Divine assistance
for protection & success, & as it is a duty incumbent on all as far as
possible in a social way to wait upon God in the way of his
appointment, to implore pardon & forgiveness of all our sins, & to ask
his guidance & direction in the prosecution of our affairs, that
neither officers nor soldiers will unnecessarily absent themselves
from the stated worship of God at the house of Prayer--or on the
Sabbath day.

Commissioned officers for picket tonight Cap. Baker, Lt. Knot &
Ensign Woodman. Commissioned officers for fatigue tomorrow, Capt.
Parker, Lt. Silvanus Smith & Lt. Lamborn; for main guard Ensign
Mitchell.

GEN. GREENE'S ORDERS.

BROOKLIN May 16, 1776.

Col. Varnum's regiment to be off duty tomorrow morning in the
forenoon, to parade on the regimental parade at 8 oclock, to be
reviewed, & their arms examined. Every man in the regiment, that is
well, is to be on parade with arms & accoutrements. No soldier is to
borrow either arms or accoutrements from a soldier of either of the
other regiments, as the true state of the regiment with respect to
arms is wanted. Col. Hitchcock's regt. will be reviewed next day
after tomorrow. Col. Little's the day after that will be reviewed in
the same manner.

No soldier is to mount the picket guard without shoes.

May 16, 1776.

Tomorrow being the day appointed by the Continental Congress to be
observed as a day of fasting & prayer & his Excellency Genl.
Washington having ordered all duties to be discontinued except the
necessary guard until next day after tomorrow, there are no fatigue
parties to turn out tomorrow morning & the reviewing of Col. Varnum's
regiment is put off until next day after tomorrow, the other regiments
are to follow in order as in the morning orders. The general desires
that the troops of the 9, 11 & 12 regiments (except those on duty) may
be strict to attend the duties of the day in a devout & cleanly
manner. Field officers for picket tomorrow night--Adjt. from Col.
Varnum's regiment. Detail for Guard & fatigue as usual.

REGIMENTAL ORDERS FOR THE 12TH REGT. OF FOOT.

James Holland, a fifer in Cap. Dodge's Company is appointed fife major
to this regiment, & is to be obeyed as such.

Comd officers for picket tonight Lt. Atkinson & Lt. Fiske.

GENERAL ORDERS.

HEAD QUARTERS, 17 May 1776.

(Parole, NEW CASTLE.) (Countersign, WILMINGTON.)

Cap. Wolverton's Company of New Jersey is to join General Greene's
Brigade. The Cap. is to take his orders from the General respecting
his post....

GEN. GREENE'S MORNING ORDERS.

May 17, 1776.

A corporal & 6 men to be sent for a guard to fort Sterling to mount at
9 O'clock. This guard is to be sent every other day. The corporal to
receive his orders from Lt. Randall of the train.

Field officer for picket tomorrow night Lt. Col. Henshaw, Adjt.
from Col. Varnum's regiment. Fatigue as usual.

May 19, 1776.

Field officer for picket tomorrow night Major Collins, Adjt. from
Col. Varnum's regiment. Detail as yesterday.

May 20, 1776.

Field officer for picket, Major Angell, Adjt. from Col. Hitchcock's
regiment.

May 21, 1776.

Field officer for picket tomorrow night, Lt. Col. Crary, Adjt.
from Col. Little's regiment.

May 23, 1776.

Field officer for picket to morrow night, Lt. Col. Henshaw,
adjutant from Col. Hitchcock's regiment.

GENERAL ORDERS.

HEAD QUARTERS, May 25, 1776.

(Parole, MUGFORD.) (Countersign, LEONARD.)

A working party consisting of nine hundred men to be ordered tomorrow
morning from the different brigades, & the regiments.

Genl. Heath's.   { Colos. Leonard's & Bailey's }
                 { Colos. Read's & Baldwin's   } To go to Powles Hook.

                 { Colos. Parson's & Wylly's--To go to Bayard's
Genl. Spencer's. { Hill. Colos. Huntington's to Red Hook. Arnold's
                 { to Fort Sterling. Col. Ward's--50 men with 4
                 { days provisions to cut pickets.... The remainder
                 { of this regiment's working party--at Fort George.

Lord Stirlings.  { Nixon's & Webb's         } On Governor's Island
                 { McDougall's & Ritzema's. } every day till further
                                              orders.

GEN. GREENE'S ORDERS.

May 25, 1776.

Cap. Silas Talbut of Col. Hitchcock's regiment, Capn. Frazier of
Capn. (Col.) Wayne's regiment, Lt. Noel Allen of Col. Varnum's
regiment & [Lt.] Samuel Huse of Col. Little's regiment are a
Committee to inspect the provisions for the troops of this brigade.
The commissaries & quartermasters are to apply to them to determine,
which is merchantable and which is not. Such as they say are good the
quarter masters are to receive and such as they condemn are to be
refused.

No non commissioned officer or soldier is to be out of camp after
retreat beating, & any that are discovered going out after that time
are to be taken up & confined in the main guard, & any that are coming
in, that have been out without leave from their officers are to be
confined; any sentry that permits them to pass without examination
will be punished for disobedience of orders.

Lt. Col. Cornell having reported great negligence among the guards,
for the future they will be visited by day & night, by the field
officer of the day. Every commissioned & non-commissioned officer that
commands guards is to be reported, that has not his guard in good
order. No soldier is to be absent from the guard without leave, & not
more than 2 commissioned officers nor more than one non commissioned
officer at a time. All guards except the picket are to mount at ----
o'Clock in the morning. The retreat is to beat half an hour after
sunset. At guard mounting in the morning, the field officer of the day
is to attend the parade & give to each respective officer a proper
detail of his guard.

One man from each detached guard is to be sent to the grand parade to
pilot the new guard to the relief of the old ones.

No person is to be admitted to any of the forts where there are cannon
or ammunition except a General officer by day, without the leave of
the officer commanding the guard, & a general officer after dark is
not to be admitted without leave first obtained of the commanding
(officer).

The officer commanding guards where there are cannon or ammunition, is
to be very watchful & not to suffer by day or night any person to
enter the forts unless they have business there, or are known to
belong to the army, or are with some officer belonging to the army.

Adjt. from Col. Varnum's.

GENERAL ORDERS.

HEAD QUARTERS, May 26, 1776.

(Parole, HANCOCK.) (Countersign, TRUMBULL.)

... The working party of Col. Nixon's regiment are to be ordered every
day to Long Island, instead of Governor's Island as mentioned in
yesterday's orders....

GEN. GREENE'S ORDERS.

May 26, 1776.

Field officer for picket tomorrow night, Major Collins, Adjt. from
Col. Hitchcock's regiment.

May 29, 1776.

A garrison court martial to sit for the trial of prisoners now in the
main Guard.

The commanding officer of the Ferry Guard is to permit the Ferry boats
to pass until ten O'clock with common passengers, but no soldier is to
pass after retreat beating, unless the Col. or commanding officer of
the regiment, to which he belongs, certify the necessity. The troops
are to be under arms at roll calling, morning & evening. Every soldier
detected snapping his lock without orders from his officer, is to be
immediately sent prisoner to the main guard, there to be confined two
days & nights, & allowed nothing to eat or drink but bread & water.

All officers are desired to be more careful of discovering the
countersign to persons that have no right to know it.

Any soldier on guard that discovers the countersign to any of his
fellow soldiers, that are not on guard, is to be immediately confined.
Every one that gives the countersign, is to give it as softly as
possible so that if any person is listening, he may not hear it.

The sentries are not to suffer any person to stand near them, while
they are on their posts after retreat beating.

The General wishes that every part of camp duty may be done with as
much exactness, as if the enemy was encamped in the neighborhood, for
bad habits once contracted are difficult to get over, & doing duty in
a slovenly manner, is both disgraceful & dangerous to officers & men.

Field officer for picket tomorrow night, Major Smith, Adjt. from
Col. Hitchcock's regiment.

         C.  S.  S.  C.  D.  F.  P.
Fatigue  1   2   1   3   1   1   80
Guard            1   1   0   0   20
Picket   1   2   2   2   1   1   49

GENERAL ORDERS.

AFTER ORDERS, May 31, 1776.

Gen. Washington has written to Genl. Putnam[230] desiring him, in
the most pressing form, to give positive orders to all the Cols. to
have colors immediately completed for their respective regiments.

[Footnote 230: General Washington was absent at Philadelphia from May
21st to June 6th, leaving General Putnam in command at New York.]

GEN. GREENE'S ORDERS.

June 1st, 1776.

A sergeant & 20 men to parade immediately to clear out Mr.
Livingston's Dock filled up by the Picket pealings. No pealings to be
thrown into the dock for the future.

Six o'clock this evening the troops to be all under arms to man the
works.

Five Cos. of Col. Varnum's Regiment upon the right in fort Box. The
other three upon the right of fort Green.

Col. Hitchcock's regt. to man fort Putnam & the redoubt upon the
left of it. 5 Cos. in the first & 3 in the Last.

Five Cos. of Col. Little's regiment in Fort Green & 3 in the oblong
square.

The independent Co. to be reserved in the rear of fort Green.

June 3d, 1776.

150 men & officers wanted from Cols Varnum's Hitchcock's & Little's
regts with arms blankets & 2 days provisions cooked & 1/2 a pint of
rum a man. To be ready to march at 3 o'clock to morrow morning every
man to take his blanket & none to go but such as are decently
dressed.

CAMP LONG ISLAND, June 7, 1776.

Cols. of 9, 11, & 12 regiments to have all the arms in their
regiments that need repairing sent to the armorers.

The pikes to be placed in the works in the following order--100 in
fort Green, 30 in the works on the right of it, 20 in the oblong
redoubt, 50 in fort Putnam & 20 in the works on the left of it. Every
regt. to clean the spears once a week at their alarm Post.

The officers at the Ferry guard to stop all arms coming over the Ferry
to the island, & report immediately to the Genl. who has them &
where they say they are going. 2 sentries to be posted at the church
to stop all arms going eastward from the city, the names and place of
abode of any person stopped with arms to be taken & reported
immediately.

June 9th 1776.

Field officer for picket, Lt. Col. Henshaw.

The 9, 11, 12 Regts to parade tomorrow morning at 6 o'clock on the
right of the encampment, every officer & soldier not on duty or unwell
to join their respective regiments.

The Fatigue party not to turn out till after ye regiments are
paraded.

The officers of the 9th, 11th, 12th are desired to exercise
together by regts 4 days, & the whole of the officers of the three
regiments to exercise together once a week to be exercised by the Col.
of the Regt. in turn or by some person appointed by the Col. whose
turn it is. The Cols. of the 9, 11, 12, Regts are desired to
make returns of the state of the arms &c, agreably to yesterdays order
tomorrow.

GENERAL ORDERS.

HEAD QUARTERS June 10, 1776.

(Parole, BEDFORD.) (Countersign, CUMBERLAND.)

The Brig. Gens. are requested to make their different Brigades
perfectly acquainted with their several alarm posts & to pay
particular attention to the men's arms....

GEN. GREENE'S ORDERS.

June 12, 1776.

A garrison court martial to sit to-day....

The Col. or Commg: officers of the 9, 11, 12 Regts to certify
to the Deputy Commissary from day to day the necessary supplies for
the sick. The Surgeons to report every day the state and wants of the
sick. Centries posted at Hospitals & armory not to demand the
countersign of passengers unless they attempt to enter those places.

June 13, 1776.

The Camp Cullimen (?) of the 9. 11. 12 regts. to keep the streets
clean, remove the filth, cover the vaults every day & dig new ones
once a week; they must attend the Hospitals, & give directions for
having them kept in good clean order. Cols. are requested to appoint
nurses. No soldier to purchase clothing of another without leave, many
soldiers stealing and selling clothing.

June 14, 1776.

The 5 Cos. of Col. Waynes regt. on Long Island are to be
mustered to-morrow afternoon. A subaltern sergeant & 20 men to be
detached from the picket guard every evening to mount guard at Red
Hook Barbette battery to rejoin the picket in the morning.

IN CAMP LONG ISLAND, June 17, 1776.

The rank of the Captains in Col. Little's regt. being unsettled, a
Court to day is to establish their rank. The members to be from Col.
Varnum's & Hitchcock's Regts.

Col. Varnum's Regt. is to take fort Box & the Oblong redoubt for
their alarm posts, fort Box 6 cos., oblong redoubt 2 cos. Cap.
Woolverton's Independent Co. to join those in the redoubt, & to
receive orders from Col. Varnum.

Col. Hitchcock's Regt. to take fort Putnam & the fort or redoubt on
the left of it for their alarm posts.

Col. Little's Regt. to take fort Greene for their alarm post.

In case of an attack all these posts are to be defended to the last
extremity.

The lines to be manned every morning between day & sunrise & the
troops to be exercised at parapet firing.

CAMP LONG ISLAND June 18, 1776.

The picket to be discontinued till further orders, except guard at Red
Hook.

300 men with their officers to parade at 8 O'clock tomorrow morning to
receive orders from Engineer Smith.

GENERAL ORDERS.

HEAD QUARTERS June 19, 1776.

(Parole, LONDON.) (Countersign, MONTGOMERY.)

A working party of 900 men properly officered to parade tomorrow
morning near the artillery park.... Brig. Gen. Greene & Col. Prescott
will furnish 150 men each as a working party on Governor's Island. On
the present emergency all working parties to work till 6 o'clock P.M.
Those who go by water will leave work sooner if wind & tide make it
necessary.

GEN. GREENE'S ORDERS.

June 20, 1776.

Field officer, Lt. Col. Cornell, Adjt. from Col. Little's
Regt.

Col. Hitchcock's & Col. Little's regts. to furnish the fatigue
party to Governor's Island tomorrow. The remainder furnished by those
regts. to be upon the "Abatee" between fort Putnam & the redoubt on
the left of it, & the Cap. from fort Putnam to the half moon. Lt.
Col. Johnson's 5 Cos. of the 4th battalion of Pennsylvania
Regt. (Wayne's) to furnish the fatigue party for Cobble Hill. Col.
Varnum's Regt. to be employed on his alarm post. The Gen.
disapproves of the report for the establishment of the rank of the
12th regt. & directs the same court to sit again day after
tomorrow to examine the rank of the Caps. & to report how the court
conceives they ought to rank, & how it may be most equitably
established.

REGIMENTAL ORDERS.

June 21, 1776.

For guard Lt. Burnham, for Red Hook tomorrow night Lt. Collins.

GEN. GREENE'S ORDERS.

June 21, 1776.

Lt. Huse is requested to oversee the well-digging in fort Greene.
110 men for Governor's Island & 40 for Red Hook. Those that are to go
on the Island to be at St. George's Ferry by 8 o'clock. The others
to march to Red Hook as soon as they have had their breakfasts.

June 28, 1776.

Picket guard to mount from the 9, 11, 12, Regts. The 9 & 11
Regts to lie in their alarm posts--the 12th to lie in the oblong
redoubt.

GENERAL ORDERS.

HEAD QUARTERS, June 29.

... The Commissary Gen. to lodge a fortnights provision on Governor's
Island, Powles Hook & in all ye detached posts, Gen. Putnam
furnishing him a list of the men.

All soldiers intrusted with the defence of any work will behave with
coolness & bravery, & will be careful not to throw away their fire.
The Gen. recommends them to load for their first fire with one musket
ball & 4 or 8 buckshot according to the size and strength of their
pieces. If the enemy are received with such a fire at not more than 20
or 30 yards distance, he has no doubt of their being repulsed.

Brig. Genls. to order Chevaux de Freze & Fascines to close the
sally ports of their respective works. 26000 musket cartridges to be
sent Col. Prescott on Govr. Isld.

HEAD QUARTERS, June 30.

... Upon the signal of the enemy's approach or on any alarm all
fatigue parties are to repair to their respective corps ready for
instant action. Working parties are not otherwise to be interrupted in
finishing the defences....

GEN. GREENE'S ORDERS.

IN CAMP LONG ISLAND, July 1, 1776.

Cols. or commd. officers of 9th, 11th, 12th, Regts.
are desired to make a line round each of the forts & fortifications
for the troops to begin a fire on the enemy if they attempt to storm
the works & the troops are to be told not to fire sooner than the
enemy's arrival at these lines, unless commanded. The line should be
about 80 yards from the parapet.

Comg. officers of the guards at Forts Green & Putnam to send a
patrolling party to patrol about the 1/4 of a mile to prevent a
surprise by a partisan party.

The general thanks both officers & soldiers who turned out voluntarily
to work upon the Little Cobble hill; such public spirit is laudable &
shall not go unrewarded, if the genl. ever has it in his power to
make a more suitable acknowledgement.

No officer below the rank of a field officer to lodge out of camp from
their Cos. on any pretence, sickness excepted. The General
recommends the strictest discipline & daily attention to arms &
ammunition. Brigade being sickly the Gen. recommends the strictest
attention to the cookery & that broiling & frying meat so destructive
to health be prohibited.

A picket of one hundred to go to Red Hook to night by order of a
private message from his Excellency.

TUESDAY July 2d, 1776.

A picket of 50 men in fort Putnam, 25 in fort Box, a sergt. & 12 men
at the milldam from the 9th, 11th, 12th Regts. A picket of 20 men at
fort Sterling & 25 at Smith's redoubt on Cobble Hill. Upon an alarm
Col. Ward's regt. of Jersey militia to form in the rear of Fort Green,
the sentries to be placed at the front of the redoubts. Major of
Brigade to see to them. Patrols to be kept up from fort Putnam every
hour.

July 4, 1776.

Officers of the guards at ye different posts to be accountable for
everything in the forts but particularly for the rum lodged there for
the people in time of action. Any one destroying the tools or taking
the liquor without leave will be punished.

Every Regt. to furnish pickets for their alarm posts & to be
credited therefor in the detail for duty. The 9th, 11th,
12th, Regts. & the N.J. battalions under Col. Cadmus & Col. Ward
to furnish a fatigue party of 250 men tomorrow morning. Garrison Court
martial to sit tomorrow, Col. Little president. Caps. earnestly
requested to examine the arms and ammunition of their Cos. & have
them ready for action at all times.

CAMP AT BROOKLIN, July 6, 1776.

The Ferry guard upon a night alarm are to repair to fort Sterling. The
ground to be levelled from which Col. Hitchcock's Regt. moved. 233
men for picket from Col. Varnum's, Hitchcock's & Little's Regts. 66
men from the same for guard.

July 8, 1776.

Col. Varnum's Regt. to remove their encampment to Red Hook, & do
the duty of that post. Col. Forman's N.J. regt. to camp on the
ground lately occupied by Col. Hitchcock's regt.

July 8, 1776.

Col. Forman's Regt. to occupy Col. Varnum's old alarm posts,
namely, Fort Box and the Oblong redoubt. Brigade Major to lead the
troops to the alarm Post at 7 A.M. The guard for the several works to
be continued the same as before from the 11th & 12th of the old
establishment & the Jersey new levies, that the new levies may have
the benefit of the knowledge of the standing troops.

GENERAL ORDERS.

HEAD QUARTERS, July 9, 1776.

... The Continental Congress impelled by the dictates of duty, policy
and necessity have been pleased to dissolve the connection which
subsisted between this country & Gt. Britain, & to declare the
colonies of North America, Free & Independent States--the several
Brigades are to be drawn up this evening on their respective parades
at 6 o'clock when the declaration of Congress, showing the grounds and
reasons of the measure is to be read with an audible voice. The Gen.
hopes that this important _Point_ will serve as a fresh incitement to
every officer & soldier to act with courage & fidelity, as knowing
that now the Peace & safety of this country depend (under God) solely
on the success of our arms, & that he is now in the service of a state
possessed of sufficient power to reward his merit & advance him to the
highest honor of a free country.

The Brigade Majors are to receive copies of the declaration to be
delivered to the Brigrs. & Cols.

GEN. GREENE'S ORDERS.

July 9, 1776.

Adjt. for the day to carry the Parole & countersign to the guards
at Red Hook, Smith's Barbette, Fort Box, Fort Green & forts Putnam &
Sterling, & the ferry guard.

A fatigue tomorrow of 100 men for Smith's Barbette.

July 10, 1776.

Deputy Commissary, Mr. Brown, to issue provisions 3 times a week, Tu.
Th. & Saturdays.

Putrid fevers prevailing among the troops, the troops are forbid going
into the water only in the mornings and evenings, being dangerous in
the heat of the day.

A fatigue party of 150 to be furnished from the 11th & 12th &
Col. Forman's Regt. for Smith's Barbette to be continued till it is
completed.

July 11, 1776.

Fatigue parties to be turned out to be at work on the Hill by five in
the morning.

CAMP LONG ISLAND, July 16, 1776.

Prisoners sent to the main Guard by the Field officer of the day with
or without arms, unless sooner released by him or the Gen. are only to
be kept till the mounting of the new guard, unless a crime be
delivered to the Cap. of the guard in writing against (the prisoners)
by the person that committed them, with his name to it.

Lt. Col. Cornell & Cap. Warner are appointed to oversee the works
at Smith's Barbette & complete them. They are to be excused from all
other duty. Fatigue parties for the future are to work as long as the
Cols. think advisable every cool day. The general wishes the troops
to be as industrious as possible, lest the enemy attack (the works)
before they are done.

A subaltern's Guard to mount at Rapalyea's mill upon the point every
night, to continue till sunrise.

GENERAL ORDERS.

HEAD QUARTERS, July 18 1776.

2 guns from fort Cobble Hill on Long Island to be a signal that the
enemy have landed on that Island.

GEN. GREENE'S ORDERS.

July 18, 1776.

Field officer of the day tomorrow, Lt. Col. Henderson, Adjt.
from Col. Little's....

Patrolling parties to be sent out every hour to advance as silently as
possible & to stop & listen every few rods, to discover spies lurking
around the works.

CAMP ON LONG ISLAND, July 19 1776.

The works on Cobble Hill being greatly retarded for want of men to lay
turf, few being acquainted with that service, all those in Col.
Hitchcock's & Col. Little's Regts. that understand that business,
are desired to voluntarily turn out every day, & they shall be excused
from all other duty, & allowed 1/2 a pint of rum a day.

Half the fatigue party to work tomorrow at fort Sterling in widening
the ditch. Lt. Col. Cornell will detach the party & give the
necessary instructions. Cap. Newell of the Train to mount an artillery
guard on Smith's Barbette, on Cobble Hill, of a Sergeant & 6 men.

F. Officer of the day tomorrow Major Parker, Adjt. from Col.
Forman's Regt. (New Jersey).

July 22, 1776.

F. Offr. tomorrow, Col. Forman, Adjt. from his regt.

The Cols. or Cg. Offrs. of the 1st, 9th, 11th,
12th Regiments are requested to send in a return of vacancies, with
a list of names to fill them, by tomorrow at 9 A.M. The 11th,
12th & Col. Forman's Regts. are to parade on the regimental
parade tomorrow A.M. instead of going to their alarm posts. Comg.
off. of each regt. will receive orders on the spot when & where to
march.

The duties being exceedingly heavy on the men, the Genl. thinks
proper to lessen the fatigue party 1/2 & reduce the guard in forts
Green & Putnam 1/3, & a Serjt. & 12 men to mount in fort Box,
instead of the present guard.

July 24, 1776.

A fatigue party of 40 men & 1 sub. to cut fascines to parade this P.M.
4 days provisions to be provided. Passengers going into the city not
to be stopped at the ferry unless there is reason to suspect them. No
one to come out without a proper pass. Fatigue for home duty to be
lessened as much as the number detached.

IN CAMP LONG ISLAND, July 28, 1776.

The success of the campaign must depend on the health of the troops;
nothing should be neglected that contributes to it. Good Policy as
well as humanity claims the attention of every officer to this object;
our honor as well as our success depends on it.

The good officer discharges his duty not only in one but in every
respect. It is a mistaken notion that the minutiæ of military matters
is only an employment for little minds. Such an officer betrays a want
of understanding and showeth a person ignorant of the necessary
dependence and connection of one thing upon another. What signifies
knowledge without power to execute? He who studies the Branches of
military knowledge relating to Dispositions, & neglects to preserve
the health of his troops will find himself in that disagreeable
situation.

The general is pained to discover inattention to the digging and
filling vaults for the regts. & to the burial of filth and putrid
matter. The general directs camp Columen(?) of the several regts.
to dig new vaults, and fill up old ones every 3 days, & that fresh
dirt be thrown in every day to the vaults, & that all filth in and
about the camp be daily buried. The sickly season coming on, & Putrid
fevers prevailing, the Gen. recommends a free use of vegetables &
desires the men may keep themselves & clothes clean, & cook their
provisions properly; & little injury is to be dreaded. A neglect of
these matters at this critical season may be attended with dreadful
consequences.

Complaints are made of the troops stealing water mellons. Such
practices must be punished. A few unprincipled rascals may ruin the
reputation of a whole corps of virtuous men. The General desires the
virtuous to complain of every offender that may be detected in
invading people's property in an unlawful manner, whatever his station
or from whatever part of the country he may come.

Aug. 1, 1776.

All the straw bunks & ---- in ye different regts. occupied by
the well to be collected for the sick of Col. Forman's regt. A
sergeant & 8 men to be employed cutting wood for a coal pit for the
armorers shop--apply to master armorers for orders.

IN CAMP LONG ISLAND, Aug. 4, 1776.

4 Cos. of Col. Gay's regt. to take fort Sterling for their alarm
post & 4--Cobble Hill.

The countersign having spread too generally in the camp, & amongst
many that don't belong to the army, the Genl. orders every person
to be punished who is base enough to discover it to those who have no
right to it.

No person allowed to pass after 10 o'clock with or without the
countersign within the limits of the camp or circle of the sentries,
except Genl. & Field Officers, Brigade Majors & expresses. This
order extends to inhabitants as well as the army.

A fatigue party from Col. Little's, Col. Forman's & Col. Gay's
regts. of 200 men, properly officered, to work at Fort Sterling
tomorrow. Col. Gay or the comg. officer of his regt. is directed
to lead his troops into their alarm posts at 5 o'clock this afternoon.
Officers are directed to acquaint themselves with the ground for miles
about their camps.

MORNING ORDERS, Aug. 6, 1776.

Commanding Officers of fortifications are requested to pay particular
attention to ye provisions lodged at each alarm post for the
support of the troops in case of seige, and also that ye water
casks & cisterns are filled & when the water is bad to have it pumped
out & fresh water put in.

Aug. 6, 1776.

By a deserter from Sir Peter Parker's fleet we learn that the
Hessians, from England, & Clinton's troops from S. Carolina are
arrived & that the enemy meditate an attack on this Island & the city
of New York. The Genl. wishes to have the troops provided with
every thing necessary to give them a proper reception. Caps. are
directed to examine the arms of their cos. immediately.

Aug. 8, 1776.

A sub. & 20 men to parade immediately to march to Jamaica. Let the men
be decently dressed, & the officers keep them from offering insolence
or abuse to any person. They are to escort & assist Lt. Skinner &
wait there for his directions.

Aug. 9, 1776.

A report from Col. Hand mentions a large number of regulars drawn up
at Staten Island Ferry, & boats to embark in. No officer or soldier to
stir from his quarters that we may be ready to march at a moment's
warning if necessary.

Aug. 16, 1776.

Col. Smith (L.I. militia) to appt an Adjt., Q.M. & Serjt Maj.
& Q. Mr. Serjt to his regt., & to have the troops in his
regt not on duty exercised daily in learning the necessary
manoeuvres and evolutions.

Genls. Nixon and Heard are to furnish a fatigue party from their
brigades and to form the necessary lines from fort Box to fort Putnam.
The gin shops and houses selling liquor, strictly forbidden to sell to
soldiers, excepting near the two ferries.

The inhabitants of houses near the lines are immediately to move out
of them, and they are to be appropriated to the use of the troops. The
General is determined to have any soldiers punished that may be found
disguised with liquor, as no soldier in such a situation can be fit
for defense or attack.

The General orders that no sutler in the army shall sell to any
soldier more than 1 gill of spirits per day. If the above orders are
not adhered to, there shall no more be retailed out at all.

The Colonels of regts. lately come in are immediately to make
returns to the Genl. of their number of men & where they are
quartered. Col. Hitchcock's and Smith's Regts are to do duty in
Genl. Nixon's brigade--Cols. Van Brunt's and Gay's Regts. to
do duty in Genl. Heard's brigade. Capts in the brigades are to
be particularly careful that the Rolls are called 3 times a day & that
the troops do not stray from quarters.

GENERAL ORDERS.

HEAD QUARTERS, Aug. 20, 1776.

... General Sullivan is to take command on Long Island till Gen.
Greene's state of health will permit him to resume it. Brig. Ld
Sterling is to take charge of Genl Sullivan's division.


[No. 2.]

MAJOR GENERAL SULLIVAN'S ORDERS

CAMP ON LONG ISLAND

[_Colonel Little's Order Book_]

[LONG ISLAND,] August 20, 1776.

Field Offr of the Day tomorrow, Col. Phipps, (?) Adjt from Col.
Little's regt.

August 21st, 1776.

Five hundred men to be on fatigue to-morrow to be on the works by 8
o'clock, to leave at 12, & begin at 2 o'clock, & work till half past
6. Nothing can be more disagreeable to the Genl. than to call upon
the men to be so constantly on fatigue, but their own salvation, and
the safety of the country requires it. He hopes that in 2 or 3 days
more the encampment will be so secure that he can release the men from
fatigue and give them an opportunity to rest from their labors.
Adjt. of the day to attend at the Genls. quarters every morning
at 8, and an orderly from each brigade daily. Four men are to be
drafted to row the Genls boat and do no other duty. The Brigade
majors, upon receiving orders from Head Quarters are to call at Gen.
Sullivan's quarters for his orders, or send adjts to take them off.

Col. Johnson's and Newcomb's regts are to consider the woods on the
west side of the creek as their alarm post, and repair there in case
of an alarm. Gen. Nixon will show the ground this evening at 6 o'clock
to the commg officers of the Regts.

Aug. 23, 1776.

The men not to turn out to their alarm posts this afternoon, (but) to
get 2 days' provisions ready, & to be at their alarm posts to-morrow
morning by 3 o'clock in order for action.

Cols. Miles & Ransom's (Remsen's of L.I.) regts. to take
possession of the Bedford road this night--Col. Ransom's regt. to
march at 5 o'clock. Col. Miles' regt. is on the spot. Cols.
Little's & Hitchcock's Regts to possess the Flatbush road &
Cols. Johnson's & Martin's to take possession of the road near the
river. All these regts. to be at their posts by 6 o'clock. Upon
their arrival the troops now there are to retire to their encampments
& get 2 days provisions dressed, & be ready for action. The Gen. will
never make a 3rd. requisition to the majors of brigade, to attend for
orders.

LONG ISLAND Aug. 24 1776.

A return to be made to the Gen. this afternoon at 5 o'clock of all
ye Light Horse & companies of troop within the lines. The adjt.
of Col. Little's regiment is to attend at Genls. quarters at 7
o'clock A.M. to-morrow.

The Genl. returns his thanks to the brave officers & soldiers who
with so much spirit & intrepidity repulsed the enemy & defeated their
designs of taking possession of the woods near our lines. He is now
convinced that the troops he has the honor to command, will not, in
point of bravery, yield to any troops in the universe. The
cheerfulness with which they do their duty, & the patience with which
they undergo fatigue evince exalted sentiments of freedom, & love of
country gives him most satisfactory evidence that when called upon
they will prove themselves worthy of that freedom for which they are
now contending.

Col. Ramsons (Remsen's) Regt. to mount no guard except quarter
guard of 12, but be considered a fatigue party, to which they are to
attend from day to day. The Genl. is sorry to find that Regt.
flying from their posts, when timid women would have blushed to have
betrayed any signs of fear at any thing this regt. discovered at
the time of their flight.

Officers are requested to see that their men always keep at least 2
days provisions, ready dressed by them. The Commissary is to deal out
one gill of rum per man each day on this Island until further orders.
Soldiers are not to be out of their encampment but upon urgent
business. Gen. Nixon to take command of the lines next the enemy until
further orders, to post his men in the edge of the woods next the
enemy. Brigde Majors to attend punctually at the Genl's.
quarters at 10 A.M.

LONG ISLAND Aug. 25 1776.

The following arrangement to take place on Long Island until further
orders--Viz: Col. Mile's 2 battalions, Col. Atlee's, Col. Lutzs, Major
Hayes, Col. Lashers and Drake's to be formed into one brigade under
the command of Gen. Ld. Stirling. Col. Hand's, Prescott's, (Late)
Nixon's, Varnum's, Hitchcock's, Little's, Smith's, & Ramson's to be
under Gen. Nixon. Wylly's, Huntington's, Taylor's, (Tyler's)
Silliman's, Chester's, & Gay's under Gen. Parsons; Johnson's,
Courtlandt's, Martins, Newcombs & Freeman's (Forman's), under the
command of Brig. Gen Hurd.

The General orders that the Brigrs. attend at Head Quarters at 8
A.M. to-morrow for directions. Brigde Major Box is appointed to act
as Adjt. Genl. for this department until further orders.

A Brigr. Genl. of the Day to attend the Grand Parade at Guard
mounting at 10 A.M., every day afterwards at 8, whose duty it shall be
to see that the guards are regularly made up, & properly posted & duly
relieved. No firing at the outposts _to be allowed_ on any pretense,
except by permission of the Comg Gen. of the day, & none within the
lines except by permission. This order not to extend to sentries on
guard.

Brigr. for the day Gen. Ld. Stirling.

The Gen. is surprised to find the soldiers strolling about,
notwithstanding repeated orders, miles distant from the lines, at a
time when the enemy are hourly expected to make an attack. The
officers are enjoined to cause the arrest of any soldier who shall be
found strolling without the lines unless they can show a written
permit from their Cap. or Comg. officer of the regt. or company.
All the officers and soldiers are to keep within their quarters,
unless ordered on duty.

All troops in this department are desired to wear a green bough or
branch of a tree in their hats, till further orders.

Col. Ward's Regt. to be added to Gen. Parson's brigade. All the troops
not[231]----

[Footnote 231: The order breaks off at this point in Colonel Little's
book, but it is fortunately preserved entire in an orderly book kept
by Captain John Douglass, of Philadelphia. (Hist. Mag., vol. ii., p.
354.) The following order from General Lord Stirling also appears in
Captain Douglass's book:

[LONG ISLAND] August 25th 1776.

"The Adjutants of each Corps of this Brigade are to attend Brigade
Major Livingston at Gen. Sullivan's Quarters every morning at 9
o'clock to receive the orders of the day. The Weekly Returns are to be
brought in this day. Such regiments as have tents are to encamp within
the lines as soon as possible."]

All other troops not mentioned and those which may be sent here
without a General Officer to command them are to be considered as a
part of Lord Stirling's Brigade till further orders.

A return of the several Brigades to be made immediately. Eight hundred
(men) properly officered to relieve the troops on Bedford Road
to-morrow morning, six field officers to attend with this party. The
same number to relieve those on Bush (Flatbush) Road, and an equal
number those stationed towards the Narrows. A picket of three hundred
men under the command of a Field Officer, six Captains, twelve
Subalterns to be posted at the wood on the west side of the Creek
every night till further orders.

It is a very scandalous practice unbecoming soldiers whose duty it is
to defend the liberty and property of the Inhabitants of the country
to make free with and rob them of that property; it is therefore
ordered that no person belonging to this army do presume on any
pretense whatever to take or make use of any Corn, Poultry or
Provision, or anything else without the consent of the owners nor
without paying the common price for them; any breach of this order
will be severely punished. The Commanding Officer of each Regiment and
Company is to see this order communicated to their respective corps
and to see it carried into execution....

Brigadier Lord Stirling to command the front of our lines next
Hudson's River and to command the reserve within the lines, and when
either of the other Brigade Generals have the command of the Advance
Lines Lord Stirling is to have command of his post in his absence.
Each Brigadier General to assign the Alarm Posts to the several
Regiments under their command.


[No. 3.]

GENERAL ORDERS

HEAD-QUARTERS LONG ISLAND Aug. 29, 1776.

Parole, SULLIVAN,   }
Countersign, GREEN. }

As the sick are an encumbrance to the Army, & Troops are expected this
afternoon from the flying camp in Jersey, under Genl Mercer, who is
himself arrived & room & cover is wanted for the troops, the
commanding Officers of Regt's are immediately to have such sick
removed. They are to take their Arms & Accoutrements & be conducted by
an Officer to the Genl Hospital, as a rendezvous & then to cross
to-gether under the directions of the Person appointed there, taking
general Directions from Dr Morgan. As the above Forces under Genl
Mercer are expected this afternoon, the General proposes to relieve a
proportionate Number of Regiments & make a change in the situation of
them.

The Commanding Officers of Regiments are therefore to parade their men
with their Arms, Accoutrements, and Knapsacks, at 7 oClock, at the
Head of their Encampments & there wait for Orders.[232]

     [From MS. Order Book of Col. Wm. Douglas.]

[Footnote 232: The series of Washington's general orders in Force's
Archives does not contain this order of August 29th, which throws
light on the preparations made for the retreat. It is found, abridged,
in both Col. Little's and Capt. Douglass's order books; in Col.
Douglas's book it appears in the above form. Original in the
possession of Benjamin Douglas, Esq., Middletown, Conn.]

HEAD-QUARTERS, NEW YORK, August 31, 1776.

(Parole, HARLEM.) (Countersign, FLUSHING.)

... Both officers and soldiers are informed that the retreat from
_Long-Island_ was made by the unanimous advice of all the General
Officers, not from any doubts of the spirit of the troops, but because
they found the troops very much fatigued with hard duty, and divided
into many detachments, while the enemy had their main body on the
Island, and capable of receiving assistance from the shipping. In
these circumstances it was thought unsafe to transport the whole of an
Army on an Island, or to engage them with a part, and therefore
unequal numbers; whereas now our whole Army is collected together,
without water intervening, while the enemy can receive little
assistance from their ships. Their Army is, and must be, divided into
many bodies, and fatigued with keeping up a communication with their
ships; whereas ours is connected and can act together. They must
effect a landing under so many disadvantages, that if officers and
soldiers are vigilant, and alert to prevent surprise, and add spirit
when they approach, there is no doubt of our success....

     [Force, 5th Series, Vol. I., p. 1248.]


[No. 4.]

GEN. WASHINGTON TO THE MASSACHUSETTS ASSEMBLY

HEAD-QUARTERS, Colonel Roger Morris's House, ten miles from }
                              New York, September 19, 1776. }

GENTLEMEN: I was honoured the night before last with your favor of the
13th instant, and at the same time that I conceive your anxiety to
have been great, by reason of the vague and uncertain accounts you
received respecting the attack on _Long Island_, give me leave to
assure you that the situation of our affairs, and the important
concerns which have surrounded me, and which are daily pressing on me,
have prevented me from transmitting, in many instances, the
intelligence I otherwise should have conveyed.

In respect to the attack and retreat from _Long Island_, the publick
papers will furnish you with accounts nearly true. I shall only add,
that in the former we lost about eight hundred men; more than
three-fourths of which were taken prisoners. This misfortune happened
in great measure, by two detachments of our people who were posted in
two roads leading through a wood, in order to intercept the enemy in
their march, suffering a surprise, and making a precipitate retreat,
which enabled the enemy to lead a great part of their force against
the troops commanded by Lord _Stirling_, which formed a third
detachment, who behaved with great bravery and resolution, charging
the enemy and maintaining their posts from about seven or eight
o'clock in the morning till two in the afternoon, when they were
obliged to attempt a retreat, being surrounded and overpowered by
numbers on all sides, and in which many of them were taken. One
battalion (_Smallwood's_ of _Maryland_) lost two hundred and
fifty-nine men, and the general damage fell upon the regiments from
_Pennsylvania_, _Delaware_ and _Maryland_, and Colonel _Huntington's_,
of _Connecticut_.

As to the retreat from the Island, it was effected without loss of
men, and with but very little baggage. A few heavy cannon were left,
not being moveable on account of the ground's being soft and miry
through the rains that had fallen.

The enemy's loss in killed we could never ascertain; but have many
reasons to believe that it was pretty considerable, and exceeded ours
a good deal. The retreat from thence was absolutely necessary, the
enemy having landed the main body of their army there to attack us in
front, while their ships of war were to cut off the communication with
the city, from whence resources of men, provisions, &c., were to be
drawn....

I have the honour to be, &c.,
  GO. WASHINGTON.

To the Hon. _Jeremiah Powell_, Esq., President, &c.

     [Force, 5th Series, Vol. II., p. 399.]


[No. 5.]

BRIG. GEN. PARSONS TO JOHN ADAMS

PHILADELPHIA

LONG ISLAND 29 Aug 1776.

... Before this reaches you the account of the battle of Tuesday last
will arrive--'tis impossible to be particular in a narrative of the
matter as many are yet missing, who we hope may come in. In the night
of the 26th nine Regiments of the English troops perhaps about 2500
with Field artillery &c passed the Western road near the Narrows from
the flat land, for our lines. We had a guard of 400 or 500 men posted
in the wood, who about three o'clock Tuesday morning gave notice of
the enemy's approach, a body of about 1500. We immediately marched
down to oppose the progress of the enemy. We took possession of a hill
about two miles from camp and detached Col Atlee with a Reg't of
Delaware [Penn.] to meet them further on the road; in about 60 rods he
drew up & received the enemy's fire & gave them a well directed fire
from his Reg't, which did great execution & then retreated to the
hill; from thence I was ordered with Col Atlee & part of his Reg't &
Lt Col Clark with Col Huntington's Reg't to cover the left flank of
our main body.

This we executed though our number did at no time exceed 300 men & we
were attacked three several times by two Regiments ye 44th &
23d and repulsed them in every attack with considerable loss. The
number of dead we had collected together & the heap the enemy had made
we supposed amounted to about 60. We had 12 or 14 wounded prisoners
who we caused to be dress'd & their wounds put in the best state our
situation would admit. About 10 o'clock we found a large body of the
enemy had advanced on the other roads near our lines, but a constant
fire was kept up on the enemy till about 12, when we found them fast
advancing on our rear to cut off our retreat. Our little main body
advanced boldly up to the enemy in the rear & broke through their
lines and secured the retreat of most of the party; but it fared still
harder with my little party who had three times repulsed the enemy in
front and once in the rear; we had no notice of the retreat of the
main body till it was too late for us to join them, the enemy having
cut off our retreat on three sides & the main body having broke
through the enemy's lines on the other side and left them between us.
We had no alternative left but force through one line into a thick
wood, which we attempted & effected with part of our men, the other
part with Col. Clark being before sent into the wood. When we had made
our way into the wood, I was accidentally parted from Col. Atlee &
most of the men whom I have never seen since. I came in with 7 men
yesterday morning much fatigued. Our loss is impossible to be
ascertained. In my party a Lt. Col. Parry was killed and one wounded.
Our loss in killed & wounded is inconsiderable, but many are missing
among whom are General Sullivan & Lord Sterling. Colonels Miles,
Atlee, Johnson, Lt. Col. Clark Maj. Wells & several other officers of
distinction are yet missing. I think the trial of that day far from
being any discouragement, but in general our soldiers behaved with
firmness.

I am sir, with esteem & Regard
  Yr. Humble Svt.
    SAM'L H. PARSONS.

MORRISANIA Oct. 8, 1776.

DEAR SIR

Your's of the 2d inst I rec'd last night, for which I am obliged to
you. If any information I can give will contribute to your
satisfaction or my country's good I am happy in furnishing what falls
in my observation. I agree fully with you that you were in the dark
as to some facts relative to the transactions on Long Island & am
fully satisfied you still remain so, or you could not suppose the
surprise there was in the day time. To give you a clear idea of the
matter, I must trouble you with a description of that part of the
country where the enemy landed, and encamped, and the intervening
lands between that and our lines. From the point of land which forms
the east side of the Narrows, runs a ridge of hills about N.E. in
length about 5 or 6 miles, covered with a thick wood which terminate
in a small rising land near Jamaica; through these hills are three
passes only, one near the Narrows, one on the road called the Flatbush
Road & one called the Bedford Road, being a cross road from Bedford to
Flatbush which lies on the southerly side of these hills; these passes
are through the mountains or hills easily defensible being very narrow
and the lands high & mountainous on each side. These are the only
roads which can be passed from the south side the hill to our lines,
except a road leading around the easterly end of the hills to Jamaica.
On each of these roads were placed a guard of 800 men, and east of
them in the wood was placed Col Miles with his Battalion to watch the
motion of the enemy on that part, with orders to keep a party
constantly reconnoitering to and across the Jamaica road. The
sentinels were so placed as to keep a constant communication between
the three guards on the three roads. South of these hills lies a large
plain extending from the North River easterly to Rockaway Bay perhaps
5 miles & southerly to the sound bounded on the south by the sound and
on the north by the hills. Those hills were from two to three miles
and a half from our lines. The enemy landed on this plain & extended
their camp from the River to Flatbush perhaps 3 or 4 miles. On the day
of the surprise I was on duty, and at the first dawn of day the guards
from the West road near the Narrows, came to my quarters & informed me
the enemy were advancing in great numbers by that road. I soon found
it true & that the whole guard had fled without firing a gun; these
(by way of retaliation I must tell you) were all New Yorkers &
Pennsylvanians; I found by fair daylight the enemy were through the
wood & descending the hill on the North side, on which with 20 of my
fugitive guard being all I could collect, I took post on a height in
their front at about half a mile's distance--which halted their column
& gave time for Lord Sterling with his forces to come up; thus much
for the West road--On the East next Jamaica Col. Miles suffered the
enemy to march not less than 6 miles till they came near two miles in
rear of the guards before he discovered & gave notice of their
approach. This also was in the night & the guard kept by
Pennsylvanians altogether--the New England & New Jersey troops being
in the other two roads through which the enemy did not attempt to
pass.

We were surprised--our principal barrier lost by that surprise, but as
far as the cover of the night is an excuse we have it.--The landing of
the troops could not be prevented at the distance of 6 or 7 miles from
our lines; on a plain under the cannon of the ships, just in with the
shore. Our unequal numbers would not admit attacking them on the plain
when landed.

When our principal barrier was lost, our numbers so much inferior to
the enemy, they not disposed to storm our lines, but set down to make
regular approaches to us--were part of the reasons which induced a
retreat from thence and a consequent abandoning New York--. Our
sentinels & guards in my opinion were well posted, they might have
been better, too great security I thought prevailed with some leading
officers, but I still am of opinion, if our guards on the West road &
Col. Miles on East End of the hills had done their duty, the enemy
would not have passed those important heights, without such very great
loss as would have obliged them to abandon any further enterprise on
the Island....

I am sir
  Your Most Humble Sv't
    SAM'L H. PARSONS.

     [Originals in possession of Hon. Charles Francis Adams.]


[No. 6.]

BRIG. GEN. SCOTT TO JOHN JAY

WHITE PLAINS, N.Y.

NEW YORK Sept. 6, 1776.

DEAR SIR:

I received your letter about half an hour ago by the messengers of the
honorable convention, in which you inform me that they are anxious to
be informed of any transactions at this place that may be of use to
the State, or otherwise of importance. My duty would have directed me
to execute this task before the receipt of your letter, had I been
possessed of the means of conveyance. I shall do it now as far as the
want of good pen and ink, as scarce as almost every other necessary
article, will permit.

I shall begin with our retreat from Long Island. For previous to that
event the convention was so near the scene of action that they must
have been acquainted with every occurrence. I was summoned to a
Council of War at Mr. Philip Livingston's house on Thursday 29th
ult. never having had reason to expect a proposition for a retreat
till it was mentioned. Upon my arrival at the lines on the Tuesday
morning before, and just after the enemy, by beating General Sullivan
and Lord Stirling, had gained the heights _which in their nature
appear to have been more defensible than the lines were_, it was
obvious to me we could not maintain them for any long time should the
enemy approach us regularly. _They were unfinished in several places
when I arrived there_, and we were obliged hastily to finish them, and
you may imagine with very little perfection, particularly across the
main road, the most likely for the approach of the enemy's heavy
artillery. _In this place three of my battalions_ were placed, the
traverse of the line in ground so low, that the rising ground
immediately without it, would have put it in the power of a man at 40
yards' distance to _fire under my horse's belly_ whenever he pleased.
You may judge of our situation, subject to almost incessant rains,
without baggage or tents and almost without victuals or drink, and in
some part of the lines the men were standing up to their middles in
water. The enemy were evidently incircling us from water to water with
intent to hem us in upon a small neck of land. In this situation they
had as perfect a command of the island, except the small neck on which
we were posted, as they now have. Thus things stood when the retreat
was proposed. As it was suddenly proposed, _I as suddenly objected to
it_, from an aversion to giving the enemy a single inch of ground; but
_was soon convinced by the unanswerable reasons for it_. They were
these. Invested by an enemy of above double our number from water to
water, scant in almost every necessary of life and without covering
and liable every moment to have the communication between us and the
city cut off by the entrance of the frigates into the East River
between (late) Governor's Island and Long Island; which General
McDougall assured us from his own nautic experience was very feasible.
In such a situation we should have been reduced to the alternative of
desperately attempting to cut our way [through] a vastly superior
enemy with the certain loss of a valuable stock of artillery and
artillery stores, which the continent has been collecting with great
pains; or by famine and fatigue have been made an easy prey to the
enemy. In either case the campaign would have ended in the total ruin
of our army. The resolution therefore to retreat was unanimous, and
tho' formed late in the day was executed the following night with
unexpected success. We however lost some of our heavy cannon on the
forts at a distance from the water, the softness of the ground
occasioned by the rains having rendered it impossible to remove them
in so short a time. Almost everything else valuable was saved; and not
a dozen men lost in the retreat. The consequence of our retreat was
the loss of [late] Govrs Island which is perfectly commanded by the
fort on Red Hook. The enemy however from fear or other reasons
indulged with the opportunity of two nights to carry off all except
some heavy cannon. The garrison was drawn off in the afternoon after
our retreat under the fire of the shipping who are now drawn up just
behind [late] Govrs Island, and the fire of some cannon from Long
Island shore; but with no other loss than that of one man's arm. What
our loss on Long Island was I am not able to estimate. I think the
hills might have been well maintained with 5000 men. _I fear their
natural strength was our bane by lulling us into a state of security_
and enabling the enemy to steal _a march upon us_. I think from the
best accounts we must have killed many of the enemy. We are sure that
late Colonel and afterwards General Grant who was so bitter against us
in Parliament, is among the slain. General Parsons late Col. and
promoted to the rank of a general officer escaped from the action and
pursuit as by a miracle. I believe him to be a brave man. He is a
Connecticut lawyer. He told me that in the action he commanded a party
of about 250 men, with orders from Lord Stirling to cover his flank;
and that when the enemy gave way, he threw into a heap about thirty of
the enemy's dead, and that in advancing a little further he found a
heap made by the enemy at least as large as that which he had
collected. Lord Stirling had ordered him to maintain his ground till
receipt of his orders to retreat. However, finding that no such
orders came; and finding the enemy by rallying to increase on his
hands, he flew to the place where Lord Stirling was posted, leaving
his party on the ground with strict orders to maintain it till his
return, but he found his Lordship and his whole body of troops gone.
There can be no doubt but Lord Stirling behaved bravely; but I wish
that he had retreated sooner. He would have saved himself and a great
number of troops from captivity, but he refused to retreat for want of
orders. We miss him much, he was a very active officer. General
Sullivan who was also made a prisoner in the action on the heights
went some days ago on parole to Congress to endeavor to procure his
exchange for Prescot. I have not heard of his return. Two or three
days ago the Rose frigate went up between the islands and took
shelter, after a severe cannonade from us, behind Blackwell's Island.
She retreated yesterday as far as Corlear's Hook, where she was
briskly cannonaded till night. I have not heard of her this morning.
By the loss on Long Island and the running away of our militia,
_especially those of Connecticut_, to their respective homes, our army
is much diminished, and I am sure is vastly inferior to that of the
enemy....

Poor General Woodhull with a lieutenant and four men were made
prisoners on Long Island. I had a letter from him dated the first
inst. but not dated from any place, nor does he tell me how he was
taken. He has lost all his baggage and requested of me two shirts and
two pairs of stockings, which I should have sent him had not the flag
of truce been gone before I recd the letter. I shall comply with
his request by the first opportunity. Commend me with all possible
devotion to the honorable Convention.

I am, Sir,
  Your most obedient servant
    JNO. MORIN SCOTT.

P.S. _The army badly paid & wretchedly fed._ 1100 men arrived from the
southward. A deserter tells me be (?) 3000 foreign troops on Staten
island. I know not what the flying camp is doing. He says the enemy on
Long Island are 26,000. I believe this much exaggerated; and 1000 in
the shipping.

     [Original in possession of Hon. John Jay, New York.]


[No. 7.]

COL. JOSEPH TRUMBULL TO HIS BROTHER

LEBANON, CONN.

NEW YORK 27th August 1776.

DEAR BROTHER

Since my last the enemy have landed their main force on Long Island
near New Utrecht Church--between that & Flat Bush, our people and
theirs have frequent skirmishes in all which our people have had the
better of them. We have lost several men, killed and wounded--. Col.
Martin of New Jersey badly wounded in the breast, but I hope not
mortally. We just have received an account of a smart skirmish this
morning at break of day--the particulars I don't yet know, if I can
get them before the gentlemen go who bring this I will write you them.
Col. Huntington is unwell, but I hope getting a little better. He has
a slow fever. Maj. Dyer is also unwell with a slow fever. Gen'l Greene
has been very sick but is better. Genls. Putnam, Sullivan, Lord
Sterling, Nixon, Parsons & Heard are on Long Island and a strong part
of our army. We have a fine ridge of hills and woods to meet them in
on Long Island before they come near our lines.

I am dear Brother your Affectionate
  JOS. TRUMBULL.

JONA TRUMBULL JUNR Esq.

P.S. It was true the enemy attacked in the morning--Several parties of
them penetrated thro' the woods & the whole body are now thro' &
within 2 miles of our lines. Some parties of them have been up to the
lines but are drove back, or upon the Heights about 2 miles off from
the lines. There has been some very brisk firing & smart engagements;
what numbers are killed or wounded on either side--the firing ceases
at present but expect it renewed again by & by. We have lost a Mr.
Rutgers of this town, an artillery man & Lt. Col. Parry of
Pennsylvania. These are all we know yet.

Your's as before.

     [Original in possession of Henry E. Parsons, Ashtabula, O.]


[No. 8.]

COL. TRUMBULL TO HIS FATHER

LEBANON, CONN.

NEW YORK, Sept. 1st, 1776.

HONORED SIR,

... We have been obliged to retreat from Long Island and Governor's
Island, from both of which we got off without loss of men. We have
left a great part of our heavy artillery behind. The field train is
off. We are in hourly expectation that the town will be bombarded and
cannonaded--and the enemy are drawing their men to the eastward on
Long Island, as if they intended to throw a strong party over on this
island, near Hell Gate, so as to get on the back of the city. We are
preparing to meet them. Matters appear to be drawing near to a
decisive engagement. Gen. Sullivan is allowed to come on shore, upon
his parole, and go to Congress, on the subject of exchange of himself,
Lord Sterling, and a large number who are prisoners; by the best
accounts we yet have, we have lost, in last week's defeat, about 800
men killed and missing; how many of each, is not yet known. I rather
expect that they will push in a body of troops between the town and
our posts at and near King's bridge. If they do we shall have them
between two fires, and must push them to the last extremity or be
killed or taken prisoners. The event is in the hand of the Almighty,
Disposer of all events....

I am, honored Sir,
  Your dutiful son,
    JOS. TRUMBULL.

     [Collections of the R.I. Hist. Soc., Vol. VI.]


[No. 9.]

COL. MOSES LITTLE TO HIS SON

NEWBURYPORT, MASS.

IN CAMP LONG ISLAND June 22d 76.

DEAR SON--We still continue in Camp at this place. No arrivals since
my last. Some hints this morning that the Torys had laid a plan to
destroy the general officers of our army. The particulars I have not
yet. The Regt generally well.

July 6--1776.

About 160 ships and transports and other vessels are arrived with
about 10000 soldiers--Numbers are landed on Staten Island. We expect
12000 more to join them. Camp very healthy. I have lost only one man
since we left Prospect Hill (near Boston). Our men in good spirits. I
am of opinion our hands will be full--hope we shall do well.

July 31, 1776.

Ten ships are added to the King's troops--part very large, can't say
whether they are men of war or transports. This island is a place of
great importance, & if possible must be defended. We are five _small_
regts, are scattered, & have 10 forts to defend. Col. Hand's
Regt is scattered over 5 miles in length. I am posted in fort Green
which is the largest. I never desire to give it up, nor be taken while
I am alive. I am of opinion my regt. will stand fast in the cause
of the United States.

August 9, 1776.

The enemy were seen to embark 30 boats full of men on 3 vessels & 100
boats full on the other transports. We expected an attack, but all is
still & quiet.

Our enemies have been reinforced by the Hessians & Clinton's fleet.
Deserters say the enemy are 30,000 strong & Genl. Greene judges
them 20,000. I think them 16,000. We have only 1600 fit for duty on
Long Island. I shall pay the Q.M. Genl. the balance due him for
cloathing my regt. this day, which will square all accounts.

Aug. 22 1776.

I have thought fit to send you my will--you will take all charge
necessary &c.

The enemy this day landed on this Island & marched within 3 miles of
our camp. Three or four regiments lodge within 2 miles of the enemy. I
expect morning will bring us to battle.

IN CAMP NEW YORK Sep. 1, 1776.

The enemy left Staten Island & landed on Long Island the 22d.
Encamped on a large plain 5 or 6 miles across, at Flat Bush 4 miles
distant. Our troops encamped in the edge of the woods in front of
them. Our line extended about four miles on the night of the 27th.
In the morning, at 2 o'clock, the enemy attacked our right wing (a
smart engagement for some time).

The enemy also advanced on the left. Lord Stirling reinforced the
right wing & defended himself till 12 o'clock when our wing gave way.
My regt. was in the center on guard. The enemy's right wing almost
encircled 2 or 3 regt's & as they were not together they were not able
to defend themselves & retreated with about 20 wounded. Our people
came in about 11 o'clock. The enemy at the same time with their light
horse & English troops attempted to force our lines, but soon
retreated being met with a smart fire from our breast works.

Two deserters informed us that the enemies dead & wounded was upwards
of 500--I wish ours may not be more. On the morning of the 28th the
enemy were encamped on the heights in front of our encampment. Firing
was kept up on both sides, from the right to the left. Weather very
rainy. 29th very rainy. Firing by both sides in front of Fort
Putnam. About sunset the enemy pushed to recover the ground we had
taken (about 100 rods) in front of the fort. The fire was very hot,
the enemy gave way, & our people recovered the ground. The fire
ceased, & our people retired to the fort. The enemy took possession
again, & on the morning of the 30th had a breastwork there 60 rods
long, & 150 rods distant from fort Putnam.

Two ships of war had got up the sound as far as Hell gate by this
time. The general ordered each regt. to be paraded on their own
parades at 7 O'clock P.M. & wait for orders. We received orders to
strike our tents & march, with our baggage, to New York. Our lines
were manned until day break.

The reason of the retreat was, that we should have had no chance to
retreat if the ships came up. I am not certain we shall be able to
keep the city of New York. You may hear of our being at King's Bridge.
A great battle I think will be fought here, or near there.

I am in a good measure of health.

I am your affectionate father,
  MOSES LITTLE.

To Mr. JOSIAH LITTLE.

IN CAMP FORT CONSTITUTION, Oct. 1, 1776.

I have been solicited by Genl. Green to remain in the service. I
before declined, but he will not hear one word about my refusing to
serve.

     [Original in possession of Benjamin Hale, Esq.]


[No. 10.]

LIEUT. COL. WILLIAM HENSHAW TO HIS WIFE

LEICESTER, MASS.

LONG ISLAND 22d June, 1776.

MY DEAR--

... Last evening a Conspiracy of the Tories was discovered; their plan
was to murder Genl. Washington, seize on the Persons of the other
General officers, & blow up our Magazines, at the Instant of Time the
King's Troops should Land. A number of our Officers rode last Night to
Flat bush on this Island, & seiz'd the Mayor of the City, who is now
in safe Custody & suppos'd to be in the Conspiracy--several others
are also taken & the Names of others we have, which I hope we shall
soon be able to give a good account of.

In haste, I conclude
  Yours affectionately,
    WM. HENSHAW.

Augt. 29th 1776.

I have but just time to inform you I am well, as I hope this will find
you, our Family & Friends. You will undoubtedly hear, before you see
this, that we have had an engagement with the Enemy--were surrounded,
& had a Number Killed & Taken. I was with the Party who were
Surrounded & through a kind Providence, got through their fire without
being Wounded or Taken.--The Particulars of which I have not time to
relate as the Enemy are close to us & we expect to be attacked every
hour. I have wrote to Brother Josy by this conveyance which letter he
will let you see.--May God Bless & preserve you from every disaster,
is the unremitting wish of yours &c.

N. YORK Sept. 1st 1776.

Last Friday we left Long Island, (being unable to keep it any longer,
without being made Prisoners) and came to New York. How long we shall
stay here is uncertain--Our Public Enemies are numerous--Our private
Ones not a few. Happy shall I esteem myself, if I live to see these
Publick Calamities at an End, when we can live peaceably at home &
Enjoy the Fruit of our Labors, the Sweets of Liberty, & none to molest
us: 7 Regiments marched to King's Bridge Yesterday Afternoon. Lord
Sterling & Gen. Sullivan are made prisoners by the Enemy. Sullivan was
with us yesterday and is now gone to Philadelphia to Congress. Numbers
of our People who were surrounded by the Enemy at Flat Bush, and we
thought were Taken by them, have since got in--My Duty to Parents.
Love to Sally, Bettsey, Ruthy & Josey, Brothers, Sisters & all
Friends, with which I conclude,

Yours, &c.

WHITE PLAINS, Octr. 31st, 1776.

In your last, you want to know whether I was in the Brush or
Battle,[233] mentioned in my last.--I was there. In our Brigade was
Kill'd & Wounded, 75--in the whole Kill'd & Wounded on our side, about
100--of the Enemy by the best Information we have about 500--since
which we have had several Skirmishes. I was not in them, though I saw
several of them. One of them last Week was fought by Reed's &
Learned's Regts., where we had six--kill'd & a number Wounded; the
Enemy had Kill'd & Wounded, about 200--the same Week, a Scouting Party
came across the famous Rogers Scouts, with a scouting party of the
Enemy, took 30 of them Prisoners, & kill'd a number of them--This Week
we had some Battles with them. Monday the 28th Inst. about 2000
of them came on a height of Land on these Plains, Attacked our
Picquet, & after some time, forced our People to give Back. The Loss
on either side I cannot ascertain, but suppose we had Kill'd & Wounded
near 100, as the Fire of Cannon & Small Arms was heavy for some time.
The Day before, they Attacked our Lines near Fort Washington with two
of their Brigades & some of their Ships--Their Ships were much
damaged; one of them they were obliged to Tow off; Our People at the
Lines reserv'd their Fire till the Brigades advanced pretty near, then
gave them a heavy Fire which caused them to Retreat; they form'd &
advanc'd the second time, when our People gave them the second Fire;
they Retreated as before, & form'd the Third time, came up & Fired at
the Lines, which was so warmly returned, that they Retreated. Our
People then Jump'd over the Lines, and pursued them, & Kill'd many,
but the Number is not ascertained.--should I have another Opportunity
to write, can better inform you: we had but one Kill'd in this Battle.
We took 14 Hessians one Day this Week, & one English Officer; have had
several Deserters come in this Week. The Enemy are now Encamp'd within
Gun shot of us, so that there is a continual firing of Small Arms--We
let two Hessians, which we took some time ago, return to the Enemy's
Camp--We daily expect an engagement with the Enemy----

[Footnote 233: Harlem Heights, Sept. 16.]

Brother Denny was here Yesterday to see me; is well & station'd at
Terry Town on the North River about 8 miles from this. Capt.
Lincoln Parkman & our People in general, were well a few Days ago.

Should I live to see Peace restor'd & our Rights Secur'd, shall prize
the Blessing more than ever. I have heard many rumors that it would be
tedious to write. Last night we took Doct. Whitworth's son (of
Boston) Prisoner. He was in some office with the Enemy.

     [Originals in possession of Miss H.E. Henshaw, Leicester,
     Mass.]


[No. 11.]

DEPOSITION BY LIEUT. COL. HENSHAW

[Without date.]

Previous to the Campaign in 1776, there were 3 Regts commanded by
Lt. Colonels. General Washington offered me the command of either of
them. I conversed with the Officers of these Regiments, & I found they
were averse to a change; I informed Gen'l W. that if I accepted his
offer, it would be injurious to the Service and declined it. He then
said he hoped I would not leave the Service, but would take a Lt.
Colonel's commission, which I did under Colonel Little, & in April we
marched for New York in the Brigade commanded by Genl Green. Soon
after Genl Washington came & ordered said Brigade to Long Island.

The latter part of August, I commanded in a picket guard at Flatbush,
where the enemy was encamped, who marched by the East wing of the
Pickets, and formed a line between us and our encampments, and knowing
the Gen. could not send us orders to retreat we marched to reach our
encampments. While marching in the rear of the enemy's line, they were
holding a Council of War, whether to storm our lines, or take them by
a regular siege. They chose the latter. Had they broke their lines and
marched into our front, we must have been made prisoners; but they
only turned on their heels and fired at us and we got in with little
loss.

     [Original in possession of Miss H.E. Henshaw, Leicester,
     Mass.]


[No. 12.]

COL. EDWARD HAND TO HIS WIFE

LANCASTER, PENN.

LONG ISLAND 27 August 1776 7 P.M.

DEAR KITTY:

Part of the enemy landed on the Island on the 22nd. they did not
advance farther than Flatbush until last night--I have had a fatiguing
time of it ever since--A number of our troops have been hemned in, but
behaved well. Many have got clear and many are yet missing. Our
Pennsylvanians were chiefly of the party.

I escaped my part only by being relieved at 2 o'clock this
morning--Major Burd and Col. Atlee were out and are yet missing. Jessy
and Jacky are yet with me

Adieu--May God preserve you
  prays
    Your affectionate
      EDWARD HAND.

Mrs. KATHERINE HAND
  Lancaster Pa.

     [Original in possession of Mrs. S.B. Rogers, Lancaster,
     Penn.]


[No. 13.]

MAJ. EDWARD BURD TO JUDGE YEATES

LONG ISLAND 3rd Sept. 1776.

DEAR SIR.

I was taken prisoner at an advanced Post on the morning of ye
27th ulto after a skirmish, on the same day Capts. Herbert and
Heister were both made prisoners. I was used with great Civility by
General Grant & admitted to my Parole, Brigadier General Agnew and
Major Leslie and Major Batt also treated me with great Politeness.

You must be sensible that hard money can only be of service in my
present situation: The Politeness of several Gentlemen would have very
fully supplied me with it, but I have only taken what will be
immediately necessary for me. I should be much obliged to you if you
could procure me a small Bill of Exchange in which perhaps Mr. Dundas
of Reading could assist you, or Gold to the amount of about £20.

I can not learn the fate of poor Colo Hand or Jesse Ewing but
believe they are not prisoners.

Colo Reed, the Adjutant Gen'l will be the only Person who can
convey any thing to me, my Letter must be short, my Love to all the
Family.

I am Dear Sir
  Your Affecte Brother [in-law]
    EDW. BURD.

JASPER YEATES Esqr.

     [Original among the Yeates papers.]


[No. 14.]

LIEUT. JASPER EWING TO JUDGE YEATES

NEW YORK Aug. 30, 1776.

HONOURED SIR:

After a very fatiguing march we are all safely arrived. The Genl.
yesterday gave orders for all the Regts on Long Island to hold
themselves in readiness to march at the shortest notice, and evacuate
our Lines for the enemy already had extended their advanced posts
across the Island, & we were entirely surrounded, so that the only
refuge he had left was New York--This morn'g a party about fifty men
went a marauding and were surprised by the enemy, who after firing
whole vollies secured one of the Boats, & then the Hessian Riflemen
began to play upon them, so that our loss including that of the first
engagement amounts to 500 men & upwards.

Lord Stirling & Genl. Sullivan are Prisoners, several officers are
still missing amongst whom are Col. Miles and Atlee--The militia from
Berks County are almost cut off. The inhuman wretches thrust their
bayonets through our wounded men and refused that mercy to us, which
we granted to them. The situation of New York is very critical, the
enemy being in possession of Long Island may reduce it to a Heap of
ashes in a days time.

The loss of the enemy amounts to 1500 men amongst whom are a Brigadier
Genl. and several Field Officers.--The Idea which we at first
conceived of the Hessian Riflemen was truly ridiculous but sad
experience convinces our people that they are an Enemy not to [be]
despised, Several Companies of their Light Infantry are cloathed
exactly as we are, in hunting shirts and trowers--Mr. Burd who
commanded a detachment of 200 men is not yet returned, and sorry am I
to say it, he is a Prisoner amongst them.--as this news must certainly
afflict Aunt and the whole family, I have forwarned my Brother from
making any mention of it.

Please to give my duty to Aunt, mammy, Kitty and my love to all the
children,

I remain, Honrd Sir
  Yr dutiful & obliged Nephew
    J. EWING.

To JASPER YEATES, Esqr.

     [Original among the Yeates papers.]


[No. 15.]

JOHN EWING TO JUDGE YEATES

"_To Jasper Yeates Esq. at Fort Pitt._"

LANCASTER Sept. 14, 1776.

HONRD SIR:

As it has pleased Divine Providence to spare my Life, I think it my
Duty to send you as good an act. of the Engagement together with the
enclosed Draught as lays in my power, as I had gone from Elizabeth
Point New Jersey to Long Island to see my brothers I had an
opportunity of seeing everything that occurred from the Time the Enemy
landed on the Island untill a Day or two before we retreated from
thence. Col. Hand's Regmt. had been on duty 2 days & the second Night
were relieved between 12 and 1 o'clock in the morning and about Two
it is thought the Enemy began their movements from Flat Bush to the
Right, and Left, and at between 7 & 8 o'clock in the morning we had
the mortification from our Lines to see our men commanded by Lord
Stirling almost surrounded by the Regulars, as they kept their stand
on a Hill without flinching an inch, The Regulars were firing at them
like Fury they at last descended then there was a continual peal of
Small Arms for an Hour or better, our men at last partly got off by
the Marsh, as in the Draught inclosed, I have been very Ill of a Fever
which I got by being cloathed too thin and lay at York about 2 Days
before our People had made that Grand Retreat from the Island which
will ever reflect honour to our Generals, from York I was removed to
King's Bridge twelve or fifteen miles from thence, after I had
recovered, my Health suffered from Travelling. The Colo. was good
enough to send me Home in a Carriage which thank God I happily--and
dont doubt of recovering Health shortly--I am Sir

Your affectionate
  Nephew
    JNO. EWING.

P.S.

I shall refer you to the papers for our Loss in the Battle though it
is with infinite regret I must inform you of Major Burd's being among
the prisoners who Lord How treats them with great politeness. Time
will not permitt my saying so much as I would wish--I left the
Colo. & all friends very well at King's Bridge where the Regt.
is Stationed as I only left them this day week.

     [Original among the Yeates papers.]

[Illustration: Reduction from Original Map. Drawn by J. Ewing Sept.
1776.